A TRVE DISCOVRSE HISTORICAL, OF THE SVCCEEDING GOVERNOVRS IN THE NETHERLANDS,
AND THE Civil wars there begun in the year 1565. with the memorable
services of our Honorable English Generals, Captains and Soldiers,
especially under Sir JOHN NORICE Knight, there performed from the year 1577.
until the year 1589. and afterward in Portugale, France, Britain and
Ireland, until the year 1598.

TRANSLATED AND COLLECTED BY T. C. ESQVIRE, AND RIC. TO. OVT of the Reverend E.
M. of Antwerp. his fifteen books Historiae Belgicae; and other collections
added* altogether manifesting all martial actions meet for every good subject
to read, for defense of Prince and Country.

AT LONDON Imprinted for Matthew Lownes, and are to be sold at his shop under
S. Dunstons Church in the West. 1602.

TO THE RIGHT NOBLE AND RIGHT HONORABLE, SIR EDWARD SEYMOVR, KNIGHT, BARON
Beauchamp, Earl of Hartford, and Lord Lieutenant general for the Queens most
excellent Majesty in the Counties of Somerset and Wiltshire: Thomas Churchyard
Esquire, wishes long life, happy health, with increase of Honor temporal,
and the fruition of heavenly beatitude in Christ Jesus eternal.
IN CALLING TO mind (Right Honorable) the manifold favors of your most noble
father, showed me in the reign of the rare Imp of grace King Edward the sixth,
1547. 1. Edw. 6.
and weighing I served under him, at the battle of Muscleborough, your father
then Lord Lieuetenant General of the English Army: I found my self for
sundry causes much bound to all his most noble house and family. And so a
long season watching opportunity to do some acceptable service to his noble
children, I could not happen on any matter (touching my pen) worthy
acceptance. Then reading of a book in Latin, written by a grave writer,
called Emanuell Meteranus: who wrote fifteen books de Historia Belgica. I
found so great profunditie in the man and matter, chiefly because he exactlie
(without adulation) wrote of martial affairs, and exployts done by mighty
Governors and valiant soldiers: that not only attained honor in the field
(some of them honorably borne) but also wanne everlasting fame by their
prowess and service. A while considering the consequence and worth thereof, I
thought God would be offended, my country dishonored, and worthy men should
be in time to come forgotten and discouraged: whereon I took in hand to revive
dead men and their actions (for fames sake which all men shoot at) that time
past and time present should be so remembered, as time to come, and all ages
should admire on, and marvel at the most manly enterprises (make Sir
Frauncis Vere and the true Captains of Ostend an example) that courageous
soldiers dare adventure, take in hand, and accomplish. I being pricked on with
their incredible valor, divine virtue of mind, and manly resolution
(considering mine own profession long that way) I took it as an injury done to
all Soldiers: if I a poor plain writer should not as much honor them with my
pen, as they have honored God and Prince with their sword: So in my great age I
clapped on a youthful courage (imagining I saw all the worthiness of men) and
stoutly stepped into the translation of Meteranus works of Historia Belgica: but
often falling sick, and like to pass from world, I called unto me one Richard
Robinson (a man more debased by many then he merits of any, so good parts are
there in the man) one whom I might commanud and keep a long while for this
purpose, and who took great pains (I being sick) in the translation, and in
writing the other Collections of this book: but my study, knowledge,
experience, and eye witness for all or most actions in this book, perfected
every point and piece of matter pertaining to the truth of al here in this
volume printed: my self beholding herein a world for a great personage to
patronage, bethought me of your honorable Lordship. So advisedly and somewhat
fearfully to presume, I have humbly presented my pains to the well liking of
your honor: accepting my good will and boldness as far as my honest regard leads
me. I protest neither matter of State, nor vain inventions drew my muse to
this hard attempt and presumption: but the love and laudation of Lordly minded
soldiers, loyal subjects, unconquered courages, and aspiring minds, that
dare fight with fortune, fly in the face of all foreign enemies, and daunt
the pride of all false hearted people of the whole world whatsoever. So for the
commendation of an infinite number of Lyonlike champions, this work was
compiled, printed, and presented: hoping it shall purchase favor of your
Lordship, and of all noble minded personages, that prefer every excellent
exercise above al slothful dronish idleness.

Your good Lordships in all at commandment, THOMAS CHVRCHYARD.

STRENVO, FORTI, SPLENDIDO, GENEROSO, atque Illustri D. D. IOHANNI NORICEO,
Equiti Aurato, and Anglorum Militum in Inferiori Germania Colonello Generali,
and in absentia Illustriss. Comitis Leycestriae Supremi Gubernatoris ibidem
Praefecto fidelissimo, and Vigilantissimo, Viro ex veteri Prosapia oriundo, and
summa quadam Integritate, Iustitia, Prudentia, Temperantia, and rei bellicae
gloria, in eaque (quod minime in multis reperiri est) faelici ac fortunato,
admodum Insigni atque conspicuo: In quo sunt omnes Imperatoriae Virtutes,
nempe, labor in negotijs, fortitudo in Periculis, Industria in agendo,
celeritas in conficiendo, and Consilium in prouidendo. PETRVS BIZARVS, cum
nihil aliud in praesentiarum habeat, in quo suam (erga Ipsius Illustrem
Dominationem) obseruantiam and summissi animi promptitudinem testetur, hoc
breue Carmen dedicauit.
VT primum Genitrix hanc te produxit in aura^,
Lactauit tenero casta Minerua sinu;
Mox solido victu pauit, mensaque Deorum.
Atque instillauit iussa Verenda Iouis.
Addidit and pectus sapiens plenumque decoro,
Facundum eloquium, Consiliumque grave:
Mars vero vt vidit, quanta sapientia and art
Formasset Pallas, qui sibi Alumnus erat,
In Natum accepit, Diua rogitata, and amorem
Indidit armorum, ac bella subire dedit.
Et simul ostendit, quo pacto Castra locanda,
Quidque etiam prosit, Vel nocuisse queat.
Bellica quid ratio, seu disciplina requirat,
Sedulus vt perstet Miles in officio.
Quinam acies media and Cornu dextrum atque sinistrum
Instrui and aptari, legitime deceat:
Vtque acie instructa procedere longius ausit,
Incensisque animis totus in Armaruat;
Quo tormenta loco disponi and quid faciendum,
Vt Polyorcetes quis queat esse breui.
Quando itidem Fabij exemplo cunctandum and inani
Spepugnae facta, continuisse iuuat.
Infectis donec rebus in Peste prematur.
Vel Fame dissoluit Castra domumque redit.
Number dolus an metus potior sit, quidue petiri
Successu efficiat, commodiori Via.
Quando Equite aut Pedite est vtendum, quidue moretur,
Euentum; Induciae an Pax sit habenda magis,
Number pugnare die, Nocturnoue tempore, quidque
Multos an paucos praestat habere bonos.
Quidue agat interea Miles dum cessat ab Host
Ne se desidiae dedat, Inersque siet,
Denique faelici postquam fera praelia dextra
Egeris, and volitas clara per ora virum:
Parcere number victis deceat, vel perdere prorsus:
Quidque horum illustret, nobilitetque prius.
Haec tibi MARS plene ostendit, docuitque vt Alumnum,
PALLADIS vt fueras ante in amore pari.
Et quoniam in bello multum sibi vendicat Ipsa,
FORTVNA hanc flexit, quo tibi adesse velit;
Annuit, haec siquidem fausto tibi Numine and olim,
Praesenti ac prompta se fore dixit open.
Ergo vt caepisti pergas DVX Inclyte bellum,
Quod nunc prae manibus prouehere atque sequi,
Donec ad optatum finem perduxeris: aqua
Cum sit causa DEO grata and amica bonis.
Idem. Ad Eundem.
FOrtunae donum est, generis quod Clara propago
Te Illustrem efficiat, nobilitetque Domum,
Quod vero proprijs meritis virtuteque adeptus,
Long praecellit, splendidiusque nitet:
Namque tua in bello Generosa and fortia facta,
Ferme Orbis totus nouit, ad Astra vehens.
Haec te perpetua decorabit gloria, laud,
Et tibi post obitum Vita perennis erit:
Tu, interea PYLII transcendas Nestoris Annos
Et placidos habeas ac sine nube dies;
Vt Patriae, atque Orbi praesis victricibus armis
Et cum Pax fuerit, Consilio atque fide.
In illustrissimi eiusdem D. Effigiem depictam.
MAgnanimi effictam quicunque conspicis art
NORICEI, effigiem, nobile cernis opus:
Sed si animum videas, quem picta ostendit Imago,
Dices nil toto magis in Orb micat.
Omne Insigne huic vni fata simul dedere,
DII superi, vnde hominum constat tutela,
Hunc tegite and vestris accumulate bonis:
Vt Victor referat multos ex Host triumphos,
Semperque aeterna gloria Illustris viuat.
Petrus Bizarus Belga.

A Table of the principal contents in this Book.
THe Translatours Collection of the succeeding Governors in the Netherlands,
and the original causes of the civil wars there 1565. page 1. The Original
wars there under the Duchess of Parma. page 4. Captain Churchyards
service. page 5. The civil wars there under the Duke of Alua. page 15. The
wars there under Don Lewis Requisensius. page 20. The wars there under Don
John de Austria. p. 24. The wars there under Alexander Prince of Parma
against the Archduke Mathias for the States. p. 30. Master Henry Knowles
service. p. 46.47. Sir John Norice knight, his first coming into the
Netherlands 1577. p. 27. His proceedings there until 1588. p. 102. The wars
there under Francis Duke of Aniow for the States, against Alexander Prince of
Parma. p. 43. Captain Edward Stranges service. p. 45. The wars there under
Parma against the Prince of Orange. p. 54. Five several messengers sent to
murder the Prince of Orange. p. 55. His death and funeral. p. 59. His Title
and Epitaph. p. 65. The wars there under the Prince of Parma and the States.
p. 67. The wars there under the Prince of Parma and the Earl of Leycester. p.
74. Captain Thomas Louel, Captain Charles Blunt, now L. Mountioy, Captain
Thomas Vauiser, now Sir Thomas Vauiser. p. 74. Captain John Pryses service. p.
79. Sir Phil. Sidneyes service there, his death and funeral. p. 88. The Earl
of Essex his service at Zutphen. p. 89. The Lord Willoughbie his services
there. p. 88.103.104. Sir Thomas Cicil now Lord Burley. p. 84. Sir Henry
Norice. p. 88.89. Sir William Russels service there. p. 95. In Ireland. p. 145.
The wars there under the Prince of Parma against Count Maurice. p. 103. The
death of Parma where the Belgic history ends. p. 111. The service of Sir
Thomas Morgan p. 18.19.32.41.47.106. The service of Sir Roger Williams. p.
38.42.97.98. His service in the Portugale voyage. p. 113. The voyage to
Portugale. p. 112. Sir Edward Norice his service there. 113.116. A Iournall of
Sir John Norices service in France. 1591. p. 119. His memorable service at
Breast in Britain 1594. p. 134. A brief discourse of his service in Ireland
against the Arch-rebell Tyrone 1595. p. 144. Sir Thomas Baskeruil, Sir Francis
Vere, and Colonel Huntley. p. 98. Sir William Pelham. p. 101. Sir Thomas
Knowles. p. 74.138.
FINIS Tabulae.
THE TRANSLATORS COLLECTION OF THE succeeding Governors in the Netherlands,
and original causes of the wars there.
BEfore I come to the Consequent, I must begin with the Antecedent; before I
frame the upper building, Exordium de quatuor circumstantijs.
I must fix a foundation: so before I come to the causes of the Civil wars
in the Netherlands, I must by due course of the Dutch and Latin History (which
I fellow) set down the succeeding Governors in those Countries, by four
circumstances, briefly gathered out of my Authors first book Histor. Belgic.
as he largely by substance delivers for former causes of later consequents.

The first circumstance is this: The deriuation of the government of those
Countries, The first circumstance. Historia Belgica lib. 1.
by process of time for many years under four Dukes of Burgundy, and as many
Archdukes of Austrich: of which, that Philip was the later Archduke, who (being
son of Maximilian, before Archduke of Austrich, and Emperor of Germany, and
son in law to Ferdinando King of Spain, leaving behind him his two sons,
Charles the elder, and Ferdinando the younger, with four daughters suruiuing)
deceased out of this mortal life in the year of our Lord. 1505.

The second circumstance.
The second circumstance is this: That the said Charles (as elder brother
Archduke of Austrich and King of Spain) sailing by sea thence into the
Netherlands Anno 1517. taking possession of those Countries for his own
behoof, Historia Belgica lib. 1.
within two years after (that is to say Anno 1519. on the 28. of July) was
elected at Frankford in Germany, both King of Romans and Emperor of
Germany, by the name of Charles the 5. Emperor: and so continuing in
magnificent and memorable honor and renown many years governed those
Countries: yet, not without some severity, as it is said: Much like the Eagle,
which (seeming naturally to affect her young ones) will yet nourish them with
great austeritie. Although even in his time (for the Religion of the Gospel)
the civil broils beginning in Germany, he sought by his great wisdom and
gravity to appease the same: yet happily lived he after this in great honor
and felicity: for he lived and saw his foresaid younger brother Ferdinando
chosen Caesar at Colen Anno 1530. and on the fifth of January 1531. crowned King
of the Romans, who became an earnest favorer and furtherer of the Gospel. He
lived also and saw the felicity of his lawful begotten son Philip, both
Duke of Burgundy, Archduke of Austrich and King of Spain Anno 1542. but he
lived not to see the life and death of his base begotten son Don John de
Austria, who died (as afterward shall appear in this history) Anno 1578. To
be short, he lived yet to see his said son Philip married with Mary Queen of
England on the 19. of July 1554. and in the next year following 1555. he gave
this his said son Philip full possession and principality over the said
Countries of the Netherlands, which he had himself so governed (not without
some severity) 38. years. Finally, omitting larger discourses of this Charles
the 5. Emperor, (of his so many notable and memorable expeditions in in his
life time performed) let these few words suffice; that he made nine into
Germany, seven into Spain, seven into Italy, ten into the Netherlands,
four into France, and two into England, which in all were nine and thirty.
After all this (to make an end of his memorials) he resigning up the Empire and
jurisdiction thereof unto the Princes Electors of the same, in the year of our
Lord 1557. and so leaving Germany departed into Spain, where he finished the
race of his mortal life on the 20. day of September in the year of our Lord
1558. having been Emperor for the full space of nine and thirty years.

The third circumstance is this: That his aforesaid younger brother Ferdinando,
The third circumstance.
succeeding him in the Empire, on the 18. day of March 1558. did so godly, and
so religiously govern the same, Historia Belgica lib. 1.
from his first inauguration thereunto, that he had much ado to be confirmed
in this Imperial dignity, by Pope Paul the 4. of that name Bishop of Rome;
because he this good Emperor granting peace unto the Churches of Germany, and
preferring the Gospel, the same Pope Paul withstood him in Italy, and thwarted
him with warlike forces out of France, to come of purpose to Rome, there to
disgrace and disanull his government even in that same very year 1558.
aforesaid. This good Emperor notwithstanding perseuering an Imperial sincere
Patron of the sacred religion (to his great comfort) saw his son Maximilian
also chosen and crowned King of Romans, in the month of November 1564. And so
he himself having been Emperor six years and upwards, was by the God of
peace called out of this troublesome world on the 25. of July Anno 1565.

The fourth and last circumstance, yet not the least which I gather out of my
Authors first book is this: The fourth circumstance.
That as the said King Philip of Spain had been from the year of our Lord
1555. aforesaid, Historia Belgica lib. 1.
possessed in his sovereignty over the Netherlands, until this year 1565.
aforesaid; so his father Charles the 5. Emperor in his time was not so severe
an Eagle, but this his son now becomes as sore a Lion, joining hands as it
were with the Pope of Rome: And whereas they two made other Christian Princes
believe they became right restorers of Christian policy; in process of time
they proved themselves to be destroyers of the peace and weal public of a
good government, in sending forth the Spanish Inquisition, as the ground of all the grief in the Netherlands, and the original cause of the civil wars
there, now following.

The original civil Wars in the Netherlands under the Duchess of Parma.
FOr first by the said Inquisition sent from the Pope and the Spanish King into
the Netherlands, Historia Belgica lib. 2.
against the professors of the Gospel, or of the reformed religion, thus it
fell out: That the King having chosen new Bishops for the purpose, Anno 1566.
sent them thither to execute the said Inquisition amongst them. The States
finding themselves greatly iniuried and grieved by ye Spanish Inquisitio^, do
exhibit unto the Regent a just protestation of their cause.
They of the reformed religion hereupon exhibit to the Lady Margaret Duchess
of Parma and Placencia (sent by the King thither for their Regent and
Gouernesse under him) a little printed book: wherein they crave mitigation of
the Kings Decree, hoping (as they alleged) that he would not infringe and
frustrate their ancient privileges and franchises in those points, and for
that cause they were reputed and called Geusij, viz. poor men. Which thing
being interpreted to the worst in Spain, and sore stomacked by the King, they
of the reformed religion perceiving the same fire every day more and more to
burst forth (to quench, The keys and custody of Antwerpe in Churchyards
hands at this uproar, witness Master Joseph and his brother Master Richard
Candeler.
or at least as it were to avoid the same) by public assemblies at Sermons,
and convenient places, do provide for their profession and for protection of
their particular estates. Hereupon on the other side began Idolatry to outface
and disanull their doings by the Papists: yet for all this the said Lady
Margaret Duchess of Parma, then Regent, was commanded by the King, to grant
security unto the Nobility of the professors (who had been before suitors
unto her for the same) that they might freely have their assemblies and
Sermons, till further order were taken therein. Then they of the reformed
religion laid away their weapons, and some Idolatrous personages were put to
death. Mean while the Regent having gathered under her some forces, Churchyard
Captain of 30. thousand in this time at Antwerpe.
began to sow discord and debate amongst the reformed Nobility: whereof the
lesser part being stirred up, or rather enforced by her menacings and
threatenings, do again take them to their weapons: whereupon at Antwerpe did
sedition and tumult arise. To avoid future danger, William Prince of Orange
and Count Nassaw hereupon departs out of the Netherlands in happy time. The
Prince of Orange and Count Nassaw departs out of the troubled Low Countries
in happy time.
Again at Antwerpe was commandment given in certain places that Sermons
should be prohibited; and so all things seem to stand in uncertainty, though
some hoped that the Kings displeasure would be pacified. To conclude, yet so
many as were suspected of the reformed religion were taken and violently put to
death: many others taken endured long imprisonment: many others fearing worse
to come, Churchyard then fled to England in a Priests apparel, and came to ye
Queen.
fled these Low Countries, dispersing themselves into diverse parts of Europe.
And all this continued under the said Duchess of Parma, Regent for the space
of twenty months.

In the time of these troubles and grant of an Interim (to have free liberty
in preaching the Gospel) there fell out a bloody conflict near Antwerpe, at
a place called Austeruile: for one Monsieur de Toloze a Protestant (suspecting
bad practices of the Regent) gathered and assembled two thousand soldiers in a
fortification, not fully accomplished at the said Austeruile, meaning with
that force to aid them of Antwerpe, if ill measure were offered them; which
the Regent went cunningly about: for she (in all secret manner) raised a
thousand horse and four thousand footmen, and gave the charge of them to a
gallant Captain called Monsieur Beauvois (albeit a cruel man) who immediately
marched privily toward this new fortification, and before Monsieur Toloze
could make himself strong to withstand his enemies, the Regents power in the
break of day set upon the unready and feeble force of Toloze, and charged
them so furiously and hotly, that they entered the weak fortifications, and
overthrew the whole company of Toloze, saving a few that escaped dangerously
into Antwerpe; among which soldiers Captain Churchyard saved himself and
entered Antwerpe. Notwithstanding Toloze being slain, and almost all his men,
the enemy (after the victory gotten) marched with all possible speed toward
Antwerpe, where forty Ensigns of the Regents power were in battle on the
Market place ready to receive them, and kept the Town gates as open as they
could for that purpose: but the Protestants fearing mischief and misery, ran
to the gates in all haste and shut them fast, carrying away the keys into the
heart of the town. The Prince of Orange, the Count de Horn, and Count
Hostraet, with Monsieur Decardes, and many more Seigneurs and Noblemen
beholding the danger they were in, knew not what to do, nor durst make any
resistance, for offending the Regent, and loss of lives, goods and lands: and
so refusing all charge against the Regent, they left the common people in a
great uproar and hazard: to avoid which extremity, the Commoners began to
clap on armor, and made a most resolute mutiny, crying Viue les gueulx, that
is to say, live poor men: and beholding over the walls Monsieur Beauvois and
his people proudly marching (after so much bloodshed) within a mile of
Antwerpe, the Protestants resolutely determined to encounter Beauvois in the
fields: but wanting a general Captain, and horsemen to match against
horsemen, they fell in a great murmuring, and knew not what was best to take in
hand: yet seeing all their governors refuse them, called courage to
themselves, and so resolved to make a stranger their Captain, they being
enterlarded with many valiant soldiers (that came from the siege of
Valenciana) came suddenly to Captain Churchyards lodging and burst open his
door, commanding him in all haste to come out, and take the charge of those
that would fight for the Gospel, which attended his coming well armed in the
streets: Churchyard told them he would serve among them, The Protestants choose
Churchyard their Captain
but was unable to govern a multitude. Whereon they bent their pikes on him,
and threatened to kill him if he did refuse their loving offer. He thereupon
gave his promise to obey, and so without any armor came into the street, where
was raised such a shout and noise of people (and so many caps flung up) that it
was a wonder to hear and see it: he presently gessed their number was great
and their quarrel good, so in a few words he desired that such as would not
fight, to depart to their wives and children: whereat all the people shouted
and cried, Go forward and we will follow. Then unto the gates goes the
assembly of 25. thousand, saving the soldiers were left by direction to make
head and beard the forty Ensigns in the Market place: so the Protestants
breaking with bars of iron a posterne gate (because the keys were hidden)
their Leader still advancing his Ensign full in the enemies view, their
horsemen somewhat slack (for the rifling Tolozes Camp) cast in the Reregard:
and not ready to charge the forefront of the Protestants, made the Protestants
use the more advantage both of shot and service, whereby they gat so much blood
and victory, that their Leader (of some great consideration) made his people
retire into the town again, the number that sallied were eight thousand. They
were no sooner entered but the Prince of Orange and Noblemen welcomed (with
embracings) the Leader and all his followers, promising great matter for their
boldness. But the Captain and his people hoping to rid the whole town of
Spaniards, marched with the advantage of the time (the gates fast shut) toward
the Market place, order being given that five thousand shot should enter at the
backs of the enemies, when one shot of Canon should be discharged against the
Protestants from the Market place (where 24. great pieces were rammed full of
stones and chains) and resolutely the Protestants holding this course,
marching through Cooper strote in as great bravery and terror as may be
imagined, they approached near the enemies with such a thundering noise and cry
as seemed marvelous. The Prince and great Earls before named, pitying the
great slaughter that might follow this bold attempt, on horseback (as all the
Nobility were) the Prince presented peace to the Protestants: who disdaining
his offer cried kill him, and so bent their pikes on him. What, what (quoth the
Captain) will you kill your governors, fie for shame, hold still your
weapons: but the Prince and the rest with him, drew back their bridles so hard
and so disorderly, that down came the Prince and his company all flat
backward in the place. The enemy then amazed at that sight (besides regarding
the privy stratagem or practices at their backs near the rivers side) began
after their musing and amaze to discourage themselves, in so much that the
Cannons they would have shot off, and the service they intended was utterly
forgotten, so that suddenly they let fall their pikes, and at the Protestants
approach then at hand, the enemies cried (to save their own lives) Viue le
gueulx aloude, and in such sort that they suffered all their Captains and
Leaders to the number of six score to be taken prisoners, losing all their
Cannons and Munition, putting every thing they had into the Leaders hands of
the Protestants, he using victory in the great advantage of that season,
caused all their Ca^nons to be drawn with ropes from the Market place to the
Mere brugge, a great street near the Burse, and filling every window full of
shot to flank each part and corner of the streets and Burse, he chained carts
together with shot in them, and thereon pitched straight ways a Camp full
upon the Meere-brugge, having then at command thirty thousand resolute
soldiers, for the space of three days and nights: all which time the General
appointed Captains and officers for every company, and all warlike orders set
in stay, he thought all had been well and in surety: but a vile cunning and
unchristian brute was raised, that the Caluinists would cut the Martinists
throtes: on which false brute, in one night the Protestants lost much more than
ten thousand men, who joined as they might with the Papists: yet God moving the
minds of good men, made the Protestants and their General courageously to
pluck up their hearts, and the General with five hundred shot, match fired in
cock, marched to the Prince of Orange his presence, and told him that this
drift of the Martinists going from the Protestants, smelled of two much subtle
smoke, the smoother thereof might set all Antwerpe on a flaming fire, desiring
him to see a quick redress herein, or else presently the Protestants would
give all the enemies a battle, to the whole spoil and overthrow of the town:
and therewithal he departed from the Prince, and used his five hundred shot,
to house and drive in all the Martinists into their lodgings: for as yet they
had not joined with the enemies force, they were so weary with watching
before, and so glad of rest, liberty, and company of their wives and friends
at that present.

The Prince then with great prudence and policy, sent word to the Protestants
that they should have free access to Sermons and preachings, which they
sought, (for the which was a goodly preaching place built) and further the
Prince promised that the Martinises and all other enemies should lay down
their weapons and pass quietly every man to his lodging, requiring that the
Protestants would make no further stir, but as quietly as were possible to
march by every man's own door, and there to leave the towns men in their
dwelling places as they marched: which request of the Prince was to Gods glory
and his honor in perfect order performed, always the Protestants kept them
strong till the enemy were all lodged, and then each man went home in peace.
All these things being done and brought to a good end, without shedding of
blood or spoil of any Christian creature: yet the Prince was after forced to
flee to Breda, as the story now shall show you following.

The noble Prince of Orange in Breda (his own town) seeing his son and
heir taken from Louaine at school, by the cruelty of the Duke of Alua, and
thoroughly considering the calamity of Flaunders (by the dealing of a tyrannous
governor): this warlike wise Prince with a fatherly regard and true affection
to Gods word and the Netherlands, began to stomach the wrongs received when he
governed Antwerpe (and the imminent danger that Flanders stood in) and calling
to mind al promises were broken that were solemnly made by the late Regent, he
consulted and communed of this matter with the States of Germany and his
friends there, who counseled him to take arms in hand and raise a power, at
his own house in Dillenbrough, a parcel of Germany (ten great leagues from
Colen) and these great Captains and worthy Germans promised not only in
person, but also in purse and munition to assist him, which they performed with
great expedition, at the time when he arrived at Dillenbrough, where Churchyard
being sent (from the Lord high Chamberlain of England) saw the meeting of all
this mighty assembly, and served under Monsieur de Lume (Count de la March)
as Cornet-bearer to two hundred and fittie light horsemen all that wars,
which was against the Duke of Alua in his first coming to Flanders. The Prince
passed his musters beyond the Rhine, between an Abbey and Andernake, a walled
town in Germany, and had in his Army two and twenty thousand foot, and
thirteen thousand horse, all Swartrutters: so paying his soldiers with
Dollars two months pay before hand, he passed this great army in boats very
near Andernake, marching from thence toward Aken, a strong town: but by the
way was a great mutiny between the Almaines and Burgonians, who said the
Almaines had lost the battle of Groaning, where Count Lodwick and all his
power was overthrown, those words made many a man be slain: but the broyle
was pacified by the Prince, who marched straightwaies to Aix, a great City,
and the Army encountered anon after the Duke of Aluaes soldiers, horsemen,
some valiant of mind, and some by sorcerie with words and characters in their
doublets, more mad than manly, yet hoping in sorcerie ventured too far, and
could not be killed with shot; a desperate royster beholding the boldness of
these enchaunted persons against shot, drew his sword and stroke one of these
men on the face, who quickly yielded himself (as after his fellows did) to
the mercy of the sword. The matter marshally a long while pleaded and orderly
by Marshall law disputed, the enchaunted men were all condemned to be hanged,
because against the law of Arms they had used unchristian and unlawful means
to murder men and shed Christian blood. These men executed the Princes army
(after a good sum of money paid for the ransom of Aix the great town)
departed toward Senttro, another walled town, which redeemed it self in like
manner. All this while the Duke of Alua with thirty thousand shot and four
thousand horse, waited on the Princes power, still skirmishing with brave
soldiers against the Princes forces. But almost forgotten at the entering of
the Princes army, he bruted that he would pass through Liege, a marvelous
mighty town, where the Duke advertised by espiall, attended the Prince his
coming: suddenly without sound of Drum the Prince parted a contrary way
toward a foord on the Maze near Mastricke, marching all the whole dark night
very fast, (which lost some men) and at break of day came to a bare Village
where the foord was, to enter into Flanders: so in all haste possible the
horsemen passed, bearing a croope behind them each one a soldier: but the
horses so many, and their legs holding up the water, the river rose so hie
that many footmen were drowned, and much victual wet and lost: yet before
night all the army left alive were landed in as great safety as could be
wished. But resting three days there, the Duke was in Mastrick (not very far
off) to give the Prince battle: so God sent a most fair day for that cause,
in his gracious pleasure. The Prince ranged and set in battle, marched on a
goodly plain toward Mastrick, and the order of the field by excellent
soldiers set and ranged in the most princeliest manner that might be (
Churchyard at all this): The vangard, battle and reregard so shining in
armor, and other awful troops of horsemen, which seemed a great wood and
terror to behold, that in very deed the show and fight thereof would have
delighted any man living to behold: for the march and order of the field was
miraculous to consider on, and most fearful to match withal and encounter.
Yet the Duke of Alua (a great noble soldier) determined (as it was thought)
valiantly to fight with all this brave army, so in short time the very same
day the Prince came within shot of Cannon (and at the length of Musket) so
near the Duke, that he sent a number of horsemen to make a brauado, and plied
it so fast with small shot out of the trenches (for he was entrenched) that it
was thought a great slaughter would ensue.

Thus continuing all the latter end of the day in skirmish and great service,
at night the Prince was feign to lodge his power near the very face of the
Dukes army, far from water or wood: but in the night season the Duke removed
his Camp, and a far off waited on the Prince daily, who never did march
backward, but came (as before is said) to Aix, Senttro, Tongre, and other towns
of good moment, making his profit as he might every where, because some had
broken promise with him in a most odious manner. For some had falsified their
faith, besides odd trumperies they devised, and othersome poisoned the
standing waters and pooles: yea and in some places milk and drink was
infected, Milles were all broken down, and no corn to be grinded: by which
Heathenlike and foul hellish practices, the Princes army was like to perish:
yet a shift was found to bring the army by little and little from these
miseries: but forced to skirmish with Alua often. The Prince came cunningly to
a town called Tongre, finding there much of the Dukes provision, and a number
of wagons full of corn and other necessaries, succored and made somewhat in
strength, and in hope of good fortune: the army meant to pass over a little
river near Tielmount, but by the way were sharply encountered with the whole
power of the Duke of Alua, where in hazard the Count de Hostraet was shot in
the leg, of which wound he died andn after. The Duke likewise (a politic
soldier and great governor) bearded the Prince a while with hot and cruel
countenance, and so sent Julian Romero to lie in ambush between a bridge and
passage, full in the face of the Princes Camp, marching to pass the water:
which Romero most like a rare great soldier, in a fine warlike sort, couched
his force flat on the earth behind the Forlorn hope, sent from the Prince to
view and make place for his armies passage: Romero came before as one that knew
the advantage of time, couching close as flat as they might, and so the day
consuming, all was in rest, and both parties in a great wood lay as close as
they could. The Duke maintaining skirmish, followed still after the Reergard of
the Prince. Romero suffered both the Carriage, Vaungard and Battle to pass
the bridge: and as the Reergard advanced themselves to march over the passage,
Romero descried his power of six thousand shot, and so put all the Forlorn
hope to flight, or slew the most of them. A noble Frenchman called Monsieur de
Malberg, and all his company of four thousand brave soldiers were there
defeated, with others to the number of eight thousand men: which fight and
slaughter endured in great and bloody broyle till the very night approached,
and compelled both the Camps to lodge within Cannon shot one of another, and in
the night the Duke privily stole away, for some hidden cause and policy: for
the next morning Monsieur Ianlis and seven thousand footmen, with fifteen
hundred horse, marched full upon the Dukes power in a fair plain near unto
Namur. The Duke dreading Ianlis boldness (and the Princes Camp not far off)
turned him back another way, and made his march very fast, for fear of a
blow: then Ianlis and all his noble troop joined with great joy with the
Princes power. Immediately the Prince prepared to besiege a town called
Chasteau Cambresi, and marching thitherwards, the Duke waited at hand, but the
town was strongly besieged: notwithstanding the Duke (as the Prince had
intelligence) minded to disturb him: the espials of the Dukes Camp were by
the Prince taken, which declared in what disorder the Dukes Camp lay: whereon
without sound of Drum (most secretly) the Prince marched to meet the Duke,
and the barking of dogs under the Ruitters wagons, gave warning how both the
armies were almost mingled together (the night being dark) whereat a great
alarm arose on both sides: but the Dukes Camp within two hours was
entrenched, and so a great encounter of horsemen a long time passed out the
morning in skirmishing, with many slain and hurt. The Prince then departing
from Flaunders came into France near Guise and S. Quintins, and marched after
to disperse his army toward Strasborogh: in the which way Churchyard
(departing from the Prince to England) so leaves this true testimony for a
witness, that the author which wrote the other history (which Robinson
translated) left partially out of his book, whereas these matters at that
season were worthy of memory.

Written fom page 5. hitherto by Thomas Churchyard.

The civil Wars proceeding in the Netherlands, under Don Ferdinando Aluares
de Toledo Duke of Alua: sent thither by the King of Spain as Commander
General.
AFter all this, King Philip still prosecuting his former purpose with further
extremities, in the year of our Lord 1567. sent thither Don Ferdinando
Aluares Duke of Alua, by the title of the Kings Commander General: a noble
personage no doubt, but a notable cruel Tyrant, tall of personage, lean of
body (like unto Brutus or Cassius whom Caesar censured to be feared) strong of
members, upright in stature, long and lean faced, hollow eyed, of fierce and
grim countenance, with a long and gray beard, haughty of mind, stout of
courage, and (as my Author says) Magnus Aulicus, Insignis Dissimulator: yet of
surpassing skill and knowledge in feats and policies of war, The Duke of
Alua sent as Governor over the Low Countries under King Philip.
exceeding therein all Spaniards of his time: who as he exercised most severe
martial discipline in his wars, so used he great judgment in leading
forth his armies, pitching his Tents, and pointing out harbors for his
soldiers, because he was of long time a continual practitioner in wars
defensive and offensive: and so bold he was and of such stout self-conceit, as
one fearing no danger, that he would take upon him no charge of any army,
except he might have the chief place and prerogative of Commendator General,
as the Spaniards call it. As certainly he served both the father Charles the 5.
Emperor before remembered, and Philip the son now mentioned, in chiefest
place or calling of Martial affairs, and that in most important and difficult
enterprises: Lib. 3.
managing their wars in Italy, Spain, France, Hungary, Germany, Africa and
the Netherlands: who now entering there in person all armed, found all things in
peaceable state: But within a year after, he began to be stir him in the
ininoyned Inquisition afresh, every where grievously vexing and persecuting the
inhabitants with new impositions, mutinies, confiscation of goods,
imprisonment, civil wars, and unmerciful death: daily inueighing against
them, that they had broken their allegiance to the King and his supreme
authority, and that they had lost all privilege of liberty, life and
possessions: therefore he calls a general new Council of the States,
abrogating old, and establishing new laws, quite contrary to the ancient
former customs of those countries; urging daily the new Bishops to be diligent
in executing the said Inquisition, Summo iure (or rather Summa iniuria)
according to that saying, Sic volo, sic iubeo, stet pro ratione voluntas: he
himself setting all things in order for civil wars, fortifieth old and
erecteth new fortresses, Castles and muniments, making provision for prisons,
and other such preparations. This being in the year 1569. our English
Merchants and Mariners (amongst whom, my self a poor Clerk travailing
toward Antwerpe, for my preferment) they some in one place, some in another, I
at Flushing (upon Christmas eeue) were taken out of our beds, He made a general
restraint of Englishme^s ships and goods.
and (our ships and goods by the Kings commandment imbargued) so carried to
the Geuarghen huise, as they called it. The cause whereof was, that certain
ships with the Kings treasure driven near the coast of England by tempest of
weather, were taken by the Queens Majesty's ships and brought into the Themes:
by means whereof both English Merchants and Mariners were detained in prison,
and their ships and goods restrained as well in all the Spanish Kings
dominions; as also on the other party the King of Spaines subjects and goods
were arested in the Queens Majesty's kingdoms of England, Wales and Ireland:
which continued for the space of two years following, till that order was then
taken for the same: when the Merchants, Mariners and their ships were released
and dismissed, but the goods liable to the value of the Spanish Kings treasures
was answered accordingly.

Thus the cruelty of the time and state in the Netherlands increasing most
odious unto other Christian princes, Historia Belgica lib. 4.
it was Gods good pleasure to put into the minds of the States of Germany,
Anno 1569.
also of Charles the 9. King of France (for mitigation of these calamities) to
enter a league with William Prince of Orange and Count Nassaw, Certain
Christian Princes assist ye Prince of Orange to fortify the Low Countries.
to levy forces of men and munition under conduct of the Count Lodwicke of
Nassaw brother to the said Prince, being also associated with the two valiant
Captains, Ienlisij and the Lord of Laxone: who (with their said forces part
Germans, part Frenchmen, part Dutchmen, Historia Belgica lib. 3.
and part English voluntaries) bending their endeavors to the surprising of the
strong town of Mounts in Henault, on the 24. of May in the foresaid year
obtained the town by fight, and possessed the same by strong fortification
thereof. In that year (says my author) King Philip upon suspicion that he had
of his only son Charles Prince of Spain (that he should prepare himself with
habiliments by sea to step away into the Netherlands, King Philip imprisoneth
his own son.
and join with the States, vz. the Prince of Orange, Count de Egmont, Grave
van Horn and others, to manage civil wars against his father and his
Commander before named) for that cause cast his said son into prison, where
continuing a certain time he died, yet as it was thought by bleeding. The
foresaid Gouernesse Duchess of Parma and Placencia departed about the end of
July home into Italy, The Duchess of Parma departs into Italy.
being conducted upon the way to the sea side by the Commander General: who
returning to his Court at Bruxels, cited thither the said Prince of Orange, The
King of Spain proscribeth the Prince of Orange, and two other estates.
Count de Egmont and Count Horn (having before proscribed them) to appear
upon their allegiance to the King, before him as his Lieutenant general over
all those Countries. The Prince of Orange kept him aloof out of his danger:
the other were taken, laid in prison, and afterward beheaded in the Market
place at Bruxels. In that year also was Tergoas besiged the second time by
Tseratius for the Prince and the States, Tergoas besieged.
who was afterward made Governor of Flushing: there at Tergoas having made
his ditches and plotted his stations for his Ordinance to be discharged, by and
by made he a breach in two places of the walls. At the which assault the
French soldiers under Monsieur and the English stipendarie hired soldiers
under Captain Thomas Morgan and others, near unto the chiefest gate of the
town, being 25* paces broad, about midnight made entrance into the City:
whilst Creitius the Colonel, being by his Frenchmen greatly furthered
therein, bestirs him to scale the other side of the gate: but being
countermaunded by the soldiers within sufficiently defending that place, both
he and they were repulsed, and forced to give back from that assault. Whereby
Mondragon the Spanish Captain (newly thereupon come thither) reserved T^^goas
from any further siege (himself and his soldiers wading through deep waters,
sent thither in great opportunity by the Commander General) as it were to
resist the assault and rescue the town, which was performed with the loss of
two hundred English and French soldiers slain and fallen into the waters
there.

Frederick the son of the Duke of Alua, Frederick the son of Ferdinando
besieges Zutphen.
having been with his said father very forward in all actions, about the 21. of
November 1572. with the forces which he had under him from his father, besieged
Zutphen in Gelderland, and shortly after took it. Thus the Duke of Alua having
with great cruelty governed for the King, making havoc of all with little
mercy wheresoever he came, casting down strong holds, and killing man, woman
and child: to make an end of his mischiefs, when now the city of Harlem in
Holland had for her own best safeguard received the Garrison of the said Prince
of Orange, pitched there his Tents, Harlem fortified by the Prince of Orange.

Captain Barnabey Rich his notes.


bringing thither his army, consisting of Wallons and Frenchmen, under their
Captains: also Englishmen and their Captains, by name Captain Turner, who
served there some 8. years, Captain Cotton, Captain Christopher Hunter,
Captain Candish, Captain George Gascoyne and others, which were all
voluntaries; and of certain Scottish Regiments, sending thither also all
kinds of necessary victuals, furniture and provision for the said army:
thither then came the said Frederick son to the said Duke of Alua, and with
his fresh forces of diverse countries (sent thither by the King of Spain)
lays great and long siege unto the same: The same besieged by Frederick the
Duke of Alua his son.
which enduring from the said year 1572. near at end, till the 15. of August
1573. he at length prevailed so far, that profligating the Princes army,
and dispersing them here and there, he entered the same city, and obtained and
kept it in possession for the King, using the inhabitants thereof with no
little extremity. Anno 1573.
About the 20. of August in the said year 1573. his said father Don Ferdinando
Duke of Alua (partly his cruelty being by the King perceived, The Duke of Alua
departs out of the Low Countries.
and partly by the States of the Netherlands complai^^d upon, leaving his said
son to govern and bea^e arms for the King) with a convenient retinue
departs out of those Countries, not without many a curse, banning and
exclamation made upon him for his farewell, when he had so there tyrannized
about the space of 6. years little more or less. Vide Hieronymu^ Connestagium
in Historia Portugaliae.

The Wars in the Netherlands, under Don Lewis Requisensius Governor for the
Spanish King.
ABout the beginning of October 1573. succeeding the said Duke of Alua, came
thither sent by the King of Spain another Noble man named Don Lewis
Requisensius, Don Lewis de Requisensius a Spaniard succeeded in that government.
he taking government upon him, smally enterprised to purpose in the latter end
of that year. In the next year following 1574. he bestirreth him by all
means possible to leuy his forces to besiege diverse towns, Anno 1574.
and to fortify some others: amongst which when the Zelanders had attempted to
besiege Midleborow, they so far proceeded that the town suffered great
penury and distress of all things both by sea and by land; Midleborow yielded
to the Prince of Orange.
and by means thereof was in the end yielded unto the said Zelanders for the
Prince of Orange, who supported their powers and forces therein.

What time in the year aforesaid 1574. this newcome Commander brought his
forces to besiege the city of Leyden, one of the chiefest cities in Holland,
Historia Belgica lib. 5.
the said Prince of Orange sent thither for safeguard thereof under Lieutenant
Edward Chester an Englishman, ten Ensigns or companies of English soldiers,
all voluntaries, who appointing certain of them for a garrison in the city,
Leydon besieged by Spanish forces.
procures the citizens to make speedy provision of corn and grain for the
necessary sustentation of his soldiers. But finding the want thereof at his
coming, and their slownes in preparing the same at that time, he complains
greatly yt they the less regarding or foreseeing the same in time, do not so
speedely provide for the premises: and still he earnestly calls upon the^ to
look well to the present necessity in time, and so for their safety and
defense he does the part of a good careful Captain, Lack of looking to
necessity in time, loses all in fine.
that in the mean time they resisted and repelled the enemies forces for three
months. And he tells them they should lack no help that he could perform
or procure any way: notwithstanding they of the city being to too negligent
and slow in following his advice in time, shortly after (for want of better
provision in due time) five Ensigns of those English soldiers were
constrained to step aside to the enemy, contrary to their promise to the
States. This town was rescued by cutting certain banks and letting in the
sea, which drowned many of the enemies troops.

In the beginning of the next year 1575. the King of Spain having victualles,
Anno 1575.
manned and rigged a Navy of soldiers purposely sent to invade the
Netherlands, a great part of the same Navy arrived by contrary wind and
weather upon the coasts of England: all for the most part of these ships were
such as they call Assabres, Pinasses, so small as that they might pass through
the narrow and deep rivers of those countries: who when they chanced upon the
coast of the I Will of Wight in England, such a friend was the Queens Majesty
unto them, that by the help of certain her Highness and subjects ships, they
were wafted over to Dunkerke, where (after they had landed their soldiers and
conveyed their treasure which they brought to the Commander) staying upon
those coasts the latter part of that winter, The Spanish kings Armado sent into
the Low Countries, cast away by tempest.
these ships (with those that were left in them) by huge and terrible tempests
there arising, were (one frushed with the other) quite sunk and cast away; a
thing surely reputed for Gods wonderful work.

This year also the States of Holland and Zeland (by the chief persuasion of
the Prince of Orange) after much and grave consultation, with no less advice
and deliberation determined, condescended, and agreed to make suite unto some
foreign Prince, to protect and defend them from the horrible furies and
outrageous tyrannies of the Spanish government.

In that year 1575. was Ziricksea also besieged by the enemies forces,
Ziricksea besieged.
which continued for nine months space: where when the Prince of Orange had
resisted the enemy what he could with men, munition and money, to his power,
it was afterward (sore against this good Princes will) yielded up unto the
Spanish King and his forces in the next year following 1576.

The same next year following 1576. what time the said Commander General
with his Spaniards and others, Anno 1576.
Historia Belgica lib. 6.
bent their forces to invade Antwerpe: there then the Marquis of Hauery being
General, and Champigny another valiant Captain for the States, joined their
forces to the full resisting of that invasion, and valiantly withstood the
enemy. But then the Earl Obersteyn making haste from the Offerlings house in
Antwerpe (being pursued by the Spaniards) thinking by flight to escape that
danger, rushed into a Flemmish ship in the river, where by the way (through
the heaviness of his armor borne down) he fell from that ships side and was
drowned. At that invasion also were missing (pursued by the Spaniards) certain
others of the chiefest personages of authority and valor in Antwerpe: There
then also the young Count Egmont was taken prisoner in the Abbey of S. Michael,
and with him Capreyse and Gogneyse two Noble men, and so carried captives away.
Then the Spaniards thus inuading the noble city of Antwerpe, entering it with
fire and sword most furiously sacked, ransacked and spoiled the same city in
horrible manner: so that they were Lords and conquerours of the same by the
fourth day of November in the year aforesaid 1576. where I note (by the way)
that on the self same day when the noble city of Antwerpe most tyrannously
and most lamentably was thus taken, burnt and spoiled by the Spaniards, even
then the same day Don John de Austria the bastard son of Charles the 5.
Emperor before remembered, and new sent Commander General for the King of
Spain, came into the Netherlands to govern the same. As for the late
Commander Don Lewis Requisensius, when he had so served his Prince King Philip
as General of the Netherlands four years, he deceased at Bruxels: upon whose
death by the author were written these verses following.

IN MORTEM LVDOVICI REquisens. Regis Hispan. Commendatoris magni praedicti in
Belgia. 1576. Carmen.
ILle Requisensus Regi percharus, and ipsi
Vrbis Quirini flaminis,
Nunc chlamydem, quandoque togam, quandoque cucullum
Triplex Chymera gestitans:
Belgarum genti Rector datus, ante faeraci
Praefectus and Insubriae.
Mitis and Horrenaus, turgens abdomine, Praedo
Prouinciarum subdolus;
Emunctor populi, Procerum Calcator, Asylum
Rasis, Piorum Carnifex.
Numen Iberorum, Batauorum terror, Iniquus
Belli atque Pacis Arbiter.
Ad generum Caereris subito se contulit, illuc,
Citatus a Vitellio:
O stupidos Belgas, passi qui talia Monstra,
Adhuc supini stertitis?
FINIS.
The civil Wars there under Don John de Austria.
Historia Belgica lib. 6.
IN January following the next year 1577. (after he was there settled a certain
space*) the Prince of Orange and diverse of the chiefest of the States (by a
certain humble endeavor to do all things for the best) do offer him in
friendly manner for his present intertainment, The offer made by the Prince and
States unto Don John of Austrich.
use and benefit, the possession of Louaine and Machlin, to the intent to have
some treaty of pacification confirmed by him: The said Prince and States (at
his request first demanding the same) on their parts giving for hostages the
before named Marquis of Haury, the Burgraue of Gaunt, and the Abbot of S.
Gertrude. He accepts their proffer made, receives the hostages, and bearing
them in hand (if he might be believed) he would remain either at Machlin or at
Louaine, where he would further proceed in treaty according to their former
request to him so made.

In so much as the same being on the 5. of January 1577. condescended,
confirmed and published by the aforesaid Prince of Orange and the States at
Bruxels: Don John (then as it seemed) being moved by many reasons to make
unity with the States, promised them first to send away and quite dismiss the
Spanish Kings forces out of those Countries, and after that makes them many
fair promises on his part to be performed, to the number of 19. Articles, The
pretended contract of Don John with ye Prince of Orange, proves in fine fraud
in friendship.
which were on the other party likewise by and for himself and his Council
on the 17. of February 1577. condescended, confirmed, exhibited and published.
But howsoever this appeared in outward show (as the Poet says) it fell out
Exitus acta probat, caret successibus opto: For the Prince of Orange and the
States looking into his water more iudicially and prudently preventing the
worst, sought by all means to provide in time for their own security and
safety, and like prospecting Patriotae for the protection of themselves and
their country, fortified themselves and the same every where. Notwithstanding
on the 7. Ides of April Anno Dom. 1577. King Philip confirms this as a
perpetual decree: Hereupon the Prince and the States do call upon the new
Governor ( Don John the Bastard of Austrich) for money, and having received
some certain pay, do satisfy in part the soldiers there so long soiourning.
So the Spanish, Italians, and Burgundian soldiers, as well footmen as
horsemen, on the 11. of May do forsake and depart from Vtrich, and from all
the Castles and Fortresses thereabouts. About the same time the before named
County Egmont captive, with the other two Noblemen taken by the Spaniards the
last year, and besides these, Valdesius with five or six others taken by the
States, were all dismissed and sent home, and at length all other strangers
also, unto whom (their promised pay being now made) County Maunsfeld Governor
of Luxenberg performs safe conduct, departing out of Luxenberg into Italy
very rich and passing joyful. To conclude, Don John who (before the departure
of the Spaniards out of the Netherlands, Historia Belgica lib. 6.
could not be made governor of the same) now in the mean time prepares
himself to take upon him that government at Louaine: Don John made Governor
General for the Spanish King.
where (when very many Noblemen came to congratulate his thither coming on the
Calends of May, this said year 1577) he with a great number of Noblemen of his
train, in great solemnity, honor and triumph went to Bruxels: where on the
4. of May he was enstalled Governor General for the Spanish King over all
those Netherlands: The people verily persuading themselves, that henceforth now
perfect stabilitie of peace would possess their expectations.

Anno 1577.
But within a while after he (seeing the government of the Country in his
absolute power and possession) began forthwith to execute that authority,
Historia Belgica lib. 7.
which in secret manner he had from the King enjoined him: And hereupon privily
conferreth out of hand with the Germane soldiers (as yet staying in the
Netherlands) to this end especially, that he may have certain chief Cities
there by some subtle slight or cunning device rendered into his hands. The
double dealing of Don John discovered and defeated.
But his Letters mentioning those secret devices, were intercepted (as God
would have them) in France: and so his fraud or guile being now discovered, he
aforehand takes the city of Namur. But when he attempted the like thing
against Antwerpe, his enterprise had no success: for the Castle being
fortified and defended by Boursius in the behalf of the States, this means,
policy and power sufficiently prevailed against the enemies enterprise. Again
also Bergen opt Zome, Breda, and Shertogenbusch, this Don John's forces were
discomfited by Champigny in the States behalf, valiantly encountering and
ouermatching the enemy at all assates.

Hereupon the Prince of Orange and the States do write unto the Spanish King,
The States write to the Spanish King of Don John's indirect dealing.
accusing the said Don John of his indirect dealing, contrary to the
confidence they reposed in him: They also certified his Majesty that this Don
John faining peace, and the procuring thereof amongst them, would not stick to
depart the country, if he were sure to bring it to pass thereby that the
Catholic Religion (as he terms it) and the kings authority might so rest in
safety. And yet in the mean time after all this protestation, this Don John
sends for the Spanish and other dismissed soldiers to come back again. To
cross him therefore another way, preventing his purpose the States do cast
down the Castle of Antwerpe, mistrusting he would forth with be their evil
neighbor there first of all: and incontinently they prepare them to war
against Don John. Therefore they send speedely for the Prince of Orange, not
far off as then, whom they condescend to make the chief Governor of
Antwerpe. Hereupon grows a jealousy, whereby many of the Noblemen being
moved in some manner contrarily, do send for the Archduke Matthias, The
Archduke Matthias sent for by the States.
brother to the then and now still Emperor Rodolphus 2. and son of
Maximilian before Emperor, hoping under his authority to have particular
jurisdiction in the several Provinces there: which thing when they of Gaunt
did hear of, they take the Duke of Ascot with others of that faction, and
commit them to safe keeping.

Here it is especially to be remembered, that on the 17. day of July that year
1577. came first to the Prince of Orange, Sir John Norice his first coming
into the Netherlands.
a worthy and forward soldier Master John Norice, second son to the Lord
Henry Norice, Baron of Rycot in Oxfordshire, a Gentleman of great courage and
dexterity, who (as Captain Peter Cripse, a follower of him in this his first
service, and in all others afterward for a long time, says) landed first at
Dunkirke with three hundred Englishmen, Captain Cripses note.
where he arming the^, marched toward Antwerpe with them, where the said Prince
of Orange remained: and so from thence to Brokam, where he made pay to all his
soldiers the last day of that month of July 1577. aforesaid.

Duke Matthias being come into those countries, and at the first thus forsaken
of them whom he should have had his assistance, by the persuasion yet of the
Prince of Orange, is by the States chosen and ordained their chief Governor
for the King: and Don John is publicly proclaimed an enemy to all the Low
Countries, Datum Bruxellae 7. December. 1577.

The States in this year send their Ambassadors unto diverse Monarchs and
Princes of diverse kingdoms and countries, to excuse themselves and accuse Don
John of the misgouernment of the Netherlands: In France they were offered by
the King his brother and Queen Mother both favor and furtherance for their
defense.

And here it is to be remembered, that whereas (by reason of the same request of
the States made unto the Queens Majesty of England) certain evil disposed
persons flattering the King of Spain, bore him in hand that the Queens
Majesty did ambitiously seek to usurp the government of those Low Countries,
contrary to his good pleasure: Her Majesty therefore being given to
understand of those slanderous and false bruites given out against her (to
purge her self of such sinister dealing, Envy and slander evermore enemies to
good enterprises.
and of that false and undeserved surmise suggested to the said King, and
dispersed abroad to blemish her Highness credit and estimation with other
Christian Princes) to the intent she would rather be known to God and the
whole world, To eschew evil and do good, to seek peace and ensue it, Psalm.
34.13. and not to be an intruder into those troubles (as it was falsely
surmised) to nourish the civil wars in those Countries, labors by
princely and friendly means of persuasion to the Spanish King for careful
conservation and preservation of the same: and likewise in Christian and
friendly manner exhorts the Prince of Orange and States of those Countries to
submit themselves to their sovereign Lord and King in all humility and
obedience, and so ceasing from civil discord, if that they would reject their
weapons, and practice to appease those troubles with patience, no doubt of it
God would work in the Kings heart to forget and forgive all that was past,
John Stow pages 1167.1168.1169.
to remedy all evils present, and provide for the best to come. These friendly
motions made by her Majesty for both the King and his subjects, written in
Latin and in English, several copies were sent from her Majesty to the King
of Spain by a wise and learned Gentleman named Master Thomas Wilks, on the 20.
day of December Anno 1577.

In the beginning of the year following 1578. the said Don John brought in a
new, Historia Belgica lib. 7.
Alexander Farnesius (the son of Lady Margaret before named, Duchess of
Parma and Regent of the Low Countries) now by the name and title of Prince of
Parma, Alexander Duke of Parma brought into the Low Countries by Don John.
as another enjoined General for the Spanish King, with his Spanish and
Italish soldiers come into those countries: In whom Don John having great
confidence, proclaims open wars against the Prince, the States and those
Countries. The Pope Gregory (alias ante Hugo) the 13. of that name on the
other side, sends his Cross, and denounces his curse against the Prince of
Orange, all the States and their partakers in those wars. Hereupon Don John
taking great encouragement unto himself, The States forces then at Gembleu
overthrown by Don John*
and those whom he had in charge under him, set upon the army of the States at
the town of Gembleu in the County Namure: and there discomfited them with
great spoil and overthrow of them on the 30. day of January 1578. And so still
prosecuting his purpose in hope of further victory, he subdueth afterward,
Louaine, Phillipville, Limburge, and certain other towns; which he together
with the Duke of Parma his forces had accomplished before July following.

Duke John Casimire comes into England.
In that January, vz. on the 22. day about 7. of the clock at night, Duke John
Casimire County Palatine of Rhene and Duke of Bauaria, landing at the
Tower-wharfe in London, was there by diverse Noblemen and others of England,
honorably received and conveyed to Sir Thomas Greshams house, the Queens
Agent, in Bishops gate street in London, where he was feasted and lodged till
Sunday next, that he was honorably brought to her Majesty's Court royal at
Whitehall, and after lodged at Sommerset-house on the 8. of February following;
he was made Knight of the Garter: and on the 14. of February he departed
homewards with great rewards, given by the Queens Majesty, the Nobility and
men of honor. This noble Duke being a valiant Martiallist, became afterward a
stipendarie warrior of great valor and account, and did much good service
against the Spaniards, for the Prince of Orange and the States of the Low
Countries.

The Wars in the Netherlands, under the Prince of Parma for the King, and the
Archduke Matthias for the States.
Upon the first day of August (amongst us English commonly called Lammas day)
in the year of Christ our Savior 1578. (which day the Spaniards do highly
honor, Captain Whitstocks note.
especially Don John, who as this day overcame the Turks in a battle by sea)
they endeavored by all means to enterprise some great exploite: so as they
sent out of Louaine two scoutes or espials in very base apparel, to pry about
and descrie the Prince of Orange his Tents, The battle on Lammas day between
Louaine and the Ledger.
at that time remaining in the Ledger: which two soldiers should indeed use al
their endeavor to burn up the houses near unto those Tents: and whilst they
should so set the inhabitants on work to quench the fire, all the whole Spanish
host, which consisted of four thousand horsemen and seven thousand footmen,
Anno 1578.
under conduct of Mondragon a Spanish Captain (although Don John the Bastard
of Austrich, Historia Belgica lib. 8.
and Alexander Fernesius Duke of Parma were both in person there also) should
suddenly and at unawares surprise and suppress the Prince of Orange his army.

But (as it was Gods good pleasure and favor to the contrary) those same two
Spies were taken, and the enemies were disappointed of their purpose, being
valiantly encountered by the English, A fierce fight for 7. hours.
Scottish and Frenchmen, from nine of the clock in the morning until four of
the clock in the afternoon of the same day: and that with a hot and fierce
fight (fortune so favoring the States and their forces) that they put their
enemies to flight, and pursued them to the utmost the space of three miles and
more.

The first of the English Captains which set upon the enemies, was that
valiant Lieutenant William Marckham, a Nottinghamshire man, stern of
countenance, strong of hands, and courageous of heart, like a Lion casting
down, overthrowing, and ouermatching whomsoever he met with: In whose
commendations the States themselves sent diverse Letters into England. But in
truth the greatest glory of this fight fell to the then courageous Colonel
Norice, who coming that Lammas day from Brokam (aforesaid) very early in the
morning to Remingham Ledger, Captain Cripses note.
where the States army were in fight with Don John of Austrich (the Grave van
Busshy being General of the States army) he the said Colonel Norice joining
with eleven companies of Englishmen more, vz. of Colonel Candish, Colonel
Morgan, and Colonel Cotton (who spent fifteen several barrels of powder upon
the enemies at that time, before they entered the Camp of the States) even
there the said Colonel Norice having three several horses one after another
slain under him, General Norice has the honor of the field.
with greatest valor pursued and subdued his enemies, being only weaponed with
single sword and his pistols which he used: even so surely, as who had seen
how courageously he laid about him on every side, might well have said he had
seen a new Hector, another Alexander, or rather a second Caesar foyling his
enemies every where. There were also present at this conflict three English
valiant Gentlemen, by name Bingams, all brethren, valiantly behauing
themselves, Three Binghams brethren.
until two of them, vz. Roger and Thomas, were pursued by the enemy unto the
very death: but the third (which was Richard Bingham, as it pleased God so to
favor him, safely then escaping the enemies danger) suruiued, Historia Belgica
lib. 8.
a man of good valor, for his service afterward in Ireland was knighted, and
there preferred to the government of Connaugh: of whose prowess and fame they
that will may read more amply both in John Stowes Chronicle, Sir Richard
Bingham deceased in Anno 1598.
and in the History of the wars in Ireland. In this fight for seven hours
space were slain of the enemies five hundred, besides a number drowned: Five
hundred Spaniards slain.
and of our Englishmen and of the Scots were slain to the number of one
hundred at the most: yet it was thought the Camp of the States would have been
utterly overthrown that day, if the English forces had not come in as they did.

Toward the latter end of the year 1578. after all these troubles and
broils, Historia Belgica lib. 9.
Don John de Austria having thus made his last mounting upon the stage
(summoned by Death to sound a Catastrophen) sickened in his Tent at Namours
about the Calends of October: The death of Don John.
and died (as some think) of the plague: others (rather believing) have given
it out that he (being sore grieved with a certain odious disease) what for
sorrow in mind conceived at ye hatred of the country upon bruiting of his base
birth, and what for stomacking and furiously fretting at his evil success in
government, took such extreme thought, that it shortened his life so much the
sooner. This Don John (as my Author says) was a lusty young man of thirty
years of age, of mean stature, hastle, His birth and properties described.
rash and proud: yet at length manifesting his malicious mind and furious
fierce outrage in undeserved troubles which he brought upon the inhabitants of
those Low Countries: because he saw he was despised of them for his base and
unlawful birth. For indeed the high and low Germans do most of all others
despise and disdain bastards: and the rather for that his mother which bare
him was a Germane, at that time dwelling in the Low Countries (whose report
being not so good) the Emperor Charles the 5. father bruited of this Don John,
caused her to be the sooner conveyed thence into Spain, that she might there
lead a new life, and appointed her a Nurse there to attend upon her and the
child: where notwithstanding perhaps the mother afterward growing
malecontent, would rather name another man to be Don John's father, then that he
was begotten by the said Emperor.

In the year following 1579. the said Colonel Norice, with other English
Captains and their forces, Historia Belgica lib. 9.
had many small skirmishes with the enemy in Brabant and Holland: but neither
part attempted any notable exploite for game or loss of that which they had
hitherto gotten, but watching their opportunity from time to time, passed forth
this year without any memorable thing done.

In the winter of this year the before named Duke John Cassimire (for a
certain time before retained by the States as a worthy warrior) came with
his forces to Teene and Areschot, and lay there in camp all that winter, and
now and then skirmished with the said Prince of Parmaes other forces. But the
Prince being too strong for him, drive him to the worse, so that with very
little or no great glory the Duke departed again into high Germany, and left
his own soldiers in the Netherlands, some under one Captain, some under
another: but in the end they followed their first Captain with better
contentment to go then to stay any longer.

Anno 1580.
Anno Dom. 1580. when the Lord George Lelain Earl of Renenbergh, so commonly
called (in times past) a faithful consort of the States, Historia Belgica lib.
10.
and a valiant Leader: but afterward (his fates so framing, or rather
frowning) being taken prisoner by this Alexander Prince of Parma, became a
Revolt or Apostata: he thenceforth made Lieutenant general under the same Duke
of Parma, when (I say) he should take his journey on the 18. day of October
this year 1580. toward the city of Steenwick to besiege it (then being under
the States) coming with his forces against the same, he found the City of
very little ability or strength to resist him, and very slenderly manned with
one small company in garrison: yet (as he thought) if he might win this, he
persuaded himself it would be for his special advantage, serving to
strengthen Drent, and so in his passage to Frizland fit him for the defense of
Vallenhoue. Therefore this County Renenbergh laid siege to Steenwick, bringing
to the field 28. Ensigns or companies of soldiers, every one having two
hundred footmen, severed in this manner, that is, fourteen bands of
Frizlanders, nine bands of new Gelders, and five bands of his own province of
Renenbergh: all which 28. Ensigns or bands contained six thousand footmen and
more, and he had moreover of horsemen twelve hundred special chosen Lansiers.
There was for the States within this city a man of good valor named Olthoff,
as chief governor, having but one Ensign or band of men lying there in the
garrison. There was also another worthy man and a notable good Leader named
Corruput, Historia Belgica lib. 10.
with his band or company, and with these were also two companies of Germans
under conduct of the Lord Hohenlo, commonly called County Hollock, whose under
Captains were Plat and Stuper, with their Leader John Berenbrooke governor of
Gelders: The Garrison in Stenwick.
but the soldiers of these two last companies were in manner Nouices, and
untrained to the wars. There were over and besides these about three hundred
citizens, but yet amongst them scarce fifty persons which a man might well
trust unto: They had not as yet any General sent unto them, neither had they
any great Ordenance, nor any horse; only the officers of the bands had some
twelve or fourteen horses for themselves: All these adiuments or helps thus
here recited, were the besieged citizens utterly void and destitute of,
wherewith they might the better resist and repulse their approaching enemies.
Wherefore in this present distress, the Governors, Captains and Burghers
(sending speedely Letters unto the States) do humbly and earnestly entreat
them to send them speedy succor and rescue. The Governors of Stenwick send
to the States for supply.
But yet only the said courageous Corruput and prudent Leader (before named)
was after a sort against this intendement: for he conceiving and pondring with
himself another thing, with great heed and foresight shows and seeks
other means otherwise how to defend the city: whose opinion the foresaid
Captain Plat and his soldiers do also well allow of. In the mean time,
notwithstanding while the Noblemen of Frizland sent thither for succor and
rescue four Ensigns or companies of footmen and a few horsemen, The first
supply sent, surprised and set upon.
County Renenbergh addresseth certain of his soldiers against them: They
which were sent for rescue, defending themselves what they could, were by the
way set upon and slain of the Renenbergers, few or none escaping.

Once again the grave counsel and advice of the said Corruput the second time
given in presence of the Governors, Captains and Burghers, touching the
cities safety (as aforesaid) being still contemned or neglected: certain of
the chiefest personages in the city by writing make and dispatch another
motion to the States to have yet again more help sent unto them, Historia
Belgica lib. 10.
and that the city with all possible speed might be delivered from the
enemies siege. But now Corruput and the said Berenbrook by their letters
persuade the States to deal more advisedly, least they afterward repent
themselves again, as they had done once erst before. The States then willing
to satisfy the citizens expectation, The second supply sent also surprised by
the enemy.
yet for all this send another fresh supply of six Ensigns of footmen under
Heighmans conduct, and appoint them for S. John's Camp, a place so called, not
far from Stenwick: But or ever these came thither they also were set upon by
the Renenbergers; and although they manfully defended themselves, yet were they
by the enemies taken, slain, and put to flight. Hereupon the enemy seeing his
advantage, marches with great courage to the city, fireth the suburbs and
scaleth the walls. The citizens seeing the fire fiercely flaming in diverse
places, as men out of their wits, be stir them by all means (yet little
enough) to quench the same, and the soldiers resist the enemy here and there
what they can, and with their Ordenance beat the enemy back from the walls:
they so gathering strength and taking courage unto them, do for a certain
season keep out the enemy and fortify themselves.

These things thus befalling, the States (more advisedly consulting how to
deliver Stenwick) go now another way to work: Here at length prevails their
purpose: they therefore with all possible speed having prepared a stronger
power wherewith to deliver this ^^stressed city, The States better aduising
themselves, send now thither Colonel Norice.
leuying and gathering money for their soldiers: for this new prepared
supply, do ordain the before named Colonel Norice chief conductor and
General of their troops, sending him with them to raise the siege. Who so
soon as he came with his Regiments to Swart Sluice, found there a certain
fresh band of the enemies newly arrived under Othon Sanches a Spaniard: These he
sets upon, kills most of them, and putting the rest to flight, burns up
the Village on the 15. of December. From thence he marches to Meppell with 24.
Ensigns, which scarsely contained sixteen hundred fighting men, Historia
Belgica lib. 10.
with whom were joined a few horsemen: and so leaves at Sluice three Ensigns
only for a Garrison by the way as he passes.

Renenberg sends thither eleven Ensigns of footmen, and six troops of
horsemen, which by a convenient passage through the ice, The now General
Norices victory over the Renenbergers besieging Stenwick.
set upon General Norice his soldiers. But when they had courageously
defended themselves for a long time against the Renenberg, in the mean season
the General in person (having good opportunity to succor and rescue his
people) with all speed suddenly rusheth upon the Renenbergers, and puts
them to flight, in such sort as many of them were slain, and many amidst the
broken ice were drowned. So the said worthy General departing with victory,
having taken two of the enemies chief Ensigns, and gotten so much armor as
might well serve for furniture of five hundred soldiers, sends one of those
Ensigns into the city of Stenwick aforesaid, accompanied with forty
soldiers, This affirmed by Captain Strange.
which carried into the same City also 570. pounds weight of gunne powder put
in leather bags, very needful and necessary as the time present then
required.

The day before the Calends of January, the said General again with his
forces made an assault upon the enemy, still besieging the city, issuing upon
them hard at their backs beyond the marrish ground: and even then the very
Garrison themselves with a great force fell out of the town also, who set upon
the enemies in such sort, as they made them to give ground and run away, yea
and with Smithes hammers brake in pieces certain Ordenance and field cariages,
left there by the enemies at their fleeing away. The said Renenbergers not
perceiving how they could by any means prevail against the towns men, do
yet (in a bragging bravery take a kind of courage unto them) devise to pass
away the time with some sports: whereupon it happened that a certain Captain
amongst others of County Renenbergs soldiers, named Thomas of Alba, chief
Captain of those which came from Albania, The enemies bragging challenge.
presumed insolently to challenge the said General Norice at the single combat
hand to hand with Lance and Sword: upon whose behalf that renowned Captain
and soldier Sir Roger Williams (since that time for his worth and valor
knighted) replied, as Lieutenant general of the horsemen under the said
General Norice, that he in his steed would defend the cause against the
challenger, Historia Belgica lib. 10*
and fight with him hand to hand. Which being determined by both parties in
certain prescribed Articles, the day is appointed, each of these champions
enter the lists between both the Armies, they marched forth and fall to
buckling one with the other; where after certain fierce blows given and taken
by either party (yet neither of them being hurt) the one drinks a carouse,
and the other pledgeth, and so both of them depart the place.

After this, on the 24. of January this year 1580. while the said General
Norice with his army was settled in S. John's Camp aforesaid: against him
thither comes County Renenberg in person with all his most strong power, and
besieging him round about with great shot, The fight in S. John's Camp between
General Norice and County Renenberg.
assaileth and forces him mightily. Here the said General and his soldiers
enduring great danger, and suffering great penury for lack of victuals
(necessity so compelling them) were enforced to feed upon horse flesh: until
such time as the Lord Nienort (sent from the States with his own soldiers,
and six other Ensigns of Frizlanders) furnished with wagons laden, brought
thither all kind of provision to strengthen and relieve the besieged persons:
which Renenberg well perceiving, secretly and suddenly breaking up the siege,
This affirmed by Captain Strange.
leaving his soldiers there some hurt and some slain, fled away with great
abundance of all things necessary.

And here now this one thing thus happening worthy of memory, may well be
told for a miracle, as in truth it proved, that in the time of th^^ siege,
three Partridges flying over the city of Stenwick on the 4. of February in the
morning, were taken and brought to the before named Captain Corruput. He
interpreting it for a good presage, said: That God in Trinity who in the old
time gave Quails (such like food as these) unto the fainting Israelites,
Exodus 16.13.
would also even now without doubt feed and relieve the besieged and distressed
city of Stenwick. These words spoke he, who little knowing what certainty be
fore signified; found not long after the assured event of his speech. Historia
Belgica lib. 10.
For of truth first the aforesaid General Norice on the 20* of that February,
sends from out of his Camp certain soldiers which brought to Stenwick so
besieged one hundred and fifty Cheeses, General Norice relieueth Stenwick
(besieged) with victuals, the 20. day of February 1580.
three hundred and fifty loaves of bread, and some quantity of gunpowder.
Secondly, even the very same day between three and four of the clock in the
afternoon, he sent thither also by certain husbandmen a great number of
horses laden with corn, branne and gunpowder, and certain of his footmen
with speed carried more Cheeses and loaves of bread into the said city.

In April following that year 15^0. the said General Norice, accompanied with
Monsieur Charles Leven, also Monsieur Temple governor of Bruxels, and their
bands of horsemen and footmen marching in good order with manly courage,
leaving Liere in Brabant, Captain Whitstocks note, confirmed by Captain
Cripse.
where they had been before, do now attempt to besiege Machlin in Brabant: on
the 9. of that month very early in the morning they skaled the walls and
fired the port in such sort, and so valiantly behauing themselves, that before
break of day they entering with their forces surprised the town, got great
booties shared amongst the soldiers, and that with no little slaughter of the
enemies, which had so before resisted them within the town. Amongst whom (as
says my Author, and which also others affirm) that General Norice
encountering with a Spanish Friar (a tall and stout fellow in arms) named Pedro
Lobo (who had before caused all the great Ordenance in the town to be shot off
against him and his forces) after a while bickering with him hand to hand, gave
him his deaths wound, whereof the said Friar died presently. Confirmed also by
Captain Cripse, that after the said General Norice with his forces had lien
there fifteen days, sacked the town and taken the spoil, they were
commanded by the States to deliver the town to Monsieur Famoise: who then to
take the charge of the town (with his Dutch soldiers and Monsieur Temples
Wallons) perceiving the English forces to depart away very rich out of the
town, fell upon them suddenly for the spoil, where they killed more of the
English then were killed at the winning of the town: where General Norice
himself was shot through the buttocke, and had his horse killed under him: and
even then Captain Price a brave soldier forsook his own horse, and mounted
him upon the same: and so altogether they marched out of the town toward
Antwerpe.

The States again send the Lord Nienort with his company thither: he in his
own person with the same company of soldiers boldly assaileth Renenberg with
often skirmishing, he kills a great number of the enemies, puts them to
flight, and as they were flying pursues them hard at the heels even to the
very walls of Groaning, giving them a great overthrow, where he slew above
six hundred of the Renenbergers: The Lord Nienort his victory over the
Renenbergers the 9. day of July 1580.
so as there was left for the said General Norice four of the enemies Brass
pieces of Ordenance, a great number of fardels, and very many horses. This
victory by the Lord Nienort, thus gotten the 9. of July 1580. he pitcheth his
Tents not far from the town of Groaning, there resting in better security
for a season. And so the city of Stenwick, after four months siege, was in
this manner at length by Gods good providence delivered. And within a little
while after, Renenbergs death.
namely on the 23. of the said month of July County Renenberg himself (after
he had been certain days sick) deceased in his Camp, as some suspect by
poison.

After all this on the 17. of September this year 1580. a consultation was had
at Lewarden in Frizland: Historia Belgica lib. 11.
where it was decreed (on the behalf of the States) to send the said General
Norice to resist the enemy. Speedy dispatch herein was made, and an army was
furnished out against a Spanish General named Verdugo: They (I mean the
States) having levied and armed certain bands of horsemen and footmen, also
mustering their companies, and paying them one months pay aforehand, do make
the said General Norice chief Governor of them. He with convenient speed
(having these his forces well fortified with six Brass pieces, marches
manfully to meet the said enemy. General Norice marches to meet Verdugo.
But it fell out so that in both armies the plague was very contagious, whereby
many officers of this army died in their Tents. Here for a certain space,
while both armies were thus settled, afterward Verdugo pitcheth his Tents at
Northorne: Him pursues hard the said General Norice, unto whom came eleven
Ensigns of Englishmen, under the conduct of the valiant Colonel Sir Thomas
Morgan: he himself having under his charge nineteen Ensigns of all these
countries, vz. four of Nassawes Regiment, nine of Monsieur Sannoy, and six of
Nienorts Regiment: so being under them thirty Ensigns, which made in all
scarsely three thousand footmen. To these were joined the troops of horsemen
under their several Captains, as the Colonel Gore, Captain Elenborne, and
Henry van Eky, who were in number scarce five hundred: So then with such a
brave army marches forwards the said worthy General Norice on the 30. day of
September that year 1580. toward Newziel, Historia Belgica lib. 10.
a place in Frizland.

Now Verdugo setting his forces in order and battle array, had got (to his
greatest advantage) for his station the upper ground near the ditches: where
the valiant worthy soldier Captain Roger Williams (before named) with the
English horsemen under his charge, together also with Elenbornes horsemen
aforesaid, do set upon one great band of Verdugoes footmen, of whom they
killed many, and put many to flight. But as even then one Wingard a Captain
and companion of Verdugo, made toward them with certain especial troops
(while the horsemen of the States had the enemy in chase) Verdugo with two
troops of Lansiers by maine force charged into the army of the States: The
battle at Northorne.
and so assailing them, not only found Munition, provision, wagons, and other
necessaries, but also carried them quite away, and took also from them many
Ensigns, where many of the States soldiers were slain and taken prisoners:
but few of Verdugoes company (of any reputation) were then either slain or
taken. And so afterward Verdugo himself confessed, that (if this army of the
States had forborne and prolonged a few days more from this fight) a great
number of these enemies had departed determinately, and would otherwise have
provided for their safety elsewhere, without any field there fought at that
time.

Here in this conflict had the said General Norice his right hand hurt with a
bullet, and many of his soldiers which escaped the enemies hands, were for the
most part spoiled of their armor and weapons: very many of them leaving their
armor in those places, where necessity compelled them either to leap or
swim over those ditches. This also confirmed by Captain Cripse, who being
there an actor, was in eight several places hurt at the least. Thus much my
author mentions of the conflict at Northorne: and thus far he writes of
the wars managed between Alexander Prince of Parma for and in the behalf of
the Spanish King, and the Archduke Matthias for and in the behalf of the
States of the Netherlands: which Archduke by occasion of displeasure of the
King, departed shortly after toward Austrich, The Archduke departs the
Netherlands, the Prince of Orange succeeds.
leaving the government of those Low Countries and the ordering of the wars
unto the Prince of Orange, who by general consent of all the States, ordering
all things with wisdom and provident foresight, held the enemy at the sword
point for one whole year, from the end of 1580. to the beginning of the second
year after 1582. at what time Monsieur the Duke of Aniow and brother to Henry
the 3. King of France, was sent for and chosen to succeed in government of
those Countries and ordering of the wars, in manner and form following.

The Wars in the Netherlands, under Francis Duke of Aniow against Alexander
Pr. of Parma.
AFter that the said Monsieur, Historia Belgica lib. 11.
with other Noblemen of France ariuing in Kent on the first of November 1581.
had been honorably received at London, and entertained at her Majesty's Court
at Whitehall, Francis Duke of Aniow comes into England.
with princely feastings and banquettings all that Christmas: and being
accompanied with the Queens Majesty of England, she with her Nobles brought
him on his way to Canterbury, feasted him there also, and each of them took
leave of other: And after that the Queens Majesty had sent with him in
fifteen ships the Right Honorable Robert Earl of Leicester, Henry Lord
Hunsdon, Charles Lord Howard Baron of Essingham Knights of the Garter, the Lord
Willowby, the Lord Windsor, the Lord Sheffield, Master Philip Sidney, Master
George Carry, and Master John and Master Robert Carry his brethren, with many
other Gentlemen, who arrived at Flushing in Zeland, where he withal these
Nobles of England and his own and their train in princely and friendly manner
was received, by the aforesaid noble Prince William County of Nassaw, Captain
Churchyard was with the Duke all that while.
and the other Nobles of the Low Countries, conducting them from thence to
Midleborow and so to Antwerpe in Brabant, where on the 19. of February Anno
1581. the said Duke of Aniow was created Duke of Lothier and Brabant with great
solemnity: which being ended, the Nobility of England returned home again,
and left him there Governor of those Countries, he repaired with his train of
French Noblemen and Gentlemen into France, where the King his brother Henry the
3. of that name furnished him with men, money and munition, for the better
supportation and countenancing of his princely port and new attained authority
in the Low Countries aforesaid: And so on the 27. day of August in the year
following 1583. for greater security of himself and his charge now taken upon
him, he returned into Brabant with those forces, containing in all companies
four thousand fighting men. The preparation of the Prince of Parma and Duke of
Aniowes forces for the fight.
These being placed in a certain Village near unto the city of Gaunt:
straightway the Duke of Parma hereof understanding, and having in a readiness a
great number of his most valiant soldiers, with their cariages and furniture
makes all haste possible to encounter him. Again, his coming being no sooner
perceived by the Duke of Brabants espials, but advertised unto him, the Lord
Pierri a noble Frenchman, Campe-master of the Duke of Brabant, commands his
companies quickly to arm and encounter: Lib. 11.
and with all careful diligence and skillful experience he advises them of
due observations in their warlike order of fight, and how to march softly and
fight slowly with the enemy. Martialling his men on this manner: first in the
front of his battle next unto the enemies were the band of English soldiers,
and to them were joined the troops of Germans, next these were the bands led
by Bouquoy, and after these marches the worthy General Norice in the
Rereward with three troops of English horse, and four troops of French
horsemen: after these followed three troops of French horsemen, with certain
footebands of Flemmings and of Scots: and last of all in the Rereward marched a
band of English footmen, and a great company of pikemen. Contrariwise again
the Duke of Parma had in his Vaward or front all Spaniards, a great multitude
whereof were very many footmen, and more then a thousand horsemen: for whom
every where by the way the Duke of Aniowes espials lay in ambush, so as not a
few enemies were slain with the shot of the Ambush; only of the Duke of
Aniowes company amongst others were wanting three or four Captains of
hundreds.

After this welco^ming made by the Duke of Aniowes soldiers unto the Prince of
Parmaes and his forces thus approaching toward him, which was short of Gaunt
two Dutch miles, being six of our English miles: Captain Edward Stranges
relation of the service at Gaunt.
the Duke of Aniow and the Prince of Orange thought good to send Sir John
Norice to the Camp where the forces lay: and thither he came with the three
troops of English horsemen, and four troops of French horsemen (as
aforesaid) for his conuoy into the Camp about twelve of the clock at night
aforesaid, where there were of all nations, English, French, Dutch and Scottish
some six thousand men. And coming into the English quarter, he enquired where
his quarter was, and where Capaine Edward Strange lay, who had the command of
all his house and his horses: where finding him lying in a little cabin hard
by his Tent, he asked him how he had bestowed all things, for the enemy was
hard at hand. To whom Captain Strange answered, he had delivered all unto
Captain Peter Cripse to send it away to Gaunt. Then said the General: We have
the Vauntgard to day, but I think the French are fled from us, and we must
then have the Rereward in spite of our hearts. So he having a squadron of
horse, lay from the Camp a quarter of an English mile, where one William Winter
a tall soldier, being one of the Corporals, and commanding the squadron, The
enemies forces discovered at hand.
sent out a very good watch, so as the enemy must of force come by them, and
by no other way. Two hours before day there came from the Prince of Parma
certain troops of horse Albanoyses and Italians talking together: and being
within hearing of ye watch, those which stood Sentinel discovered them, and
presently sent word to their guard lying in a house hard by, to certify the
General that the enemies forces were at hand. The word coming to the
General, he presently commanded that every company should be ready to
answer the alarm: but it was found that as well others as the French were
marched and retired toward Gaunt. There the General stood fast until his
own company came unto him: and presently three companies of Albanoyses came
thither and offered to charge him, he being accompanied with Master Henry
Knowles (a most worthy and gallant Gentleman) all that day. So the General
marched from the quarter down the hill, and at the foot of the hill, by the
counsel of the said Master Knowles, he armed himself, asking Captain Strange
where the Turney horse was, for he would ride upon him that day, having three
other horses led, every one by two grooms a piece to serve for that day: and
being first mounted upon the Turney horse, the said Albanoyses durst not come
down themselves, but sent against him those English Rebels, which a little
before ran away from before Bridges. They being both Targatiers and
Musketeers came down the hill, as the General made his retreit toward his
own battle of Pikes, the English Rebels very hardly assaulted him: amongst
whom one of them calling to the General as he was in retreit, General Norice
and Sir W. Knowles four english miles from Gaunt, assailed by English Rebels.
which he could not long endure, but turning upon that Rebel with his Rapier,
he struck the Rebel on the head with such a force, that his Rapier bowed to
his very hand: upon this came down the troops of the enemies horse, and
charged the General three ways, vz. upon the Rereward, so that he and Master
William Knowles were both feign to put their horses among their pikes for their
safeguard, and so marching at the push of the pikes four English mile they
continued the fight still, and none but this Generals Regiment consisting of
seven Ensigns, which might be in number some one thousand strong, until they
came to the very walls of Gaunt. The enemy forcing them so near that they
came and attempted to pill the wagons, putting the whole force of the Camp so
near as the very town ditch: until such time as the Ordenance played so fast
out of Gaunt, that thereby the enemies were enforced to retire from those
places: Coronell Cotton and Coronell North.
Where the English forces, vz. Colonel Thomas Morgan, Colonel Cotton, and
Colonel North with their forces joined themselves together by the Generals
direction in continual fight, from the Sun rising until the Sun setting:
within which time about four of the clock in the afternoon Monsieur Rochpot
the Duke of Aniowes Lieutenant, and Monsieur Byron Marshall of the same Dukes
Camp, came forth unto the said General, who said unto him: General Norice
honored by the French forces.
The Duke of Aniow our Master has sent us unto you, to give you the honor of
this service this day, as most worthy thereof above all other Commanders. The
General gave them thanks, praying them to do his humble duty unto his
Alteze, and to the Prince of Orange, and so continued his service till after
Sun set, as is aforesaid. And besides this, there came voluntarily diverse
brave French Gentlemen out of the town of Gaunt unto the said General, The
offer of the French Nobles to the English General Norice.
and besought him to vouchafe to accept of their service, that they might
traile their pikes under his Colors: of which offer he courteously accepted at
their request: they also passing through the whole company, desired the
soldiers to accept of them as their companions, vowing to live and die under
those Colors.

While they were thus bickering both Armies together, the Duke of Aniow and
with him the Prince of Orange stand upon the walls of Gaunt beholding them,
Historia Belgica lib. 11.
and encouraging their soldiers to the fight, command them politikely to go
somewhat aside, to the end that their enemies pursuing them, might be the
better beaten and foiled with the shot from of the Rampires and Bulwarks of
the City. Here again with hot skirmishing a number were slain on both sides,
as also diverse hurt and killed within the town with the enemies shot, at which
time one John Iux (then serving the Duke of Aniow, The Prince of Orange and
Duke of Aniow behold the fight.
and now the Queens Majesty's Trumpeter) standing by the Duke upon the walls
of Gaunt, was shot in at the mouth, and Parmaes forces were compelled with the
shot of their great Ordenance to retire. So did the Duke of Aniowes army covet
in ranging to approach near the city still, and the enemy returning with some
breathing freshly assailed them: From the wailes still was the Ordenance
discharged with horrible shooting, to the great slaughter of the enemies. Here
were slain very many of Parmaes company, but very few of the Duke of Aniowes
soldiers were either hurt or slain. In the evening Parma with his wearied
remnants making haste out of the field, as he that might have done more harm
if he had been more diligent then he was: near unto the city he burieth about
two hundred of his slain soldiers; the wounded persons he gathers up where
he can find them, carries them away in wagons, and so departs the field
without more fight at that time.

That night the English were appointed to lie in a little Island or piece of
ground environed with water, and had Reeds to make them cabbins for their
succor. Then the town of Gaunt sent them very great store of victuals, and
Sir John Norice at his own charges sent them a pipe of Rhenish wine, and three
hogsheads of Claret wine to make merry withal: And upon this Monsieur the Duke
of Aniow made his retreit for Antwerpe in Brabant, and all the forces went
after him, where happened as follows.

Now come we to the end of this Comedy, interlaced, with an interchaunge
Tragicallie metamorphosed, I mean of this Duke of Aniowes fair flourish at
the first, where, in his fair show and sun shine he said of his honor; Sol
discutit and fouet; now contrariwise, nubibus obtenebratur and fallit in the
end. The history affirms what time this Duke of Aniowes forces by conduct of
Byron the french Marshall came first out of France (as before we have
mentioned) after speeches and consultations had with him of diverse weighty
enterprises, The Duke of Aniowes metamorphosed mind and manners.
amongst others he deliberately advised himself how he might attempt to take
into his jurisdiction many of the Cities in Brabant, Holland, and Zeland: he
determined to lose no opportunity nor occasion to accomplish his desire, and
use his absolute authority herein: So as first he took Dunkerke, for that was
in his way out of France, next after that Dixmew, and afterward Dendermond:
in process of time he attempted further, but that enterprise brought him evil
success at Bruges, Aloste, Newport, and Antwerpe; especially at Antwerpe he
had his hardest success, and greatest dishonor, grown by his mind alienated
from his oath, and metamorphosed in his manners. For where before he smothered
his affections with a kind of hot friendship, now the sparks fly first, and
the flame follows of his fraudulent infidelity. For ambition had kindled the
fire, vain glory blown the bellows, and hypocrisy had made way for the
flame: So as attempting to rule all things after his sensuality, when he went
further in wilfulnes then wisdom required, The City of Antwerpe all on a
tumult by the Dukes displeasure.
the Citizens of Antwerpe spying the flame of his furious outrage to burst out
against them, whereby the City was in an uproar, they seeking their own
security do strengthen themselves by force of arms to withstand his
wilfulnes: insomuch, as every street and gate was out of quiet, and a quarrel
thus begun was not so soon ended till this Duke had seen the slaughter both
of many a Citizen and many a soldier: who before feeding the humor of their
graund Duke and Captain, by their unbridled wilful boldness, mooning a most
cruel tumult in the City (spurred forth with hope of rich spoils) as if they
all had been of one mischievous mind, with one and the same voice, making a
clamorous outcrie upon the Citizens, they rush and run against them in
hostile manner with their weapons shaken in their hands, Historia Belgica lib.
11.
terriblie thus crying, Ville Gaigne, Viue la Mess, tue, tue: the town is
won, the Mass prevail, kill, kill. The cause hereof as it might best be
imputed to the said Dukes displeasure conceived against the City; so a little
after all this tumult, he rode in a hot choler out of the City into his
Pauilion which he had prepared for himself without in the fields: whom when a
certain noble French man accompanied, as he went with the Duke out of the
gate called Kipdorp, he (fayning to have broken his own leg by mischance)
the more exasperated the Dukes anger against the Citizens, and caused here
another tumultuous terrible slaughter of Citizens and soldiers within the said
gate called Kipdorp; insomuch as 1500. French soldiers were there, and at that
time slain, amongst whom were about 320. Noblemen and Gentlemen of great name
and authority.

The Duke of Aniow hearing the thundering thumps of the gunnes of the City,
supposing that this should signify some evil presage to him and his retinue,
making haste away into his Tents, and next day after removing them thence, got
him and his retinue to the Castle of Bercheny, a lodging place scarce fit
enough for him, altogether destitute of household furniture, victuals and other
provisions needful: from thence yet very greatly abashed at his own doings
and with penury of all things distressed, he takes his way toward the Abbey
of S. Bernard; from thence purposing to pass over the river Schaldis and
Dermonde, the Citizens of Antwerpe with all festination, sending their ships
of war against him, do stop the way at Macklin in Brabant.

Hereupon also forthwith was the noble General Norice addressed with 23
Ensigns of English men and Scots into the country of Waste to withstand his
passage that way, General Norice sent to meet the Duke.
who out of hand drowneth a great part of the country near unto Dermond with
the waters there abouts: but the Duke (necessity so constrayning him) with
great hazard passes at Duffle over the river Nete; and so with no little shame
returned home into France, Historia Belgica lib. 11.
where he afterward for very sorrow (sore repenting him of these things) ended
his life in such manner, as I shall declare truly reported in the history
thus proceeding.

This Duke of Aniow and late Duke of Brabant by the Sates so created as before
you have heard, thus being sore abashed at his own indirect dealing, and
returning (as he came first with his powers) by Dunkerke into France: when he
was there arrived, the Duke of Parma presently beseegeth the same town of
Dunkerke, and takes it with certain other Cities left at all adventures,
being therein aided by the Citizens of Gaunt, and by the Prince of Chymay the
Governor. And the said Duke of Aniow then being in France, notwithstanding
all former inconveniences tolerated by the States, Historia Belgica lib. 11.
they yet once again seek for mutual reconciliation with him, and offer
their friendships to receive him again, upon good assurance of better
expectation: but he (newly returned with his soldiers, Coming into France he
falls sick.
dismissed, scattered abroad and discouraged) as well falling sick in body,
as wearied in mind with thinking upon his former great misfortunes, saw in
himself now yt which he loathed; being laughed to scorn of his adversaries,
and besides that little accounted of with many others, by reason he was at some
discord and ods with the King his brother. Again, the Queen mother a woman of
most subtle wit and perilous mind (who had first fostered the discord
between these her two sons, to the end she might prevail in her purpose
otherwise) then practiced to reduce them to unity, Practice of Queen Mother.
and brought the matter to that pass that the Duke as humble suter for favor,
acknowledging his fault, should crave pardon of the King his brother. Being
constrained so to do that he might again insinuate a renewed mind into the
affections of the States to make the former breach a more firmer knot of
amity, concord and league with them: who had by experience well learned that
the Duke without the king his brothers countenance and supportation, could not
well accomplish any thing answerable to their expectation: for they hoped
hereby only the French forces should the rather return unto them, and by his
more careful consideration all should yet again be amended which before was
far amiss. And in this behalf the States beforehand prudentlie providing
for their security do send the Lord Schonwalley as their Ambassador unto the
French king and the said Duke his brother: They provide for their safety.
but or ever this embassage could take effect, or once be solicited, the said
Duke of Aniow removing himself to the Castle of Theodor, incontinently fell
most grieuouslie sick, the blood gushing out of all the pores of his body, as
if his veins had been burst with too much vehement ryding: So as at length
refusing natural sustenance, after the fortieth day of his sickness come and
gone, he died on the 10. of June in the year of our Lord 1584. At his death
being in good mind and memory, it is affirmed, he would not have any Monk or
such other person for his Confessor. He acknowledged, professed, and protested
to such as were present at his death, That he reposed all his hope in the
bloodshedding of Jesus Christ only, as his only and alone Savior; which
thing for certain the author of this history had related unto him by credible
persons then present: which his death some say was not without suspicion of
poisoning. His desire before he died was to be buried as Governor and Duke of
Brabant, with his coat armor, shields of arms and such other appurtenances
to the same dominions usual and accustomed: but his brother the French kings
Counselors thought it not so convenient, His description and properties.
for favor that they bare to the king of Spain. He was somewhat above the
mean stature of men, well compact of body, of a swart complexion, black
eyed, black head curled, of a hie forehead, a greater nose then any his
ancestors had, he was very fierce of nature, witty, eloquent, affable, nobly
minded, bountiful, ambitious, nothing blood thirsty or desirous of revenge,
but merciful and courteous: not contemning any man for religion sake, yet
unquiet, quick and hasty in his doings, but for all this, as his disposition
sufficiently well showed) a peaceable person, as appeared by his endeavors
when he went unto the king of Navarre (now king of France) as then being his
adversary, the Ambassadors of the Low Countries then thither accompanying the
said Duke.

Men say that he (two days before his death) sent a copy of his testament
unto the king his brother, and therein declared the great sorrow of his heart
in that he had offended his Majesty with his doings and enterprises: he
requested of him many things, especially, he humbly beseeches him to be
gracious Sovereign Lord unto many his retained Nobles and Officers at arms
lately serving him in the Low Countries, Historia Belgica lib. 11.
and there impouerishing themselves. And further, where he in conscience was
touched with consideration of a certain debt to the sum of 300000. Florens
which he had not yet satisfied, he humbly besought his Majesty of all
brotherly love between them, to take some order for the payment thereof:
acknowledging touching his presentabilitie, that he could not leave behind him
sufficient restitution or satisfaction, neither should he carry away with him
out of this world into his grave any other riches, but the tears and sighs
of sorrowful persons: to conclude he desired neither sumptuous nor stately
funeral but wished the monument of his memory to be founded and fixed in the
minds of his friends and vassals. Whose funeral in decent and honorable
manner the king his brother accordingly accomplished within the City of Paris
in the month of August that year, His funeral.
1584. Thus much for the manner of the government, actions, life and death of
the said Duke of Aniow after he was Governor in the Low Countries, being for
the space of two years and a half, as before is declared.

You have heard hitherto what interchange of Governors have been on both
sides, as well for and under the king of Spain, as for the States; what wars,
what slaughters of men, and what infinite charges and troubles it has been
for all parts; and yet no placart of peace purchased at the Pope and King of
Spaines hands: but rather the one more like blood thirsty Baalac cursing the
Israelites, and the other more like Pharao persecuting and oppressing them;
Numb. 22.5. Exodus 7.3.31. Prou. 28.15.
but both of these most like the roaring Lion, and hungry Bear which Solomon
speaks of, seeking now more and more the pray and spoil of the chief godly
Governor the Prince of Orange now ruling the Low Countries, and defending
their wars with the States, whom the Pope and Spanish King had proscribed
certain years agone, and could no way come by his body to bring it into
thraldom by wars, threatenings nor subtle sleights to circumuent him. Now
therefore they the said Pope and king of Spain, practice subornation of
murdering messengers to hunt and haunt his Court under color of some far fecht
and dear bought false friendship: The first messenger sent to murder the
Prince of Orange 1582.
as in the last year 1582. one John Iaureg with full purpose sent from the
Pope and Spanish King to murder this good and godly Prince and Father of his
Country, then keeping his Court within the Castle of Antwerpe, accompanied
with the foresaid Duke of Aniow, the Council of the States and the noble
General Norice, with others his faithful friends: even then the said
murdering messenger when he had discharged a dagge at the good Prince, the
wound (as God would) was not so desperate but that he recovered within a while
after: and the malefactor in the very deed doing was apprehended, stabbed with
27. wounds, and afterward beheaded, bowelled and quartered in the market place
of Antwerpe. And praised he God (who preserves his Elect) the said good Prince
so recovering lived afterward full two years. The second 1583. one Peter
Dordoigne Lib. 11.
Although even in the next year following 1583. another caitiue of Caines crew
named Peter Dordoigne a Spaniard, sent from that Romish Babylon and Spanish
Periander coming in the month of May to Antwerpe about the like purpose, was
taken at Antwerpe before he could do the deed as God would have it: who being
thereupon imprisoned, confessed that he was sent out of Spain from the king
himself, with whom he had secret conference and encouragement to do that
mischief upon the Princes person: but the king concealing it not to be his
fault, commanded him to lay the fault upon one of his Secretaries, and so this
messenger had his judgment and was put to death at Gronyng, as guilty in
mind, will, and purpose to kill the said Prince.

But now in this year 1584. the good Prince being assaulted by three other
several champions of Satan, might seem to have sufficient warning by the
former persons, whom he should simply suffer to be brought unto his presence,
when that subtle Serpent the Devil, that old craftsmaster of theirs, deuiseth
sundry means to work mischief by: The third 1584 one John Ianson. Lib. 11.
As here by the first of these three whom I am to speak of, upon the 13. of
April one John Ianson a rich Merchant (upon hatred which he conceived against
the good and harmeles Prince) coming into a seller near unto a place where
the Prince was then lodged, had provided with gunpowder to blow up and destroy
the Prince and all his retinue: but though the Prince saw not the person, yet
he smelt the rat, found him and laid hold upon him (as God would) or ever he
had power to perform that mischief, and so the malefactor was headed,
bowelled and quartered for the same.

The fourth 1584. a French man. Lib. 11.
The second of these three and fourth in number of the murdering messngers
hitherto sent, was a Frenchman and Captain of a band named Gottus, who being
captiued a little before by the Marquis of Rombase, one of the Duke of Parmaes
Generals, promised the said Marquis if he would set him at liberty, he would
work such way, being very well acquainted with the Prince of Orange, that he
would with all possible speed dispatch him out of his life: saying, that as he
was very familiar with him, and could easily upon any occasion come to his
presence, and have full conference with him; so especially (says he) if I
shall be invited to the Princes table, to eat of his meat, I can subtly
cast (that few shall perceive) into some Eele broth (which the Prince loves
very well) such a powder, as infecting the whole dish of meat, shall (if he
eat thereof) without long delay destroy him. But this French Captain Gottus,
having gotten himself at liberty, haunting the Princes presence, yet not so
far put in trust nor so much made of as he made account to have been, and yet
employed in service for the Prince and States in a certain Sconce (before he
either put his purpose in practice, or performed his promise to the before
named Marquis) was by Gods good will no doubt prevented, and in defending that
Sconce, being ouerseene with drink, was shot into the head by a Musket, and
so died presently in the said Sconce.

The last of the three missiue Manquellers this year sent, being the fifth and
last of all yt were sent hitherto, Historia Belgica lib. 12.
and most mischievous soldier of Satan's cursed crew, was a young fellow named
Balthazar Gerard a Burgunnian, The fifth and last messenger which murdered the
Prince of Orange, Anno 15^5.
of seven and twenty years old, of short stature, hard favor, and base
constitution (dissembling himself otherwise to be called Francis Guyon the
son of one Peter Guyon, put to death for preferring the reformed religion)
when indeed this is that messenger of Satan, here of all others chiefly
transforming himself, as Saint Paul says, into an Angel of light: 2. Cor.
11.14.
This villain comes in the beginning of the month of May in the foresaid
year 1584. unto the Prince of Orange his Court, (O that he had here been so
simple as the Dove to have shunned by flight this mischief at the first;
Matthew. 10.16.
or as wise as the Serpent, to have vanquished the wisdom of the viperous
wretch at the last) and pretending to bring letters unto the said noble good
Prince, importing great and rare news out of France, using a certain
protestation in express words of his zealous mind unto the Gospel, and adding
for that cause he came far to prefer his service unto the Prince himself,
above all other Princes; bringing with him and showing forth also unto the
Prince certain writings signed by County Maunsfeld (called commonly flying
seals) under color of friendship purporting enmity, namely how Luxenburge
and the cities of other Provinces might craftily be taken by the Prince of
Orange his soldiers. The Prince perusing over the writings, and marking well
the seals, saying, there could be no great matter performed by them;
commanded him for a while to depart away. Here before he went, this villain
begged of the Prince some money to buy him hose and shoes: whereupon the
Prince commanded his Secretary to give him some money for his said necessity,
Lib. 12.
upon the 8. of July that year 1584: which he no sooner received, but
incontinently going his way from the Princes presence, and coming to the
uttermost court, he bought with that money of two stipendarie watchmen two
hand-dags. But when this villain had bought them, The Caitiues deceitful
doings.
calling to mind (as he afterward being taken confessed) what the Prince of
Parma and one other named Assonuil had before said unto him concerning this his
mischievous act (they as it seemed setting him on thereunto) he then on the
tenth of that July about dinner time repaireth unto the Prince, and as one
falsehearted and fearful to speak, desires letters of pasport and
safeconduct. Within a while after the Prince had dined, he went through the
Court and stood at the gate (forgetting, or at least mistrusting not that
mischief which this Judas was now meditating, nor yt Ioabs congee which was
consulted of before against his person) for notwithstanding all the fair show
of those writings and their seals, yet it fell out this false conclusion:
Virgil. Ecloga secunda.
O formose puer nimium ne creed colori; Alba ligustra cadunt, vaccinia nigra
leguntur. He good Prince believing all for the best, standing (as I said) at
the gate, then comes this villain unto him, and faining his false purpose
under a fair show of requesting his said letters of pasport and safeconduct,
he crowcheth and creeps near the Prince (not then so well aware of him)
where suddenly he discharges one of his new bought dagges, having three
bullets in it, full upon the Prince: who feeling the wound, lift up his hands
and eyes, saying: Lord God be merciful unto my soul, I am sore wounded: Lord
God be merciful unto me and unto this thy afflicted people. Within a while
after, being borne into his parlour (where he had a little before dined) he was
laid upon his bed, and so gave up the ghost, to the inspeakable sorrow and
lamentation of the Princess and her people. The murdering messenger and
cursed caitife of Caine, The villainous murdering of the Prince of Orange.
or rather of Tubalcains crew, having perpetrated this villainous act, took his
heels and fled thereupon through the posterne gate of the Princes palace with
all haste he could: and casting away his other dagge out of his hands, running
by the street near the ditch of the city of Delph, as he prepared himself
with two bladders to swim over, he was taken by two of the Princes servants,
brought back again to the Princes palace, and carried to prison. Where he
(being of the Senate or chief men of the city examined) writ and affirmed his
intention and confession full and whole: adding most desperately and
diuillishly, Lib. 13
that if the deed were again to be done upon the said Prince, he would yet
do it, yea if the Prince were guarded with 500000. men round about. For the
which cause, The execution of the villainous murderer.
sentence of law and judgment definitive being given upon this his mischievous
act, he was condemned to be carried to a gibbet, set up before the Towne-house
or Senate House of that City: here first he had his right hand with a hot iron
seared and cut off, which did the deed, and cast into the fire: next of all,
with fiery hot pincers he had his flesh torn and plucked off from six parts of
his body which were most fleshie, vz. of his breast, arms, legs and buttocks,
and those cast into the fire, and his body beginning from the lower part was
with an axe chopped in pieces, his belly was ripped, his heart was plucked out and
cast at the villains face (yet in some life) and afterward his head being
chopped off, was (with other four parts of his body, as arms and feet set
upon four poles on four turrets or ports of the city) fastened upon a long
pole set upon the turret of the Schoolehouse, on the backside of the Princes
lodging; and whatsoever he had in his life time about him was taken from him
and given away. This execution was done upon Saturday the 14. of July Anno
1584. within the city of Delph in Holland.

Now, not without sorrow and lamentation for the loss of so noble and painful
a Prince, The funeral and solemn order of the Princes burial.
let us return to describe the manner of solemnity used, and the whole order
of his funeral, which in so few words and as briefly as I can I will set down.

Upon Friday the third day of August 1584. the body of the Prince was buried
at the ordering of the States of Holland, Zeland, Frizland and Vtrecht, in
magnificent manner, according to the dignity of his excellency; and specially
in remembrance of his honorable virtues and most princely deserts toward
them: for he was the fourth of five brethren of the house of Nassaw, which lost
their lives in the faithful defense of the States and of those Countries.

The order of his burial or funeral was thus observed:

1 First went the Citizens of Delph in armor, with long mourning cloakes.

2 The dumb show of the Trumpetters in mourning apparel likewise.

3 Then followed eight horses covered with black mourning clothes, every of
which horses were led by two Noblemen, one on the one side, and the other on
the other side going on foot: and behind every horse was also borne the
Military Ensign of so many several Countries as the Prince in his life time
had under his government, which Ensigns were borne by eight other several
Noblemen in mourning cloakes down to the feet.

4 After them went the Lord Mansert, bearing the Military Trumpet. Next to him
the Lord Rihouius with the Princes Standerd, and next to him the Lord Naelwik
with his Military Ensign, each of them bearing in them several Arms
emblazoned.

5 Then followed the four several Shields with their several Arms of the
Prince deceased, which other four Noblemen mourners bare likewise.

6 After them two other Lords, whereof one bare all his whole Arms, with his
Helmet and his Crest: the other being Captain of his Guard bare his sword of
war, both mourning also.

7 Then followed the funeral Horse covered all over with black Velvet down
to the ground: being led forth by the Lord Bredroed on the one side, and the
Lord Maldre on the other side, two stately personages mourning in foot side
cloakes.

8 Next unto them went two other Noblemen tall and stately personages: the one
bearing the Princes naked Sword, the other his golden Coronet, both mourning in
long side gowns likewise.

9 And last of all went the Princes three chief Stewards of his retinue in
mourning cloakes, each of them going with a black staff in his hand.

10 After all these was borne the body of the deceased Prince in a coffin,
embalmed, seared and covered with black Velvet hanging down near unto the
ground: where about were fired diverse scutcheons of Arms, and penants of the
Princes honors and dignities: The body being borne upon twelve tall
Gentlemen's shoulders, all bareheaded and in long mourning cloakes.

11 Next unto the body went the four principal Lords of the States, as John
of Burgundy Lord of Fruymont, etc. Walraeffe of Bredroed Lord of Loredwod, etc.
John of Merode Lord of Soeterwould, etc. with hoods covered over their faces,
which were the chief Mourners for the Low Countries.

12 After these followed Earl Maurice of Nassaw, second son to ye deceased
Prince, in a long black fine mourning cloak, the train whereof was borne by
another Lord: on the right hand of Prince Maurice went the Prince Elector of
Colen, by name Truckses: on the left hand of him went the Earl of Hoghenlo.
There followed these personages, three other Lords, vz. William Earl of Nassaw,
Philip Earl of Nassaw, and the Earl of Solmes, which were the last of the
chief Mourners for this deceased Prince.

13 Then came after these the General States.

14 After them the Council of those States.

15 Next unto them the States of Holland, 16. and their Council.

17 Then followed the Provincial Council.

18 The President of Holland.

19 Then the high Council and the President.

20 The Secretaries of the States.

21 The Consuls and Senators of Delft.

22 The learned Preachers.

23 The Captains of the Guard.

24 The Captains of the wars.

25 The chief officers of public authority in the Common wealth, whom last
of all followed a multitude of common people innumerable.

With this solemn, sorrowful and mournful funeral was the good Prince of
Orange buried in the chief Church of the city of Delft on Friday the third of
August 1584. as aforesaid. He lived almost 52. years, vz. 51. years 11.
months and 25. days, accounted from his birth. The time of his life, and
description of his personage.
He was of body well compact, of stature little more then mean, of good
complexion, aburne beard, somewhat full faced. Who so will desire to know his
sharpnes of wit and disposition of mind, may best discern them by his
honorable actions and godly government so many years.

26 His title was this. William by the grace of God, Prince of Orange, Lib. 12.
Earl of Nassau, Catzenelenburg, Dietst. Viand, etc. Marquess of Der Vere,
and Flushing, Burgraue of Antwerpe, His Style.
Barron of Bread, Dyest, Grymberg, Arkize, Nozeroy, etc. Lord of Castebelyne,
etc. Governor General of the Low Countries, viz. of Brabant, Holland,
Zealand, Vtrecht, and Frizland, Admiral of the seas in the lower Germany.

27 His matrimonial state was first joined with the only daughter and heir
of Maximilian of Egmond, His Matrimonial estate.
and Earl of Buren and Leerdam, etc. of whom he begot Phillip Earl of Buren,
which in the year 1577. was captiued by Duke de Alua, and sent into Spain,
who is now Prince of Orange: Also by the same wife he had one only daughter
named Marie, married to the Earl of Hohenlo. He had to his second wife the
Lady Anne only daughter of Maurice Duke of Saxony and Prince Elector, by
her he had one only son named Maurice, at this present General of the
united Provinces, and Admiral of their seas: and by his said second wife he had
also two daughters, the one named Anne, and the other Emilia. His Issue.
He had to his third wife Charlot of Burbon daughter to the Duke of
Montpensyer, of whom he begat six daughters, namely, Ludouica, Iuliana,
Elizabetha Flandrina, Katherina Belgora, Charlot Brabantina, and Aurelia
Antwerpiana. And he had to his fourth and last wife the Lady Loyse daughter of
Iaspar de Coligni, Lord Chastillion and high Admiral of France slain at Paris
in the year 1572: of her he begat two sons, the one named Frederick, the
other Henry of Nassau: and he left begotten of an unknown woman his base son
named Iustine of Nassau, at this day Admiral of Zealand. These twelve sons
and daughters left the said deceased Prince of Orange behind him as aforesaid.

28 His progeny was this, His Progeni^
he was the son of William of Nassau the brother of Henry of Nassau, who had
both to father John brother of Enghelbert: both which had for their father also
John Earl of Nassau, and the Lady Leona his wife to their mother.

29 His brethren were these. His Brethren.
This Prince William of Nassau was the eldest of five brethren, with himself,
namely the four other were Lodwicke, Adolphe, and Henry, which three were
slain in these wars of the Low Countries: the fourth being John the second
son of Nassau as yet living at Dilemberge. This Lord has living also many
sons and daughters, of which sons the two eldest Earl William and Earl
Phillip did bear arms in the Low Countries, stoutly against the Spanish
forces.

His Sisters.
30 His sisters were many, married to many and mighty personages, full of
issues: so as Julian mother of this Prince William Countess of Sheerenbergh, a
chaste wife and painful Lady, when she had lived seauentie five years, in
the year of Christ 1578. saw (which came of her and her issue) Earls Sons
and Nephews, to the number of 123. personages. A goodly, great, and most rare
blessing of God no doubt, and a token of Gods great loving favor and comfort
unto those noble Parents in their life time, and a singular great comfort and
mutual consolation, unto the posterity after their death, upon which Princes
death the author of this Belgicke history has written both this title,
Epitaph, and verses in Latin following.

ILLVSTRISS MEMO GVLIELMI PRINCIPIS AVRAIci, Comitis Nassouiae, Cattorum,
Dietzii, Viandae, Marchionis Verae and Vlissingae; Burgraui Antwerpiae,
Historia Belgica lib. 12.
Vicecomitis Bisontij; Baronis Bredae, Diestij, Grinbergae, Arlei, Nozereij*
etc. Domini Castrobellini, etc. Propraesidis Generalis per vniuersam Belgiam;
Praesidis Brabantiae, Hollandiae, Zelandiae, Vltraiectini Frisiorum, etc.
Admiralij;
HEROIS FORTISSIMI, ORTHODOXAE Ecclesiae propugnatoris, literatorum maecenatis;
Patris Patriae; Belgarum Assertoris, pro quibus nec sibi, nec suis pepercit;
Delphis sclopi ictu transuerberati: Ioh. Esychius
Quod habuit extremum in Dominum suum Clementiss: Honoris Monumentum, cum luctu
posuit.
Vixit Annos, LI. Menses, II. Dies, XXV, obijt Anno Christi, M.D.XXCIV. Sexto
Idus Iulij.
CARMEN EPITAPHIVM.
QVem non Hispani imperiosa potentia Regis,
Dirum tot annos fulminantis impulit;
Quem non insidiae, scelerum noxa, ante reclusae,
Terruere; non tot Principum inconstantia
Princeps Auraicus Belgarum assertor and vltor
Ecclesiae; Ille terror inquirentium
Horrisonis (praesente Deo) Tranquillus in Vndis
Burgundio superatur a Qui falsis subscriptionibus insinuatus Aulae.
Falsario.
Oppetit and Quartus pulchram per vulnera mortem
Nassouiorum, qui iacent pro Belgica.
Vah Satan? ad facinus quem Auri sitis alta coegit,
Os dum latice Quae promulgata A.C. M.D.XXC. proposito percussori praemio
25000. coron.
Proscriptionis proluis.
Infaelix de morte Andegauensis qui obierat eodem die mensis praecedentis.
Ducis modo nuntius: atra
Nox teque and Auctorem premant oblivia
Sicut agit penna solvi metuente superstes,
(Rumpatur Invidens Iberus) Gloria.
Auraicum summis certantem Heroibus and iam
Dijs fidelium Triumphis institum.
Vnum hoc, O Proceres, advertite, quemlibet ista
Scelesto ab vno posse tolli machina:
Infestam Hispanus capitis septemplicis Hydram
Quo iure, quave iniuria, dum promo vet.
AD MAVRITIVM NASSOVIVM. G. F.
VLturus Patrem and Patruum, Virtutibus, annos,
Olim Africanus antevenit Scipio:
Mauriti, Patrias si vis vlciscier Vmbras,
Paterna stringe Scipio, Vestigia.
FINIS.
The Civil Wars there under the Prince of Parma and the States.
Manifestly thus it appears in the sight of God and all the world, what
impiety, malice, mischief and cruelty the Pope and Spanish king has with
foxlike subtlety, and lyonlike force practiced against the nobles and States
of the Low Countries, infringing their ancient privileges, breaking fidelity
in contracts, violating the bonds of amity, and violently oppressing al
integrity of loyal subjects and faithful servants of God, seeking to make
havoc of high and low, rich and poor, young and old, with more then Turkish
tyrrany in those dominions most intolerable. Neither rest these two there
contented with the great effusion of innocent blood like conquerours, preying
on, or spoiling every silly sheep with their jaws imbrued, waxing ever more
hungry, never rest raging hither and thither, casting down Bulls, threatening
silly lambs, swift of foot, and greedy of tooth to tear in pieces the
christian members, and to quaffe up their blood in their unquenchable thirst in
those Countries: but this Antichrist and his adherent unjustly without cause
given them (as the just God judge and revenger of all wrongs knows) do now
also bend all their forces even in this year, against the most lawful,
natural, christian, and religious Phoenix of feminine sex, and the most
peerless Paragon of true professing Princes, Elizabeth Queen of England her
gracious Royal person, her noble lawful kingdoms, natural faithful
subjects, and happy peaceable estate and government. This Antichrist, I say
this Romish seven headed, ten horned, and triple crowned Dragon (whose tail
draws the third part of the stars from heaven and casts them to the
earth) presumes to approach near the woman, Revel. 12.
the Church of God, the defender of the faith, and watches wililie with inward
and outward Serpentine malice to devour the innocent and harmless child: Lib.
13.
whereupon although this Dragon send forth his angels to war with the woman,
though he send forth his Jesuits the English fugitives, whom he has nu^led up
in Popish abomination many years, and though he again likewise infect, Reu.
15.14.16.
and enforce the Locusts and Scorpions of the bottomless pit with his
infernal fury: such as Francis Throgmorton, and many other vipers, which
would have wrought intestine wars, and civil bloodshed against their
natural most gracious Prince, their country and friends by foreign
confederacies of the Pope and Spanish King, their abbetters, subborners, and
supporters, yet to the perpetual glory of God, these wicked Angels, Locusts,
and Scorpions (having no power to hurt any good or godly member, but such as
themselves which have not the seal of God in their forehead) were overtaken by
Gods power and providence, and cast out into the earth: and so the Lord of
hosts fought for our Queen and us in peace and mercy to our comforts, but in
his justice and judgment against our inward and outward enemies, for which God
make us thankful to his glory for ever.

Historia Belgisa lib. 13.
After the death so sought for, and procured of the aforesaid noble Prince of
Orange by the said Pope and Spanish king as before mentioned, the ordering of
the affairs both civil and politic, rested in the wisdom of the Nobility
and States of the Low Countries: who seeing themselves like sheep left without
a Shepherd, a nation without a Governor, and a body without a head, plucking
up their spirits unto them, taking heart and christian courage unto them, in
their godly, just, and lawful cause for defense of Gods true religion, of
their ancient privileges, themselves, their wives, children and country; and
for eschewing the horrible tyranny of the foreign usurping Pope and Spaniard,
their Idolatry, unjust exactions, oppressions, unmerciful vexations, and
horrible desolations: do with most careful consideration take opportunity of
time, and with mature deliberation to consult upon some peculiar and special
protection of themselves and their countries thus grieuouslie distressed.
Whereupon in the next year following 1585. (after conference had amongst
themselves in the month of May that year) they dispacht into England an
honorable Embassade, which arrived at London on the 26. day of June, being
personages of great account in the Netherlands: Namely, the Lord James Gryse,
the Lord Roger Harsellus in the behalf of Gelderland, Master Noelus Caronus,
Lord of Schonwall: (who at this day is resiant in England, Agent for the
Estates) and John Dousta Lord of Nortwich for the south part of Holland with
eight others, men of great account, which for brevity I do here omit: whom
they substitute as their deputies to solicit their cause unto the Queens
Majesty of England: these were lodged about the Tower street, and had their
diet in worshipful manner appointed at Clothworkers hall in London upon her
Majesty's own charges. On the 29. of June they repaired to the Court at
Greenewich, where they presented unto her Majesty, the Soueraignetie of those
Countries, which being ratified contained at large 31. several Articles, as to
the Duch history I refer the Reader.

With godly and neighborly commiseration, The articles contained the
yielding of certain towns as pledges to the Queens Majesty.
whereof her Majesty being pitifully moved to put forth her helping hand, to
save that which was in extreme peril; considering well by former accidents how
sinister a mind the Spanish king by the Popes instigation had of long time
unjustly borne, of late put in practice, and would now likely proceed further
if God and good regard in due time were not her best friends: her excellent
Highness therefore to prevent the worst, provides first for her own safety and
her subjects at home, trayning and mustering of able men in all places of the
realm for necessary domestical defense whatsoever might befall; and
afterward in the month of Iulie, presses out of the City of London certain
convenient companies of Soldiers furnished for the wars, at the charges of
the Fraternities, or Societies of the same City, and on the 13. of August
following, with certain special brave Knights, approved Captains, and worthy
Seruitors over them, transporteth all these into Holland, Zeland, Brabant, etc.
as other the like Soldiers had been before time sent out of other parts and
places of the realm. Of these several Companies at this time, was sent the
before named valorous General Norice chief Commander (who coming from
thence for that purpose a little before) taking his leave of her Majesty and
her Nobility, embarked himself and his retinue on the 24. of August this
year 1585. and with a prosperous wind arrived in Holland about the 26. of the
same, where his forces being before arrived, he disposed of them as was most
convenient, till time and opportunity served for their purpose.

About this time the Right noble by birth and for virtue renowned Knight Sir
Philip Sidney (son and heir of that most noble Sir Henry Sidney Knight, Sir
Philip Sydney sent over and made Lord Governor of Flusshing. Lib. 13.
sometime Lord Deputy of Ireland, and then Lord President of Wales) was by her
Majesty sent over after the said General Norice on the tenth day of October
in the year aforesaid: who ariuing in safety at Flushing, was on the
nineteenth of that month by the States established Lord Governor of Flushing
in Zeland: where by his valor, wisdom and great diligence he surprised the
town of Axel in Flaunders, and at Doesburgh in Gelderland, His honorable
actions in the Low countries this year 1585.
made manifest proof of his valor and magnanimity. But as he had lived
always in honor, excelling by the Laurel and the Lance (I am but Paruus
Laodocus in re tam magna, to describe his demerits of fame condignely) so yet
amongst others, feeling in his life time his honorable favor, and finding
after his death the want of his furtherance unto my poor distressed Muse) I
cannot but in duty honor his virtuous, godly and learned life, and with
dolor deplore his untimely death, with his honorable actions then lastly
performed, as in the next year following hereafter shall appear.

But to return to the order and proceeding of the history for this year
1585. aforesaid, after that the said General Norice had disposed those
several companies under their several Colonels and Captains, and placed
convenient Garrisons in the frontier Towns before resigned to her Majesty,
namely Briel, Flushing, Oftend, and Berghenoptzome, the very entries into
Holland, Zeland, Flanders and Brabant: the said General departed with his
forces into Gelderland, where by the special help of God, his own great
valor and diligence of his soldiers, he took the Sconce by Arnhem called
Iselwerdt, erected where the Isel falls out of the Rhine: wherein for better
success in the enterprise he placed five Ships and two Hoyes, which sped very
ill for that they were on ground and in the enemies reach, knowing no way to
escape the imminent danger. Which Captain Hunnings on the said fifteen of
November that year 1585. perceiving, and seeking to escape the enemies hands
(being already hurt very sore) thinking to leap out of a ship into a boat;
but by reason of his armor somewhat heavy, and lighting short, he was
unfortunately drowned. Notwithstanding the said General Norice still continued
his skirmish on land (in a Sconce which he had butted against them) so
manfully, that having sore discomfited them by means of his Fort and that hot
assault, the day drawing near to an end, they rested without any more ado.

On the next day the General, both in respect of his own valor and his
countries credit, continued in his determination and purpose to give a new
assault. But the enemies knowing the want of ability to withstand his force,
and being without hope of help, voluntarily appealed to the law of Arms, that
they might depart with bag and baggage: and so they surrendering the Sconce
into his hands, the said General with no small credit to his country and
honor to his name, yielding humble and hearty thanks unto God for his
clemency, entered the said Sconce of Arnhem: in the which he placed such a
Garrison, as was fit and convenient for the keeping thereof.

Histor. Anglica Anno. 1585.
Moreover, the said General Norice determining to leave no thing unattempted
that might any way annoy the enemy, and profit his Prince and Country, with a
mind unconquerable marched with his forces toward the city of Nimeghem;
where by honorable force and Knightly chivalry subduing another of the
Enemies Sconces, he partly cleared the River Rhine: by which deed he opened
the passage from Colen and all the high Countries, which was a very profitable
and ready help to all the English Camp. This done, by serious pains and
industry (as a wise and politic General, letting slip no occasion that might
profit his purpose) he raised a mount before the city, and that of such a
height and strength, that thereon he planted his Ordenance: for that the
situation of the town was such, that otherwise he could have done it small
hurt, but by means of this new raised mount: On the morrow he shot furiously
into the Market place, greatly terrifying the enemies and all the inhabitants
of the city.

The Prince of Parma hearing what had happened, presently marched toward the
succor of the city, purposing fully to have given the said English General
the repulse: who for the better and more easy accomplishment thereof intended
to travel secretly in the night, thinking thereby to take the Englishmen
unprovided for their coming. As indeed so they had done, if the commendable
and diligent care of our Espials had not prevented that inconvenience, The
Prince of Parma marches to meet General Norice.
by fore warning the Camp of their coming, who at that instant were not far
off. At length the enemies approaching, having for their guide and governor the
said Prince of Parma (a man of great force and dexterity in feats of wars)
and the English having for their Governor the said noble General Norice, a
man of no less courage then actiuitie, he with a most valiant heart and
cheerful voice encouraged his soldiers to the encounter: wherein he
himself, The battle bidden by the Prince, but the General had the victory.
for better emboldening of all under his charge, and for their only evident
example of valor and courage, gave the first charge, and that so terrible to
the enemies, that turning their backs they fled away as me^ amazed, not being
able to sustain the force of his hands: which the Englishmen well perceiving,
most venturously followed their fleeing fainting foes, with such fury that the
Spaniards were by heaps laid level with the ground. In which conflict were
slain of the enemies, to the number of three thousand: at what time also there
was taken from them in the field nine Ensigns, which loss was no small grief
to the enemies, greatly bewayling their unfortunate success: which was done
with very small loss of the English, as it was found by the due survey and
view made of such as were then missing.

This skirmish was sought on Monday the 15 day of November in the said year
1585. after our English General, with those worthy Knights, Colonels and
Captains were employed in the said Low Countries as aforesaid. For which
gracious victory by God given unto them at this present, great and memorable
thanks and praise with singular joy and comfort as well by the actors as by
the inhabitants of those Countries, were rendered unto Almighty God, and made
manifest amongst them with mutual consolation inspeakable. And not thereabouts
only where this honorable exploit was performed, but also where and when the
said General and the Camp returned thence to Briel (being made Governor
thereof under and for her royal Majesty) he was in most honorable manner
received by all the States and Burghers with great triumph and joy: General
Notice made governor of Briel.
who in every corner of the City made great bonfires, in every Church rung
their bells, and many a great volley of shot for to welcome him into the City:
where all the people with loud voices every where said, God save good Queen
Elizabeth, God save the good Queen of England.

The names of such Captains as were hurt before this conflict at Arnhem Sconce
were these: Captain Thomas Louels note.
Captain Thomas Louell Sergeant Mayor, Captain Borowes, Captain Thomas
Knowles, now Sir Thomas Knowles, Captain Charles Blunt, now Lord Mountioy,
Captain Vauisor brother to the now Sir Thomas Vauisor, and Captain Thomas
Wilson. In all six Captains hurt at that time. The number of the English
slain at this conflict at Nemeghem, as Captain Thomas Louell told me, was
some 60. persons and not above.

The civil Wars there under the Prince of Parma, and the Earl of Leicester.
Historia Belgica lib. 13.
AFter the said Ambassade sent by the Estates of the Netherlands unto the
Queens Majesty of England Anno 1585. (as before by composition in 31.
several Articles contained) which for brevity I omit: And also after the
memorable enterprise by the noble General Norice and the English forces
happily achieved against the Enemy at Arnhem and Nemeghem, last before
recited in the same year: it pleased her gracious Highness to send now over
into the Netherlands the most nobly renowned Lord Robert Dudley Earl of
Leicester, Baron of Denbigh, and one of her Majesty's most honorable privy
Council, etc. with a magnificen^ and worthy train of Noblemen and Gentlemen
attending upon (...) into those Netherlands: where he (ariuing at Flushing in
Zeland the 19. of December Anno 1585.) was of the Magistrates and Townsmen
most honorably entertained, and also with him the Lord Robert Deuoreux Earl of
Essex, and other English Nobles and Gentlemen to the number of seven hundred
horse. From thence out of Zeland they sailed into Holland, where in all Cities
and places as they passed they were joyfully received, until they came unto
the Haghe in Holland, in the month of January 1585: and there the Estates
general and Provincial came unto his Excellency, friendly embraced him, and
honorably entertained him, and all his train with surpassing joy and welcome:
and on the Calends of February following surrendered unto him (as to her Highness
Lieutenant General of all her forces there) the government of those united
Provinces, vz. of the Duthcie of Gelders, Counties of Zutphen, Holland and
Zeland, the Seigniouries of Vtrecht, Frizland, and Ouerissel, and of other
Towns and places which as yet they possessed in Flanders and Brabant.
Promising and binding themselves by virtue of their oath in all and every degree
from the highest to the lowest, by land and by sea to yield and perform al
diligence, obedience and fidelity for their and our general good of peace and
wars, from time to time during his government: His Excellency making like
promise of his part for the defense of the said Estates, people and Provinces
accordingly. Actum Hagae in Hollandia Call. Februarij 1585. Subscripsit Aersius.

According to the rule and form of these ordenances the said Earl General
takes upon him the said government: Historia Belgica lib. 23.
confirmed in full and absolute authority thereunto by common consent of the
said Estates in general, there bearing public offices with the several
Governors of those Provinces, Colonels, Captains and soldiers under their
charge: for whom and in whose name especially County Maurice of Nassaw and
County Hoghenloe, with other Martial Governors, do promise to perform all
possible endeavors, assistance, defense and supportation in all points.

The Queens Majesty of England receiving news hereof, was moved in mind,
and (thinking these things chiefly done to the end she should be more bounden
or tied to inconvenience then she determined) sends forthwith thither Sir
Thomas Hennage Knight her Vizechamberlaine with letters the 13. of February
Anno 1585. aforesaid: The Queens Majesty's letters unto the States of the
Netherlands.
wherein she signified her self hardly to allow the absolute government of
those Countries so surrendered unto the Earl of Leicester, and that it seemed
very absurb unto her, for as much as her Highness had refused such proffer to be
made unto her: and to lay the burden of that government upon her Minister or
Officer (before refused of her Majesty) without her Counsel, seemed indeed
to be a great sign of manifest ignominy or injury done unto her Highness: as
though her Majesty's wisdom and judgment were wanting, and could not
discern what were to be received nor what to be refused. So as that thing was
quite contrary and repugnant especially to the Declaration published in print,
as touching these affairs: wherein was openly testified, that her Highness gave
only succor unto the Netherlands, and unto her Neighbors, and not indeed to
intrude or thrust her self into absolute protection or supreme government of
those people and Provinces. For these things being so done, now would every man
take occasion to think and judge otherwise then her Highness meant herein:
especially such persons would do that, who think they may lawfully censure
and judge upon Princes doings as they list, Historia Belgica lib. 10.
and after their sensuality, so as thereby her Majesty's fame and honor might
chiefly be detracted. Note here her Majesty's meaning and commandment.
And therefore that all the world might know, how justly and uprightly in this
behalf she determined to procoode; her Highness pleasure is, and she
commands the said authority to be revoked, and forbids that the Earl
shall not use any other authority, then is contained in the mutual Contract
made and published. And that thing being so observed, no doubt it would be
profitable to the Commonwealth in time to come. And her Majesty further
adds, she made not refusal for that cause that she had not any care of the
welfare of those Provinces, but for that she had provident care of her own
Honor, and how to stop the mouths of the malignant, and such as were her
enemies. The residue which were to be spoken herein, were expressed in her
Highness letters so written.

The Estates seeing these letters were in much doubt, and do send answer unto
her Majesty touching the same on the 25. of March 1586. out of the City of
Amsterdam: The answer of the States to her Majesty's letters.
and excuse the same authority so given to be with all humility and
commodity for both parts, and affirm that these things were not done to
burden or bind her Majesty more then the Contract contained, but (as cause
of necessity so required) they were thus done and passed. They allege how
that authority must especially be necessary, and better it was the Provinces
to have but one, then two Governors, and it seemed far safer for them to
entertain her Majesty's subject and Deputy, then to choose and authorize
another: and such a one as they had before, and such authority to give him, as
the same might be revoked at any time. The word Absolute interpreted
But for the word ( Absolute) they allege, that was only added to distinguish
the government, that the same might be discerned from others, that they (by a
Prouiso) might be ordered, and by commandments and instructions might be
bounden and tied the better to perform their duties: and for better execution
of Martial discipline, and not that sole and sovereign rule might be given
him. That it was by example of the Romans, and other people (Salua dignitate
Principatus and Dominij, Exemplum Romanorum.
quae remansit penes populu^) saving the dignity of the Principality and
sovereignty which remained in the power of the people: and moreover to the end
they might more easily withstand and resist the enemies practices and
enterprises, and that the peoples hearts troubled and altogether broken with
fear and furious outrage, might be the better succored and comforted. And so
they beseech her Majesty not to forsake them now, in their distress; and
promising all duty answerable to her Majesty's most royal expectation, they
return other more words of answer by the said Sir Thomas Hennage, to be
related unto her Majesty at large by word of mouth. Actum Amsterdami in
Hollandia, 25. die Martij Anno Christi 1586.

This was the manner of the answer made by the Estates to the Queens
Majesty, concerning the authority wherewith they had invested the Earl of
Leycester as Governor General in those countries, and although her Highness
was with this excuse somewhat pacified, yet (says my Author) the Earls
authority was amongst many by reason hereof little empaired or diminished.

The Earl General receives contributions, etc.
In the Earl General his name, were received all manner of contributions,
payments, taxes, and tallages levied for maintenance of the wars, and for
defense of those people and Provinces: which might amount yeerelie to the sum
of 2500000. Florens, besides the commodities of licenses and other common
provision made for the service by sea, and the assistance or help of the
Queens Majesty: but unto the Earl for his ordinary expenses, the Provinces
allowed 100000. Florens to be levied and delivered yeerelie.

After this be publishes orders of military discipline, and by a decree of
the 4. of April 1586. at Vtrecht, he forbids the transporting or carrying
away of all manner provision of corn, armor* and munition, or any merchandise
unto the enemies and their confederates: yea, and to the places or ports of
such others as were neutrall. The General makes orders for Military
Discipline.
Moreover he forbids all traffic and natural trade by letters, contracts,
or whatsoever other covenants with the enemies to the Queens Majesty, and to
the Estates and people of the Netherlands. Besides all this, he leuieth
impositions, and contributions upon all Mariners and Shipmaisters of
whatsoever foreign Nation coming thither into any Port within the united
Provinces, for their private affairs.

Here I am now to report of a Honorable, true and rare piece of service
performed immediately after the Earl of Lecister had taken his oath at Haghe,
Captain John Pryse his relation of the service performed at the City of
Grave. Anno 1586.
and then coming to Vtrecht for special service of the land, which the States
most earnestly required for the relief of the City called the Grave being a
key into Gelderland: which was between the months of April and May Anno 1586.
The said Earl of Leycester with the consent of the States, sent for that
honorable great soldier Sir John Norice from Arnhem, demanding of him his
opinion of the said relief of Grave: To be short his answer was, that if it
would please his excellency to send him with a sufficient force of Foot, he
would be ready to perform the uttermost of his service therein. Whereupon
Count Hollock was appointed to go up the river of Grave with certain Ships
of war for that service, a little higher then Battenborow, and there staid,
until Sir John Norice then colonel General of the said land forces came unto
the same Island on this side Battenborow: bringing with him some eight Ensigns
all English, and sending for Captain John Pryse, who was at that present
Sergeant Mayor of the Army. he came from the City of Amersford with eight
Ensigns more, al English, marching toward Sir John Norice. And so soon as
Captain Pryse was come ye said Sir John Norice rose with his troops, and
marched within half a mile of Battenborow Castle, which the enemy then
possessed, which was upon a dike for most part, and there the camp set down
for a day or two, until they had further direction. Presently the said Sir
John Norice went aborde of Count Hollocks Ship, where they took counsel how
they should relieve the Grave: General Norice takes counsel with Count
Hollocke how to relieve Grave.
for the enemy was set down being 12000. strong before it, and had also
chained up the river with a bridge made over for their men to pass to and fro,
and a sconce at either end of the bridge. The said Count Hollocke and General
Norice concluded, that there should be a certain Loope sconce set up within a
little English mile of the enemies bridge, and so to come nearer and nearer to
the enemy: whereupon the said General sent unto the said Captain Pryse (who
in his absence had the command of the troops) to bring him 200. Pioners, and
200. chosen soldiers. Who so soon as they came fell to work and cast up the
said Sconce, and working most part of that night, and the next day, the enemy
(imagining and seeing plainly that they were about such a matter) sent out
2000. men, and procured a small skirmish with us, we having advantage upon the
said ditch: but what with Count Hollocks men of war, playing upon them, and
the land forces they were enforced that afternoon to retire to their Camp.
But this great soldier Sir John Norice knew very well it was needful to fall
to his work again very hard, for he knew well that the next day the enemy
would be doing with him again, The General appoynteth Captatne Pryse to his
charge.
and would not suffer him there to rest, and therefore he called unto him the
said Captain Pryse, and willed him to go back again to the Camp and to
choose out 300. mo soldiers out of the 8. Ensigns of the best and choice men,
which the said Captain did send him with his own Lieutenant called Anthony
de Boys. And besides all this the said General Norice sent to the said
Captain Pryse that he should come himself, and bring with him 7. whole
Companies, which were in all 800. men, and be with him by break of day or
there abouts. But before the said Captain Pryse could come with these
Companies, the enemy was approached and come to the said Generals sconce with
4000. brave choice men of his Army, the said General being in the Sconce with
500. choice men, and a brave Captain with him named Sir John Burgh, mother to
the late Lord Burgh, the enemy and General Norice being in fight a long hour
upon the Sconce at the push of the pike, there were many slain on both sides:
so as the said enemy getting the Sconce, the said General was hurt, Sir John
Burgh lost one of his fingers, and was hurt very sore besides: also the enemy
following in chase, and killing our men* until such time as the said Captain
Pryse came with his 7. Ensigns, who having great care in placing of his men to
gain all the vantage of the dike, had put with a Sergeant 50. Musketeers on
the one side of the dike, which was of some good breadth, and 50. more with
another Sergeant below the dike on the other side, Captain John Pryses good
service against the enemies.
and also placed two or three Officers in the Reareward, giving them straight
charge that if any man should retire or run away to kill him. Presently the
said Captain Pryse met with the said General Norce all bloody about his
mouth, which was no small grief to the said Captain to see the same. Quoth
the said General, O Captain Pryse, welcome, now for the honor of England,
behold there is the enemy, which was hard at his heels. Captain Pryse
hereupon commanded all his Shot courageously to deliver a vollie in the very
teeth of the enemy: and presently came upon them with their pikes, so that
the enemy retired with the loss of a great number of men, for the said
Captain Pryse and his soldiers had the killing of them even at his will the
space of two English miles and a half, until he came unto a place where a
windmill stood, whither were sent by the enemy a thousand fresh men to second
the others: the said Captain Pryse being foremost went so fast, and the rest
behind still following the execution of the enemy and weary, had not with
him at the encounter with this supply above 50. or 60. men at the most:
whereupon this fresh company of the enemy delivered a vollie of shot upon the
said Captain, and shot him through the thigh, and killed some of his men: but
the said Captain by the help of some special men about him was rescued from
the enemy, and presently the said General Norice sent him a horse to carry
him away down to the water side. Then the enemy following and killing some
few of our men, the ships of war played upon them so hotly, that they made
them to retire to their Army. The General and Sir John Broughe were carried
into Count Holloks Ship, where being very weary and wounded, they rested
until the next day, where there was a general reuew what men were slain on
both sides, A view of the loss of men on both parts.
and there was found by the reuew taken by the Count Hollocke and the English
Officers of the enemy above 700. men slain at the secong charge: besides them
which were slain by the said General Norice, at the Fort before the coming
of the said Captain Pryse, being some hundred or there abouts. There were
slain of our men that day, not fully 150. men, as was found by a general
reuew of the said Officers. And so the next day the said City of Grave was
relieved, the enemies bridge broken, and Count Hollocke sent into the town
seven horses laden with butter, cheese, munition, and other necessaries: which
was to the great honor of our English nation, and the great comfort of that
distressed garrison.

The Belgicke history makes this report of the field fought at Battenborow
aforesaid, Historia Belgica lib. 13.
and of the siege of Grave, viz. Parma in the beginning of winter, Anno 1586.
by Count Charles Maunsfield, causes the City of Grave to be besieged and
compassed about with four Bulwarks or Forts, and entering upon the bridge of
Naia near the river, he causes all the passages to be made sure within, and
without, and all manner of victuals to be kept within the City. In the
Bulwarks he had placed some 1500. soldiers for a garrison, and besides 5000.
Spaniards more or less, the rest were serving in the Tents, almost half a
mile from the City. After these had for 3. months space and more besieged the
Grave, the Earl General came from Haghe by Harlam and Amsterdam in Holland
unto Vtrecht, and sent about 400. horsemen into Velonia or Velna as far as
Niekerke to help the Citizens of the Grave.

General Norice and Count Hoghenlo marched unto them with 2000. footmen
which carried victuals and provision into the City, for with their horsemen
they could do no good. These footmen at the first invade the Bulwark called
the Molensconce half a mile from the Grave, and after that fortify themselves
in a new sconce not far from the Spaniards Bulwarks: which they perceiving
came fiercely upon them with 3000. of their chosen soldiers to surprise them,
and at the second or third assault drive away their workmen even in the very
erecting of their Sconce, who meet some 900. of the garrisons, and there make a
stand: which the Spaniards perceiving, charged them a fresh, and drove them
away to the next Sconce, though the Spaniards so doing five hundred of them
were slain, and many were wounded: amongst whom were seven Captains of
companies, and two men of great account, from whom the Englishmen took away a
brass piece of Ordinance. And thus was the field fought at Battenborow, as
that history mentions: so of the siege of Grave when Parma had beaten it
with 24. pieces of battery, he so battered and rent the walls thereof, that
he compelled the Citizens and their garrisons to yield the Town unto him: who
entered the same with his forces, and gave them leave to depart with wife and
children and all that they had, whither soever they would with bag and
baggage.

Immediately after the service so done at the Grave, and surrendering or yielding
the same unto the enemy, the Earl General caused the Lord Hemert a Martial
governor, with certain others, to be apprehended, carried to Vtrecht,
prosecuted by order of law, and put to death in the presence of all the
Captains for most part and of the soldiers lately serving at the Grave:
although (says my Author) they had done no treason, nor made any secret
confederacy with the enemy. But through a certain youthful want of skill in
Military service, had rendered up the town of Grave unto the enemy: which act
of the General (says my Author) turned away the hearts of many Noblemen, and
inhabitants there from him, especially because they saw one Welsh, sometimes a
Captain of the English forces* and a notable Traitor (before taken by County
Hoghenloe) which with others more such as himself was, betrayed the city
Alosto in Flanders, and delivered it unto the Enemy) was not put to death, but
preferred in Military service: and also Sir William Stanley and Rowland York,
two notable fugitives and false forsworn Traitors to their Prince and
Country, escaping unpunished likewise.

The Earl General in the month of August 1586. having gathered a convenient
army of English, Dutch and other Nations, sent the first company under Sir
John Norice and Sir Thomas Cicill, Historia Belgica lib. 13.
now Lord Burley, Knights, who placed them near unto Seuenter in Cleueland,
purposing to march toward the Prince of Parma and his forces. But the Earl
General himself the 6. of September Anno 1586* departs from Arnhem in
Gelderland toward Eltem in Cleueland, The Earl General marches to meet the
Prince of Parma.
honorably accompanied with Prince Emanuel son of Anthony King of Portugale,
the Lord Truxsis the Prince Elector of Colen, County Maurice of Nassaw,
County Philip of Nassaw nephew to the deceased Prince of Orange, the Counties
Solmes and Obersteyn, the Earl of Essex General of the horsemen, the Lord
Peregrin Bartu Lord Willoughby, the Lord John North Baron of Kirtlington, Sir
Philip Sidney Lord Governor of Flushing, and others of great authority. And
having taken a view of his host, his Excellency numbered his footmen to be
about 7000. and his horsemen 1400. But this army seemed unto him insufficient
to give Parma the repulse (who was said to have 12000. footmen and 3500.
horsemen). And for that he would deliver the city of Berck upon the Rhine from
the present siege of the Enemy, he determined therefore first by policy to
assault Doesburgh in the County of Zutphen, to withdraw the Prince of Parma
from the siege of Berck aforesaid.

This town of Doesburgh was in times past called of Drusus the son of
Tiberius Caesar Roman Emperor, Drusburg, who caused the River of Rhine from a
very ditch to be dug and enlarged beyond Arnhem aforesaid, into an Island at
the town of Drusburg, which at this day is now also called Drusus Ditch. The
city is high walled, after the old manner, and environed with large and deep
Ditches. There were within the same three hundred Wallons in garrison sent from
the prince of Parma thither, and also armed citizens five hundred more or
less. The Earl General sends County Hoghenlo, Sir Philip Sidney, and
others the Leaders of the forces with five hundred horse and eight hundred
footmen in the night time to discover and beset the city about: himself with
the rest of the army came after them the ninth day of September: his
Excellency commands them in warlike wise quickly to entrench themselves, and
to make provision for a battery. On the Thursday five pieces of Ordenance were
mounted, which made two great breaches: which the Towns men with all possible
haste and diligence made up again and fortified. And whereas the Ditch being
three foot broad and more, and thirty foot high encompassed the City, the
assault seemed very difficult to be made: but the soldiers being thereunto
encouraged, the Earl General determined to try the assault: whereunto he
appointed County Hoghenlo with his Germans and Scots, and Sir John Norice
with his Englishmen and Zelanders to give the assault. When ye besieged
townsmen saw that, they offered to yield upon certain conditions: which being
refused, they yield up the city (only with safety of their lives) the Lord
Borough and Sir William Stanley (the government being given unto the Lord
Borough) entered both into the town.

And to the end his Excellency might now next of all withdraw the Prince of
Parma from the siege of Berck, he takes his journey toward Zutphen, one of
the four chief cities in Gelders, famous by name in respect of other cities,
populous and well defended: when he understood it lacked victuals, he went
about either to take it, or else to withdraw the Prince of Parma from Berck,
which thing so happened. Zutphen was in the keeping and defense of John
Baptista Taxis, a man courageous in fight, the Lieutenant Colonel to Verdugo
Governor of Groaning: and seeing even from this city there situate over the
River of Issell all the country of Velue and Holland were troubled and
molested with the Enemy (and therefore the Estates not long before had builded
a Fort or Sconce of defense: but by reason of the great floods and too much
violence of water there increasing, incontinently after they were driven away
from thence) therefore the citizens of Zutphen strengthened and fortified the
same again. And because they of Zutphen extorted spoiling exactions throughout
all the Velue, by reason of the commodity of these their new erected
Fortresses, the Hollanders two years passed besieged the same in vain almost
for ten months space. The Earl General now increasing his army, joins a
great part of those soldiers (which under the Lord Rihouias and Cosmus
Pescarengio were gathered to invade Flaunders) and forthwith pitcheth his Tents
by the River side and before Zutphen it self, on the 18. day of September
1586: and with boats chained together cross the River almost a mile from the
city made a bridge to pass from the one side to the other.

When his Excellency had thus pitched his Tents there, he took his journey
thence with all speed toward Deuenter in Ouer-Issell (for as yet there were
iarres and discords within the City) and though the city also did contribute
with other cities, yet did it refuse to conserve or keep orderly mutual
league with them: he enters into the city, having for his guard about four
hundred footmen, and two troops of horsemen: and when he had received news
that Parma had left Berck, he made toward his Tents with all speed that he
could, and strengthened them so soon as possible might be, the more
confidently to besiege the said city of Zutphen aforesaid. The Prince of Parma
fearing lest the Earl General should prevail against Zutphen, and
understanding that the town of Berck aforesaid, was well defensed and hard to
be won: when he had already fortified the Isle before the town in the River
of Rhene, and blocked and besieged it about with other Forts and Sconces, and
thought he had sufficiently furnished it with victuals and all other
necessaries, departing from thence on the 22. ot September Anno 1586. he
marches toward Wesel in Cleueland and the Castle there, and making a bridge
of ships had passed over the River of Rhene, and had made Forts from the other
part of Resa upon the Rhine and other places, whereby he might both fortify
the Bridge and defend himself in his journey more safely, he came to Bercklo,
and from thence he sends his provision to be conveyed into Zutphen aforesaid.

The Earl General so soon as he perceived that the Prince of Parmaes
provision so carried in was not sufficient for the Garrison there, the next day
he determined to set upon the Garrison: and committed that service to Sir John
Norice and Sir William Stanley, with a great number of footmen, and to
certain others with a great number of horsemen. And when on the 23. of
September the Prince of Parma had again commanded some more provision to be
that morning conveyed into the town, Historia Belgica lib. 13.
guarded with seven troops of horsemen, and two thousand Harquebuziers, they
performed his commandment: and in a certain well fenced place near the
Village called Warresfeld (in the way almost a mile off from the City) they
made a stand. In the mean time while the cariages and wagons do enter into
the city, presently the Earl of Essex, the Lord Willoughby, Sir William
Stanley, Sir Philip Sidney, Sir William Russell, The English forces suddenly
assail their enemies.
Sir Henry Norice, and his brother the General Sir John Norice, having with
him about two hundred horsemen, also fifteen hundred Musquetters, and Sir
William Stanleys Regiment, with as much speed as they could marching thither,
do suddenly and fiercely charge the enemies sooner then they thought for, by
reason of a great mist which dimmed and darkened their eyes at that time. But
even these English forces were by and by encountered by certain troops of the
enemies footebands out of a very commodious place like unto a Fort: and yet did
the English very courageously and valiantly pass through and endure the
manifold stormy hot batterings of the bullets, and yet not one of them once
brake his order: all keeping themselves constantly together in a wonderful
manner. Then the enemies not knowing what number of Englismen these were whom
they saw approach nearer unto them, they quickly send out under Captain George
Cressy Albanoys a troop of horsemen: which being well beaten and dispersed
here and there (whereof many were slain and taken) they send out again
County Hannibal Gonzaga with his troop, The enemies well beaten and scattered.
which in like case were overthrown, and he himself by a deadly wound there
slain. So the victors pressing through the thickest of the Harquebuziers,
there the third troop being a troop of the Enemies horse, seemed as if they
would resist them: but by and by they turn their backs, run away, and so
depart the field, after two victorious troops of the English forces had slain
and sore wounded 180. of the enemies: themselves having of theirs only but
thirty persons of all their companies slain and wounded: amongst whom was
that right nobly renowned Knight Sir Philip Sidney before remembered, of whose
action and manner of death at large I have thought good here, according to the
report of George Whetston and others, actors and eyewitnesses there, thus to
declare the same.

I have before (by occasion ministered unto me) made mention of the virtuous
life and valorous service of that renowned Knight Sir Philip Sidney, the last
year in the Low Countries, spent to the advancement of Gods glory, honor of
his Prince, and benefit of Gods Church and of the kingdom of Christ: now is
occasion given me to set down his honorable enterprise a little before his
death, and so thereby to make his virtuous life, valorous service, and
honorable death more rightly renowned unto the posterity. Thus it happened in
the latter end of the next year following 1586. the English Nobles, The
English forces approaching toward Zutphen.
vz. the Right Honorable Robert Earl of Essex, by his valor reviving his
fathers fame; the Lord Willoughby, the Lord General Norice, Sir William
Russell, and Sir Thomas Parrot, Sir Henry Norice, with diverse others both
Knights and Gentlemen of good account serving then on horseback; this famous
worthy Knight Sir Philip Sidney as forward as the best (all these being mounted
against the enemy, and his power approaching on the 22. of September 1586. unto
the town of Zutphen in Gelderland: Sir Philip Sydney mortally wounded.
) This noble Knight like Caesar charged the enemy so sore, that first an
envious Musquetier from the spiteful Spaniards espying his opportunity slew
his horse under him: who getting to horse again, was with a poisoned bullet
from the enemy shot in the thigh, wanting his Cuisses, which might have
defended him. The wound being deep and shiuering the bone, yet his heart was
good, and his courage little abated, one Vdal a gentleman alighted and led his
horse softly, to whom he thus spoke: Let go, let go till I fall to the
ground: The foe shall miss the glory of my wound. And so riding out of the
field with a rare and constant courage, his wound was searched, no salve too
dear but was sought, no skill so curious but was tried to cure, ease, and
recover this noble Soldier languishing in pain, all remediles. Who feeling
death drawing on, desired yet (were it Gods will so to be) that he might live
to do his Country more good service: alleging that he feared not death, but
lamented that his years as yet (being but green) brought forth but leaves,
the bloomes being fair, no fruit yet appearing, his life could not be
lengthened for the enlargement of that good, which both in heart he wished, and
in power he would have performed toward his Prince and country, had he lived
here longer: who being demanded if he feared not any whit to dye, answered: No
whit because I live thereby.

Touching the honor of the field there fought, as all our English Lords and
Knights by their valors much diminished the enemies force and daunted his
courage: so amongst them Sir Thomas Parrot stroke down Gonzaga at a blow,
County Hannibal was left for dead in the field, and Captain George one of the
enemies commanders, was by the worthy Lord Willoughby taken prisoner: only
Captain Thomas and Captain Martin amongst our English were slain in that
fight, and not any more of account missing. So by this honor ensued the
untimely death of this renowned noble Knight on the 17. day of October 1586.
living just 25. days after his received hurt, in hope by death to inherit with
Christ the Crown of life and glory. Whose mortal death how greatly it was
lamented of all sorts, from the highest to the lowest, who so please may look
and read in the Reportarie of this action, afterward penned by George
Whetston Gentleman: where he declares how the corpse of this noble deceased
Knight being brought over in the Black Pinnis, so called, was shrined in a
Hearse within the Mynories in London: and his funeral day being appointed upon
Tuesday the 16. of February next after following in that year 1586. The
solemn order of the same was thus martialled in honorable manner, vz. having
three Earls and other Lords of the States his chief mourners, with all their
train as they followed the Corpse. After them went Sir Wolston Dixi Knight then
Lord Mayor of London, and the Aldermen mourning in their purple robes. And last
of al a warlike band of worthy Citizens his welwillers, with weapons trailed in
solemn wise, brought the Corpse from out of the Quier of the Cathedral Church
of S. Paul in London (after a learned Sermon there made) to the upper Northeast
end of the Isle above the Quier by the second pillar, where with solemn
honorable ceremony usual, the corpse was laid to his rest in Christ Jesus:
which done, the said souldierlike Citizens bestowed for their last farewell of
their beloved noble friend and Captain, two volleys of shot, and so returned
home every man to his house, heavy, mournful and sad for the loss of so
virtuous, honorable and true renowned personage: upon whose death the
aforesaid George Whetston made this Epitaph.

HEre under lies Phillip Sydney Knight,
True to his Prince, learned, staid and wise:
Who lost his life in honorable fight,
Who vanquished death, in that he did despise
To live in pomp, by others brought to pass:
Which often he termed a Dyamond set in Brass.
There is another Epitaph usually pendant at the said pillar under his Crest,
Cote Armor, and colors there fixed.

ENgland, Netherland, the Heavens and the Arts,
The Soldiers, and the World, have made six parts
Of the Noble Sydney; for none will suppose,
That a small heap of stones can Sydney enclose.
His body has England, for she it fed,
Netherland his blood in her defense shed:
The Heavens have his soul, the Arts have his Fame,
All Soldiers the grief, the World his good Name.
After the death of this nobly renoumed Knight Sir Philip Sydney, so greatly
lamented as well in the Netherlands as in England, Historia Belgica lib. 13.
the Earl General makes attempt to take the Fort on the other side of
Zutphen, placing his Tents in che Velawe; there is a little Island before the
Town of Zutphen, whereunto out of the City, there is an open passage almost
on dry foot, by a Ford which now and then has been kept by a garrison of
thirty soldiers only, Anno 1586.
this he battereth with his Ordinance and takes it.

The Prince of Parma seeing this Island taken, marches to the said City of
Zutphen, on the fourteenth of October following Anno dicto with a strong power,
furnished with great store of all manner of provision, and the next day after
returns back two miles from Zutphen, unto Barcklo, from thence to Wesel and
so to Burck: then making a bridge over the Rhene, he falls sick in his way
coming to Bruxels, and there being enfeebled by sickness, be ordains the
Marquess of Renty, Parma falls sick.
Lord of Montigni (descended of the house of Lalaigne) chief Governor of the
Army in his steed.

The Earl General battereth with his Ordinance (on the 16. of October anno
dicto) the lesser Fort toward the North and commands it (after dinner) to
be razed to the ground, and in this place there were 300. in garrison: but in
the greater Fort were 800. and in the City 2000. when the Prince of Parma
himself was absent from thence scarce two miles. The Earl General assaileth
the little wing near Zutphen.
So as what time neither out of the City it self, nor out of the Fort any
man came to resist or withstand the Earls forces, this was by them sharply
assailed: in the assailing thereof Edward Standley an English Gentleman
(together with Sir William Standley being a Colonel) behaved themselves very
courageously. For master Edward Standley climed up the rampere of the Fort,
out of which one supposing to strike him through with a pike, the said Edward
took it perforce out of his hands, and held it stoutly, and the more the
enemy strove to wrest it from him again, the higher he raised the said
Edward Standley so much more out of his reach: whereby he escaped the enemies
danger, Master Edward Stanley Knighted.
which deed was the chief cause of the victory. For which enterprise the Earl
General dubbed him Knight, as by desert, and gave him a yearly pension of
600. Florens: in this assault there were no more but eight of the Generals men
slain, and there the Count Hoghenlo was wounded in the face.

His Excellency on the next day after this battereth, and so takes the said
greater Fort by commodity of the lesser Fort, and the I Will on the north part
aforesaid, so as thereby he might utterly stop the passage between the
great Fort and the City: and while the garrison were in fear thereof, leaving
their Ordinance there at random, The Earl takes certain Castles.
before the Englishmen had placed their Ordinace, they fled into the City, and
so these Forts together with the Castles of Newbeken, Boxburgh, and other
places near adjoining were taken, whereby all the Country of the Velawe was
delivered from the violent extortions, and burning spoilers there before raging.

His excellency thought not good to assail the City of Zutphen, because it
was strongly fenced, encompassed with waters, environed with walls, and
situate between Deuenter, Doesburgh, Lokam, Doeterum and the said Fort: for
he hoped they would then especially yield unto him: if penury so constrained
them by a little and a little. Therefore almost in the midst of winter he
remoueth his Camp (which thing also Parma doing) the Earl General disposes
his garrisons in good order every where, aduaunceth certain Leaders, and
English Nobles for their approved valors with great honor, and made some
others of them Knights.

And so the Earl General having performed all these services in the
Netherlands, was worthily, well, honorably and highly reputed of them
hitherto: but after this (he is said by my Author lib. 13. fol. 391. page 2.
(whether and how he deserved it I know not) to incur the disliking of the
Estates in some points, as also in that he placed Rowland York aforesaid
Governor of the Fort at Zutphen; The Earl incurreth the States displeasure.
for although they had used him in diverse services for his benefit before time,
yet he was not found so faithful to them in those causes as he ought to have
bin, and as was expected. Also for that the said Earl General made Sir William
Srandley knight, giving him charge over 1200. English and Irish footmen, and
over 200. horsemen: into whose doings the Estates General advisedly looking,
found him also far more unfaithful then either he should have bin, or they
worthily deserved at his hands.

The Earl General when in the deep of winter he understood that Parma was
departed out of Gelderland, and knowing for certain that the soldiers
appointed in the Osteland (by the confederacy and secret conspiracy of
certain false forsworn soldiers which he had in his government) had revolted
from him, yea and to their great shame (no necessity urging them) to run
away from him: and when he now also saw, that neither time nor place was given
him for performance of any further service, and the Town Berck was delivered
lately from the siege (from whence Colonel Thomas Morgan was now returned)
the Earl General I say now departs toward Haghe in Holland. But when his
soldiers leaving at random the I Will before Zutphen, removed their Tents, they
were suddenly and fiercely charged by John Baptista Taxus the Spanish
Colonel: but they escaped away from the enemy, Lib. 13.
with the loss of some six or seven of the Englishmen and no more.

At that time the Estates finding themselves agreeued at the Earls indirect
doings (as my Author says) in those countries, do make and exhibit unto him
certain requests for diverse respects: whereof the whole reformation was
reserved until his return again out of England, when God and her Majesty
should so permit. And so his Excellency taking his leave of the Estates
General (not sufficiently contented with his doings) he takes shipping at
Flushing passes into England, and ariueth at London on the fourth of December
Anno 1586.

About this time (for as much as Sir Philip Sidney late Governor of Flushing
was slain at the siege of Zutphen, 1586.
Historia Belgica lib. 14.
as before is said) the Queens Majesty of England, in his place gave the
government thereof to Sir William Russell Knight (son to the Earl of Bedford)
a man of great account and worthiness: Sir William Russel.
He arrived there at Flushing, and with him Monsieur Tyrlone, sometime Admiral
of Zeland, who for suspicions in some points, was a long time kept in prison:
but being afterward set at liberty, and discharged of all matters, went into
England to render his due and condign thanks unto the Queens most excellent
Majesty.

Before that the Prince of Parma purposed to besiege Sluice in Flaunders, he
levied an army throughout all the Provinces of his jurisdiction, making as
though he would take his journey through that part of Flaunders, which we call
the land of Waste: These forces about the beginning of the month of May next
following, which was in Anno 1587. were dispersed into sundry parts about
Bridges by little and little increasing. And to the end they should the less
suspect them, they give out speeches that they were sent with Mounsier de Lamot
to the Town of Oudenburgk in Flaunders, Anno 1587.
to the end they should repress the outrageous spoils of the Soldiers at
Ostend and of Sluice: when now all his host was in a readiness, Lib. 14.
and as well the Bands come out of Germany as out of the Netherlands, and
other Nations were gathered, they passed on forewards to the siege of Sluice.
The Prince of Parma himself on the seventh of June departs out of Bruxels,
and the next day came to Bruges leading with him 9. Troops or Companies, after
whom the rest of his whole host followed: Parmaes preparation to march toward
Sluice.
the coming of these, and the forerunning fame of their prepartion throughout
Flaunders greatly amazed the minds of them at O^tend, and Sluice. Insomuch as
from the Governors of both towns, diverse messengers were sent into Zeland and
Holland to provide themselves of soldiers, victuals, armor, and other
necessary warlike furniture against the coming of the enemy toward them.

I have seen (says my Author) amongst others the letters of Arnold
Greeneveld then Governor of Sluice, written to the foresaid Sir William Russell
newly made Governor of Flushing dated the 9. of June 1587. wherein he
signified unto him, Sir William Russel made General of Flushing.
that he (having made diligent search and view as well throughout all the
public magazin or garners of the City, as through all the private garnets
within the inhabitants houses of the City) could not yet find any more store
of corn, and grain in them all, then might serve for sustentation of their
own families even for a very few days.

Sir William Russell being with the reports of these letters thoroughly moved,
had a few days before sent for certain companies of footmen from the garrison
of Berghen, which within a while after came timely enough: and moreover on the
11. of June dicto he writ unto the States for souidiers also. But for corn,
and grain, and warlike munitions, he writ unto the States of Zeland only, by
Peter Vanhela, a Netherlandish gentleman, together with Nicholas Meetkirck
Liuetenant Governor of Sluice, sent thither for that very purpose: of whom
when they received but only promises for their answer (because the Zelanders
denied that the danger was not so much as they made report of in writing.) Sir
William Russell therefore by these messengers, Sir William Russels care for
provision.
instanteth the Zelanders on the tenth and eleventh of that June for speedy
dispatch of the requisite provision, and yet (fearing in mean time their
wonted delays) expreslie commands Vanhela, that (taking unto him the
Magistrate of Flushing for his helper in this case) he would find out some
store of corn and grain wheresoever he could get it, and that he without all
delay should send it over to Sluice: who the very same day (by diligent search
made) commanded by authority so given him, a Ship which he found laden with
corn to depart with all speed unto Sluice, which hereby was sufficiently
provided of corn and grain for, and during the whole time of the siege.

The same day arrived three Companies in Zeland which came from the garrison of
Berghen, to whom Sir William Russell adding one of his Companies with certain
chosen soldiers, made up four just companies, Sir Roger Williams.
which were in all very near 800. men: there arrived then also out of England,
that worthy soldier Sir Roger Williams, and certain other English gentlemen
come thither, by reason of the rumors of the enemies approach, daily about
Ostend. So the garrison of Sluice by this means increased to the number of
about 1600. men.

For by this time the Prince of Parma had pitched his Tents in Cadsandt, an
Island in Faunders, Lib. 14.
and had there the greater part of his host, which was at Bersquin in
Flaunders: so that all along that part of the Country they might be safe from
the English forces at Ostend: the garrison of Sluice so besieged, made often and
stout sallies upon the enemy, wherein although they made great Skermishes to
the foil of the enemy, yet lacked they many of their company. Amongst the
nobility and gentry of the Netherlands great commendation for their valor
gained Nicholas Meetkirck, from whose side his youngest brother Adolphus never
departed: also Charles Herogier, Nicholas Mandy, and very many other
Captains: amongst the English warriors Sir Roger Williams, Sir Thomas
Baskeruile, Historia Belgica lib. 14.
Sir Frauncis Vere, and Colonel Huntley, deserved also most worthy and
memorable commendations.

In the mean time when no sufficient power came to succor the Slusians, nor
any preparation (before written for) was made by the Estates, al men had then
their voices at large toward the before named Earl of Leycester, their late
Governor General: saying, that of duty his presence and authority was now
requisite, that he might the better succor and defend them in this their
present danger.

The Earl General then being in England well understanding these things, The
Earl General returns into the Netherlands.
and thinking occasion was now given him to gain praise and glory, means
being made thereunto, he embarketh himself with a good number of new soldiers
for Zeland: and ariuing at Flushing on the 6. day of July 1587. was there
received with great expectation and joyful welcome of all men. By this help
of his presence and of the Englishmen arrived with him, the Earl (bestirring him
by all means possible to deliver Sluice from the present siege) prepares all
necessary adiuments and muniments by sea and by land to repel and raise the
enemy from the siege thereof.

County Maurice of Nassaw when he had intelligence of the Earl Governor
General his return out of England into Zeland, came unto him, leaving County
Hoghenlo in Brabant with three thousand men, hoping greater helps would come
out of Gelderland, Frizland and Vtrecht, to succor him, which came not so well
to pass.

In the mean time the Prince of Parma with his forces so mightily battered the
town of Sluice, that he first taking the Fort, battered continually the walls
of the town with thirty pieces of Cannon, and eight Culuerings. To be short,
spending upon them 17400. shot (of which on S. James day from three of the
clock in the morning until five in the afternoon, were four thousand shot
made) so that the Prince of Parma himself confessed, that (to his remembrance)
he never performed against any others in one day such violent force and
continual assault. By which great and vehement assault given and exceeding
battery of his Ordenance, there was a breach made in the walls of 250. paces
long: into which breach the besieging enemies oftentimes with all their forces
made assault upon the townsmen, but were of them with Pikes, The resistance of
the Slucians.
Halberts and other weapons so worthily entertained, that after a great
slaughter made of them, the rest were glad to retire into their Trenches again.

In which assault, which lasted from nine of the clock in the morning one day
until eleven of the next at noone, the Marquis of Renty was hurt, The loss on
both parts.
Monsieur Lamot lost his right arm, Strippen the Leader of the Burgundians,
with many Captains of great account, besides others, were slain, and (as the
Enemy himself afterward confessed) as many hurt also: when they of Sluice so
besieged lost but 150. men only, as was found by a just reuiew taken thereof.
And although that the Prince with his Pioners often and dangerously annoyed the
inhabitants of Sluice, yet such vigilancie and diligence they used, that they
met with their enemies in like manner; almost every hour fighting with them
continually for nine days space, with Swords, Targets and Harquebuziers, so
long, until of the 1600. (which were at the first there placed for garrison)
there were in five but seven hundred left alive in the garrison, as hereafter
more plainly shall appear.

When the town had thus been besieged now full seven weeks, the Earl General
having gathered his forces every where by sea and by land, he enters into
conference with the Estates, taking counsel of his Leaders how to relieve
Sluice with all possible speed. A great Navy was then prepared, The Earl
General prepares forces to relieve Sluice.
furnished with soldiers by the said Estates. To him came Iustine or Nassaw
Admiral of Zeland, and other Netherlandish Governors by sea. The Earl
General with 31. companies of footmen and six troops of horsemen passes out
of Zeland unto Ostend: where the Right Honorable Lord Charles Howard Lord high
Admiral of England, and the Right Honorable George Earl of Cumberland with
certain ships, wherein went a great part of the Nobility of England, sailed
into Zeland, purposely as well to help his Excellency, as to see how he did.

His Excellency had determined to invade the Port or Haven of Sluice in the
very entrance thereof with certain ships, well and strongly furnished, at a
certain deep place under the town where the ships might ride safely. But the
Sea-gouernours, Shipmasters, and others experienced in marine affairs
(especially they of Zeland) were of a contrary opinion, thinking it not so
convenient a thing to attempt that which they could not accomplish, but in so
doing should rather bring their ships into assured danger. Touching this
enterprise diverse were the opinions, which with great dislike troubled their
minds.

Therefore the Earl General seeing he could not so do any good with his ships
by sea, seeks now by what device he can to try the enterprise by land.
Wherefore when he arrived at Ostend on the 30. day of July 1587. and unto him
were come many English Nobles, besides five thousand men which he brought over
with him this later time (though he had not so great a power with him as
needful it was for him to have) yet with those which he had going out of
Ostend, he gives assault to the Fort of Blanckberg in Flanders, and with
determination to have taken Blankenburgh, The Earl assaulteth the fort of
Blanckberg.
he sent from Ostend some five thousand foot, and certain troops of horse,
with two small field pieces, under the command of the Lord Willoughby Colonel
general, and Sir William Pelham Lord Marshall, his Excellency went in a
Pinnasse by sea: where when they came they found the Sconce too well manned and
provided to be assailed, but with great loss: wherefore his Excellency
commanded them to retire to Ostend, where the next day they embarked, and
sailed to the entrance into Sluice, where they lay seven days.

In the mean time the besieged town of Sluice (which had so valiantly endured
with so little help such and so great storms with the Enemy, as before is
said) now also still for two months space fully continuing, and saw not any
man come to help them (but two only Englishman named Captain Allen and
Captain Heart, which twice or thrice swam over from Sluice* to make relation
unto the Earl General and the Estates of the present estate of the town):
They I say, now half despairing of any help, by reason the Earl General was
at some jar with the Estates, began to wax faint and feeble both in courage
and power. For the enemy was now lodged in the Counterscarfe, and had sapped
into the Rampart, daily undermining further into the town, so as there went a
noise amongst them that he was already come into the city. Besides these
things, of twenty pieces of Ordenance (which they had at first in the town)
they had now but four only left, which the Enemy with his vehement shot had
not yet broken, neither had they so much powder left them wherewith they were
able to hold out fight even for half a day. Wherefore by all men's judgments
they were not able to endure the enemies assault twelve hours longer together,
no, not by all means they could possibly devise.

Therefore incontinently after, hereupon they received compositions from Parma
worthy of their valors, vz. That with their bag and baggage, with their
Ensigns flying, the match in cock and bullet in mouth, they should also
presently depart out of Sluice, and march away down to the ships in Zeland: The
yielding up of the Sluice.
And all these were in number only but seven hundred (as I said before) residue
of that sixteen hundred, which so left the town of Sluice, yielded up unto
Parma and his forces on the 4. day of August Anno 1587. aforesaid.

So the Earl departing on the 17. of August 1587. out of Zeland by ship, he
came the next day unto Bergen, where forth with he sent away all the forces
which he brought with him, to take the Castle of Hochstrate in Brabant. But
that enterprise had no success.

On the 24. of August he passes from Bergen to Dordrecht in Holland, where the
Estates do meet him and take their leave of him. The 14. of November
returning into Zeland to visit the Cities there, and so at Vere in Zeland
reconciling unto him certain Captains of the Garrison in secret manner, The
Earls last return into England.
he departs thence the 21. of November, and at length taking ship at Flushing
the 17. of December Anno 1587. he returns the second and last time into
England.

The Earl of Leycester (late Governor General, as before remembered) returning
into England, lived until September following 1588. in which time the Estates
were about once more to entertain him as Governor General again amongst
them. But he dying on the 14. of that month Anno 1588. within a homely house
in a certain wood near Langley in Oxfordshire at 63. years of age, The death
of the Earl General.
was buried the 20. day of October Anno 1588. at Killingworth, trying all
fortunes.

In the mean time from the Earls said departure out of the Netherlands, let us
leave him so dead and buried, and return to the government of those Provinces
again by County Maurice, against Alexander Prince of Parma.

And concerning the remedy of those evils in the Netherlands, her Highness
sends her express Letters unto the Lord Willoughby etc. (who had then been
in the Netherlands her Majesty's Lieutenant general under County Maurice,
since the Earl of Leycesters first return into England) of whose service from
time to time I have here fit place, occasion and time now offered me, to set
down all occurrents, as the order of the present history requires.

This noble Gentleman by birth, and virtuous Lord by his life, Lord Peregine
Bartu (by his title Lord of Willoughby, Eresby and Beck) the only son and
heir apparent of the Right Worshipful, or rather Right Honorable (for his
birth, virtue and learning) Master Richard Bartu, descended of the Noble house
aforesaid (who married the Right noble and virtuous Lady Katherin Duchess of
Suffolk, The Lord Willoughby his birth.
widow of that nobly renowned Soldier Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk) being
borne at Wesell in Duchland in Queen Mary's time (his parents making their
journey out of England for the profession of the Gospel) by the tender care
and good education of his parents being named Peregrine (as borne in a strange
country) in process of time from his youth forwards to his manhood proved
pregnant in wit, prompt in knowledge, and practiced especially in Martial or
Military actions: whereby he became the most rare, and surpassing ornament of
his noble progeny, and a most honorable and worthy Instrument for the
service of his Prince and Country.

In so much as his first service wherein the Queens Majesty employed him, was
when in his Adolescencie he was sent her Ambassador unto Fridericke the second
of that name king of Denmark, His services from time to to time.
toward whom he so wisely behaved himself, and from whom he so discreetly
demeaned himself toward her Highness in his return and answer, that seldom a
better or the like Ambassade has been in the like case found in one of so
young years for her Royal Majesty unto any foreign parts, either before or
since his time.

Next after that his Heroical spirit, yet further affecting Military
affairs, as one more desirous to serve his Prince and Country, it pleased her
Highness with the advice of her most Honorable privy Counsel (upon the great
good opinion and liking they had conceived of his dexterity) when the Earl of
Leycester was the first time returned into England, to send him over to the
Netherlands as Lieutenant General of the English forces there, His service in
the absence of the Earl General.
Anno 1586. where his noble courage so conjoined with dexterity, and his
forwardnes with such fortune, that he himself was foremost in all attempts and
enterprises of his forces, fiercely like a Lion he assailed the enemies,
fought with them, spoiled them, and foiled them, wheresoever he came. So
verily and in such sort, as the Duke of Parma then himself confessed of this
worthy Lord Willoughbie and his service (for four years space in those
Countries) never any English man enterprised more boldly to meet his enemies
in the face, more bravely encountered them, nor more painefullie pursued and
sought them out near and far off, to their disgrace, spoil, and foil,
wheresoever he found them.

At Sutphen (as before is mentioned) when the Prince of Parma came thither to
relieve that Town, this worthy Lord Lieuetenant Willoughbie (under the Earl of
Leycester who came not into the fight) being in place more forward then the
rest, marched well mounted, met the enemies courageously, brake his Lance in
the midst of them, made way with his sword every where, and so forciblie
adventured his noble person through the thickest of them: His service at
Zutphen.
that all his men nearest him much feared, when his bases were bereued from his
body, his plumes plucked away from his head, and his Arms be battered with
blows, (except God would then mightily preserve and protect him above all
expectation) he should utterly have been foiled in the fight, and spoiled
both of life and all things else about him, he was so desperately endaungered
every way.

Yet so mightily God himself doubtless prevailed with him, and for him in the
instant hazard of his life, that he pressed through the thickest of them
without any bodily harm, and in this hot broile, with his own hands caught
hold of Seignior George Cres^yonyer Albanoys before mentioned page. 88. one of
Parmaes ch^ef^ Commanders of his horse, carried him away prisoner perforce, He
takes an Albanoys Captive.
and (maugre all resisting force of the enemies) sent him to the Estates to be
kept their Captive.

No Conuoy could at any time escape his victorious hands, neither durst any
enemy approach the Town of Berghen, where and while he was then Governor.
Such by the favor of God was his virtue joined with his fortune in his said
government, He challenges the Marquis of Guasto.
that he was highly honored of his own garrison, and also greatly feared of
his enemies: when he often times made challenge of the brauest of them, as
namely the Marquess of Guasto (a Nobleman of chiefest account with the Duke
of Parma) who yet for all that refused to encounter with him hand to hand.

After the return of the Earl of Leycester General of her Majesty's forces in
the Netherlands, this worthy Lord Willoughbie (as Leiutenant) with great
wisdom, circumspection, diligence, and fidelity discharged his duty so
honorably and uprightly in all points, and at al times, that he withstood the
enemies attempt, gained the good will of the people of those Provinces,
appeased their troubles, and ended all controversies in the Towns of
Medenblick and Narden in Holland, and also of Camphere and Armude in Zeland to
the great peace and common quiet of the same Towns and Countries.

For when Count Maurice and the Estates had with their forces ensconced the
Town of Medenblick aforesaid, and had opposed their forces against the
soldiers in that Town, they did what they could to surprise, and take the
spoil of the Town from Mounsier Snoy Governor thereof: but little therein
did they and their forces prevail, until (by her Majesty's most Princely
care, and chargeable expenses) this worthy Lord Willoughbie treated a
reconciliation between the States and those towns: so as those towns were
rendered into the States hands again without bloodshed.

After all this the Enemies having vainly invaded the Isle of Thole, Historia
Belgica lib. 15.
lost four hundred of their men: They then marched with their forces toward
Berghen opt Zome, near the River of Schalde, Parma marches toward Berghen opt
Zome.
which city they prepared to besiege, seeing they could not obtain the Isle
of Thole, being therein hindered, by the watchfulnes, virtue and valor of the
Count Solme, who in his own person watched night and day in the Fortress all
the time that the Duke of Parmaes soldiers besieged Berghen.

This city or Marquisate of Berghen opt Zome has a dignity, which (after the
death of the last Marquis of that house named John, being poisoned in Spain
Anno 1567.) descends unto his Sisters daughter begotten by the Lord of Merode
and Peterson: who is married to the Lord of Bersole Baron of Brabant, a follower
of the Spanish Kings wars and his adherents, yea though he dwelt at Leyden.

This city is situate in Brabant by the River of Schalde, and is very large
and commodious, builded at the flood Zoma, now by ouerflowings somewhat distant
from Schalde; but with a fit Haven stretching toward Schalde, where it has a
certain head or foreland, which (being environed with strong Ramparts and
munitions) a Garrison did use to keep the same sometime.

There was the same time Governor of that City a certain Colonel named Sir
Thomas Morgan (since for his valor knighted) a Welshman borne, he succeeded
that worthy Knight Sir William Drury in that government: Colonel Drury.
Colonel Morgan.
The Garrison in that City were Englishmen, unto whom were adjoined some few
Netherlandish horsemen; and amongst all these certain adventurers which made
great spoil and took many booties from the enemy, and therefore were called
Boot-halers, Historia Belgica lib. 15.
in Duch Buythaillers. These daily made excursions into Brabant, ransacking all
places penetrable, making havoc of all they could lay their hands on,
Outrageous spoylers.
besetting the high ways to Antwerpe, Bruxels, and Machlin, by land and by
water: yea they robbed and spoiled travelers by high ways (although they were
guarded with convenient companies of soldiers) and miserably bereaved them of
all that they had about them, carrying away back with them into the City of
Berghen great riches and spoils every day. Moreover, they took very many
Merchants and citizens of great account as their Captives, which gave them for
their raunsomes, ten or twenty thousand Florences a piece.

The Duke of Parma therefore on the 24. day of September Anno 1588. sets his
soldiers on work to fall to the siege: and for speedier dispatch of the
matter he causes some to convey thither warlike engines, and great Ordenance
for assault and battery: The Prince of Parma lays siege to Berghen.
and others he makes to bring thither great and small gabions, Masts,
Dealeboords, sparres and boats. He also sends thither Carpenters and Smithes
with their necessary tools: And first he sets upon the Fortress on the
foreland of Berghen, which is called the North Sconce, to cast it down,
placing his Ordenance upon a bank, and so battereth the same Fortress with
many sore blows: and withal he practices by subtlety also to further the
enterprise by suborning two Englishmen to serve his purpose (as he made account
by playing a false cast) whom he knew long since when he kept them his
captives. These making themselves moved by Parmaes request, took upon them
(under color that most of the garrison were Englishmen) as they bare him in
hand to betray the City unto him: A pretty practice of two Englishmen to
beguile Parma.
and to the end they might more probably perform this action, they alleged
unto him that the Garrison were for many causes grown maleconte^ted. These two
were called the one William Grimston, and the other Robert Redhead (both of
them being before instructed of the Governors of Berghen, The politic devise
of Redhead and Grimston.
how they should herein demean themselves) with whose priuitie they performed
all this service. They handled the matter so cunningly, that they had by this
time gotten of Parma rich chains of gold, and withal large and liberal
promises. This politic device was so far forwards brought, that what was
promised unto Parma from such persons of the Garrison within Berghen, should be
performed on the 24. of October that year 1588. in the chief Fortress which
was on the North side of the city: and to the end Parma should be in the
greater security and assurance hereof, Redhead pledged unto him his own
person, and was bound hand and foot to be killed outright, if he brought not
Parmaes soldiers within that Fortress.

Now there were some thirty or forty of his soldiers received into the gate,
amongst whom was the said Robert Redhead, when the Lord Willoughby Governor of
the town and of the English Garrison let down the Port Cullis of wood over
the gate. But the Captains and Leaders of the enemies seeing themselves
pressed and thrust at their backs by four thousand of their company, whereof
fifteen hundred were Spaniards, (and that in a very narrow place) determined
with courage and manhood to assail the Fortress. The enemies ^ntrapped,
slain, and drowned.
Using the occasion of the low water, and the ebb of the sea, they passed
through the Ditch, and coming to the Rampart pulled down the Pallisado, and
fought with our men at push of pike upon the top of the Rampart. But al things
were there prepared for Parmaes coming, in such sort that they which gave the
assault, were to their great loss beaten back. Whereunto also happened that
the side of the sea coming in again upon them many were drowned in the Ditch,
whose number being added to the multitude of those which were slain, arose to
many hundreds, and amongst others were taken there eighteen or twenty
Spaniards Gentlemen of some account. This heavy hap and misaduenture Parma
tolerating so patiently as he could, all sad and melancholic in mind,
Historia Belgica lib. 15.
caused his forces by a little and a little to raise the siege from Berghen,
and so to depart toward Bruxels. Parma raises his siege, and departs from
Berghen.
By this means was Berghen delivered from the siege of the enemies, to their
great overthrow and detriment, many of whose chief men of war and of the
Nobility were left there behind captiued: and the town of Berghen it self
from thence-forth became in far much better and safer state, vz. both better
fortified and more largely reedified with new and beautiful buildings.

After the siege so raised from Berghen, Count Maurice of Nassaw being
inaugurate the Marquis of Der Vere in Walchern, in the province of Zeland,
Count Maurice inaugurate the Marquis of Der Vere.
on the 20. day of November 1588. there in that solemnity, caused new Coins
of silver money to be made, which he cast abroad unto the people, having the
Arms of Nassaw and of Der Vere stamped upon them with this inscription: on the
one side; Nodus Indissolubilis: and on the other side; Ie Meyntiendray. Other
pieces of money were by him also cast abroad, having two hands the one joining
with the other, holding between them Mercuries Scepter or Rod, with this
inscription: Auxilia humilia, firma consensus facit.

In obsidionem Bergensium solutam, Carmen Numerale.
Hosts, Ausonia vt Rapina par Ma;
Zonae Berga tuae auferatur, instant;
Cunctas Dux ad istud adhibetque arts:
Queis, and te and tua possit occupare;
Frustra hos vertere Berga terga cogit.
In the month of May 1589. three troops of horsemen which were of Count
Maurices and of the Marshall Villers now deceased, and of Chymscies Regiments
issuing out for adventure, fell amongst the Garrisons of Gertrudenberg, and
others their companies, which put them to flight so far as the town of Osse
in Brabant: Historia Belgica lib. 15.
There were taken (amongst others of the Netherlanders) Captain Riscier, and
the Lieuetenant of Skymsky with many others.

When now Parmaes host by the siege of Hewsden, the overthrow of Hyemert, the
yielding up of Heyl and other Fortresses unto them, they thought themselves now
strong and safe enough in that part of Brabant: Their Leaders determined in the
month of September to pass over the River Moza, with a purpose to invade the
country of Tyle in Gelderland, from whence they would pass either to Buren in
Gelderland, or to Vtrecht. But the Spaniards by occasion of a sedition or
mutiny risen between them and the Italians (which thing the Duke of Pastrana
and the Duke of Ascoly were had in belief to maintain against the Duke of
Parma) they refused to pass over the River, crying alowd, Viue il Re, fuora il
mal gouerno: that is, God save the King, let us cast off evil government. A
sedition amongst the chiefest of the Spaniards.
And when Count Maunsfeld went about to take them, they shot at him with their
dagges and great pieces, put him to flight, and drove him into the Garrison of
the City of Grave. And when Count Maurice having now gathered some forces
about him, endeavored to stop their passage every where again, planting his
Ordenance and Munitions round about Heyl to besiege it: so it happened that
Parma was constrained (winter coming on) to dismiss his host, and furnishing
with convenient forces of their Garrisons the Castles of Heymert and Heyl and
other his defenses, he departed to the mouth of the River Deynsa, adjoining
near unto the town of Sherteghanbusch.

The Duke of Parma in this year 1589. was overtaken by a grievous disease or
sickness, many were the causes supposed to be thereof; namely and first that on
the tenth day of November 1588. as he was riding from Berghen to Machlin, he
fell off from a bridge into the water. Unto which chance happened many other
evils, Historia Belgica lib. 15.
such as were the sorrow which he conceived by the evil success of the
Spanish Navy in the invasion of England a little before in that last year
1588. The Prince of Parma falls into many griefs.
And the siege of Berghen, from whence he was enforced to depart without any
thing done by him. Also that by the Duke of Pastrana and the Prince of Ascoly
many things were spoken and done to his reproach and disdain. And again,
because he understood that certain letters of Exchange (as they call them)
sent by him into Spain (by the instigation of some evil willers which
perchance he there had) were neither received, nor yet the money for them paid:
when those letters mentioned that the money amounted unto 100000. Ducats:
wherefore he labors greatly by some means to satisfy the Italian
Merchants, and about the same time deceased his Uncle by his fathers side
called the Great Cardinal Farnesius, by whom he had great help and
furtherance. The Prince of Parma his death.
To be short therefore, he falling sick in the month of May 1589. all
vnhealthie and heavy in plight, then departed to Spada a Fountain in the land
of Luke, there to use the benefit of a Bath, taking his lodging at Montfort, or
in the town adjoining: where he drank the waters of Spada or Spau for his
health sake, and lived after that until the 12. day of November 1592. and then
died in the city of Arras in Artoys one of the seventeen Provinces of the
Netherlands.

Thus far translated out of Emanuel Meteranus, his Belgic History.
A BRIEF DISCOVRSE OF THE MEMORABLE VOYage to Portugal, Anno 1589. by Sir John
Norice and Sir Francis Drake Knights, with the English forces.
INprimis, to the glory of God and honor of her Majesty be it specially
remembered, that the two Generals aforesaid made certain orders in number 14.
for the Soldiers and Mariners going to sea: and other 54. orders for the
Captains, Soldiers and Sailers, during the voyage, to be by them and every of
them duly and dutifully observed and performed.

Their Navy consisting of Ships great and small, and of men, set forward
from Plimmouth the 17. of April Anno 1589. to the sea.

The Admiral, The Arc: Sir John Norice, Sir Francis Drake two Generals.

The Vizadmirall, The Golden Lion: Captain Thomas Fenner.

The Rereadmirall, The Dreadnot: Captain William Fenner.

The six principal Masters of the Queens Ships: Thomas West, Robert Wignald,
John Bennet, Robert Heart, Roger Tallent, Richard Burnet.

The five Colonels of the five Regiments in the Navy and Army: Sir John
Norice, Sir Francis Drake, Sir Roger Williams, Sir Edward Norice, and Captain
George Fenner.

The five Lieutenants Colonels of the five Squadrons: Captain Thomas Drake,
Captain Sachuile, Captain Garton, Captain Goring, and Captain Winter.

The five Captains of the Watch of the five Squadrons and their Corporals:
Captain Web of the Revenge, Captain Champernoune of the Non per illa,
Captain Gifford of the Dreadnought, Captain Norwood of the Foresight,
Captain George Drake of the Swiftsure.

Corporals: Captain Young, Captain Seigar, Captain Thomas Baker, Captain
Wild, Captain Cripse.

The seven Commissioners: John Sachuile, William Winter, Alexander Musgraue,
William Fenner, Thomas Drake, James Lancaster, John Goring.

The Secretary of the Navy, Master Anthony Ashly.

The Surueyor general of the victuals, Master Marmeduke Daryell.

The Treasurer of the Navy,

The Viztreasurer, Master Stalling.

The Surueyor of the Navy, Captain To. Flicke.

The Lieutenant of the Ordenance of the Navy, Captain James Lancaster.

Captain general of the Watch, Captain Bowyer.

The Master of the Discoueries and Lieutenant Colonel of the Pinnasses,
Captain Foxcroft.

The Transport Master, Captain Alexander Musgraue aforesaid.

The Clerk of the store, Master Aldridge.

The five Corporals of the five Squadrons: Captain Young of the squadron of
the Revenge Captain Seigar of the Non perilla, Captain Thomas Baker of the
Dreadnought, Captain Wild of the Swiftsure, Captain Peter Cripse of the
Foresight.

A Journall of the Portugal Voyage Anno 1589.
WEdnesday the 17. of April 1589. they embarked at Plimmouth.

Tuesday the 23. of April they fell with the Coast of Galizia.

Wednesday the 24. of April they landed at a little Hermitage East side of the
Corunna or Groyne, supposed 12000. strong. From thence to Andyas, where they
had a small skirmish with no loss to the English.

The 25. of April being Thursday, our men wasted and burned in the country
what they could with fire and sword.

Saturday the 27. of April they assaulted the base Town of the Corunna and
won it, with small loss to them: and the Enemy retired into the high Town,
not above seven Ensigns strong as was thought.

Sunday the 28. of April they so battered a great Galeaz (wherein Ricaldo
served the last year 1588. as Vizadmirall of that Navy sent into England)
that the Spaniards now not able to keep her, discharged her Ordenance, fired
her, and ran her on ground, with no hurt to us at all.

The same day they went from Andyas to the base Town of the Corunna, where
they found much Beef, Salt, Meal, Wheat, Oil, Fish and Wines as was thought
to victual 40000. men a quarter of a year: besides Gables, Hemp, Rosen,
Wax, Pitch, Tallow, and other things for shipping store: which was levied for
a new force to have come into England this Summer. But in fourteen days there
was hardly one bit of bread, wine or other victuals to be had in any quarter of
the Town, except by some private officer or Captain.

The same day the Enemy lying not far off thence, presented a Brauado before
the Town gates: against whom when our men sallied forth, without more ado or
any encounter they fled, and twelve of them were slain.

Monday the 29. of April our men summoned the high Town, who refused all
parley. There all the Spaniards that our men could gather (after they had taken
them) they slew, to the great amazing of the Enemy beholding the same.

That night the Spaniards desired parley, and not long after fired certain
houses near their upper town walls.

Wednesday the first of May 1589. our English laid their battery unto la
Corunna the great, where through the weakness of the Rampire between our great
Ordenance and the Enemy (which fell down with often shaking) they were driven
from their pieces by the enemies Musket shot from the town wall. There was
slain Captain Spencer, and some few others, and Captain Goodwin shot through
the face. The same day (in parley time) a Spaniard shot at an Englishman, and
was hanged therefore by the Enemy: In this parley the Enemy desired to have
fair wars with us.

Saturday the fourth of May they made a breach in the West side of the Corunna,
four of our men making an assault retired again without hurt. The same day
Captain Young being dangerously shot died soon after.

Sunday the fifth of May they assaulted the breach, filled up by the Enemy, to
the hurt of some of our armed men. Two Captains shot through, and Captain
Breyton hurt, Captain Sydenham slain, and one Cuckfoot an Ensign to Sir
Francis Drake.

Monday the sixth of May John Kempston Marshall of the Ordenance was slain with
a shot from the high Tower.

Tuesday the 7. of May we marched forth nine Regiments upon the Enemy, which
had encamped themselves at a town called Faro, four English miles from the
Corunna, our men charged on them being eight thousand, and took their bridge
there. On either side the bridge our men entered the water, drove them away,
killed some Colonels, wanne their Town, victuals and provisions, fired the
rest of their Villages near, drove them to retreite, pursued them in chase
three miles or more, and slew of them in all three hundred at least: of us
Captain Cooper was slain, and not above three more. There were only hurt of
our chief Commanders Sir Edward Norice, and Captain Hender, who recovered
both thereof, and Captain Fulford who died thereof. Of those Spaniards at Faro
was chief Don Iuan Pacheco Marquis de Guasto, and Governor of all Galizia,
who fled on horseback with the foremost.

Wednesday the 8. of May our Sailers went on shore, ranged the country, burned
and spoiled above five miles, returning with some victual and pillage, without
any resistance.

The same night the Non per illa was fired about five of the clock by
negligence in the harbor of Corunna, and about twelve of the clock that night
the Merchant Royal was fired, six men blown up with powder, and some few
hurt besides, without more harm, praised be God.

Thursday the 9. of May we raised our siege from the Corunna, fired some of
their ships in the harbor, burnt and rased the base town and Mils up to the
high town, and so embarked away thence that night.

Friday the 10. of May we set sail from the Corunna, and that day about noone
met with us again six sail of our Fleet, which at our setting forth parted
from us about the Coast of France.

Tuesday the 14. of May we doubled Cape finister, the wind then at the East.

Saturday the 22. of June we departed from Vigo in Galizia to go toward
Peniche. From Peniche the Army came to Lisbon, where they stayed some two or
three days expecting the coming of the Fleet to Lisbon: of which preparation
and stay there Sir Anthony Wingfield writes thus: It may be demanded (says
Sir Anthony Wingfield, writing upon this voyage) why a matter of so great
moment should be so slenderly regarded, as that the General should march with
such an Army against such an Enemy, before he knew either the fulness of his
own strength, or certain means how he should abide the place when he should
come to it. Wherein (says he) I pray you remember the decrees made in the
Council at Peniche, and confirmed by public protestation the first day of our
March. That our Navy should meet us in the River of Lisbon, in the which was
the store of all our provision, and so the mean of our tariance in that place:
which came not though we continued till we had no munition left to entertain a
very small fight. We are also to consider that the King of Portugal (whether
carried away with imagination by the aduertisements he received from the
Portugals, or willing by any promise to bring such an Army into his country,
thereby to put his fortune once more in trial) assured the General that upon
his first landing there would be a revolt of his subjects: whereof there was
some hope given at our first entry to Peniche, by the manner of the yielding
of the Town and Fort: which made the General think it most convenient
speedely to march to the principal place, thereby to give courage to the rest
of the Country. The Friars also and the poor people that came unto him
promised that within two days the Gentlemen and others of the country would
come plentifully in: within which two days came many more Priests and some very
few Gentlemen on horseback: but not till we came to Torres Vedras, where they
that noted the course of things passed, might somewhat discover the weakness of
that people. There they took two days more, and at the end thereof referred
him till our coming to Lisbon, with assurance that so soon as our Army
should be seen there, all the inhabitants would be for the King and fall upon
the Spaniards.

After two nights tariance at Lisbon, the King promised a supply of three
thousand foot and some horse: but all his appointments being expired even to
the last of a night, all his horse could not make a Cornet of 40. nor his foot
furnish two Ensigns fully, although they carried three or four Colors: and
these were altogether such as thought to enrich themselves by the ruin of
their neighbors: for they committed more disorders in every place where we
came by spoil, then any of our own.

So while we stayed at Lisbon we both failed of the aid which the King Don
Anthony promised us, and we expected, and also because our English Fleet came
not unto us thither to Lisbon, we rose up thence and went for Cascayes: where
meeting with our Fleet we returned altogether into England, where some of us
arrived at Plimmouth, others at Portsmouth, and others at London in the
beginning of the month of July Anno 1589. aforesaid.

Here ends the Iournall of the Portugal Voyage.
A Iournall of the Honorable service by the renowned Knight S. John Norie,
General of the English and French forces, performed against the French and
Spanish Leaguers in France. 1591.
THis morning being Sunday, my Lord General with Sir Henry Norice, April. 11*
Captain Anthony Shirley, Master William Deuoreux, etc. took Posthorses at
London to ride to Southhampton: where (in taking order for shipping and for
diverse considerations) his Lordship staid until Sunday the 25. day.

Monday the 26. dict. we embarked and fell down with the shipping to
Portesmouth: where his Lordship staid that night at Captain Richard Wingfields
house.

Tuesday morning the 27. dict. we set sail being of us in all 23. ships and
other small vessels, and having a scant shifting wind at north and north east,
we cast an anchor before Saint Helenes point in the Wight.

Wednesday morning about ten of the clock (being until then becalmed we
happened of a small gale of wind blowing N. N. west, wherewith we recovered the
Haigue. 28.


Thursday about ten of the clock at night, 29.
we anchored before the Castle of Gernsey: and my Lord General and some other
Gentlemen with him lay at the Castle that night.

Friday morning we set sail from thence, 30.
and about five of the clock in the evening we put into the road of Iarsey.

Monday my Lord General expecting the Companies out of the Low Countries, 1591.
were this day arrived with Captain Anthony Wingfield Sergeant Mayor of the
Camp: May. 3.
his Lordship went abord, and lay at anchor in the road all that night.

Tuesday in the morning we loosed from thence, and having a fine wind at North
and by West, about eight at night we anchored in the road of Pimpowle ariuing
in the road called Lemoys de Guelle near Pimpoule.

Wednesday ye 5. of May we discovered diverse shippings and botes that came from
Brehake, and made toward S. Malowes: whereof we took one laden with salt and
fish. It is to be remembered that those of Brehake and of the Castle taking
knowledge of our approach abandoned the Castle, and yielded themselves to the
kings authority.

Not long after the enemy fled from the Castle of Lantegard, which was
fortified for the king by the Prince Dumbeez now Duke Mountpenser at this day.

My Lord dispatched letters into England from the Abbey of Beauport.

Thursday the 6. of May was spent in vnshipping the horses, munition and
soldiers.

This day also the Prince Dombeez sent 20. Moyles laden with bread to the Abbey
for provision of the soldiers.

Wednesday the army marched toward Guyngamp, and lodged in a small village in
the way (near the Abbey) and this night the Guyngampiers hearing of our
approches, 12.
set fire on their suburbs, which we might plainly discern.

This night likewise my Lord General rode before to the Town to take view,
and to save as much as might be of the suburbs for the lodging of the troops.

13.
Thursday, our troops being with the French accompanied, were lodged in such
houses and other places of the suburbs as were left unburned: the same day the
enemy sallyed out of the town in pursuyng us, Captain Wolf an Englishmans
colors were taken, which we recovered again at the winning of the town and
delivered to him.

Fridaie, May. 14.
those within the town (not believing that we had any Cannon with us) sent out
diverse spies to discover, which we took: This day our Artillery (being a
Cannon and two Culuerings) came to us.

Saturday, it pleased my Lord General to put them within the Town out of
doubt; 15.
for the Artillery being planted, our first shot was so exceeding well made,
as that it dismounted a piece which the enemy played withal from a steeple:
the Prince Dombeez being present.

Sunday, Monday, and Tuesday were spent in drawing plat-formes, and in planting
the Ordinances.

Wednesday the Canons were ready to play being planted in a Cloister in the
French quarter on the north side of the town. 19.


Thursday morning we having expected certain Artillery of the Princes to have
come from Breast, (which came not to us) we began the battery with our own 4.
pieces: continuing the same all that day, and the next until three of the
clock in the afternoon to the number of 400. shot: at which time,
notwithstanding that the breach was very vnassaultable and small (the wall
being passing strong) yet the French humor urged my Lord General very hotly
to an assault. Which upon so small a possibility of doing any good, his
Lordship was hardly drawn unto: only (in regard of the honor of our
nation) he made choice of certain out of diverse companies, whereof Captain
Iackson, Captain Heron, and Captain Hayes, to have the leading: and
afterward (the dice being cast) the chance fell to Captain Iackson and
Captain Heron to have the point of the assault, and to be seconded by Captain
Hayes, as occasion should serve: who being accompanied with Captain Catesby
and many other English gentlemen (although the breach was very vnassaultable
as before, and exceeding troublesome by reason of the height thereof, and the
light falling of the moulder of the wall, and the great number of the
fetherbeds, May.
and such like (which the Cannon had beaten down) yet a great part of our men
perforce obtained the very top of the breach, where they endured a hot and
long assault: Captain Heron receiving a push with a pike under his gorget was
there slain, and about some ten or twelve of the common soldiers, and
besides thirty hurt with stones, the residue not being able to maintain the
assault any longer (for the causes before remembered) were driven to retire. The
Baron Monluc (having in this service the conduct of certain French) showed
himself very courageous, and gained at that time unto himself great
reputation: but the residue (for the most part) came forwards very coldlie. It
was thought good that Captain Hayes and his company should not at this time
come forwards, but be reserved until the next day, at what time the finishing
of a Mine (then in hand) was appointed: during this assault Captain Dennis an
English man (offering a Scalado on the other side of the town) was shot with a
Musket in the belly, whereof he died shortly after.

23.
Sunday next following (being Whitsonday) beginning again to play (after a
three or four tyer) the enemy summoned a Parley: which in fine grew to a
capitulation in this sort viz. That the next day the horsemen in the town
should depart with their horses and Harquebusses (leaving the Cornet behind
the footmen with their swords) and the Townsmen to Fine 40000. crowns to the
Prince.

24.
Monday, they came forth accordingly, to the number of 200. horse and 260.
foot: and the town possessed Mounsier de Cargamart, being appointed Governor
of the same. There was found in the town (being yielded up) four Ensigns,
one Cornet, one Cannon perier, one demi Culuering, six Sacres, and of Mynions
2000. weight.

The town was found to be very strong, defensible and sufficient able to have
kept the same for a far longer time, if they within had bin honest men: May.
my Lord General doubted not but to have drawn them of the town to far
strickter conditions then is said, had not the Prince Dombeez seemed to be
very glad of this, and that his hap sorted to so good success, and therefore
would not further stand upon it.

Wednesday then next following my Lord General dispatched letters to certain
the Lords of her Majesty's most Honorable privy Counsel, 26
to my Lord Norice his father and to my Lady his mother, and other his friends
in England.

Thursday the 27. dicto a Muster was taken of the Army.

Tuesday the first of June anno dicto, upon the taking of Guyngamp, June. 1.
it was purposed that we should have gone for Morlayx, but (by certain after
Counsels) that intent was altered: for that it was said that the Duke Mercoeur
was removed from Pontiny, where he joined with 4000. Spaniards under the
leading of Don John de Laguna, who was marching toward Morlayx by the way of
Corlay.

Monday next following the Duke Mercoeur, arrived at Corlay (a Castle pretending
to hold for the King) but in the possession of Madam de Guyneny, whose brother
Mounsier de Bodolphin is the Dukes Lieuetenant: so the party being made before
hand, the Castle was rendered without one shot of the Cannon.

Tuesday we dislodged toward the enemy and lay at Chateau Lodune. To this
place the Duke sent a Trumpeter to the Prince with letters; whereunto he
answered, vt patet per copias: here likewise the Prince sent an other Sartell
to the Duke, wherewith he seemed so moved, that he vowed to offer battle to
the Prince.

Wednesday the Duke dislodged and encamped at Queremen a village distant a
league and a half from Chateau Lodune, situate on the foot of a hill: which
(by deep ditches, enclosures and hedges) confronted a little heath of two
miles compass. To which heath (upon discovery of the approach of the enemy,
by my Lord General (who then with the Prince was ridden to take view of a
place convenient) our battle was drawn.

Thursday the enemy within one quarter of a league of the heath shows his
whole Army in order of battle upon the top of a hill: 10.
whereupon my Lord General disposed the troops into three battailions,
whereof the infantry English made two, and the Lance Knights the third. This
day was spent in some slight skermishes.

Friday the enemy drew his Army to the foot of the hill, 11.
and placed his Artillery upon: he sight of the heath in a place of such
advantage, as it commanded in the nature of a Caualier the whole heath: where
he bordered all the hedge with shot. Now my Lord General sent out 200. footmen
to see the countenance of the enemy, who drove them to their strengths, put
them to their hedges and Baricadoes, and slew diverse of them upon the retreit:
to these the Duke put forth 500. French and 300. Spaniards to repossesse the
place, whom he followed with the Army. Which being perceived by the Prince
removing in the heath with Mounsier de la Hunnaday commanding the auantgard,
and having his regiment of horse in battle: (my L. General, with Mounsier de
Pogny, de Pruneanx, Momartin, Bastinay) order was given to put forward 300.
foot commanded by Captain Anthony Wingfield, Captain Moreton, and the
English horse led by Captain Anthony Sherley: this direction was valiantly
prosecuted by ours, but specially by the English: so as the enemies horse and
foot which were in the plain were enforced to flee, many slain, and the rest
driven to save themselves within their Artillery: being taken in this charge
Mounsier de Guybreun Colonel of the foot of the Army, and slain Don Rodrigo
chief Marshall of the Spaniards, one Spanish Captain, also the number of 200.
French, and 60. Spaniards.

This resolute charge so amated the enemy, June.
as that they suffered within 200. paces of their Cannon to disarme the dead,
and to retire at their ease.

In this charge Captain Anthony Sherley gave such an example to the French
horse as was admired, and the Companies on foot performed their parts with no
less valor: namely the Sergeant Mayor and Lieuetenant Long, who received in
his body five Harquebuz shot: the rest of the day was spent in skirmishes.

Saturday the enemy made a great show to come forth, 12.
and sent out some number of shot: against whom Captain Anthony Sherley with
fifteen horse, and some few foot made them quickly take their heels,
pursuing them to their Baricadoes, where his horse was shot in the head, and
some small hurt done.

Sunday, little was performed that day. 13.


Monday being S. John's day (as they write after the Roman Calendar) with them
it was thought somewhat would have bin done in the honor of the day, but in
deed nothing at all: for the Duke used it rather as a color whereby to run
away, having that night withdrawn his Cannon, and retired himself to Queremen.

Wednesday the 16. of June, Mounsier de la Noe with the troop of the Count
Mongomery consisting of 100. Curaces, and the Count de Comburg came unto
Chateau Laudra: whose ariuall promised some good success to the kings affairs.

Thursday being Midsomer day the Nativity of S. John Baptist, we dislodged to
Quintine. 24


This night the enemy being lodged at Corlay within 3 small leagues of us, an
enterprise was made upon some of their light horse that lay wide of their
Camp: which for that it was not attempted by footmen (as my Lord General
earnestly persuaded them unto) it took no great effect: saving that there
were killed some 16. of a Corpse du Guarde, and their horse taken. The rest
might easily have bin had as good cheap, if the horsemen would have lighted
and forced their Baricadoes: the French thought they had done wondrous well,
June.
and so that service ended.

Mounsier Tremblay (who had the command of the French Light horse) was now
slightly shot in the thigh: other hurt we received none.

Friday the 25. day the Enemy attempted a revenge, and came forth with some
horse and foot, and gave us an alarm: which was performed so favorably, as
they neither hurt man nor beast.

Tuesday being S. Peter's day, my Lord General dispatcheth certain letters by
Peter Brown to certain the Lords of her Majesty's most Honorable privy
Council, 29.
to my Lord Norice his father, and to other his friends in England.

Iulie. 2.
Friday the second of July Anno 1591. the army dislodged to Pleu or Plessue.

Tuesday the sixth day we marched toward Lamball, and lay in a small Village in
the way.

Wednesday about ten of the clock in the morning the town of Lamball was
entered at the West Southwest, and by Captain Symmes and Captain Richard
Wingfields Ensign, who led two hundred shot: The Southside of the town was
entered by Captain Hall and Captain Guest with other two hundred shot. Both
these were seconded by Captain Dolphin with one hundred Pikes, whom Captain
Main was appointed to have followed, if occasion had so served. But the
aforesaid Captains Symmes and Hall with their troops came so resolutely upon
the Baricadoes of the Town, that the enemy was forced to abandon the same,
and to make a hasty retreit into the Castle. From whence Captain Baynton and
Barbar Lieutenant to Captain Symmes were both shot, and died that day:
Captain Richard Wingfields Ensign bearer having received from the walls of
the Castle a shot through both his thighs at that time.

Thursday there were two of our Cannons mounted on the Southwest side of the
Castle; and that day the Enemy made some proffer of a sallie upon Captain
Halles quarter.

Friday, July. 9.
a Spur which covered the Gate of the Castle was made assaultable: by two of
the clock in the afternoon two Frenchmen were sent to discover the breach; and
it was appointed that other French should have entered the same, who should have
been seconded by the Lieutenants one Guest and Braconbury. But the first of the
French performing but badly, and the second flatly denying, Monsieur de Mo
Martin was enforced to advance himself somewhat further then his place
required: whereby he received a Harquebuze shot in the thigh. Being judged by
my Lord General and Monsieur de la Noe, that the Spur (when it should have
been taken) was not assaultable, it was thought good that certain shot should
be sent out in the smoke of the Cannon, to lodge themselves directly under a
Bulwark upon the right hand of the gate, whereby the breach might in some sort
be flanked: Whiles Monsieur de la Noe stood behind a Baricado, to behold how
those that were sent performed this service, he was shot in the head with a
Musket, whereof he died soon after.

At the time of this service one Monsieur de Boa Captain of a Company of
Light horse, was slain with a small shot.

My Lord (well weighing the slow success of this enterprise) thought it best
to defer the service upon the Spur, until the darkness of the night
following: His Lordships purpose was to assault with some thirty shot and
Pikes well armed (if the height of the breach would have been taken) whereof
little doubt was made.

The leading of these men was committed to Lieutenant Guest: it was further
resolved, that Captain Hender with other thirty shot and Pikes should lodge
himself under the great Baricado on the right hand of the Gate; and to assay
by all means he could to work himself further under the very foundation
thereof.

July.
In the darkness of the night my Lord General caused two with firelocke pieces
and two Pikes to discover the breach, who made their way without any great
difficulty: Lieutenant Guest followed with two Pikes only, and six
Musketeers, who winding to the height of the breach (besides many sore blows
with stones) received two shot upon his armor, whereof one was a very
dangerous wound, and so retired from the place which was so flankered, as it
could not well be kept.

Sunday the 11. day of July 1591. Master Danyel desirous to see out of the
height of a Tower, received a shot in the shoulder with a Harquebuz: And in the
same place one Master Pawlet was shot in the head, whereof he died presently.

Upon an assured intelligence that Duke Mercoeur with his whose force was come
to Pleny Ingot with a resolution to raise our siege; my Lord General at the
instance of the Prince (most of our French having at that time forsaken us)
thought good to dislodge and to meet the Enemy. We dislodged, and that night
the Army came to Queymer, where we continued until the last of July present.

26
Monday fourtnight following my Lord General sent letters to the Lords of the
Council by Master Browning.

Tuesday the 27. Monsieur de la Verdune came to the Prince with 220. horse, and
700. foot: The Marquis de Villeures did accompany him.

30
Friday the Army dislodged and lay that night at Brehake.

August.
Sunday the first of August, the Prince Dombeez, my Lord General, 1
Monsieur de la Verdune, and the principal Commanders amongst the French being
followed with twelve hundred shot, whereof four hundred were English (twenty
being taken out of every Company) and all the Cauallerie did march from the
army at Brehake toward the Enemy encamped by Ingon. August.
The intention was to have cut off three Cornets of the Enemies horse which lay
at a little Village about a mile and a half off from the strength of the
Army. But (upon an advertisement taken) it was found that they dislodged
themselves that morning, and had drawn themselves to another Village, not five
hundred paces from their Army: We coming to the first place and missing the
Enemy, sought them in the second, from whence likewise (upon their alarm
given by their Sentinels) they had withdrawn themselves to the army. Yet in
this second place some small resistance was made by French shot: which being
soon overthrown, and some 25. of the Enemies horse taken (which in a hasty
fear they left behind) Monsieur Tremblay seeing some three or four score of
the enemies horse begin to make a head and proffer to pass a River, determined
to charge the first that would attempt the same. In which charge, being least
of all the rest (four only excepted) that charge with him, his horse stumbling
and so falling with him, he was taken prisoner, after a slight hurt received
in his face with the shot of a Pistol.

Tuesday our Army dislodged to Kerso.

Thursday to Monconter. 3.


Saturday from thence to S. Brieux. 5.
7.


Sunday my Lord General dispatched letters into England by Peter Brown the
Post. 8.


Saturday we removed to Ville Rabel. 21.


To this place place came Master Barker with my Lords horses out of the Low
Countries.

At this place considerations were drawn by the Prince and his Council, which
implied a necessity for the marching of the Army in the high parts of
Britany, whereunto my Lord General in writing answered his opinion.

Tuesday the 24. of August dicto, 24.
the Army came to Collinee.

The 26. of August.
Thursday the Army dislodged, and because the Prince was certainly informed
that Mounsier de Mercouer came to Benne, it was certainly resolved that the
Army should that day march to S. Meyn: but through the vnredines of all things
apperteyning to the Cannon, and distance of place, that course was altered, and
for that night we lodged at Medrimak a reasonable fair village in the mid way
between Collinee and S. Meyn. Here the Prince Dombeez understood that Mounsier
de Mercoeur had in all secrecy dislodged that night before from Diuant and was
come to Pleumalan, with a resolution to prevent us of our lodging at S. Meyn:
Pleumalan is two leagues from Diuant, and four from S. Meyn; from Medrimak to
S. Meyn but three leagues. Whereupon it was concluded, that Mounsier de la
Verdune accompanied with 80. Curasses, 300. Harquebuz, a Cheuall, and 400.
English should dislodge about midnight: and assay (if by a speedy march
toward S. Meyn they could) before the enemy should inuest the town with
those forces.

27.
Friday we dislodged very timely, and (in our march) were certified that S.
Meyn was invested with those forces, sent the night before with Mounsier de la
Verdune: and that it was not heard that the enemy had any such intention as
before.

31.
Tuesday the thirty one, and last of August we dislodged to Yfendit. Here
Mounsier de la Verdune left the Prince.

The second of September.
Thursday the second of September anno dict. the Army removed to Breal.

3.
Friday the third, from thence to Moyal.

Saturday from Moyal to Chasteauieron.

Sunday my Lord General was invited by the inhabitants of Rheyas, to visit
their City.

Thursday we dislodged to Chasteau burg.

11.
Saturday from thence to S. Hulbin.

At this place lay the Army when the Castle of Chastileon was taken in by
assault.

Friday my Lord General sent letters into England by Captain Maxie. 24*


Tuesday we removed to Feynes. 28.


Thursday the seventh of October anno dict. we dislodged to Bauongie Simples.
The seventh of October.


Fridaie from thence to S. Oven. 15*


Sunday from S. Oven to Ferie.

Monday we removed to Bauongie.

Monday from Bauongie to S. Hillarie.

Monday the eight of November dict. we dislodged to Tilyel.

Thursday the eleventh day we dislodged from Tilyel to Fugeralles.

Wednesday to the Castle of Dorec.

This fort seemed of such strength unto the Prince Dombeez, and some of his
Counsel (as Mounsier la Verdune) that they thought it not meet to be
undertaken without special means, such as we wanted: having neither munition
nor any other thing fit for service, saving two or three small iron pieces for
battery. Our men (such as were reserved from the extremity of the then late
sickness amongst us) being very weak and feeble, having wanted of long time
before both clothes and money: yet it pleased God that by the most politic
and circumspect direction of my Lord General, the enemy was drawn to abandon
the same this present night, to the great freeing of those parts there abouts:
and Captain Latham was put in as Governor of the same.

The same Sunday at night my Lord General sent Mounsier Carmarak with letters
to the Lords of the Counsel.

Friday the Army dislodged to Pyboray.

Monday from thence to Ernye.

Thursday the second of December anno dict. the Army dislodged from Erny to
Gorrone. The second of December.


From this place my Lord sent letters into England by Captain Richard
Wingfield, Captain Moreton, and Captain Dennis, who had license to repair
thither.

19
Sunday our Army dislodged to Ambrizer, where my Lord General kept his
Christmas.

28.
Tuesday we dislodged from thence to S. Georges.

29.
Wednesday, and so from S. Georges to S. Germyns.

January.
Saturday the eight day of January anno dicto the Army removed to S. John sur
le Meyne. 8.


Sunday from thence to Baconiere.

9.
Monday from Baconiere to Bourne en le Forest.

10.
11.
Thursday the Lord General road to Vi^terie, where the Princes of Condy and
Dombeez (by commandment from the king) met together for the determining of
some present service against the league, which was concluded: and in fine, Sir
Henry Norice (at the request of the Prince Dombeez) was sent over with letters
to the Lords of the Council, to my Lord his father, and my Lady his mother,
and others his friends in England: and withal to know her Majesty's
resolution, whether for the reenforcing of the troops in Britanie, or for the
disposing of them elsewhere.

28.
Monday Sir Henry Norice departed from Laual, to imbarque himself at Cane.

February. 1.
Monday the first of February anno dicto, at night M. Carmerek returned with
letters to my Lord General: wherein his Lordship had license to come over.

18
Thursday the Lord General departed from Goron (where the Camp at that time
lay) for England: leaving Captain Anthony Wingfield Sergeant Mayor
sufficiently authorized till his return.

Sunday the Lord General came to Cane, where for want of sufficient tide he
was driven to stay until the last of this month. 21.


March. 1.
Monday the first day of March anno dict. his Lordship finding a Barque of M.
Champerneyes, he imbarqued himself in the same, whom Colonel Sherly, and
Captain Lo with others also accompanying, they had a very good gale blowing
full Southwest, which continued until three of the clock the next morning:
after which time we were very much becalmed, until ten of the clock. When
having a reasonable fair wind at west southwest, we recovered the Isles of
Wight: where we had very much foul weather. So yt his Lordships horses being
in a small Fleebote, some doubt was here of the safety of them: which
afterward (God be thanked) obtained safely the harbor: we being within the
point, there anchored, and the next morning his Lordship landed at Portes-mouth.

Here ends the Iournall of the service in France against the Leaguers. Anno.
1591.
THE MEMORABLE SERVICE OF THE NOBLE General Sir John Norice Knight, performed
Anno Dom. 1594. at Breast in Britain.
THe first of September our worthy General Sir John Norice, landing with new
forces out of England at Penpole, received letters presently from Marshall
D'Aumond and Sir Thomas Baskeruil, who commanded in his absence the English
troops, being then before the Castle of Morlayx, in what terms they stood
expecting every day to be fought withal by the enemy Duke Mercoeur, who was
advanced for the same purpose within three leagues of them, and did but only
attend the coming of Monsieur Boisdolphin, with some French horse to join
with them: but this their temporizings in the end cost them the Castle, for
immediately the very next day after the Generals landing with great expedition,
to wit, the second of September he put himself upon the way to Morlayx, and
upon the fifth of the same month arrived there, being fourteen leagues distant.

His coming was generally ioyed at by all the Britons, but especially by the
inhabitants of Morlayx, whose good or ill estate depended on his coming: for
both the Castle (a cruel neighbor) held against them, and the Duke Mercoeur
was at hand to rescue the defendants, who in assurance of relief from him
acquitted themselves manfully, namely the Governor himself Monsieur
Rochempoul, the Count Magnion, and Monsieur Rostin, with diverse other gallants.
But the General so amated the Enemy, that the Duke Mercoeur not only stayed
from marching nearer unto us, but the tenth of the same retired with all his
forces both French and Spanish, assuring himself that he could expect of Sir
John Norice nothing but blows. They of the Castle acquainted therewith, within
two days after the Dukes retreit yielded up the Castle. So that only his
presence without the hazard of any of her Majesty's subjects, both enforced the
Duke to retire, and the Castle to yield.

This Castle thus rendered, we stayed there ten days, in respect that the
Marshall wanted money for the satisfying of his people: whereof at the last he
was fournished by those of the town of Morlayx. Then Mounsieur de Lyscot, a
wonderful brave man, and the Baron of Molac were sent before with some
Harquebuziers, to the end they might block up the Fort of Croyzon by Breast,
and preserve the quarters about, who were further assisted with four hundred
men out of our ships by Sir Martin Fourbysher who commanded the English
shippings. And presently the army dislodged to a place called Iuez, thence to
a Village called La Fou, next to Chastrau-lin, the next day to Lacornan a
village three leagues from Quinper-Corentin which was held hy the Enemy.

The same night the Marshall with four hundred French, and Sir John Norice
with as many English marched to Quinper-Corantin, and on a sudden surprised the
suburbs, and possessed them with small resistance. The town was willing to
yield, but that the Garrison would not suffer them. But Sir John Norice, whose
mind was still to do some exploit against the Spaniards at the Fort of
Coryzon, leaving this town invested by the Marshall and three of our English
Regiments, commanded by his brother Sir Henry Norice our Lieutenant General,
October.
himself only with his own Regiment, and his own company of horse, marching
toward the Fort, and lodged that night at Croyzon. And the next day sat down
before the Fort.

Three days were spent in vnshipping and bringing up the Artillery, 2.3.4.
which were fourteen pieces (whereof the Marshall furnished but two
Culuerings) and in making of approches, which was greatly hindered by the want
of Gabions, Pioners, and other provisions for the making of platformes, which
we hoped by promise to have had in a readiness sent us from the Governor of
Breast: but our General could procure almost nothing from thence but with many
difficulties by reason of the weather.

5.
The fifth of this month we had news that the Marshall and Sir Henry Norice had
Quimper yielded unto them.

The sixth of this month the Enemy made a sallie out upon our trenches, 6.
but were very bravely beaten home again with the loss of seven or eight of
their men: but yet this their loss was very unfortunately answered by the
death of Captain Anthony Wingfield our Sergeant Mayor general, Sir Anthony
Wingfield slain with a Cannon.
being shot with a Cannon out of the Fort, as he stood by the Gabions with his
Rapier drawn, the which with the shot was beaten through his bowels. This man
with great reputation had long time served her Majesty both in the Low
Countries, Portugal, and France: and at his last going into Britain, so
disposed of his estate as if he were never to return; and the same day, or the
day before his death, took such order for his debts, as if he had a presage of
his end.

7.8.9.10.11.
The next day the Marshall D'Aumond and Sir Henry Norice with our English
Regiments, came to us from Quimper, and were quartered at Croyzon and
thereabouts. After whose coming four days were spent in mounting of the
Artillery, planting of our Ordenance, and making of platformes for them to
play.

On the 12. day the Enemy made a sallie upon the French trenches: who having
not the leisure to arm themselves, lost between thirty and forty men, and
as many hurt: and from thence they advanced themselves toward our trenches,
where we lost in their defense ten or twelve men: but we did put them again
in possession of their trenches.

Having now all things ready for the battery, I will as well as I can
describe unto you the Fort.

You shall understand that more then two parts of the Fort was defended by the
water, the rest was made so exceeding strong, as either by art or charge could
be done.

On the South front thereof on each corner were two exceeding strong Bastions;
that on the West side was seventeen paces in the front, that on the East side
ten paces: the Curtain between both was 37. foot thick at the top; and
within these they had made a very large intrenchment, and the Bastions were
exceeding well flanked from the Rock by the water side, planting both on the
flankers and bastion some great Ordenance. We lay entrenched within three or
four paces of their Counterscarp: the Frenchmen on the East side, and we on
the West side, the battery lay in the midst between the trenches. These
things thus prouidently ordered by the Marshall and our General; on the 23.
our Artillery began to play, and continued some seven hundred Cannonodos, but
did so little harm by reason of the strength of the place, as scarce any show
of a breach appeared, only we did beat away their parrapete and some of
their flankers: whereupon some hundred men commanded by Captain Lyster, were
sent to view and see if they could hold the Counterscarp. Then many of our
brave men and gallants thirsting after honor, desirous to do somewhat
further, having possessed themselves of the Enemies Counterscarp, which only
they were commanded to attempt, undertook the breach, which they performed so
well, as that notwithstanding the vnsatiablenes of the place, and the great
resistance the enemy made. Yet the most part of them attained to the very top
thereof, which they held for a while, but were afterward repulsed. This
enterprise was with wonderful great resolution and valor seconded by S.
Thomas Baskeruil, who likewise got so far as the point of the breach.

There were lost in this attempt many brave men, namely,
Slain in the assault.
Captain Barker. Captain Prudder. Captain Iackson, Sergeant Mayor of Ostend,
who had no charge there. Haynes. Ensign to sir Henry Norice. Corporal Essex.
M. Throgmorton, and some 16. or 18. soldiers*
Hurt in the assault.
Captain Audley. Captain Bartley. Captain Couch. Captain Goodwins
Lieutenant. Captain Williams Lieutenant. Captain Bucks Lieutenant, and other
private men.
Burned with Powder.
Sir Thomas Knowles. Captain Ashendon. Captain Bishop. Lieutenant Larkeley.
Captain Lopeley. Master Waineman, and diverse others.
You are to understand that this attempt was only made by the Englishmen on
the bastion of the west side, for the Frenchmen never attempted any thing
against their Bastion, aleaging that it was not Assaultable.

The Marshall and our General seeing the little effect that our Artillery
wrought, 24
devised to make a mine on one of the bulwarks, namely on the East bastion
toward the French trenches in perfecting thereof some 17. or 18. days were
spent.

But on the 30. being an exceeding wet morning whereby our powder and match
were not fit for service, the enemy again found thereby oppertunitie to fall
out upon the French trenches, and killed so between twenty and thirty of them
at the least, among whom was Mounsier Lyscot, a very brave gentleman one of
the Marshals of the Camp, who was abandoned by the French and their trenches
wholly possessed by the enemy, but our English men did presently repossesse
them of their trenches, and killed some of the Spaniards. Our nation lost an
exceeding great friend of this Mounsier Lyscot, he exceedingly loved our
General, as if he had bin his own father, and generally favored all English
men, and gave us the reputation to be very brave soldiers.

By the seventh of November our mine was reasonable well perfected, November.
7.
and a determination held again to begin the battery, with a resolution that
so soon as the mine should be blown up which was made toward the bulwark by
the French trenches, that the Frenchmen should assail that part, and the
Englishmen their Bastion, and that others with scaling ladders should make
attempts in every corner, so that the defendants should be on every part
assailed. But the Marshall being that day sick, sent in the morning for our
General, and showed him his letters from the Governor of Rennes, and from
diverse others, by which he was advertised that John Don Joan de la Auquilar
General of the Spaniards, was marching toward Croyzon with all his Spanish
forces to rescue the fort, and was already advanced to La-cornan a village
within five leagues of us, and therefore advised our General to dislodge to
Croyzon, thinking it not fit to hazard any men, having so strong an enemy at
hand ready to join battle with them. But Sir John Norice having his courage
nothing daunted with the approach of the enemies, his heart serving him both to
win the fort by assault, and to encounter his enemy in the field: showing what
a dishonor and disreputation it were to abandon the siege, and also what
little cause the enemy should have to advance himself farther if the fort
were gotten, his coming being only to resue it. He so much importuned the
Marshall, that he gave him wholly the ordering of that days service.
Immediately our General gave order to the Cannoniers for the battery, and
caused the Artillery to play. Every man was assigned his charge, some to the
assault, other with scalados to attempt to enter, and by 12. of the clock he
caused fire to be set to the mine: which albeit did not so much as was looked
for, yet it made the access so easy unto the French, as that a man might have
ridden upon horse back: and our men, namely Captain Latham, Captain Smith,
and Captain John Norice, with diverse other gallant gentlemen gave up on the
other bulwark, and continued the assault without losing one pace of the height
until half an hour past four, and in the end first entered the same, and
seized up on three Ensigns that were there, and put every man they found in
the fort (saving one alferez) to the sword: some of the Spaniards leapt from
the rock to the water, but our Mariners with their small boats met with them
and slew them: some three or four others being taken escaped with their lives,
no man was found, Au sang Froyd.

Sir Thomas Baskeruil served this day with great valor and industry, to the
admiration of all men. Our seamen and Mariners this day acquitted themselves
wonderful bravely, and were exceeding forward in all attempts, as may well
appear by that valiant Knight Sir Martin Fourbisher, who in the assault
receiving a hurt, is thereof now dead.

The chiefest of the French men, namely such gentlemen as serving on
horseback, putting themselves that day on foot, did exceeding g^llantlie,
namely. Mounsier Roumege, Un Maistre du Camp, a man of great courage, and who
most entirely loved our General, was slain upon the rampart, and his Ensign
by him: who if they had bin well seconded, undoubtedly they had carried it
first, and had got the reputation of the first entry. As for the rest I hold
them nothing worthy of commendations in this action.

Slain in the assault.
Captain Edge once Captain of our Generals Gaurd. Lieutenant Flud. Captain
Smiths Lieutenant. Ensign to Captain Brett. Eight Gentlemen of our Generals
own company. Many other Gentlemen, and between twenty or thirty private men.
Hurt in the assault.
Sir Thomas Baskeruil. Sir Martin Fourbisher, who is now dead. Captain John
Norice. Captain Brett. Captain Smith.
The victory being thus gotten by the great virtue and admirable industry of
our General, the fort being appointed to be raised, 1.
we dislodged the next day to Croyzon to join with the rest of our troops, to
attend there what the enemy durst do, who within two days after, found
reason to retire themselves five leagues further from us.

Thus have I finished I assure you truly, although not largely: all that was
most remarcable in this days service.

It may be I give not namely to every man the honor he deserved, but therein
I excuse my self with my shortness in writing, and also my self being herein
an Actor, my eye was not at leisure to note every man's desert. There was found
in the fort 29. barrels of powder, some match, and very few small shot: and of
meat, biscuit, wine and beef reasonable good store. I must a little commend
the defendants, for an enemy deserves his just praise, especially the chief
Commander. He never in all these attempts showed himself daunted, he made
sundry sallies, but most upon the French, to his great advantage and
reputation. He lost before this last days service 60. men, some at his
sallies, some with our Cannon, and some at our first attempt upon the breach,
also this very last day our Cannon playing incessantly upon the maine
courtaine, between the two bastions slew fifty of his men. This last assault
continued almost five hours without intermission, they never quailed until he
was slain, which was a small time before the entry, and then the greater part
being slain, the rest over tired and hurt, were forced by our Gallants to
retire, and so there were slain of Spaniards in this fort almost 400. I note
another sign of his great resolution, for if he found any willing only to
speak of yielding, he would cause him to be bound to a stake or post, and
exposed him to the breach, leaving his arms at liberty to fight for his
defense. I hope no man will dislike if I commend the valor of the enemy which
was conquered, for the greater is the honor of them that were the Conquerours.
This their vain resolution might well have served their turns, if they had
not dealt with our General who was as resolute as they, and therein ouermacht
them. For the next day, Don Joan de l'Aquilar sending a trumpet for the
redeeming of prisoners, our General sent him answer that their ransomes were
paid, and that he was now as ready and at leisure to fight with him. This
victory achiued, he sent the three Spanish Ensigns into England, and presented
them to her Majesty, who as a most sacred and gracious Prince, most highly
esteemed, and lovingly accepted them. God of his infinite mercy send her
daily so to triumph over her enemies, and that it will please him to protect
our General for her greater services.

FINIS.
Here ends the memorable service of S. John Norice knight, at Breast in
Britain. 1594.
THE MEMORABLE SERVICE OF THE NOBLE General Sir John Norice Knight, in Ireland
(after his return from Breast) 1595. with his death there, and burial here in
England 1597.
THis noble Knight and renowned General of her Majesty's forces in Britain
(immediately after the said service done by him at the Fort of Breast in that
Province) ariuing in England in the month of March Anno 1595. after he had
stayed at London a month or thereabouts, March. 1595.
General Norice departs for Ireland.
was thence by her Majesty commanded over into Ireland: and with him to
embarke his forces appointed directly over thither under the conduct of his
brother Sir Henry Norice Knight; there to have his Commission drawn, as
General of her Majesty's forces in that kingdom.

After his landing at Waterford (which was about the fifth or sixth of May Anno
dict.) he dispatched letters to Sir William Russel Knight, May. 5.
Lord Deputy of Ireland, signifying his landing at Waterford aforesaid, and
withal craving leave for the ease of his body, that he might stay in his
government of Munster for some short time: which as it seemed was granted him,
He landeth at Waterford.
in regard that he stayed there about three weeks, and then removed thence to
Dublin, to the said Lord Deputy there resident.

Immediately after the same stay there, Iulie.
his Commission was drawn, his counsel used, and he required to accompany
the said Lord Deputy into the field, Sir William Russel Lord Deputy.
together with his own Company of horse and foot. The place appointed for
the Rendezuous of the Army was by Dundalk a town bordering on Vlster, from
whence the said Lord Deputy, Sir John Norice, and others of the Council with
the Army, marched altogether unto Armah, where they found a ruined Church or
Abbey. But afterward by the advice of the Lord Deputy and his Council, that
place was thought fit for a Garrison, in regard that it bordered upon the
entrance of Hugh Onele the Earl of Tyron that Archrebels country, and was
situate within two or three miles of the Blackwater in the country of Tyrone,
where her Majesty had heretofore a Fort. So this place was forth with made
defencible, and there were left in Garrison three or four of the Companies
which came out of Britain.

Now after the fortifying and victualling of that Garrison, and other
necessaries fit for the holding of it, the Deputy, with Sir John Norice and
the rest of the Army, marched to Monohan, another ward bordering upon the
said Archrebels country, and held as then by Sir John Dowdal an English Knight
and his company. So after order taken for the victualling of that place, and
other necessaries, The Lord Deputy coming forwards, Tyrone returned back.
the Army marched back toward the Newry in the Province of Vlster, where Sir
Henry Bagnal Knight (the Marshall) commanded five Companies which lay there
continually in garrison. But the Archrebell Tyrone hearing of the Lord Deputies
return back, did purpose (as it was thought) to have possessed himself of
the pace before him, that lies between the Newry and Dundalk aforesaid,
thereby to offend him in his passage. Word being brought to the Lord Deputy
hereof, and he knowing that the said Archrebell purposed to pass within four
or five miles of the place where the Lord Deputy encamped: the next night
thereupon there were Scoutes sent out, and word brought by them that they had
descried the said Archrebels army. Whereupon order was given, that there should
be certain horse and foot made ready, to attend the Lord Deputy and Sir
John Norice, who went forwards with those men, until they came within sight of
the Archrebels whole army, being then reputed four thousand strong of horse
and foot. But whether the Lord Deputy were ill guided, or whether the enemy
in fear to save himself made more haste then the English could follow, I know
not, but for that time they escaped. But it seemed that fear served to some
good purpose: for afterward in our passage through the place we were not at
all intercepted, although the Enemy might have done it with great advantage.

Now, after leaving some companies at the Newry and Calingford, 1595.
the English returned to Dundalke, where (after the establishing of that
Garrison, August.
and others in the English pale) the Lord Deputy, with Sir John Norice and the
rest of the Council, went to Dublin. Shortly after their being there, it was
concluded upon, that Sir John Norice then General should draw an army into
the field. The place for the companies to join was appointed, and other
preparations for the army, as cariages, Pioners, victuals, etc. sparingly
provided. Not fully so well provided, as when the Lord Deputy went himself,
and therefore not so much expected to be performed by him, as by the Deputy)
although the numbers of men were left unto himself for to name: it was given
out that the General should go to victual Armah, whatsoever was besides
pretended: and indeed that charge was faithfully performed by him, and as much
for the Queens honor, as any thing that has been done since the Archrebell
Tyrone first entered into his rebellion.

September.
For after that by a tedious travel with the whole army to and fro about four
or five times from the Newry to Armah (which the General was feign to do in
regard he was but sparingly furnished of Cariages, besides his army which were
but thirteen hundred strong thereby much weakened) at this time did the said
Tyrone take all the advantage he could. And at the Generals last return from
Armah, the Enemy sent three hundred of his best shot to lodge in a place,
where our English army should pass thorough, to meet the General and
intercept him in his passage. But it fell out that our men in their march had
possessed themselves of that pace before the Enemy: which the General
perceiving, and withal knowing himself followed in the arriere of our army
both with horse and foot of the enemies, made a halt in the place where he
perceived them to follow, and so stayed until two hundred of the archrebels
horse came up to charge him. But they (finding him as ready to join as they)
retired back to the archrebell, who was ready with other horse to have
seconded them, if they had attempted any thing to any purpose.

Hereupon Tyrone sent down of his foot 200. Scots and 300. shot to have galled
the Generals troop of horse: but he (although unarmed) made good that place
where he first made a stand (which was with the loss of some of his best
horse) until he had sent for three or four wings of shot from the Colors;
himself in this stand (which was in effect against Tyrones whole army) was
shot in the arm, and in the belly, his horse under him shot in three or four
places. His brother Sir Thomas Norice shot through the thigh: Sir Richard
Wingfield Commander of the Generals horse had his arm broken with a shot (no
other man hurt of any name) only of horse and foot about eighteen slain,
besides some twenty or thirty hurt. This stand so honorably made by him was
to good purpose, otherwise it could not be but that our whole army had been
overthrown: but how Tyrone (upon the slaughter of two hundred of his Scots,
besides some of his best shot) was followed, he lives to make report of it, if
he list: but I am sure (so botly) that in four days he could not hear of
twenty of his men together in a company, they had so dispersed themselves in
the pursuit.

October.
After this service done by the General, within short time he came to Dublin:
where after a month of six weeks stay there he went down to his government
of Munster. Tyrone oftentimes after this conflict, did send a fained show of
submission unto the Lord Deputy, (namely whiles that the General was in
Munster) and thereupon he was hearkened unto, November.
and Commissioners were sent from the Lord Deputy to talk with him upon some
Articles: besides, Sir Henry Warren Knight was employed in that service, and
had free access to Tyrone. The cause why Sir John Norice the General retired
himself from those public affairs, after his good service done, is known to
many, and every private man could speak of the crossings between the Deputy
and him, whosoever was faulty: But the state (whiles they governed) stood in
better terms, then it has done since, howsoever it has bin thought that the
treating of peace did prejudice any good proceedings.

At this time Munster was quiet and most part of Lemster (except Feaugh
Mack-Hughes country) kept in good terms: In Conacht, the misery that they
had endured before, Munster in good quiet.
taught them to desire quietness, only they would speak reprochfullie and
bitterly against Sir Richard Bingham their Governor. The towns upon the
borders of the North, and those of the English pale were defended by garrison,
so that there was no great harm done to the English pale, but by the
incursions of some of the Orrelyes, who were continually prayed and seized
upon by our garrisons: all Vlster both at that time, and now continues still
rebellious, and this was the state of the country at that time, when Sir John
Norice withdrew himself into Munster.

After his being at Munster, the said General Norice came to Dublin, where
staying some two months, there came order out of England, 1596.
that he and Sir Ieffrey Fenton should be joined in Commission to treat with
Tyron upon some Articles of peace. April.
There was (as I have formerlie said) Commissioners appointed by the deputy to
treat concerning the same business: but after the order came out of England
that Commission ceased, Messengers appointed between the Commissioners and
Tyrone.
and the said Sir John Norice, and Sir Ieffrey Fenton were authorized in their
places. Those that were appointed as messengers between the Commissioners and
Tyrone were Sir Warram Sellenger, and Captain William Warren, both of them
sufficient men, and of Tyrones old acquaintance, and those who faithfully
proceeded according to their instructions. These men brought to that pass by
the direction of the Commissioners, that he was to have his pardon: and no
question had he meant to be loyal, those slight doubts that he made of his
safety would never have made him unmindful of so high and merciful a grace
and favor, after his most vile and treacherous offense.

It may be doubted because there was some private crossings between men of
high place, that their crossings would have hindered his hope of deserving well
hereafter: It was reported that he should say so much, surely (which if he
did) it was but to excuse his intended treachery, as he has often done since.
Now during the Commissioners stay on the borders, Tyrone sent his own
submission in by the aforesaid two Agents: and besides sent into Dundalk (for
to make the better show of his fained submission) some of the chiefest men of
Vlster. As namely, Mack Gwyer, Mack Mahun, the Orrelyes and others to deliver
their submissions to the Commissioners: so after the receiving of them in, May.
the Commissioners repaired to Dublin to the State, and so shortly afterward
from thence, they went toward Conacht, according to their Commission. Where
they were to meet with Odonele, and others of his country, there to receive
them into submission, as they had those of Vlster.

Sir John Norice being chief Commissioner with Sir Ieffrey Fenton, held
notwithstanding his place as General of the Army, and did carry the same
into Conacht, most part of which Army, continued in the Province all the time
of his being there: At his coming thither he found all the country in
rebellion, and in great misery, yet most part of the best men in the country
were ready to receive her Majesty's gracious pardon, most of them did come in
very submissiuelie, and made offer to do her Majesty good service.

Sir Richard Bingham was grown somewhat grievous amongst those of Conacht, and
they would bitterly complain against him, alleging that he was the cause of
their revolt: but that is their custom, and he must be a man of very rare
government, that shall every way satisfy, or give content to their rebellious
affections. Upon the countries complaint, Sir Richard Bingham was sequestered
from the government of that Province, and they were hearkened unto in
whatsoever they could allege against him: so gracious and just is her
Majesty in every way, righting a nation, 1596.
which notwithstanding prove most disloyal and rebellious.

November.
Now during Sir Richard Binghams sequestration, Sir John Norice had absolutely
the command of his said Province, and did (during his time) very good
service: namely, in bringing into her Majesty's obedience many of the best
gentlemen of the country, and continually praying, spoiling, and killing of
the rest, who (being desperately obstinate) held themselves still in
rebellion. This his good service so performed against those persons, was
sometimes by the garrisons, and sometimes by the Army, as they marched through
the country: insomuch, that at the Generals departure forth of the country,
he left it in good terms.

So about December, he was called from thence to Dublin, where (after some
stay there) the State having notice, that the garrison of Armah was like to be
distressed (if they were not presenlie relieved) the General was appointed to
draw an Army into the field, for the victualling of that place: but it should
appear he was authorized to treat with Tyrone, about the victualling of it.
For the Army being drawn together by Dundalk, and ready to march, there was
such order taken, that he the said Tyrone should suffer it to be victualled by
two or three Companies from the Newry: which was performed, January.
and so the Army disposed into the garrisons again.

It should seem, that besides the victualling of that place, it was appointed
that the said Tyrone should speak personally with the Commissioners: for that
after it was agreed, that he should suffer it to be victualled, he appointed a
day to speak with the Commissioners, Sir George Bowser being then joined with
the others in Commission. What their conference was when they met, I know not
altogether: but the manner of their meeting was this.

Tyrone having his Army near unto the place appointed for the Parley, caused
four or five hundred of his shot, together with his best horse, to lie within
a mile of the same his Army, who were then encamped on the side of a hill nere
Dundalk: there was six gentlemen of the Generals troop of horse appointed to
stand on the one side of the forde of a little river there, where the parlie
was, and six others of Tyrones to stand on the further side with him in sight
of the Commissioners: he seeing the Commissioners come down from our Army,
began to come forward himself, not suffering any other to come with him, so
saluting Sir John Norice, told him he was glad to see him, being of his old
acquaintance. Sir John Norice likewise told him, that he would be glad to see
him become a faithful subject: withal remembering him of the great favors that
her Majesty had showed him heretofore, and that (yet) her Highness was
mercifully inclined to have him received into grace, if there were any hope
he would forsake his treacherous course, and become a faithful obedient subject.

He answered with great protestations, that he was sorry for his offense, and
that there was no Prince in the world, whom he did or would more honor and
reverence, then her Majesty; never naming her Highness, but with his hat off:
Tyrones answer.
all which shows of obedience in him, made many believe that he meant to
become otherwise, then since he has proved himself. But those that have lived
long in that country amongst them, know by experience, that they are a people
full of malecontentment, inconstancy, rebellion and treason: desiring no other
government, but their own rude barbarous and disordered kind of life and
manners, most horrible and odious to all that fear God, obey their Prince, and
love their Country.

It was ever doubted by Sir John Norice, and to be believed of every one that
know the Rebel Tyrone, that he never meant to be faithful in his word:
wherefore his treacherous delays could not be imputed to any remiss course
held by Sir John Norice toward Tyrone. But there is no question, Sir John
Norices doubt of Tyrone.
had Sir John Norice lived, he would have made it appeared unto the world (as
he has done heretofore) that the zeal he did bear to do her Majesty and
his Country service, was such, as that private malice in crossing him should
never have had power, either to make him fail in the least point of his
allegiance, or to bury any of his honorable intended enterprises.

1597.
I have heard him say my self, and so have others which now live in Ireland,
April.
that if he could but hope, that the Rebel Tyrone would unfeignedly accept of
her Majesty's grace and mercy toward him, and that he the said Sir John
Norice might have been the instrument to have persuaded him to become a
faithful subject, he would not have cared what labor or pains he endured to
be assured thereof.

It was thought that the prosecuting of Feugh Mac Hugh was contrary to the
Articles agreed upon between the Commissioners and the Rebel Tyrone; and it
should appear that he disliked thereof. For after his pardon was sent him by
Sir Edward Moore, and he in all things (to the show of the world) ready to
have accepted thereof: on the sudden his pardon was brought back, and he
returned exceedingly discontented. After the time of this last treaty with
Tyrone, which was in the latter end of January aforesaid, he remained upon the
borders of the North, still expecting direction how to proceed in those
Northern affairs, which continued from the month of January aforesaid 1596.
until the month of May in the year 1597. following, 1597.
for the space of four months. May.
At which time he the said General Norice received advertisement out of
England, that the Lord Borowes should come over Deputy into Ireland: So until
his coming the General kept himself upon the borders of the North.

It was thought at the Lord Borowes coming over, the old grudge would be
renewed: but I think that matter was carried into England, before the Lord
Borowes departed thence. For that after their meeting (contrary to the
expectation of many) Sir John Norice carried himself very discreetly and
respectively toward him: besides that, he made known unto him the state of
the country at that present, together with his best counsel and advice, for
the reforming of the desperate estate that then the kingdom was left in. In so
much as it was thought, before Sir John Norice his going into his government of
Munster, that they were both good friends.

But now upon the Lord Borowes his receiving of the Sword, Sir John Norice was
absolutely sequestered from all command, except that of the Province, and so
sent down into Munster, with an opinion to get leave to pass into England:
But that fell out contrary to his expectation. So he have over three months,
with a show of his health, although inwardly he felt his own grief. General
Norice conceiueth a grief.
And thus the cause of his conceived grief was the hastening of his death, and
so judged of by most men which knew the same.

The manner of his death was answerable to his honorable life, The good
General Norice deceased in Ireland 1597. at his brothers house at Mayallo.
and known to some of his servants and followers, who now with great grief
must rue it. He died the third day of September 1597. at his Brother Sir Thomas
Norices house in the town of Mayallo in the Province of Munster within the
kingdom of Ireland, at the 50. year of his age: having spent 26. of them
(being the most flourishing time of his life) in her Majesty's service against
her enemies, in the Netherlands, Spain, Portugal, France, Britain and
Ireland, as particularly before and here finally is mentioned.

The Honorable Lord Henry Norice Baron of Rycot, father of the said Lord
General, had five sons more all Martial men, vz. Master William his eldest
son serving in Ireland, and there deceased: Sir Edward his third son
serving lastly at Ostend, now living: Sir Henry Norice his fourth son, and
Sir Thomas his fifth son, both serving lastly in Ireland, hurt and died there,
but buried in England: and Master Maximilian his sixth and youngest son died
in France. The honorable Lady Margerie Mother to all these died at London
1599. The said honorable Lord Henry their father died at Rycot Anno 1601.

Thus being entreated to set down what I knew that passed upon Sir John
Norices side, at his latter days in Ireland; I have (although not iournally)
yet of my certain knowledge truly and duly described all the notable
occurrents that passed from his last coming out of Britain, to the time of
his death in Ireland, as before is said. All this service in Ireland was set
down by Daniel Gyles, sometime Page, and after lately servant to the said
General Norice at his death, as aforesaid.

FINIS.

