SEVERAL LETTERS BETWIXT THE FRENCH KING AND THE Q. MOTHER, Concerning the
present Troubles there.

Unto which is added, The French Kings Declaration upon the departure of the
Queen Mother, and Monsieur his Brother out of the Kingdom.

The Confirmation of the Court Parliament of Paris upon the same.

Faithfully translated out of the French.

LONDON. Printed for NATH: BVTTER, and NICH: BOVRNE. 1631.

A LETTER OF THE FRENCH KING TO THE QVEENE MOTHER.
Madame:
I Cannot sufficiently testify my grief, for having understood by your
Letters and by the report of my Cousin the Marshall of Schomberg, and of the
Lord of Roijssy, the refusal which you have made of all the conditions I have
offered you, for the change of your abode at Campeigne, into some more
convenient place for your self, and less suspected for me. Were it not a
thing altogether necessary for the welfare of my affairs, I would not have
caused you so much to have been pressed thereabout. And because I have
reserved to my self to give you shortly to understand the last resolution
which I have taken upon so important a business, I will say no more thereof to
you at this present, but will answer only to that which you have written in
your last concerning my said Cousin the Marshall of Schomberg, and the said
Lord of Roijssy. It had been very difficult for me to have sent you persons
of more approved honesty; and the report which they made me of your intention
at their return from you, is so agreeable to the sense of these Letters you
writ unto me by my said Cousin the Marshall of Schomberg, and the Lord of
Roijssy, as you have no occasion thereupon to complain; but I rather, because
my instant and reiterated prayers have had so little power to work upon you.
God will inspire into me, if it be his pleasure, what I ought to do for the
good and quiet of my estate. After the which I shall always have the same
consideration of you, which you can expect Madame, from

Your most humble and obeisant Son, LOVIS.
From Fontainebelleau, 28. May, 1631.
Answer of the Queen Mother to the Kings Letter above-written.
Monsieur my Son:
I Had deferred to have written you an answer to your Letter the 28. of this
Month, had not mine enemies spread a rumor to my prejudice, that I was escaped
into Flanders. This shall assure you, that I am yet here, resolved not to
depart hence, unless it be by force, if this be not to vpbraid you with with
the respect which a good Mother, such as I am to you, ought to be in with her
Son; for I never had nor shall have the desire to retire my self into any
place where you have not absolute-power, having (God be thanked) no crime upon
my Conscience which should give me occasion to withdraw my self thence, nor
which ought to hinder me from hoping; that your goodness weary of seeing me
thus to suffer, will oblige you in the end to restore me to the calm which is
due to mine innocence; most humbly beseeching you to vouchsafe, that for
answer to your last upon this occasion, I may tell you, that if I had no other
consideration of remaining here, but mine own, I would long since have rendered
you that obedience which you require at my hands, of departing hence. But if
you please to consider what those displeasures are of a Mother so afflicted as
I am, without having committed any fault against You or your estate; you may
easily Judge, how unseemely it would be both to you and me, that me continual
tears and my extreme affliction should be exposed to the eyes of your
Subjects in so long a Journey, I should have to make unto any one of those
places which you have caused to be propounded unto me, and that the triumph of
mine enemies should be adorned with this spectacle, which would be most proper
to illustrate their power all the world over, and the miserable estate whereto
I am reduced. If the counsels which are given you upon this subject, came not
from the same persons which have persuaded you to confine me to this place, and
who does not think (knowing me so well as they do, to be subject to stoppings
of breath, whenever I am sick) that I can live 3. days to an end; You might
well know that it is far more important for your state, that the ill usage
which I suffer without cause be concealed here within four walls, then made
known to every one in my passage; nor would you be so earnest after it in your
said Letter, nor so much complain of my refusal of doing it. I know well what
duty I owe unto you as you are my King; but you also as my Son ought to
compassionate mine afflictions, and not to allege unto me always as you do,
the considerations of your estate, seeing there is no man that knows not right
well that mine abode here can bring no prejudice thereunto, and that this is
none other pretext or artifice; then that which was used by others heretofore,
during our former separation, for which you were so sorry, so soon as you were
come home to your self, after the death of the Constable LVYNES, and which is
now put in practice to torment me; to the end that loosing (as I do) my
repose, my health may be so impaired, as I must sink under the burden, and
loose my life, which they cannot any longer endure.

As touching the Conditions which have been offered me, I doubt not, but they
have told you, and would make it publicly to be believed, that they are very
advantageous unto me: But if they would describe them as they ought, there
would be no such Judgment made; seeing that MOVLINS and ANGERS which have
been propounded unto me for mine abode, are so infected with the Plague, as
without doubt they have bin chosen by them of purpose to thrust me into the
jaws of death, which they see, does not seize upon me here so soon as they
could wish. Your disposition is too good to consent to their wicked designs,
in case you know them: but under pretext of the duty which you owe to your
estate is hidden the poison which they would have me swallow, to rid their
hands of me, contrary to your intention: God will deliver you from that, and
your Mother also, if he please, and will touch your heart, to make you know,
that next your own self I am the person most interested in your preservation,
and that for this purpose, my life imports you more than my self. There is no
honest man in your Kingdom that does not think so. For the honesty of my
Consin the Marshall de Schomberg mentioned in your Letters, I leave the
judgment thereof to God, and do beseech his divine Majesty, to grant both him
and me the grace, that his counsels may be such as he is bound in Conscience
to give you, and that he will inspire also into you that which you ought to
do, for the good and repose of your estate, assuring my self, if you follow
those divine inspirations in stead of the passionate counsels against me which
you have taken ere-while; your estate shall therein find quiet and safety, and
I the comfort which is so necessary for me, and those effects of love which I
ought to expect from you

Monsieur my Son, Your most humble, and most affectionate Mother and subject,
MARIE.
From Campeigne this last of May, 1631.
The Copy of a Letter written from PARIS the 7. of August, 1631.
Upon Monday last, the Queen Mother sent hither the Lord De Beno'ville with
letters to the Parliament, and to the Sheriffs of this City. And he delivered
both the one and the other in open and full Assembly, and afterward departed
again without contradiction. These letters were presently sent to the Kings
Majesty without being opened. It is confidently reported, that the said Letters
are manifestly replenished with very unseemely and strange threatenings.
Thereupon, and upon the arrival of an Ambassador from Bruxels, the Kings
Majesty having changed his purpose concerning his devotion of our Lady of
Liesse, is now expected here in very few days to enter into the said
Parliament: there to open his Declarations against the said Queen and
Monsieur. It is confidently held that he will restore the Paulette, to the
Officers of the Court according to the ancient form and custom.

The farther we do proceed, the more the divisions of this Court do increase
and wax worse. The jealousies which have here been conceived concerning the
same, have cause order to be given for the augmentation and reinforming of the
old Regiments, and Commissions to be granted for 10000. Foot forces more, and
20. Cornet of Horse.

The Kings Majesty has given Charge and Commandment to Monsieur de Guyse, De
Gramont, to the Earl of Rochefoucault, and to Monsieur de Valencay, with all
speed and diligence to be present with his Majesty. The last of these (as we
are informed) has given a flat denial, that he will not depart out of
Calais. And if Monsieur be sure enough without, as we are certified that he
shall be, it is very credible that the rest will be no less refractory, but
draw back as well as he.

Monsieur the Kings brother has put away and discharged one of his
Secretaries, and three of his other Officers, who were by the Lord -- Coigneux
suspected of Treason. He is yet at Beyancon.

We have received Letters from Bruxels, that Forstenbergh and Altringer, are
about to join their Forces unto those Troops of the Administrator of
Wirtenbergh, who so miserably is fallen away from the Conclusion made at the
Diet at Leypsich. Since we have been informed of this Design, concerning the
forenamed Conjunction, word was sent to Monsieur de la Force, to put the Army
of Champeigne into the Field, but he answers, that as yet it is not
expedient.

Monsieur de Loraine, has sent hither the Lord de Ville, to make known to his
Majesty, that Loraine is at his Devotion, and that if the Gates of Nancy are
not large and great enough, the very walls shall be broken down, to give
entrance to, and to receive his Majesty. But all their kind of submissions will
not purge and clear his Highness. Who is like enough to receive the first
stroke of the forces of this estate; If so be that the said Lord do but
enterprise any thing, and especially, if he do give entertainment into his
company to the Prince of Phalsbourgh, who (as it is reported) for a certain,
is one of his parties.

The forenamed Ambassador of Bruxels, comes to make excuse to his Majesty in
that the Infanta being taken on a sudden could not afford that due honor and
respect to the Queen Mother, which otherwise she would have done.

Those of Straesburgh, much sorrowing at the miserable and unfaithful falling
of the Duke of Wirtenbergh, do now earnestly implore the succor and aid of
our King by the Lord Clafer. His Majesty has given him all assurance, that he
will in no wise forsake them. God grant that he may return home better
contented than the Ambassador of S^yeden. Who much grieved, that he could not
receive grant of 4000. men which he required: will within few days return
home very ill satisfied. Nevertheless he has received the gift of a Chain of
Diamonds, worth the value of five thousand Crowns. The Lord Larson, Treasurer
of the said King of Sweden received a Chain of two thousand Florens, and the
secretary of the said Ambassador, had one given him of one thousand.

The Lord De Villars has sold the Government of Honfleur to the Marquis De
Sourdis, from whom it is like to be taken away. He was lately brought in
question and accused before the King that his Company of the Guard was not
complete and that he pursed up the Moneys of those that were more to pay.
Whereupon, and by reason of some Insolent words which he gave in the presence
of his Majesty, his Majesty plucked from his neck his Corslet and degraded him,
and disarmed him most shamefully in open Company.

A Letter written by the Queen Mother to the Kings Majesty with the Answer of
his Majesty to the same.
The Letter of the Queen Mother to the King.
Sir. My Son.
I Have thought it my duty diligently to acquaint you by my Lord De la Bar
that I am departed from Campaigne, as also to declare unto you the reasons and
Motives inciting me thereunto which your Majesty shall find in this Letter.

If I should allege no more, but the hardness and harshnesse of my
imprisonment, the continual disquiets and persecutions which I suffered by the
Cardinal Richelieu, I think they might easily be of power to give abundant
satisfaction to your good disposition, for I know that your inclination is such
that you would not have me obey him to the very prejudice of my life. And to
the prejudice of your pious affection to your Mother, which can no longer be
preserved, nor consist with my obedience to him in this place, especially when
all those evils and wrong inflicted upon me, are pretended to be done in your
name. I have hitherto (without express of my grief, and relating of my
tears) suffered that which were impossible for a woman of a far baser rank
and degree, to suffer with any kind of patience. I have been held from the
first beginning as guilty, because I would not obey the Cardinals pleasure, for
this the most veritable letter bears it, being the first declaration addressed
from Champaigne to the Parliaments and Provinces. Since that I have been used
and dealt withal, as if I were the greatest Enemy of the whole Kingdom of
France, not only in the denial of my honest and just requests, but even in
the misconstruing of my good meaning and intentions. And in shutting up in
prison my officers and servants as well as my own person. Insomuch that they
might not budge out of the City without his warrant, that kept and guarded me
with two Companies of foot Soldiers 500. Horsemen, and unanswerable to all my
submissions, and the lenity and mildness which I manifested in all my treaties
and proceedings with you, I have been opposed and set upon with nothing but
threatenings, violences, and insultings; Which undoubtedly and infallibly, (if
you respect my natural disposition) would have by this time enterred me in my
Tomb, if the Lord of heaven himself had not strengthened my courage with a
magnanimous and generous resolution, and in recompense of my candid and fair
proceeding I have been repaid with tricks and dissimulations. The forces that
were brought upon the borders of Champaigne were only retired thither to abuse
those good people that did sympathize with my Imprisonment, and under show of
the liberty which I had yielded me to walk abroad, to surprise me as it were in
Ambush. As I have bin well informed by such as could easily know something
concerning the evil intention of the Cardinal against me, to prolong my
misery, and to keep the people and strangers in suspense and expectation.
There have been sent unto me diverse Ambassadors, who noysed abroad, that they
came to allay all difference and amend the matter. But, O God! What remedy and
amendment did they speak of to me? When as some of them have bin so insolent
that violating the honor and respect due unto me as did the Marshall of
Schomb^rgh, greedily raging after me until the very entrance of my bedchamber.
The last voyage which my Cousin the Marshall Destree made, and the Lord Mesmin
was no better than the former, for it was only to threaten me with the
returning again of my guard and again to make me fear the former violence,
and the loss of my faithful officers and servants, necessary for the
preservation of my life; And to yield my self to their proceedings, God knows
to what end and intention. As also to propound unto me the journey of going to
Chartres or to Mante where you might see me before I went into Champaigne.
Which caused me to suspect their proposition, Champaign being the way, but not
Chartres. But this was more proper and agreeable to their desire which they
had, to lead me along in Triumph, and show, and with me all Europe, where my
Children command and reign, more then our mutual meeting, which I desire more
than any thing, the privation whereof is the greatest and most sensible misery
which I suffer, how ever the other are cruel enough. All these things I have
suffered with resignation, to testify to the whole Kingdom of France, that I
did respect your Authority even in the hands of my Enemies, and that I never
had nor shall have, any but wholesome and good intentions toward your State,
for having matter and subject enough to compaine of, I contained my self with
all patience five months together, to give you leisure to find out and
acknowledge my integrity and innocence. And to let it appear unto you, that I
never had intelligence, nor held Correspondency with any of my Children but
your own self. However the Cardinal maliciously has possessed and persuaded
you to the contrary, to the end that he might attain to the accomplishment of
his own wicked desires and intentions. Which is, to chase and expel both
Mother and Children, out of the Kingdom, to attain to the end of his
designs, and one day you will find it and acknowledge the same, perhaps when
it will be to late.

In mean while, now how as the time of my sufferings has continued long, a
new to give you an impression of my innocence, and that longer time would make
me to be esteemed guilty, if I did not now have a care for the preservation of
my life, and the reestablishment of my liberty seeing that my Children cannot
dispense with the disgrace and Infamy which should be laid upon me. That shall
notwithstanding, (by Gods grace) justify me in the mind and before the face of
all the world, for as I have perceived that my body did decrease, and my
strength was daily abated and I daily weakened, and that it was the intention of
the Cardinal to have me die within four walls; I was then resolved to save
my life and reputation and to give some easement to my sorrows and sufferings.
Wherefore I will accept of that good offer made unto me by the Marquis de
Verdes, who every day since my departure, has wished me to go to the Capelle
of which he is Governor, which is a place where your May: has absolute power,
I was then resolved to betake my self thither, and was not come within three
leagues from that place, but the said Lord De Vardes sends me word by two
Gentlemen, one of which was the Knight his brother, that I could not enter into
the said Capelle, and that he had delivered up the said place into the hands of
his Father. I beseech you to consider how I was grieved and anxious, when after
that I found my self thus basely deceived, I found also my self earnestly
pursued by the Cavallerie whereupon I was advised to press forward and to go
forth of your Kingdom. Insomuch that I was constrained to journey thirty
leagues without either eating or drinking. And it has been Gods pleasure in
this occasion, as in others also that the cunning devices should be discovered
even by the mouth of such as were agents. Who have in some manner confessed
that the said Cardinal had plotted the business and only intending to make
me to stye and abandon your state, which was that which he only desired and
that which I only feared. Being th^^ reduced and brought to this miserable
extremity, I have betaken my self into this place of Avennes which belongs to
the Archdutchesse, being constrained in a strange Country to seek my liberty
and safety and protection of my life, which I thought easily to have found in
some place under your obedience. But what was so faithfully proffered me, was
shamefully refused me, and as now I perceive was merely offered unto me by the
stratagemes and devises of my Enemies, rather then in any good intention to
receive me. Now I seek nothing but only the confident trust upon Justice and
equity, which you deny not to the most miserable and meanest of all your
subjects. After the same shall have quitted and justified me, although my
Enemies should receive no other punishment but the shame of tormenting and
persecuting me, with the declaracio^ of their injustice, yet this will then
hinder all farther evils which might accrue, and it will cause the complaints
of my other Children to cease, who have some interest in my sorrows by reason
of their own reputation, and will give satisfaction to all Europe, and lay an
obstacle to whatsoever hereafter may be plotted against me.

For mine own part I should not much care but rest contented to sacrifice the
remnant of my days, unto the vengeance of the Cardinal, were it not that I
desire to make up the breach, and to establish the union and concord between
your self and my son. D'Orleans which he has already overthrown, in your
mind by his several devises. You may if you please yield a remedy against this
great evil, and hinder any worse proceeding by your good Judgment and
understanding. If I may be so happy, as to return again to you, I promise
faithfully, I will cause you to know, that in any thing I ought, I have never
esteemed any dearer to me* then your good and Vtility.

Since I am MONS: my Son. Your most humble, and most affectioned Mother and
subject MARIE
Avennes the 21. July 1631.
Answer of the King to the Letter of the Queen his Mother.
MADAME,
I Am so much the more moved at your resolution, which you have taken, to
absent your self from this State and Kingdom, by how much you had less
ground and cause. The imaginary imprisonment, the supposed persecutions which
you complain of, the apprehensions which you confess your self to have
conceived in Campagnie concerning your life; they have no more foundation, than
the pursuit which you say was made after you at your departure, and the
intelligence which you write vntome, has been held with the only Son of
the Lord de Vardes. Their intentions are a device somewhat like unto that
fear, which you fained to have three months ago, that I would send you back
again into Italic, which you know I never thought, much less ever intended.
For those proffers which I have made you, of diverse and several dwellings and
habitations, far remote from those parts, can testify the contrary. Such
calumnies and accusations shall not (God be blessed) disgrace and dis-repute me
in Christendom, where my actions do sufficiently make me known. Whatsoever
you tell me of those that serve me and are near unto me, has not so much as
an appearance of truth. And I wonder and am even astonished, that the Authors
of your letters are not ashamed, to set before your eyes such things against
those, unto whom your conscience knows, that such things cannot be imputed. I
do perceive and know by manifold infallible proofs, the affection and
sincerity of my Cosen the Cardinal of Richel^^^: His religious obedience
which he affords me, his faithful care concerning whatsoever does concern
my person and estate, speaks for him. If you please, Madame, you shall permit
and give me leave to tell you, that the action which you have so lately done,
and what has passed not long since, causes that I cannot be ignorant what
has been your intention heretofore, and what I may expect in the time to
come. The respect which I bare you makes me forbear of saying any thing more
unto you. I pray the Lord in the mean while to give you good counsel, And
that you may always prevail, with his affections who shall always be

Madame, Yours

The French Kings Declaration upon the departure of the Queen his Mother, and
Monsieur his Brother, out of the Kingdom.
Confirmed at the Parliament at Paris the 13. day of August 1631. faithfully
translated out of the French Copy.
LEwis by the grace of God King of France and Nanarre,
to all those unto whom these presents shall come, greeting.
We have by our Letters of Declaration, the 30. of March last past, published
throughout our whole Kingdom, for the causes contained therein, declared all
those guilty of Crimen lasa Maiestatis, who abusing the facility of our well
beloved and only Brother the Duke of Orleans, did by their evil devices and
pernicious counsels, entice and persuade him to withdraw himself from us, and
to depart out of our Kingdom without our knowledge and permission, as also all
those that should be found to be his followers, if in a certain prefixed time
they did not take recourse to our Grace and Mercy, having hoped by this means
to give them leisure to find out and acknowledge their fault, and so to reduce
them unto their duties, and thereby cause them to depart and abstain from all
evil ways and practices, which they had begun, as well within as without the
Kingdom, to trouble the rest and peace of the same. But in stead of using this
means to repent them of their fault, and to take their refuge to our clemency
and favor, they have persisted in their evil counsels, and carried away our
Brother (against the duty of his birth, and the respect which he owes us) and
instigated him to write unto us letters full of bitterness, calumnies,
impostures and accusations against the Administration and Government of our
State; striving and aiming by those said letters, full of injuries and
falsenesse (with other writings of the like nature, which they have caused to
be printed every where) to persuade our people to be ill conceited of us, and
by them and other Princes our neighbors, to have sinister opinions of our
affairs and government, accusing (against all truth and reason) our well-beloved
Cousin the Cardinal Richelieu of infidelity, and of enterprizing against our
person, and the person of our much honored Mother, his own, and our Estate;
as also some others which we do employ in our Government (even about the most
weightiest matters of our Estate) of adhering to his evil counsels,
notwithstanding that from them we do receive the greatest contentment that
we can desire. Yea they have been so bold and audacious, as that they did
dare to present a request to our Court of Parliament, under the name of our
said Brother, against our foresaid Cousin the Cardinal Richelieu, in like
manner as the former, full of falsenes and forged calumnies, contrary to all
humanity, reason and truth. Which caused us to answer our said Brother, and by
our letters the 5. of June last published in our Chancery, to declare our good
intention and meaning, and the exceeding satisfaction which we have received by
the service, faithfulness, and good carriage of our aforesaid Cousin the
Cardinal, in so many, great, and weighty occasions, in the which we have very
profitably employed him for the good and greatness of our State, as also from
the rest our chief Counselors. All these means notwithhanding have hitherto
served only to make them the more impudent and insolent, and to continue their
enterprises, and pernicious designs, which they had begun and undertaken, not
only to divert our said Brother from the obedience which he owes us, but also
he much honored Lady our Mother, who since a short space of i am has suffered
her self also to be led away and seduced by their mischievous counsels, and to
side with our brother in his designs, more than did well become her. It may be
perhaps by reason of the false and evil rumor which some persons have spread,
who make profession of curious and evil sciences, gives them hopes of some
ready change in this Kingdom. We perceiving all these their proceedings, and
seeing that it was a difficult matter to provide for the safety of this
Kingdom, and our own person, if any longer we should suffer them to go on in
these devices, ways and practices, which they did publicly attempt even in
our Court, by those which did approach near unto them, We thought good at the
same instant when our Brother withdrew himself from us, to acquaint the Lady
our Mother with the intelligence we had of all their practices and devices,
which they used to our great prejudice, and with our resolution which we had
taken for the stopping of that course; As namely to take into hold and durance
some persons which we knew to participate in their designs, and to banish the
rest from our Court. Also we desired and entreated her, to this end, to assist
us with her best counsel, as formerly she had done within these few years,
and to leave and separate her self from all the secret intelligences, which
she had or might have with our foresaid Brother, who was then departed from us.
We persisted in this our supplication even to Campaguis, where we made known
unto her diverse other instances by our trusty and well-beloved, the Lord
Chastean-newf, Keeper of the Scale, and our trusty and well-beloved Cosen, the
Marshal de Schomb^rgh, unto both which she answered, that she was weary any
longer to intermeddle with our affairs, and that she would no more have any
share, nor be partaker with our Counsels; which caused us too too confidently
to understand and believe, the firm resolution which she had taken, to remain
linked and joined to the designs of our said Brother, and to follow and be led
by the pernicious counsels which were given him. Whereupon we resolved and
determined to separate our selves for a while from her, and to entreat her to
withdraw herself and retire to Moulins, a place which properly belongs unto
her, and which place during the time of our minority, she voluntarily chose
for her own abode. Unto this she gave answer, that then she would willingly
go thither; but a few days afterward, she requested us to think it expdient
and fitting, that she might betake her self to Neuers: Which she was so much
inclining unto, and did affect, because she had a desire to approach and draw
nearer to our said Brother, who was then as yet at Orleans. A while after this,
learning and perceiving that our said Brother in his proceedings, used many
devices and cunning practices, striving and endeavoring to assemble together
many warlike troops, we invited him by our well-beloved Cousin the Cardinal de
Valette, to absent and separate himself from all those wicked counsels, and to
return again to us, where we promised him that he should receive all good and
favorable contentment; which he refusing to do, and to have correspondencie,
and to join with our good meaning and intention, we journyed as far as
Eltampes, where presently we were informed that he was departed from Orleans,
so to retire and leave our Kingdom, where he was no sooner departed, but our
said Mother sent us word that she would no longer go, either to Moulins or
Neuers, and that she desired not to depart out of Champaguie; and at the very
same time she and our said Brother did devise and effect to publish and
divulge this rumor, that she was detained in prison, notwithstanding she had
all liberty afforded her with her train either to go to Moulins or Neuers,
although in those places there was no Garrison. But as this supposed
imprisonment served for a pretense of coffeehouse unto those that waited for
such an occasion and opportunity, so she continued this false complaint,
notwithstanding that daily our Cousin the Marshall Destree, and also the Lord
Marquess of St Sch^^^^out did advertise her in our behalf (which two we have
many several times sent unto her) that she would be pleased to depart out of
Campagnie, and to choose such a place within our Kingdom, as she should think
most fitting for her abiding: offering her (to the end she might abide there
with the more respect and authority) the government of that Province, into the
which she would betake her self, forthwith declaring and making known unto
her, that her remaining still in Champagnie, gave unto us great cause of
jealousy and suspicion, forasmuch as we were certainly informed they did
persuade her to depart out of our Kingdom, (unto which she would no way
condescend, nor thereby be persuaded) faining many causes of complaint, as
among others, that we would have sent her unto Italy, and that our Gallyes
were ready prepared for the same purpose. Then we sent unto her our said
Cousin, the Marshall of Shombergh, and the Lord de Roissye Counselor in our
Council of State, to desire her to conform her self to our will and
pleasure, and to resolve with herself to depart out of Champagnie, and to
choose such a place within our Kingdom which she might like of for her
dwelling, only Champagnie excepted. To the end that those pretenses might
cease of those who had entised our said Brother to forsake our Kingdom, and
that they might not have so much as any appearance to ground their reports
upon, of our Mothers imprisonment. Nay which is more, they two in our name,
proffered unto her the government of Anion, which she complained she was
bereaved of, and that the same was taken from her, although indeed she had of
her own accord abandoned the same, for some considerations best known to her
self. They urged also unto her and showed her, that it was very requisite for
the good of our affairs, and that it would prove very aduantagious to her
self if she would be pleased to conform her self to our will and
intentions. But whatsoever reasons they could lay before her, it was impossible
to divert and draw her from her strong resolution, which she had taken to
abide in Champagnie, for to bring to pass the design, which since that time
she has executed. Notwithstanding all this her resistance, to testify more
and more our affection toward her, and the earnest desire we have to reunite
her unto us, we caused those troops to be removed which we had left in
Champagnie, and since that did diverse times send to her our said Cousin the
Marshall Destree, and the Marquis de St Shanmont, to reiterate the request
which so often we had made unto her, that she would choose any other place
than Champagnie for her abode. Yea we proffered her to come and visit her in
her house at Monceana, or some other place in the way to Blois, Angers, or
Moulins if she went thither, to the end that we might be reconciled together.
This in appearance she seemed to agree unto, and willing to embrace, which
gave us great contentment, and abundant satisfaction, supposing that this also
was the way to reduce our said brother to his deuoir, and to remove all those
pretenses which the foresaid evil Authors of bad counsel did make use of. But
when we believed that our said Mother was well contented with us, and was most
ready and willing to follow our good intention, which we had for our common
good, and the good and happiness of the whole Kingdom of France, which hope
we conceived by the answer delivered unto us by our said Cousin the Marshall
Destree, who brought us word, that she would never depart out of Campagnie, to
go into any other place without our knowledge and consent. But all this proved
but a shadow, for in lieu of performance, we understood that she was departed
out of Campagnie the 19. of the last Month, in a Caroch of the Lady du
Fresney, accompanied with the said Lady only, and one of her Chamber-maidens,
and so passed along to Chosy and Bleren Court, and there arrived at the Village
of Rosny, where she found the Caroch of the Baron of Creuecoeur Governor of
Auennes, a Town in the obedience of the King of Spain, which Governor had
expected her himself 15. days in the Town of Sein; where being arrived, a
Gentleman of the Marquisse de Vardes told her, that the Lord Vardes the father
was arrived at Capelle, and had banished thence his son and his wife; and
hereupon she went to Auennes, where she was received, and a while after
visited in the behalf of the Infant by the Prince d'Espinoy, Governor of
Enhault, as since that time we have learned by the inquiry which we have
caused to be made, concerning her departure out of our Kingdom, by one of our
Masters of Requests, at the very same time when she departed from Champagnie.
And since that to follow the same course which our said Brother had taken, she
sent a request to our said Court of Parliament of Paris, full of forged and
calumnious accusations against our said Cousin the Cardinal of Richelien, very
like unto the same which our Brother would have laid upon him. She was no
sooner arrived at the said place of Auenues, but she did presently write
letters unto us, full of invented pretenses to color her departure, and the
like complaints against our said Cousin the Cardinal, which have no ground at
all nor foundation, but only slanders and inventions, which doubtless have
been suggested unto her by the Authors of those same which our Brother wrote
unto us; which is evident enough, especially since both the one and other do
tend to the subversion of our Authority, and of our Kingdom and State; and we
know that her departure has been plotted by those Agents which they have at
Bruxels, to cause her to retire (as she has done) into a Country under the
command of the King of Spain.

But she not resting contented with the first slanders and calumnies which
she wrote unto us, abusing our goodness and lenity, and the mildness which
hitherto we have used toward them that have been the bringers of the same,
she has begun to write others and new slanders to our said Court of
Parliament, and to the Provost of the Merchants of our good City of Paris,
striving to incense them against us, and to give bad examples to others.

Now therefore desiring to prevent all those evils which may ensue and accrue
by the departure of the said Lady our Mother, and our said Brother in this
estate, and to hinder them that they continue and increase not through the
credit which some of our Subjects might afford unto their complaints and
inventions, written and manifested to be full of impostures, which they publish
against us, our Government and our principal Ministers of State; and to the
end that none of our said Subjects be not so rash and ill advised as to adhere
unto them, and participate of their evil counsels, to adjoyne unto them or
have any private intelligence with them, or those that follow them.

We do make known by this present, that with the ad^ of the Princes, Dukes,
Peers, Officers of our Crown, and (...) great and eminent personages of our
Counsel, which are ^re about us, We confirming our precedent declarations of
30. of March, and 5. of June last, have pronounced and declared, and do
pronounce and declare by this present, signed with our own hand, guilty of
Crimenlaesae Majestatis, and disturbers of our common peace and rest, all those
that shall be found to have participated to such pernicious and damnable
Counsels; or have withdrawn our said Mother, and our only Brother the Duke of
Orleans from our obedience, and have enticed or instigated them to depart out
of our Kingdom: As also all those that shall have followed them and departed
with them, of whatsoever rank or condition they be: with all those that shall
assist them, or have levied or raised any soldiers against our service, and
made any devices or practices prejudicial to our authority, as well without as
within the Kingdom. We will therefore, that there be proceeded against them
as against those that are guilty of Crimenlaesae Majestatis, and disturbers of
our common peace, according to the rigor of our Laws, with all the diligence
that may be, both of our Proctors General, as also their Substitutes and
Deputies.

And hereby we prohibit and utterly forbid all our Subjects of whatsoever
quality or condition they be, from having any intelligence or correspondencie
with our said Mother, and our said Brother, and with their domesticke servants,
and those that are partakers of their Counsels, under whatsoever pretenses it
may be.

And we wish that all their Lordships, and whatsoever honorable privileges
they enjoy, moving under our Crown, be seized upon, and afterward reunited to
our own revenues, that they be deprived of all dignities, places or offices
whatsoever they enjoy, And that all their other goods as well moueables as
immoueables be seized and praised, afterward to be by us taken from them and
confiscated. And further we will that all those that levy any soldiers, or
maintain any forces without our Commission be earnestly pursued, and dealt
with all according to the rigor of our Laws and Ordinances, ^ed because it is
a very difficult matter to hinder and preue^ di^ said Mother and Brother, and
such as follow them and adhere (...) them, from sending and writing to those,
to whom they think good; and because it were unreasonable and ill-beseeming,
that those to whom they send or write unto, should incur the penalties here
prescribed, We will and ordain, that those to whom these Letters shall be
addressed, shall be bound as soon as ever they shall have received the same,
or as soon as any one shall come unto them in their behalf, to declare it,
and carry those letters to the chief Judge Royal in that Province in which
they dwell, and cause these (if they can) to be staid and arrested, which shall
bring these letters to them, or be trusted with any message to them, which
Judge shall be bound instantly to send the said letters to the Secretary of
State, who has the deportment of that Province. And if this happen in our
Court, they shall address themselves to our beloved and trusty Keeper of the
Seal. And if it happen in our City of Paris, they shall be bound to acquaint
the Lieutenant of the City, and he shall be bound to acquaint us as soon as
possible may be, and all this under the same penalty.

To this end we will and command all our beloved and faithful Counselors, and
those of our Court of Parliaments, to cause this to be read, published and
registered, and the contents of the same to be executed in every particular,
according to their form and tenor. As also our Proctors General to make all
diligent and earnest inquiry, and necessary pursuit for the punishment of the
delinquents. And farther we charge and command all Governors, Lieutenants
General of Provinces, Governors and Captains of our towns and places, to
fall upon all disobedient and rebels, and to suppress them as far as in them
lies, with their forces which they command for our service, as also in time of
need to assemble forces to that end and purpose, And all Judges to execute
judgment against the offender. And the Prouosts of our beloved Cousins the
Marshals of France, to fall upon their Camps, and assault ^^ose, that contrary
to our prohibitions, shall leuy any for^^ without Commission expressly signed
by Us, and countersigned by one of our Secretaries of State, and sealed with
the Great Seal; To execute and fully proceed in judgment against those they
shall apprehend, and cut in pieces those who after they have been summoned,
shall go about to stand in their defense. For such is our Will and Pleasure.

In witness whereof We have caused our Seal to be put to these presents.
Given at Paris the 12. of August, in the year of Grace, 1631. and of our
Reign the 22. year. Signed Lowys. and somewhat lower by the King.
De Lemene. and Sealed with the great Seal in Yellow wax.
Read, published, and registered, heard at the request of the Attorney General
of the King, Copied according to the Original, sent forth therewont.

At Paris in the Parliament of the King. August 13. 1631.



