NEW MEXICO. Otherwise, The Voyage of Anthony of ESPEIO, who in the year 1583.
with his company, discovered a Land of 15. Provinces, replenished with Towns
and villages, with houses of 4. or 5. stories height, It lies Northward, and
some suppose that the same way men may by places inhabited go to the Land
termed De Labrador.

Translated out of the Spanish copy printed first at Madreal, 1586, and
afterward at Paris* in the same year.

Jmprinted at London for Thomas Cadman.

To my very loving friend master Henry Anderson Merchant.
ALthough good will and perfect friendship is not to be requited nor bought
with money, yet such is the excellency thereof, that it is oftentimes requited
with some ingratitude, wherewith the virtue is much more beawtified, as it was
with the good and wise king Don Alonso of Spain: who being given to
understand, that one unto whom he had done great good by preferring him to
honor, besides many liberal gifts, was very unthankful for the same. He
answered in a mild manner, that a great good turn is never requited without
some ingratitude, even so I may compare you in this happiness unto him, and in
unhappiness my self unto the other, who for much good have returned but ill.
Wherefore I am the bolder, being so well acquainted with your good disposition,
to show my self thankful, being well assured that you cannot think of my
service evil, seeing (as I have said) you have always done well, being
delivered unto me by Master Boldley a small Spanish Pamphlet of the late
Discovery of the 15. Provinces in the west Indians, which the Spaniardes
entitled The New Mexico. Knowing your Christian and loving care unto the
common weal of your country, in wishing unto our nation, the knowledge that
belongs unto all good Christian people, that nothing be hidden whereas some
profit may be reaped. And although this small Treatise be the least of this
argument that ever was translated, and my skill much less in the doing
thereof, yet being well considered and noted, there may happily grow thereby more
profit unto those which intend to reap the benefit then in some other books of
greater discoueries, because it reuealeth more rivers, coasts, and people,
toward our northern parts then others heretofore have done. Thus assured of
your good liking and the accepting of my good will, wherein although I have
used a worse English phrase the^ others would do, yet I have kept (so near as
I can) the very Spanish sense: craving pardon, I commit you to God and my
Pa^phlet to the good Reader. London this 13. April 1587.

Your loving friend, A. F.

Of New Mexico, and the discovery thereof, and what is known touching the same.
WHereas in the title of this Treatise I have said that in the year 1583.
there was discovered a Land containing 15. Provinces, lying in or upon the
continent of New Spain, which by the discouerers thereof was named New
Mexico, I will with as much brevity as I may (for it I had diffusedly set
down all that have been therein seen and known, it would require a history)
declare the substance of the same: which is, that in the year 1581. a certain
religious person of the order of Franciscans na- Friar Augustine Ruis, dwelling
in the vale of S. Bartholmew, being given to understand by certain Indians
called Conchos, who communicated with other their neighbors near adioining,
called Passaguates, that toward ye north parts men might traueile by land to
certain great towns, of the Spaniards never discovered nor known: pretending
the salvation of their souls, he craved license of the Conde of Corunna
viceroy of the said New Spain, and other his superiors, to travail thither
to learn their language, and afterward to bring them to receive baptism, and
to preach unto them the holy Gospel. Having obtained this license, and taking
with him two companions more of the same order, with eight soldiers who
voluntarily offered to accompany him, he departed, in purpose to put in
practice his pretended Christian and charitable intent, and within few days
journey came into a Province named Tiguas, distant from the mines of S.
Barbara, where they began their journey, 250. leagues northward: in which land
through occasion, the inhabitants killed one of his two companions. Which when
the soldiers that came with him perceived, entering into further consideration
of their success, and fearing least some thing to their great harm might
thereof ensue, they determined with a common consent to return to the mines of
S. Barbara from whence they set forth, in respect of the small number that
they were to withstand such matters as might happen, being so far distant
from the places which the Spaniards did inhabit, and from al necessary
succor. But the two Friars that remained, did not only dislike of their
resolution, but also seeing so fit occasion to execute their purposes, and so
much fruit even ripe for Gods table, when they could no way persuade the
soldiers to proceed in the discovery, resolved to stay in the said province
with only three Indian boys and one mungrell, whom they carried with them,
thinking that notwithstanding they there remained alone, yet they should be
very safe by reason of the affability and love wherewith the inhabitants
entreated them. When the eight soldiers were thus returned to their desired
place, they presently sent news of their success to the viceroy at Mexico,
which is distant from S. Barbaras mines 160 leagues The Franciscan friars
hearing of the stay of their brethren did much mislike hereof, fearing least
being so alone, they might be slain, and therefore began to move and stir up
the minds of sundry soldiers to accompany an other Friar of the same order
called Friar Bernardine Beltran into the same province, thence to bring the
said two other friars in safety, and to prosecute that which was before begun.

At the same time there was (through occasion) at the said mines, a citizen of
Mexico, called Anthony of Espeio, a rich man, and of great courage and
industry: one zealous in the service of the kings majesty Don Phillip, and
was borne in Cordoua. This man (understanding the said friars purpose, together
with the importance of the muse, offered his person to the iourny, as also to
spend part of his substance, and to adventure his life therein, if he might to
that end obtain license and authority of the chief deputies in those
places. Wherefore by the procurement of the said Friar, there was order taken
by Captain Ontinerus, his majesty's chief Alcady in the town of the sour
kings within the government of Biscay, 70. leagues from the said mines of S.
Barbara, that he might as well in person go forward on the said iourny, as also
to gather and take up such soldiers as voluntarily would accompany him, to ye
end so to prosecute this his Christian an enterprise. The said Antony of
Espeyo took this business so earnestly in hand, ye in very few days he had
gathered together his soldiers and necessary provision for such a journey,
spending therein a great part of his substance: and so departed from the vale
of S. Bartholmew upon the 10. of November, 1582. carrying with him for all
occasions that might fall out 115. horses and moiles, with much weapon,
munition and furniture, and some people of service. He took his way toward ye
north and within 2. days journey he met with many Indians called Conchos in
rows or streets of straw houses, who when they understood of the coming of
our people, came forth joyfully to meet them. The food of this people, as
also of all the rest of this province which is very large, is ye flesh of
conies, hares, and dear, whereof they have great plenty. They have also very
much Mais, which is the Indian wheat, goords, and abundonce of good mellons,
also great store of rivers which yield them great quantity of fish of diverse
sorts, and for the most part they all go naked, their weapons are bows and
arrows, they live under the signiory and government of Cassicques as the
Mexicans, but there were found no Idols, neither can it be found that they
woorship any thing, which is ye reason that they easily agreed ye the
Christians should set up crosses, wherewith they were well contented after
they were by our people informed of the signification of the same, through such
interpreters as they carried with them, by whose means also they learned of
other towns whither the said Conchos accompanied and guyded them, going with
them above 24. leagues which was all inhabited with their Nation, and through
the advice which the Cassicques gave from one town to another, came forth to
meet them, and received them with peace.

Having thus passed these 24. leagues, they came unto another people called
Passaguates, Passaguates.
who after ye manner of ye before said Conchos their neighbors came forth and
used them in the same manner as the other had done, guiding them forward 4.
days journey with advise from the Cassicques as before. In this iourny our
people found many silver mines in ye judgment of such as have skill in such
things, and very rich metal.

One days journey beyond these, they came to another nation called Tobosos,
Tobosos.
who seeing and hearing of our people, fled into the woods, leaving their towns
and houses desert. We afterward understood that a few years before there had
been some soldiers which going to seek mines had led certain of the
inhabitants captive, which was the cause of ye fear and suspitiousnes of the
rest. But the captein gave order for the calling of them back, with assurance
that they should have no harm, using so good policy yt they returned and
were very well used, whereby enjoying their favor, and by interpreters promising
that they should have no harm, they became quiet, and were content with the
setting up of crosses, and to hear ye mysteries of ye same, wherewith in
outward show they seemed to be well pleased, and afterward accompanied them as
their neighbors had done, until they brought them to another people about 12.
leagues distant from them, they use also bows and arrows, and do go naked.

The people whereto the Tobosos guided them are called Iumanos, Iumanos.
whom the Spaniards by an other name do call Patarabueyes. Patarabueyes
Their province is large consisting of many towns with much people. The houses
have sellers and are of lime and stone, and the towns traced in very good
order, all the men and women have their faces, arms, and legs painted, they are
a corpulent people, and more politic then any of the former, and have much
victual, and great store of game both of foot and winge, with plenty of fish,
by reason of their great rivers running from the northward, whereof some are as
large as Guadalquiuir which fall into the very north sea. It has many lakes of
salt water, which certain times of the year do curdle and they make thereof
very good salt. They are a warlike people and so showed themselves, for the
first night that our people pitched their camp, they shot and killed five
horses and hurt as many more very sore, nether had left any alive if the watch
had not behaved themselves very well in the defense of the rest, and having
done this mischief they unpeopled the town and fled into the woods there
adioining, but the next morning the Captain with five soldiers, and an
Interpreter called Peter, an Indian of their own nation, went thither to them,
and with very good speech quieted them and brought them to peace, so as he
caused them to return to their habitations, yea and persuaded the^ to certify
their neighbors that they were men that did no harm to any, neither went to
take and rob them of their goods. This through his wisdom did he bring to
pass and easily obtained, and gave unto their Casciques certain bunches of
glass beads which they carried of purpose, and hats and other childish toies:
upon this and other good usage of them many accompanied our people certain
days along the great river aforesaid, whereupon stood many towns of this
nation, during al which iourneis (the Cassiques giving notice from one to
another they came forth without their bows or arrows to meet our people, and
brought them much victuals with other dainties and gifts, especially skins of
Chamois so well dressed that those of Flanders are no better. They go all
clothed, and it was found that they had some small inckling of our Christian
faith, for they made signs toward God with looking up into heaven, whom in
their language they call Appallito, and him they acknowledge for the Lord at
whose hand and mercy they confess that they have received life and natural
being. Many of them came and brought their wives and children, to the intent
that the religious persons of whom we spoke, which went with the soldiers might
give them their blessing. Afterward being demanded of whom they had learned
that knowledge of God, they said of three Christians and one Negro that had
passed that way and stayed a while in their country, who by the tokens that
they gave, seemed to be Aluares Nuns Cabeca de Vacca, Dorantes, Castillio
Maldonado and a Negro, who were escaped from the Armato wherewith Pamphilo of
Naruaes entered into Florida, and having been long slaves chanced to come to
these places, where GOD wrought many strange things by them, yea and healed
sundry parsons, whereby their name was famous throughout all that country. All
this province seemed to remain very quiet, in demonstration whereof they
accompanied and served our people sundry days along the river before said. A
few days after they came to a populous country of Indians, whose inhabitants
came to receive our people, after the (...) ^ir neighbors they understood of
(...) Savior, and brought forth many ^gs made of feathers very curiously of
sundry colors, and many cotton ma^tels striped with blew and white, like to
those that came from China, to bartare and change for other things: Both men
and women are apparelled in Chamois very well dressed. Our me^ could not learn
the name of that nation for want of an Interpreter that understood their
language, notwithstanding they dealt with them by signs, and when they showed
them certain stones of very great price, demanding whether there were any
such in their land: They answered by signs, that about five days journey from
thence toward the West there were plenty of the same, also that they
themselves would guide them thither and show them unto them, which they
afterward performed, acco^panying them for the space of 22 leagues, all
inhabited by the same nation. Next unto whom they presently came along the
river to an other nation far more populous then the last, where they were very
well received and entertained with many presents, especially of fish, which was
there infinite by reason of great lakes thereabout wherein the same were bred.
They remained among those people three days, who enterteined them night and
day with diverse dances after their manner, and sundry demonstratious of great
joy, but they could not learn their name for want of an interpreter, howbeit
they understood that ye country stretched very far and were a great nation.
Among them they found an Indian of the nation of the Conchos, Conchos.
who by signs gave them to understand that 15. iourneis thence toward the
west, there was a great and very broad lake, and about the same many great
towns, and houses of three or four stories hie, the inhabitants apparelled
and plenty of victuals, and promised to bring them thither, where of they were
very glad, and so they gave over the prosecuting of the first determination
taken at ye beginning of the journey, which was to go northward to ye end to
succor the friars aforesaid. In this province that which particularly was to
be noted, is, yt ye same was of a good temperature, a welthy cuntry, plenty of
game as well on wing as foot, rich in metals, and other particular things of
profit. From this land they traueiled 15 days not meeting any other people.
Thus passing along through great woods of pine apples and pines like those of
Castile having iournied by estimation 80. leagues they came to a small village
or town of a few people, in whose houses (which were poor and of straw, they
found many skins of dear very well dressed, as those of Flanders, with much
white salt and that very good: here they lodged them very well for the space
of 2. days that they there remained, and then conveyed them 12. leagues
further, still going northward by the river aforesaid until they came to the
cuntry named New Mexico: along the marshes of ye same river grew plenty of
white elms, which they call Alamos Blanchos, like woods in some places 4.
leagues large, and the like of walnuttrees, and many arbors of vynes like those
of Castile.

Having iourneyed two days through these groves of elmes and walnuttrees,
they came to 10 villages or towns scituat on either side of ye said river,
besides others which they might see further of, which seemed to be very well
peopled, as also those that they came unto contained above 10000 souls: In
this province they were much made of and had very good interteinment, being
guided from town to town, and had great plenty of victual given the^, as
hens and many other things, and all with great good will. Here they found
houses of 4 stories high, very well builded with gallant lodgings, and in most
of the^ stoaues for the winter season. Their garments were of cotton and of
deeres skins, and the attire both of the men and women is after the manner of
the Indians of Mexico, but the strangest thing of all was that both men and
women did wear shoes and boots of good leather, with soales of cow hides, a
matter never seen in any other of those countries before. The women do keep
their hair very well combed and dressed up, without any thing upon their
heads. In all these towns they have Cassicques that govern them in like manner
as the Mexicans, with their sergeants: and officers to execute their
commandments. which going thorough the town to with an outcrie deliver the
Cassicques precepts unto ye people, causing the same to be put in execution.
Here our men found many idols which the inhabitants did worship, and especially
they have in every house a temple for ye devil, wherinto they ordinarily carry
him meat, and as it is among the Christians an use to erect crosses in the high
ways, so have this people certain high chapels, in in the which they say the
Devil uses to take his ease and recreate himself as he trauelleth from one
town to an other, these chapels are very well trimmed and painted. In all
their crable grounds whereof they have plenty, they erect on the one side a
porch standing upon four pillars wherein the laborers do eat and make their
feasts, for the people are much given to labor and do ordinarily follow their
work. It is a wooddie country full of pyne trees. The weapons that they use
are very strong bows and arrows pointed with pedernall or flint, wherewith
they will peerce a coat of maile, they have also certain staves of half a
yard long full of sharp flints, sufficient to cleave a man asunder in the
midst called Imacanas, and they use shields of raw cow hides.

Of New Mexico, and the things there to be seen.
Having remained 4. days in this Province, not far off they came to another
called the Land of Tyguas, Tiguas.
containing 16. towns, in one whereof called Poala, they understood that the
inhabitants had slain the 2. Friars aforesaid: viz. Friar Frauncis Lopes, and
Friar Augustine Ruys whom they went to seek for, and the three boys and the
mungrell. When the townsmen therefore and their next neighbors see our people
there, their consciences accusing them, and fearing least our men came to
punish the^, and to revenge the death of the persons aforesaid, they durst not
abide, but leaving their houses empty, fled into the woods bordering about
them, from whence they would never come down, notwithstanding sundry devises
which our men practiced there about. They found in the towns and houses good
store of victuals, with infinite numbers of hens of that cuntry, and sundry
sorts of metals, whereof some seemed to be very good. I am not able to show
what numbers of people this province might contain, by reason (as is
aforesaid) they were fled to the thickets.

Finding those to be deceased whom they sought for, they entered in
consultation whether they should return into new Biscay from whence they came,
or else go forward on the journey, wherein were diverse opinions. Howbeit
understanding that toward the east parts of that province, and somewhat distant
from thence there were some very great and rich towns, also finding themselves
so near the same, the said captain Antony of Espeio with the consent of friar
Bernardine Beltran and the most part of his company determined to proceed in
the discovery, to see whereto it would come, as also to give assured and
certain notice to his majesty, as eye witnesses of all that themselves had
seen, and so with one accord they determined that the army should lie still
there, while the captain and two more of his company should prosecute their
desire, which they put in practice. After two days journey they happened of
another province wherein they see 11. towns and much people, in their opinion
above 40000 souls: It was a very fertile soil, and no less furnished with
provision, whose co^fines did immediately adioine unto the land of Cibola wherein
are many kine, with whose skins they do apparel themselves as also with
cotton, imitating in their government the orders of their neighbors, there
seems to be many rich mines, of whose metals they found in the Indians
houses, which Indians have and do worship Idols, and received our men with
peace, giving them victuals to eat. This being seen, as also the disposition
of the country, they returned to the camp, there to give notice to their
company of all that is aforesaid.

Being returned to the army, they had intelligence of another cuntry called
Quires, Quires.
which stood along upon ye north River, about 6. leagues of, and in their
journey thitherward about 1. league from ye place, there came forth very many
Indians to receive them in peace, requesting them to go with them to their
towns, which they accepted and were very well enterteined. In this province
they found but 5 towns, though very full of people, for they saw above 15000,
souls, who do worship Idols, as do also their neighbors. In one of these
towns they found a parrat in a cage, as they use in Castile: also shadows
called Tirasoles, like unto those yt they bring from China, wherein were painted
the sun, moon, and many stars, where having taken ye altitude, they found it
to be 37. degrees and a half under ye north. Departing out of this province,
and traueiling by the same path, within 14. leagues they found another province
called Cumes, Cumes.
where they did see other 5. cities, ye greatest whereof was called Cia, and was
so large yt it contained 8. market places, the houses tyled and painted of
diverse colors, and much better then have been seen in the former countries.
The number of inhabitants seem to be above 20000. souls. They gave to our
people for presents many curious ma^tles, with meats well dressed, and were
accounted to be more curious and of greater policy then any of them yt yet
they had seen, and of better government. They showed the^ rich metals, and
the mountains not far off from whence they had them: here also our people
heard of another province bearing toward the northwest, whereunto they purposed
to go.

Having travailed about 6. leagues, they came to ye same province, which was
called Amages, Amages.
containing 7. towns very great, and to their judgment in ye same 30000.
souls, one of these towns was very fair whereto they refused to go, as well
because it stood in a wood, as also for fear of mishap, if per chance they
should be separated one from another. They are people in ma^ners not unlike
their neighbors, as well furnished as they and of as good government. About 15
leagues from this province westward they found a great town called Acoma,
Acoma.
consisting of above 6000 souls, standing upon a high rock, which was above
50 paces high, having no other entrance but by a ladder or pair of staiers
hewn in the same rock, which bred a great marvel in our men: al their water
they have in cesternes. The chief me^ of this town came peaceably to visit
the Spaniards, bringing them many mantels, Chamois well dressed, and ple^tie of
victuals. Their erable land lies 2 leagues from them, and the water that
moisteneth the same proceeds from a small river near thereto, about the which
do grow many rose trees like to those of Castile. There are also many woods
having in the^ some mines of metal, but they went not to see them because the
Indians be both many and very warlike. Our men remained here 3 days, and in
one of the towns the people made them a solemn dance, and therewith came
forth in gallant garments, and plays very ingenious wherewith they were
wonderfully delighted.

About 24 leagues from hence toward the west, they happened upon a province in
the country language called Zuni, Zuni.
and by the Spaniards named Cibola, wherein do inhabit very many Indians. In
this city had Frances Vasques Coronado erected many crosses and other tokens
of Christianity which yet remain. They also found there three Indian
Christians that had continued there, ever since his said journey, whose names
were Andrew of Cuyoacan, Jasper of Mexico, and Antony of Guadalaiara, who had
almost forgotten their own language, but could speak that country speech
very well, notwithstanding that in a small time being talked withal, they
easily recovered the understanding of what so ever was spoken. Of them our men
understood that 60 days iourneis of, there was a very great lake and upon the
shores thereof many goodly towns, also that the enhabitans of ye same had
plenty of gold, which was ye better to be known because they al did were
bracelets and earerings thereof: also that Frances Vasques Coronado being
certified thereof had gone out of this land of Cibola and proceeded 14 iournies
thitherward, and then through want of water was forced to return, determining
nevertheless to make a second voyage thither being better furnished for ye
same, which he never performed, being prevented therein by death.

Unto the news of ye riches aforesaid did the said Anthony of Espeio apply
himself, to whose opinion the most part of his company condiscended, except the
Friar, who alleged yt it was now time to return to new Byscay, from whence
they came, there to give account of yt which they had seen, whereto most of
them consented, leaving their captain with only 9 companions yt willingly
followed him, who after knowledge of ye riches aforesaid, departed with his
said companions, and traueiling directly toward ye west, after he had
iourneied 28. leagues, found another very great Land, which by estimation
contained 50000 souls and more. The inhabitans understanding of their approach,
sent them word upon pain of death to come no nearer their towns, whereto ye
captain answered, yt their coming was no way to harm them, as they should
well perceive, and therefore requested them not to molest them, and withal gave
to the messenger some such rewards as they had at hand, who upon ye same, gave
so good words of our people, yt he mollified ye hearts of the rebellious
India^s, and obtained leave for them to come among them, which they did with
150 of their friends of ye province of Cibola aforesaid, and the three Mexican
Indians before mentioned.

When they came within one league of the first town, there came forth to
meet them above 2000 Indians with necessary provision, as victuals, etc. who^
the captain rewarded with some things of small value, which unto them
nevertheless seemed of greater account then so much gold. Approaching nearer to
the town, which was named Zaguato, a great number of Indians came forth to
meet them, and among the rest the Cassicques, with so great demonstration of
joy, that they cast much meal and maiz upon the ground for the horses to
tread upon: with such triumph they entered the town, where they were much
made of, and very well lodged, which the captain did in part requite, giving
to the chiefest among them hattes, and beads of glass, with many such
trifles that they carried with them for the like purpose.

The said Cassicques presently gave notice through ye whole province of ye
arrival of these new guests, who^ they reported to be a courteous people, and
such as offered them no harm, entreating them to come to their towns, which
they yielded unto, though with great foresight what might follow, wherein ye
captein also used some policy, giving them to understand ye the horses, who
(as they had already been informed, would devour men) were very fierce, and
therefore ye it was necessary to make some fort of lime and stone wherein to
keep them, to avoid such inconvenience as otherwise might fall to ye Indians
by them, which the Cassicques did so steadfastly believe, yt with all speed ye
said fort which our men required was by them finished. Moreover upon the
capteines speech ye he would depart, they brought unto him a present of 4000.
mantles of cotton both white and painted, a great quantity of handkerchiefes
purled and stitched, and some rich metal among which seemed to co^tein much
silver. Among these Indians they learned much concerning the great Lake
aforesaid, as also of the riches thereof, and great abundance of gold.

The captain reposing some confidence in this people, left there 5 of his
company with the rest of his Indian friends, who thence should return to Zuni
with ye baggage, and took ye other 4 with him, proceeding with such guides as
he had gotten, and having traveled 45 leagues toward ye west, he came to very
rich mines, out of the which with his own hand he took rich metal and much
silver: these mines were in a wooddie mountain, whereto they might easily get
up by reason of an open way ye lay to the same. About the^ were some towns of
Indians called Seranos, Seranos
who came forth to meet them with crosses in their hands and other tokens of
peace. In these parts they found 2 rivers, having on their shores diverse arbors
of very good grapes, great walnuttrees, and much flax like that of Castile,
and they showed by signs yt behind this mountain there was a river of 8 leagues
broad, but we could not learn how near it was, but by their demonstration it
seemed to draw toward the north sea, also yt upon the edges thereof on either
side there stood diverse great towns, in respect of which the town wherein they
were was but a street. From hence ye Captain departed toward ye province of
Zuni, whither he had sent his company: and being come thither, he met with his
5 co^panio^s, and Friar Bernardine Beltran with the soldiers, who (as is
aforesaid) were before determined to return, but as yet upon certain
occasions not departed, who^ ye people there had very well entreated, as they
did the captain afterward, and those that came with him, meeting him with tokens
of great joy, to whom they gave much victuals for his iourny homeward, desiring
him to return with all convenient speed, and to bring with him more Castillis
(for so they term the Spaniards) to whom they promised food sufficient,
affirming ye to that end they had sown that year more grain then in any
years before. At this time did the Friar and soldiers aforesaid proceed in
their former determination, and concluded upon their return to ye province from
whence they came, to who^ also Gregory Hernandes (who had been in all the
former iourny) joined himself. These thus departed, ye captein with the 8
soldiers proceeded in their begun journey up by ye north river, and having
travailed about 60 leagues toward the province of the Quires aforesaid, being
within 12 leagues of the east part thereof, they found a people called the
Hubates, Hubates.
who received them with peace, and gave the^ much victuals, informing them
also of very rich mines which they found, whereout they got good and
glistering metal, and therewith returned to the town from whence they came.
This province contained by estimation about 25000 souls, all very well
apparelled in mantels of cotton painted, and and chamois very well dressed: they
have many groves of pines and cedars, and their houses are of 4 or 5 stories
height. Here they had notice of another people, which was about one days
iourny thence, consisting of above 40000 souls, in which place when they came,
the inhabitants would give the^ no food, nor admit them into their towns: for
which cause, as also because of the danger wherein they were, as also ye some of
the soldiers were not well at ease, and themselves very few, they departed into
the cu^tries of the Christians in July 1583. being guided by an Indian that
went with the^, who led them another way then they went forth by, along a river
called of Kine, in respect of the great numbers of kine ye feed all along the
banks thereof, by the which they traueiled for the space of 120 leagues, still
meeting with store of the said cattle.

From hence they went forward to ye river of Conchos by which they entered, and
thence to ye vale of S. Bartlemew, from whence they first entered into their
discovery. Thither they heard ye friar Bernardine and his company were safly
come many days before, and were from thence gone to the town of Guadiaua. In
this town did Antony of Espeio deliver ye certain informatio^ of all yt is
aforesaid, which presently he sent to ye Conde of Corunna viceroy of ye said
kingdom, who sent the same to his majesty and the council of the Indians, to
the end they might take such order as they thought best, which they have very
carefully performed.

Let it please our Lord to further this business in such wise, yt such numbers
of souls redeemed by his blood, may through his mercy be delivered from ye
thraldom of satan: whose good wits (wherein so far as by those yt have dealt
with the^ may be gathered, they do far exceed those of Mexico and Peru) as it is
supposed may soon be brought very readily to embrace ye evangelical law, and
to abandon such iddlatry as now ye most of the^ do live in. Which God bring to
pass, as full well he can, for his glory and the increase of Christian faith.

FINIS.

