A CATHOLIC and Ecclesiastical exposition of the holy Gospel after S. JOHN.

Gathered out of all the singular and approved Deuines (which the Lord has
given unto his Church) by Augustine Marlorate.

And translated out of Latin into English by Thomas Timme Minister.

Seen and allowed according to the order appointed.

Imprinted at London by Thomas Marshe.

Anno Domini. 1575.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Lord Thomas Earl of Sussex, Vicount Fitzwalter, Lord
of Egremont, and of Burnell, one of the Queens Majesty's Honorable privy
Counsel, and Lord high Chamberlayne of her house, of the noble order of the
Garter Knight, Justice of Oyer of the Forests, Parkes, VVarraynes, and Chases
from Trent Southvvarde, and Captain of the Gentlemen Pentioners: And to the
right honorable Lady his wife, increase of honor and true knowledge, in Christ
Jesus.
THE GREAT Profit which the Christian mind is to receive by reading this
Book, was the cause why I took the pains to Translate it out of Latin into
the English tongue: and the Recommending thereof the more diligently to have it
read, was the occasion which moved me to Dedicate my part therein to your
Honors. For what English man is there which will not think it a Book most
worthy the reading, which he sees warranted by your Names? The honorable and
general report whereof hartneth me to present it unto you: wherein ye shall
find the deep and divine Evangelist Saint John: the marrow of all
Commentaries upon him, under the name of Marlorates Collection: last, and
least, my faithful travel to turn them both to the use of my Country. The
thing I know your Honors will like well, because, as I hear, you can skilfully
judge, so I doubt not but you have made your choice what to read, which so
much bruteth the credit of your ability, found out by effect. As for my
labor, may it please your Honors to like it, as coming from one, which caught
with the commendation of your Learning and Wisdom generally noyzed, could not
but offer my self to you, as the wondering Queen of Saba could not rest till
she had seen Salomons person, of whose wisdom she had hard so much. And
withal I thought it good in offering my labor to your Honors, to join you
both together, thinking with my self that it must needs follow, that such
skill and judgment being in so Honorable a man, must needs by society of
match work like effect in so honorable a Mate. Wherefore not to trouble your
Honors with longer speech, I take my leave, Recommending my poor Pains to
your Honors protection, the recompense whereof you shall receive in your
reading of the book, whose fruit will bring, by Gods grace, health to your
souls, and continuance of your Honor.

Your Honors most humble, Thomas Timme.

A CATHOLIC AND ECCLESIASTICAL EXPOsition of the holy Gospel after S. JHON.
The Argument.
ALthough the word of GOD depends or hangs not upon the authority of men,
yet notwithstanding, 1. John. 4.
as it is profitable to prove the spirits whether they be of GOD, or no: So it
is necessary that they which take upon them the office of teaching in the
Church, do keep their authority in the same, to the end the testimony
which they bring concerning the truth, may more firmly abide with the
faithful. But truly this Gospel which John brings, is nothing else, than a
testimony of Christ Jesus: that is to say, that Christ is the son of God,
the life of men, the light of the world, the bread of life which came down
from heaven, the resurrection, the way, the truth, and the life, the good
Shephearde of the sheep, and to be short, the only savior of the world. It
is convenient therefore that we know who this was which so bears witness
of him which was conuersaunt among men, having the show of a servant, Philip.
2.
being in the similytude of men, and found in his apparel as a man, being
tempted in all things as we are, and yet without sin. This one witness is
to be credited of us even as well as a thousand, Heb. 4.
because he was one that writ these things to the edefying of the Church, and
for the common profit of all men, not by the common fame and report of other
men, but by that which is most sure and infallible, namely by that which he
heard and saw himself, even as he himself speaks of himself in the end
of this history saying: John. 19.
He which savve, bare witness, and his witness is true, and he knovveth
that he speaks truth, that ye might believe. And in an other place he says:
That which was from the beginning which we have heard, which we have
seen, which we have looked upon, and our hands have handeled of the word of
life: we show unto you. For this writer of the sacred History, 1. John. 1.
or Gospel was in the time of Christ, being the brother of the Apostle James,
borne in Galilee and the son of Zebede, and Solomon, as many think: Of whose
calling to the office of an Apostle, S. Matthew in the.iiij. Chapter makes
mention, aptly therefore he calls this history the Gospel, for he does more
largely and plainly set forth the divinity of Christ, and the mystery of our
redemption, than the other Evangelists. The which thing being forseene by our
Lord and Savior Christ, called this our Evangelist, and his brother also, the
son of Thunder, or as Mark has, (...). Furthermore the other three
Evangelists are very large insetting forth the life and death of Christ, but
our Evangelist shortly touching those things, stands more upon that
doctrine, by the which both the office of christ and also the power of his
death and resurrection is explicated. And to be short, all of them seking to
set forth Christ, the first three namely Matthew, Mark, and Luke, do set before
us (If I may so speak) the body, but John the soul. Insomuch, that this
Gospel may truly be called the key which opens the door to come to the
understanding of the other three. For who soever shall attain to the knowledge
of Gods power, the which is here cunningly expressed, he at the length shall
read with profit that which the other Evangelists have written as concerning
the redeemer. Neither was it done without the singular counsel of the holy
Ghost, that the Gospel written by Matthew, Mark, and Luke, should be
published and set forth in the world, before that which was written by John:
for the weak ears of the faithful were not capeable of so great thunder.
Therefore it was convenient that the Incarnation of Christ should first of all
be set forth, his Nativity described, and how according to the scriptures he
was borne of the seed of Abraham, of the tribe of Judah, and of the stock of
David, by what documents he proved him self to be the true Messiah, how
according to the scriptures he suffered, and was buried, and rose again the
third day, and showed himself alive again to his Disciples, after that
ascending into the heavens, that so faith increasing by little and little, there
might be a way made to receive the more hie documents of the divinity of
Christ. But there be many that think that John was specially led to wirte to
this end and purpose, namely that he might defend the divinity of Christ,
against the wicked blasphemies of Ebion, Cerinthus, and Carpocrates. But what
soever occasion he had then to write, there is notwithstanding no doubt, but
that GOD had a farther regard to his Church. He did therefore so guide the
pen of the Evangelist to write, that the parts being divided amongst them, he
might bring the whole body to a perfect work. And whereas they have placed
John in the fourth seat, it was done upon the consideration of the time in the
which he wrote, namely when he was in exile, or when he was called back
again (as some affirm) from the death of Domitian.

A CATHOLIC EXPOSItion upon the Gospel of Saint JOHN.
The first Chapter.
IN the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and God was the
Word.

Jn the beginning was the word. CHR. ALL THE other Evangelists beginning at
the incarnation, John, pretermittyng the Conception, Nativity, Education, and
growing of christ, sets before us even at the first, his eternal generation,
saying: In the beginning was the word. B. For to the end he might express
the divinity of the Lord Jesus, he called him in his Epistle also, the word
of life which was from the beginning. 1. Ihon. 1
C. And by this exordium or preface he does declare the eternal divinity of
Christ, to the end we may know that God is eternal, which was made manifest in
the flesh. 1. Timo. 3
But this is the purpose of the Evangelist, to show that the restoring of
mankind to the favor of GOD, and to everlasting righteousness, must needs
be brought to pass by the son of God: seeing by his power all things were
created, as well in heaven as in earth, both things visible and invisible,
whether they be majesty or Lordeshippe, either rule or power, seeing he alone
breaths life and strength into all creatures, and continues them in their
estate: Collos. 1
and specially in man himself he has made a singular show and proof both
of his power, and also of his grace: insomuch that although Adam fell, and
transgressed, yet for all that he ceased not to be loving, liberal, and
merciful unto his posterity.

R. And this is the purpose of the Evangelist until he comes to these words
contained in the sixth verse: There was a man sent of GOD. etc. In the which he
does first of all teach the divinity of Christ, by the which all things are
created: and then he sets before us his humanity, the which to the
faithful is the way of recreation or creating again. For it does very well
agree, that they which are created by Christ, should also by him be created
again. C. But whereas he calls the son of GOD, the word, this seems to
be the true and simple cause, namely, for that first of all he is the
eternal wisdom and will of God: secondly, the very express Image of his
purpose and counsel.

For as the word is said to be the Caracter or declaration of the mind in
men, even so, this is not without cause also attributed unto GOD, that he
should be said to express himself by his word. A. Therefore whether ye
call the word Logon in Greek, or as Erasmus has, Sermonem, beware lest you
think that his proper essence is truly, as it is in it self, expressed by
this appellation. M. For it is a Metaphorical speech, which being applied to
our capacity and understanding, may describe unto us some shadow of that
thing, of the which he minds here to speak. For it is taken of the
similitude of our mind, the which, although it rules the whole man, yet
notwithstanding it is invisible and unknown, except the purpose and counsel,
which it has conceived, be bewrayed and made manifest unto others by word,
by which in deed a certain Image of our mind is set before others to
behold: Even so God also, which is that omnipotent power, the creator and
preserver of al things (who for that he perceth all things, is called of the
Greeks, (...) (theo^) is compared (so far as that incomprehensible nature of
the divine Majesty may be shadowed) to the mind, by which all this world
is governed, and the Lord Christ his only begotten son, is compared to the
word, because by him the knowledge of God is revealed to mortal men.

Colos. 1.
So Paul calls Christ the Image of the invisible God. So Christ him self
said: John. 14.
Philip, he which sees me, sees my Father also. And again: No man comes
to my Father (that is to say, to the knowledge and fellowship of the Father)
but by me. John. 11.
Also it is said: No man has seen God at any time. The son which is in the
bosom of the Father, has showed him unto us. C. Therefore, as God did
manifest him self, in saving the world by this word: even so he had the same
in his will and purpose at the first: that there might be a double relation:
the first to God, the second to men.

A. Lest any man should with Seruetus, imagine, that this eternal word had his
beginning, when it was pronounced and put forth, in the creation of the
world. As though in deed it were not before that time, that his power was
known by the eternal work. But our Evangelist teaches here another manner of
matter, not assigning to the word any beginning of time, but saying that it
was from the beginning, he goes beyond all Ages and times. For he says: In
the beginning was the word. R. In what beginning? Either we must simplye
understand (In principio) or in the beginning, to be that beginning which the
Latins call Inprimis, or at the first, either without the preposition (In) as
Principio, or Primum. and so to have it limited and comprehended in time: Or
else to say, In the beginning, that is to say, The word is without the
compass of time, incomprehensible, and unspeakable, and so the word was with
that beginning in the which GOD said, Fiat lux, Let there be light. and.

Howbeit he was never without being, Gene. 1
there was never any time in the which he was not.

For he is the brightness of the glory of his Father, Hebr. 1.
and the express Image of his substance. He was never absent from the Father,
nor never out of his sight. For thus he says in Solomon. Prou. 8.
The Lord has possessed me in the beginning of his way: I was before his
work of old, I was set up from everlasting, from the beginning, and before
the earth B. In the which place Solomon by the name of wisdom, means the
power of God: For in that Chapter by a figure called Prosopopoeia, he brings
in wisdom speaking of her self, how all things were made by her, as is
there to be seen at large.

Our Evangelist John in this place, therefore speaks more profoundly then
Moses does in his Genesis the first Chapter: For he says not, In the
beginning God made the word, Gene. 1
as Moses says: In the beginning God made Heaven and Earth: But he says: In
the beginning was the word: That we might understand the same to be from
everlasting, to be even already in the beginning of things, and not to have
his beginning then. By this word he leads us beyond the beginning of all
things, even to the Eternity it self, (to the which notwithstanding, the
cogitacion of our mind can never attain) not that we should curiouslye
search for the same, but that we should believe and adore the Eternitye of
the word, least we might think as certain Heretics do, that the same
began first to be at the beginning of the Creation of all Creatures, or
else when he was borne of the Virgin Marye.

And therefore he him self says, I am Alpha, and Omega, the first and the
last.

Reave. 1.
A. And in another place he says, Verylye, verylye, I say unto you, before
Abraham was, I am. The which thing the Apostle also confirms with these
words, John. 8
Jesus Christ, yesterdaye and to day, the same also is for ever.

Heb. 13.
And the word was with GOD. M. Because the Evangelist had said: In the
beginning was the word, (that is to say, before the world was, before any
thing was made, when things were now ready to have their beginning, yea,
before all these things was the word) it followed that he should show where
it was. It could be in no place nor in no time, because as yet there was
neither place nor time. Where was it then? nay where could it be? The
Apostle answers and says, It was with God. Truly it could be no where
else: But again, it may here be demanded where God was, when as nothing was
created? Hear we must stay. For GOD could be in no place, neither can he
be at this time, seeing he is infinite, neither can the heaven of heavens
comprehend him, as Solomon says. 1. King. 8.
John therefore puts a difference between this word and all other things
created, and does also attribute unto him, a distinct substance from the
father. For the Evangelist should have absurdelye said that he had been
always with GOD, except he had had a certain proper subsisting in God.

Therefore this place is of great force to confute the error of Sabellius,
because he shows that the son does differ from the father. Wherefore
although men ought to speak soberlye and modestlye of so great mysteries and
secret things yet notwithstanding, the aunsient writers of the Church are
worthy to be excused, who, when they could no otherwise defend the true and
sincere doctrine, against the double and deceytfull words of Heritiques, were
constrained to devise and invent certain words, the which notwithstanding
should sound or signify no other thing than that which was already put down
in the sacred Scriptures. They said that there were three Hypostases or
persons in one simple essence of God, understanding by the name of persons,
several properties in GOD, which offer themselves to our minds to be seen.
The which separation, Math. 28
Christ also confirms in these words, Go ye forth and teach all nations,
baptizing them in the name of the Father, of the Son, and of the holy Ghost.
And Saint John, 1. John. 5
in his Epistle says, There are three which bear witness in heaven, the
Father, the Word, and the holy Ghost, and these three are one. M. Moreover
whereas Christ is said to be borne of the Father, and coming out from the
Father to come into the world, it is not so to be understood, that he being
borne of the Father, and come from the Father, was separated from him, that
this which John says, And the word was with GOD, might be understood of
some time when he was not the Son of the Father, and when that he was come
from the Father, he was no more with the Father: GOD forbid. It fares so
among us which are mortal men: But it goes not so with GOD and his word. For
the word of GOD neither in being borne, nor in going forth is separated from
GOD the Father, even as neither the brightness from the sun, nor the heat
from the fire, by going forth is separated, nor the counsel of the heart is
separated from the wise man, in bringing the same to a work, even as the
Apostle in diverse places witnesses saying: Ehe. 1
Blessed be GOD the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which has blessed us in
all manner spiritual blessing, in heavenly things by Christ: according as he
had chosen us in him, before the foundation of the world. Therefore we are
chosen of God, before the beginning of the world. But how? In Christ (says
he) that is to say, by the word and purpose of God, which was with him in ye
beginning. And in another place who has saved us, and called us with an holy
calling, not according to our works, but according to his own purpose and
grace which was given us in Christ Jesus before the world began: but is now
made manifest by the appearing of our Savior Jesus Christ. 2. Tim. 1
Therefore the grace of God is given unto us, before the world was made, when
as in deed we were not. But how? In that purpose and word of GOD, Christ,
which was with God in the beginning. The like words we have almost in his
Epistle to Tytus, where he says, that eternal life was promised before the
beginning of the world, and that by the word of God, which is manifested by
the preaching of the Gospel.

And God was the Word. R. The Son is not only with God the father, but he is
God also, for the father and the son are two persons, but one God, and one
essence. M. And this is gathered by the two premises or propositions going
before, namelye where he said, that this word was in the beginning, and that
it was with GOD: so that this sentence is now as it were the conclusion. For
whatsoever was not made in the beginning, but had his being before, and was
also with God, the same is God. But Christ the word of God was in the
beginning with GOD, therefore he is God. For how should he not be GOD, which
is the wisdom of God, the word of God, the virtue, the power of God, and the
Son of God? How should he not be God, which is everlasting, having neither
beginning nor end of days? How should he not be God, which was always with
God, and shall be for ever? C. Least any man therefore should remain
scrupulous or doubtful of the divine essence of God, Saint John plainly
affirms that he is God. Now seeing there is one God, it follows that Christ
is one essence with the father, and yet notwithstanding that they differ in
something. R. For the Father imprinteth the Image. The son is the Image
imprinted or expressed. The father shines, and the word is the very same
brightness which does shine. M. Wherefore we must not fear lest the
Evangelist shall appoint a new God unto us, against the law of God, in the
which it is said, Psalm. 81
Thou shall have no new God. He cannot be God which is not equal with God in
sempiternity. It is written: There is no God before me, neither is there any
after me. If this word be sprung forth after God, it cannot be God. But the
Evangelist takes away this fear from us, seeing he says not: And that word
was made God, But the word was God. Not because afterward it ceased to be
God. God forbid. How had that been God, which could afterward cease to be
God? But to the end he might express the everlasting divinity of the word
of God, the which has no beginning, he said, and God was the word: That is
to say, In the beginning, before the world was made, before all times, this
word was God. A. But this confession of Christian faith by occasion, was the
cause of many persecutions. For when the world could not attain to know by
carnal wisdom, how God would be manifested in the flesh, it persecuted the
Apostles and Martires of Christ to the death, because they seemed to affirm
the plurality of Gods, when as they with great constancy of mind affirmed
that to be true, which this our Evangelist has here put down by plain
words, namely, God is the word. But truly John does not affirm that God is
with God.

2. The same was in the beginning with God.

M. The Evangelist repeateth those things which he spoke even now, but so that
he joins together those things which were spoken severally. For these two
being joined together, In the beginning was the word: And the word was with
God: do attribute unto the word an undoubted Godheade. And it is very well
that they are repeated jointly, and together, which in deed are joined
together, least occassion should be given to the malicious, to gather and say
that the word was in the beginning, but not by and by coeternall, or of like
eternitye with God, which was somewhat before the word. Therefore he repeateth
this, that the same was in the beginning with GOD, ascribing unto him the like
sempiternitie with GOD. C. And so those two former parts are gathered by him
into a short conclusion, that he was always and that with God: to the end we
might understand the beginning to be before all time. Now we see with how
few words (notwithstanding circumspectly and Godly) the Evangelist has
handled the mystery of the divinity: the which thing if the Christians of old
time would have followed, the churches had not been so miserably and
daungerouslye divided, neither should they have given occasion to the subtle
and busy adversaries, 1. Cor. 2
to contaminate and obscure the divine majesty with their impure inventions. We
shall not come into the wholesome knowledge of the divinity, but by the means
of the mediator, the man Christ Jesus. Wherefore it shall be good to learn with
Saint Paul to know Christ Jesus, and the same crucified, that thereby we may
humble ourselves, and may diligently prosecute the mortification of our
flesh according to our promise. Furthermore we are here admonished not to
fainte, because we see in this our time also many wicked sects to be sprung
up: they are the darts of Satan against the wholesome truth of the gospel,
the which is a manifest sign that the truth is amongst us, for otherwise he
would not stir.

3. All things were made by it, and without it was made nothing that was made.

Al things were made by it C. After he has affirmed the word to be God, and
declared his eternal essence, now he proves his deuinitie by his works, B.
showing by what means he did insinuate, and secretly reveal himself to the
world. First of all he did it by creation: for by him all things were made,
and without him there was nothing made that is made: secondely both by the
conservation and deed: for by his blessing al things live. M. First of all
therefore the Evangelist propounds the work of ye creation, and then he
passes to the work of redemption. And he puts the work of creation in a
most brief compendium of all things, the which Moses more largely has
described. All things (says he) Heaven, Earth, Sea, and all things else
contained in them were made by him, that is to say, Heb. 1. Collos. 1.
by Christ the word of God. So says the Apostle: By whom he made the
Heavens also. Saint John therefore by these words does bring a light unto that
which Moses has written, to the end we might understand that those things
which are written in the first of Genesis, as concerning the works of
creation, do set forth unto us the deuinity of Christ. R. For Moses even in
the beginning of Genesis affirms that God made all things by his word
(which is the only begotten son of God Christ our Lord) saying: Genesis 1.
And God said, Let there be light, and there was light. And afterward he
says: Again GOD said, Let there be a Firmament. Let the waters be gathered.
etc. Let us make man after our own Image. Whereby we see that to be true
which the Prophet sings in his Psalm: Psalm. 33.
By the word of the Lord the heavens were made: and all the powers of them by
the breath of his mouth. Psalm. 148.
And in another place he says: He spoke the word and they were made: he
commanded and they were created. Colos. 1
And the Apostle Paul says: All things were made by him, and for him: and
he is before all things, and in him all things consist. C. Therefore the
Evangelist goes about here to show that the word of God had his eternal
action even in the beginning of the creation of the world. For seeing that he
was incomprehensible at the first in his essence, his power was then openly
known, and made manifest by the effect.

M. But where as the Evangelist says in the pretertence, or time past, that
all things were made by it, we must not thereby gather, that after the world
was created, and all things therein contained, GOD does make nothing any more
by his word, but does suffer all things to be done by chaunse, and is as it
werein the mean time idle or a sleep: God forbid. For those things which
he made by his word, he governs and preserves with his everlasting
providence: as testifies our Savior Christ him self, John. 5
saying, My Father works hitherto, and I work. And the Apostle Paul: 1.
Cor. 12 Genesis 2
Which works all in all. For in that he is said to rest the Seventh day
from all his work, it is no otherwise to be understood, than that he ceased
from the creation of the Heaven and Earth, which we see, not that he left of
to govern the same, and to preserve it. For he bears up all things by his
mighty word. Heb. 1
The which thing ought to bring no small consolation to the minds of the
Godly. For so they learn to rest and stay them selves on Gods providence,
without the which not so much as one here of their head can perish. Luke. 21
R. For he which feels by faith, that all things depend upon God, he
believes also that he falls into the hands of God, when he forsakes al
things, and enters into death. A. We are also here admonished that their
opinion is perverse and wicked, which think this world to be everlasting. We
learn hereby also that the Son of God was neither made nor created, seeing
by him all things were made as says our Evangelist.

And without it was made nothing that was made. R. This is an exposition of the
sentence going before: For all things were so made by the word, that without
the same there was no creature made. Now if all things were made by the word,
it follows then that the word was not made. Wherefore the word is God, and
not a creature as Arrian dreameth.

And because Satan goes very much about to derrogate the glory of Christ, it
seemed good to the Evangelist, preciselye to affirm, that of all things that
were created, none ought to be excepted. A. For God created all things by his
son christ. M. But we must not think that as one Idle he made all things by
his word, as by his servant, and therevppon to gather that Christ is less
then the Father: God forbid. For he made al things by his word, not as by a
servant, but as it were by his wisdom and power. Neither must we think that
the Father being unable of him self to make and create, did set his son to
finishe this work: God fobid. For although it be written, that he made all
things by his word, that is to say, by his only begotten son, yet the
Father is not thereby excluded from the work, nor made unable, but is joined to
the son, both in omnipotencye, in glory, and in all other things.

Therefore this place admonishes us, that so often as we behold the heaven,
the earth, the Sea, and al things in them contained, we should consider the
omnipotencye of God in them, waying in our minds that all these things were
made without any labor, without any pain, without any difficultye, without
any other helps: by the word only.

By this consideration, the faithful may very much comfort them selves, and may
arm their minds with this faith against all the enemies of God: For when they
consider the singular omnipotencye of God in this, that by the power of his
word he made all things, they are taught that there is nothing hard or
impossible unto God, to be done, which with his word only can make all things.

But we must take heed that we think not those things only which are
profitable and seem in our judgment to be the best, to be made of GOD by
Christ, and not the other also which we have in small reputacion, or think to
be hurtful. AVG. He made all things from the Angel to the worm that
crepeth on the ground. M. There be many things in the Creatures of God, of
the which we are ignorant, and for that cause to the unskillful they seem to
be good for nothing. There be many things which are judged of us to be
hurtful, as Serpents, Woolues, and such kind of wild Beasts, and
therefore they are thought not to be made of God. But we must thus think, that
God has created nothing without great wisdom, and special consideration. If
we be hurt with the Creatures, as with Beasts, with Water, with Fire, with
Winds, we must not blame the maker, but our sins, and the natural pride
which is in us, to tame and bring under the which, Flies, Lyce, Fleas,
Woormes, and such like were created. The which we may behold in Pharao,
Herod, and in others which were eaten with Lice and woormes. A. Therefore the
word of God is the aucthour of all things.

4. In it was life, and the life was the light of men.

Jn it was life. C. Hitherto the Evangelist has taught that all things were
made by the word: and now he attributes the conservation also of those
things which are created unto the same: as if he should say, that not
only his sudden power and virtue which by and by passed away, appeared in
the creation of the world: but also is evident to be seen in this that the
order of nature abides stable and firm. But this life whereof the Evangelist
speaks, may either be extended to those things that have not life (which
notwithstanding live after their manner, Trees have a kind of life which is
called, Vita vegetatiua.
although they want sense) or else it may be expounded of those things only
which have life. It makes no great matter to which we refer it: for the
simple sense and true meaning of the place is this, that the word of god was
not only the original of life to all creatures, that they might begin to be
that which as yet they were not, but also that it came to pass by his
quickening power, that they now continue in their estate. For except his
continual inspiration of life should uphold the world, it must needs come to
pass yt whatsoever has life, must needs decay and come to nothing. B.
According to the Psalmist. Psa. 104.
If thou hide thy face they are troubled: If thou take away their breath, they
dye, and are turned again to their dust. For he affirms that all life
depends upon the spirit, that is to say, upon the power of GOD, and upon
the word, by the which all things being made, consist and are preserved. C.
And that which Paul ascribes to God saying: In him we live, move, Acts. 17.
and have our being, Saint John affirms to be done by the benifite of the
word. It is GOD therefore which does quicken us, but by his eternal word. M.
This also pertains to the Divinity of Christ, that he is written of the
Evangelist to be the life, yea, and that which is more, to be the well of life,
Psalm. 36.
as also in the Psalm. For what things soever are made by him, have their life
from no other than from him. But no man ought to gather of the words of Saint
John, that the Son of God, after the Creation of the world, left of to be
the life. For those things which are in GOD are everlasting. The life which
is in Christ, is everlasting, not only that temporal life, which is in the
creatures of this world, but also that which shall be in the world to come,
the which life the elect have from him. Of the which Christ him self,
oftentimes speaks, saying: I am the bread of life, John. 6.
which came down from heaven: If any man eat of this bread, he shall live
for ever. Again: John. 11.
I am the resurrection and the life, he that believes in me, though he were
dead, yet shall he live. Also he says: I am the way, the truth, and the
life. John. 14.
In this sense also our Evangelist Saint John, calls him in his Epistle: 1.
John. 1.
The word of life. Therefore so many as are not made pertakers of the grace of
God in Christ, are deprived of the true and everlasting life. For without that
everlasting purpose and word of GOD, no man can have eternal life: the which
Saint John noted by these words in another place, saying: He that has the
Son of God, 1. Epist. 5
has life, and he that has not the Son of God, has not life.

Notwithstanding we must take heed, that we attribute not so the power of
quickening to the Son of GOD, that we take away the same from the Father. For
as the Father rayseth up the dead, and makes alive, John. 5.
even so the Son also quickens whom he will. And in another place S. John
says: 1. Epist. 1.
And the life was with the Father. And again: As the father has life in him
self, John. 5.
so has he given to the son to have life in him self. And yet
notwithstanding there are not two wells of life, even as there are not two
Creators, nor two Gods. The Father quickens all things by his word, even
by it he has made all things, does as make all things, and preserves them
being made.

And the life was the light of men. AVG. By the light men are lightened, but
Beasts are not lightened thereby, because they have not minds capeable of
reason and wisdom: but man which is made after the Image of God, has a
reasonable mind, by the which he can perceive and understand wisdom.

Therefore that life by which all things are made, is the light, and not of all
creatures, but of men only. M. So that the Evangelist means not that light,
by this word light, which pertains to the Son, and does lighten the eyes
of our body, but he means that light, by the which the eyes of our mind are
illuminated to know God. And he makes mention of that part of life, by the
which men excel all other living Creatures: As if he should say, that not a
common kind of life was given unto men, but such a life as is joined with the
light of understanding.

And he separateth man from the number of all other creatures, because we
perceive better the power of God in us by sense, than we behold the same a
far of. So Saint Paul teaches that God is not to be sought a far of,
Acts. 17.
because he reuealeth him self inwardly in us.

After therefore the Evangelist had set before us the general consideration of
the grace of Christ, that he might bring men to a more near consideration
thereof, he shows what is specially given unto them: namelye, that they are
not in creation like unto brute Beasts: but are set in a more hye degree,
having a mind endued with reason and capeable of wisdom, that they being
endued with this wisdom, might be brought to the knowledge of God, the very
well of life: So says the Prophet David, Psalm. 36.
With thee is the well of life, and in thy light shall we see light.

5. And the light shines in darkness, and the darkness comprehended it not.

And the light shines in darkness. A. Here the Evangelist begins to note
men of ingratitude and blindness, because by their wickedness they reiecte
this light offered unto them. And that we may understand this thing, we must
note that the Evangelist first of al admonishes that the light, with the
which men were endued in the beginning, must not be judged, according to their
present state, because in this corrupted and defiled nature, the light is
turned into darkness. Notwithstanding, he therewith affirms that the light
of understanding is not clean put out: because in the obscure darkness of
man's mind, certain sparks of light as yet do spring up. M. The Evangelist
therefore excuses the Diuinitye and Majesty of Christ, when he says that the
same has ever shined unto mortal men, as a certain most evident and manifest
light: and he lays all the blame of the ignorance of GOD, on the blindness
of men. C. For in that he affirms the light to shine in darkness, that
pertayneth nothing at all to the praise of corrupt nature, but rather to the
taking away of the pretenced cloak of ignorance. M. For this light shines in
the world, and the minds of mortal men might by the same have been brought
to the knowledge of the living of God, had not their minds been overwhelmed
with darkness. For he calls here the blindness of men's minds,
unbelief, impietye, and the ignorance of GOD, darkness. For as the eyes
that are blind, can not comprehend the light, even so the minds that are
blinded, cannot comprehend the light of life. A. And as the light is present to
the blind man, the which notwithstanding is absent from his eyes: even so the
light of life is present to mortal men, the which notwithstanding their
minds being oppressed with darkness, can not attain. C. For since the time
that man was alienated and fallen from GOD, ignorance has so captiued his
mind, that what light so ever remains in the same, lies suffocated and
choked without effect. And this thing experience daily proves. For they which
are not borne again by the spirit of GOD, having some reason, stand for a
certain document, that man was not only made to breathe, but also to
understand.

But there are two special parts of the light, which remains as yet in the
corrupt nature of man. For there is naturallye ingrafted in all men a certain
sound seed of religion or godliness. Furthermore, a difference of good and
evil is engraven in their Consciences.

But what fruictes at the length come forth? surely that religion, and
Godliness, which does degenerate into a thousand monsterous supersticions,
and that conscience which does altogether pervert judgment, that it may
confound vice with virtue. To conclude, the natural reason which is in man,
does never direct men unto Christ.

But we must note that the Evangelist speaks only of natural gifts, and that
he does not as yet touch the grace of regeneration. For there are two distinct
virtues of the son of God: the first is that which appears in the making of
the world, and in the order of nature: the second appears in the renewing and
repairing of the decayed and defiled nature of man.

6. There was a man sent from God, whose name was John.

There was a man sent from GOD. C. Now the Evangelist begins to show how
the word of God was manifested in the flesh. For Christ did not only offer
and set him self before the eyes of men to be seen, but he would also be
known by the testimony and doctrine of John. Yea, GOD the father sent him
before to be a witness to his son Christ, to the end all men might the more
easily receive the salvation offered of him. R. Even as therefore the Lord
GOD, when he went about to make the world, he revealed him self out of the
profounde darckenesse, that is to say, out of nothing by the word: Even so when
he went about to restore the Faithful, and to repair his Church, he sent his
Son appearing outwardlye and in the sight of men: even as if he had been God
in no point, until at the length the glory of his Godhead more and more
appeared: for he was covered with the fragillitye of the flesh, and the shame
of the Cross, least at the first sight he should be known. The which thing
was foreshewed by Esaias, saying: Esaias. 53
He is despised and rejected of men, he is a man full of sorrows: and has
experience of infirmities: we hid as it were our faces from him, he was
despised, and we esteemed him not.

Therefore when Christ should come in the flesh, and covered with the shame
of the Cross, he did not amiss to send before his face a witness. For so also
the Lord foreshewed by Malachy that it should come to pass, saying: Mala. 3
Behold I send my Angel, and he shall prepare the way before thy face. This
was John the Baptist, which was sent of GOD, first that he might bear witness
of Christ, although his grace needs no testimony: for the truth is a
sufficient testimony of him, as he him self declares in the fifth Chapter
saying: John. 5
Ye sent to Ihon and he bare witness of the truth: But I receive not the
testimony of man: But I speak these things that ye might be safe. C. Therefore
this our witness was not ordained because of Christ, or for Christ's sake. AVG.
For, because the son of God, was so made man, that the godhead lay hid in
him, there was sent before a great and excellent man, by whose testimony he
might be found more than a man. And how could this man speak the truth of
God? He answers to that, and says: that he was sent of God. C. By the
which words the Evangelist does not confirm the calling of John, but does
only make mention of the same by the way. For this is not a sufficient
certainty or warraunt, when men that run of them selves, boast them selves
to be sent of GOD: but the Evangelist speaking hereafter somewhat more of this
witness, thought it sufficient in one word to show that he came not but by the
commandment of God: after that we shall see how he affirms God to be the
Aucthor of his ministry. Math. 1. Math. 3. Luke. 3.
M. And he begins this part very well of the forerunner Ihon, as also the
rest of the Eua^gelistes do. For from the time of John's baptime, that light
having taken upon it flesh, Luke. 2. Math. 2.
began to be revealed. And although at the time of his Nativity, certain
beams began to shine of that light (as we may see in the history of the
Shepeherds, of Simeon, of Anna, and of the wisemen) yet notwithstanding
whatsoever light had shined, it vanished away by and by again, and was almost
thirty years, even to the beginning of his preaching, obscured and darekened
again. For this testimony of John was reserved and kept even until the same
time, in the which Christ would reveal himself to the world, by the
preaching of the Gospel, and by the working of miracles, that he being the
forerunner of Christ, might prepare the way before him. The which thing John
the Baptist sufficiently declared by these words, saying: There stands one
in the midst of you whom ye know not. C. But if any man object that the
testimony of John is to weak being but a man, that Christ thereby should be
proved to be the son of God: we may quickelie answer, Answer.
that John the Baptist is not cited as a private witness, but because he was
endued with authority from God, he bare rather the person of an Angel than
of a man. Therefore he is not beautified or commended with the titles of his
own virtues, but with this one, that he was the Ambassador of the mighty
GOD. CHR. Judge therefore none of those things which are spoken by him to be
of man. For he spoke not those things which were his own, but the things
that belonged to him that sent him: and therefore he is called by the Prophet,
an Angel. For it is the office of an Angel to speak nothing of his own, but
that, for which he is sent.

C. But we must note that the same which is spoken of John, is required to be
in all the teachers of the Church, namelye, that they be called of God, that the
authority of teaching, may be founded on no other than on God him self.

For the Prophets speak against such, which run, being not sent of God.
Iere. 23. Romans 10.
They run (says he) and I sent them not Again it is said, How shall they
preach, except they be sent? And to be sent of God, is to do the
commandment of God.

Whose name was John. C. The name is here expressed, not only to discribe the
man, but also because, it was given to him, upon consideration of the matter
it self. M. For the very name does contain in it self the signification of
grace. And iustlye he obtained this name, which should be the foreronner, and
first preacher of the grace of God, which was offered to the world by Christ.
And therefore by Gods appointment by the Angel, he received this name before
he was borne, and that not without the wonderful admiration of his Parents.
Luke. 1.
C. But the Lord had respect to the office, to the which he ordained John, when
he commanded him to be so called by the Angel: that thereby all men might
know him to be a proclaimer of the divine grace of God.

7. The same came for a witness, to bear witness of the light, that al men
through him might believe.

The same came for a M. Now consequentlye he teaches to what purpose John was
sent of GOD: He came (says he) to testify. C. that he might prepare a Church
unto Christ: For he inuiting and calling all men unto Christ, does
sufficientlye declare that he came not for his own cause. But to know from
whence, to whom, and what time John came, that which is contained in the third
of Luke may serve. This our Evangelist, after he had said that he was sent of
GOD, adds this only which was more necessary, namelye to what purpose he
came being sent of God, namely, to bear witness.

M. The Prophets also which were before John came to witness, that is to
say, to bear witness of the incredulity, and impietye of the Israelites: but
this John came to testify of the light, Christ: that is to say, he came to
this end, that he might show the rising of this light, and might be the
foreronner, and setter forth of the same to the people of Israel. For him,
whom the Prophets foreshewed should come, John the Baptist pointed out with
the finger.

That al men through him might believe. M. He says not simply, That al men
might believe, but he adds, throw him, that is to say, that all men being
moved by the aucthority of John, and believing his testimonye, might know this
light, and embrace the same. It was necessary therefore that such a witness
should be sent, as the Israelites might give credit unto. For this cause he
was so endued with the grace of GOD, that he made all men to behold him.

He was, says our Savior Christ, (speaking of John: Ihon. 5 Math. 3 Math. 11
Mat. 1 Luke 1
) A burning and shyning light. For all Jerusalem went out to him: He neither
eat bread nor drank Wine: His meat was Locustes and wild Honye, his
apparel of Camelles here, and a Girdle of a Skin about his Loins. He was
endued with the spirit and power of Helias. He called all men with severity to
repentance, sparing neither the hie Priests, Scribes, Luke. 3
nor Pharisees, whom he called generation of Vipers: He dealt seuerelye with
Herod the King, Math. 14.
as we may read in Mathewe.

Therefore the testimony of John tends to this end, which he bears of
Christ, that we believe in him. Faith is that by the which we behold this
light, know the same and embrace it. By this grace was set forth to the
world, not only the testimonye which John bare concerning Christ, but also
the testimony of all the Apostles and Evangelists, both by voice and writing.
And therefore it is said in the end of this Gospel: These things are written
that ye might believe that Jesus is the son of god.

But what is the profit of this faith? The profit (says he) of this faith is,
that ye believing might have life through his name.

Moreover the grace of this light, 1. Tim. 2
must be set before all men, for God would have all men to be saved, and to
come to the knowledge of the the truth. Also it is sad, Luke. 3
Preach ye the Gospel to every creature. etc. B. Whereupon Saint John
Baptist Preached the Gospel to the Soldiers and Publicans.

8. He was not that light: but was sent to bear witness of the light.

He was not that light. B. By this new Preaching of the Kingdom of Heaven,
many thought that this John was the same light of the world, which was commonly
talked of, and the same word also, by which al things were made. But the
Evangelist says, he was not the same light. M. For we read that he had so
great aucthoritye a-among the Israelites, that they said among them selves: Is
not this Christ? Least therefore his exceeding brightness should obscure the
glory of Christ, Luke. 3
the Evangelist teaches that he was not the light. M. He was the light
truly, but not the same light, whereof it is here spoken, which is the light
of men, the well of all light, the word, and the Son of God. The Apostles
also are called the light of the world.

Math. 5
And Paul calls the believing in Christ, the light. Ye were sometimes (says
he) Darkness, but now are ye light in the Lord: Ephe. 5.
But they are so called in another manner of respect. C. For all the Godly are
called light in the Lord, because they being lightened with his spirit, do
not only see to them selves, but also do direct others by their example into
the way of salvation.

The Apostles also are specially called the light, because they prefer the
light of the Gospel, which drives away the darkness of the world. But the
Evangelist here entreats of the only and everlasting well of light. M. John
therefore was a light, but he was set on fire, and illuminated by this light.
For as the mountain in the morning before the Sun appears unto men, is
lightened with his beams, even so are all the Saints of God light in the
Lord, of whom they are illuminated.

R. Wherefore this place, puts a difference not only between Christ and
John, but also between Christ and all the Saints, Patriarks, Prophets,
Apostles, and Martyrs: For neither John, nor any other of all the Saints, were
the true light, but were only proclaimers, and setters forth of the true
light. M. Let us therefore hereby learn to esteem of the Saints, as they are
made and appointed of GOD, and no otherwise.

But was sent to bear witness of the light. A. John therefore repeateth this
again to show what men ought to judge of them, which being sent of God, preach
the word unto the world: Least we attribute any thing, of that unto them which
pertains only to the Son of God. M. For great is the wilful folly of the
world in this point. Either it rejects altogether the witnesses of Christ,
and despises them, or else it gives reverence and honors them above Christ.

The Jews at the first received John for the Messiah Christ him self, which
was not Christ: and yet they received not the testimony which he bare unto
Christ. Even so the Corinthians little or nothing at all regarded Paul, that
singular Preacher of the kingdom of Christ, but they made more of the false
Apostles, than appertayned to the Mynisters of of Christ, 1. Cor. 4
insomuch that the Apostle was feign to show them what they ought to think of
the Ministers of Christ, and what not: And we our selves have had experience,
what great estimation the world has had, and yet has of dead Saints, and of
the Bishops of Rome and others, and how little it regards the true Ministers
of Christ.

9. He was the true light, lightening every man that comes into the world.

He was the true light. C. The true light is not here opposed or compared to
the false light, but the Evangelist here goes about to put a difference
between our savior Christ and al other, least that any man should think that
he is even the same light, and no better than ye which angels and men are said
to be.

But this is the difference, that whatsoever is bright and shining in Heaven
and in earth, it borrows his brightness from another: But Christ is light of
him self, and shining by him self, and lightening with his brightness the
whole world: insomuche that there is no other cause or Original of
brightness, but he. He called therefore that, the true light, to whose
nature it is proper to shine.

M. Therefore this is the first note by the which Christ is discerned from
John, and from all other Apostles.

For John and the Apostles were light (as it is said before) but not the true
light, that is to say, not that natural light, which shines of it self, and
which takes no force to shine of any other. Such a one is Christ, but John
and the Apostles not so: for if they had not been illuminated by this light,
they had been altogether darckenesse.

Lightning every one that comes. Here he puts the other note of true
light, by the which he is discerned from the other Saints, being lightened.

Many are (truly) lightened by John and the Apostles of Christ, as it were by
the instruments and Ministers of the light: but all men are not simplye
lightened by them. But this place was wont to be expounded two manner of ways.
For some restrain and refer unto them an universal note, which are
regenerated by the spirit of God, and are made pertakers of the quickening
light: and so the meaning of this place to be, that none is illuminated but by
him, even as if there be in the City one Schoolemaister which has a School,
he shall be called the Schoolemayster of the whole City, although few come
unto the School. But this other sense and meaning seems to be more nere and
agreeing to the purpose of the Evangelist, namelye that certain beams are
diffunded and powered from this light into all mankind: as it was also said at
the first. For we know that men have this specially above all other
creatures, namelye that they are endued with reason and understanding, that
they bear and have in their conscience the difference between that which is
right and false. There is none therefore, to whom some sense and feeling of
the eternal light comes not.

But because Fanaticall men rashelye taking this place do wrest the same, that
they might thereby gather that the grace of lightning is offered to all men
alike: Let us note that the Evangelist only here entreats of the common
light of of Nature, which never grows unto faith. For no man can pearce or
atcheeue to the kindome of GOD, no not with all the industry and promptness
of his mind: it is only the spirit of Christ which opens the gate of
heaven to the elect. 2 Thessalonians. 3. Math. 20.
A. Therefore if any do object that many abide in blindness which are not
lightened by Christ, (because faith pertains not to all men, and few be
chosen) The answer is ready, namely this, Aunsvvere.
M. That all men are lightened by this light, with the light which men call the
light of nature, the which in deed is reason and the force of understanding,
by the which man differs from brute beasts. And so all men are lightened
from Adam by Christ, by the word, by the light of men, and the life, unto the
extreme end of mortal men. C. But let us note that the light of reason which
God had given to men was so obscured by sin, that scarce small sparks arise,
even in thick darcknesse, which also by and by are choked.

Wherefore we may hereby learn that without Christ, all things are darcke,
and whatsoever light there is in men, the same commends and sets forth
the Diuinitye of Christ.

10. He was in the world, and the world was made by him, and the world knew
him not.

M. He said before that Christ the true light does illuminate every man, and
least it should be only understood of those which were in the world after
his Incarnation, and are now also, he added these words, Coming into the
world, that we might also be constrained to understand it of those which were
borne into this world, before the natiuitye of Christ. And therefore here very
aptlye he adds saying, He was in the world, that is to say, from the
first beginning of mankind, from the first creation, this light was in the
world lightening every man. C. Because before Christ was made manifest in the
flesh, he declared his power every where, Therefore those daily effects
should have corrected the wickedness of men.

But such was the ingratitude of men and wilful blindness, that the cause of
the light which they enjoyed was unknown to them: For what can be more
absurd than to draw out of a flowing river, water, and not to remember the
spring, from whence the river flows? Therefore in that the world knew not
Christ before he was made manifest in the flesh, there is no just excuse of
ignorance to be found, for this comes to pass, by their sluggishnesse, and
blind dullness, which had him always present with them in power. M. John
therefore now expounds that which he said before in these words: The light
shined in darckenesse, and the darckenesse comprehended it not. Otherwise this
word (comprehended) might be taken as well for the use, as for the knowledge of
this light. The use of this light was in darcknesse, but the knowledge not so.
For this light always shined in darckenesse, but the darckenesse comprehended
it not, (that is to say) it knew it not.

By this place truly all flesh is condemned, that no mortal man could know
this light of the word, and of the power of GOD, being so evident to be seen
with the eyes of the mind.

1. Cor. 1
For the world by his wisdom, in wisdom knew not GOD: Notwithstanding, we
must not think that no man knew Christ before he was borne in the flesh:
John. 8
For Christ himself says, Abraham desired to see my day, and saw it, and
reioysed. But no man knew him, but by a singular revelation, and special
lightning of the mind. Wherefore it is not said, and no man knew him, but,
the world knew him not, that he might condemn the wisdom of the world, and
all the judgment of flesh.

11. He came into his own and his own received him not.

R. How is Christ said to come, when as he was before in the world? He came,
Aunsvvere.
that is to say, he was made man, and showed himself to be a visible man. M.
For the Evangelist comes to the dispensing of our salvation, and to the same
declaration of the word of GOD, which was made by the Incarnation, of the which
he began to entreat, when he said: There was a man sent of GOD whose name
was John.

He came into his own. C. C. This place is diuersely expounded, Some think
that the Evangelist speaks generally of the whole world. For there is no
part of the world, which the son of GOD does not rightlye challenge to him
self for his own. Therefore the sense and meaning according to their opinion,
is, when Christ descended into the world, he went not out of his own bounds,
because all mankind is his proper inheritance. But their opinion is better to
be liked, which refer it to the Jews only: for there is in these words
contained a secret comparison, by the which the Evangelist does the more
Exaggerate the ingratitude of men.

The son of GOD in one nation chose him out a place to dwell in, and when he
came thither, he was rejected. Hereby therefore it evidently appears how
wicked the blindness of man is. M. They were the people of God, a chosen
people out of all nations, to this people he came by incarnation, who other
wise by his deuinitie is and has been always in the world, and was never
from the Father. To this people he was promised a Messiah of the seed of
Abraham, and David, and was made a Minister of the circumcision for the truth
of God, Romans 15
to confirm the promises made unto the Fathers. R. And he was not only
rejected of them, but also Crucified and put to death.

The knowledge of Christ is less among none, than among the wise and mighty
men of this world. For Christ is to the Mighty and Wise of this world,
foolishness, and a stone to stumble at.

M. But why does the Evangelist urge this same so often, that Christ was not
received? For (says he) The darkness comprehended him not: The world knew
him not: His own received him not: Surely he does it, least any man should
say: Thou do preach unto us, a great light which is come already into ye
world: but why came he so late? why did he neglect the first world? He
answers, he came not to late, but always shyned, he was always in the
world, but the world knew him not.

And his also, to whom by great benefits he had joined him self, to whom he
came with singular grace and favor, to whom he should have been best known,
received him not: So thick truly and palpable are the darkness every
where of this world.

He does also take away that stumbling block, by the which many were moved,
for that he wrappeth the Jews in the same darcknesse that the world was in.
So says Paul: Blindness fell upon Israel. To the same effect pertayneth that
complaint of God by the mouth of Esaias, Romans 11
saying: The Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his Masters Cribbe: but
Israel has not known me. Esaias. 1


For although he has the rule of the whole world, yet notwithstanding he
makes him self the peculiar Lord of Israel, whom he had chosen to be as it
were his dear Sheepefolde. This place also serves to make us fear, that we
be not careless of Christ, when he is revealed and Preached. For we are not
therefore just, because we hear the word, and because Christ comes: but
because we believe and work according to the measure of faith.

A. The Jews had no regard to the Law and the Prophets, and therefore they
stumbled and fell at the Stone of offense: and were rejected for their
unbelief. M. Furthermore it should not seem strange to any man, if the
sons of GOD which are in Christ, be not received of this world, seeing that
light was received, neither before nor after the incarnation, neither of the
Gentiles, 1. Ihon. 3.4
nor of the Jews. The world receives that which is his own.

12. But as many as received him, to them he gave power to be the sons of
God, even to them that believe in his name.

But as many as received him. Therefore that which is spoken before: And his own
received him not. Is not so to be understood that none of all the Jews received
Christ (for many received him) but because he was not received by a general
consent: Even as if thou should say: The Gospel came into England, and
England received it not: How can England be said not to receive the Gospel,
seeing there are so many Christian Englishmen that receive the same? Surely it
may be truly said, not to receive it, because it does not receive it, with a
and general commen consent, all men agreeing to the same.

R. To receive Christ (as John interprets the same) is to believe in the name
of Christ. And the name of Christ, is wisdom, righteousness, sanctification
and redemption If any man therefore give him self to the righteousness of
Christ, or to his redemption, 1. Cor. 1
sins shall not remain, death shall vanishe away, and Hell fire shall be
quenshed. For men shall be made such as Christ him self is, if they give and
bequeathe them selves wholly unto him. According to that which follows:

To them he gave power to be the sons of God. C. Least this let should hinder
or stay any man, that ye Jews co^tempned christ, the Evangelist lifts up the
minds of the godly which believe in him above the Heaven. For he says that
this glory, to be the Sons of GOD, must be obtained by faith.

And in this universality (as many) is contained a secret comparison. For the
Jews were puffed up with a blind vain glory, as though they alone had GOD
tied unto them. The Evangelist therefore pronounces that the lot is altered:
because the Jews being forsaken, the Gentiles are chosen in their steed. For
it is as much as if the right of adoption should be transported to strangers.
And this is that which Paul says: The destruction of one people was the life
of the whole world: Romans 11
because the Gospel being expulsed as it were of them, began now to be
spredde even throughout the whole world. CHR. Therefore whether they be bond
or free, whether they be Barbarous or Scithians, wise, or foolish, men or
women, Children or old men, all are worthy of one honor, of the which it is
said: He gave them power to be the sons of GOD.

C. The Papists by this place gather that it is in our power either to choose,
or to reject this grace. But the text it self does plainelye overthrow this
false collection. For straight after the Evangelist adds that they are made
the sons of GOD, for he says, To them he gave power to be made the sons of
God, but specially by the next verse following.

This making comes not by the will of flesh, but by the will of God, by the
benefit of regeneration. Wherefore, if faith do regenerate us that we may be
the sons of God, and if God from heaven do enspire the same into us, it is
manifest that the grace of adoption is not only offered to us of Christ in
power, but also even in the very act. Moreover in this, Christ has
woonderfullye set forth his grace, that he has given this honor to unclean
and profane men, yea to such as lie in the shadow of death, that they should
now suddenly begin to be the sons of God. Notwithout cause therefore does ye
Evangelist extol ye greatness of this benefit, Ephe. 2
even as S. Paul says to the Ephesians.

Even to them that believe in his name. C. He does briefelye note the manner of
receiving of Christ, namely when men believe in him. Therefore we being by
faith ingraffed into Christ, do attain the right of adoption, that we may be
the sons of God. And certainelye seeing he is the only begotten son of
God, this honor pertayneth nothing at all unto us, were it not that we are his
members. M. To believe in the name of Christ (as we showed even now) is to
receive him as the son of GOD, and the Savior of the whole world, the which
is done of us when we depend wholye upon him by a sincere faith and trust, and
commit our selves wholye as Disciples unto him. He says not, they which are
pure, and altogether void of sin, and worthy to be admitted into the
fellowship of this fraternity: but he says, which believe in his name and
receive him, that is to say, which acknowledge by faith the grace offered, and
receive it in heart. Therefore they which believe not, receive not Christ, they
cannot obtain this saving health, and dignity of the sons of God, in so much
that they must of necessity perish with this world under the wrath.

13. Which were borne, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor yet of
the will of man, but of God.

Which were borne M. These words pertayne to the description of them which
believe in the name of Christ, and do receive the right of the adoption of the
sons of God. They which are such are not borne of flesh and blood, but of
God: Flesh and blood begets not the Children of God. That which is of the
flesh is flesh, John. 3
and that which is of the spirit is spirit. B. By these words the
Evangelist means nothing else, but the carnal Birth. For he makes a
comparison of the generation of the flesh, and of the spirit, rejecting the
one and allowing the other. C. Neither is it necessary that we understand
here by this word, flesh, the Woman, as many would have it. The Evangelist
rather repeating one thing by diverse words, goes about to inculcate the
same, and to print it more deepelye in our minds. Therefore he does
secreetelye touch the wicked trust and confidence of the Jews, who had
always in their months the worthiness of their offspring, as though they
springing from a holy Progeny, were Saints by nature. They had worthelye
boasted them selves to be of the stock of Abraham, if they had been lawful
Children and not bastardes.

But the boasting of Faith does arrogate nothing at all from the carnal
generation, but gives GOD the praise for all things that it has received. ^.
Therefore S. John in effect says thus much: They which believe in Christ,
being before unclean Gentiles, are not borne the sons of God out of the
womb, or by flesh and blood, but are brought thereunto by the workemanshippe
of the holy Ghost. And although properly he has respect unto the Jews which
were proud in the flesh: yet notwithstanding, of this place, a general
Doctrine may be gathered, namelye, that where as we are counted the Sons
of GOD, it comes not by the propertye of our nature, neither of our selves,
but because the Lord has begotten us of his own freewill and singular love.

A. Notwithstanding the Evangelist seems very vnorderlye to make
regeneration the first in order, as though it went before faith, when as rather
it is the effect of Faith, and therefore the latter of the twain. Aunsvvere.
C. I answer that it is both first and last in diverse respects, because by
faith we conceive the incorruptible seed, by the which we are borne again
into a new and divine life: and yet nevertheless, faith is now the work of
the holy Ghost, which dwells in none but in the sons of God.

Therefore in diverse respects, faith is a part of our regeneration, and an
enteraunce into the kingdom of Heaven, that we might be nombred among the
children of God. For in that he illuminateth our minds with the spirit, he
shows the work of regeneration. After this manner, faith springs from
regeneration, as from the well. But because we receive Christ by the same
faith (which sanctifies us with his spirit) therefore it is said to be the
beginning of our adoption. Therefore in respect of our sense, we begin not to
be the sons of God, but after faith only. M. But we must note what
difference there is between them which are adopted in this world to the
inheritance of earthlye goods, and those which are adopted to be the sons
of God. They which are adopted to have the inheritance of earthlye goods, are
adopted by grace of good will, although they come not of the same flesh,
neither are regenerate in mind, but abide in the same mind whereof they were
before. But they which are adopted to be the Sons of God, are not borne of
the substance of God, (as was Christ the only begotten son of GOD) but they
being by grace taken for heirs and sons, are also changed in mind, and of
carnal are made spiritual. And this is that which he says: But are borne of
God.

We gather also by this place, that faith comes not of our selves, but is
the fruit of spiritual regeneration For the Evangelist affirms that no man
can believe, but he which is borne of God. Faith therefore is a heavenly gift:
Furthermore we may hereby gather, that faith is not a cold or bare motion,
seeing none can believe except he be reformed by the spirit of God.

14. And the same word became flesh, and dwelt among us, and we saw the
glory of it, as the glory of the only begotten son of the Father, full of
grace and truth.

And the same word C. Now he teaches what that coming of Christ was, of
the which he had made mention before, saying, He came into his own: Namelye,
that he having taken upon him our flesh, openly showed him self to the
world.

M. And by the flesh, he understands the whole man, in somuche that it is al
one, as if he had said, And the word beecame man. C. For this word flesh,
serves more to set forth the force of his mind, than if he had said, That
it was made man. His purpose was to show what a vile and base condition the
Son of GOD took upon him for our sakes, coming down from the throne of his
heavenly glory. The scripture speaking of a man, contemptuouslye, calls him
flesh. When as therefore the Evangelist, calls the son of God flesh, he
means, that he has so much abased him self, that he has taken upon him
this flesh, subject to so many miseries. R. As to fragillity, contempt,
execration, pouertye, hunger, thirst, nakedness, death, and damnation: and
that we might be made through him, Strong, Blessed, Rich, Full, Immortal,
and righteous, whereby we have everlasting salvation.

For what thing else is flesh than weakness, dust, and as it were hay, and
the glory thereof, as the flower of the field, which in the morning grows,
and in the Evening is cut down, and withered?

C. But the flesh is not here taken for the corrupt nature of man, as Paul
oftentimes takes it, but for the mortal man. Very fond therefore is
Appollinaris, which imagined that Christ had a humane body only without a
soul.

For this is a figurative kind of speech, because the inferior part does
comprehend the whole man. For by an innumerable sort of testimonies, a man may
gather, that Christ our savior as he had a body, so also he had a Soul.

And the scripture, when it calls men flesh, it does not thereby make them
void of Soul. It is very manifest therefore that the word being begotten
before all worlds of the Father, and which was always with the Father, was
made man. John. 2
M. We must also take heed, least we think the word to be said, to be
made flesh in that sense that the water is said to be turned into Wine.

For there the water was so made Wine, that it left of to be water any more,
and was only wine: but here the word, was not so made flesh that it should
cease to be the word, that is to say, God, and should be now nothing more then
flesh. God forbid. For it can not be that God should be changed into man,
and should then cease to be God. The divine substance of the word will neither
admit mutacion or end, seeing it is immutable and infinite, or without end.
Morouer, the flesh of Christ, has not left his proper nature, and is changed
into the word. God forbid this also. For else as Christ is there deprived of
his diuinitye, even so here he should be deprived of his true humanitye, in so
much that he should not be now true man, neither truly conceived, nor
truly borne, neither yet truly suffered, nor dead, and consequentlye,
neither truly raised again from death.

M. Let us therefore firmelye hold and believe that GOD was made man, that he
took unto him that which before he was not, Two things to be believed.
and that he lost not that which he was. C. And therefore in this principle of
Faith, there are two principal things of us to be believed, namelye, that
two natures in Christ, were so joined and come together into one A. And if we
believe these two principles, we shall easilye drive away all errors, which
Satan has brought in by his Ministers touching the Diuinitye and humanitye of
Christ.

For Nectorius, Eutiches, Seruetus, and the Anabaptists, have brought no small
contumelye unto Christ, in going about some of them to rob him of his
Diuinitye, and some of them of his humanity.

And dwelt amongst us. R. That is to say: The Son of GOD, having taken upon
him our flesh, lived amongst us men, spoke with us, and did eat and drink
with us.

M. Herevppon the Prophet called Christ Emanuel, Esaias. 7
that is to say, God with us. B. For he being in the form of God, thought it
not robbery to be equal with God: but made him self of no reputacion, taking
on him the form of a servant, Philip. 2
and made in the likensse of men, and found in figure as a man. R. And again,
it is said, God was manifested in the flesh, justified in the spirit, 1.
Timo. 3
seen of Angels, preached to the Gentiles, believed on in the world, and
received up into glory.

C. But it is doubtful whether the Evangelist speaks generallye of men, or
of him self only, and of the rest of the Disciples, which were eye witnesses
of that which he says. It is most likelye that he speaks of him self, and
of his fellow Disciples, for he adds saying:

And we saw the glory of it. M. He has the same words almost in his Epistle,
saying: That which was from the beginning, 1. Epist. 1
which we have heard, which we have seen. etc. For although the glory of
Christ might be seen of men, yet notwithstanding it was unknown to the
greater part by reason of blindness. Only a few, whose eyes the holy Ghost
opened, saw this manifestation of glory. The sum and effect of these
words is, that Christ was so known to be man, that he showed forth somewhat
in him self, to be seen of men to be far more excellent. Whereupon it
follows that the Majesty of GOD was not abased, although it was compassed
about with flesh: It lay hid under the baseness of the flesh, but so
notwithstanding that it showed forth his brightness. M. John says not, we
saw his essence, but, we saw his glory. No man sees, nor has seen the
very essence of the word: But the believing Apostles saw his glory.

B. The which as it was specially seen of three of the disciples in the mount
Thabor: Math. ^7
Even so by his glorious resurrection and Assention, it did mightelye shine,
and was openly exhibited to be seen of all the Disciples. M. Therefore by
this word glory, he understands those things, which set forth the glory of
this word, that is to say, which are certain show tokens of his Divine
goodness, wisdom, and power.

Even as in the Chapter following, Saint John says, After Christ had made
Wine of water: He manifested (says he) his glory. A. And Christ him self
hearing of the death of Lazarus, says, This sickness is not unto death, John.
11
but for the glory of GOD, that the Son of God might be glorified thereby.

M. And because the Apostle saw all these things, Saint John testifies of
them in this place, saying: And we saw his glory. For in these things the
glory of Christ was declared.

As the glory of the only begotten son of the Father. C. This word (As) is
not of improprietye in this place, but it rather signifies a true and perfect
approbation. Ephe. 5.
Even so when Paul says: Walk as children of the light, he means that we
should truly testify by our works the very same, that we are the children of
the light.

The Evangelist therefore means that the same glory was seen in Christ,
which did agree and belong to the son of God, and was an assured testimony of
his Diuintye M. For testimony is given of Christ, not as of some holy man and
Prophet of GOD, which was conuersaunt among them, and whose glory they saw:
Exodus 34
(as the Israelites also saw the glory of Moses which he had in his face)
neither, as of a glorious King of this world, (which kind of glory some of
the Disciples desired, saying: Grant that we may sit in thy glory, the one
on thy right hand, and the other on the left: the which also the Jews
foolishlye looked for at the coming of their Christ.) But as of the incarnate
and only begotten word of GOD, the which is called by the Apostle, Hebr. 1
The brightness of the glory of the Father. And the Evangelist here calls
the word, only begotten, because he is the only begotten son by nature, as
if he should place him above men and Angels, and should attribute that unto
him, which belongs unto no other creature. But we must not think that their
faith did see all the glory of the only begotten son of GOD, in the
dispensing of man's Salvation, seeing the same is infinite. The Israelites could
not behold the glory of Moses countenance and yet could the eyes of the
Apostles behold the glory of the only begotten son of GOD. They saw
surely so much as was appertayning to the dispensing of our salvation.

Full of grace and truth. B. As if he should say: I have said, that we have
seen, and plainly beheld the glory of the only begotten son of God, and
that not once or twice only, because he was full of all grace and truth.

M. The Evangelist therefore by these words commends the conversation of
Christ amongst his Disciples, because of two things, with the which the same
was replenished, namelye, with grace and truth. Act. 7.


C. Stephen also is said to be full of grace, but in another sense. For the
fullness of grace is in Christ, he is the well from whence al we must draw, as
more largelye hereafter shall be declared. John therefore means that Christ was
hereby known to be the son of GOD, because he had in him self the fullness
of all things which pertained to the spiritual kingdom of God: and because
he truly showed him self in all things to be the redeemer and Messiah,
which is in deed the special note by which he should be discerned from
all other.

B. This fullness of grace in Christ, was at sondrye times foreshewed by the
Prophets: as in the Psalms, and in Esai, Psalm. 49 Psalm. 89 Esaias. 16 Ihon. 14
and in other places.

Truth, in this place may signifye sinceritye, and integrity, with the which
Christ was always replenished. R. I am the way (says he) the truth, and
the life.

15. John bears witness of him, and cries, saying: This was he of whom I
spoke, He that comes after me: is preferred before me: For he was before me.

John bears witness of him. M. Because he had said before that John was
sent to this end, that he might testifye of Christ the true light, which
lighteneth every man coming into this world, and by his testimony had brought
most men to believe the same, it was necessary that he should add these
testimonies, and should teach that they both testified one thing concerning
Christ.

And he brings five of his testimonies by the which he manifested Christ, of
the which we will speak in order as we come unto them. John (says he)
bears witness of him, namely of the word incarnate, and of the only
begotten son of God.

C. For, by the word of the present tence, the Evangelist means the
continual act. And truly this Doctrine ought to florishe for ever, even as if
the voice of John did continuallye sound in the ears of men.

So also he says that John cried, to declared that the doctrine of John was
not obscure: and that he did secretelye tell the same in the ears of a few,
but that he openly with a loud voice preached Christ. R. This therefore so
excellent a man, whom the whole multitude reverenced as a Prophet, who for his
holiness and pureness of life, was taken for Christ, this so singular a man,
I say, bears testimonye to Christ, of this fullness.

Whereby the wicked obstinacye of the Jews is noted, that having so notable a
person to bear witness of Christ, so plainelye and openly Preaching of
him, yet notwithstanding, abode in their hardness of heart and perished, of
the which the Evangelist spoke before, saying: He came into his own, and his
own received him not. And so all excuse is quite taken from them.

Saying this was he of whom I spoke M. This is the testimony of John. Before
that Christ came to him, that is to say, to receive Baptism, he instructed
all men throughout al his race of Preaching of Christ, which was now ready to
come, directing them from him self unto Christ, Baptizing them, not into him
self, but into him, and teaching to prepare the way unto him. And this is that
which Paul says, John truly Baptized with the Baptism of repentance,
speaking of him that should come after him, that they might believe, that is
to say, Acts. 19
Of Christ Jesus. And he pointed him out with the finger, saying: This is he
of whom I spoke.

C. By the which words he means, that this was his purpose from the
beginning, namely to make Christ known, and that this was the end of his
Sermons.

M. Of this mind and disposition ought every Minister of Christ to be, that
after the example of John, they learn, not to preach themselves, but Christ:
and not to suffer any to depend upon them, but to direct and send them unto
Christ. So Saint Paul teaches saying: For we Preach not our selves, 2 Cor. 4
but Christ Jesus our Lord, and our selves your servants for Christ's sake.

If all were endewed with this mind which will seem to be ministers of
Christ, there should be true concord and unity through the whole Church,
neither should there be at any time Scismes in the same. C. Moreover when
John the Baptist speaks of Christ, saying: He which comes after me:
although he was elder than Christ by certain months, yet notwithstanding,
here he speaks not of his age. But because he had done the office of a
Prophet a certain time before Christ had openly showed him self, therefore
by time he prefers him self before Christ. Therefore in respect of the
public revelation of Christ, Christ followed John.

16. And of his fullness have all we received, and grace for grace.

And of his fullness have all we received. M. These words and that which
follows to the other testimony of John beginning at the nineteeth verse, are
referred of some to our Evangelist, and not to John the Baptist. Although it
make no great matter whose words these be, yet notwithstanding there seems
to be no cause why they should be taken from the testimony of John the
Baptist.

Now therefore he begins the Sermon touching the office of Christ, because
he contains in him self the affluence and fullness of all good things,
insomuch that no part of salvation is to be sought for of any other.

With God truly is the well of life, of righteousness, of truth, and of
wisdom: this well is hidden and shut from us: but in Christ the fullness of
all these things is offered unto us. For he is ready to flow unto us of his
own accord, if so be we give unto him passage by Faith. And with Christ is
the fullness, because he has received the spirit without measure. John. 13
For the Father has given all things into his hands. The which thing was
shadowed in the Law by Aron, who when he was consecrated Priest, had Oil
powered on his head, the which, for the great plentye thereof ran down by his
Bearde, even to the skyrtes of his clothing.

Psalm. 133.
As therefore the Ointment upon the head, which ran down the Bearde, even
Aarons Bearde: Even so Christ was anointed without measure most abundantly
with the holy Ghost, and has powered the same upon the Beard, and skirtes of
his clothing, that is to say, upon the faithful.

And as in the first Natiuitye, we all received of the fullness of Adam, even
so in the new birth, we all are overwhelmed with the fullness of Christ For
Adam is a Tipe of Christ, as Saint Paul shows in the fifth Chapter to the
Romans. C. But to return to the words of John the Baptist. First of all he
shows that we are void every one of us of al spiritual goodness. For
Christ abounds to this end, that he might supplye and help our lack, ease
our need, and satisfye our hunger.

M. The which Saint Paul confirms by these words: What have thou O man, 1.
Cor. 4
which thou have not received? C. Secondlye he admonishes, that so soon as we
depart from Christ, we do in vain seek for any benefit, be it never so
small: because GOD will have all goodness to rest in him alone.

Therefore we shall find Angels and men dry, Heaven void, the Earth barren,
to be short, all things nothing, if we will be made partakers of the gifts
of God otherwise than by Christ.

Thirdly, he teaches that we ought not to fear, lest we should want any good
thing, if so be we draw at the fullness of Christ, the which is so filled
with all heavenly treasure, that we shall feel. the same to be in very deed
a bottomless well. And John makes him self one of the rest that wants
perfection, not for modestye sake, but that it may euidentlye appear that
none at all ought to be excepted.

M. Let us hear therefore both the voice of GOD, and also the voice of his
Saints. The voice of God is: Math. 1^ Esaias. 55
Come unto me, I will refreshe you. Hear me and your soul shall live. The
voice of the Saints is. We have nothing of our selves, those things which we
have come from another. Crave of him, of whose fullness we all have received.

By this place also they are to be admonished and taught, which have so
received of this fullness of Christ, that they possess more than others,
either in the knowledge of GOD, either in temporal blessings, that they
inuert not, nor abuse the nature of Christ's benefits: For as they came unto
us, of his free liberalitye and goodness, so they must be communicated and
given by us to others liberallye, that the need of others may be supplied
and helped by our fullness. He does iniurye to the benefits of Christ
received, which either greedelye keeps them to him self, or which by filthye
riote vainelye wastes them. Of this matter saint Paul admonishes us in his
Epistle to the Corinthians. 2. Cor. 8


And grace for grace. M. This place is diversely expounded. Some understand
the first grace to be that, by the which through Faith we receive, remission
of our sins: the other grace, to be life everlasting, the which kind of
grace is given to the faithful: according to this saying of the Apostle, but
the grace of God is eternal life. Romans 6


But other some will have the first to be that which in the old Testament
was given to the Jews: the other to be more copious and large, and given to
all men.

C. But the simple sense and meaning of the text, seems to be this, that
whatsoever graces GOD does power upon us, they do also spring from this well.

For whatsoever we receive of Christ he does not only give it unto us as
GOD: but also the Father has so given al things into the hands of Christ,
that whatsoever we receive from God, they come to us by Christ, as by a
Conduite Pipe. They judge therefore rightlye, which say that we are watered by
the graces powered upon Christ.

This was the ointment with the which he was anointed, that he might anoint
us all with him. Whereupon he is called Christ, that is to say, anointed,
and we Christians, that is to say, anointed of him.

R. Therefore, we have received grace, that is to say. God the Father favors
us: for grace, that is to say, because, he favors Christ his Son, whose
brethren we are, and in whom we believe. For this (says he) is my beloved
Son, Math. 3
in whom I am well pleased. Wherefore the Father also loves us, which by
faith are made members of his Son.

M. First of all therefore, we have here to learn, that we receive not grace
for our own merits sake, but for the worthiness of Christ and his sake.

Secondlye, let us be admonished by the example of the Israelites, not to
neglecte the benefits of the grace of Christ, A. that is (as the Apostle
says) That we receive not the grace of God in vain.

2. Cor. 6
Thirdlye, that we knowing, how that we receive the blessings of GOD in this
life freelye by Christ, be confyrmed in the faith and hope of the blessings to
come: Esaias. 64 2. Cor. 2
the glory and greatness whereof the ear has not heard, the eye has not
seen, neither has it at any time entered into the heart of man.

For it can not be, that he which is touched with no feeling of the benefits
of God received in this life, should conceive in his mind a certain hope of
the blessings to come.

17 For the Law was given by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ.

B. In that he makes mention of Moises by collation, it is done by a figure
called Occupatio, For the Jews always boasted of Moses, although in deed
they believed him not. John therefore attributes to Moses, that which was
right, namelye, that the Law was given by him: for he stood between God and
the Children of Israel, that he might show them the word of the Lord. For by
this Law, (Christ set aparte) they were so far from finding favor in the
eyes of the Lord, that they were altogether guiltye of impietye and execrable:
For the Law accurseth so many as observe not all those things which it
commands.

Herevppon it is that Paul calls the Law the administration of death and
condemnacion, and a kylling Letter. Deuteronomy. 27 Gala. 3 2. Cor. 3


A. But when we come unto Christ, we find in him grace, C. that is to say,
the Spiritual fulfilling of those things which the law contained in the
letter: we find also in him truth, that is to say, a firm, and sound
stabillitye of things.

The Evangelist therefore teaches how much inferyoure the Mynisterye of
Moses was to the power of Christ.

M. Moreover these two, grace, and truth, are oftentimes in the Scripture
joined together: C. but here by a figure called Hypallage, they are both
aptlye referred to one end: as if he had said: That grace by which the truth
of the law stands, was at the length offered in Christ. But because the
sense will remain all one, it makes no matter whether they be joined or
separated. This truly is certain that the Evangelist would have this
granted, that the Image of all Spiritual blessings was shaddowed only in
the Law: but in Christ perfectlye published and revealed. Whereupon it
follows, that if we separate the Law from Christ, there shall nothing remain
therein bare figures.

In consideration of the which, S. Paul says, Colloss. 2
that in the law are shadows, but in Christ the body. M. And Moses is said
to be far inferior unto Christ, because he was in the house of GOD as a
servant, for a testimonye of those things which should be spoken: Heb. 3
but Christ was as Lord over his house.

C. The truth therefore consists in this, that by Christ we obtain grace,
which the Law could not bestow. So that this word, grace, is taken as well
for the free remission of our sins, as for the renouation of the heart.

18. No man has seen God at any time: the only begotten son which is in
the bosom of the Father, he has declared him.

C. This is very well and aptly added for the confirmation of the former
sentence. For the knowledge of GOD is the gate by the which we enter into the
fruition of all good things. Therefore seeing GOD does reveal himself unto
us by Christ only, it follows consequentlye that all things be sought for
at the hands of Christ. M. These things therefore do so agree with that
which goes before, that the authority of Moses (upon the which the Jews
did depend, because he talked with God face to face) is thereby made
inferior unto Christ. Moses saw not God, nor any other man, whether he were
of the Prophets, or of the Patriarckes.

C. Furthermore when John says, that no man has seen God at any time, his
words are not to be understood only of the external sight of the corporal
eye: for he means generallye, that seeing God dwells in the light, which
no man can attain unto, he cannot be known but in Christ, 1. Timo. 6
his lively and express Image.

Wherefore our condition is far better than the state of the fathers: because
GOD which at the first lay hid in his secret glory, has now after a sort made
himself visible.

For certainly, when Christ is called the very express image of the father,
that pertayneth to a special benefit of the new Testament. Even so the
Evangelist in this place shows us a new and strange thing, when he says
that the only begotten son which was in the bosom of the Father, and
before that time hyd, is now expressed unto us. He commends therefore the
revelation of GOD, which by the Gospel is brought unto us, in the which he
puts a difference between us and the Fathers, and does prefer us before
them. If any man object and say that God was then also seen of the fathers,
face to face, Jacob did, Genesis 32 Deuteronomy. 5 Number. 12
God spoke also to the Children of Israel face to face, and to his servant
Moises) we may answer that the same sight is in no point to be compared to
ours: Answer.
For GOD using at that time obscurelye to show him self, and as it were a far
of, when he appeared more gloriously unto some, they said that they had seen
him face to face. Therefore they have respect unto their time: howbeit they saw
not GOD, but as it were in shadows and mystes. A singular vision was that, and
almost far exceeding all the rest, which Moses obtained in the mount: and
yet notwithstanding the Almighty expressly says: Thou can not see my face,
Exodus 33
only thou shall see my hinder parts. By the which metaphore he declares
that the time of full and perfect revelation is not yet come. R. But now he
which sees Christ, sees the Father also. John. 14
For the son only knows the Father, and he to whom soever the son will
reveal him.

C. Therefore this is most certain, Math. 11
that GOD which was at the first invisible, has now appeared in Christ. When
he says, that the Son is in the Bosom of the Father, it is a translation,
or kind of speech borrowed of the custom of men, who are said to admit
those into their bosom to whom they commit al secreete matters. The place of
counsel is the breast. Therefore he teaches that the son was even in the
deep counsel, purpose, and secreete mind of the Father: to the end we might
know that we have, as it were the open and revealed breast of God in the
Gospel. Colloss. 2


19. And this is the record of John, when the Jews sent Priests, and Levites
from Jerusalem, to ask him: what art thou?

And this is the record. C. Hitherto our Evangelist has made mention of the
Sermon which John made concerning Christ: and now he comes to a more famous
testimonye, given to the messengers of the hye Priests to carrye to Jerusalem.
He says therefore that John openly confessed wherefore he was sent of GOD.

R. And in that the Evangelist so oftentimes makes mention of the testimony of
John the Baptist, it is done specially for two causes: first to cast in the
Jews teeth, and to vpbraide them with their impietye, which took John the
Baptist for a man of GOD, and the Lords anointed: and yet notwithstanding,
would not believe him concerning the testimony which he bare of Christ, and
also that he might keep the godly Jews in the faith of Christ, being nothing
dismayde with the persecution of the Scribes and Pharisees, which
contumeliouslye put Christ to the shameful death of the Cross.

Secondly, to declare the constancye of John the Baptist, in maintayning his
former testimony which he had given concerning the Messiah: and to prove that
he was not a Reed shaken with wind. M. Whereas therefore the Evangelist
says, Mat. 11
When the Jews sent from Jerusalem, it is not to be understood of the
common sort of people which thought well of John but rather of those which
bare rule, and which could also by their own aucthoritye command the
Priests and Levites to go whyther they would have them.

The Evangelist John makes mention that the Priests and Levites were sent
from Jerusalem, partly, that we might understand by the qualitye of the
message, the purpose of the senders, partly that he might add a certain
weight and gravity to the testimonye of John, which was not given in secreete,
or to the ears of the common people only, but to such as were seriouslye
sent from the Elders of the people, yea, from the Elders of that famous City
Jerusalem. But with what purpose came these messengers to John?

Surely: the people had been now without Prophets a long time. And John
came suddenly forth, and unlooked for.

Every man looked now for the coming of the Messiah: as we may see in the
storye of the Woman of Samaria: I know (says she) That the Messiah shall
come, which is Christ, John. 4
when he therefore comes, he shall show us all things.

C. Least therefore the Priests should seem to be slothful in their
office, if they should dissemble and neglecte a matter of so great weight,
they demand of John who he is. Therefore in the beginning they dealt not
craftily, but rather being moved with the desire of the redemption, they
coueted to know whether John were Christ, yea or no, because he began to
alter the accustomed manner in the Church.

How be it, it cannot be denied but that there was in them an ambicious
desire to keep their right: but yet at this time they went about nothing less
than to give the honor of Christ unto another.

It appears therefore that there was a common fame of John, which styrred up
the minds of all men.

20. And he confessed, and denied not, and said plainly, I am not that
Christ.

R. He confessed the truth, and denied not, he did not retract the testimony
which was given before unto Christ: but truly again as before, he gives
testimony unto him. Mala. 4
C. He confessed therefore plainly, and without dissimulacion, or
circumstaunces, that he is not Christ.

M. I would to God that they which take upon them no small countenance in the
Church of Christ, would follow this constancy of mind, and sincerity
toward Christ.

21 And they asked him, what then? Art thou Elias? And he says, I am not: art
thou that Prophet? and he answered, No.

And they asked him: what then? C. Why do they name Elias rather then Moses?
M. The very times did declare that the coming of Christ was even at hand,
before whom Elias should come according to the prophecy of Malachy. Malath. 4
R. They enquire therefore after Elyas the Thesbite, which was in the time of
Achab the King. For although they had red in the Prophet Malachy, that the
Prophet Elyas should be sent before the great and fearful day of the Lord
came (the which is the coming of Christ, being a blynding of the unbelieving,
yea judgment and damnation to them) yet notwithstanding as they were a carnal
people, so they understood carnally, not that another should be sent in the
spirit and power of Elias the Thesbite, but even the very same Elias which
was taken up into heaven in the fiery Chariot: C. or at the least they being
deceived with the common error imagined, that the soul should come in an
other body. B. By this error Herod was deceived, Math. 14
thinking that John whom he had beheaded, was now alive again, and was called
Jesus. By this error also part of the common people thought the Lord to be
Elias, Math. 16
part Hieremias, or some one of the Prophets. When as John therefore had
denied himself to be Christ, the messengers asked him if he were not Elias the
Thesbite.

And he says, I am not. A. And yet notwithstanding our savior Christ, which
cannot lie, affirmed him to be Elias. But John means that he is not Elias in
person, but in spirit and power, and so our Savior Christ calls him Elias.

Art thou that Prophet? Although this word (that) be added in this place, yet
notwithstanding it has no Emphasis or force. And afterward the messengers
declare sufficientlye that they understood another Prophet beside Christ. For
they said, If thou be neither Christ, nor Elias, neither a Prophet. In the
which words we see diverse persons to be noted, least any man should restrain
this unto Christ. They demand therefore simply if he be not a Prophet sent
of God.

And he answered, No. John in denying this thing does not lie for modesties
sake, but does sincerelye even from his heart separate him self from the
number of the Prophets: and yet for all that, this answer is not contrary
to the words of Christ, which calls him a Prophet, and more than a Prophet.
For by those words, Math. 11
he does nothing else but bring a certain authority and credit to his
doctrine, and does also extol the office committed unto him.

22. Then said they unto him: what art thou that we may give an answer to
them that sent us: what say thou of thy self?

M. By these aunsweres of John, the messengers of the Jews, had hitherto
learned nothing else, than, that he was neither Christ, nor Elias, nor any of
the Prophets: For this only they demanded. Therefore they object their
aucthorytye, of whom they were sent, least they should return to them again
emptye, and uncertain of their answer. Touching the exposition of the other
two verses following, read the third of Matthew, beginning at the third verse.

25. And they asked him, and said unto him: Why baptizest thou then, if thou
be not Christ, nor Elias, neither a Prophet?

R. Although the most holy and best learned were sent unto John, yet
notwithstanding, he is not so moved with their aucthoritye, that he would
depart from the truth, to the which he had borne witness. And although they
were the most learned of all others, in the law, yet notwithstanding they
understood not the answer of John, which was taken out of the Scriptures:
and therefore like blindemen they go forewarde. Wherefore (say they) Baptizest
thou? That is to say: seeing thou art nothing but a vanishing voice, seeing
thou art neither Christ, nor Helias, nor a Prophet, who then has given thee
aucthoritye to teach new things, and to innouate old rites and Customs?
For although thou teach the truth, and do consecrate the people unto GOD by
new Rites, yet notwithstanding, because thou art neither anointed nor ordered
by our Bishops, thou ought not of thine own rashness to usurp unto thy
self so great aucthoritye.

Wherefore thou shall be excommunicated and cast out of the synagogue, except
thou either retracte that which thou have done, or else do agree to the
dignitye of our Bishops. M. For who gave thee this power to bring unto the
people new Ceremonies, contrary to the aucthoritye of the Law, and the order
of Priesthood? For howsoever thou lead an austere life, yet for all that it is
not meet for thee to bring in new Ceremonies without our aucthoritye, as
though our Law were not pure enough of it self. C. In appointing these three
degrees, (namelye, if thou be neither Christ, nor Elias, nor that Prophet)
they seem to reason very aptelye. They granted all power to be in the
Messiah hand. They conceived also this opinion, that at the coming of Elias,
the renewing both of the kingdom, and of the Church should be begone. And to
the Prophets they grant it lawful to discharge that office, that is enjoined
them.

Therefore hereupon they conclude that it is a new invented thing, unlawful
that John should take upon him to Baptize without the outward calling. But in
this they are deceived, that they acknowledge him not to be Elias, of whom
Malachy makes mention, although he deny him self to be that Elias of whom
they dreamed.

M. Furthermore they quite ouerpasse the Prophecye of Esai, when as they might
have gathered thereby, what the cause was that he Baptized: namelye, because he
was sent of GOD before the face of his Son, as a crier and forerunner, to
prepare the way before him, and to move the hearts of the Children of Israel
to true repentance.

26. John answered them saying: I baptize you with water: but there stands
one among you, whom ye know not.

C. Concerning the Baptime of John, of Christ, and of the Apostles it is
sufficiently spoken in the third of Matthew. A. Now John the Baptist does
secretlye reprehende the blindness of the Jews, because they were ignorant
of Christ, to whom principally they should have directed their minds. And he
does always inculcate this diligently, that no part of his ministry can be
known until they be come to the aucthor himself. He says that Christ
stands in the midst of them, to the end that he might stir up their
endeavor to know him. M. And he notes therewith also their perverse and
worldely judgment, by the which they judged of the men of God according to the
outward appearaunce, and vain show. Christ was in the midst of them, that
is to say, he was conuersaunt among them: but they knew him not. And
wherefore? Because he was base in his outward appearaunce, and as a common
man. By the way let us here note that it is the lot of Gods children, not to
be known in the world, and because they are not known, they are sure to
have reproach for their part. Read the.xij. verse of the seventeenth Chapter
of Matthew. And the first verse of the third Chapter, of John's first Epistle.
Touching the seventeenth verse following read the third of Matthew.

28. These things were done in Bethabara, beyond Jordan, where John did
baptize.

B. These words are added to the end the testimony might be more certain.
And worthy truly was this testimony of John, being given so constantlye to the
chief Rules of the Jews, in so great a concourse of people as was there
assembled. This answer of John, took from them all excuse that might
afterward ensue. C. Therefore the noting of the place does not only make for
the truth of the history, but also to the end we might know that this was
done where many people might hear it, being a place of great resort. For many
came to the baptime of John: and this was the ordinary place where he
baptized.

29. The next day John sees Jesus coming unto him and says, Behold the
Lamb of God which takes away the sin of the world.

M. This is the third testimonye of John the Baptist concerning Christ.
Hitherto John has showed, what the Baptist witnessed, first of all to the
people, concerning Christ being absent: secondely, what answer he gave to the
Pharisees that were sent from the Elders of Jerusalem: and now consequentlye he
shows what he witnessed of Christ openly he being present.

C. There is no doubt, but that before this time he had spoken of the
revealing of the Messiah, but when Christ was come forth, he thought it good
in short time to publish his proclamation concerning Christ: and now the time
was at hand in the which Christ ended the office of John, even as when the
son is risen, the twy light (as we call it) vanishes away. Therefore when
he had showed to the Priests that were sent, that he was in the midst of
them, of whom the truth and force of Baptime should be learned, the day
following he showed him openly. And this is the cause why Christ offers
himself into the presence of John. Therefore the next day following John saw
Jesus coming to him. M. But from whence, and to what end? This is
sufficientlye declared in the thirteenth verse of the third Chapter of Matthew.
where it is said: Then came Jesus from Galile to Iordane to John to be
baptized of him.

Behold the Lamb of GOD. C. He now briefelye and plainly expounds the
office of Christ, namelye, that he taking away the sins of the world by his
death, reconcileth men unto God. Christ truly bestows other benefits upon
us, but this is the chief upon which the rest depend, that he in pacifying
the wrath of his Father, makes us to be counted just and righteous.

For out of this well flows all Rivers of good things, because God not
imputing our sins, receives us into his favor. But by this word (Lamb) he
has respect to the old Sacrifices of the Law. He had to do with the Jews,
who being accustomed with Sacrifices, could be no otherwise taught concerning
remission of sins, than by setting before them a sacrifice. And there being
many kinds of Sacrifices, he makes mention only of one, by a figure called
Sinecdoche. And it is likely that John had respect unto the Paschall Lamb.

So that the Jews for the most part, having a very gross and supersticious
opinion of Sacrifices, were of him reproved for the same, showing to what end
all those belong. This was the wicked abuse of Sacrifycing, that they had their
trust reposed and fired in the outward signs. Therefore John setting Christ
before them, affirms him to be the Lamb of God: by the which he means
that whatsoever sacrifices the Jews were wont to offer under the Law, they
were of no force to put away sins: but were only figures, the truth of which
were fulfilled in Christ him self: Heb. 9.10. Psalm. 40
As Saint Paul at large shows in diverse places.

Saint John uses this word sin in the singular number, for all kind of
iniquitye: as if he should say, what unrighteousness soever there be,
which allienateth God from men, it is taken away by Christ. B. For christ is he
alone which takes away the sins of the world: for he which believes this
testimonye, will crave al pardon for his offense of this our only hye Priest,
all other creatures set apart (Good men may exhort to believe in Christ, and
to hope for remission of sins at his hand, and may also testifye that all
sins are truly remitted to the faithful: but they can not remitte or pourge
sins by their own power, or give and increase Faith in Christ. For he is the
only mean to take away sins. We must also note by these words of John
the Baptist, that Christ was manifested to be a redemption, not only to the
Jews, but also to be made a Mediator and Savior, to the whole world.

As our Evangelist says also in another place: 1. Epist. 2
He dyed not for our sins only, but for the sins of the whole world. The
which is not so to be understood, as though that slain Lamb took away the
sins of them only which in this world live in the new Testament wheresoever:
No, it is not so to be understood, for he takes away the sins of all those
also, which from the beginning of the world were partakers of the grace of
GOD. Neither did any other thing in the old Testament take away the sins
of the world, than the same that is in the new a healer of our soores, that
is to say, that only Sacrifice, Christ Jesus.

So we read that this Lamb was slain from the beginning of the world.
Reuela. 13
C. Saint John therefore goes about to show that there remains nothing now
for sinners, but that they flee unto Christ their refuge: to the end he might
overthrow all satisfactions, offeringes, and redemptions of men, being nothing
but false and forged collusions of Satan our enemy.

This word (takes away) may be two manner of ways expounded, 1. Peter. 2
Esaias. 53.
either that Christ has taken upon him self the burden wherewith we were
oppressed, or else that he quite abolisheth sins. CHR. Furthermore in that
he says (Takes) in the present tence, the continual action of taking away
is meant: For the offering which he once made, always stands of force.

Let us know therefore, that we now at the last for Christ his sake are
reconciled unto God the Father, if we take the right way unto his death, and
if we do believe that he was the only Sacrifice nailed to the Cross, which
takes away our sins.

R. Furthermore, Christ does not so take away sins, that it may be lawful
for every man licentiouslye to live as him lysteth (as the carnal falsely
gather) but that we should live unto God, Romans 6
and to righteousness. For wheresoever sins are taken away by faith, there
in steed thereof succedeth the Spirit, mortifying from thencefoorth the
dreags of sin.

Touching the exposition of the next verse, read that which is spoken of in
the fifteenth verse going before.

31. And I knew him not, but that he should be declared to Israel: Therefore am
I come baptizing with water.

And I knew him not. C. Least men should think this testimonye to be given
either for favor or friendship, he preuenteth that doubt, affirming that he
has no other knowledge of Christ, than that which came from heaven to him. M.
Although therefore he knew him to be in the midst of Israel, yet for all
that he knew him not by face, for there was no familiaritye between them.

Christ had led his life in Nazareth of Galilee, being there with the Carpenter
Joseph, and now at the first he came from Nazareth to Jordan: But John lived
in the wilderness among the beasts, and inhabitauntes of the Wilderness.
Least therefore by a wrong suspicion and doubt, the testimony should be
discredited which was given to Christ, he adds saying: And I knew him not.

But that he should be declared to Israel. He came to Baptize for this
principal cause, though this was not the only cause. He came truly to
Jordan, preaching the Baptism of repentance, that by this occasion, he might
know him, whom before he knew not, that being known of him, he might
reveal him to Israel. He Baptized also to this end, that he might bring the
hearts of the Israelites to repentance, and by this means might prepare the
way of the Lord, which was at hand.

Notwithstanding, he says well that he came to this end, that Christ might
be made manifest unto Israel: For unless this be done, all the rest profits
nothing. This thing ought all the Ministry of John and the Apostles to do.
Moreover, except repentance be joined unto it, Christ is declared in vain.

C. And seeing it was necessary that John should be sent of GOD, that he
might lawfullye Baptize, we may gather herevppon, that no man has liberty,
of him self to institute Sacraments: for this right only pertayneth to God:
Even as our Savior Christ, in another place to prove the Baptism of John,
demands whether it was from Heaven or of men. Math. 21
For the exposition of the two verses following, read the third Chapter of
Matthew.

34. And I saw, and bare record, that he is the son of God.

M. Although John knew Christ, (whom he had showed to be present, and of
whom he had Preached,) before this time to be the Son of GOD, yet
notwithstanding, by the foresaid Heavenly inauguration, contained in thirtye
and two, and thirtye and three verses, he knew this Jesus whom before he
knew not to be the Son of God. And he knew this not by the vision only,
but by the voice also of the Father which came from Heaven, saying: This is my
beloved Son. Math. 3.
C. So that this sign was added because of confirmation, and that not so much
in respect of John, as for all our sakes. M. But seeing Christ is in the
Scriptures called the son of David, John say: And I saw and testified, that
he is the son of David? Answer.
Because, that although he had made noe lie, yet notwithstanding he should
not sufficiently have set forth the glory of Christ.

And this is worthy to be nooted that he witnessed Christ to be the son of
God, because Christ should be the gyuer of the holy Ghost, and because the
honor and office of reconcilyng men unto God, belongs to no other beside
him. M. And this knowledge and faith of the Son of GOD, as it springs of
the divine revelation, so it makes a man blessed: as Christ plainelye declared
to Peter in the sixteenth chapter of Matthew. Math. 16


35. The next day after John stood again, and two of his disciples.

B. By little and little, the Evangelist passes, by narration, from the
testimonies of John, to the testimonies which his own deeds and sayings gave
to the Lord. And seeing it was the office of John, to reveal Christ unto
Israel, has he thus far forth made mention of that story, passing over,
without doubt, many things which John preached concerning the Lord.

The other three Evangelists have more largelye written of that which he has
omitted, with the which the Godly are satisfied. M. But this is the last
testimonye of John concerning Christ, among those which the Evangelist meant
to repeat. Who in affirming John to stand, commends his diligence in
revealing Christ, as one that sought al occasion to fulfill his office.

C. Here furthermore we see how base and simple the beginning of the Church
was. John truly prepared Disciples for Christ: but Christ now begins him
self to prepare his Church.

36. And beheld Jesus as he walked by, and says, Behold the Lamb of God.

M. From whence, and whyther he walked, the Evangelist shows not. But it is
likelye that Christ, according to the great humilitye of his mind, as he
vouchsafed to receive John's Baptism, so also he was contented to hear his
Sermons, which he communicated to the people: and so it came to pass when the
Sermon was ended, because it was now almost euentide, that he went to that
place, where he meant to rest all night.

But it appears by this appellation of Christ, that John oftentimes called
Christ the Lamb of God, taking away the sins of the world: and that
notwithout cause: for it is the office of a good teacher, not once only, but
oftentimes to inculcate those things into the ears of his auditors, which
are necessary for them to know. Touching the calling of him the Lamb of God,
and what is thereby to be noted, it is already declared in the nine and twenty
verse.

37 And the two disciples heard him speak, and they followed Jesus.

M. They did as yet directlye follow Jesus forsaking all that they had (for they
were afterward called of Christ) but they followed him to get some knowledge
of him, the which when they had gotten, they returned to their own again.
But let us note the disposition and example of these two, first in this, that
although they were of the Disciples of John, with others more, yet
notwithstanding they did not so stacker, that they would not give ear and
credit to his word, as some other of the Disciples did, who were nothing
moved with all these testimonies concerning Christ, to join them selves unto
Christ: nay, they upon a rash zeal, did greatly withstand the opinion and
Judgment of their Master. Secondlye in this, that it is showed whereupon they
were moved to follow Christ. The two Disciples (says he) heard him speak,
and they followed Jesus. Therefore by the hearing of the word which John
preached concerning Christ, they were moved to follow Christ. As yet they had
seen no Miracle, neither had they heard of any Miracle done by Christ.

Christ therefore was at the first made manifest by John in the word, and not
by the admiration of Miracles. And thus are Gods elect satisfied, who desire
not Miracles: but are content with the word of God. The wicked generation
said: John. 6.
What sign do thou that we may see and believe thee? And again, Master,
Math. 12
we would see a sign of thee.

B. Moreover we see that God in due time brings all things to pass. John
many times before had witnessed both to the people, and also to his Disciples
concerning Christ Jesus: and yet notwithstanding it was reserved until this
moment of time, that Christ the Master of life should be known, and that the
Disciples of John should give credit to the testimony of their Master.

Therefore when the word of the Gospel is either foulye contempned of Hogs,
or outragiouslye rejected of Dogs, it must be yet constantly and with good
hope Preached, and committed to the heavenly Father, that he will make the same
effectual when and in whom it shall please him.

38. And Jesus turned about and saw them follow him, and says unto them, what
seek ye? They said unto him, Rabbi, (which is to say, if one interpret it,
Master) where dwell thou?

C. As Christ had offered him self to his Disciples that they might come unto
him, even so now they coming unto him, he gently annimateth and exhorts
them. Neither does he tarry to let them move the question first, but asks
them saying: What seek ye? M. He was not ignorant what they sought for. But
thus he meant by his gentleness to make them more bold, and take from them al
shamefastness. For he does very well first of all to demand what they seek:
because it makes very much what they seek for which follow Christ.

One said unto Christ, Master I will follow thee whether soever thou go.

But because he sought not for that thing in Christ which he should have
sought for: he was not admitted to be a Disciple, but heard it said unto
him: The Foxes have holes, Math. 8
and the Birds of the air have nestes, but the Son of man has not where to
rest his head. C. But this so gentle and friendly inuitacion, which pertayned
to these two, does now pertain unto all men. Wherefore we need not fear
that Christ will hyde him self from us, or will deny us access unto him: If
he perceive that we desire to come unto him: but will rather stretch forth his
hand to help our endeavors.

And how should not he help those that come unto him, which seeks a far
of those that go astray, that he might bring them into the way?

They said unto him, Rabby, M. They would not slightlye, and with
circumstaunces by the way, show unto him what they sought for, but (as it was
needful in a matter of weight) meant to declare unto him their mind a part,
and that more exactly, and to understand of him the word of truth: therefore
they ask of him where he dewelleth, or (as it is in the Greek text) where
he abides.

C. The name of Rabbi was common to great men, and such as were of honor and
great calling. But here the Evangelist shows another use of this word in his
time, namelye, that Doctors and interpretours of the word of GOD were
saluted with this name. Although therefore as yet they know not Christ to be
the only Master of his Church, yet notwithstanding they being moved with
the title that John gave unto him, they do count him as a Prophet and
teacher, the which is the first step to aptness to be taught.

Where dwell thou? By this example we are taught not to be content with the
naked and bare sight of Christ, but also to seek, where his abiding place is,
that he may receive us as Ghestes. For there are some which smell the Gospel a
far of, and so they suffer Christ sodainelye to vanishe away, and to let
slip whatsoever they had learned of him. And although they were not then made
his Disciples, yet notwithstanding, there is no doubt but that the same night
he did more fully instruct them, insomuch that a little after they were wholly
addicted unto him.

39. He says unto them: Come and see. They came and saw where he dwelt, and
abode with him that day: for it was about the tenth hour.

Come and see. M. Who can sufficientlye express this great facillitye and
humanity of our savior Christ? He might honestly have made a denial of that
which they demanded, or in two words have showed them the place of his
abiding: but he is so far from being offended with their vntimelye coming,
that he inuiteth and bids them to come, and see his Mansion place, when they
demanded where the same was. John. 6
R. Christ therefore receives so many as come to him in faith, and rejects
none. Nay, he calls all men unto him, saying: Math. 11
Come unto me all ye that travel and are heavy laden, and I will ease you.

Great therefore is the facillitye and gentleness of Christ toward these
Disciples. First he asks them what they would have? and then of him self he
bids them home to his lodging, although in time not convenient, no doubt to
the end they might lodge with him all night, and might hear more of him. But
in that he says, Come and see, and says not rather, I dwell here, or I dwell
there: It seems to declare, that no man can know Christ a right, except he
have experience of the feeling of Christ by faith. They shall be all taught
(says the Prophet) of God. But that feeling of faith comes not but by the
ministerye of the word. Esaias. 54


Who so ever therefore seeks where Christ abides, where GOD dwells, let
him hear the word and follow it, then shall he be sure to find Christ.

Whereupon the Apostle Peter says: 2. Pet. 1
We have a right sure word of Prophecy, where unto if ye take heed, as
unto a light that shines in a dark place, Psalm. 119
ye do well. And the Prophet David says: Thy word is a light to my paths,
and a Lantern to my feet.

They came and saw where he dwelt. M. They say not, we will come to morrow,
it is now evening: but with a thankful mind they receive the gentleness of
Christ, and the occasion also offered to talk with him. But what they heard
of Christ, the Evangelist hear makes no mention, notwithstanding by that
which follows somewhat appears, that they saw and heard those things,
whereby they came to the knowledge of Christ. For hereafter it is said that
Andrewe told his Brother Simon, saying, We have found Messiah.

For it was about the tenth hour. C. That is to say, the evening was at
hand. By this circumstaunce of the time, we gather that these two Disciples
had such a desire to hear and know Christ, that they were not careful for
their nights lodging.

The Children of this world are far otherwise, who always are weary and
unmeet to follow Christ.

40. One of the two which heard John speak and followed him was Andrew Simon
Peter's brother.

C. The purpose of the Evangelist unto the end of the Chapter is this, that
we might know how the Disciples were brought by little and little to Christ.

Here he speaks of Peter: afterward he will make mention of Philip and
Nathanael.

41. The same found his brother Simon first and said unto him, We have found
Messiah, which is by interpretacion, anointed.

The same found his Brother. B. In that Andrewe found Simon Peter his brother
in Judea, either by chaunse or looked for, it is an argument that he for
Religions sake, went to John the Baptist, although peradventure he was not his
continual Disciple.

It is a token truly that they lived together one with another, because when
they were called the second time to the perpetual fellowshippe of the Lord
(of the which Mathewe and Mark make mention) they were a Fishing together.
Math. 4 Mark. 1
M. Touching the other Disciples of John, whatsoever is affirmed, this is
certain, that this Andrewe, was the first after John in this, that he went
about to make Christ known: the which thing the Evangelist declares in saying
not simplye: The same found his Brother Simon: but, the same found his brother
Simon first. And no man will deny but that this is spoken by the Evangelist to
his praise. But there is no mention made where he found him.

We have found Messiah. That which is in the Hebrew text Messiah, is in the
Greek text Christos, and in the Latin text Vnctus, which three words have
all one sense, and signify anointed.

But these words, We have found Messiah, seem to be spoken with great
Emphasis, or force, and do note that Simon also (to whom Andrewe toulde this
news) burned marueilouslye in desire toward Christ. For his words are thus
much in effect: Rejoice brother, for him, whom both of us have sought so
carefullye, we have found, even the savior Christ. John. 4.
He spoke not doubtfullye as did the Woman of Samaria, which said: Is not he
Christ? But as one fullye certified Andrewe says, we have found Messiah.

42. And brought him to Jesus. And Jesus beheld him and said: Thou art Simon
the Son of Iona: thou shall be called Cephas, which is by interpretacion, a
stone.

And brought him to Jesus. E. By these words we see what is the force of
faith: so sone as we are borne a new in Christ by faith, by and by our mind
shows it self to another, and begins to declare, how great goodness it
has found, and it is not possible that faith should be idle, for it will
confess Christ, either with the mouth though there were a thousand deaths
set before our eyes: or else by charity toward our neighbor, by which it is
known who is a Disciple of Christ.

C. Andrew had scarce one spark of faith, and yet notwithstanding with the
same he does illuminate his brother Simon. Woe then unto our sluggishnesse, if
we being more fullye illumined, do not endeavor our selves to make others
pertakers of the same grace. Yea, we may see those things in Andrew which
Esaias requires of the sons of God, namely that every man lay hold on his
neighbor: and that he say, Come let us ascend to the Mount of the Lord, Esaias.
2
and he shall teach us. For Andrew reaches out his band to his brother, but to
this end, that he might be a Disciple in the school of Christ.

M. So are they woonte to do which are in love with the truth which they have
known. Math. 25
And this is the duty of a good servant to use the Talent well, that he
has received for the behoof of his master. And in that this Andrewe went
about first of all to win his brother Simon to the Lord, it is a token of
natural and true love, the which truly is taken from the godly in Christ.
For it is the Husbands part first to win the Wife, the Parents their
Children, the Brother his Brother, the Master his Servants, and the
Maiestrates to win their Subjects to the Lord. C. Furthermore the purpose
of God is here to be noted, in that he would have Peter, which did far
excel the other, to be brought to the knowledge of Christ, by the work and
ministerye of Andrew: to the end none of us although we excel should think
scorn to be taught of the inferior. B. The efficacy also of Gods calling is
here to be considered, For so soon as Simon was called to Jesus by his
brother, he followed. So, as many as are chosen shall receive the Gospel, being
called of God, and drawn of the father to the son. John. 6
A. For all that my Father gives me (says Christ) shall come unto me.

B. We know not the time when God will call in heart those that are his, for
large is the mercy of God, and therefore the ministry of the Gospel must
still be used toward them which show not them selves to be Dogs or Hogs.

Thou art Simon the son of Iona. R. Whereas our text has, the son of Iona,
Nonnus reads it, the son of John, and not of Iona. To the which agreeeth
this place, Simon Iohanna, John. 21
or Simon the son of John, love thou me? But it is likely that the Father
of Simon was called in Ebrue, Iochanan, or in the Chalde tongue, Iochanna,
whereupon, the letter of aspiration being altered out of his place, and.s. put
to the end, came Johannes: the which also afterward being made short, became
Jonas. And Iochanan, or Iochanna do signify that which we call in English
John, and is as much to say, as gracious. C. Therefore Christ gives Simon a
name: not by reason of any thing past (as men commonly do) but because he
would make him Peter. First of all he says, Thou art Simon the son of
Iona: the which is as much as if he should say, thou shall be far
otherwise then thou art now. For he makes not mention of his Father for
honors sake, but being come of an obscure steeke, and of no estimation among
men, he shows that this shall be no let to him to be made a man of invincible
fortitude. Therefore the Evangelist makes mencio^ of this as a prophecy in
that Simon had a new surname given to him. So that our savior Christ here
commends the grace with the which he meant to indew him. Therefore he says not
that this is his name presently, but that it shall be in time to come.

Thou shall be called Cephas. Cephas is thought of those that are learned, to
be a word of the Chaldee tongue: the which tongue the Jews commonly were
thought to use in the time of Christ. For after their exile into Babylon, they
did much use that pronunciation and speech. So that there is nothing ambigious
or doubtful in the words of Christ. Wherefore the words of Christ are in
effect thus much.

B. Rejoice with thy self that thou came to me: I will make thee a certain
Rock of godliness, and saving health: and therefore after this thou shall be
called Peter, of Petra, a Rock.

C. It is meet truly that all the godly be Peter's, or Rocks, which are
founded in Christ, 1. Peter. 2
that they may be meet to build the Temple of God: but here one for his
singular excellency is so called. But very ridiculous and foolish are the
Papists, which set him in the place of Christ, that he may be the foundation
of the Church. As though he him self were not also founded with the rest in
Christ.

What blind follye is it of them to make a head of a stone. Read the tenth
Chapter of Matthew, beginning at the second verse, and the sixteenth Chapter
also beginning at the eighteenth verse.

43. The day following, Jesus would go into Galilee, and found Philip and says
unto him: Follow me.

M. The Lord Jesus came forth of Galilee, where he was brought up, to hear
John preaching, Baptizing, and witnessing of him. For that he should come and
be openly made manifest to the people, the office of John required, who was
sent of God for this purpose, that he might reveal the only begotten son of
God to Israel: John might have left Judea, and have come into Galilee, and have
manifested Christ in the same Region: but it came to pass by the purpose of
God, by reason of greater aucthoritye and credit, that he should abide still
in Judea, and should there preach and Baptize, that is to say, should show
to the Jews, that Christ was now present.

When this was done, and the time of Christ at hand, to manifest him self
openly, and to gather his Disciples which he might use afterward for the
ministerye of the kindome of God: he thought it good to repair to Galilee.

First because from thence he would take his Disciples: and secondlye that he
might honor that Country where he was brought up with the very beginning of
his dispensation, least in the beginning of his manifesting and revelation, he
might seem to desire that which was great, and reject and despise the humble
and base. For that also was already foreshewed by the Prophet, that to this
Nation which sat a long time in darkness, and in the shadow of death,
contempned and despised, Esaias. 9
a great light should arise. And Christ at that time went into Galilee, when he
returned out of the desert, in the which he had fasted xl. days, without
meat or drink, after the which he was tempted of Satan. Math. 4
Let us note here that godly men always desire to benefit their country.

And found Philip. But not by chaunse, neither did Philip afterward find
Nathanael by chaunse. For (says he) before Philip called thee, when thou
wast under the Fig Tree, I saw thee. He therefore whom Philip found, was
not found of him by chaunse, but by the disposition of the providence of
Christ: and shall we think that Christ found him by chaunse, whom he found by
his providence?

And says unto him follow me. He did not call him to the end he should follow
him a little way, but that he might be a continual follower and disciple of his.

C. Now because Phillips mind was set on fire with these few words, we may
hereby gather of how great efficacy the word is: but it appears not alyke in
all men. For the word is preached to some without profit, even as if a vain
sound should pass through their ears. Therefore the external preaching of
the word of it self is unfruitful, (saving that it wounds the reprobate
to death, making them inexcusable before GOD) but when the secret grace of the
spirit does quicken the same, all our scences are by and by so affected, that
we are ready to follow God whither soever he calls us. M. This Phillippe is
the first: Whom neither the testimonye of John, nor the perswation of any
other Disciple drew, but the only word of Christ. C. Moreover, in that
following of Christ there was a special reason. He is commanded to follow
him, not only as any one of us, but also as a Companion and inseperable
friend. Notwithstanding this calling is a pattern of the calling of all men.

44. Philip was of Bethsaida the City of Andrew and Peter.

C. It seems that the name of this City was put in by great diligence, to
the end the great goodness of God might be the more manifest in the three
Apostles. Math. 11
We know how severely Christ threatened that City, and cursed the same.
Wherefore, to have some received into Gods favor, out of so peruers and wicked
a Nation, is as much to be counted of, as if they had been brought out of
hell. A notable benefit therefore. M. In Philip we have an example of
obedience. We read not that he curiously inquired of any thing, as flesh and
blood commonly does, he being simply called, obeys: committing himself
wholye to the caller.

45 Phillippe found Nathanael and says unto him: we have found him of whom
Moses in the law and the Prophets did write, Jesus of Nazareth, the son of
Joseph.

Phillip found Nathanael. M. We said even now that Nathanael was not found of
Phillip by chance but by the disposition of the providence of christ.

This Nathanael was of Cana of Galilee, as we shall see hereafter. C. We have
here the same desire of building set forth unto us in Phillip, which before at
the first was propounded unto us in Andrew. But how slender that little measure
of faith was in Phillip, which he had, hereby it appears, that he cannot
speak four words of Christ, but therewith he must join two gross errors.
He makes him the Son of Joseph, and also a Nazarite by birth, both which
are very false: and yet notwithstanding because he sincerelye desired to
profit his brother, and to reveal Christ, this his diligence is accepted of
GOD, and he has also prosperous success. For truly every man must endeavor
himself, soberly to abide within his bounds. And we must not think that the
Evangelist makes mention of this thing, as though it were worthy of praise in
Phillip, that twice he enformeth, and falselye reports of Christ: but his
doctrine is commended of him to be profitable, how corrupt and erroneous
soever it was, because it tended to this end, to reveal Christ.

Foolishly he calls Jesus the son of Joseph, and ignorauntly he makes
him a Nazarite: notwithstanding he applies this to no other than to the son
of God which was borne at Bethlehem: neither does he make a counterfayte
Christ, but would only have him known to be such a one as Moses and the
Prophets had foreshewed.

We do see therefore that this is the special point in doctrine, namely, that
by all means they which hear us, may come unto Christ.

This place also teaches us not disdainfully to reject that which simple and
unlearned men bring unto us concerning Christ, though it be not so aptly
alleged, if so be they direct us unto Christ.

But least we be drawn away by the false imaginations of men, from Christ, we
have always this remedy at hand, that is to say, to seek for the pure
knoledge of the truth out of the Law and the Prophets.

B. And in that, that Philip said unto Nathanael, (We have found him of
whom Moses the Law and the Prophets did write) we may conjecture that
Nathanael was studious in the Scriptures and had dilligently searched in them
for the coming and kingdom of Christ.

46. And Nathanael said unto him: Can there any good thing come out of
Nazareth? Philip says unto him, Come and see?

Can there any good thing come out of Nazareth. R. Nathanael is offended at the
baseness of the place, according to the manner of flesh and blood, which is
always offended at abject things, because it always aspireth to high and
great things: but God hides his excellent works under a base form and
show, that he might be wonderful in his works. C. This godly man is at the
first offended with the unadvised and rash talk of Phillip, for that which he
foolishly thought, this man certainly believes: beside this by the hatred and
contempt of the place he had conceived a wrong Judgment. In like manner,
except we take heed diligently, we shall not be without the same danger. For
truly Satan daily goes about to stay us with the like lettes from coming to
christ. For he seeks diligently to have many lies spread abroad which may make
us either hate the Gospel, or suspect the same, that we may fear to taste
thereof. There is yet another stumbling block which he laith in our way, and
that is to make Christ seem contemptible unto us. For we do see what a great
offense to many the baseness of the Cross is, the which appeared as well in
Christ the head, as also in his members.

M. Nathanael therefore having regard to the words of the Prophet, which
foreshewed that Christ should be borne in Bethleem, and not in Nazareth,
demands whether any good thing can come out of Nazareth. Mich. 5
So some in the company of the Pharisees said: Shall Christ come forth of
Galilee? Does not the Scripture say that he shall come of the seed of
David, and out of the City of Bethlehem?

Come and see. B. John. 7
When Philip was not able to resolve this doubt, he bids him come and see.
M. For he answers nothing to the demand of Nathanael, but that he should
go with him to Christ and see. The which notable counsel Andrewe also used
before, when he brought his brother Simon to Jesus. For these two, Andrew and
Philip, had so great experience in the force and virtue of the Divine power of
Christ, that with good and assured trust they desired nothing else, but that
he should be heard of men, being certified that it would come to pass that
if any heard him, they should have so great experience of the light of the
truth, that afterward they should feel no doubting in them. B. Therefore
Nathanael had so great a desire to the truth, that out of hand he followed
Philippe to Jesus, although it seemed to be contrary to the Scriptures which
Philip had showed. And hereby he got straight way the knowledge of the Lord.

C. For he suffered his double error by this inuitacion of Philippe to be
corrected. Even so by his example, let us show our selves tractable and ready
to be taught, let us not also refuse to inquyre and search, seeing Christ is
always ready to ease us of those doubts that trouble us. And if at any time
our objections can not be satisfied, let us not yet condemn that which is
offered unto us, and seasse to seek any farther for the truth.

47. Jesus saw Nathanael coming to him, and says of him: behoulde a right
Israelite, in whom is no guile.

M. Nathanael was not of their crewe, which condemned the Doctrine of the
truth before they heard or knew the same, and by obstinate impiety could not
abide to hear the same. Such were the Scribes and Pharisees of the Jews: and
that contrary to the Law of God, as Nicodemus notes.

Does our Law (says he) judge any man before it hear him, John. 7
and know what he has done?

Such are the Judges and Bishops at this day of the Popish Church, which very
rashely reject the Doctrine of the gospel, and condemn and persecute the same.

And says of him, behold a right. C. In that Christ prayseth Nathanael, he
does it not for his sake, but under his person he propounds a common
doctrine. For seeing there are many which boast them selves to be faithful
which are nothing less, it is meet that the true and good be discerned from
the false and counterfayt, by some note or mark. We know how greatly the
Jews boasted in their Father Abraham, when they boasted of the holiness of
their offspring: notwithstanding scarce one of them among an hundred was found
which was not a Bastard, and a Stranger from the faith of his fathers.

Therefore, Christ to the end he might take away the cloak from the
Hipocrites, he briefly defines a true Israelite: and does therewith also
take away the offense which afterward should arise upon the wicked contumacie
of that Nation. For they which would be counted the Children of Abraham, and
the holy people of God, became afterward mortal, and sworn enemies of the
Gospel. Least therefore the common impiety almost of all estates, should
discourage or trouble any man, he admonishes before hand, and in dew time,
that among many which pretend the name of true Israelites, few are true in
deed.

R. But how do these things agree that Nathanael is offended at the
baseness of the country, Israelite? specially, seeing that Christ says,
Math. 11
Blessed is he which is not offended by me. It may be answered, that although
he was offended at the baseness of the country of Christ, Aunsvvere
yet notwithstanding, because he simplye made haste to come to the knowledge of
Christ (whereas others did caluminate) therefore he is called a true Israelite.

M. So that Christ fares as though he knew not that scrupe in Nathanael,
which he had of the base Nazareth, and shows him the whole matter, which was
that he might know the son of god by certain arguments, whom Phillip had
called the son of Joseph. For it belongs to GOD only to search the
hearts and reigns. C. But to the end we may in few words understand the
mind of Christ, we must note that deceyte is opposed or set against
sincerity. He calls therefore those deceitful which in another place of the
Scripture, are called double in heart. And not only that gross hypocrisy is
touched, when men feign themselves to be good, whose concience bear themselves
witness that they are evil: but also the inward hypocrisy, when men are so
blind in their sins, that they do not only lie to themselves, but to others
also. The integritye therefore of the heart before GOD, and the upright dealing
toward men, make a true Christian.

But Christ specially touches that deceyt whereof mention is made in the
Psalm. Psalm. 32 Genesis 25
M. So it is said of Jacob, that he was a simple and plain man, and dwelt in
Tents. Whereupon we at this day must note, that if we mean to be Disciples
of Christ, we must be simple in mind. For he loves not those that are
crafty and wise according to this world, but those that are simple and void
of deceyt. Math. 10
Be ye simple (says our Savior Christ) as Doves. And Saint Peter says: Lay
aside all maliciousness, 1. Epist. 2
and all guyle, and fainednesse: and as newborn Babes desire ye the milk of
the word which is without all deceyt.

Math. 18
And our savior Christ, Except ye become as Children ye cannot enter into the
kingdom of heaven. What Christians therefore are they which are rather like
unto Woolues and Serpents, then to Sheep and Dooues, being full of all manner
of deceyte, Hypocrysie, and malice?

38. Nathanael says unto him: whence knew thou me? Jesus answered and
said unto him: Before that Phillippe called thee, when thou wast under the
Fig Tree, I saw thee.

Nathanael says unto him, Whence know thou me? M. Nathanael is all one
manner of man still. When he heard that Christ had given him so notable a
title, in calling him a true Israelite, he is not tyckled with pride in mind,
neither does he in like manner by and by burst forth into the praise of Christ
whom he knew not (as many Clawbackes are wont to do) neither does he by
hypocrisy dissemble the commendation of honesty and sincerity, which Christ
gave unto him, saying, Thou know not me whence I am: peradventure I am not
so free from deceyte as thou think I am. After the which manner, Hipocrites
are wont to dissemble the praise offered unto them, when as in heart it does
them good to hear it. But Nathanael does not thus dissemble. For as he was a
man void of all deceyte: so simplye he utters by and by in words that
admiration which he had conceived in mind, and demands of him, that which
more pertayneth to the matter. He thinks that Christ speaks of him as one
whom he had known a great while before, when as he in like manner knew him
not. For this Nathanael had at no time any manner of acquaintance,
familiarity, or fellowship with Christ.

Wherefore not without good cause, as one amazed he asks saying. Whence
knew thou me?

Before that Philip called thee. C. This answer of Christ seems to be
little to the purpose, and yet for all that very apt and of great weight. For
as it is proper to God to know men which he never saw, even so also it is
proper unto him to see those things which are not before his eyes. When
Nathanael therefore perceived that he was seen of Christ, not after the manner
of men, but with divine eyes, he might thereby gather that he spoke not now
unto him as a man. C. Wherefore Christ does insinuate himself to Nathanael, and
does so secretly creape into his mind at full, when he says that he knew him
and saw him a far of under the Fig Tree, that he acknowledged him afterward
to be the son of GOD. C. Furthermore we may gather by this place a very
comfortable doctrine, namelye that when we think not of Christ, we are seen
of him: and so it must needs come to pass that he can reduce those that go
astraye, and be turned from him.

M. Whosoever they be therefore that pertain unto Christ, they are not only
in his knowledge, but in his sight also, and that before, they being called by
the ministerye of the Gospel, come to the knowledge of him.

Christ does not only know those that are his, but he sees them also in
what place soever they be. Great therefore is this consolation, to a faithful
mind, when it believes that it is always in the eyes of the Lord, whether
we live or dye.

49. Nathanael answered, and said unto him: Rabbi, thou art even the very
Son of GOD, thou art the King of Israel.

R. It appears that the answer of Christ was not vain. For by the same he
breathed him self into the mind of Nathanael, insomuch that most effectuallye
he felt his diuinitye. Whereupon he by and by burst out into this Confession.

Rabbi, thou art even the very son of God. A. In the which he confesses more
than he had heard before of Philip. For he had said that he was Christ the
son of Joseph: but Nathanael acknowledges him to be the son of God: he
pronounces Jesus to come out of Nazareth: but this man freelye preaches him
to be the king of al Israel. So great and effectual is the power of the holy
ghost in the elect and chosen of God. C. And in that Nathanael by the divine
power acknowledges him to be the son of God, it is no marvel. But for what
cause does he call him the King of Israel? Israel. But Nathanael has a
farther respect. Answer.
He had heard before that he was the Messiah, now to this Doctrine he adds
a confirmation. He houldeth also another principle, namelye, that the Son of
God should not come, but that he should also declare him self unto the people
to be a King.

So that he does truly confess him to be the King of Israel, which is the
son of God. And truly, faith ought not to rest in the presence of Christ
only, but to have also a respect to his power and office. For it shall profit
little to know who Christ is, except we know also how he will behave him self
toward us, and to what end he was sent of the Father.

But seeing the kingdom of Christ is most large, Psalm. 2 Reuela. 17
in so much that he is called the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, why does
Nathanael call him only the King of Israel? Surely, he does it, Answer.
because his confession is limmitted to the measure of faith. For he had not
profited so far as yet, that he knew him to be a King set over the whole
world: or rather that the Children of Abraham should be gathered from all
places, that the whole world might be the Israel of the Lord.

Let us now by the example of Nathanael, exercise our faith in the hearing of
the word, and let us confyrme the same by all means possible: and let it not
lie hid, but let it burst forth into the confession of Christ to the glory of
God.

50. Jesus answered and said unto him: because I said unto thee: I saw thee
under the Fig tree, thou beleeuest, thou shall see greater things then
these.

B. The Lord Jesus going about to confyrme the Faith of Nathanael and the rest
of the Disciples, added these words.

C. He does not reprehend Nathanael as one to light of credit, but rather
allowing his faith, promises unto him and to the rest greater arguments of
confirmation. By the which words he lifts up their hope for the beholding
and knowing of farther matter. As if he should say: If of so small
beginninges, thou have received faith, I bid thee be of good cheer, and hope
to see greater matters in time to come.

It was but a mean token truly of the divine power, in that Christ said here
to Nathanael, I saw thee under the Fig Tree. For we read of many such
things to be done by Heliseus, as in the storye of Gihesi and Naaman the
Sirian. 4. King. 5 and. 6 John. 4
Such a Miracle was that which we read of concerning the unlawful Husband
of the woman of Samaria. These and such like are but mean and indifferent
things, if they be compared, to those Miracles which follow: but such
notwithstanding as have brought great increase of Faith, by little and little.

By these words also of Christ, (Because I said unto thee, I saw thee under
the Fig Tree, thou beleeuest,) We learn that faith comes by hearing, Romans
10
and hearing by the word of Christ.

51. And he says unto him: Verily, verylye, I say unto you, hereafter shall
ye see heaven open, and the Angels of GOD ascending and descending upon the
son of man.

A. Touching the opening of the heavens, it is already spoken of in the third
Chapter of Saint Matthew. In that Christ speaks of the opening of the heavens,
and of the ascending and descending of the Angels upon the Son of man: many
refer it to the resurrection of Christ, to his ascension, and to the sending
of the holy Ghost. C. But it rather signifies a certain continuance, which
should always be extant in his kingdom. It is most certain that Angels
appeared sometimes unto the Disciples which at this day are not seen: it is
certain also that there was another manner of revelation of the heavenly
glory, when Christ ascended into Heaven, than we now see.

But if we well way and consider of the matter, we shall find that the same
which was done then, is abiding for ever.

For the kingdom of Heaven being shut up against us at the first, Acts. 7
Math. 17 Luke. 24.
was truly opened again in Christ. Of this matter as well Stephen, and three
other Disciples in the Mount, had a visible sight, as also other of the
Apostles in the ascension of Christ.

But all the signs by the which the Lord shows him self to be present
with us, do pertain to the opening of Heaven, specially where he does
communicate him self unto us to life.

The Angels are said to ascend and descend, as they are Ministers unto us
of Gods will. Therefore by these words the mutual communication between God
and men is noted. And we must be thankful unto Christ for this benefit:
because without him there is rather mortal enmity between the Angels and us,
than a familiar care to help. Therefore they are said to ascend and descend
upon him, not that they do only minister unto him, but because in respect of
him, and for his honor, they hold up by their care the whole body of the
Church. Gene. 28
And there is no doubt but that he has some respect unto the Ladder which
was showed to the Patriarch Jacob by a vision. For the same which that vision
shadowed is truly declared and showed in Christ.

To be short, the sum of this place is, that where as all mankind was
banished from the kingdom of God, now the gate of the kingdom of Heaven is
opened unto us, that we may be Citizens with the Saints, and fellows with
the Angels, and they being ordained to be keepers of our saving health, may
come down from their blessed rest to help our miseryes. B. For the service of
Angels pertayneth to all those that trust in the Lord, as well as unto
Christ, according to that which is written in the Psalm, Psalm 91. and 34
He has given his Angels charge over thee. etc. For they are all Ministering
spirits, sent to serve them which have their inheritance in the kingdom of
Heaven. Heb. 1
M. So that now man with God, and the earth with heaven, are set at peace. For
so says the Apostle: It pleased the Father that in him all fullness should
dwell. And by him to reconcile all things to him self, Collos. 1
and to set at peace through the blood of his cross by him, both the things
in earth, and things in heaven.

The second Chapter.
1. And the third day there was a Marriage in Cana of Galilee, and the mother
of Jesus was there.

HITHERTO the Evangelist has showed how and in what order the Revelation of
Christ began to be manifested by the testimonies of John: and who they were
which claue unto him: now consequentlye he adds how by the light of
Miracles, he began partlye to confirm his Disciples which as yet were but
weak, and partlye to reveal his glory to Israel. C. For this storye does
contain a declaration of the first Miracle that Christ wrought: and for that
cause it becomes us to be the more diligent to consider of the same.
Howbeit, as we shall see hereafter there are other causes, which do commend
the same unto us.

M. Therefore the Evangelist going about to describe the beginning of the
Miracles of Christ, to the end he might bring credit unto the Historye,
puts down unto us, both the time, the place, and also the other
circumstaunces of the matter. M. This third day whereof saint John speaks
here, was the third after Christ came into Galilee, and had called Philip: or
after he had received Nathanael, which came to him.

Jn Cana of Galilee. C. It is not that Cana, which lies over against Sarepta
between Tire and Sidon, which was called the greater in respect of the other,
which some judge to be in the inheritance of the Tribe of Zabulo^ but other
some in the Tribe of Asser.

For Saint Hierome also affirms that as yet in his time there was a City
there remaining of that name. But it is like that this Galilee was adioining to
Nazareth: seeing that the Mother of Christ came thither by reason of the
Marriage. It was but one days Journey from Capernaum, as may appear by the
forty and six verse of the fourth chapter following. As concerning Marriage,
Matrimony, and the institucion thereof we have spoken at large in the
nineteen of Matthew.

And the Mother of Jesus was there. B. This may seem to prove, that the
Mother of the Lord was not with him in Judea: and also that she was of
familiar acquaintance with them of the Marriage.

2. And Jesus was called and his Disciples unto the Marriage.

M. In that they called Jesus to the Marriage, it was done according to the
custom of the time? for the Jews did use to call unto the Marriage, their
Kinsefolkes, Neighbors and Friends. For as yet he was not known what he was:
for if they had known him, they would not only have made him one of their
Ghestes, but also they would have craved of him the blessing of the Marriage.
C. In that the Disciples are also called, it may be gathered what a simple
and temperate life he led: because he lived with them in common. Neither ought
it to seem absurd, that a man not Rich and plentiful (as it shall appear
by the want of Wine) should bid four or five others for Christ's sake to the
wedding.

For the poorest sort are most ready to bid Ghestes: because they fear no
shame as the Ritche do, if they cheer not their Ghestes with great daynties.
For the Poor do more retain the old custom of good fellowshippe.

M. We are also taught by this example, to rejoice with them that rejoice, and
to apply our selves to the custom of men, in matters that are lawful and
honest. Great was the modesty of Christ and his Mother in this matter. Who is
moore holy then Christ? Who is more chaste then the pure Virgin, the Mother of
Christ? and yet notwithstanding both of them, being called, repair to the
Marriage. B. But the Anabaptists, Monks, and Nuns, think them selves to
be polluted, if they should come to marriages, which they commit to worldly
men: thinking them selves to spiritual to deal in such matters. As though
Christ were not spiritual, and the chastitye of the blessed Virgin inferior
to the virginitye of Nuns.

B. In time past the Lord would have his people to be merrye and banquet Deuteronomy.
16
before him. He is the same GOD to us ward, and no chaungeling. But in all
our banqueting, the Poor, Deuteronomy. 14 and 16
the Fatherles, and the Widows may not be forgotten. Read the book of
Deuteronomie.

3. And when the Wine failed, the Mother of Jesus says unto him: They have no
Wine.

And when the Wine failed. M. We must not be here inquisitiue to know,
whether the Bridegroom were so poor that he was not able to give Wine enough
to his Ghestes, or whether they drunk so intemperatelye in the beginning of
the Feast, that never a whit was left in the latter end: but we must rather
behold the providence of God, and must say, that god by his secret counsel
suffered the Wine to fail, that occasion might thereby be offered unto Christ to
declare his glory: even as we read that it was said of the blind man,
Neither this man sinned, John. 9
nor his parents, that he should be borne blind, but that the works of God
might be declared in him. Let this be the opinion of all the godly, that the
want of necessaryes, is an occasion oftentimes to set forth the glory of God.

The Mother of Jesus says unto him. C. It may be doubted whether she ask
or hope for any thing of her son, when as yet he had wrought no miracle. And
it might be that she looking for no such remedy, did put him in mind to
take away from the Ghestes, all irksomeness for want of wine, by some Godly
exhortacion, and also might put away the shame, which the Bridegroom thereby
sustained. For when the Godly woman saw that the Feast might be distayned,
because they which were bidden, thinking them selves scarce welcome, should
murmr against the Bridgrome, she wished for some solace.

4. Jesus says unto her, Woman what have I to do with thee, mine hour is not
yet come.

Woman, what have I to do with thee? R. A very hard answer certainelye.
What follows therefore? Did Christ therefore come unto the marriage that by
his example he might teach children hardlye and irreverently to behave them
selves toward their Parents? God forbid, that he which is a most absolute
example of life, should teach such wicked things. But by this sharp
answer, Christ declares what is the reason and manner of Faith, as hereafter
shall more plainly appear.

B. First of all, in that Christ here, and in other places also, calls not
his mother, by the name of mother, but woman, all men think it to be done of
him, to declare him self to be a son of greater calling, then the son of
Mary, whom he was only thought to be.

For he did all things to this end, he spoke all things to this end, and
he came to this end, that the elect might know and acknowledge him to be the
son of God, and might hope for salvation of him, whom no man doubted to be
the son of Mary and a man. R. It is also manifest that men are after a sort
restrained by this voice, from giving honor supersticiously unto Mary: least
they should attribute those things unto her, which be proper only unto God.

Christ therefore so speaks unto his mother, that he might give unto all men
a lesson for ever, least the immoderate honor of his mother, should obscure
his divine glory. And how necessary this admonicion was, it is sufficiently
known by the gross supersticions which afterward followed. For Marye is now
become the Queen of Heaven, the hope, the life, and salvation of the world:
and the madness of the world has gone so far, that it has almost robbed
Christ of his honor. But they do great iniurye unto Mary, when they take from
God that which belongs unto him, to deforme her with false and counterfayte
titles of praise. B. Moreover, Christ is an example to us in aunswering his
mother sharpelye, of suppressing the affections of the flesh in Gods
business, and of diligent observing and taking heed in all things to the
oportunitye and convenient time which GOD has decreed. Luke. 2 Exodus 20 Iere.
35
R. For in respect of charity we owe unto our Parents all honor and
obedience: but in respect of faith, we must hate our Parents: even as Christ
says: If any man come unto me, and hate not Father, and Mother, Luke. 14
and Wife, and Children, and Brethren, and Sisters, yea, and his own life for
my sake, he is not worthy to be my Disciple. Also he says: Math. 10
I came to set a man against his Father, and the Daughter against her Mother.
etc. Whereupon Christ did his duty to his Parents so often as he should do
the work of Charity: and he was hard and sharp toward them, so often as
he had the business of his heavenly Father in hand, as when he says: How
chaunse ye sought me? Luke 2
Know ye not that I must go about my Fathers business?

My hour is not yet come M. He does not deny playnelye to help them that
lacked Wine, but tarryeth until he have oportunitye offered him. Therefore he
signifies that he has not been hitherto unmindful, and slothful: As if he
should say, R. I have as yet no convenient time: I am now about my Fathers
business: I have respect to the glory of my Father, and not to thy affection.
For the will and glory of the father is to help them when necessitye
requires, and when man's help utterly fails, and when carnal counsel and
help ceasseth.

C. Therefore as he shows unto his mother that she makes to much haste,
so again he puts her in good hope of the miracle. John. 7
The hour of Christ is sometime said to be that which is appointed to him of
the father. But in this place he challenges unto him self a will to those
time to work.

M. We are therefore admonished by this place, that we commit that thing which
we ask of God to his wisdom, to help when he sees convenient time, and
not to desire to prevent his honor. C. For so often as the Lord keeps us in
suspense, and deferreth his help, he is not unmindful, but rather does so
moderate his works, that he does nothing but in due and convenient time.

5. His Mother says unto the Ministers, whatsoever he says unto you, do
it.

Bv. In the mother of Christ we have a noble example of a singular faith. For
she commands them to have respect only to the commandment of her son,
being neither offended with the sharp answer that he gave her, nor yet
distrusting his goodness and power, but hoping that at length he will supply
the want. C. She shows also an example of true obedience, which she ought
unto her son, when the matter stood not upon humane duty, but upon his
divine power. She stays her self therefore modestlye upon the answer of
Christ, and exhorts other likewise to obey his commandment. And the power
which she might have seemed to challenge to her self as a mother, she utterly
rejects, wyllyng all obedience to be given unto Christ.

Therefore we are hereby generallye taught, that if we desire any thing of
Christ, we can not obtain our peticions by any other means than to depend
wholly upon him, to have respect unto him, and to do that which he commands.
Bv. Wherefore this place is quite contrary to the supersticious, worshipping for
the Creator the creature, thinking the Lord Jesus to be so tied to his mother
by duty, that he can deny her nothing. Whereupon they leaving the true
mediator and intercessour the son of God, turn them selves to his mother
the virgin, asking that of her, which they should ask of the son. A. But
she sends other unto Christ, whom they should hear by right, according to
the commandment of God, Hear him. Math. 17


6. And there were set there six water Pots of stone, after the manner of the
purifying of the Jews, containing two or three Firkins a piece.

M. Now the Evangelist proceeds to the narration of the Miracle.

There were six water pottes. C. We may gather by the supputacion of Budeus
that these water Pottes held a great deal of water. Christ therefore made great
abundance of wine, yea, so much as would serve a hundred and an half of men,
to make a merry banquet. Moreover, as well the number of the water pottes, as
the measure, does serve to prove the certaintye of the Miracle. If there had
been but two or three gallons of Wine, men might have suspected that they had
been brought from some other place. If the conversion of water into Wine, had
been done in one vessel only, the certainety of the miracle had not been
manifest. The Evangelist does not in vain rehearse the number, and the
quantitye of every vessel.

After the manner of the purifying of the Jews. CHR. The Evangelist adds not
this without cause, for he has so done least any Infidel might mistrust
that some thick Wine was put into the vessels, and being mixed with water, was
made more thin and plentiful. These words therefore do show that there
was no. Wine at no time put into them. C. But this came of superstition, that
so many and so great vessels of water should stand there. They had their
custom of washing out of the law: But (as the world is to forward in
external matters) the Jews being not content with the prescript and simple
commandment of God, used continual washings. And there is no doubt, but that
they did it of pomp and vain glory. Even as at this day we see in the
papacy, what soever are said to pertain to the worship of God, are done of
mere ostentation. There was two faults therefore in this: First because
without the commandment of God, they did rashelye occupye themselves in
feigned and superfluous ceremonies: Math. 15
and secondlye, because under the pretense of Godliness, ambition rained in
that outward appearaunce.

7. Jesus says unto them: Fill the Water Pottes with Water. And they filled
them up to the brimme.

M. It was done by great foresight, that he turned not the water into wine in
such vessels as had been before occupied with wine, but in such as were
altogether accustomed to hold water: that thereby the truth of the Miracle
might be the more manifest. And in that he commands them not only to fill
some of them, but all, it is an argument of his divine power, and also of his
liberality. Bv. Also, in that he himself fills not the pottes with water,
but commands others to do it, he did it to this end, that he might have
the waiting servant witnesses of the miracle, which drew the water, least
there should be thought to be any deceyte in that which he went about. For
if any had been hard to believe, the Ministers might have witnessed that they
both drew the water and filled the vessels therewith. CHR. But could he have
made Wine in the vessels without water or any other liquor, which created
all things of nothing? M. Yea truly, he could have done it. What need was
there then of the element of water? Surely this water which he used, made the
miracle more evident, than if he had made wine of nothing. For else it might
have been thought that he had done it by coniuration, and so there should
not have been so manifest testimonye of the truth, if he had filled the
empty vessels with wine.

And they filled them up to the brimme. C. This commandment might have seemed
foolish and vain to the waiting servants, for there was water sufficient
before: but after this manner God commonly deals with us, that his power might
have the greater success unlooked for.

8. And he says unto them: Dravve out now, and bear unto the Governor of
the feast, and they bare it.

Bv. We read not that Christ spoke any thing at the turning of the water, or
used any monsterous words, as the Coniurers do. For with him to will is to
speak, and to speak is to will. Even as therefore before time he spoke the
word, and they were made, he commanded and all things had their being: Psalm.
148.
Even so now also, because he would and commanded by his secret power, the
water is turned into wine, his power working the very same that it wrought in
the beginning, Psalm. 14^
in the creation of heaven and earth.

M. But why does he rather send it to the governor of the feast, than to the
Bridegroom or to his ghestes? An order in this thing was to be kept, by which
the miracle might be made more manifest.

If the Wine had been brought first to the Bridegroom or to his Ghestes, they
would have thought that the governor of the Feast had brought the same by his
provision, and that it had been kept hitherto by his care. The governor of
the feast knew that there was no wine. And therefore the Wine was brought first
of all unto him by good order for the more certaintye of the matter. C. The
Evangelist calls him the governor of the feast, which was made chief
ouerseer of the Table, whom we commonly call the Sewer: not that it was so
great a Banquet, that such officers were required: but because the honorable
names are also transferred to the Marriages of the Poor, out of the order of
Banqueting of the Ritche.

And they bare it. C. In that the Ministers so willingly obey the commandment
of Christ, we may thereby gather that there was much dignitye and reverence in
him. A. So in another place, when he commanded the multitude to sit down,
John. ^
they obey him, although they see no preparation before them.

9. When the Ruler of the Feast had tasted of the water that was made Wine,
(and knew not whence it was, but the Ministers which drew the water knew)
the gouerner of the Feast called the Bridegroom.

When the Ruler of the Feast had tasted. Bv. Now the excellent and famous
Miracle of the Lord is revealed, his clemencye commended, and his power and
glory praised.

But the ministers which drew the water knew. M. He could without the help
of the Ministers have filled the water Pottes with water, and of the water made
Wine: but it was meet that the Miracle should be so disposed that they might
be his witnesses. And for this cause they are commanded to fill the water
Pottes a fresh, that afterward the Wine being drawn out of them, they might
undoubtedly know whereof it was made. So he commanded his Disciples to see
how many Loaves they had: then when he had blessed, he gave to them to set
before the people: and last of all he commanded to take up the fragments. All
the which Miracles were done, that they might have certain experience of the
Miracle done. And God uses this manner of working Miracles in the world, very
much, insomuch that he will not do many things without the help of men, which
he could otherwise do. He could bring all things out of the earth which we
use, without the work of Plowing, Planting, and watering: but he has so
appointed that we must Plant, and Water, and he will give the increase: not
that it is so necessary to be done, but that we might seek for the wonderful
and certain knowledge, and might so be norished and grow in the faith.

10. And says unto him: Every man at the beginning does set forth good Wine,
and when the Ghestes have well dronk, then that which is worse: but thou have
kept the good Wine until now.

M. The Governor of the feast thought that this Wine had been kept hitherto,
by want of discretion in the Bridegroom. Concerning the goodness whereof he
witnesses, saying: Thou have kept the good Wine until this time. For this
cause the Evangelist thought good to set before us these words of the governor
of the feast (although he erred, thinking that the Bridegroom had kept the
Wine until this time) that there might be sound and perfect testimonies
concerning the Wine: first from whence it came, concerning which the Ministers
testified: secondelye, what Wine it was, (that is to say, the best) concerning
which the Governor of the feast bears witness. Bv. Whereby it is manifestly
declared, that the Governor of the feast tasted no other Wine than that which
the Lord had made. For it is said that he knew not whence it was, to the end
we might understand that he spoke nothing because of Christ, but that he
uttered his mind simply and truly concerning the Wine as it was in deed. M.
But by these words of the governor of the feast, the manner and disposition of
this world is lively depainted, in that first of all they are wont to set
before men the best and chiefest things to eat and drink, and after that,
those things that are worse. Even so, they which sell, do first of all show
unto the Byars those things which are chiefest and best: but in process of time
they will serve them with worse and worse. They also which become servants,
do at the first show themselves very dilligent, that afterward when they
have gotten credit, they may more easyly beguile their masters. R. For the
world, as a man would think, promises all good things, with great
prosperity: But (as we commonly see) in the winding up, it leaves unto us
nothing but diseases, afflictions, calamities and death. On the contrary
part, Christ, even at the first, lays on the shoulders of his servant,
the cross, imprisonment, persecution, and death: but at the last, he gives
unto them, joy and peace of conscience, with everlasting life.

11. This beginning of miracles did Jesus in Cana of Galilee, and showed forth
his glory, and his Disciples believed on him.

This beginning of miracles did Jesus. C. The meaning is, that this was the
first miracle that Christ our Savior wrought.

For whereas the Angels told the Sheepeheardes that he was borne in
Bethlehem: Luke. 2 Math. 2 Mark. 3
whereas the star appeared to the wise men: whereas the holy Ghost descended
on him, in the shape of a Dooue, although these were miracles, yet
notwithstanding, it cannot be said properlye that they were done of him. M.
But here the Evangelist speaks of miracles of which he himself was the
aucthor, and which were done by Christ, as he dispensed the Gospel of the
kingdom. C. For it is vain and ridiculous which some affirm, namelye that
among the miracles that Christ did in Cana of Galilee, this was the first: as
though he to set forth his power chose a special place to himself, where
we read that he was never but twice. But it was rather the purpose of the
Evangelist to note the order of the time, which Christ used in declaring his
power. For until he was thirty years of age, he lived still at home, as a
private man. At the last being baptized, he came abroad to do his office,
and began to make it known by manifest documents and proofs, wherefore he
was sent of the Father. It is no marvel therefore if he deferred the first
show of his divinity until that time.

R. Furthermore, Christ by this Miracle declared, and after a sort has bound
him self, that he will be always present in Matrimonye. For most commonly
the reason and wisdom of the flesh, is wont to be discouraged from the
contract of Matrimony, because it sees not how necessary things for food
and raiment, will arise, and whereupon the Children that are like to come,
shall be brought up: specially seeing both Father and Kinsefolke must be
forsaken for a Wife. Genesis 1
Christ therefore by this miracle teaches that he is careful for married
folks, and that thou shall have Food, Raiment, and Riches sufficient, if
thou bid him to the Marriage, earnestlye beleeuest in him, and do
dilygentlye follow that calling to which thou art appointed of GOD. For the
blessing of the Lord makes men Rich. And he which tylleth his ground shall
have plentye of bread. Proue^. 10


And showed forth his glory. C. That is to say, he declared and manifested
his divine power, which brought health unto men in every place. B. Because then
he had shown forth a notable and glorious show, to prove him self the son
of God. For what miracles soever he has showed to the world, they were
testimonies of his divine power. But then the due and convenient time to set
forth his glory came, when by the commandment of his Father he would be
known. Whereby also the end of Miracles may be gathered. For this is as much
as if it had been said, that Christ did this Miracle to set forth his
glory. What shall we think then of those Miracles which obscure the glory of
Christ. A. But concerning this matter we have spoken more largelye in the
eleventh of Matthew.

And his Disciples believed on him. C. If they were his Disciples, it must
needs be that they had some faith before, but seeing they had followed him
hitherto without any certain faith, now at the last they begin to give them
selves whollye unto him, in so much that they acknowledge him to be the same
Messiah that was before preached unto them. But great was the merciful
sufferaunce of Christ, in counting them to be his Disciples, which so small ye
were endewed with faith. Being moved therefore by this miracle, they believed
on him. B. For as miracles are declaracions of a certain strange and rare
divine power, even so they draw the minds of the elect to know the same, and to
give them selves wholly unto it: but they take away all excuse from the
reprobate, and do make them stark blind with their glory: the which happened to
the Pharisees by the miracles of Christ, as the work of the Evangelists
plainlye declares. C. Therefore the true fruit of miracles is here declared,
namely, that they ought to be referred to the confirmation and profit of
faith.

12. After that he went down into Capernaum, he and his mother, and his
brethren, and his disciples: But they continewed not many days there.

M. The Evangelist seems not to touch certain things appertaining to the
order of the Historye: paraduenture for that he knew they were written already
of those which before had committed the deeds of Christ to memory, as we may
see in Luke, Luke. 4.
what he did in Nazareth, where he was brought up, and how he leaving Nazareth,
went down to Capernaum. Wherefore, in this place we must understand, that
Christ went not down by and by from Cana after the marriage, with his Mother,
Brethren, and Disciples, into Capernaum, but went from Nazareth, after he had
taught there a while, to Capernaum. For as the Prophets were wont most commonly
to teach in the famous Cities, even so did Christ, that the Doctrine of God
might be the more conveniently taught and spread abroad, and that the power
of God might chiefly be there declared to save, where the force of Satan was
most to destroy.

And his Brethren. C. Why did the brethren of Christ follow him? Surely it is
uncertain, except they meant to go with him for company to Jerusalem. Moreover,
it is certain that by the name of brethren, in the Hebrew tongue, all sorts
of kinsfolks are meant. For which matter, and for the City of Capernaum, read
the six and forty verse of the twelfth of Matthew, and the first verse of the
ninth of Matthew, with the three and twenty verse of the eleventh chapter of
Matthew.

But they continued not many days there. CHR. Because he meant shortelye to go
up to Jerusalem.

13. For the Jews Passover was at hand, therefore Jesus went up to Jerusalem.

M. The Law as yet kept his state in all things.

Deuteronomy. 16.
B. And it commanded that Passover should be celebrated every year, and
that in the same place which GOD had chosen to dwell in, and to put his name
there. For it was not lawful in any other place to celebrate Passover. B. And
the City of Jerusalem was at that time the place appointed for that purpose.
Christ seeking to satisfy and fulfill this Law, although he were not under
the Law, that he might so fulfill all righteousness, and redeem those that
were under the Law, and to the end also he might take occasion to manifest
his glory, when the Passover drew nigh, he went to Jerusalem. C. And let the
reader note, that for one of these two causes he went always up to Jerusalem.

M. Let this example also teach us to celebrate the Ceremonies received from
God, (although they be external and but for time) with the weaker and ruder
sort, until the time which they shall have an end, come.

14. And found sittyng in the Temple those that sold Oxen, and Sheep, and
Doves, and chaungers of money.

C. The rest of the Evangelists also declare this thing which we read here
to be done by our savior Christ, Math. 21. Mark. 11. Luke. 19.
but the like to be done diverse times. Christ therefore purged the Temple twice
from fylthy and profane business: once about the the beginning of his
Embassage: and again, when he was ready to go out of the world to his father.
M. So soon therefore as he was entered into the City, he vewed the Temple. Let
this be the chief care of all men, not only of Bishops, but also of al
Magistrates, that the kingdom and worship of God be sought for.

A. Concerning the prophanacion of the Temple, and the covetousness of the
Priests, read the one and twentye of Mathewe.

15. And when he had made as it were a scourge of small cords, he drove them
all out of the Temple, with the Sheep and Oxen, and powered out the changers
money, and overthrew the tables.

Christ by and by goes about to purge the Temple, plainly affirming that the
Temple of the Lord is not a place of Merchandise. Notwithstanding, it may be
demanded why he began not first with doctrine: for this seems to be a
troublesome and preposterous way, to correct vice with violence, before the
same were assayed to be remedyed by Doctrine. But Christ had respect to
another matter. For because the time was now at hand, in the which he
should openly discharge the office enjoined to him of the father, he would
after a sort take possession of the Temple, and plainelye declare his Divine
aucthoritye.

And to the end all men might be attentive unto his Doctrine, it was meet
that their sluggishe minds should be wakened with a new and unwonted deed.
The Temple was now a place of heavenly Doctrine. When he went about to restore
the puritye of Doctrine, it was meet that he should show him self to be
Lord of the Temple. Moreover, he could not bring any otherwise the
Sacrifices, and exercises of Godliness to their spiritual end, than in
taking away the abuse. Therefore this thing which he did was a certain
beginning of that reformacion for the which he was sent of the Father.

M. They which teach that external euilles are not to be taken away which
are in the Church, except they be first taken out of the hearts of men, may
by this place learn to alter their opinion.

For by this reason Christ should first have taken Covetousness out of the
hearts of the Jews, and afterward have reformed the Temple.

But we see the contrary to be done here of Christ. He cast the Byars and
Sellers out of the Temple, although they kept covetousness in their breasts.

16. And he said unto them that soulde Dooues, Have these things hence, and
make not my fathers house, a house of merchandise.

M. He does not simplye dislike that Sheep Oxen, and Dooues are soulde to them
which came far of to offer Sacrifice, seeing the same was appointed in the
Law, but because they were soulde in the Temple, and because the Temple was
made a house of merchandise, which was a filthye token of special
covetousness. These things might have been soulde in certain places without
the Temple.

So at another time, he suffered not a vessel to be carried through the
Temple. Wherefore if he so pourged this Temple, which in a short time should
perish, that it might not be a house of merchandise, what shall we think
that he will do unto those Temples at this day, in the which not only all
things are soulde for filthye gain, but also such things as are most
pernicious and altogether fained, are set forth to sale?

The Sacrifice of the body and blood of Christ is soulde, 2. Peter. 2.
which they say the Priest makes, being a mere feigned lie. The deliverance
of Souls out of Purgatory is soulde: when as their Purgatory after death is
nothing else but a Money matter of Priests. Remission of Sins is soulde
which cannot be bought. The merits of Saints, with many things more
offered to sale, which money in deed in no wise may purchase.

He that considers of these things, what will he judge of these Churches,
but only that they be places of feigned marchaundise. C. But the Temple was
called the house of Prayer, because God would there be specially called
upon, and because he had ordained the same for spiritual exercises. R. The
Temple of Jerusalem also was called the Temple of the Lord, and the house of
God, because it was consecrated for a shadow of Christ, in which Christ the
Father hears those that pray, and whose only Sacrifice is acceptable to
the Father. Whereupon our savior Christ says: Whatsoever ye ask the Father
in my name, John. ^6.
he will give it you. Behold he says, In my name, not, in a Temple of stone.
For the hour will come, when the Father will be worshipped, neither in
Jerusalem, nor in the Mountain, but in spirit and truth. C. The other
Evangelists say that he spoke more seuerelye at the second time that he
cast them out of the Temple, namelye, that they made of the Temple a den of
Thieves. Math. 21.
But he admonishes them not to profane the Temple of God, in turning it to
other use then God had appointed the same. And in making mention of the Father,
he declares him self to be the son of God, that he might challenge to him
self the right and aucthoritye to pourge the Temple.

17. And his Disciples remembered that it was written. The zeal of thine house
has even eaten me.

And his Disciples remembered. B. Namelye after Christ was risen again, when
they understood the Scriptures by receiving the holy Ghost: as the Evangelist
him self expounds in that which follows. C. For we must not think that
they remembered this place of Scripture, when Christ did this deed: but
afterward, when they being taught from above, considered with them selves
what this deed of Christ should mean, and so by the direction of the
spirit, this place of Scripture comes into their mind. And truly the
cause of Gods works does not always come into our minds out of hand.

But afterward in continuance of time, he reuealeth his purpose unto us. And
this is a very fit bridle to restrain our boldness, least we should at
any time murmr against God, if we at any time should dislike of those
things which he does.

For therefore GOD does defer the perfect revelation of his worckes to stay
and keep us in the bounds of modestye. And the place which is here cited is
taken out of the Psalm. 69. Psalm. 69.


And in the name of Temple, David by a figure called Sinecdochen, comprehends
the whole worship of GOD. For these are the words of the Prophet. For the
zeal of thy house has eaten me: Verse. 9.
and the rebukes of them that rebuked thee are fallen upon me. Where the
second member answers to the first: and is nothing else but a repeticion.

The effect of both parts is this, that David was so careful to maintain
the glory of God, that he willinglye bare al manner of reproaches, with the
which the reprobate reproched God, yea, he burned with such a zeal, that this
one affection, overcame all other.

And in this sense truly he says, that he was endued with zeal: but there
is no doubt, but that he speaks those things in his own person, which
did properlye belong to the Messiah.

Bv. This therefore is applied unto Christ the Lord by a Tipe, which with his
whole mind sought the reformation of the Church. C. Therefore the Evangelist
says that this was one of the notes, by which Jesus was known of his
Disciples to be a repayrer of Gods kingdom. M. And here we have to note that
whatsoever things are written, they are written for our learning, that through
patience and consolation of the Scriptures we might have hope. C. We must
also note that no man shall know what Christ is, or to what end all that he
did and suffered pertayneth, but by the instruction of Scripture. Wherefore as
every one of us shall desire to profit in the knowledge of Christ, so we
must bestow continual diligence and meditacion in the Scriptures.

But let us return to the deed of Christ. R. Christ him self says in
another place, Learn of me, Math. 11.
for I am meek and lowlye in heart. In that therefore he seems in this place
to be cruel contrary to his wonted manner, it is neither filthye desire,
Envy, nor rashness, but divine zeal, and just anger.

C. It rests therefore now that every man follow the example of Christ,
seeing in the head a general example is propounded in the whole body.

According to that which Paul has in his Epistle to the Romans. Romans 15.
Let us not suffer so much as in us lies, the holy Temple of GOD to be
defiled by any means. And this zeal ought chiefelye to be in the heads of
the Church.

M. With how great ardent zeal were the holy men of GOD in time past
endued: Exodus 32. Number. 25. 1. King. 17. 3. King. 18. Acts. 7. Acts. 13.
As Moises, Phinees, David, Elias, Stephen, Paul, and the rest of the Apostles.
C. Notwithstanding we must take heed least any man pass the bonds of his
calling. R. For a true zeal pertayneth not to every spirit: wherefore let no
man usurp the same unto him self of his own aucthoritye, least in steed of
zeal, he have rashness: and always take heed that thy zeal be according
to knowledge. Romans 10.
For the Jews persecuted Christ upon zeal, but not according to knowledge.

18. Then answered the Jews, and said unto him, What token show thou unto
us, seeing that thou do these things?

M. It is very like that those Jews which were in danger of loosing their
gain, set upon Christ with this question. But they defend not their deed,
as though they were without just cause cast out of the Temple. For they could
not deny but that they had made of the house of God, a house of merchandise.
What then do they demand? Surely, they demand by what aucthority, with
such seueritye, he casts out the Buyers and sellers. For by seeking to blame
Christ, they go about to excuse their own fault. For he had said, Make not
the house of my Father, a house of Merchandise.

And therefore the Evangelist says that the Jews answered Christ, namelye,
to that which he spoke concerning his Fathers house.

They sought no sign with their whole heart: but sought only to condemn him
of rashness and sedicion, because he being neither endewed with divine, nor
humane aucthoritye, took the government of the Temple and worship of God to
him self. Hereby therefore we see the disposition of those, which sin in the
Temple and worship of GOD for gains sake, who when they can neither deny
their fault, nor defend the same, than they reprove those of whom they are
corrected of rashness and sedition: so far they are from amending that
which they do amiss. B. Therefore because Moses confyrmed his Embassage
with signs, these also require a sign that they might know that aucthoritye
which the Lord does arrogate unto him self to be committed unto him of God:
whereas those miserable wretches might even than have seen a Miracle, had they
not been amazed and blinded. C. For, in that no man, in so great a company
laid hands on Christ, as the Buyers and Sellers that were there, it is a
manifest sign that they were all stricken by the power of God, that they might
stand as men amazed.

Wherefore, except they had been stark blind, this miracle was evident enough
to be seen, that one should be so bold to stand against so many, that one
which was a naked man, should not let to encounter with the valiant, that one
base in the sight of men, should contend with Princes. For why did they not
withstand him, since they did far excel him in power, but only because their
force was restrained? But the Jews did err in this thing, that they would
not allow the vocation of Christ, except it were confyrmed by a miracle.

For this was not seen in the Prophets and other Ministers of God, that they
should always show Miracles: Neither has God tied him self to this
necessitye. But this was their corrupt custom, and evil disposition: Math. 12.
the which Christ him self notes, saying: This Adulterous and wicked
generation requires a sign. etc. Not to the end they might know the truth,
but rather to the end they might thereby take some occasion to cavil.

Such are they which at this day not being content at the first with the
truth of the Evangelical Doctrine, desire to have signs given unto them.

19. Jesus answered, and said unto them: Destroy this Temple, and in three
days I will rear it up.

C. This is an allegorical kind of speech, and somewhat hard to be
understand, the which Christ used, because he judged them unworthy of a
manifest answer. M. He could have showed unto them by and by an argument of
his Divine aucthoritye, if Divine signs might have served to ostentacion,
which were ordained for the health of mankind. But because they demanded this
question of a malicious mind, and not to learn, but to cavil, he does not
answer unto their question plainlye, but obscurelye: and he offers unto
them a very great sign, and the most certain of all other, but known only
to the faithful: Romans 1
that is to say, the resurrection, by the which he was declared to be the
son of God. The which sign as yet not come, was not known to the
unbelieving Jews.

C. This is that therefore which he says in another place, that he speaks in
parables unto them which can not comprehend the secreete mysteries of the
kingdom of heaven. Math. 13
First of all therefore he denies to give unto them a sign which they
required: either because it should have been unprofitable, or else because he
knew the due time was not yet come. Nevertheless, he affirms that his power
shall be ratified and confirmed by no small sign, least they should thereupon
take some colloure of excuse. R. Even as in another place he gave unto them the
sign of the Prophet Jonas, meaning thereby his resurrection which was to
come. C. But all these things he does figuratively, handling the unfaithful
as they deserved, and setting him self free from their contempt.

It did not appear as yet that they were obstinate: but Christ did
sufficientlye perceive what their affection was.

Notwithstanding, it may be demanded seeing he did so many Miracles, why he
speaks but of one miracle here. It may be answered that Christ therefore
made no mention of the rest of his Miracles, because his resurrection only was
sufficient to stop their mouths: and also because he would not set forth
the power of God before them to be a mocking stock. For therefore also he
spoke figuratiuelye of the glory of his resurrection. R. Also how the Temple
of Jerusalem shadowed Christ, he him self in this place declares. Destroy
(says he) this Temple, that is to say, ye shall kill me, which am that true
Temple in the which all true Prayers being made, are heard, in the which only
God is found favorable.

C. We must also note that our bodies are called the Temple of GOD, but in
another sense, that is, Colos. 2 1. Timo. 3
because by the force of his spirit, God dwells in us: but in Christ the
fullness of the Godhead dwells bodily, as says the Apostle, in so much
that God is truly manifested in the flesh.

And I will raise it again. C. Here Christ challenges unto him self the
glory of his resurrection, when as notwithstanding the Scripture testifies
that it is the work of God the father. But these two things do very well
agree together. For to the end the Scripture might commend unto us the power
of God, it does plainlye ascribe the raising again of the Son from death,
to the Father: but Christ does here specially set forth his Diuinitye.

M. This place therefore does agree with that which we shall see afterward,
where Christ speaks thus, I put away my life from me, John. 10
that I may take it to me again. No man takes the same away from me, John.
10
but I put it away of my self. I have power to put it away, and I have power
to take it to me again.

20. Then said the Jews: Fortye and six years was this Temple a building, and
will thou rear it up in three days?

M. The Jews understood that to be spoken of the temple built of stone, which
he understood of his Body: and they judge in the answer of Christ great
rashness to consiste, in so much that they did judge him to be mad, not by
his deeds only, but also hy his words. As if they should say: What
madness is this in thee, that thou dare promise that this Temple shall be
built in three days again, if it be destroyed: seeing that with so great
labor and cost, it was a building Fortye and six years?

And here is to be noted that whereas the Jews said that the Temple was a
building six and fortye years, it agrees with the Prophecy of Daniel. Dan.
9. and.25.
And although in the book of Esdras the Temple seems to be built in a far
shorter time, whereby some contrarietye may be gathered, yet notwithstanding,
there is no repugnancye at all. For so soon as the Sanctuarye was erected
before the building of the Temple was finished, they began to offer
Sacrifices. Afterward by the slothe and negligence of the people, the work
was left undone for a long time, as evidently appears by the complaints of
Aggeus. For he does there seuerelye blame them, Agg^. 1
because they were to diligent in building their own houses, and very
negligent, in leaving the Lords house unfinished.

Touching the exposition of the one and twenty verse, read the nineteenth
going before.

22. As soon therefore as he was risen from death again, his Disciples
remembered that he thus had said: and they believed the Scriptures, and the
words which Jesus had said.

As soon therefore as he was risen. M. For then he opened their sense and
understanding, that they might understand the Scriptures: Luke 24
as says the Evangelist Luke.

At the first the Disciples understood not Christ when he spoke: but afterward
that Doctrine which seemed to be spoken in vain, brought forth his fruit in
due time. Therefore, although many things in the deeds and words of the Lord
be obscure for a time, yet for all that we must not despair to obtain that
which by and by, we can not attain unto.

M. That which Thomas understood not upon the very day of the resurrection
of Christ, John. 20
he understood the eight day after. Although therefore the reprobate abide in
their blindness, and walk in darkness, yet notwithstanding, the elect are
always lightened in their time, and by the calling of Christ, come to the
knowledge of God. C. The text also is here to be noted, namelye, that they
believed the Scripture, and the word of Christ. For the Evangelist hereby
means that they conferring the Scripture with the word of Christ, were
helped, that they might go foreward in the faith. Bv. The which thing is put
down to be a Doctrine, and an example unto us, that we comparing both the
words and deeds, with the Scriptures, may believe Jesus to be the son of
God, a King and hye Priest, and the Savior of the world.

23. When he was in Jerusalem at the Passover, in the Feast day, many
believed on his name, when they saw his miracles which he did.

M. There wants not some reason, that the Evangelist added these words to
that which went before. For the rude and ignorant reader might have been much
offended at the answer of Christ, as though he of purpose neglected the
salvation of these Jews, which desired a sign to be given unto them, he
being able to show them signs inowe, with the which he might have made his
glory manifest. Therefore for the ignorants sake, he seems to make mention of
these things, to the end he might show that Christ had a care for all men:
but, that he showed such evident miracles in the Feast of Passover, that
many being then present at the feast at Jerusalem, and moved by the light of
the Miracles, believed on his name. John therefore very aptlye adds this
narration to that which goes before. But to the purpose. Christ gave not
such a sign as the Jews desired: for he perceiving that by many miracles
which he had already showed, he had profited nothing, but brought them to a
vain show of Faith, he thought it not good to grant unto them their desires,
as unworthy.

Here was some profit of signs, that many thereby believed on the name of
Christ, in so much that they professed to follow his Doctrine: This their
faith, although it was not as yet perfect, yet in time it might become perfect:
this faith might be a profitable preparation to celebrate the name of Christ
unto others.

M. But what signs they were which our savior Christ showed, the Evangelist
makes no mention, neither let any be curious to know: as though he had done
any notable wonders, more now, than he was wont to do.

24. But Jesus did not commit him self unto them, because he knew all men.

C. That is to say, Christ did not take them for his own Disciples, but rather
made account of them as light and vain. The place is diligently to be noted
how that not all which profess them selves to be the disciples of Christ, are
thought to be such in his sight: For the Evangelist says here, Because he
knew them all. There is nothing more dangerous than Hypocrisy, both for
diverse ca^ses, and also because it is a vice more then common.

There is no man almost which likes not of him self: and when we deceive
our selves with vain perswations, we think that GOD is blind. But here we
are taught how much his judgment does differ from ours. For he is a
searcher of the heart and raines, nothing is secreete unto him. Men may be
deceived with external shows, but God can not be mocked. Let us therefore be
sure of this that that they are the true Disciples of Christ, which are allowed
of him. For the Lord knows who are his. 2. Tim. 2
And as this is a great comfort to the children of God, that they are known of
him, so also it ought to bring great terror to the minds of the ungodly,
that they are known unto him which shall come to judge both the quick and
the dead.

25. And needed not that any should testifye of man, for he knew what was in
man.

C. Whereas the Evangelist says, that Christ knows all, it is to be
referred to those of whom mention is made before. But because some man might
doubt whence Christ had this knowledge, the Evangelist cutting of this doubt
or question, answers, that whatsoever is in men hidden from our eyes, is
seen of Christ. But we may not hereof gather, that no man ought to be
trusted, because that which is in man, is not known unto us: For no man
knows what is in man, but the spirit of man, that is in man: First, because
we are such that we stand in need one of another help. Secondly, because we
are evil and ready to condemn But least we should always be deceived by
Ipocrites, it belongs to Christ only to endue us with the spirit of
discretion, whereby we may discern them from such as mean simplye and
truly: the which gift we must obtain at his hands by Prayer.

The third Chapter.
1. There was a man of the Pharisees named Nicodemus, a ruler of the Jews.

There was a man. C. THE PVRpose of the Evangelist S. John in this Chapter, is
to set forth certain of the words and deeds of our Lord and savior
Christ, that by them he may be known to be the savior of the world, the
eternal power of GOD, yea, and God him self. Seeing therefore in the Chapter
going before he made mention of two of his notable and wonderful deeds, by
which his Diuinitye might plainelye appear, he thought it now meet to
adioyne thereunto the communication which he had with Nicodemus the Pharisee,
and a chief Ruler among the Jews, in the which he plainelye expresses by his
own words, both what he cause to ^oe, that we might be Citezens of his
Kingdom, and also what he requires of us.

It seems that the Evangelist enters into the narration of this Historye,
with the same purpose and intent that he did enter into the narration of those
things which are set at the latter end of ye chapter going before: namely, to
show that their obstinacye is inexcusable, which desired of Christ that a sign
might be given unto them, because he had showed so many notable Miracles, that
the Pharisees them selves also were constrained to acknowledge his Divine
operation.

The Evangelist also sets before our eyes, in the person of Nicodemus, how
frivolous and vain their faith is, which being moved by Miracles, suddenly
became Disciples of Christ. For this man seeing he was a Pharisee, and one of
the chief rulers of the people in his country, ought for to have excelled
others. For among the common sort of people lightness reigns much.

Of the Pharisees. M. There was no sect that more envied Christ, than the sect
of the Pharisees. For they were puffed up with an opinion of holiness, and
with their aucthoritye, by which they excelled other of the Jews: but Christ
uncovered the Hypocrisy of these men, and therefore they did hate him to ye
death. A. But touching that which partayneth to their sect and original: read
our exposition upon the third Chapter of Matthew. C. This was great honor to
Nicodemus, that he was a Pharisee, and a Ruler of the Jews: but the Evangelist
does not give him this title for honors sake, but rather notes that the same
was an obstacle, and let unto him, from coming with a free and quiet mind unto
Christ.

Whereby we are admonished, that they which excel in the world, are very much
wrapped with troublesome snares, that they can not aspire unto Heaven. But the
Evangelist does not only make mention that Nicodemus was by order a Pharisee,
but also one of the chief rulers of the people, that is to say, one of the
Seniours, and Ecclesiastical Doctors: as may appear by the words of
Christ: Art thou a Master in Israel, and know not these things?

Called Nicodemus. M. The Evangelist puts down his name to bring the more
credit and aucthoritye to the Historye.

2. The same came to Jesus by night, and said unto him, Rabbi, we know, that
thou art a teacher come from God: for no man could do these miracles, that thou
do, except God were with him.

The same came to Jesus by night. B. Here come two things to be noted: 1.
Timo. 2
The first is, that the Lord God has those that are his, among all sorts of
men, which would that all men should be saved and come to the knowledge of
the truth: The second is, that the elect can not but at the length, they must
come unto the Lord, according to the saying of our savior Christ, John. 6
All that my Father gives me, shall come unto me.

C. Notwithstanding, in that he comes in the night, we may gather that he
was too to fearful: for he was blinded in his own conceyte. It might be
also that shame did stay him: because such men as are ambicious, think that
they have for ever lost their fame, if they descend from the stately degree of
a Master, to the order of a Scholar. And there is no doubt, but that this
man was puffed up with a foolish opinion of his own knowledge. To be
short, seeing he did make great account of him self, he would not willinglye
lease any part of his estimation. And yet for all that he seems to show
some spark of Godliness to be in him, in that he hearing a Prophet of God
to be come, does not contempne, or neglect the Doctrine which was brought by
him, but has some desire of the same. The which desire sprange no doubt of
the fear and reverence of GOD. A frivolous and vain curiositye, pricketh some
forward greedelye to inquire after new things, but there is no doubt, but
that Religion, and the prick of Conscience led Nicodemus to desire
familiarlye to know the Doctrine of Christ. And although this spark of
Godliness lay hid as it were, a long time, yet notwithstanding, so soon as
Christ was dead, it brought forth such burning Love toward our Savior
Christ (which no man ever looked for) that he showed him self in deed to be
a Faithful and true Disciple of Christ. John. 19


Rabbi, we know that thou art a teacher. R. The disputacion of Nicodemus with
Christ is very modest and wise: for the disputacion of the rest of the Jews
were either captious, as was that for the payment of Tribute, and concerning
the Byll of Diuorcement: either envious, Math. 22. Math. 19. Math. 22. John. 2.
as about the resurrection, and the great commandment in the Law: or else
unfaithful, and importunate, as when they desired a sign to be given them.
But the disputacion of Nicodemus is Civil and simple, for he comes not unto
Christ to contend, or maliciously to try him, or to catch him in his words:
but to learn which is the true way to justification. His words therefore are
thus much in effect, Master, we know that thou art come to be a Master.
For seeing at that time learned men were commonly called Masters, Nicodemus
saluteth Christ by this name according to the accustomed manner: and afterward
affyrmeth him to be sent of God to teach. And of this beginning the aucthority
of all the Doctors and teachers in the church depends. For seeing we must take
our knowledge from Gods word only, none are to be heard, but they out of
whose mouth God speaks.

M. Truly, it is a forceable way, to promote and further the truth, if so be,
he which teaches the same, be known to be sent of God: but this prevails
only with the godly: as for the wicked they have no regard, whether their
teachers are sent from God or no. With the Godly it prevails thus much, that
at the first they resist not the Doctrine, nor the teacher thereof, although
through infirmitye, they dare not as yet openly seem to favor the same:
Whereas contrary wise the wicked, which are blinded with rancour and envy,
have so little discrecion and regard to discern the spirits, that they can
not bridle their malicious minds. He says not, I know that thou art a
teacher come from God: But (says he) We know. Which, we? Surely, we
Pharisees, and Seniors of the people: even we are constrained by the virtue of
those signs and Miracles which we have seen, to know and understand that
thou art sent from God, howsoever we resist thee. Hypocrites withstand the
truth against their conscience.
And this is the manner and disposition of Hipocrites, of Iusticiaries, and of
Simoniakes, which make Merchandise of Religion, to withstand the known and
manifest truth against their consciences.

For no man could do these Miracles. Bv. Nicodemus gathers by the Miracles,
that Jesus was sent from Heaven, to be the teacher of the whole world: and
according to his ignorance and want of knowledge, he deemeth him to be no
better than a Prophet, which showed signs and wonders by the help of God, and
not by his own proper power. For, says he, No man could do these miracles
which thou do, except God were with him.

Therefore because none do more proudly glory and boast of the title and name of
God, than false Prophets, it is necessary that we have that discretion,
whereby the spirits are proved and discerned. Therefore Nicodemus affirms it
to be manifest that Christ is sent from heaven, because God does so manifestly
reveal and show forth his power in him, that it can not be denied, but that
God is with him. And he presumes that no man will deny, but that God does
commonly work by his Ministers and servants, and by no other: insomuch that
he confirms and approves the office and charge committed unto him. And he
does not so presume without cause, seeing it is the Lords will that Miracles
should be always as seals of his Doctrine. And he does most aptly and truly
make God the author of miracles, when he says, that no man could do these
signs, except God were with him. For in effect he says, that they are the
deeds and works of God, and not of man. A. For otherwise spoke those
Pharisees, which spoke thus of Christ, after he had opened the eyes of the
blind: John. 9. John. 7.
This man is not of God, for he keeps not the Sabbath day. And in another
place: He seduceth the people. Notwithstanding, the argument of Nicodemus
seems not to be very strong. For seeing false Prophets, have deceived the
blind and ignorant with their false and forged signs, no less, than if they
had proved them selves to be the faithful servant of God, by true signs in
deed, what difference shall there be between truth and a lie, if so be faith
should be builded upon Miracles? Deuteronomy. 13
And Moses plainly affirms that, we are tried by this means whether we
love god or no. We are not ignorant also of the admonition of our Savior
Christ, and of the Apostle Paul, where the faithful are put in mind to beware
of false signs, with the which Antichrist deludeth, Math. 24. 2. These. 2
and deceyueth many. Answer is to be made, that they by the just judgment
of GOD, are deceived by the fallacy, and subtle deceytes of Satan, which
have deserved so to be: Miracles are no certain proof of the truth always.
notwithstanding, the same does not let, but that the elect and chosen, may
behold and see the power of God in Miracles, which is to them a confirmation
of true and wholesome Doctrine.

2. Cor. 12 Romans 15
Thus Paul reioysed that his Apostleshippe was approved with signs and
wonders. Therefore howsoever Satan would seem in his darkness, to Imitate
and follow God, yet notwithstanding, so soon as men's eyes are opened, and
that the spiritual light of wisdom does appear, Miracles do set forth
the same presence of God, whereof Nicodemus here speaks. A. For this cause our
savior Christ, Math. 10 Mar. 10
when he sent forth his Apostles to Preach the Gospel, would have them to
seal and confirm the same with Miracles.

3. Jesus answered, and said unto him, verily, verily, I say unto thee, except
a man be borne again, He can not see the Kingdom of God.

Jesus answered. Bv. The manner and way by the which the Lord instructed
Nicodemus, is in manner of a Dialogue. For the same is very plain, simple,
manifest and evident. Dialogues an aunsient kind of teaching
And the Lord in all things has framed him self to our imbecility and
weakness, and has sought by all means to speak so sensiblye, to our
understanding, that we might not fail of his meaning in any point. And it is
a most ancient and approved kind of teaching, to instruct by a Dialogue,
which also the most ancient Philosophers have used. B. Therefore whereas our
Savior Christ so louinglye, and familiarlye, applies this Doctrine to the
Imbecilitye of Nicodemus, and despised not the same, Such as are weak must
be borne with all.
we are taught how to handle such as are weak, and to reject no man which
seeks after the truth, but with all gentleness, and long suffering, to
teach and instruct such.

M. Nicodemus was to be blamed in this, that he came not to our savior in the
day time, but in the night: For the which the Lord might iustlye have
reproved him: But the most meek and pacient Creator of all flesh, objected
no such thing unto him.

He says unto him: If so be thou know that I am come a teacher from God,
and do planelye perceive the power of God, by the signs which I do, why
then do thou come unto me secreetelye, and not openly in the day time? But
he thought it better a great deal to open to this good man the very well
spring of evil. He perceived that he was as yet ignorant of the truth, and
that he feared man more than God: therefore he disputes with him concerning
the very root, and original of all wickedness. And whereas our Savior
Christ, twice repeateth this word (Verylye) he does it to make him the more
attentive.

For he intending to speak of a matter, most waightye and grave of all
others, could not but make Nicodemus more attentive, who otherwise, would have
very slightlye, or little, or nothing regarded this whole communication.

M. But how do these words of our savior Christ, answer those things,
whereof Nicodemus spoke? He came to our savior with good intent and meaning,
but yet as a Doctor of the Law, who thought to have easylye attained to the
understanding of the truth, at the mouth of Christ, by his own wisdom and
learning. But the Lord, even at the first puts away this persuasion,
affirming the Doctrine of the Kingdom of GOD to be such, that no mortal man,
how worldly wise, or learned in the Law soever he be, can understand the
same, except he be borne a new.

C. Therefore how far fetched or unapt for the purpose, these words of our
savior seem to be, yet notwithstanding most fetelye he begins therewith.
For as the seed is cast in vain upon the untilled ground, even so the
Doctrine of the Gospel is Preached in vain, except the hearers be first
framed to obedience, and be made apt to be taught. Therefore if we will
profit in the school of Christ, we must learn to begin here.

Except a man be borne again. As if he should say: So long as thou have not
that which is most principal in the kingdom of God, I make small account of
this that thou do acknowledge me to be a teacher. For this is the first
step into the kingdom of God, that thou become a new man. M. This answer
of our Savior Christ, ought diligently to be considered: For it comprehends
two special things necessary to be known of these which are conversant in
reading of the scriptures. One is, that no man can know what things pertayne
to the Kingdom of God, and to our salvation: The second is, that the new man
is required to the knowledge of Gods kingdom.

Bv. Our Savior Christ says here, No man shall see the Kingdom of God, For,
No man shall enter into the kingdom of God, C. as shall afterward appear by
the text. But they are deceived which take the Kingdom of God, for Heaven,
when as rather it signifies a spiritual life, which is begun in this world
by faith, and does grow daily more and more, according to the increase of
faith. Therefore the sense and meaning of this text is, that no man can be
truly gathered into the Church, and be reckned among the Sons of GOD, except
he be first renewed. So that it is here briefelye showed, what is the
beginning of Christianisme: and hereby also we are taught, that we are borne
exiles and banished men, from the kingdom of GOD, and are at perpetual
enmity with him, until, he alter and change us by the second birth. For it
is a general sentence, which comprehends all mankind.

B. At other times our savior Christ spoke the very same in other words,
namelye, that no man can be his Disciple, except he deny him self, and take
up his Cross and follow him. Luke. 14.


Herevppon the Apostle Paul requires the new man, and a new creature in
Christ, which so soon as it is given unto us, makes us to believe in his
name, and to be the Sons of God: but it is perfited daily by the holy
Ghost, which frames us more and more, according to the Image and likeness of
GOD. Of the which ye may read in all those places here coated in the Margent.
2 Cor. 3.4 and.5 Gala. 3.6. Ephe 2.4 Collos. 3
But what need we cite the places of Saint Paul, when he handeleth the same
in no place, as the principal point of Christ's Doctrine.

C. To be short, by this word of the new birth, he means, not the
correction of some one part, but the renouation or renewing of the whole man.
Whereupon it follows that there is nothing in us but corruption.

Bv. For the first Birth comprehends all the strength of mankind, as,
Wit, Reason, Understanding, will and what soever we have else by nature. R.
Wherefore, man's free will, his merits, and whatsoever else he can imagine
to bring righteousness to him self, is quite overthrown by this one sentence
of our savior Christ. We must therefore lay aside the wisdom of the
flesh, and contempne all humane strength, that the second birth may take
place in us.

4. Nicodemus says unto him: How can a man be borne when he is oulde? Can
he enter into his mothers womb, and be borne again?

M. Nicodemus, being as yet carnal, and sauouring not of the Spirit,
carnallye understood those spiritual things, which were spoken by Christ.

He knew not the natural corruption of the first Natiuitye: for if he had,
he would have made another manner of answer. C. And although the phrase of
speech here used by our savior Christ, was not expressed in the Law and the
Prophets: yet notwithstanding, seeing in some places of scripture, Scribs
ignorant of regeneration.
mention is made of renouation, or renewing, and seeing it is one of the first
principles of Faith, it may appear how vainelye the Scribes at that time had
travailed: For truly this was not one man's fault to be ignorant of the grace
of regeneration: but every one of them occupying them selves about vain
iangeling, and questions of no profit, neglected the most principal part of
Christian Doctrine.

The like also we may behold at this day in the Papists. For they wearying
them selves all their life time, with secreete speculations, whatsoever
properly appertains to the true worship of God, to the assurance of our
salvation, and to Godly life, they know no more than does the Cobbler, or
Cowheard, the course of the Stars: and pleasing them selves in strange
mysteries, they do co^tempne the more necessary doctrine of the Scriptures, as
though they were too well learned, to spend their time in reading of them.

It is no marvel therefore if Nicodemus do stumble here as it were at a
straw. For this is the just judgment of GOD, that they which think them
selves to be the greatest and best learned Doctors, to whom the simplicitye
of the common Doctrine seems base, should be senseless and blind in the
least Articles. R. For neither can humane reason attain to that which is
divine, nor yet any mortal man, to those things which belong to Gods spirit:
1. Cor. 2
nay those things which are spoken unto him, seem foolish. For as a
vessel retayneth the sauoure and smell which it has once gotten, and
afterward when other liquour is put into it, does make it to relishe of the
same: even so our reason at the beginning of our Natiuitye, is seasoned with
carnallitye, and carnal affections: in so much that whatsoever afterward it
hears, it understands according to his oulde relishe, that is to say,
carnallye: and does by and by reject all such things as pass humane
capacitye. M. For it enquireth, how God can be incarnate? How a Virgin can
bring forth a Child? How a man Crucified and Buried, can be the savior of
the world? How Baptism can take away sin? How can Christ give his Flesh
to eat? and such like Misteryes of our Faith. All these things blind reason
condemns as foolishness, and derideth them.

5. Jesus answered, verylye, verylye, I say unto thee, Except a man be borne
of water, and of the spirit: He can not enter into the Kingdom of God.

Verylye, verylye, I say unto thee. Bv. Nicodemus understood not the opinion
concerning Regeneration or new Birth of man: therefore our loving and
merciful Savior, moore plainlye expounds those things which before he
spoke misticallye, teaching that to be borne again is nothing else, than to be
borne of water, and of the spirit, and that the same is the very true manner of
regeneration.

But all men for the most part, by this sentence of our Savior Christ
understand Baptism: Baptism.
and many of them do hereby make Baptism so necessary, that they affirm it
impossible for a man to attain to salvation, except he be washed with the
water of Baptism: and so disorderlye they include the assurance of our
salvation under the sign: when as the wole Scripture attributes the grace and
power of regeneration to the holy ghost: Mark. 16.16. Titus. 3.5. 1. Pet.
3.12.
as may appear in diverse places of Scripture, but specially by these places
noted in the margent.

C. And as touching this place we ought to understand the same simplye of man's
regeneration, and not of Baptism. For the purpose of Christ was to exhort
Nicodemus to newness of life, because he was not capable of the Gospel,
until he were a new man. Therefore this is the simple meaning of this
sentence. That it behooves us to be borne again, that we may be the Sons
of GOD, and also that the holy Ghost is the aucthour of this second birth.
For Nicodemus dreaming of a Pithagoricall Regeneration: Christ to waken and
remove him from that error, added this for an interpretacion of that which he
spoke before, namelye, that man was not naturally borne again, The holy ghost
the aucthour of our regeneration.
neither was it needful that a man should have a new body: but that he is
borne again, when he is renewed by the grace of the holy Ghost, both in
soul and mind. And therefore by these words (Spirit, and water) he
understands all one thing.

The which interpretacion ought not to seem in any man's sense to strayte and
far fetched. For it is a common phrase of speech in the Scripture, when
mention is made of the Spirit, to add the name of Water and Fire, to express
the force of the same.

In third of Matthew it is said, that Christ baptized with the holy Ghost,
Math. 3.11
and with fire: in the which place, there is no difference in sense between
fire and the holy Ghost, but does only signify what the efficacye of Gods
spirit is in us. And where as here we have the name of water set before the
spirit, it makes no great matter: nay, rather this manner of speech sounds
better than that other of Matthew: because the plain sense and meaning
follows the Metaphore: as if Christ should have said, No man is the son of
God until such time as he is renewed and borne again by water: that is to
say, by the spirit, which purges us anewe, and which by his grace and power
in us, inspireth and replenisheth us with the moisture of a heavenly life,
seeing by nature we are altogether dry, and withered: And upon good
consideration our Savior Christ brings this phrase of speech used in the
Scriptures, to set before Nicodemus his ignorance and blindness. For
Nicodemus should have known at the last, that the same which was spoken by
our savior Christ was taken out of the common doctrine of the Prophets.
Therefore by water is meant, nothing else, but the inward purgation and
moisture of the holy Ghost. So that the second is but an explycation of the
first. Whereupon also our Savior, when he adds a reason why we ought to be
borne again, making no mention of water, teaches that the newness of life
which he requires, is wrought by the holy ghost. Wherefore it follows that
water must not be separated from the spirit.

6. That which is borne of the flesh, is flesh, and that which is borne of
the spirit, is spirit.

B. This is a reason of that which went before. For therefore no man unborn
again can enter into the kingdom of God, because all that is borne of flesh,
is nothing else by that first and natural Natiuitye, but flesh. And flesh
and blood can not enter into the kingdom of Heaven. For by the knowledge of
GOD, we are made partakers of his kingdom: John. 17.3. 1. Cor. 2.14.
for it is said: This is life eternal (O Father) to know thee. etc. Now man,
which is flesh, can not understand those things which belong unto GOD.
Therefore it is necessary that so many as shall enter into the kingdom of
God, be transformed and spiritual: that is to say, so many as will be the
Sons of God. C. Therefore Christ proves by an argument of the contraryes,
that we are all shut out of the kingdom of God, except we have entrance by
regeneration.

For he takes this as granted unto him, namelye, that we cannot enter into
the kingdom of God, except we become spiritual. But we bring nothing from
our mothers womb, but our carnal nature. Therefore it follows that we are
naturallye banished out of the kingdom of God, and being deprived of the
celestial life, do abide under the bondage of death. This word flesh, does
signifye the whole man. For flesh in this place, does not only signify the
body, but also the Soul, and every part of man. For the Papists do very
fondlye restrain it to that part, which they call sensual: because by this
means the argument of Christ should be very vain, as to say, that the
second birth is needful, because some part of us is corrupted, and defiled.

But if any man object and say, that there remains yet some part of Gods
gifts in this our degenerate and corrupt nature: and therevppon conclude, that
we are not in every part paruerted and polluted: We may easilye answer to
this objection and say: That those gifts which GOD left in us after the
fall of Adam, in respect of them selves are highlye to be esteemed and
praised: but seeing the contagion and corruption of sin has difunded and
spread it self throughout every part, we shall find nothing in us pure, and
free from all pollusion.

Wherefore, as we have naturally some knowledge of God, whereas there is
ingraffed in us a certain discretion to judge between good and evil, Whereas
we have wit and reason to defend this present life, and whereas we excel
the brute Beasts, in so many notable gifts, Man's nature defiled.
these things of them selves, and as they proceed from God, are very
notable: but all things are defiled in us no less, than the Wine that is
unsavory through stinking Vessels, being made thereby very hurtful.
Therefore because man, is by nature from his Mothers Birth, only carnal, he
must be transformed again by the Spirit, that he may begin to be
spiritual.

And this word spirit, is here taken two manner of ways, namelye, for
grace, and for the effect of grace. For in the first place Christ teaches,
that the holy ghost is the only aucthour of a pure and reformed nature: In
the second place he teaches that we are spiritual, so sone as we are renewed
by the virtue of the same.

R. Of this manner of renewing the Apostle also speaks, saying, The Law of
the spirit of life, sets me free from the power of sin and death, through
Jesus Christ. For what the Law could not do, by that part, by which it was
weak through the flesh: that did God by sending his own son, in the
similltude of sinful flesh: Even by sin condemned sin in the flesh, Romans
8.
that the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, which walk
not after the flesh, but after the spirit. For they that are carnal, are
carnally minded, But they that are spiritual, are spiritual ye minded. To be
carnallye minded: is death, but to be spirituallye minded, is life and peace.
Because that the fleshlye mind is enmity against God: for it is not obedient
to the law of God, neither can be. So then they that are in the flesh can
not please God. But ye are not in the flesh, but in the spirit: If so be that
the spirit of God dwell in you. M. In this place the Apostle attributes first
to the flesh, and then to the spirit, certain things which make very well
for the declaration of the words of Christ. He gives to the flesh two
impossible things: The first is, that it cannot obey the Law of God: The
second, that it can not please God. Herevppon it follows that the same is
under the power of sin and death, as an enemy unto God, and that the
Doctrine of the Letter, which he here calls the Law, cannot reform the
same: in so much that it stands altogether in need of the Heavenly power,
by which we are regenerate. Then he gives that to the spirit which
fulfilleth the justification of the Law that is to say, which makes man
spiritual. For the Law requires a spirit conformable, The spirit of God is
the aucthor of our regeneration.
and agreeing with the will of God: Such a will does the holy ghost begette.
The spirit therefore delivers from the power of Sin and death, and
quickens: and therefore it is called the spirit of life. C. But it is very
absurd, which some have gathered upon this place of Christ, namelye, that we
take our beginning of our first Parents, not only in body, but also in
soul. For Christ says nothing here, but that we are all carnal according to
our Birth: and that our nature does savor and taste of nothing but flesh, in
this respect, that we be borne mortal men into the world. For he does here
simplye distinguishe between the natural and supernatural gift.

7. Marvel not that I said unto thee, Ye must be borne again.

M. This sentence may be referred as well to those things which go before,
as to that which follows: B. as if the Lord should say, Thou have heard
good cause and reason Nicodemus, why I said that no man can enter into the
kingdom of GOD, except he be borne again: marvel not therefore. M. But if
we refer it to that which follows, then we must understand that the
Lord went about to take from Nicodemus, by the similitude following, the maze
which Nicodemus had conceived, by the strangeness of the thing which he
heard. C. The which we must not so take as though the Lord would have so
notable a work of God in man's regeneration to be little esteemed of
Nicodemus: but he would not have him to wonder least his faith should be
hindered. For many reject that which is difficile and heard to be
understood, as frivolous and vain.

To be short, we must not doubt but that we are framed again by Gods
spirit, and are made new men although the manner how the same is brought to
pass, be not revealed unto us.

Ye must be borne again. M. First of all our Savior Christ excludes himself
from this necessity of being borne again, not because he had not the
substance of flesh (of the which he was borne) but because he was not so
borne of the same, that he had need of regeneration, as other mortal men had
and have, which are conceived and borne under sin. Then he joins Nicodemus
a learned man in the Law and the Prophets, and a Pharisey, to the rest, and
includes him to this necessity of reregeneration with all other men. Psalm.
53.4 Romans 1.12 Heb. 7.16
R. For all have gone out of the way, all are become unprofitable, there is
none that does good, no not one. Luke. 1.35
But Christ by right is exempted from this corruption, seeing that he is
exempted from sinners. Whereupon the Angel said unto Mary: That holy thing
which shall be borne of thee, shall be called the Son of GOD.

8. The wind blows whyther it lists, and thou hear the sound thereof:
but can not tell whence it comes, and vvhyther it goes: So is every one
that is borne of the spirit.

The wind blows B This is an explanation of those things which went before.
But there are some which understand these things, not of the wind, but of
the holy Ghost, because the Hebrew word, Ruah, signifies either of them. CHR.
Other some a great deal better understand the same, which say that the
similitude is taken of the wind: and do thus apply it to this present place.
The force of this wind is felt, but the original and cause thereof is not
known.

C. But howsoever we wrest the scence of Christ, let us hold fast this, that
Christ borrows this similitude of the order of nature. Nicodemus thought that
incredible which he had heard of regeneration, and of a new life, because
his capacity could not reach unto the same. Christ to take from him this
scruple or doubt, teaches that the wonderful power of God, is to be seen in
the corporal life, the reason whereof is hid. For all men draw the vital
spirit out of the air. Even so the agitation or moving of the air is felt,
notwithstanding from whence it comes, or whyther it goes we know not. If in
this frail and momentanye life, God deals so mightelye, that we are
constrained to wonder at his power, what an absurd thing is it in the
celestial and supernatural life, to measure his secret work by the
apprehension and capacity of our mind, insomuch that we will believe no more
than appears? Even so Paul, when he inueyeth against those, which therefore
reject the doctrine of the resurrection because it seems impossible, that the
body which is now subject to putrefaction, should be blessed with
immortality, when it is brought to nothing and consumed to dust: reprooueth
their dullness, because they consider not the like power of God in the seed
Wheat. ^or. 15 Psalm. 104
For the seed does not grow until it has suffered putrefaction. This is even
the same wonderful wisdom of God, of the which the Prophet David cries out in
his Psalm. Therefore they are to gross and dull, which being taught by the
common order of Nature, have no farther respect, to know that the power of God
in the spiritual kingdom of Christ, is far more mighty and wonderful. He
says, It blows whyther it lists, not because the wind has properlye a
will, but because the agitation and whirling thereof is free and diverse: For
the air is one while carried this way, another while that way. M. And this is
no unwonted phrase of speech, by which human scence seems to be given to
things without life.

So is every one that is borne of the spirit. C. Hereby our Savior Christ
declares that the mocion of the holy Ghost and the power of the same, may be
as well discerned in the renouation and regeneration of man, as we may
perceive and feel the motion of the air and wind in this terrestrial and
external life: but yet, that the manner how, is hidden from us: and therefore
that we are ungrateful, and too to wicked, if we do not adore and magnify
the incomprehensible power of God in the heavenly life, of the which he has
in this world set before us so liuelye a vewe, and also if we attribute
less unto him in restoring to us our souls health, than in defending the
state of our corporal life. The application shall be more plain and manifest
if we thus resolve the words of our Savior, Such is the power and efficacy
of the holy Ghost in a man regenerate. PAR. For the spirit of God transformeth
and changes men's minds by secret inspirations.

The power and effect thereof is felt wonderful, and yet notwithstanding,
the action of the same is not discerned with the eyes. And they which are thus
regenerate, are not now led with the human or fleshly spirit, but with the
spirit of God, which quickens and orders all things: Bv. Insomuch, that
the Apostle feeling the force thereof, says, Galat. 2.20
I live: yet now not I, but Christ lives in me. And although the inward
grace of the spirit have the pre-eminence in regeneration, yet notwithstanding
let no good man reject the preaching of Gods word, by which faith is planted
(For it is that immortal and incorruptible seed, by which men are borne again
to life) nor the prayer of the faithful, by which the saints desire to have
faith given and increased, nor baptism, by which we are said to be purged,
and washed from our sins.

9. Nicodemus answered and said unto him, How can these things be?

B. The hour was not yet fully come, in the which Nicodemus should be fully
taught all things concerning the holy Ghost: At the first when he thought
that Christ spoke of a carnal regeneration, he objected the impossibility of
the same. After that when he understood that he spoke of another manner of
Nativity than of that which is carnal (as of the Nativity by water and the
spirit) the which was declared unto him by a similitude, he woondereth, and
as one amazed, demands how these things can be? C. We see therefore what
specially let and hindered Nicodemus: Whatsoever he hears he counts
wonderful, because he is not able to comprehend it. Even so there is no
greater hinderaunce unto us, than our own arrogancy, because in deed we
always seek to be more wise than needs: and thereupon through a diuilish
disdain, we reject all that our reason cannot comprehend. As though it were
meet that the unspeakable and incomprehensible power of God, ought to be
restrained to so strait a measure. We may after a sort enquire of the order
and manner of Gods works, so that it be done soberlye and reuerentlye: But
Nicodemus by this demand, rejects that which he beeleeueth to be
impossible as a fable. M. And it is not without cause that the Evangelist so
dilligentlye puts down unto us the dullness, and scencelesnesse of
Nicodemus, in matters divine and appertayning to salvation. For we have in
this man some proof of that which Christ spoke before, set before us, namelye,
that it is impossible for any man to see the kingdom of God, except he be
borne again. Bv. For Nicodemus being so notable a Clarke, being blind and
ignorant after so great light (because he was not borne again) says, How can
these things be? Whereby it appears that he was so amazed at the doctrine
of the kingdom of Christ, that he was not only ignoraunte of the matter it
self, but also was not able to comprehend the declaration of the same as it
was propounded by christ in plain words.

Even so at this day we see learned and wise men to be quite senseless and
foolish, when they come to comprehend the doctrine of Christ's kingdom. It is
no marvel therefore if they which are the Ministers of the truth, do not by
and by persuade every one to whom they preach, when as Christ with his
words could not at the first persuade Nicodemus. But the fault was not in
Christ the teacher, but in Nicodemus, which comprehended not those things
which were spoken.

10. Jesus answered, and said unto him: Art thou a Master in Israel, and
know not these things?

M. Our Savior Christ seems to wonder at the scencelesnesse and ignorance
of Nicodemus, being a man learned in the Law, as if he had not known the
same before. But by these words our Savior casts rather Nicodemus in the
teeth with his ignorance than woondreth at the same: and yet nevertheless
without disdain. C. For Christ seeing that he spent the time in vain with a
proud man, and that he lost his labor in teaching of him, falls to plain
reprehension. Bv. And being offended at his dullness, he reprooueth his gross
wit, as if he should have said, O miserable condition of those sheep, the
charge and care of whom is committed to a Pastor so dull and ignorant in
heavenly things: Hitherto thou have been accounted of us one of the chief
masters and teachers in Israel: but seeing thou art ignorant of those
things, whereof even such as are Disciples and Scholars may be ashamed to be
ignorant of, men may marvel what thou, and the Scribes and Pharisees, men
of thy calling, teach the people committed to their charge.

E. How comes it to pass that thou art ignoraunte of these things so
common in the Scriptures, seeing thou art a teacher of other men? For what
other thing else means the circumcision of the heart, which Moses so
dilligentlye commended unto you? What else was the meaning of the
sanctification so often times preached to the people, but this innovation and
spiritual Nativity of men's minds, of the which I speak? The whole
Scripture does sufficientlye testify, Genesis 6.5. and.8.21.
that all flesh is only inclined to that which is evil. How therefore
should any flesh, but that which is borne again and sanctified, enter into
the kingdom of God, which is the kingdom of righteousness? What can be more
plain, than that which the Prophet Esaias, Iere. 31.19. Ezech 11.19 and.36.26.
Jeremy, and Ezechiel have spoken, concerning the regenerating and renewing
spirit? Of the same also most plainelye has the Prophet in his Psalms
prophesied. It is marvel therefore that my doctrine seems so strange unto
thee. Behold here the true way and manner, how proud persons that are puffed
up with vain glory, and which stand in their own conceit ought to be
handeled C. For doctrine shall take no place, or profit nothing at all, until
such time as they be clean purged, from the pride of their own wicked
conceypt. R. And this is a general reprehension, by which Christ reprooueth
the blindness of all the Rabbines. For Christ so talks here with Nicodemus,
that by him he understands the whole order of the Pharisees, and Deuines,
and all the professors of their Leven. M. Therefore let such as have the
titles and names of Pastors in the Church, Two things required in a Pastor.
and which brag of the same, consider how they answer and discharge that
their calling: For two things are required in faithful and true Pastors,
namelye, purity of Doctrine, Purity of doctrine and holiness of life, required
in a true Pastor.
and holiness of life. Concerning the first, we have mention made here:
concerning the other, read the thirteenth of Matthew, and the second Chapter to
the Romans.

11. Verily, verily, I say unto thee, we speak that we know, and testify
that we have seen, and ye receive not our witness.

Verily, Verily. Bv. The Lord by this sentence declares how certain and
firm the whole doctrine of the Gospel is, not only in the Doctrine of
regeneration, but also in all other articles and special points of our faith.
And this he confirms with an oath: the which he is not woonte to do, but in
matters most sure and firm. M. Seeing therefore there were two things to be
reprehended in the Jews, namelye the ignorance of divine matters, and the
fault of unbelief, Christ when he had reproved the first, comes to the
second.

We speak that we know. A. Some refer these words to Christ, and to John
the Baptist, who was sent of God to testify of the true light. CHR. Othersome
understand them of the Father and the son, whom he sent into the world.
John. 1.7
For Christ spoke those things in the world, which he had heard of the
Father. John. 8.26
Othersome say that the Plural number is put for the singular by a figure
called Enallagen.

C. But there is no doubt, but that Christ here joins him self with all the
Prophets, and Ministers of God, and speaks generallye in the person of them
all. For Philosophers and other vain Doctors, do oftentimes bring in those
vain toys which they them selves have imagined and devised: But Christ
challenges this as proper to him self, and to all the servants of God
alone, that they deliver nothing but a certain, and undoubted Doctrine.

For God sends not such as should prate and talk, of things doubtful and
unknown: But such as deliver to others those things which they have learned
of him in his School. B. Here therefore we are taught, that no man ought to
teach any thing for a truth and certaintye whereof he is not most assured.
1. Peter.4
All things that we speak in the Church, ought to be as the words of God.

C. Let every one therefore take heed what is revealed to him of the Lord:
least he go beyond the bounds of his Faith, and loast he speak those
things which he has not heard of the Lord.

Bv. Moreover, let all those observe and weigh this sentence of the Lord,
which cry that the aucthoritye of the Gospel should be nothing, if so be
the aucthoritye of the Church had not allowed and confirmed the same. For the
Doctrine of Christ, and of the Apostles, has sufficient aucthority and
allowance of it sellfe, and needs no other testimonye: The Gospel needs
not the allowaunce of the Church
For it is Authential, and set forth by those which are eye witnesses, and
most assured of the same: having for the aucthour thereof the Son of God him
self, the wisdom of his Father, and the holy Ghost, which is the true,
living, and eternal God, speaking by the Apostles.

And testifye that we have seen. B. As if he should say: We testify even the
very same thing, which few of you receive: for some of you have received it.
The like is read in the first Chapter going before, where it is said: He came
into his own, and his own received him not. C. By which manner of speech,
and by this complaint of our Savior Christ, we gather, that this was appointed
to the word of God, as a fatal destinye in all ages, not to be received and
believed. M. Whereupon also Christ uses the plural number, saying:

Ye receive not. C. Because this not receiving pertayned to the greater number,
and almost to the whole body of the people. Therefore Christ thought good to
add this, least the aucthoritye of the Gospel might be deminished, through
the ingratitude of the people. For, because a very few embraced the Doctrine
of truth, and the most part of the world rejected the same, it must be
brought from contempt: least the Majesty thereof, be therefore the less
regarded, because almost the whole world despises the same. So that we may
out of this place note two special Lessons: The first is, that we ought not
in any point to dislike of the Gospel, although it has few disciples on
earth: As if Christ should have said: How so ever ye refuse my Doctrine, it
abides nevertheless firm and stable: because the hardness of heart, and
incredulitye that is in men, shall never bring to pass, but that God shall for
ever abide just and true. Romans 3.3
The second is, that they shall not escape unpunished, which at this day seek
to discredit the Gospel, seeing it is the sacred and most excellent truth of
God. With this Buckler, it behooves us to be guarded, Faith founded upon God.
that we may go forward in the obedience of the Gospel, against the
obstinacy of men. And we must hold this as a most certain truth, that our
faith is founded upon God: but so soon as we have God our aucthour, we ought
bouldlye as men carried above the Heavens, rather to despise the whole world,
than that the infidelity of some should trouble us. M. Also it is a plain
argument of miserable blindness, that the testimony of those men, which
testifye nothing but those things which they know for a certain truth should
be rejected, Lies preferred before truth.
when as there is no lie so impudent, and notable, which in this world is not
received. And this of al other is ye most just judgment of God, that they
which receive not the doctrine of truth, brought unto them by the Ministers of
God, should embrace the illusions of certain lies, brought in by the Apostles
of Satan: 2. The. 2.11
as the Apostle Paul teaches. Of ye which we have a horrible example in King
Achab, who gave credit to spirits of error, after he had taken displeasure
against the Prophet of God, and would not hear him: because he told those
things, which rather displeased, 1. King. 22.29.
than pleased him, yet notwithstanding they were true.

12. If I have told you of earthly things, and ye believe not: how shall ye
believe if I tell you of heavenly things?

R. By earthly things, Christ understands the Doctrine of the law, or else
those rustical and earthly similitudes which he was wont to use: by heavenly
things, he understands the doctrine of wholesome strong meat, which
appertains only to such as be strong. For so the Apostle Paul says, that he
taught ye Corinthians, saying, 1. Cor. 3.1.2.
I could not speak unto you brethren, as unto spiritual, but as unto carnal,
even as unto babes, in Christ: I gave you milk to drink, and not meat. etc. C.
Or (as it pleases other some) this may simplye, be referred to the forms and
manners of teaching. For albeit the whole Sermon of our savior christ were
heavenly, yet for all that he spoke so familiarlye, that the sermon, after a
sort may seem earthly. Furthermore, these words ought not to be restrained to
the Sermon alone. For here the usual manner of teaching, which our savior
Christ used, (that is to say, the simplicitye of the common sort) is compared
with pomp, and sumptuous shows, to the which ambitious men are to much
addicted. A. So Paul affirms that he did not preach the Gospel to the
Corinthians in a glorious show of words, of human wisdom. 1. Cor. 2.4.
C. Therefore Christ concludes, that the fault rests in Nicodemus, and in
such as he himself is, if so be they profit not in the doctrine of the
Gospel. And this is a great fault in many men, who so curiouslye and
schoolelike, seek to instruct and teach others.

Hereupon it comes to pass that the greatest part of men delight in hie and
secret misteryes and speculations. Herevppon also it comes to pass that many
men esteem the less of the Gospel, because they find not in the same,
things delectable to their ears. And therefore they will not vouchsafe to
occupy themselves in the study of this base and common doctrine. But
certainelye, this is to much wickedness in us, that we should therefore the
less esteem of Gods word, because it has pleased him to frame the same to
our rudeness.

Therefore, Barborosnesse in the Scripture is for our weakness.
whereas the Lord does speak grosselye and barbarouslye in the Scripture, let
us know that it is done for our sakes. Whosoever he be that shall pretend to be
offended at such barbarietie in the Scripture, because he will not believe
the same, lies. For he which will not embrace God when he is near unto him,
will much less ascend unto him above the clouds. Bv. We also gather that
hereby it is lawful for us more sharply to reprove their dullness who when
they have both plentifullye and plainly heard the doctrine of the truth, by
reason of their dull scencelessenesse, cannot for all that comprehend or
conceive the same. Mat. 15.16
A. So Christ spoke unto his Apostles when they understood not a matter of it
self most plain, saying, Are ye as yet without understanding?

13. And no man asce^deth up to heaven, but he that came down from heaven,
even the son of man which is in heaven.

And no man ascends up to heaven. R. When our savior Christ had reproved
sharpelye the whole order of the Pharisees, he returns to the argument of the
disputacion, showing from whence we m^^^ fetch true righteousness.

C. And again he exhorts Nicodemus, not to trust to him self, nor to his
dexteritye of wit, for so much as no mortal man, by his own industrye, can
pearce the heavens, but he which is guided thither by the Son of God. B. The
Heaven signifies the light that no man can attain unto, in the which God
dwells, 1. Timo. 6.16.
and the revealed brightness of the Divine Majesty. C Therefore the ascending
into Heaven, signifies the pure knowledge, and light of Gods mysteries, and of
Spiritual understanding. Hither, as no man could know the Father, but the
only begotten son of God, so none could ascend but he. For Christ
teaches the same here, which the Apostle does in another place, saying,
Mortal man does not understand those things which belong to God. 1. Cor. 2.14


Therefore he separateth all human understanding and wisdom from divine
matters, because it cannot sufficiently reach unto God. But we must note the
words, that only Christ which is celestial ascends into heaven: and all
others to be shut out of the same. For in the first part he does humble us,
when as he excludes the whole world from heaven. 1. Cor. 3.18.
The Apostle Paul wills every one to be a Fool in his own eyes, if he
desire to be wise with GOD. But we are to nothing more unwilling, therefore we
must embrace the sentence of our Savior Christ here, namelye that all our
scences do vanish away and fail us, when we come to the deep consideration
of GOD. But after our Savior, has excluded us from the kingdom of heaven,
he straightway offers to us a remedy when he adds saying that it is
given to the Son of man which is denied to all other. Christ ascended into
heaven to lead us thither.
For whereas he ascended into heaven, he did not thither ascend for his own
private sake alone, but that he might be unto us a guide and a director or
preparer of the way. And for this cause he has called him self,

The Son of man. B. That is to say, perfect man: least we should doubt to
have entrance with him thither: who therefore took upon him our flesh, that
he might make us pertakers with him of all good things.

Seeing therefore he is the only Counselor of his Father, Esaias. 9.6.
he admits us to the knowledge of his secret mysteries, which otherwise
should lie hid. And to this effect pertain the words of the Euaungelist
before, where he says, No man has seen GOD at any time, John. 1.18.
the only begotten son which is in the bosom of the Father, John. 14.6
he has declared him. And in an other place our Savior Christ says: I am
the way, the truth, and the life: No man comes to the Father but by me. R.
For he is the treasury of Gods wisdom and knowledge, nay, he is the wisdom
of God it self, which reuealeth himself to Babes. M. But how does Christ
affirm that no man has ascended into heaven but the son of man, 2. King. 2.
seeing it is written of Elias, that he ascended by a whirle wind into heaven? I
answer, Aunsvvere.
That Christ speaks not here of a Corporal ascension, but of that ascension
by which men come to the light of the divinity that cannot be attained unto,
and to the knowledge of the heavenly mysteries of Gods will. Elias at the
first, although he were in body caught up into heaven, yet notwithstanding
he knew not the secrets of the heavens only known to GOD, Ephe. 3.10.
and hidden from the very Angels.

But he that came down from heaven. Now our savior begins to direct his
speech to make declaration of the reason of the Dispensation, and Incarnation
which he had taken in hand.

This discention or coming down from heaven is the Incarnation of the word,
by which the only begotten Son of God, was made the Son of man.

Even the same which is in heaven. C. There is no cause why this saying should
seem hard and absurd unto us in that he affirms him self to be in heaven,
when as he dwelt on earth, because in Christ by reason of the unity of the
person, that which is proper to the nature of one, is transferred and given to
another. The which is very often used in the Scripture, as when it is said,
That GOD has purchased himself a Church by his blood.

Christ therefore which is in heaven, took upon him our flesh, Acts 20.28
that by reaching to us his brotherlye hand, he might lift us up with him,
into heaven.

14. And as Moses lyfted up the Serpent in the wilderness, so must the Son
of man be lifted up.

M. These words and those which follow, contain an exposition of the
dispensation which he had taken upon him, whereby he being the only
begotten Son of his father, descended from heaven into this world, to
redeem mankind. C. Therefore Christ here more plainly declares, Christ our
entrance into heaven.
wherefore he said, that the kingdom of heaven was open to him alone, namely
that he might bring all those thither, which will follow him their leader and
guide. For he affirms that he must plainly and openly be offered to all
men, that he may power out his virtue and power upon all. Number. 21.8
The storye which here is rather touched than expounded, is written in the
Book of Numbers: Bv. Where we read that Moses prayed for the people, which
were afflicted with strange Serpents, for their murmuring and hardenesse of
heart. But the Lord commanded Moses to erect and set up a Brazen Serpent for
a sign, by the sight whereof those that were stong with the Serpent, were
healed. C. To be exalted, here signifies, to be set and placed in a plain and
high place, that all men may see. This is done by the preaching of the Gospel.
For where as some understand these words to be spoken of the exalting and
lifting up of our Savior Christ upon the Cross, it agreeeth not with the
text, and is very far from the purpose of Christ. Therefore the simple sense
and meaning of these words is, That Christ should be set up and displaied
like an Ensign, by the preaching of the Gospel, whom all men should behold
with their eyes, as Esayas before had Prophesied, saying: Esaias. 2.2
It shall be in the last days, that the mountain of the house of the Lord
shall be prepared in the top of the mountains, and shall be exalted above
the hills, and all nations shall flow unto it. Of this exaltation, the lifting
up of the brazen Serpent by Moses was a type or figure, the sight whereof was
a present remedy to all those which were mortallye stong with Serpents.

Wherefore, Christ makes mention of the same in this place, to this end and
purpose, namely, to teach that the doctrine of the Gospel must be set before
all men to behold and consider the same: that so many as behold him with the
eyes of faith, may attain to eternal salvation.

Whereby we may gather that Christ is plainly set before our eyes in the
Gospel, least any man should complain or find fault with obscurity: and
that this manifestation or revelation of Christ, is common to all men, Faith
most effectually beeholdeth Christ. Galath 3.1
who by faith may see him as effectuallye as if he were present before their
eyes, even as the Apostle says: that he is described before our eyes, when
he is truly preached. And this similitude is not impertinent or far fetched.
For as the Serpent of Brass was but an external show of a Serpent, Christ
the brazen serpent our salvation.
and contained nothing within that was hurtful or venomous. Bv. Even so Christ
took upon him the form and similitude of sinful flesh in all things, having
our true and carnal substance in every point, most disagreeing, and far from
all sin: C. to the end he might heal that deadlye wound of sin, that is
in us.

Bv. For that old Serpent, did sting very foore, our father Adam in Paradise,
and every one of us, also which are borne of Adam, he has so infected with
his Pestiferous Poison, that in all the raze of our life, we are whole
addicted, and given to self love, and to the desire of earthlye things, and
can desire nothing but that which is against GOD. But Christ is here set before
us, as the only remeedy against that mortal sting of the Serpent: Who is
therefore called the Serpent, because he is like unto sinful men. Heb. 7.26.
And he is compared to a Serpent of Brass, because he is pure and cleansed
from all filthiness of sin, Holy, Innocent, and undefiled. 1. Pet. 2.7.
Also he is called the Brazen Serpent, because he is fyrme, and a sure Rock
of defense, for all such as put their trust in him.

15. That all that believe in him, should not perish, but have life
everlasting.

M. Thus the truth agrees with the figure. The Brazen Serpent was not exalted
without cause, neither for it self, but for the healing of those which
otherwise had been but dead.

Even so Christ is exalted by the Preaching of the Gospel, Ephe. 2.3.
that we, which are borne by nature the Children of wrath, might be cured:
so that we behold him which is the aucthour and finisher of our Faith. Heb
12.2.
Whereupon also it is said, that he has cleansed and puryfied his Church,
Ephe. 5.26
in the word of life. For as they which beheld the Serpent lifted up, were
healed from perishing, and restoored to life: even so they which believe in
Christ Preached, shall not perish, but have eternal life.

M. The Brazen Serpent was a remeedye only against corporal and temporal
death, but Christ is a remeedye against eternal and spiritual death.

C. This certainelye, is a notable report of Faith, Faith delivers from
eternal destruction.
that it is said to deliver us from everlasting death and destruction. For
Christ went plainelye about to express and declare, that although we seem to
be borne to death: yet notwithstanding, we have most certain deliverance
from the same offered to us through faith in him. And thus death, Our meri^s
obtain not eternal life.
which otherwise hangs over us, is not to be feared. Furthermore if eternal
life be obtained by faith, where are then our merits? where are our works?

Who can attain to righteousness by his works, and to everlasting life by his
merits? C. Also Christ uses the general word (All) both to call all men to
the participation of life, and also to cut of all excuse from unbelievers.

M. Therefore Christ Jesus is ready to bestow eternal life upon all those
that believe in him without respect of persons: for louinglye he calls all
unto him. Bv. Old men, Young men, Women, Learned, Unlearned, Poor, Rich,
Jews, and Gentiles, and to be short, he calls all kind of men, which
Labor, and are Laden, with the heavy burden of sin, that he may
refreshe them, and indewe them with everlasting life. C. Notwithstanding, let
us here note and consider that life is so generallye promised to all men that
believe in Christ, Mat 11.23.
that yet faith is the condition annexed to the promise: which faith
appertains not to all. For Christ is exhibited and offered unto all:
notwithstanding, 2 Thessalonians. 3.
GOD opens the eyes of the elect, only that they may seek him by faith.

16. For so GOD loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son that
all that believe in him should not perish, but have everlasting life.

R. Our Savior Christ, goes on still in the former disputation, still more
plainly opening and declaring, that righteousness comes not by the Law, but
by the behoulding of the Serpent, that is to say, by faith in Christ: and
therewithal shows the first cause and principal original of our salvation,
No peace of Conscience without Gods love.
and that because we should not be least in doubt.

For our minds have no peaceable rest or quietness in the which they may
stay them selves, until we come to the free love of God. Therefore as the
whole substance of our salvation consists in no other then in Christ, so we
must see whereby Christ is united unto us, and why he is offered to us to be our
savior. Love in God and faith in us, bringet (...) us life eternal.
Both these things are bear distinctly put down unto us: the first is a
lively faith in Christ: The second is the love of God, by which he so loved the
world that he sent life to the same by his only Son to save mankind from
destruction. And this order is diligently to be noted. For when the original
of our salvation comes in question, by and by, according to our natural
ambition, burst forth devilish imaginations of our own merits. We feign
that God is therefore merciful, because he has respect to none but those
whom he judges worthy. Mercy of God makes man's merits frustrate.
But the Scripture does every where extol his mere and simple mercy, which
clean abolisheth all merits. And this is the very meaning of our Savior in
these words, when he appoynteth the cause in Gods mercy. M. Therefore the
love of God with the which he has loved the world, has so determined, that
the world should be saved by the sending of the Son. And our Savior does
slightlye pass over this love, but does dilligentlye amplyfie and inculcate
the same, when he makes mention of the sending of the only begotten son
of god: who was given unto us, as a most certain and undoubted pledge of his
fatherly love toward us. R. Whereof then comes salvation, whereof comes
justification? whereof comes the hope of eternal life? Come these from the
worthiness or merits of men? God forbid: but they have their original of
the love of God. For we had always aboade, so much as we could, in our
sins, in death, and in hell, except God of his entire love, with the which
he loved us being as yet miserable sinners, had not given his only begotten
son for us. Herevppon the Apostle says: In this is love, not that we loved
him (for the flesh is utterly void of the knowledge of God) but because he
loved us first, 1. Ioh 4.10
and sent his Son to be the propitiation for our sins. And the Apostle
Paul says: Romans 5.8
GOD commends or declares his love toward us, in that when as yet we were
miserable sinners, Christ died for us. Sin brings with it death.
C. Without all doubt where sin reigns, we shall find nothing but the
wrath of God, which brings with it, death. Therefore it is only mercy which
reconcyleth us unto God, that therewithal we might be restored unto life. If
any man demand in whom this love is founded, The Apostle Paul answers,
Ephe. 1.5
That it is founded in the purpose of his will. Notwithstanding this manner of
speech seems to be contrary to many testimonies of Scriptures, which place
the first and principal foundation of Gods love toward us, in Christ, and do
show that without him, we are displeasing and hateful unto GOD.

But we must remember that the hydden and secret love, with the which God has
loved us, because it springs from his eternal purpose, is above all other
causes: but that his grace, which he would have to be made manifest unto us,
and by which we have assurance of salvation, begins at the reconciliation
made by Christ.

For seeing we must needs grant that he hates all sin and wickedness,
how can we assure our selves to be in his love and favor, until our
sins are clean put away, for the which he is justly angry with us.

Thus the blood of Christ must be the mean to make God favorable unto us,
before we can have any manner of feeling of his Fatherly love and clemency.

B. And Christ is called the only begotten Son of GOD, because he is the
head of Gods children, and have all received of the fullness of his grace,
that we also might be the sons of GOD. Moreover, there was never any man
beside him, Heb. 7.26.
that was without sin, and which bare the full and perfect Image of God: for
he only is innocent. And this name of the only begotten son, Christ by
nature, but we by adoption are the sons of God.
appertains to Christ by right, because by nature he is the only Son of
God: but we, by adoption, being ingraffed into his body. Therefore this name
of (only begotten Son) is put down unto us, to express the vehemency of
Gods love toward us. For, because men do not easilye persuade themselves to
be beloved of God, to take away all doubt from us, he expressly says, That
God has so greatly loved us, that for our sakes he has not spared his
only begotten son. Seeing then God has sufficientlye declared unto us his
love, he shall not be a little injurious to Christ, that not contented with
this testimonye shall doubt still, and make no more accounte of Christ, than if
one of the common sort of men had been given to death. But we must rather
way and consider, of how great price God esteemed his son, to whom our
salvation was so precious, that he would redeem the same with the price of
his only begotten son. Even so the Apostle sets this love of God toward
us, before our eyes to be considered, Romans 8.32.
saying: which spared not his own son, but gave him for us all, how also
with him, shall he not give unto us all things?

That every one which believes in him should not perish. A. Concerning these
words read the fifteenth verse going before.

17. For God sent not his son into the world, to condemn the world, but
that the world might be saved through him.

M. These words appertain to the enlarging and setting forth of the love of
God with the which he has so loved this world, that he has given his
only begotten Son to the same. He might by the sending of his Son
utterly condemn and destroy the world, (For the world by his wickedness
and impiety has deserved perpetual condemnation): but such is the love of
GOD toward the same, that he had rather spare it, and by sending his son to
be a Savior, sought rather to offer the cause of salvation, than of
condemnation. Therefore this is here attributed to the love of God, because he
would not take vengaunce of the wickedness of the world, and because the same
love was so great, that by the excellency thereof it has repressed the
severity of the judgment, by which he might iustlye have condemned the
world. R. The will therefore of the Father, is to save by the son. But what
for all this? Surely although our sins condemn us, yet the father saves us
by the son: If we be afflicted by the cross, the Father saves us by his
Son. If we be overwhelmed with death, yet the Father saves us by the son.
Therefore let us stedfastlye believe and lean to this word, God sent not his
Son into the world to condemn the world, but that the world might be
saved through him. For hereby thou may receive great comfort and
consolation in all thy afflictions.

Bv. For our Lord Jesus Christ shall come in the Clouds of Heaven, Math. 26
and.24
to judge both the quick and the dead, with great power and Majesty: But it
will be in the end of the world first: Now he comes not as a Judge, but
as a most merciful Savior. Therefore although now thy great sins do accuse
thee, and condemn thee, consider that this is the time of grace and mercy, and
fear not, but be of good courage: and so shall thou find grace and favor:
Ezech. 18 and.23
R. For thus says the Lord: I live, which will not the death of a sinner, but
rather that lie turn from his wickedness and live.

Bv. Therefore if thou be converted, and repose thy whole trust in the Son
of GOD, who suffered for thee, that he might make satisfaction for thy sins,
Romans 8.31
and reconcile thee unto God, thou shall be safe. 1. John. 2.1
For Paul says: If God be with us, who can be against us? And Saint John
says, If any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins: and not for our sins
alone, but for the sins also of the whole world. Luke. 19. and.10
To this effect also appertains this Evangelical sentence: The Son of man
comes to save that which was lost: and diverse other such like sentences. E.
Moreover, that which is spoken in another place, John. 9.39
is nothing contrary to these words of our Savior Christ, I came to
judgment into the world, that they which see not, might see, and that they
which see, might be made blind: For in these words he declares what his
coming shall be to many, but in this place, what specially it shall be to the
whole world. John. 12. and.47
So is that to be taken which he says in another place, For I came not to
judge the world. C. To judge here is taken, for to condemn, as in many other
places also. Therefore in that he denies that he came to condemn the world,
he notes thereby, the proper end of his coming. For, how needelesse was
it, that Christ should come to destroy us, which were to much already
overwhelmed with destruction? Therefore in Christ we must consider nothing,
but that God of his infinite mercy and goodness, Romans 8.33.
sought to help us, and to deliver us from destruction. B. And as he cannot
sin to condemnation, which is borne of God, the Lord at the length by his
holy spirit, purging out all sin, Ioh. 5.24.
and undoubtedly pardoning whatsoever is committed: Even so, such a one cannot
be judged, that is to say, condemned: For by Christ he has passed from
death to life. And being assured of Gods love and favor in Christ, has
already eternal life.

Wherefore, whatsoever belongs unto sin and death, must decrease and fade
away. Othersome, which believe not in the name of the only begotten Son of
God, have not, neither can have at any time, him, which may deliver them from
their sins. Therefore miserablye they perish in their sins. Whereupon,
because it is not given to them to believe in christ, they are already judged
and condemned, no less than he which having received a deadlye wound, and
having no Surgian, is sure to dye: or than he, which being adjudged to dye,
has no redeemer. Even so, verylye, Christ redeemeth not them eternallye from
everlasting death, to whom it is not given to believe in Christ. For he alone
delivers from death, and that by faith only.

C. They therefore which reject that grace which is offered in him, are worthy
to find him a Judge, and a severe punisher of such wicked, and foul
contempt. Of the which we have a plain testimonye in the Gospel. For seeing
it is the power of God to salvation, Romans 1.16
to all that believe the same, most wicked is their ingratitude, which make it
a savor of death, unto death. 2. Cor. 10.6
Both these did the Apostle Paul, very well express, when he said, that he
had in a readynesse the vengeance against all the adversaries of his Doctrine,
when the obedience of the Godly is fulfilled.

For his words are as much in effect, as if he should have said, that the
Gospel principally does belong to the Faithful, that it may be unto them
Salvation: and then to the wicked that it may be unto them condemnacion,
because they contemning the grace of Christ, had rather have him the aucthour
of death, than of life. This word (world) is twice repeated, that no man might
think him self excluded, if so be he continue in faith.

18. He that believes in him, shall not be condemned: But he that believes not,
is condemned already, because he beIeeueth not in the name of the only
begotten son of God.

He that believes in him. R. This is the sum of all Preaching, He that
believes in Christ, shall not be condemned: He that bleeueth not, is
condemned already: A. As it is also said in another place: Mark. 16.
He which believes and is Baptized, shall be saved: But he which believes not,
shall be condemned. M. Therefore it is Faith which makes us partakers of the
Grace of Christ, and delivers us from judgment. Faith justifies before God.
And for this cause the Apostle attributes justification before God, to Faith,
the which justification, is nothing else but remission of our sins, purchased
by the blood of Christ: so that, not to be judged, is even as much as to
say, as to be justified, to be absolved from sins, and to be accounted for
just.

He says not: Whosoever believes in him, is without sin, and therefore
cannot be judged: But he says, whosoever believes in him, is not judged:
that is to say, by the grace and mercy of God he is saved, the sentence of
deserved condemnacion also being taken away. So the Apostle Paul says:
There is no condemnation to those that are in Christ Jesus. Rom 8.


C. And whereas our Savior Christ so oftentimes, and so diligently
inculcateth, and affirms that all the faithful are out of the perrill of
death, we may thereby gather how necessary the certaintye, and stabilitye of
faith is, to take away the trembling, and oppressing fear of conscience.
Therefore he pronounces again that there remains no condemnacion so soon
as we believe: the which also moore at large he speaks of in the fifth
Chapter following.

Bv. But if for faithes sake a man is not judged, (as the truth it self here
plainlye affirms.) Where is now Indulgences, and Pardons? Where are the
Ronishie Satisfactions? Yea, where is the fire of Purgatory, and such like
human imaginations and fantasies? Surely, they are vanished away and
perished for ever. For the truth has said, (which ought never to be
forgotten) Who so ever believes in him, is not judged.

But he that believes not. This is the other part of the sentence: for it is
double, and consists of contraries. C. And it teaches us, that there is no
other remeedye by which any man may escape death, than by believing in the
Son of God: as if he should have said there remains nothing but death for
all those, Faith contains life
which reject that life offered to them in Christ: because life consists
only in Faith. R. Therefore, as nothing saves but faith: so nothing
condemns but infidelitye. And faith therefore saves, because it receives al
good things from Christ, and works also all goodness in the ^^beleeuer. For
as it receives righteousness of christ, even so it bestows the same again
into the bosoms of our brethren, works of Faith.
by the works of Charity. But unbelief, therefore condemns, because it
rejects and contemns all the graces of Christ, and is the cause of all
wickedness. Unbelief condemns.
For as it receives all unrighteousness from Satan, which is the father of a
lie: even so also it commits all evil, Works of unbelief.
against GOD and men: it does nothing that is just, it always sins, it
continuallye breaks the Law of God. Wherefore this is a most just sentence.

Whosoever believes not, is condemned already. C. And he uses the
Preterperfect tence of the Verb, for a greater Emphasis of force, to the end
he might thereby the better express and declare, that there remains nothing,
but utter destruction for unbelievers. But we must noote that Christ speaks
specially of those, whose impietye shall bewraye them selves, in the manifest
contempt of the Gospel.

M. For we must not apply this sentence to every one that believes not. For
the Apostle Paul sometime believed not the Preaching of the Gospel, nay, he
persecuted the same: and yet notwithstanding afterward, when the time of his
calling was come, by believing he was saved, and escaped the judgment of God.
Also the elect are for a time in unbelief: but not for ever.

A. Herevppon the Apostle says, We our selves, Titus. 3.3
were sometime foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving diverse lusts, and
voluptuousness, living in maliciousness, and envy, full of hate, hating one
another. But after that the love and kindness of our Savior God to manward
appeared. etc. M. Therefore in this place he speaks of those, which
persevere in unbelief. And he adds the reason.

Because he believes not in the name of. Bv. As if he should say: There is
given to the world, one only savior, which should take our sins from us,
malediction, and condemnation, and should abolish them by his divine power:
that every one which believes in him, may be absolved from his sins, from
malediction, and eternal death, as the Innocent, and only begotten son of
God: and that he may be an heir of everlasting life, and blessedness.
Without this, there is no other benediction, Purgation, Satisfaction,
Absolution, and salvation: whereupon it consequently follows, that he is
yet in his sins, and subject to death and damnation, which has not this
son in whom alone consists life and redemption. 1. Ioh. 5.10.


To this effect pertayneth that saying of John: If we receive the testimonye
of men, the testimonye of God is greater. And so forth till ye come to these
words, He which has the son, has life, and he which has not the Son,
has not life. M. Therefore we look for the coming of Christ, not as of a
Judge, but as a deliverer, and redeemer. But to the wicked and unbelieving, he
shall come a terrible and fearful Judge. Heb. 2.2


Bv. For if they escaped not the judgment of God, which despised the sending
and words of Angels, much less shall they escape the horrible judgment of
God, Heb. 10.27
which would not believe the only begotten son of God. For there wayteth
for them, a certain fearful looking for the coming of the Judge, and a
burning fire which shall devour his adversaries.

19. And this is the condempnation, that light is come into the world, and men
loved darkness more then light: because their deeds wear evil.

And this is the condemnacion. M. Because he said that the unbeliever was
Judged already, and condemned by his own wickedness, he adds and
declares that the reason and order of this judgment is such, that no man can
not chose but acknowledge the same.

C. Therefore he preuenteth by answer, the murmurings, and grudgings, which
profane and wicked men are wont to use, to reprove the severe rigor (as
they think) of God, when he deals more sharpelye with them, than they would
have him. It seems to be very hard, that every one which believes not,
should be damned.

Therefore least any man should ascribe his damnation to Christ, he teaches
that every man must impute the same to his proper fault. The reason is,
because Infidelitye is the witness of an evil conscience. Whereby it is
plain that the wickedness of unbelievers does hinder them from coming to
Christ.

There are some which think that there is only noted here the sign of
damnation: But the purpose of our Savior Christ here, is, to bridle the
wickedness of men, least they should presume according to their manner, to
contend and reason the cause with GOD, as though he dealt unjustly with
them, in punishing their infidelitye with eternal death. Therefore, he
teaches that such judgment is just and free from all sclaunder, not only
because they do wickedlye, which prefer darkness before light, and do
willingly shonne the light offered unto them: but also because that hatered of
the light: proceeds not but from a wicked mind, which accuses and condemns
it self of evil.

B. Wherefore the principal point and substance, of their whole condemnation
is, Predestination.
that they can not prefer Christ before their own desires: because so many
as are damned, were judged and condemned before they were borne: Ephe 1.4
even as also with God so many as are saved, were saved before the foundation
of the world. For as these were elected before the foundation of the world,
so were the other rejected before the world was made.

Reprobation.
And this reprobation does then appear, when they reject the Gospel of grace
offered unto them, and had rather be ignorant of Christ, (that is to say, to
want the light) than to receive him, and to attain to life. By the which
contempt of the Gospel, they do accomplish and fill up the measure of
their wickedness to the full: that is to say, they give occasion to have
their judgment, and condemnation sealed and fulfilled. M. Therefore in this
they are inexcusable, that they do willinglye reject and refuse that grace
offered unto them, which most earnestlye they ought to embrace and desire.

B. By darkness is here meant, the ignorance of Christ, and whatsoever else
worldly men love more than Christ. For they which are not borne of God, as they
can not hear the word of God, so it is necessary that they prefer the
ignorance of Christ, before they knowledge him, and so to love darkness more
then light.

M. When he says, that light came into the world, he means that all
things in this world, are replenished and full of darkness. For what can
be found in this world without Christ, Darckenesse is all things in this
world without Christ.
but darkness? Bv. That is to say, the concupiscence of the flesh, the
ignorance of God, Impietye, Error, blindness of the mind, Supersticion,
Idolatrye, wickedness of life, filthiness, uncleanness, profane talk,
Gluttony, Drunkenness, and an infinite number of such like wickednesses. For
it follows in the words of the Lord.

Because their deeds were evil. B. This is the cause why the wicked are
enemies to the light of life. Christ the light of God.
Christ is the light of God, by which, whatsoever is evil, is reproved. For
how can Injustice be hid, when righteousness is in place? how can
foolishness not be seen when it is compared with wisdom? Now flesh, in
the which there is no goodness, can abide nothing less, than to have the same
uncovered: and therefore it can not choose but hate Christ, which manifests
and reuealeth all things, and therefore they must be renewed and borne again,
which receive Christ.

M. The reason therefore, why those men (namelye the Scribes, High Priests,
and Pharisees, and those of that sect) love darkness more then light, is
because their deeds are evil: that is to say, because their own consciences
bare them witness, that al their works were evil. Bv. By this word (works)
he understands evil intentes, thoughts, words, and works. Out of these
words, the Apostle borrows this saying: If our Gospel be yet hid, 2. Cor.
4.3.
it is hid in them that are lost: In whom the God of this world, has
blinded the minds of them, which believe not, least the light of the Gospel
of the glory of Christ, which is the Image of God should shine unto them.
Therefore in that they perish, they perish through their own fault, seeing
the most merciful Lord has done his part: but they will not do their duetye.
If the Sick man perish, which will not bewraye his disease to the Physician,
least he should be healed, may he not pronounce of him self, that he
perished through his own fault? Even so, men that are lovers of this world,
are enemies to the light offered to them, because their deeds are evil. A. It
is no marvel therefore, if they run headlong into destruction.

20. For every one that evil does, hates the light: Neither comes to the
light, least his deeds should be reproved.

M. This is a general sentence taken of the disposition of the reprobates, the
sense whereof is this, B. he is commonly said to hate the truth, which
does amiss. Seeing therefore the wicked can not abide Christ the light of
God, it is most certain that they are evil, and that their deeds are evil,
also. C. For therefore the Light is odious unto them, because they and their
deeds are evil, and do seek to cover their sins so much as they can:
whereupon it follows, that they refusing the remeedye, do willinglye seek
their own damnation.

R. But Christ speaks not here of gross and outward sins, as of Theft, The
light hated of wicked men.
Murder, Adulterye, False witness, Force, Luxury, Drunkenness, and such
like: (which also are condemned, of the wise men of this world) but of the most
excellent virtues of the world, as of Reason, Wisdom, and human
righteousness, which in this world are counted for most excellent things.

PAR. Therefore as he which goes about any wickedness, loves the night, and
flees from the Sun, least his deeds should be manifest, even so, they
whose consciences do accuse them, hate the light of the Evangelical truth, by
which all things that are filthy are bewraied, that they may be reformed in
Christ: By this reason, wicked Kings, Princes, and Potentates, which swell with
Ambition, which are defiled with excess and filthy pleasure, and which are
imbrued with the blood of Innocents, have hated the Light of the Gospel,
because it condemns all these things. In like manner the Popish Bishops,
Abbottes, Priests, Monks, and Nuns, which repose their trust, in Masses, in
Idolles, in Purgatory, in wicked Vows, in Indulgences, and such like, do hate
Christ and his light, which teaches that al these things are unprofitable,
more than Vatinius was hated of the Romans. Insomuch that they persecute the
Preachers of the Gospel, and hang them up, because they Preach against the
Sacred Canonnes, against the dignitye Episcopal, against the Popes Holiness,
and against Peter's Keys.

That is to say, because they discover the Tyranny of Antichrist, and do
freelye pronounce the dignitye and aucthoritye of Bishops, to be forged,
counterfaite, and mere false.

C. Therefore we are much deceived, if we think that they are led with
Godly zeal, which rage against the Gospel, when as they rather hate and
abhor the light, that they may the more freelye walk in darkness.

21. But he that does truth, comes to the light, that his deeds may be
known, how that they are wrought in God.

M. That is to say, He which knows that he does the truth, and seeks
the same, being a hater of all falsehood and lies, he truly neither hates
the light, nor shunneth the same, but loves it. For, to do the truth, is as
much to say, as to deal faithfully, without any manner of deceyte, like good
and honest men. C. But this seems to be spoken improperlye, and absurdly,
except a man would confess that some are good and true, before they be borne
again by the spirit of God: the which is clean contrary to the whole
Doctrine of the scripture: for we know that faith is the root, from whence
do come all good works. But Christ simply affirms, that they which deal
sincerelye, and vprightlye, do desire nothing more then the light, The light a
Touchstone to wicked men.
that their works may be approved: because by that trial and Touchstone, it
may the better appear that they have walked vprightlye, and purelye before
God, from all deceyte.

Therefore it is very fondlye said of some, that men before Faith, are well
disposed. For Christ says not, that the Faithful do believe, to the end
they may have the praise of good works: but he only shows what the
unbelieving would do, if so be their own consciences did not accuse them of
evil.

R. Therefore, if Abbottes, Monks, Priests, and Friars, did the truth, they
would also come to the light, and would suffer their condition to be tried.
But hereby they them selves do bewray their own deeds to be evil. For he
which does the truth, that is, he whose cause is just, whose work, is of
Faith, which teaches the truth, which is delighted in the truth, which hates
Hypocrisy and lies, which deals iustlye, and to be short, which gives all
glory unto God, and gives place to the Preaching of the Gospel, he can
abide the light, and to have his cause, his works, Doctrine, and state tried,
and examined. Whereupon Christ, because his works and Doctrine are of God,
has left unto all men free leave, to pronounce and judge of them, so that
they do it uprightly. John. 18.20
Enquire (says he) of those which have heard me, what I said unto them.
Behold, these know what I have said. But the Pharisees and their successors
will not suffer any man to judge of their Doctrine, but will have all things
that they teach and decree, simplye, and as a manifest truth, to be received
and allowed. C. Therefore our Savior Christ used this word.

Truth. Because we being deceived by the outward show of works, do not
way and consider, what is contained within. And he calls those works
wrought in God, which are approved of him, and are good according to his rule.
Hereby let us learn not to judge of works, except they be brought to the
light of the Gospel: because our reason is utterly blind and corrupt. Bv. And
seeing Christ of his goodness has called us to the light of the Gospel, let
us understand that it is our parts to do the truth, with a willing mind,
the Apostle exhorting us unto the same: Ephe 5.8
Ye were sometime darkness, but now are you light in the Lord, walk as
children of the light: for the fruit of the spirit is in all godnesse, and
righteousness, and truth, approving what is acceptable unto the Lord. And
have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather rebuke
them. And the Apostle John: This is the tidinges which we have hard of him and
declare unto you, that God is light, and in him is no darkness at all, If we
say that we have felloweship with him, and walk in darkness, we lie and
do not the truth. But if we walk in light, even as he is light, then have
we fellowship with him.

22. After these things came Jesus, and his Disciples into the Land of Iurye,
and there he tarried with them, and Baptized.

M Now that the Evangelist has described the Diologue between Christ and
Nicodemus, he consequentlye makes a way, to bring in the testimony of John
the Baptist, which most excellentlye he gave unto Christ, before he was
shut up into Prison. For the Evangelist specially trauaileth, to credit and
confirm the Diuinitye, and aucthoritye of Christ, with most firm testimonies
given from Heaven.

Bv. Therefore when the Lord had observed the Feast of Passover, at
Jerusalem, and had discharged his office according to the oportunytye of the
time, Preaching the Gospel of the kingdom, C. he came into that part of
Galilee, which was near to the Town of Aenon, which is situate in the Tribe
of Manasse, B. that there also he might exhibit and declare him self to be
a savior. For abiding there and Ministering Baptism by his Disciples, he
brought many Citizens to the Kingdom of God.

The Lord Jesus abode not long at Jerusalem, for his hour was not yet come
that he should be gloryfied: but toward his end, he executed his office
moore diligently there, and showed many Signs, because the time of his
gloryfication drew near.

M. But because the time was come to gather together the Churches of the
Faithful, Two things delivered to the Church.
Christ began to order and appoint a Church. Bv. And there were two things
specially, which he delivered to the Church, with the which he exercises
the same, namely, the Preaching of the Truth, and holy Baptism. C. For
although Christ Baptized by his Disciples, yet notwithstanding, he is here
named as the aucthour of Baptism, the Ministers being left out, which did
nothing but in his name, and at his commandment. R. To the end we might
know that it makes no matter, what manner of person the Minister is, in
respect of the word and Sacrament.

AVG. For when the Integritye, and pureness of the Sacrament is handeled, it
makes no matter, what Faith he is of, which gives the Sacrament. It makes
much touching the way of his own salvation, but as touching the question of
the Sacrament, it makes no matter at all. R. For the Sacrament has his
integritye from the word, or from the Preaching annexed to the Sacrament: but
the word has his aucthoritye from God.

23. And John also Baptized in Aenon, beside Salim, because there was much
Water there: and they came and were Baptized.

M. Christ now teaching and Baptizing, John, as it may seem, might Lawfullye
have forsaken his office, given him self to rest, and have followed security:
John. 1.29
A. specially new that he had testified of him already, that he was the
true Lamb of GOD, which takes away the sin of the world.

M. But because he was sent by God, to teach and to Baptize, he does not at
his own will and pleasure, lay aside the office committed unto to him, but
looks and wayteth for the time appointed of GOD. We may not forsake the
Ministry of the word at out own pleasure, which are called to be Preachers.
Iere. 23.21


By this example we are taught, not to cease from executing our office and
duetye, so long as the administration thereof is permitted. For as he
offends which runs before he be called, ( A. as the Lord complayneth
by the Prophet Ieremye) even so, verylye he offends no less, which at his
own pleasure takes, and forsakes the office which GOD has committed to him.
C. The Geographers affirm, that these two Towns, Aenon, and Salim, are not
far from the River of Iordane, and Iaboc, near unto the which two Towns
they make a City called Scythopolis. Hierome says it makes no matter,
whether you Read Salem, or Salim. C. The cause why John Baptized in Aenon is
added, for that There was much water there, B. Judea wanting the same very
much. Water of Baptism sanctified by the word of God.
But the River of Iordane did ouerflowe, and yet we read not, that it was
consecrated with any Crosses, Charracters, or Seremonies. For the pure Water of
Baptism is Sanctified by the word of GOD, and by the Godly use of the
Sacrament.

In the Acts of the Apostles, we read the like hereof, where it is said: And
as they went on their way, Acts. 8.36
they came to a certain water, and the Eunuche said, See, here is water, what
lets me to be Baptized? Not that we may at this day, leave the Temple of
God, and Baptize in every River, Lake, or Spring: for the Apostle wills all
things, to be done decentlye, and in order. 1. Cor. 14.40.
C. By these words of Christ, we may also gather, that both John, and
Christ, celebrated Baptism, by ducking the whole body in the water.

How be it, let us not be too Curious in the external Rite, so it be
agreeing with the Spiritual truth, and with the institucion and rule of our
Lord and Savior.

24. For John was not yet cast into Prison.

M. Therefore, the Prison was the end which GOD had appointed for John, to
finishe his office of Preaching and Baptizing, even as the Cross was to our
Savior Christ. Deuteronomy. 13.5.
And yet truly, Prisons and Crosses, belong not to true, but to false
Teachers.

But this is the lotte of the Godly, and of all true Teachers, in this most
wicked world.

Concerning the Imprisonmente of John the Baptist, and his Death, read more in
our exposition of Matthew, beginning at the third verse.

25. And there arose a question, between John's Disciples, and the Jews,
about purifying.

And there arose a Question, between John's Disciples. Bv. Now the Evangelist
comes nearer to the matter it self, of the which he intended to entreat.
C. And first of all he recites a controuersye, which arose by the Disciples
of John about Purifying: and not in vain.

For the less that they were instructed in Doctrine, the moore bouldlye they
put forth them selves to disputacion, according to the Proverb, Who so
boulde, as blind Bayarde?

If other had begone the contencion with them, they might have been
excused: but whereas they being unable to encounter with the Jews, and yet do
wyllinglye prouooke them thereunto, and that rashelye, without cause, they are
much to blame. For the words of the Text, import that the question was
moved by them.

And beside that, they deserved blame for their rash contencion about an
unknown thing, which exceeded the reach of their knowledge, they were also to
be reprehended for another fault, no less than this, namelye, For that they
were not so ready to defend and maintain the Lawful use of Baptism, as they
were to defend their Masters cause, that he might have his aucthority still.

PAR. For there came many unto John, Contencio^ between the Disciples of John
and the Jews.
and were Baptized of him: many also came to Jesus, and were Baptized of his
Disciples. And hereupon arose envy, in certain of the Disciples of John,
against Jesus, that he being of late Baptized of John, and behaved him self as
his Disciple, and was commended by his testimony unto the people, would now
suddenly make himself equal with him, and would also prefer him self before
him, whose Disciples took upon them the administration of that, which John
alone had hitherto used. C. Therefore, both these faults were worthy of
reprehension: because they not waying the consideration of Baptism, make but a
trifle of Gods holy institucion: and because through wicked Ambition, they
take their Masters part against Christ.

About purifying. C. The question was about Purifying, because the Jews had
diverse and sundry precepts, concerning Baptism, from the Law: and being not
content with those Legal rules: they used many other things, which they had
received from their Elders: A. as ye may more plainly perceive, if ye read
the fifteenth of Matthew, and the seventh of Mark.

C. Therefore, because a new rite also and order of Purifying, is brought in
by Christ, and by John the Baptist, they having already so great plentye, and
varietye, they think it very absurd, and without reason. M. Wherefore in the
Disciples of John, we see a carnal disposition, C. who being wholly occupied
in the persons of men, have little regard to the veritye of doctrine.

R. For this contencion is plain carnal, and proceeding from Ambicion: as
also the Disciples of Christ accused a certain man, which cast out Deuilles
in the name of Christ, and yet followed not them, for that they thought that
aucthoritye to work Miracles, Mar. 9.38. Mat. 18.1. Luke 22.24
was given whollye unto them: Furthermore, they contended too carnallye about
the Supremacye.

M. And it is not only in this place spoken of the Disciples of John, Mat.
9.14.
that they labored for their Master against Christ, by the Spirit of
Emulacion: for we have the like; in the ninth of Mathewe. But notwithstanding,
all this, there was no contencion between Christ and John, neither did John
seek any other thing, but that he might decrease, as Christ increased.

Bv. Therefore by this example we see how much we may hurt the peace and
tranquillitye of the Church, The unity of the Church rent by leaning to
much to Gods Ministers.
if we attribute to much, to Gods Ministers. For so, both the glory which
belongs unto Christ the Creator, is given to Creatures, and also the unity
of the Church rent, when as one is addicted to this minister, and another to
that. Therefore the Apostle says, to the Corinthians. 1. Cor. 1.12. 1. Cor.
3.4.
I hear that there are contentions among you, For every one says: I am of
Paul, and I am of Apollo, and I am of Cephas, and I am of Christ: Is Christ
divided? Was Paul Crucified for you? Math. 23.8
Either were ye baptized in the name of Paul? To this end also pertayneth
the saying of Christ. Be not ye called Lords, for one is your Lord, even
Christ.

C. Therefore, they are here noted which are rather led with the vain, and
wicked love of men, than with the Love of GOD: and therefore we are
admonished, to have regard to this one thing, and to seek by all means
possible, that Christ alone may be glorified. 1. Cor. 4.1.
A. And as for all others, let us esteem them as the Ministers of Christ, and
as dispensatours of the mysteries of God.

26. And they came unto John, and said unto him, Rabbi, he that was with thee
beyond Iordane, to whom thou barest witness, behold the same baptizeth, and
all men come to him.

And they came to John. PAR. The Disciples of John went about to turn away
the People from the Baptism of Jesus, and to persuade that the Baptism of John
was more effectual to wash away sins, than the Baptism of our Lord Jesus.
The which thing when they could not persuade the people unto, they came unto
John, making complaint unto him, and thinking that he would take it in evil
part, and by some means or other restrain this emulation. M. And they find
no fault with the Legal purifyinges, but with the Baptism of Christ: and by
the spirit of emulation, they are fullye bente against Christ, for John's sake.
Even as Iosuah, Number. 11.28.
was zealous for Moses. And truly this emulation or envy, is so much the
worse, for that contemptuouslye they speak of Christ. For to extenuate and
abase Christ, they give him no manner of title of reverence, whereas they call
John, Master. As if they should have said: He which joined him self to
thee, as a friend and favorer of thy cause, and which was Baptized of thee,
of whom also, for honors sake, thou barest witness, as of a holy manne,
behold the same, being now converted and turned another way, abuses thy
Testimonye against thee, presuming to Baptize, and has gone so far, that all
men now come to him, the which no doubt will fall out greatly to the defasing
of thy honor and fame. R. Therefore we pray thee, that by thy aucthoritye
thou would forbid him, and his Disciples to Baptize: for it is a venture,
if they proceed, least we be forsaken and despised: for all men forsaking us,
gooe to them, and are Baptized.

Bv. Behold the fruits of a rash zeal without knowledge. Zeal with out
knowledge.
B. Hereby also it appears how sone good men may be made the aucthours of
sects against their wylles.

To whom thou barest witness. C. By this argument, either they gooe about to
make Christ inferior to John, or else to make him bound unto John, because he
was come to honor. For they count it for a great benefit, that John had given
to Christ such glorious titles and names, concerning the Messiah.

And whereas they add, that all men come unto Christ, that proceeds of
most wicked envy. For they fear least their Master shall be forsaken
straight way of the multitude.

A. The like almost spoke the high Priests and Pharisees, of Christ, saying:
If we let him go thus, John. 11.48. Ioh. 12.19. John. 8.12.
all men will believe on him. Also said they, Ye see that ye profit nothing:
Behold all the whole world goes after him.

But I would to GOD, all the world would follow Christ. For he which
follows him, walks not in darckenesse, but has the light of life.

27. John answered, and said, A man can receive nothing, except it be given
him from above.

Certain refer these words unto Christ, as though John should accuse his
Disciples of wicked presumption against God, in going about to take away From
Christ, that which was given him of his Father: As if he should have said, No
man will usurp, or take any such thing upon him, except it be given him from
above: Let it not therefore offend you, that he gathers Disciples unto him
by Baptism, and that many come unto him: I would to God, that both you and
all other men would acknowledge him for a Master, and principal teacher. In
vain therefore ye go about to abase him whom God has exalted. But other
some think it to be an exclamation, into the which he bursteth forth even
for very grief, that his Disciples had so little profited. And verylye they
were to much blinded in seeking to make him no better than his servant, whom
they had heard so often to be Christ. Therefore John might have iustlye
pronounced, that he had spent his labor in vain, in teaching men both Deaf
and senseless, until they were renewed in mind. But their sentence is more
probable, which refer these words to John: as if he should have said, It
is not in your, nor my power to make myself great: because every one of us,
must be such as it shall please God to appoint. Heb. 5.5
For he which is the son of GOD, has not honored him self, what man is
he that dare presume to couette more then it shall please the Lord to give
him? Therefore it does not appertain to my aucthoritye, to stay Christ from
his office: for this is my office only which I have received from God, to
prepare the way before Christ, that I may be the voice of a Crier in the
Wilderness, to Baptize with Water. Greater aucthoritye then this, I have not
received, neither do I arrogate any more to my self. For it is great
ingratitude for a man to usurp, and take more unto him self, than GOD has
committed unto him.

For Solomon also says, Prou. 4.25
Let thine eyes direct thy way before thee, That is to say, Have respect
unto thy vocation C. This only cogitation if it were graven into the minds
of all men, would be sufficient to put away all Ambition. And Ambicion
being taken away, the mischief of contencions shall cease also. For how
comes it to pass, that every one so Ambiciouslye exalts him self, but
only because we do not depend upon the Lord, and content our selves in
that state whereunto we are called?

M. This sentence also does admonish us of our necessitye and need. For we
have nothing, nor can have as of our selves, whether we have respect to
heavenly or to earthly things. We are miserable, Man void of all goodness.
and miserable were we borne, wanting all things, and except we were
nourished, and preserved by GOD, we should perish sooner than the flower of
the field.

Therefore, to take away all Pride and haughtiness of the mind, let us
have always before our eyes, this saying of the Apostle: What have thou, O
man, 1. Cor. 4.7.
which thou have not received: and if thou have received it, Why do thou
boaste, as though thou had not received it?

Also he says, It is better to give, Acts 20.35
than to receive. Therefore it is miserable to receive, and more miserable than
to give. So that nothing ought to be attributed to our works, or to our
industerye.

Bv. Hereby also we gather that they do greeuouslye offend, which give that
glory unto Saints, which they owe unto Christ (whom God has appointed to
be our mediator, Advocate, and Intercessour) and do also give more unto
Saints, than God has appointed, by which they do rather dishonor, than
honor them.

M. Moreover, if man can receive nothing, except it be given him from Heaven,
than how so ever human wisdom braggeth and boasts it self, yet
notwithstanding it cannot have in very deed, that which it has not received
from heaven, The Popes triple crown, and the signification thereof.
although this whole world attribute, the same unto him. Therefore, although
the Bishop of Rome, to signifye his power and aucthoritye in heaven, earth, and
in hell, wears the Triple Crown on his head, and would have all men to
worship the same, being herein like unto Jupiter, (of whom the Poet faigneth)
with the triple Scepter, yet notwithstanding, because he has received the
same from Constantine (as some affirm) and not from heaven, he shows him
self to be vaineglorious, and nothing inferior in Pride to Lucifer. And
whereas his faultors, and defendours object unto us the Church, it skilleth
not. AV. For it is not written here by the Evangelist, Except it be given him
from the Church, but he says, Except it be given him from heaven.

28. Ye your selves are witnesses, how that I said, I am not Christ, but am
sent before him.

C. John blames his Disciples because they believed not his words. For he
had oftentimes told them, that he was not Christ. Therefore it could not
otherwise be, but that he with the rest, were servants and subjects to the
only begotten son of God. M. John says not, there are many which have
heard this of me, and can be witnesses that I have said, how that I am not
Christ: (least any man should suspect that he had not told this to his
disciples, but to certain others secreetly, leaving them in that false opinion
which they had conceived of him) but he says, Ye your selves are witnesses
how that I said,

J am not Christ. By this place we see how obstinate, and self will man's
wisdom is, when it has once conceived a false opinon, and being admonished
thereof, retayneth an indiscreet zeal, by which it Judges those things that
are least, to be more principal, and those things that are principal, to be
least. C. And whereas he adds that he was sent before him, he declares
how much he differs from him. For John was sent before Christ, to prepare
his way, according to the statelye manner of Kings, who usually have their
Haruingers, and forerunners to make the way before them. M. But there is great
difference between the King him self, and his forerunner, John's humility.
who has no other dignity than that which he receives from the King: which
is, to show before the coming of the king, and to stir up all men to go
forth and meet him.

C. Therefore John makes him self no better then a Subject to the head, and
as one of the Ministers in the Church, not extolling him self to dishonor
his head.

C. In no less evil part do all the Saints of God take it, if any man
conceive of them a false opinion, and attribute that faith and reverence unto
them which is due unto the Lord him self: even as the Apostle Paul teaches.
1. Cor 4.1.
And contrariwise, we offend herein, if so be we attribute less unto the
Ministers of God than of right appertains unto them. Therefore we must
observe and keep a measure, whereby we may give unto the Lord, those
things that are the Lords, and to the Ministers, those things which belong
unto Ministers.

29. He that has the Bride, is the Bridegroom, but the friend of the
Bridegroom, which stands, and hears him, reioyseth greatly, because of the
Bridegromes voice: This my joy therefore is fulfilled.

He that has the Bride. Bv. Least that any doubt should remain in the minds
of his Disciples, by hardness or obscurenesse of speech, John propounds a
Parable, wonderfully agreeing with his purpose, by which he teaches, that to
Christ appertains all glory, and that of him, the whole Church ought to
depend: affirming of him self, that he is only a Ghest, and looker on at
the Marriage. C. For by this similitude, he proves more plainelye, that there
is but one Christ, which is taken from amongst all other men.

For as he which Marries a Wife, does not therefore call his friends to the
Wedding, to make his wife common to them, or to make them partaker of the
Bedchamber with him, but rather that the Wedding by their presence, might be
made the more honorable: even so Christ does not therefore call his ministers
to the office of teaching, that they should suppress the Church, and usurp
unto them selves the Lordshippe of the same, but that he might use their
faithful labor, to sociate the same to him self. It is a great and notable
thing for men, to be set as governors, and overseers of the Church, and to
represent the person of the son of God. Therefore, those whom the Bridegroom
joins to him, are as friends, to celebrate the Marriage together. But we
must note the difference, that we forgetting not our estate and condition,
draw that to our selves, which is proper to the Bridegroom: but rather with all
our might, to seek the advancement of his glory, and that by the sincere
Preaching of Gods word: as the Lord him self signified to Peter, saying, Simon
Ioanna, Love thou me, Ioh. 21.15
more then these? Feed my Lambs. And the Apostle Paul says, It is required
at the hands of stewardes that they be found faithful. 1. Cor. 4.2
Therefore he cannot be a true Minister of Christ, which is not a friend to
Christ. Whereupon, the Apostle speaking of himself, affirms that he is a
friend to the true Bridegroom of this Church: saying, For I am gelous over
you with godly gelousie. 2. Cor. 11.2.
For I have coupled you to one man, to present you a chaste Virgin unto Christ.
R. Therefore Christ is the Bridegroom, and the Church is the Spouse. C. And
as he truly offreth himself unto us, that he may be ours: even so at our
hands iustlye he requires that faith and love, which the wife owes to the
husband. And as for the chastity which he requires that specially consists
in the obedience of the Gospel, and in our constancye in the pure simplicity
of the same. A. Herevppon the Apostle Peter writes to the faithful saying: 1.
Pet. 1.22.
Ye which have purified your souls through the spirit in obeying the truth.
C. Therefore we must be subject to Christ alone, he must be our only head,
we must not swerve the breadth of a here from the truth of the Gospel, and
Christ above all other must be glorified, that he may retain and keep the
right and place of the Bridegroom. But what say you to the Ministers? Verily
the son of God calls them, to attend upon him in the time of celebrating
the sacred marriage. Wherefore it belongs unto them, to seek by all means
possible to deliver unto the bridegroom (whose care is committed unto them) a
pure and chaste Virgin. But they which seek to bring the church rather to
themselves, than unto Christ, do falselye violate the marriage, which they
ought to honest and adorn. And look how Christ does endew his Disciples with
the greater honor, in making them keepers of his Spouse, the greater is their
infidelity, if they seek not to preserve his right unviolated. M. For the
Ministers ought to stand and hear what the Bridegroom commands, and then
to induce others to his obedience. Whereupon Saint John says not, that he
rejoices because of the Bridegroom, but because of the Bridegroomes voice. A.
The which saying I would to GOD were well noted of those which are not afraid
to object the authority of the Church against the very word of Christ, as
though Christ, the only and true Spouse of the Church had left an imperfect
and lame doctrine to the faithful. For he says, I say not unto you, John.
15.
that ye are servants, because the servant knows not what his master
does: But I have called you friends, because I have declared unto you all
things that I have heard of my Father. M. Therefore al auctority is given to
the Bridegroom, not to the Bride. To the Bridegroom is given a voice to
speak and to command: to the Bride is given ears to hear: according to this
saying: Hearken O daughter and see, Psalm. 45.11
and incline thine ear. C. Therefore John the Baptist affirms that he has
obtained his full desire, in that he seeeth Christ to reign, and to have that
audience which he deserves. Bv. As if he should say, As he which is not
the Bridegroom, but a friend to the Bridegroom, and a looker on, neither
enuieth the Bridegrooms felicity, nor takes away his Bride: but rather
rejoices for the marriage made between them boath, and standing by rejoices
hereat secretlye in his heart, and not openly, because he sees the labor
which he took in making the marriage, to have prosperous success, and the
Bride which is brought of the Bridegroom to enjoy most sweet and pleasant
company of the same: Even so I being a Foorerunner of Christ, not the
Bridegroom, but a friend of the Bridegroom, wholly desiring that the people
of GOD may be associate and united to his marriage: neither do I envy his
great glory, neither will I pull from him his people, but do most heartily
rejoice, that I have lived unto this day, most happelye with my eyes to behold
and see, that my Preaching has not been in vain, but that all men speedelye
come unto Christ, to whom I have hitherto invited them: this my exceeding Joy
(I say) is fulfilled. C. Verylye whosoever is so affected, that he will seek
Christ, and not him self, and is contented to have Christ's honor advanced,
shall faithfully, and profitablye govern the Church. But whosoever shall
decline either to the right hand, or to the left, from this way, shall be an
unchaste Adulterer, and can not chose but corrupt, and defile the Spouse of
Christ.

30. He must increase, but I must decrease.

R. This is a very short sentence, but yet worthy to be noted. C. For, because
John was at the first highly advanced by the Lord, he shows, that he
received this honor but for a time: and must now, that the Son of
righteousness is risen, give place. Therefore he does not only repel and
reject the vain titles of honor, which men, ignorantly, and erroniouslye had
given unto him: but also seeks carefullye, that the true and lawful honor,
which the Lord had bestowed upon him, should not obscure the glory of christ.
For this cause he says, that hitherto he was counted for a great Prophet,
and that he was appointed to enjoy his Dignitye, until the coming of
Christ, to whom he ought to render up the same. B. As if he should say, Now
I have throughlye discharged my Office.

Bv. I said that Christ should come, yea, I have Preached that he is come
already, I have promised remission of sins, and all other graces, in him,
and to this Christ, I have called all men: therefore, there remains nothing
now, but that he alone should live, Teach, Florishe, Reign, and should be
all in all to his Saints in the Church: neither must there be had any regard
to me any longer, for it is meet that his glory should be alone increased in
the world, and be known unto men: and contrariwise, that my name, as the name
of a Minister or Servant, decreased.

M. And it is to be noted, that he says not, He increases, and I am
deminished, (for his Disciples saw this, and were sorye for it, and complained
thereof) but, to the end he might admonish them, that there was nothing done
but that which of necessity must be done, and which ought not nor could not
be let or hindered, he says:

He must increase, but I must decrease. And Christ increased when his
knowledge and glory, shined more and more in the minds of men, John
diminished when the opinion of his name decreased before those which came to
hear Christ. Bv. Otherwise John keeps his glory and honor in the Church,
Math. 11.11
because among women's Children, there arose not a greater than John the
Baptist. For he shall be counted for ever, as a good, faithful, and true
witness of the Son of God: and yet not for the Messiah (as many then
thought him to be) But for a faithful Forerunner and Minister of the Messiah.
The which I would to God they would dilligentlye noate and consider, which at
this day make much prating of the intercessions, and worship of Saints. R. By
this sentence also we are admonished, that all the auctorities, dignities,
offices, righteousness, wisdom and power of men, must fall down, that the
aucthority, dignity, office, righteousness, wisdom, and power of Christ, may
be established.

31. He that comes from an high, is above all, he that is of the earth, is
earthly, and speaks of the earth: He that comes from heaven, is above all.

He that comes from an high. Bv. Thus far Saint John has removed the
sinister and false opinion which the people had conceived of him: and now he
declares his mind and judgment concerning Christ, C. and shows by another
similitude, how much Christ differs from all other men, and how greatly he
excels them. For he compares him to the King and most excellent Governor,
who speaking from his high throne, is to be heard for the reverence of his
Emperies sake. But he teaches that it is sufficient for him to speak from of
his footestoole. Bv. As if he should say, This man is not a man only as ye
think, but God also: and he comes from an high, and has been from the
beginning: by whom all things were made, and therefore he teaches things
both heavenly and divine: Why then should not all men come unto him?
Therefore he says that Christ came from an high, not only in that he is
God, but also because in him there is nothing to be seen, but that which is
full of majesty, and heavenly. M. And whereas it is said, that Christ
descended from above, it is no otherwise to be understood than of the
prerogative of the original, by which he came into this world, not only
from heaven, but also from God the Father, being the only begotten son of
God. For otherwise the Angels come from heaven, to whom notwithstanding that
dignitye does not belong, which is here given to Christ, Who says: I went out
from the father, and came into the world. Ioh. 16.28
B. Furthermore, to the end he might most evidently set before the eyes of
all men, the dignity and excellency of the son of God, and might alure the
whole world and his Disciples, to worship, to hear, to embrace and to receive
him, he adds that Christ:

Js above all. M. That is to say, above all mortal men, and above all
creatures, yea, above the very Angels. He says not, He shall be above all:
But he is above all: because he does not declare of what estimation Christ was
among the Jews (to whom he was the outecaste of the people, Esaias. 53.3. Psalm.
22.7.
a worm and no man, yea, and the reproach of men) but how he was esteemed in
the sight of God his Father. Heb. 1.2.
Bv. For all things are subject unto him, he is the Lord of all, and is
subject to none, according to his divine substance: but he is equal with his
Father, and rules over all.

He that is of the earth, is earthlye. C. That is to say, He that is of the
earth sauoureth of his original, and according to the condition of his nature,
stays himself upon the order of heavenly things.

Christ only, speaks from Heaven.
This therefore he affirms to be proper only unto Christ, to speak from
an high, because he speaks from heaven. Therefore he calls Christ
heavenly, 1. Cor. 15.
even as the Apostle calls him in that collation, in the which he compares
him to Adam. And by these words man's nature is extenuated and abased, to the
end all flesh may learn to abase and humble it self before GOD. Even so
must man's nature be humbled and abased, when it is compared with that which is
divine and celestial. So Abraham when he talked with the Angel of God said,
Genesis 18.27
I have begone to speak with GOD, and am but dust and ashes. Even so, so
often as we are drawn unto pride, we must be put in mind of our own
imbecility, baseness, Man's corrupt nature beats down his Pride.
he shall not boast nor exalte himself neither against man nor against GOD.
B. And if it fortune that man's dignity at any time be extolled, it is so
extolled and commended in respect of the Image of God, which he has ingraued
in man. But because, Psa. 49 1^
when he was in honor he understood not, therefore he is compared to the
Beasts that are without understanding, and is made like unto them. And
therefore it is needful that he should be always put in mind of his
baseness, and of his profit. C. But it may be demanded if John the Baptist
came not also from heaven, in respect of his vocation and office, and was
therefore to be heard, the Lord speaking by his mouth. For he seems to be
injurious to the heavenly doctrine which he preached.

M. For seeing he speaks generallye of all men, and puts himself without
all doubt in the same number, how can that belong unto him which he says:

And speaks of the Earth. Are those things which he preached, and the
testimonies which he bare unto Christ, and the Baptism wherewith he baptized
Christ, earthlye? If they be earthlye, how can the Euaungelist say, John. 1.6.
There was a man sent from God, whose name was John. In like manner, Mat. 21.2^
how does Christ argue and affirm that the Baptism of John was from heaven.
Luke. 7.3^


Also in another place, he calls the Baptism of John, the Counsel of God
despised of the Pharisees. If these things are not of the earth, but heavenly,
how then does he say here of him self, He which is of the earth, is
earthlye, Aunsvvere.
and speaks of the earth? C. Answer here unto may thus be made. This
which John here speaks is not simply spoken, but comparatiuelye. If we
consider of Ministers by them selves, they speak as it were from Heaven, with
great aucthority, that which is commanded them of God: but so soon as they
begin, to apose them: or compare them with Christ, we ought not. So the
Apostle comparing the Law with the Gospel, says: Hebr. 12.25
If they escaped not which refused him, that spoke on earth: much more shall
we not escape: If we turn away from him that speaks from heaven. Christ
therefore will be acknowledged in his Ministers: but yet so, that he will be
Lord alone: as for the Ministers of GOD, they are contented to be in the
order of Servants specially when comparison is made beetweene Christ and them.

He that comes from heaven, is above all. M. He repeateth this sentence,
first of all, to inculcate and imprint the same in the minds of his Disciples,
that they might submit themselves to Christ alone, which boath came from
heaven, and also is above al: and that they should not depend upon him, who
himself is subject to another, whom he knew to be preferred before all men
by God the Father: Secondly, to the end he might the more conuenientlye
adioyne and bring in that which remains unspoken.

32. And what he has seen and heard, that he testifies: and no man
receives his testimony.

CHR. Because these by corporal scences of hearing and seeing, we know all
things certainly, and think our selves worthy to be believed when we have
seen and heard (as such that neither feign nor tell lies) therefore to
confirm the matter Saint John says, that Christ testifies that which he
has both seen and heard. C. For to the end his Disciples might obey Christ,
he commends the Doctrine of Christ by the certainetie of the same, because
he utters nothing, but that which he has received from the Father. B.
Therefore Christ teaches those things which are most certain and approved
true: Ioh. 1.18
seeing he is in the bosom of GOD, and the wisdom of the Father. M. and he
says not, He speaks that which he has seen and heard, But, he
testifies, to admonish them, that Christ is not only a teacher of Gods
truth, but also a most assured witness of all things. A. For he says,
Ioh. 8.26.
What things I have heard of him I declare in the world. And in an other
place he says: John. 15.15
I have showed unto you al things that I have heard of my father. M. Therefore
by this place we may note what prerogative Christ had above John and above
all other teachers: because he could and does by his holy spirit teach the
minds of men as well as by words. How many soever in this life teach divine
and heavenly things, how holy soever they be, yet notwithstanding they
cannot testify of those things which they teach, that they have seen them in
heaven, though they be true which they speak. For those things which they
have received, they have not received by knowledge, or by fight in heaven, but
either by the revelation of the holy ghost, or else by Faith in Gods word:
but Christ could testify in this world those things which he had both
heard and seen.

And no man receives his testimonye. Bv. Saint John here does reprove, not
only the unbelief of his Disciples, but also the incredulity of other of
the Jews, who withstoode the Doctrine of Christ, notwithstanding that it was
most true. John. 3.11.
M. So Christ said to Nicodemus, We speak that we know and testify that
we have seen, and ye receive not our witness. Where he reprooueth the
blindness of the Jews even as John does here, their incredulity. The which
notwithstanding is not so to be understood, as though no man received the
testimony of Christ: (seeing the Apostles and diverse others received and
believed the same) but he means that a very few, in comparison, have
received and believed it. C. For if we compare the believers with the huge
multitude of the wicked, they will appear nothing.

And to receive the testimony of Christ, is stedfastlye to believe in him, and
to embrace his word with thankesgeuing, as the most assured testimonye of Gods
will. This is done but of very few also, at this day. For the credit given
to this Heavenly Doctrine, is even now as little as it was then. He says not,
And no man hears his testimony: But, No man receives his testimony: For
there have been always many hearers thereof: But there have been few
receyuers of the same found.

A. So this place may be expounded, even as that which we heard before, He
came into his own, John. 1.11
and his own received him not.

33. He that has received his testimonye, has set to his seal, that God is
true.

M. From this verse, to the end of the Chapter, John the Baptist notes two
things: First, what praise and profit he shall receive, which receives the
Testimonye of Christ: Secondlye what hurt shall happen unto him, which
receives not the same.

He which receives his testimonye, has put to his seal. R. That is to say:
He which believes his word, has put to his seal, or approves by his
faith and confession, that God is true, and keeps his promises: or else
receives the testimonye in his heart, that those things which Christ speaks,
are the very words of GOD. And this testimony is the holy Ghost, certifying
and confirming our consciences, as a seal, that this is the Son of GOD in
deed, and that his word, Ioh. 15.2^.
is the word of GOD in deed. Hereupon Christ says, When the comforter
comes, which is the spirit of truth, he shall bear witness of me. 2.
Cor. 1.22
And the Apostle says, Which has sealed us, and has given the earnest of
the spirit into our hearts. Ephe^
Also in an other place, After ye believed ye were sealed with the holy
spirit of promise, which is the pledge of our inheritance. C. Saint John also
here preuenteth and meets by the way with an offense or stumbling block,
which might turn many from the faith, and might hinder or at least stop their
swiftness in their race. For the greatest part hangs to much upon the
judgment of men, and deemeth and judges of the gospel after the contempt of
the world: at the least when it sees the same in some places to be rejected,
having before conceived this prejudice, it is the more hard and slow to
believe. Here therefore the man of GOD exhorts and encourages the godly,
boldelye to embrace the doctrine of the Gospel: as if he should have said,
There is no cause why the Godly should be ashamed or grieved at the
smalenesse of their number, God the aucthor of our faith is more than all the
world beside, to give testimony to the truth.
seeing that God is the Aucthor of their Faith, who himself alone is all in all, and therefore all sufficient, and to be preferred before multitudes.
Therefore although the whole world do withstand the faith, yet
notwithstanding, this ought not to keep good men from the obedience and
service of GOD. They have also whereupon to rest and stay themselves seeing
they know, that to believe the Gospel, is nothing else than to believe the
Oracles of GOD. In the mean time we gather, that this is proper to faith, to
rest and stay it self upon God, Faith sta^eth it self upon Go^
and to be grounded and established by his word. For there cannot be a true
faith, before GOD has spoken by his word. By which Doctrine faith is
discerned not only from the imaginations of men, but also from a doubtful and
wavering opinion. For it is necessary that the same be agreeing with the
truth of GOD, which is clear from all doubtfulnesse. Faith shakes not.
Therefore as GOD cannot lie, so is it impossible that Faith should waver or
shake. Shilding our selves with this Buckler we shall be sure to overcome for
ever, by what means soever Satan shall assault us. M. But some will say, what
is he that ever doubted of the truth of God? What need is there then of the
Testimony of Christ, whereby we may know God to be true? But John the
Baptist speaks not here simplye of the truth of God, but of that truth, by
which the promises made unto Israel, (and in Israel to mankind) were fulfilled
and performed in Christ. Romans 15.8.
So Christ, is called the Minister of Circumcision, for the truth of God, to
confirm the promises made unto the Fathers.

This truth of God can not be apprehended, without we apprehende also the
testimony of Christ. And of this truth, Christ him self speaks, John. 8.31.
saying: If you abide in my word, then are you my Disciples in deed, and ye
shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free.

C. Hereby we are also admonished, what an acceptable and precious Sacrifice
faith is before God. For as he esteems nothing more than his truth, even so
we can do to him no service or worship more acceptable, than by our faith to
profess him to be true: for then we shall give unto him his due honor.
Again, we can do unto him no greater iniurye, than not to believe the
Gospel: for he can not be spoiled of his truth and verytye, but all his
glory and majesty must be clean abolished. M. Therefore look how much
the faith of the Godly which believe in Christ, makes to the glory of God, so
much on the contrary part, does the unbelief of the ungodly make to his
dishonor.

Not that their impietye, can make the Faith and truth of God of none effect,
but because they reprove him of vanity. To this effect pertains the saying
of Saint John in another place, He which believes in the Son of God, has
the testimony of God in him self: 1. Ioh. 5.10.
he which believes not God, makes him a liar, because he has not believed
the testimonye, which God has testified of his Son. C. Verylye, unless we
be to dull, and stonye, this so notable a commendation given to faith, ought
to kindle in our minds, a most fervent love of the same. For what great honor
is this, which God vouchsafes to bestow upon miserable men, which by nature
are nothing else but liars and vain, that they nevertheless, should be
thought meet to confirm, and allow the holy truth of God, by their
subscription and sealing.

34. For he whom God has sent, speaks the words of God: For God gives
not the Spirit by measure.

For he whom God has sent. M. This is the reason why he puts to his seal
that God is true, which receives the testimony of Christ, namelye, because the
testimonye of Christ, is the testimony of God: C. because Christ proceeded from
no other, than from his heavenly Father. Therefore it is God only which
speaks by him. M. So says the Lord him self: John. 7.16.
My Doctrine is not mine, but my Fathers which sent me. Also he says: The
word which ye hear is not mine, but his which sent me. Ioh. 14.24


R. Therefore he which hears Christ, hears God, and he which possesses
Christ by faith, possesses God.

For God gives not. Some extend this place, to the common dispensation,
because God which is the bottomless well of all goodness, does nothing at al
empty him self, when largely and plentifullye, God a bottomless well of grace.
he powers his gifts upon men.

They which power water out of any Vessel, or draw a Well, come at the
length, to the botome of the same: but we need not fear or doubt of the like
to be in God: for the more his gifts are bestowed upon us, the more
plentifully they abound. This exposition seems to have some color, because
the sentence is somewhat intricate and obscure: C. notwithstanding their
opinion seems moore probable, which interpret this to be spoken concerning
Christ: and so the sense and meaning is, that the Spirit is not given by
measure unto Christ, as though the grace in him were to be measured: even as
the Apostle Paul teaches, Ephe. 4.7 1. Cor. 12 7
that to every one is distributed according to the measure of the gift, so
that no one man abounds at the full. And verylye the Spirit must rest upon
Christ without measure, John. 1.16.
to the end we might all receive of the fullness of the same.

Bv. There is a common Proverb, He gives by measure, that is to say, He
gives sparinglye, or nigardlye. For he which gives liberally, and
bountifullye, does not measure that which he gives, but gives by heap.

John the Baptist received the Spirit by measure: as did also diverse others of
the Saints. Wherefore they cannot be compared unto Christ, so far they are
of from being his equalles. But concerning Christ: the Prophet David says in
his Psalms, Thou have loved righteousness, Psalm. 45.7.
and hated Iniquitye, wherefore God thy God, has anointed thee with the Oil
of gladness above thy fellows. Colos. 2.9.
Also Saint Paul says, In Christ dwells all fullness of the Godhead
bodylye, and in him ye are complete.

Christ has the spirit of God super-aboundantly.
CHR. Therefore by this note, the Son of GOD is discerned from the Prophets,
and from other holy men. For it is impossible that they which have received
the Spirit of GOD by measure, should give and bestow the same upon others.
Neither has one holy man bestowed the holy Ghost upon another, but all (as
we have said) have received of the fullness of Christ. Therefore because
Christ is the geuer of the spirit, let no man doubt, but that he
substantiallye possesses in him self the holy Ghost. Act. 8.17.
If any man object and say, that the holy Ghost was given by the hands of
the Apostles, it may easilye be answered: That they made their Prayers to
the holy Ghost, who being entreated, came, and was said to be given by their
hands.

For holy Moses, that Saint of God, was not seen to take of the spirit of
GOD which was in him, and to give the same unto others, but this is reserved to
the Divine power only. For these works belong to God alone.

35. The Father loves the Son, and has given all things into his hand.

The Father loves the Son. Bv. Saint John gathers in few words, all the
Mysteries of the Gospel, into a brief compendium, or short sum: and does
more plainelye set forth those things which hitherto he has spoken of Faith,
and the virtue thereof. To the end therefore, he might show that the faith
of the Godly is not in vain, which is reposed in Christ, he declares that
all power to save, is wholye given to the Son, because he is loved
exceedinglye of the Father. M. John Baptiste had heard the Heavenly voice, by
which the Father spoke from Heaven, saying: Math. 3.17
This is my well-beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.

Now, the whole inheritance cannot but belong to the well-beloved son:
Therefore when John was about to say, And has given all things into his
hand, He very well added first, The Father loves the Son.

C. But what is the meaning of this reason? Does he hate all others?

Answer is made hereunto, Aunsvvere
that he speaks not here of the common love, with the which God loves men,
and other works of his hands: but of that singular and special love, which
beginning at the Son, flows from thence to all other Creatures.

For this love of God (by which he loving his Son, loves us also) brings
to pass, that he does communicate unto us, by his hand all good things.

Bv. Whereupon the Apostle Paul says, He loved us in his well-beloved Son.

Ephe 1.6.
And has given all things into. M. These few words appertain greatly to
our Faith, by which we depend upon Christ, as upon the Lord of all. Bv. For
all things, as well visible, as invisible, and whatsoever else without
exception, has the father given unto him, M. to be in his power, in his proper
possession, and in his disposition and government. Bv. I say, he has given
unto him all things, not that in respect of his Divine nature, he wanted them
at any time, or that he was not equal with the Father in omnipotencye: (For
he says, Glorifye me now, O Father with thy self, with the same glory,
which I had with thee, before the beginning of the world,) CYR. but because
when the fullness of time was come, the Son of God was incarnate, and made man,
and was humbled to the death, even to the death of the Cross, therefore God
has exalted him, and according to the nature which he has taken, is said to
have received some what, not, as from another, but as his own proper right: M.
and he is said so to have received the same, not to refer that to him self
alone, which he has received, but liberallye to dispense the same to others.

In consideration whereof he calls all men unto him, saying: Come unto me,
all ye that travail. Mat. 11.27
etc. Also he says, All power is given to me, Mat. 28.18
both in heaven and in earth. Go ye therefore unto al Nations. Neither took he
this power by force or violence, nor yet did he buie the same: the which
happens as we see, in the kingdom of Antichrist: but took the same
naturallye of the Father, as the only begotten and well-beloved Son of God.
Bv. The which is done for our sakes. For, as it is said, he has received all
those things for us, and distributeth them unto us, and makes them subject
unto our power, that we might be Lords of Life, of Death, of Men, of Devils,
and of al other things, according to the saying of the Apostle, Whether it
be Paul, or Apollo, 1. Cor. 3.22.
or Cephas, either the world, either life, either death, whether they be
present things, or things to come, al are youres, And ye are Christ's, and
Christ is Gods. Of the like benefit of God, Psalm. 8.7.
and of the same glory appertayning to men, speaks the Prophet David in his
Psalms.

36. He that believes on the Son, has everlasting life: he that believes
not the Son, shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him.

He that believes on the Son. C. He adds this to the end we might not
only know, that all grace and goodness is to be sought in Christ, but also
that we might know how to get and enjoy the same. He says that the way
to enjoy grace and everlasting life, is, by faith: Faith obtains salvation
in Christ.
and not without good reason: because by the same we possess Christ, who
brings with him righteousness, and life, the fruit of righteousness. M. He
says not simplye, He that believes, but, He that believes in the Son.

By the which note, the Christian faith is distinguished from the faith of
other Nations, yea, from the faith of the Jews, because we believe in the
son of God, Christ Jesus, whom the whole world contemns and derydeth.
This is our foolishness in this world.

Has everlasting life. Bv. He speaks here in the present tence, Life
everlasting in this life.
saying: He has, he says not, He shall have, for he possesses already
everlasting life, waiting in hope, for that which he is assured he shall have.
Moreover, the faithful feel in this carnal life, Vital motions of the
Spirit, and life it self, Gala. 2.20
the Apostle witnessing, I live: yet now not I, but Christ lives in me: and
the life that I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the son of
God, which loved me, and gave him self for me. Life is set against Death,
against Malediction, and Condemnation, signifying Justification, absolucion,
happiness, and everlasting blessedness.

He that believes not the Son. C. As he propounded life in Christ, to allure
us unto him by the sweetness of the same: even so now he denounseth unto
them eternal death, which believe not in Christ. He says not simplye, He
which believes not, but, He which believes not the Son. For all unbelief
is not condemned, but that only which despises the Son of God. He which
believes none of the Fathers, nor the Bishop of Rome, is not under this
sentence of condemnation, so that he believe the Son of God.

C. Also this sentence, does properly pertain unto them (as it is said in
another place) which reiecte the Gospel preached unto them. For although all
mankind is wrapped in like destruction, yet notwithstanding, greater
vengeance shall fall upon those, which refuse the Son of God to be their
deliverer.

Shall not see life. That is to say, he shall never enjoy life. M. By this
manner of speech, Life, and enteraunce into the Kingdom of Heaven, is not
denied to the unbelieving without an Emphasis: as if he should say: He which
believes not, shall be so far from having everlasting life, that he shall
never enjoy so much as the sight of the same.

Bv. So said our Savior Christ, to Nicodemus, John. 3.3
Except a man be borne again, he can not see the Kingdom of GOD. Also he
says, Except ye believe that I am he, John. 8.24
ye shall dye in your sins.

But the wrath of God abides on him. The wrath of God is here apposed against
life: therefore it comprehends all miserye, Calamitye, Unhappiness,
Sickness, Pouertye, Vengeance, Death, Sin, Malediction, Punishment, and
torment.

AVG. He says not, The wrath of God shall come on him, but, The wrath of God
abides on him. All mortal men which are borne, bring with them the wrath of
God, and that for the sin which they have drawn from Adam. But the Son of
God came having no sin, and having on him our flesh, was amongst us, to
turn away the wrath of God, if so be, man would receive the grace of GOD
offered unto him. He therefore which believes not the Son, the wrath of GOD
abides on him.

What wrath is that? Surely, the very same, of the which the Apostle
speaks, saying: Ephe. 2.3.
We are by nature the children of wrath. C. And although, they which are
naturally condemned, are reprobates already, yet notwithstanding, they bring
new death unto them selves, by their own infidelity. Math. 16.19.
And to this end the power of Binding, and Losing, is given to the Ministers.
For this is the Just punishment of man's contumacye, and Pride, that they which
shake of the wholesome Yoke of GOD, do tie them selves with the bonds of death.
M. Here therefore is appointed, the perpetuitye, and duraunce of the wrath of
God, and of the punishment of the wicked. For as it is necessary that he
should live unto God, who so ever he be, that is capable of his everlasting
goodness: (for he is not the God of the dead, but of the living) so it is
necessary, that he be guilty, and destroyed for ever, which is subject to the
everlasting wrath of God through incredulity. Hereupon it is said. Math. 3.12.
That he will burn the chafe with unquenchable fire. They shall go into
everlasting torment: Their worm shall not die, Math. 25.46. Esa. 66.24
and the fire shall not be quenched. R. This is a notable Sermon of John the
Baptist, the which we ought always to remember. For he preaches unto us
Christ, and sets him before us, to the end we might know what great
treasures of blessings we possess in him through faith.

Bv. Let us therefore often times diligently read over the same, and deeply
consider the same in our mind: and then we shall reap thereby the most
pleasant fruits of the liuelye knowledge and faith of Christ, which from time
to time shall increase and grow more and more, and abide firm and sound for
ever.

The fourth Chapter.
1. As soon as the Lord knew how the Pharisees had heard that Jesus made and
baptized mo disciples than JOHN. R.

IN THE BEginning of the former Chapter the Evangelist has described, the true
way of Justifying: Now in this Chapter he adds the example of true
Justification in the Harlot of Samaria, least that Doctrine should seem
frivolous and vain, for want of an example. Bv. All the parts of this
Historye, are very well knitte together. For now the Evangelist passes from
the communication of Christ and Nicodemus, and from the Testimonye of John, to
describe another conference between the Lord, and the Woman of Samaria. C.
And first of all he shows the cause why our Savior Christ went out of
Judea. For when he knew that the Pharisees were evil affectioned, he would
not put him self in danger of their furye, before the appointed time came.

Therefore leaving Iewrye, he went again into Galilee. Wherefore he came not
of purpose into Samaria, there to abide, but because he must pass through the
same into Galilee.

As Soon as the Lord knew. M. The Evangelist speaks not here as though the
Lord were at any time ignorant of the practices of his enemies: for he need
not be admonished of the devises of his enemies: for he knew their evil
Cogitacions, and therefore he shunned their fury. C. The Evangelist makes
mencio^ only of the Pharisees, which were sworn enemies unto Christ, not that
the other Scribes were his friends: but because this sect of the Pharisees
then reigned, and were mad, under the pretense of a Godly zeal. Saint John
says here that these men heard how that Christ made and Baptized more
Disciples than John the Baptist: but he says not that they saw this. First
of all this was heretical, by the Sacerdotall, or Priestly Judgment: for this
might have divided the Church, and have bread Schisms.

For so many as became the Disciples of Christ and were Baptized, went to a
new Church, and imbrasing the Yoke of Christ, were drawn from the government
of the Pharisees, Scribes, and Priests. C. Moreover, their minds being
sturred up before, by the gathering together of Disciples by John, they were
now the more exasperate, and set on fire, when they saw that Christ came, and
drew more Disciples after him, than John had done. For from the time that John
preached him self to be nothing else but the forerunner of the Son of GOD,
the greater number followed Christ, and the Ministerye of John began now to
cease. And so by little and little he resigned to Christ, the office of
teaching and Baptizing: A. as he him self had said, Math. 3
He must increase, but I must decrease.

The Lord made Disciples, that is to say, he wanne unto him hearers, and
bound them unto him, with the knot of Religion: And in very deed the hearers
of the Lord, have been always called from the beginning, Disciples,
afterward Christians.

2. (Though that Jesus him self Baptized not, but his Disciples.)

A. It is said in the two and twentye verse of the Chapter going before, that
Christ was in Iewrye, and that he there Baptized, the which Saint John here
expounds, saying: that he Baptized by his Disciples. AVG. Therefore the
Lord Baptized, Christ baptized not: and yet did baptize.
and Baptized not. For, he Baptized, because it was he that cleansed, washed,
and purified the sins: he Baptized not, because he used not the outward
Sacrament of dipping, or ducking in the Water. The Disciples used the
Ministerye of the body: and he Joined thereunto his Majesty and grace.

B. Therefore the Lord Baptized by the Ministerye of his Disciples.

This outward sign was committed to the Ministerye of the Church: and to
this Ministry Christ chose his Apostles. As therefore by this the Church ought
to be ordered and governed: even so he thought good to prepare his Apostles to
the same, and to enter them into this holy ministerye. M. For he said
afterward to his Apostles: Go ye forth, Mat. 28.19 Mat. 16.1^
and teach all Nations, and Baptize them in the name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the holy Ghost. C. So that we see, that the same is called the
Baptism of Christ: which is ministered by the hands of other men, to the
end we might know that Baptism does not depend upon the person of the
Minister, but that the force thereof does whollye hang upon the aucthour, in
whose name and at whose commandment the same is ministered. Whereby we have a
singular consolation: for seeing we know that our Baptism is of no less
efficasie, to cleanse and to renew us, than if the same were given to us, of
the son of God him self, what a special comfort, and unspeakable Joy,
may we have thereby? And this is sufficient to confute the Annabaptistes,
Anabaptists conf^red.
which affirm that Baptism is defiled, and imperfect, by the sin and
wickedness of the Minister: and for this cause they greatelye trouble the
Church, as sometime did the Donatistes. But concerning this matter, we have
spoken sufficientlye before in the third Chapter, the two and twenty verse.
M. By this place also we may easylye gather, that the office of teaching, is
far better than the office of Baptizing.

The Lord Preached him self, The office of teaching excels the office of
baptizing.
but he Baptized by the hands and Ministerye of other men. For the Preaching
of the Gospel, is an office of greater power, and more plentifullye sets
forth the Grace and knowledge of God, than the Ministerye of Baptising: even
as it is a work of greater Industrye, and cunning, to prepare the Wrastler to
the Game, than to give the Garlande and price to those that win.

B. Christ therefore was contented to teach, and by the sign of imposition of
hands, to give the spirit of God and other gifts: and straight way permitted
the Apostles to baptize. M. So says Paul, that he was not sent to Baptize
but to preach. 1. Cor. 1.17
And Peter himself being present baptized not the house of Cornelius, Act.
10.48
but commanded them to be baptized. There ought to be in the Church boath
preaching Ministers, and Baptising Ministers.
Therefore there must be an order observed in the Church, that they which
excel others, may have the most excellent offices committed unto them.

3. He left Jury, and departed again into Galilee.

He left Jury. R. Christ by reason of the persecution of the Pharisees, fleeeth
out of Judea, not for fear of death (for he therefore descended from heaven,
that he might dye for men) but because as yet he had scarselye begone his
office, for the which he was come. For so soon as he had done this, he
went forth to meet his enemies: John. 18.4
so far he was from fleeing death.

So Paul by the Brethren was let down in a Basket over the Wall in the
night, Act. 9.25
and fled: but when he had discharged his office and calling, he was ready
not only to be bound, but also to dye at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord
Jesus. Act. 21.13


And departed again into Galilee C. Why does he seek to hide himself in
Galilee, as though he would not be known, when he should rather have made
him self manifest?

I answer that Christ would observe an order in his doings, and so used
the opportunity of the time, that he did not let pass or forslew one moment.
Therefore he determined to finishe his course in good order and with
discretion. Whereby also we are taught, that we ought to be of such stout
courage, that we should not be so terrified with any fear, Persecution may
be fled sometime.
but we should go forward in our office: and that we should not be boulde
in casting our selves rashelye into perils. R. Christ could with his beck
only have withstand all his enemies: But for our sakes he abased himself,
taking upon him the form of a servant, Phil. 2.7. Heb. 2.18
and would be subject to infirmities, that he might help those which are
tempted.

4. For it was so that he must needs go through Samaria.

These words are an introduction to the History of the woman of Samaria, For
the Euaungelist says that the Lord was constrained by necessity to pass by
Samaria, the which could not be done without offense to the Jews. He says
therefore that these countries or regions were so placed, that going from Jury
to Galilee, he could not pass except he went through Samaria, which lay
between them. C. Christ then came not of set purpose into Samaria, but because
the necessity of the journey did so require. For until he had opened passage
to the Gospel by his resurrection, it was necessary that he should be
occupied in gathering together the lost sheep of the house of Israel, for the
which he was sent. Whereupon he is called a Minister of the Circumcision.
Romans 15.8


And at the first preaching of the Apostles, Math. 10.5
he forbadde them to go to teach the Samaritanes. Least therefore Christ
should seem to do any thing contrary to that which he had commanded, the
Evangelist thought good to pretermitte this. B. For Luke testifyeth, that if a
man will go out of Galilee to Judea, Luke. 9.52
he must pass through the Country of Samaria. M. But the Evangelist, by the
name of Samaria, means not that Samaria, which afterward, the name being
changed, was called Sebaste, but the Countreye lying about the same: as may
be gathered by the text: For it is added.

5. Then came he to a City of Samaria, which is called Sichar, besides the
possession, that Jacob gave to his son Joseph.

B. Josephus writes that Sichima, which bordereth upon mount Garizin, (which
is higher than all the mountains of Samaria) was the chief or Metropolitan
City of Samaria, in the time of Alexander the great. Herevppon it is lykelye
that the same Sichima, is called by the Evangelist, Sichar: C. which also was
called Sichem, the Inhabitauntes whereof were Trayterouslye slain, Genesis 34.25
Iud. 9.49
by Simeon and Leui: and which Abimelech (notwithstanding, that he was borne
in the same) afterward destroyed and made even with the ground. But so
notable and excellent was the place, that the third time a City was builded
there again, which in Hieromes time was called Naples.

And the Evangelist takes away all controuersye, by adding so many
circumstaunces. For it may evidently appear by Moses, Ge. 48.22.
where that field was, which Jacob gave unto the sons of Joseph.

M. And the Evangelist makes mention of this giving, to commend the Faith of
Jacob, who being at the point of death, and not unmindful of the promise made
concerning the Land of Canaan, by faith gave this platte of ground to his
Son Joseph. But if Jacob gave this place for an Inheritance to his Son
Joseph, Samaritanes (that is to say, a foreign Nation brought thither out of
Babylon) were found there by our savior Christ? Read the Historye in the
seventeen Chapter of the Second Book of Kings. Aunsvvere.
I answer, That God divided the Land to the Sons of men, insomuch, that
every Nation was appointed his dwelling place: But (as we see by this example)
it comes oftentimes to pass, by the just judgment of God, that the
reprobate are cast out of their own Nations, which their Ancestors have
received of God, with singular grace and favor.

6. And there was Jacobs well. Jesus then being wearye of his Iourneye, sat
thus on the well: and it was about the sixte hour.

And there was Jacobs well. R. The Evangelist makes mention of this Spring,
which he calls Jacobs well, because it is credible, and likelye that Jacob
Dug a well there, Genesis 21.2. Genesis 26.15
following the example of his Fathers, Abraham and Isaac. M. And whereas this
piece of ground, and this Well, of the which, the Evangelist makes mention,
have retained in them selves, The memory of the Godly abides for ever.
so many Ages, and so long time the remembrance of the Patriarche Jacob, we
may thereby be admonished and taught, how sure and stable the memory of the
Godly abides even in this world. This place was of greater fame, by reason
of the remembrance of Jacob, than the high mountains of Robbers, whose
memory sodainelye vanishes away. Let us leave unto our Posterity, the
remembrance of Godliness, which is much more precious than Gold.

Jesus then being weery. Here begins the History. When the Disciples were
entered into the City, to bye meat, the Lord sat in the mean time, beside
the Well, as waiting their return, not entering with them into the City,
both, that he might not give them an evident occasion of offense, and also
that he might attend the finishing of that work, which he knew he should
take in hand. For he sat, (says the Evangelist) being weery of his Journey,
by the Wells side. C. He did not feign a weariness, but he was weery in
deed.

For to the end he might the more effectuallye suffer the Passions of a
natural man, he took upon him our infirmities. R. For he came into this
world to declare, that he is our high Priest with his Father. The office of
the high Priest.
It is the office of ye high Priest, to Care, to Pray, and to make
intercession for the People, and to take the sins of the People upon him
self: the which may manifestlye enough appear out of the old Law.

Now, how can Christ suffer with us, and be touched with our Infirmyties,
except he were subject to those affections, and infirmities before? Therefore,
he is one while described to be Hungrye, another while Thirstye, another
while Weerye, another while Scourged, another while Crucified, another while
Dying: to the end we may know, that we have an high Priest, that has felt
in him self our infirmities, and so may have a sure hope and trust in all
adversities. For Christ knows how we are minded, and affected in them, and
of what help we stand in need, seeing that he him self has borne the
like. This matter is very well handeled by the Apostle in his Epistle to the
Hebrews. Heb. 2.14. and.4.15.
M. This also belongs to the confirmation of our Faith, by which we believe
that Christ was not only GOD, but also perfect man, in all things like unto
us, sin excepted. For in that he was weerye of his Journey, he does not
declare thereby his Diuinitye, but rather his humanitye, and the Imbecillitye
of the flesh, according to the which, he suffered Hunger, Thyrste,
Weariness, sorrows, and death it self. It was necessary that by these and
such like arguments the true Assumption of our flesh, in the which the
redemption and reconciliation of mankind, was made perfect, should be
declared. Moreover, these things prescribe and set before us an example of
true humilitye and modestye to follow. The Lord was weerye of his Iourneye.
Wherefore? because he used not to Ride, but always went on Foot, what
Journey so ever he took in hand.

CHR. Humblye, according to the condition of the place, he sat by the wells
side, and that alone, without any guard, and without any Cushen, or Boulster of
ease. M. Woe therefore be to our Pride, woe be to our niceness, and follye.
The Lord of Heaven for our sake, took upon him our flesh, and put upon him
the forms of humilitye, of modestye, and of temperaunce for us to follow: but
as for us, we seek by all Niceness, and Immodest behavior, to lose that
which he has purchased.

Bv. Therefore the Lord took his Journey on Foot, and not on Horseback, or
in his Coache, or Chariot, that by his example, he might condemn the excess,
and carnal pleasure of our Bishops. C. Whereupon, when the Evangelist says,
that Christ sat thus, he does express as it were the ghesture, and behavior
of a weerye man. Bv. But yet after his labors, he sought rest, least any man
should think, that the body ought to be Tired above measure. The body must
not be oppressed with labor.
For God does not allow immoderate exercise, by which man does accellerate,
and hasten his death before the time.

A. Herevppon the Apostle teaches, that the care of the flesh, ought not
altogether to be cast of: but he adds, To. 13.14.
saying: And make not provision for the flesh: to fulfill the lusts of the
same.

And it was about the sixte hour. V. The Evangelist according to his manner,
describes all things diligently. Bv. He calls that the sixth hour which
to us is the Noonetide: CHR. to the end we might know that the Lord was
weerye, not only by his labor, but also with the heat of the Noonetide.

For the Sun coming toward his height doubleth the labor, and makes the
Journey more painful. C. And seeing the day has twelve hours, from the
rising of the Sun, until the setting of the same, the sixth hour, was the
mid day, or twelve of the Clock at high Noone, as we call it, R. about
which time the heat of the day is most fervent, and provoke Thirste.

B. Whereby it appears that the Lord had occasion to ask Drink of the woman.
A. We are taught also by this Circumstaunce of the time, to have greater
consideration of the mind, than of the body, seeing that Christ sent not his
Disciples to buy meat for their Dinner, before it was high Noone. Let us
therefore remember this lesson, which Christ has given unto all those which
are his. First seek the Kingdom of God, Mat. 6.33.
and the righteousness thereof, and all other things whereof ye have need,
shall be given unto you. The which rule gluttonous and Riotous persons observe
not, which betimes in the morning make haste to Breakfast, before they have
served God: to whom the Lord by his Prophet, Esaias. 5.11.
threatens extreme destruction except they repent.

7. And there came a woman of Samaria, to draw water: Jesus says unto her,
Give me drink.

And there came a woman. M. We saw before in the person of Christ, a base
exordium, or beginning, and now a base or contemptible instrument of great
matters is brought in: First the Woman, then what woman, namelye, a Woman of
Samaria, and if this be not enough, a common woman, a harlotte, a Woman
polluted and defiled with uncleanness.

Could he use his Apostles as instruments: to offer the knowledge of his
heavenly grace to this City? yea verily. But so it was convenient for the
glory of Gods grace, that those things which were infyrme, weak, and lost,
should be cured and saved with the first. So it was meet that she first
should come to the Sheepeheard of Souls, not as one strong and whole, but as a
weak, feeble, and straying Sheep. So it was meet that such a one should come
to the Physician, as was not whole, or lightlye sick, but such a one as was
troubled with a grievous and dangerous disease, in the which, first of all the
singular benefit of healing, given to the world in Christ, and secondlye, that
singular humanitye and gentleness of the Heavenly Physician, is declared,
which should afterward be the Instrument to increase and spread forth the
Heavenly grace. Here therefore that appears to be most true which the
Apostle writes, saying: God has chosen the foolish things of the world, 1.
Cor. 1.27
to confound the wise: and God has chosen the weak things of the world, to
confound things which are mighty: and unable things of the world, and
things which are despised, God has chosen, yea, and things which are not, to
bring to naught things that are: that no flesh should rejoice in his
presence. R. Moreover, the Evangelist writes of the Woman according to the
rule of charity, which willinglye ever sought to excuse and hide others
faults. For this Woman was an Harlotte: notwithstanding more honestlye he
calls her a Woman, and not a Harlotte. A. But least any man should think,
that this woman went therefore out of the City, to seek Christ the Savior of
the world, (as we may read how that the Woman of Canaan went out of the
Coasts of Tire and Sydon, Mat. 15.22.
to entreat Christ for her daughter possessed of a Devil) the Evangelist not
unaptly says, Apoc. 22.17
that she came to draw water: and yet notwithstanding she found him by the
wells side, Esaias 65.1.
which gives the water of life freelye to them that thyrste: to the end we
might note that to be most true, which the Lord says by his Prophet: To.
10.20.
I am found of those which sought me not. And thus it happens unto us
oftentimes, that while we are thinking and doing of another thing, the
benefits of our Heavenly Father are offered unto us.

Insomuch that the truth of Gods word may appear, John. 15.16
Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you.

M. For she was altogether ignorant of that which should come to pass. Not
knowing of all these things she chaunsed upon our Savior Christ. She came
to draw water, for bodyly drink: and she found the well of life, by which
the Souls of men are refreshed to everlasting life. She seems to come by
chaunse, but he which disposes al things, led her mind by his secret working,
that she might come in this moment, in the which she should find Christ, the
well of life.

By this example we see how our actions are in the hands of God, so disposing
those things which we intend to do, that oftentimes we doing one thing,
happen upon another thing, of the which we never thought. Rebecca came to the
Well, not thinking to find the servant of Abraham there, which was come to
betrothe her unto his Masters son, but intending to draw Water: and
although she might seem to come by chaunse to this Well, Genesis 24.5.
yet notwithstanding, she came by the providence of God: and by chaunse met
with him, whom she looked not for.

God disposes all our affections as it pleases him. Genesis 29.9.
Even so also Rachel found not Jacob, as one that should be her Husband,
whom she knew not, but came to the Well, to water her Fathers Sheep: But
the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, ordered all things by his secreete
disposition. Also Lydia, a Seller of Purple, came not to the Temple, which was
by the Ryuers side, but only for Devotions sake, being altogether ignorant
of Paul, ^cts. 16.14
and Barnabas the Apostles of Jesus Christ, and yet nevertheless, she met with
them, the Lord providing for her saving health. So that (as we have said)
those things which belong unto our Salvation, are bestowed and offered unto
us, by the providence of God, without our knowledge, when we are otherwise
occupied, to the end we might learn whollye to depend upon his divine
providence: as Saint James very well teaches us to do. Iam. 4.14


R. Verylye, in this place we may behold the wonderful Judgments of God.
For Christ fled from Iewrye, in the which were the High Priests, Scribes, and
Pharisees, being holy as they seemed, both in outward profession, and also in
Godly life. But to the Harlot, overwhelmed with sins, looking as yet for no
such thing, he came, and brought her Salvation: to the end men may know
that to be true which he says in another place: Math. 21.31 1. Tim. 1.15.
The Publicanes and Harlottes, shall enter into the Kingdom of God before you.
Also the Apostle Paul says, Christ Jesus came into the world, to save
sinners. Bv. Therefore Christ tarried not until the Woman of Samaria asked
grace, or until she spoke first unto him, but preuenteth her, who minded to
say nothing, and offers unto her occasion to speak, saying: Give me drink.

Bv. Modestlye speaking unto her, whom he might have called by a reprochefull
and dishonest name. But now throughout all his communication, he tempereth his
speech, as if he had, had to do with a very honest woman, least he should
offend and drive her away by sharpness of words.

By which his behavior he has left an example to the Preachers of the Gospel,
by lenitye, and civil wisdom, to win many to Christ, and to
righteousness, and for this cause to abstain from reprochefull words, and
lavishness of tongue. C. And whereas he requires water of this woman, he
does it not simplye, for this purpose, to have occasion given him to teach
her, (for Thirst constrained him to desire Drink) but this could be no let,
but that when he had gotten occasion, he used the same: because he preferred
the woman's salvation, before his own necessitye.

Therefore, forgetting his Thyrst, and taking time and occasion to talk, that
he might instruct her in true Godliness, he brings her from the
consideration of visible water, unto that which is spiritual, and waters her
mind with heavenly Doctrine, which denied to give him water.

8. For his Disciples were gone away into the town to buie meat.

Bv. This the Evangelist adds of him self, least any man should ask: And
why did he not command his Disciples to draw Water?

This occasion which the Lord offers to the sinful woman, seems to be very
base and contemptible: and no marueyle, seeing to the most part of us, at this
day, they seem small occasions, which the Lord offers unto us, to put us
in mind of amendment. But the faithful man despises no occasion, which may
move him to repentance.

M. Moreover, in that our Savior Christ was solitarye, and alone, the woman,
might the more bouldly put away shamefastness, and also the better consider
of her fault. Therefore, the wisdom, and Ciuillitye of Christ is commended
unto us in this place, that we might follow the same, so often as we have to
do with sinners, and weak persons, least we offend them, dashe them out of
countenance, or drive them away. A. Furthermore, when the Evangelist adds
that the disciples went into the City to buie meat, he declares that they
were not altogether without Money: as we may also easilye gather by another
Evangelist, where the Disciples are reported to say, Shall we go and buie
two hundred Penny worth of Bread, Mat. 6.37. John. 12.6 and.13.29.
and give them to eat? Also Judas was Treasurer, and carried the Bag. M.
Therefore the Evangelist says, they went to buie, The Disciples of Christ
were no begging Friars. Mat. 23.14
and not to beg. For they were not of the order of Begging Friars, which
think it greatly appertayning to the Gospel, not to live of their own
Labor, but of the sweat of other men's brows, and to devour Widows
houses, under the pretense of long Prayers: as Christ vpbraideth the Pharisees,
their Predecessors.

9. Then says the Woman of Samaria to him, How is it that thou being a Jew,
ask drink of me, which am a Samaritane? For the Jews meddle not with the
Samaritanes.

Then says the Woman. CHR. The woman of Samaria, suspecteth Jesus to be a
Jew, both by his Apparel, and also by his tongue. M. For she could by no
other means know him, than by that which she both heard and saw. For that
Nation above all other had a special kind of Apparel, and a special
Language, whereby they might be easelye known from other Nations there
aboutes. Christ ^lowed (...) fashion (...) his Country in apparel.
Christ therefore observed the manner and fashion of his Countreye, both in his
Apparel, and also in Language: the which is a great token of Grauitye. Even so
the Fathers of Ancient time, framed them selves to common decensie, and
Grauitye, because they would not exceed the manner and fashion of their
Country in their Apparel, and behavior. But at this day, all men for the
most part, put upon them vanitye and lightness: in so much that a man can not
know a Frencheman from a Germane, nor an Italian, from a Spaniarde, nor a
Spaniarde from a Germane: and as for the English man, he in his Apparel, is
so disguised, that of all other people, he seems this way to be most vain.

This lightness, does not only change the apparel, but also banisheth
away, the countreye affection and mind, in so much that a man may truly
say of these kind of men: Affectus Patrios, Patria cum vest relinquunt. That
is, As forsaken they have their Countries attire:
So of Countries love, they have quenched the fire.


C. But the answer which the woman makes here, is a reprooche or taunte, by
which she does object unto him the common contempt of her Countreye. As if
she should say. Is it meet for thee to ask drink of me, when as the Jews
accounte us Samaritanes so profane? For that which is added, For the Jews
meddle not with the Samaritanes. seems to be spoken by the Woman. Howebeit
othersome think it to be spoken by the Evangelist, in steed of an exposition.
A. But concerning the hatred, Verse. 52.
which the Jews bare toward the Samaritanes, and of the Original of the same,
read the ninth Chapter of Saint Luke.

10. Jesus answered: and said unto her, If thou knew the gift of GOD, and
who it is that says to thee, Give me drink: Thou would have asked of
him, and he would have given thee water of life.

If thou knew the gift of GOD. C. Now taking occasion Christ begins to
preach of the grace and power of his Spyrite, and that to a Woman, which was
altogether unworthy once to talk with him. A wonderful example truly of
his goodness: For what was in this miserable woman, that of a Strumpet, she
should suddenly become a Disciple of the Son of God? Howebeit he has
showed also no less mercy upon every one of us, as we have said a little
before.

Bv. But Christ makes no answer to the objected dissension between the
Jews and the Samaritanes, but rather makes haste to save, and to reveal his
Heavenly treasure. For he did not allow this behavior of the Jews, because
they did not withdraw them selves from the fellowshippe of the Samaritanes, for
that they hated impietye, but because of disdain, and vaineglorye.

M. Here therefore we are taught, not to answer to every objection, but so
to make our answer, that we forsake not edification. It is not only
worldly, but also Heavenly wisdom, first of all to propounde some certain
proposition, which may tend to edification: and then diligently to direct
all things that shall be spoken unto the same: and not to suffer our selves to
be drawn away therefrom, by the objection of the ignorant and unlearned:
therefore he says: If thou knew the gift of GOD.

C. These two members, If thou knew the gift of God: and who it is that
talks with thee: are so distinctly to be read, that the latter should be an
interpretacion of the first. For this was the singular goodness of God, to
have Christ present, which brought with him eternal life. A. Even as he him
self said, Blessed are the eyes which see those things that ye see. For I
say unto you, that many Prophets and Kings, Luke 10.23.
have desired to see those things that ye see, and have not seen them: and to
hear those things, that ye hear, and have not heard them.

M. Christ therefore declares to the woman, what she ought to have done,
rather than to have denied the Water which he asked. For thus she should
have said, I have need to ask of thee that water of life, whereby I may
mitigate the Thryst of my languishing and pyning Soul: and do thou ask
this earthlye water of me? Or thus: How comes it to pass that thou, which
art the well of life, ask drink of me, which am a miserable woman, and
more dry than any Sponge? But rather give thou unto me, out of thy Well, the
water of life. But in that the Woman did not thus, Christ ascribes it rather
to ignorance, than to malice, saying: If thou knew, thou would have
asked.

C. Moreover, we are taught by these words, that then at the leangth we
know what manner of person Christ is, when we understand what the Father
has given to us in him, and what graces and benefits he offers unto us.
But this knowledge begins at the feeling of our need. Christ the water of
life, for the Thyrstye.
For it is necessary that every man, first feel his miserye before he seek
for a remeedye.

Therefore the Lord calls not the dronken, to Drink more, but the
Thyrstye: not the full bellyed to eat more, but the Hungrye. And to what end
should Christ have been sent with the fullness of the Spirit, unless we had
been emptye? Christ herewithall teaches us also, how effectual the
knowledge of his graces, is, namely, of such force, that it will encourage,
and allure our minds to desire the same. If thou knew (says our Savior
Christ) thou would have asked. Therefore he went about to make the Woman
more desirous, least she should contemptuouslye reject the life offered unto
her.

And he would have given thee, of the Water of life. This is a plain argument
of Gods great goodness, and lyberallitye, by which he does not only consider
how miserable we are, and of what benefits we stand in need, but also
allureth us to crave those things which are prepared, and ready to be
offered unto us, so that we ask them. For he testifies that if we make our
Prayers unto him, they shall not be in vain.

And truly without this persuasion and trust, we should have but a cold
desire to pray. But seeing Christ meets by the way, with those that come
unto him, and is ready to fill every Hungrye Soul, there is now no place or
excuse, left for slothfulness and negligence. But there is none but will
think that this is spoken generally unto all men, except he be stayed by
incredulitye. A. For it is not promised in vain: Ask and ye shall receive:
seek and ye shall find, Math. 7^ Mar. 11.^^
knock and it shall be opened unto you. Whatsoever things ye desire, when ye
pray, believe that ye receive them, and ye shall have them.

C. Yea, we see that not only the liberallitye of God, but also (which is
greatly to be wondered at) the Lord of all things, has put upon him such
entire love, that having taken on him our flesh, and therewith also our
miserye, is come down unto us, and being Hungrye and Thyrstye, craves of us
those things which be Earthlye, that by this occasion, he might bestow upon
us in like manner, his heavenly, and everlasting treasures.

He, who him self is the well of life, desires water to be given unto him,
out of a Well, by a base and abiecte woman: and he promises unto her, again
the water of life. Even so, 2. Cor. 8.9.
for our sake, he was made poor, that we by him might be made Ritche. So in
like manner, he became Hungrye and Thyrstye, that he might feed us with
heavenly Food, and refreshe us with the Water of life. A. And so often as the
Poor shall crave our Alms, Alms deeds.
to be refeshed, let us remember that Christ beggeth in their person, not to
spoil us of our goods, if we give any thing in his name, but rather to
exchange with us heavenly and everlasting things, for those things which
are corporal, and transitorye: As we may read in the Gospel. Mat. 10.42
and.25.40
B. Furthermore note here, how Christ makes a comparison between Drink and
the holy Ghost, whom metaphoricallye, he calls water of life. C. And this
Metaphor, as it is common, so it contains notable reason. For we are like
unto dry and barren ground, without any dew or moisture, until such time
as the Lord does water us by his holy Spyrite. In another place also, the
spirit is called clear Water, but in another sense: because it purges and
washes away the Spots, with the which we are polluted and defiled.

But here and in such like places the secreete refreshing is handeled, by
which he quickens, defends, and perfiteth life in us. B. As therefore the
liuelye and springing water does ever flow to assuage, and cool the thyrst
of men: even so the holy Ghost, bearing witness to our Spirits, that we are
the Sons of God, does for ever expel the thyrst of the Godly, until at
the last it does make them perfectlye blessed, and does perpetuallye comfort
them by a sure and certain Faith: concerning the which, read the Epistle of
Saint Paul to the Romans. Romans 8.16. Gala. 4.9.
C. Therefore Christ thought good to oppose, or set Water against the vanitye
of all good men, with the which mankind is troubled and oppressed. And he
calls it the water of life, not only of the effect, as of quickening, but
also he alludeth to diverse kinds of waters. Therefore it is called liuelye,
because it springs, and flows from a lively well. So that, in these words,
Christ does excellentlye and brieflye declare, what manner of person he is,
and what he bestows upon his faithful servants, namelye, all fullness of
life, and perfection, of felycitye.

B. If therefore, a man shall make Metaphors, and Allegories, after this
manner, they shall be firm and very profitable to teach in the Church.

11. The Woman says unto him, Sir, thou have nothing to draw with, and the
Well is deep: From whence then, have thou that Water of life?

M. This Woman calls our Savior Christ, Master, or Sir, after the common
manner of Wives, which are accustomed to call their Husbands so, for reverence
sake: and not only women used this manner of speech, but also men,
specially toward such as were Strangers. Gene. 24.18.
Rebecca said unto the servant of Abraham, Drink Sir.

Marye Magdalene, said unto Christ, suspecting him to be a Gardener, Sir, Ioh.
20.15.
if thou have taken him away. etc.

Abraham, Lot, and Gedeon, Genesis 18.3. Genesis 19.8 Judge. 6.13 Acts. 16.30.
called the Angels which appeared to them in the likeness of Strangers, by
the name of Lord, or Sir. The keeper of the Prison also called Paul, and
Silas, which were Prisoners, by the same name. Wherefore, they have slender
reasons to allege, which by this name think that this woman began now to
have more than common knowledge of Christ. C. Nay, rather she despised
Christ, and deryded him: She understood well enough that Christ spoke
figuratiuelye: but she reprehendeth him by a contrary figure: as if she had
said, that he had promised more than he was able to perform.

As therefore the Samaritanes were despised of the Jews, even so the Jews
were despised of the other in like manner.

12. Art thou greater, than our Father Jacob, which gave us the well, and he
him self drank thereof, and his children, and his cattle?

B. She thought that the Lord arrogated to him self, power to make a well, as
did Moses, who caused Water to flow out of the hard Rock. C. Whervppon she
accuses him of arrogancye, because he preferred him self before the holy
Patriarche Jacob: as if he should say, Jacob was contented with this well for
his own use: and for the use of his whole familye, and have thou better water?
What an ungodly comparison this is, it may hereby appear, that she compares
the servant with his Lord, and a mortal man to the living God: and yet
notwithstanding, how many be there at this day, which commit the same fault?
Wherefore, we must take the more diligent heed, least we so far extol the
persons of men, that we obscure thereby the glory of God. The gifts of God,
truly are reverently to be embraced, where so ever they appear. Therefore it
is meet and lawful to honor notable men, which are indewed with godliness,
and with other rare gifts: but they must be honored no farther, than that
God him self may have the pre-eminence and glory, that Christ with his
gospel, may shine most clearly. For to him ye whole glory of the world must
give place. B. We must also note, yt although the Samaritanes were Strangers,
yet notwithstanding, afterward when the Jews prospered, they boasted that they
sprang of Joseph: Joseph last chap. of the 9. book of the Antiquities of the
Jews.
as Josephus testifies. Hereupon this woman called Jacob her Father. C. Even
so at this day, the Papists being Basterdes, and an Adulterous seed, very
arrogantly brag and boast of the Fathers, and exalt them selves above the
lawful sons of God. For although the Samaritanes sprang of Jacob, according
to the flesh, yet notwithstanding, because they did degenerate, and swerve
from true Godliness, this was a preposterous bragging: Now they being the
offspring, of the people of Cuthah, (so called of the River Cuthah) C. or at the
least wise, 4. King. 17 24.
gathered from among other profane Nations, yet notwithstanding, let not to
brag falselye of the name of the holy Patriarche: but without any profit.

Even so it must necessarily happen unto all those which joy amiss in the
light of men, as, to be deprived of the light of God, and to have no society
with the holy Fathers, whose title they have abused.

13. Jesus answered and said unto her, whosoever drincketh of this Water:
Shall thyrst again.

M. Again, the Lord answers not unto all the words of the woman, but
rather to that which appertains to the purpose, and that because she had so
greatly exalted this Well, as though there could no better water be given. For
this cause he expounds his former sentence concerning the water. C. And
although he sees, that he profits little, and that his Doctrine is made but a
Jest: yet notwithstanding, he goes foreward more plainelye to expound that
which he had spoken, R. to the end he might the more stir up the woman to
seek that water of life. For he puts a difference between the use of both
Waters, as, that the one belongs to the body for a time: and that the other
perpetuallye serves for the refreshing of the Soul. For as the body is
subject to corruption, so the Preservatives belonging to the same, must needs
be temporal and transitory: but that which quickneth the soul, must needs
be everlasting.

14. But whosoever drinks of the Water that I shall give him, shall never be
more a thyrste: but the water that I shall give him, shall be in him a well of
water, springing up into everlasting life.

R. The manner of Drinking of this water is, by faith. Therefore every one
which Drinks of this water, (that is to say, every one that believes in
me, and receives of me the promised spirit) shall never Thyrste: but there
shall be in him a Well of water, springing into everlasting life. This is the
very same which he says in another place: Ioh. 7.39.
He which believes in me, shall have flowing out of his bellye, ryuers of
water of life. This also he spoke of the Spirit, which all the believers in
him should receive. For he which has received the holy Ghost by faith, he
has a vein or spring, flowing from sin to righteousness, from damnation to
Salvation, from death to life, and from earth to Heaven.

B. It is most certain therefore, that this Water is the holy Ghost.
Wherefore, if he that has once Drunk of this Spirit, can never Thyrst
again, it is manifest, that he which has once this Spirit, (that is to
say, to whom it is once given to believe) shall never fall from the grace of
GOD. Therefore Paul gloryeth that nothing from above, neither from beneathe,
Romans 8.35.
can remove him from the love of GOD, which is in Christ Jesus. C. Moreover, it
is not repugnaunt, nor disagreeing with the words of Christ, that the
faithful, even to the end of their life, have a fervent desire to have more
plentye of grace. For his meaning is not, that we shall drink our fill the
first day, that he gives unto us his holy Spirit: but that he only
seeks to give us to understand, that the holy Ghost is a Spring flowing
perpetuallye: and so, He which once receives the spirit of God by faith, is
sealed to eternal life.
that there is danger lest they should wyther away, which are renewed by
Spiritual grace. Therefore although we Thyrst all our life time, yet
notwithstanding it is certain, that we have not received this Spirit for one
day, or for a short time, but that the same flowing perpetuallye, should
never forsake us. Thus the faithful Thyrst during all the time of their
mortal life, and that feruentlye: and yet notwithstanding, all that time they
are full of lively Licour: because, how little grace soever they have received,
the same does daily moysten them, that they can never be quite dry.
Wherefore, this fullness is not opposed or set against desire, but only against
dryness. The which thing in the words following, as yet he does more plainelye
express. There shall (says he) be a Well of water, flowing into eternal
life: for here is a continual watering noted, which in this mortal and
transitory life, fostereth and increases in them heavenly eternitye. B. For
as he can never, wyther away by drouth, which has a spring continuallye
flowing in his Bowelles, even so he must needs be full of all goodness and
grace, and must always, and in all things have present consolation, in whom
the Spirit of the Lord, the Spirit of Gods children does dwell.

C. Therefore the grace of Christ, does not flow in us for a short time, but
does continually power out it self, until we come to the blessed state of
Immortalytye.

15. The Woman says unto him, Sir give me of that Water, that I thyrst not,
neither come hither to draw.

B. This Woman seems to be but a pratler, and talker, how soever she was
elected to eternal life, and had the seed of God. For there is no doubt but
that she knew well inoughe, that Christ spoke of Spiritual water: but
because she contemns him, she makes no account of all his promises. For
there is no way to teach, so long as he which speaks, is of no aucthoritye
with us. The Woman therefore very ouerthwartly replyeth against Christ, B. and
speaks these things Ironice, that is to say, in a contrary sense, as if
she should say, thou braggest much, but I see nothing: if thou can do as
thou say, do it in deed. M. Therefore by this example we see that the
elect sometimes, so long as they are in darkness, without the knowledge of
Christ, do deride the doctrine of the Spirit, as rydiculous, and foolish.
Wherefore we must take heed that we do not by and by condemn every one,
whom we see to be deriders of the Doctrine of Christ: but rather let us seek
to reduce them after the ensample of Christ to the right pathe of truth.

16. Jesus says unto her, Go, call thy Husband, and come hither.

B. Christ seeking to beat down the malepartnesse of this woman, commanded
her to go and call her Husband: thereby taking occasion to put her in mind
of her evil life paste. C. For when he saw that she scoffed, and Iested at
all things which he spoke, he provided a very apt remeedye for this evil,
for he strikes the Woman's conscience, with the feeling of her sin.

And this again, is a notable example of his mercy: for that almost he draws
her against her will, which wyllinglye would not come. Nevertheless, we must
here note, that they must be wounded with the feeling of sin, which are to
secure, and almost past feeling. For to such the Doctrine of Christ will seem
as a Tale, until they being Sited to the Tribunal, and Judgment seat of
God, are constrained to fear him as their Judge, whom before they despised.
After the same manner also all those must be handeled, which in scoffing
malepartnesse, are not afraid to rebel against the Doctrine of Christ, to the
end they may know that this their wickedness shall not escape unpunished.
For so great is the ostinacye of a great many, that they will never vouchsafe
to hear him, except they be constrained thereunto. Therefore so often as we
see the Oil of Christ to be unsavory, we must mingle the same with Vinegar,
that it may begin to savor. Yea, this is necessary for every one of us:
for we are not seriouslye affected, when Christ speaks, except we be awaked
by repentance. M. For except we be affected with the feeling of our sins,
the largeness of Gods grace shall be commended to us in vain. For this cause
the Preaching of repentance was appointed to go before the Gospel of grace.
Mark. 1.4 15.
And it pricketh more, if we be but once admonished of our sins by others,
(specially of our secreete sins) than if the same were done ten times in the
secreesie of our conscience. This woman also knew that the Husband which she
had, was not her Husband: notwithstanding, she could not in the mean time be
brought to repentance, by the Prycke of her own Conscience: but was driven
thereunto by another man's admonition.

The like also happened to David. 2. King. 13.
For he was not ignorant of his sins, but yet nevertheless, he was not
drawn unto repentance, until he was reproved by the Prophet Nathan. And
for this cause, at the least it shall be profitable to come to Sermons, that
having gotten at the length a feeling of our sins, we may repent. This
therefore the more principal part, is necessary for us all, that we may be
made pertakers of Heavenly grace. The other is, that we may acknowledge
Christ to be that well of grace.

This comes to pass by the Preaching of the Gospel, which leads us to the
knowledge of Christ. Without this, repentance is Preached in vain. Bv. And
certainelye, so often as the righteous Lord, reproves and reprehendeth our
sins, he does it to no other purpose, than that we should acknowledge our
disease, and run to the Physician, and be healed. We must also here note the
modestye and gentleness of Christ. He might have said, What pratest thou of
Heavenly things, and derydest the words of life, seeing thou art a vile
Strumpet? Or else he might have said, Go, and call that Adulterer, with whom
thou have unlawful company. But because his purpose was to deliver her out of
misery, he thought good, not to prouooke her, but to bring her fair and
softlye, to the knowledge and feeling of her own uncleanness.

This example of our Savior Christ, must be followed, where there is hope of
repentance: where the same is not, but by obstinate impenitencye, the Doctrine
of truth is resisted, there greater seueritye must be used.

Mat. 23.13 Luke. 11.42 Luke. 20.23 Ioh. 8.44.
Even as we may read that our savior Christ did in diverse places, against the
Scribes and Pharisees, impudent and obstinate enemies of the grace of God.

17. The Woman answered, and said unto him: J have no Husband.

M. As yet she speaks careleslye: and although after a sort simplye, she
confesses that which is true, not suspecting what would follow, yet
notwithstanding, she answers not without carnal wisdom. I have (says
she) no Husband: Bv. desiring to cover her filthiness, and denying
Matrimonye, dissembled in the mean time Adultery. C. Therefore the fruit of
that admonition, by which Christ intended to prick, and provoke the Woman's
mind to repentance, appeared not as yet.

And truly, the Dronken love of our selves does so dasell our senses, that
the first pricks, and prouocations, does nothing at all move us. But Christ
very aptlye provides for this dullness, more forceablye pressing the sore.

18. Jesus said unto her: Thou have well said, J have no Husband: For thou
haste had five Husbands: and he whom thou now have is not thy Husband: In
that saydest thou truly.

C. Christ now plainelye lays her fault before her, M. and conuinceth her
secreete sin, that she might be touched with the feeling thereof, and
knowing her self, might desire the Heavenly grace, and gift of God which was
offered. Then also he does greatly Insinuate him self, and creep into her
Conscience, and brings her to this pass, that she begins to have a
better Judgment of him. Bv. For by these things he declared his Divinity,
John. 1.
seeking by all means to profit the Woman, even as he dealte also with
Nathanael. M. And he takes occasion of this matter, by the woman's answer,
and that very friendlye, and calmelye, as it were commending her, because in
making this answer, she had told no lie: but so, that with that her
commendacion, he reuealeth that which she for shame had keepte secreete. C.
But it seems here that not one fault of whoredom only, is noted. For in
that she is said to have had five Husbands, it is credible that she made so
often change of Husbands, because she being a Malepart, and disobedient
wife, constrained them to be divorced from her, As if Christ should have
said: When God had joined thee to lawful Husbands, thou never made an end
of sinning, until by many infamous Divorces, thou had brought, thy self to
plain whoredom. For he to whom thou keep thy self, is not thy lawful
Husband, but a secreete Whoremonger: and yet notwithstanding, thou in thine
own judgment think thy self an honest woman: thou iustifiest thy self,
saying: I have done no evil.

19. The Woman says unto him: Sir, I perceive that thou art a Prophet.

C. Here now appears the fruit of reprehension. For the Woman does not
only modestlye acknowledge her fault, but also shows her self prompt, and
ready to hear the Doctrine of Christ, which before she rejected. Repentance
the beginning of true Docillitye.
Therefore (as we said before) repentance is the beginning of true
docillitye, and aptness to be taught, and the opening of the gate, to enter
into the School of Christ.

R. For she being confounded by the judgment of the Lord, and brought to the
knowledge and feeling of her sin, is made sorrowful and careful, to seek a
remeedye for her terrified Conscience, by reason of sin. M. In the which we
may behold a difference between the elect and the reprobate, when they are
admonished of their sins.

The Reprobates, when they are for some cause reprehended of their sin, they
either deny that they have committed any such thing, or else subtillye excuse
the same. For the plain deniers of sin, Acts. 5.2. 1. Kin. 15.20
committed, we have these examples: Annanias and Saphira: for the other we
have King Saul, who subtillye excused his disobedience.

Othersome there are, who when they be reprehended, are angrye, in so much
that they rail, and seek to be revenged: Mat. 6.17 Mat. 21.4^ Acts. 7.57.
so dealt the wicked Kings of Israel, with the Prophets, so dealt Herod with
John the Baptist, and so the high Priests, Scribes, and Pharisees, behaved
them selves toward Christ, and toward Stephen, whom they Martired. A. But the
elect, so soon as they are admonished by the servants of God, of their
sins, and are called to repentance by the Preaching of the word, freelye
confess their sin, and with great submission of mind, 2. King. 12. 12.
Esaias. 39.8. Acts. 2.37.
call for the help of God: as David, Ezechias, and the hearers of Peter's
Sermon. M.

Even so this Woman of Samaria, so sone as she heard that her sin was
revealed and objected unto her, she neither denies it, nor is angrye, neither
yet excuses the same, but truly acknowledges, and confesses the same,
saying: Lord I perceive that thou art a Prophet, that is to say: Learned, and
instructed in the Law of the Lord. I perceive that thou art an Interpretour
of the Scripture. For how could thou with such exquisite Judgment
pronounce of my sins, if thou had not the knowledge of the Law? or how
can it be that thou should so plainelye know my secreete sins, unless
thou were endued with the Spirit of Prophecy? Wherefore, I pray thee to help
me sillye wretch: and teach me the way, by which I may escape and
extinguishe the fire of my Conscience, now burning by the acknowledging of my
sin. For seeing thou have revealed my sin unto me, I think it meet that
thou show unto me the righteousness, by which I may be delivered from my
sin: Thou have brought me into death, bring me therefore again into life:

Thou have placed me in Hell, but exalt me out of Hell, into the Kingdom of
Heaven.

C. The woman by this her example teaches us, that when any teacher or
Preacher, is sent unto us, we should use the same occasion, least we be
unthankful unto God, who never sends Prophets unto us, but he does as it
were reach out his hand unto us, and call us unto him. For Saint Paul says,
that they which have the gift of teaching, are sent to us from God. Romans 10.15
Two sorts of Prophets.


M. And here let us note, that there are two kinds of Prophets: Samuel,
Elias, Elizeus, The second are they which are Interpretours of Gods word, and
setters forth of Gods will unto the people, as, call them from their sins,
and exhort them to repentance, and to a Godly conversation. 4. King. 4, 1.38.
And such were the Sons of the Prophets, of the which we may Read in the
Book of the Kings.

1. Cor. 14.32.
A. The words of the woman here, may be referred to both sorts, when she
calls Christ a Prophet: notwithstanding properlye to the first: because she
perceived that to be open and manifest to Christ, which she knew was
secreete and unknown to others.

20. Our Fathers worshipped in this mountain: and ye say that in Jerusalem
is the place, where men ought to worship.

B. For so much as that which follows, sufficientlye proves that this woman
was a Daughter of Abraham, and chosen to everlasting life, there is no doubt
but that of Godly Devotion, she questioned with the Lord, concerning the true
worship of God. For when she had confessed the Lord to be a Prophet, she
began by and by, to reason about the worship of God.

M. That therefore is false which some Imagine, affirming that the woman
subtly began to slide and digress to another matter, because she could not
abide the foresaid reprehension.

C. But she rather goes from that which was particular, to the general, and
being taught concerning her sin, she desires to be generallye instructed
in the pure worship of GOD.

And, in that she seeks to learn of the Prophet, she deals very
orderlye, least in worshipping God, she should err: For there is nothing
more disordered, than to feign and devise, sundry sorts of worship, without
the word of God. M. Therefore such questions as concern Religion, are not to
be propounded to every one, but to those alone as have not only a zeal,
but are also endued with a special knowledge of pietye and truth. C.
Furthermore, it is well enough known, that there was a continual contencion,
between the Jews, and the Samaritanes, about the true manner of worshipping.
For although the people of Cuthah, and other strangers, who, when the ten
Tribes were in Banishment, were translated into Samaria, had received the
Rightes of the Law, being thereunto constrained by punishments, 4. Kin. 17.27.
and professed that they worshipped the true God of Israel: yet
notwithstanding, their Religion was lame, and diverse ways corrupted: which was
not tolerable among the Jews. But this contencion was more vehement after the
Temple built upon Mount Garizin, by Manasses the son of John the high
Priest, and by the Brother of Iaddi, at what time Darius the last King of the
Persians, held Judea by the hand and power of the Liefetenaunt Sanabalet. M.
Therefore the contencion was, concerning the manner, and the place, of
worshipping God. The Jews affirmed, that God was to be worshipped at
Jerusalem, and in no other place. The Samaritanes had their peculiar, and
special Temple in Mount Garezin, where they said God ought to be worshipped
only. That Mountain is higher than the rest, Iosep. An. 11 Chap. 7.
and bordereth upon the City of the Sichimites. Josephus makes mention both
of this Mountain, and of the Temple also upon the same. The Jews had to
maintain their worship, the word of God: first, Deu. 14.23 Deu. 16.5.
because it was not lawful to appoint unto God, an imagined worship, nor any
place for the same, but must retain that only, which God had appointed for
him self, thereby to be worshipped and served.

1. Chro. 17.12.
Furthermore, after God had forsaken the Tabernacle in Silo, he chose mount
Sion, there to be worshipped. But the Samaritanes, on the contrary part,
pretended the example of the Fathers (as always the forsakers of true pietye
are wont to do,) M. because they had worshipped God in that Mountain.

Genesis 33.20 Genesis 22.2. Deu. 27.12
We read of Jacob, that he erected an Alter to the Lord in that place. Some,
affirm that Abraham offered his son Isaac in that place. Moreover, this
mountain was chosen to serve God there.

But those things which the Jews objected out of the scriptures, concerning
the Temple of Jerusalem, the Samaritanes did not acknowledge for Authentical.

For they allowed not the Scriptures, saving only the five Books of Moises.
And this is the same which the woman says here: Our Fathers worshipped in
this Mountain, and ye say, that in Jerusalem is the place, where we should
worship. C. But the Samaritanes did very preposterouslye in forsaking the
word of GOD, and following their own Imaginations in worshypping God.
Whereby also we may note how disorderlye they deal, which prefer the
examples of the Fathers, before the commandment of God. Such are the
Papists, which without any respect of persons, esteem them for Fathers,
which are most unworthy of all others so to be counted. Moreover, let us here
understand not every kind of worship, (for private Prayer might every where
be used) but that worship only to the which Sacrifices were annexed. Math.
14.23.
B. For the Lord him self oftentimes, sometimes in the mountain alone,
sometimes in other places, prayed to his Heavenly Father.

21. Jesus says unto her: Woman, believe me, the hour comes, when ye shall
neither in this mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem worship the Father.

Woman. M. Although this Woman's name was not unknown unto our savior Christ,
yet notwithstanding he does not call her, by her proper name, but by the common
name of her sex or kind, Woman.

First of all, because the same was not necessary. She knew now well enough,
that the Lord had the Spirit of Prophecy. Secondlye, as yet she was not
made familiar with him. And it is a note of familiaritye for a man to call
another by his proper name.

When Christ appeared in the form of a Stranger, to Mary Magdalen, first he
called her Woman, saying: John. 2^
Woman, why weepest thou? For hitherto, he would be unknown unto her. But
when he would be known, he said, Mary: which voice had a great show of
familiarytye.

Believe me, the hour comes. Christ therefore requires to be believed at
her hand, because without this faith, the Doctrine of the Spirit, and of the
kingdom of GOD, is delivered in vain. Bv. As if he should say. Woman, cast
out of thy mind all brawles, overthwart aunsweres, and contencions: and, if
thou believe me to be a Prophet, as thou professest, believe my words. For
I will not feign, I will not lie, but will simplye, and purelye, set forth the
truth. M. See therefore that thou do not deride those things which I speak,
(as thou have hitherto done) but believe them in good faith, and doubt of the
truth of nothing, that I shall say. A. By this place it appears how
disdainefullye, and presumptuouslye they deal, which exclude the common sort
of men, from the reading of the scriptures, and from the searching out of those
things which belong to the true worship of GOD, and souls health. For
Christ answers not this Woman, saying: What matter is it to thee, whether
God be worshipped in this Mountain, or at Jerusalem, which have so little
fear of GOD, that thou do not abstain from committing manifest evil? But
rather get thee home to thy house, and look to thy business: suffer the
Doctors to confer, and reason among them selves, of so great misteryes: it
becomes not thee to talk of these matters. The Lord objected none of these
things to the woman thyrsting after the truth, but rather was contented to
reveal unto her, those things which exceeded the capasity C. And this
answer of Christ, consists of two parts. In the first, he brieflye
abolisheth the Ceremonial worship, which was instituted under the Law, with
the same also which the Samaritanes had devised without Moses, was but for a
time, the same time being then at hand when the veil should be taken away.
By this means the worship of God, which was shut up in a corner of Judea,
extended it self farther, in so much that the Samaritanes were partakers of
the same also. So that Christ speaks here of the abrogation of the Law,
concerning the Temple and the Priesthood, and other external Rites and
Ceremonies. M. Therefore we see how the worship of God in the new Testament,
is tied to no place, in so much that the law of God, made concerning the true
worship of God, ought to be abrogated, notwithstanding the evil example of
Fathers. For he says not only, Ye shall not worship the Father in this
Mountain, but also he adds, Nor at Jerusalem. What then (may some say)
did never any man after that worship God aright at Jerusalem? Did not the
Apostles abide there a certain time after Christ's death? Was not the Church
of the Faithful there, after the resurrection of Christ, before and after the
destruction of the City? Did not the same worship God at Jerusalem? I
answer: Christ speaks not this to exclude the true worshippers of God from
Jerusalem, Aunsvvere.
but to teach that the time is at hand, first, in the which that shadowed
worship shall cease: secondlye, in the which God will be worshipped, not
only in Jerusalem, or in the Mount Garizin, as before, but in the whole
world: to fulfill this Prophecy, Mala. 1.11.
From the rising of the Sun, unto the going down of the same, my name is
great among the Gentiles, and in every place Incence shall be offered to my name,
and a pure offering: For my name is great among the Heathen, says the Lord of
hoastes. 1. Tim. 2.8.
A. To the which agrees the Apostle, saying: I will that men in every place,
lift up pure hands. For he means that there is now no more difference
between the Gentile and the Jew, when God is acknowledged to be the Father of
all. Ephe. 4.6.


C. Whereupon Christ here calls God the Father, whom he seems to oppose
and set against the Father, of whom the woman had made mention: As if he
should have said, God will be the father of all men, that he may now be
worshipped of all men, without difference of place or person. M. In like manner
he gives to understand, that he speaks with an elect Daughter of God,
concerning the chosen, and Children of God. A. For such worship God, not only
as God, but as the Father, the Spirit, bearing witness unto their spirits,
that they are the Sons of God, and crying in their hearts, Abba, Father.

The Reprobate, Romans 8.16. Gala. 4.6.
although they seem to worship God, yet they know not what true worship
means, and do always abide in darkness, although the light of the truth,
do shine more bright than the Sun.

22. Ye worship, ye wot not what, we know what we worship: For Salvation
comes of the Jews.

Ye worship ye wot not what. M. Because he had said, that the worship of
both, as well of the Jews, as of the Samaritanes, should cease, least he
might seem to have now better lyking of the Temple of God, at Jerusalem,
than of that which the Samaritanes had in Mount Garizin, Bv. or might seem to
make the Samaritanes worship, equal with the Religion of the Jews, he
puts down a difference between them both in these words, and that no
trifling one, but a difference of great weight. C. Notwithstanding, he
deuideth the sum of his oration into two parts. In the first he condemns
the form of worshipping God, which the Samaritanes used, as supersticious, and
erroneous, and allows the worship of God among the Jews, as good and
lawful. And he adds the cause of this difference, namely, because the
Iewishe worship was grounded upon the word of God, but that of the
Samaritanes, had nothing certain from Gods mouth to maintain the same.
Secondlye, he declares that the Rites which the Jews had hitherto observed
and kept, should shortly have an end. B. Therefore because the worship
which was at Jerusalem at that time, was stayed upon the word of God, and
that of the Samaritanes false, by the Immitacion of the Fathers, without the
word of God: he repressed here the vain bragging of the Samaritanes, and
affyrmeth that they worship they know not what. That is to say, they
worshipped God after a fashion of the which they were uncertain, whether it
were acceptable before God or no: nay it was rejected by plain oracles from
God. Therefore he taught the Woman, that it was not meet for the Samaritanes
to boast of their Religion, and to prefer the same before the Religion of the
Jews.

C. This sentence of our savior Christ is worthy to be noted, by which we
are taught, that we ought to do nothing rashelye or unadvisedly in Religion:
because unless knowledge be present to direct us, we worship God no longer,
but a fantasy. Wherefore by this sentence, Good intencion overthrow
all good intencions (as men call them) are overthrown: for we know that
men can do nothing else but err, when they are led by their own opinion,
and imagination, without the word of God. M. For in the true worship of God
there is required not only an Intencion to worship the true God, but it is
needful also that we have knowledge to worship, that we may be certain of
our worship, whether it please God or no.

For salvation comes of the Jews. B. Some restrain this unto Christ, who
being the Savior of the world, Romans 1.^
was a Jew by birth. C. But because there is no doubt, but that Christ
therefore prefers the Jews, because they worshipped one God alone, and no
unknown God, which revealed him self unto them, and had chosen them to be his
people: under the name of Salvation, that saving manifestacion or revelation,
which they had out of his word ought to be understood. But why does he
say, that salvation comes from the Jews, when as rather it was hid,
Aunsvvere. Esaias. 2.3.
That the Law should come from Sion. For therefore were they segregated for a
time, from other people, that from them at the leangth, the pure knowledge of
God, might flow to the whole world. B. For the Gospel was derived and brought
from the Jews to the whole world. Lu. 24.47.
And before the time of the Gospel, the pure knowledge and Doctrine of God
flourished in no other nation than among the Jews, and it is likelye,
whatsoever the wise men of the Gentiles have ever taught, that the same was
ever borrowed of the Jews. Romans 1.17
C. But this is the sum, that if we will have our Religion allowable before
God, we must stay the same upon the knowledge conceived out of the word of
GOD.

Whereupon it follows that they must needs fall to Idolatrye, which forsake
the word of God. M. Moreover, Christ joins him self with the worshippers of
God, who notwithstanding is not only worshipped as true God of the faithful,
but of the Angels them selves, with the Father and the holy ghost. But in that
he took upon him the form of a Servant, and was made man, in that respect
he worshipped the Father, and was made obedient to him, Phili 2.8.
even to the death of the Cross.

23. But the hour comes: and now is, when the true worshippers, shall
worship the Father in spyrite, and in the truth: for such the Father also
requires to worship him.

The hour comes. C. Now follows the second part concerning the
abrogating of the Legal worship: M. whereby he teaches what is the worship of
the New Testament, at the coming whereof, those old Ceremonies, which were
either at Jerusalem in use, or in any other place, ought to cease. And so he
admonishes that the time of reformation is fulfilled. Heb. 9.10.
Therefore we must note here the Antithesis or comparison between the
spirit, and external figures: as between shadows and the truth. Therefore
the worship of God is said to stand by the spyrite, because it is nothing else
but the inward faith of the heart, which brings forth invocation: secondlye,
the puritye of Conscience, the denying of our selves, that we may be whollye
addicted and bent to the service of God. Hereupon aryseth a question. Aunsvvere.
he has not from the beginning of the world, allowed any other worship, than
that which is Spyrituall, which might agree with his nature. Of the which
matter Moses him self is a sufficient witness, who declares in many places,
that this is the only end of the Law, that the people cleave unto God, in
faith, Deu. 10.12.
and in a pure conscience. But the Prophets more plainly have expressed this
thing, when they do seuerelye inueye against the Hypocrisy of the people,
because they thought that God was pleased with that external worship only,
Psalm. 50.8. Esaias. 1 11. Mic. 6.7. Amos. 8 14
with the offering of sacrifices. Of the which we may read in the fifteen
Chapter of Matthew, beginning at the eight verse.

For such the Father also requires to worship him. M. This is the reason, why
the true worshippers worship the Father in Spyrite and in truth, namely,
because so it seems good unto God, so the father will be worshipped.

Therefore the will of God is, that we worship and serve him. Psa. 14.2.
The Lord looked down from Heaven, to see, if there were any that would
understand and seek after GOD. And in another place, Psa. 50.15.
Call upon me in the time of trouble, and I will hear thee, and deliver thee,
and thou shall glorifye me. For that mighty God will be worshipped and called
upon of us, whom all the Angels worship, that we may be made pertakers of
his grace, and may have occasion to glorifye his name. So he says in
another place, Esaias. 43.7
Every one shall be called by my name: for I created him for my glory, formed
him and made him.

Bv. This therefore is an argument, taken of the good pleasure of God, which is
oftentimes revealed unto us in the Scripture. M. Wherefore all those Imagined
and false worshippes are rejected, which man has devised: and this is
prescribed to be a true note of the worship of God, that the same be
according to his Divine will. The which Socrates, also is said to know and
acknowledge.

24. God is a Spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in
spirit, and in the truth.

Bv. The other argument of the Lord is taken from the nature of God. God
(says he) is a spirit: where, spirit is opposed against corporal
substance.

Therefore God, by his nature and substance is without a body. Therefore he
needs not, neither is he delighted with corporal things, neither can we
win his favor with any thing, but with the spirit. He delights in pure,
sincere, and spyritual things. C. But seeing men are flesh, it is no marvel
if those things please them, which be agreeable to their disposition.
Herevpo^ it comes that many things are myxed with the worship of God, which
are full of corruptions, and imperfections. But it should become them to
consider this above all things, that they have to do with God, B. But thou wylt
say, if God be a spirit, and therefore will have no other worshippers of him,
but such as worship him in spirit and in truth, why then gave he so many
Ceremonies to them of old time?

Aunsvvere.
For he was then also a spyrite. In deed he was a spyrite: neither did God
then regard any other worship, than that of the spyrite: but because the
people was then more rude, and like unto a Child, it seemed good unto him, so
to declare his glory, in a rude and Childishe people, and to have some
worship: especially he required to be feared, and to have his word
obeyed, and that with the whole heart. Behold the worship of Spirit and
truth. C. Moreover, we must note, that truth is not here compared with a lie,
but with the external addition of Figures: that ye substance of spyritual
worship might be pure and simple. M. But the Bishops could not abide this
simplicity, which was most acceptable to the Apostles, and to the primitive
Church: but so added Ceremonies upon Ceremonies, and beautified the same with
outward show, and made it glorious to the eye, AV. that (as this day
testifies) Christians far exceed the Gentiles, and the Jews, in
superstition, of external worship. The which specially then prevailed, when
worldly wisdom rejecting the word of God, ruled the Religion of Christ. For
how many is there at this day, which being contented with spiritual
worship, desire not some external Ceremonies, to worship God withal? B.
When as notwithstanding, Christian Religion for many signs, received of Christ
a few, by which the true worship consisted: and the same few easy to be
done, r^yall to be understood, and pure to be observed. M. Therefore this
argument taken of the nature of God, is most strong of all other, and such,
that it is not only known to the Godly and faithful, but also to many of the
Heathen Philosophers, and Poets. Whereby their madness appears to be the
greater, which think that they do greatly please God, with Gold, with
silver, with Tapers, with Images, with Bells, and with such like Gentillity. A.
Therefore let us content our selves with this, that God will be worshipped in
spyrite and truth, and not with man's inventions.

25. The Woman says unto him, I wot that Messiah shall come, which is called
christ: when he is come, he will tell us all things.

J wot that Messiah shall come. C. Although the Religion of the Samaritanes
was impure, and confounded with many errors: yet notwithstanding, they still
bear in mind, certain principles which they had taken out of the Law: as
this of the Messiah M. For they also looked for Christ, thus far agreeing
with the Jews, although in worship, without Christ, they greatly disagreed. To
this Messiah therefore the woman appealed, when she knew not how to answer
the words of the Lord.

C. For it is probable or likely, that when the Woman gathered by the words of
Christ, that there was a wonderful and strange alteration of the Church at
hand, she straight way remembered Christ, under whom they looked for a perfect
reformation of all things. B. Whereupon, the woman as it were to make an end
of their talk, I am not ignorant (says she) that Christ promised of God,
and looked for already of thus many ages, shall come, until whose coming I
will reserve these questions, for he shall at large declare unto us all things
whatsoever thou have uttered, concerning the abrogating of the worship of the
Jews, of the Samaritanes, and of the Gentiles, concerning Religion, and
concerning the Well and water of life. C. Therefore when he says that
Messiah shall come, he seems to speak of a time, near at hand. And
truly it may appear by many reasons, that the minds of all men for the
most part, were greatly comforted by hope of the coming of the Messiah, which
should help those that were in miserye, and even at the brinke of
destruction. Bv. For all the Prophesies were fulfilled, the kingdom was taken
away from Israel, and the Priesthood, Genesis 49.10
was subject to the power, and government of the Gentiles, according to the
old Prophecy of Israel.

When he is come, he will tell us all things. M. Therefore they which looked
for Christ, first acknowledged that knowledge of GOD, which they had before
his coming, to be obscure and imperfect: Secondlye, that the same should be
made perfect by the coming of Christ, because he should plainelye declare all
things. The which two things are very necessary for our times: For
unless we know that all things are obscure, and imperfect, without the
knowledge of Christ, and that by Christ, all things necessary for our
Salvation, and the knowledge of God, are plentifullye set forth, it can not
be that we should embrace the Doctrine of Christ, as necessary to our
Salvation. C. Whereupon we see, that this Woman prefers Christ before
Moses and the Prophets, in the office of teaching. For in her words is
contained a secreete Antithesis, or comparison between Christ and the
Prophets, in that she makes them to be but Disciples, as it were unto
Christ. Furthermore, she means that Christ is the utmost end of wisdom,
beyond the which it is unlawful for any man to go.

I would to GOD that they which now boast them selves to be the pyllers of
the Church, would but follow this sillye Woman, that they might be rather
contented with the simple Doctrine of Christ, than to take unto them selves
such aucthoritye, as to join therewith their own inventions. Bv. For they
make Laws to day, which to morrow they abrogate, and they think that they
may do what they list them selves. But this place proves that Christ has
taught all things that are necessary to the knowledge of GOD: and not
frivolous, or curious things. C. Whereupon comes the Popish, and
Mahumetishe Religion, but only of those wicked forged inventions, which they
have devised to fill up the Doctrine of the Gospel, and to profit the same,
as though without such doting dreams, it should be lame.

But whosoever will be well instructed in the School of Christ, let him seek
no other Masters, neither admit them, being fullye persuaded, that treasures
of all wisdom and knowledge, are laid up in Christ: in so much that he
ought to be heard, and no other, even as the Father has commanded.

26. Jesus says unto her, I that speak unto thee, am he.

M. Because it seemed that the woman now lacked nothing, but this one thing,
that she should know the instructour, and heavenly teacher of al things,
(whose coming she looked for) to be now present: therefore without all
dissimulacion, he manifests him self unto her, saying: J that speak unto
thee, am he.

R. By which voice the woman did not only receive full justification by
faith, but is also certified in her conscience, that this is that very Christ,
which is righteousness, 1. Cor. 10.1.
sanctification, and redemption. This is that voice, the which if Christ speak
in our hearts, it cannot be but, we must feel most passing sweetness of
Gods grace, or shall be replenished with all Heavenly joy. For it is the force
of the Gospel, to pacifye the conscience terrifyed with the knowledge and
feeling of sins: because it is the power of God to salvation to every one
that believes. Romans 1.16.
When the Lord confesses him self to the woman, to be the Messiah, he
offers him self no doubt to be her teacher, to the end he might satisfye
her conceived hope.

Therefore it is likely that there followed more plentiful Doctrine, to quench
her Thyrst. And he thought he would show such a document, and example of his
grace, upon this poor woman, that he would manifestly declare unto all men.
that he will never forsake his office, where a teacher is required.

Therefore there is no doubt, but that he shall be well instructed and taught,
whom he finds a prepared and apt Disciple: but they which disdain to
submit them selves unto his lore, (as we see that many proud and profane
men do) or they which look for more perfect wisdom from some other (as do
the Turks and Papists) are worthy to be drowned in the Labyrinth of all
errors. M. Whereas he does not only say, I am he, but adds also, which
speak unto thee, he does it to this end, that the woman might way and
consider the gift of God, of the which he had made mention, in the beginning
of this communication, to whom it was given not only to see and know Christ
the son of God, but also to have him with her alone preaching unto her, with
all gentleness the words of life.

A. Truly, a great and unspeakable gift of God, that not only the son of
God came into the world, but also spoke to sinners, that they which reiecte
him, might have no excuse. Wherefore, Psa. 95.^
if we will hear his voice, let us not harden our hearts, Deu. 18.^
least God power his vengeance upon us, who has sent so great a Prophet
unto us, yea, the Lord of all Prophets. M. But here it may be demanded, why
the Lord does manifest him self in so plain words, declaring him self to be
Christ, when as he forbade his Disciples, to declare the same to any man,
before his death, and resurrection. I answer: Aunsvvere.
Although of it self, it be not only indifferent, but also good, that he was
known to be Christ, yet notwithstanding, for certain causes, he would not
have the same made common unto many, but unto certain selected and special
persons, before the fullness of time was come. But these were not known unto
the Disciples: therefore he forbad them to reveal this secreete to any.
Notwithstanding, what was the let why he did not manifest him self to those
whom he would, seeing he knew well enough, and that from the beginning, who
they were which should not believe on him? Ioh. 6.64.
There are certain dispensations of good things, which are not to be
committed to every one, but to those only, which by their wisdom know how
to bestow and direct all things to the edification, and profit of the elect.

Wherefore, we are here admonished, not to require an account of the Divine
dispensation or disposing, why the Lord gives to one, and denies to another,
the very self and same thing, in it self very good. Bv. By the very same
reason we see, that the Lord does not at the beginning of the talk, declare
him self to the Woman, to be the Messiah. For no doubt she had slyded away
from him, as accounting him to be but aproude, and arrogaunt boaster of him
self. But now going forewarde by degrees, she not perceiving whereabout he
went, he conveyed him self wholye into her breast, and so made her believing.

27. And immediatelye came his Disciples, and maruayled that he talked with
the Woman: Yet no man said, what seek thou? Or why talkest thou with her?

And immediatlye came his Disciples. M. These things are not added by the
Evangelist, without great diligence. For he means hereby that the providence
of GOD kept back the Disciples which were absente, so long as the Lord was
unknown to this Woman: least they by any manner of means might hinder their
communication: but so soon as the Lord had made him self manifest unto her,
they returned.

For we may read how the Disciples went about at one time or other, Math.
19.13.14. Mar. 10.13.
to hinder, either by their importunitye: or else by their indiscreet zeal,
the good works of our Savior Christ: as the Evangelists testifye.

Bv. Least therefore by any manner of means, this godly conference might be
broken of, and not continue to the end: Christ would not have his Disciples
return before he had manifested him self to the Woman.

And maruailed. C. There may be two causes of this admiration: either
because they were offended at the vileness of the person, or else because
they thought that the Jews were polluted, if they talked with a Samaritane.
And although this admiration arose of the Godly reverence which they showed
toward their Master, yet notwithstanding they do amysse, if they marvel, as
at an absurd thing, in that he vouchsafed to talk with so base a Woman. For
why have they not rather respect unto them selves? For there they should have
found no less matter to be amassed at because they being base men, and as
it were the ofscouringes of the people, were so highlye exalted.

And yet notwithstanding, in that the Evangelist says, that they durst not
ask, it is profitable to be noted. M. For it is not the part of a good
Disciple, rashlye to examine his Masters doings, but rather to be so
persuaded of his goodness and wisdom, that he in no wise doubt, but that
whatsoever he does, is done by excellent reason and wisdom. C. Therefore if
at any time something in the words, and works of GOD, and of Christ, does
mislyke or displease us, let us learn not to control, either in word or
thought: but rather modestlye to keep silence, until such time as that be
revealed to us from heaven, which is hidden from us. And the foundation of this
modestye, is the fear of God, and the reverence of Christ.

M. But out alas, that reverence which we owe unto God alone, men have given
to the Pope of Rome, in so much that by certain of his Laws, it is decreed,
that no man shall presume to call him to account, although he carrye with him
infinite numbers of souls unto hell.

28. The Woman then left her water Pot, and went her way into the City, and
says to the men.

Bv. The Woman made no answer at all, being amassed, and wholye overcome with
the admiracion of the matter. For so soon as the Lord had said, I am he
which speak unto thee, the Disciples being therwithall come, she went away
leaving the water pot behind her. M. For how could it be, that she should
not be amassed, seeing him to talk with her, face to face, at whose coming,
all men looked to see notable things? R. Behold therefore the fruit of faith.
For as Peter says, when we have once tasted of Christ, and received him by
faith, we forsake all things: Mat. 19.27
Behold, we have forsaken all and followed thee. For he which has put upon
him Christ, is a new creature, seeks for those things that are above,
cares for heavenly things, and not for earthlye things: has his abiding
place, in heaven, and not in earth: he seeks those things that belong unto
God, and not his own. Bv. Therefore this woman now thirsted no more for
water, when she had once tasted of the water of life, which Christ had
promised unto her. Faith therefore specially brings to pass that we, as it
were, forgetting our selves, give our selves whollye to the service of God.

29. Come see a Man, which told me all things that ever I did: Is not he
Christ?

Come see a man. M. Here is a difference between temporal and spiritual
benefits. For if a man should find Treasure in the Field, he alone would
use the same, and would reveal it to none. B. But it is the nature of the true
knowledge of Christ, that he which has once gotten the same, shall desire
nothing more than to communicate the same to others. C. For the knowledge of
god can not lie secreete, or hyd, in the hearts of the faithful, but will
show forth it self to men. For this must needs be true: I believe, and
therefore I will speak. Psalm. 119 1^ 2. Cor. 4.13 Romans 10.10
R. Also it is said, With the heart man believes to righteousness: and with
the mouth man confesses to salvation. C. And so much the more we must note:
the vehemencye, readiness, and cheerfulness of the Woman, because a little
spark of faith only inflameth the men of the City: For she had scarslie
tasted of Christ, when she proclaimed him in the whole City. Therefore they
which have but meanly profited in the school of Christ, may be to much
ashamed to be slothful. For she says not, Go ye forth, and see, but, Come
ye, and see. For here we see the nature of those which have once tasted of the
truth, how constantly they retain the love of the truth, until they have
styrred up a desire in others to know the same, and will not separate them
selves from them, but desire to have their company and fellowshippe in
understanding the truth. John. 1.4^


A. As we may see in Andrewe and Philippe, at another time. C. But this seems
rather worthy reprehension in the woman, because she being as yet rude, and
not sufficientlye taught, passes the bounds of her faith. I answer, that
she had done unadvisedly, if she had taken upon her the office of teaching:
but now, seeing she desires nothing but that her Citizens, should hear
Christ speak, we may not say that she forgetting her self, went beyond her
bonds: for she plaieth the part only of a Trompet or Bell, in calling men
unto Christ.

Which told me all things. Hereby we see the Godly zeal of the Woman, who
nothing regarded her estimation and credit, to magnifye and extol the name of
Christ. Acts. 22.3. Acts. 26.9 1. Cor. 15 9. Gala. 1.13. 1. Tim. 1.13
For she does not abstain from repeating her own reprooche and shame. A.
Even so the Apostle Paul in diverse places makes mention of his former life,
which he led without the knowledge of Christ, to the end he might thereby, the
more notablye commend the grace of God.

Js not he Christ? C. Because she speaks here doubtfullye, she might
seem, not to be much moved by the aucthoritye of Christ. Because she was not
fytte to reason of so great misteryes, she, according to her power, seeks to
bring about, that her Citizens might be taught of Christ.

And this was a notable provocation to stir them up, when she upon her
own experience, declared him to be a Prophet. For, because they could not
judge of his Doctrine, this inferior preparatiue, was profitable and meet for
them.

30. Then they went out of the City, and came to him.

M. Thus much the woman brought to pass by her preaching, that the people of
the City went out to Christ, of whom notwithstanding, as yet they knew
nothing. They were not hindered by the vileness of the woman's person. For this
matter was wrought by the instincte, and providence of God.

Bv. They object not to the woman her faults, as we may read that the
Jews, did to the blind man, saying: Thou art altogether borne in sin,
John. 9.34
and do thou teach us? But go forth, and in very deed, have experience
of that thing which the sinful woman before in words had Preached. Wherefore
we must not have consideracion, so much of the speaker, as of that which is
spoken unto us. B. Here also is to be noted the force of the word of Christ,
when he purposed to persuade the truth. For nothing can stay, or hold back
them whom he has purposed to call, but they will forsake all and follow him,
whom they know to be the Savior.

A. As for example, Zache, Mathewe, Paul, and the other Apostles.

31. In the mean while, his Disciples prayed him saying, Master, eat.

Bv. Here also the Evangelist, incerteth or weaneth in, the talk between
Christ and his Disciples, begone concerning the Apostleshippe, and Preaching
of the Gospel to the Gentiles. The which very well agreed with this present
place, a great number of Samaritanes and Gentiles, coming now apace to the
Preaching of the Gospel.

M. Therefore the Disciples being ignorant what the Lord had done, and seeing
that he had no appetite to eat, and yet notwithstanding, knew that he was
wearye of his Iourneye, and travail, put him in mind, and prayed him also to
eat: that is to say, that he would refreshe and strengthen his body by
eating. And this which the Disciples did, was not rashlye, or unmannerly done,
but proceeded rather of a Godly care, which men always have for those whom
they love: otherwise it might seem very uncivil, and rude, that the
Servant, should will his Master to eat.

32. He said unto them, I have meat to eat, that ye vvote not of.

R. Look what manner of person the man is, so he speaks, and so he thinks.
Herevppon the Apostles, as yet but carnal, speak of carnal meat, and
carnally understand the word of Christ: but Christ being Spyrituall, speaks
of Spyrituall food. A. And as he took occasion upon the water, which the
woman would have drawn out of the well, to speak of the Spyrituall water, and
to teach the woman: even so he took occasion of the meat which the disciples
offered him, to prepare them, and to make them ready for that Embassage, on
which he meant to send them. C. And in deed, the Metaphor of the Meat and
Drink has the greater Grace, because it was brought in very aptlye, and in
good time, of the present talk. CYR. Because therefore they should be the
teachers of the whole world, he teaches them by his example, that they must
have greater care, for men's Salvation, than for their own bodies, and must
prefer the Kingdom of God, before all bodyly commodities. M. He says not, I
am not Hungrye, eat ye: But, I have meat to eat. By which words he meant
to stir up the minds of the Disciples, and to make them attentive to those
things which should follow:

And so taking occasion of their request, he applies his talk unto the
present business, to provoke them to desire that meat. C. God verylye
permits us to Eat and Drink, so that we be not drawn from that which is
principal, and a greater matter than meat. That is to say, that every one
may follow his vocation. M. So that, Christ does not here forbid his
Disciples to eat meat, which they had bought for the necessitye of the body,
and to satisfye nature, but he puts them in mind of farther matter. It is
no holiness, but rather Hypocrisy, to constrain men against their wylles to
abstain from necessary meat.

A. But of this matter we have spoken before in our Commentarye upon Mathewe.
Chapter twelve, Verse fortye and eight.

33. Therefore said the Disciples among them selves: Has any man brought him
ought to eat?

Mat. 16.7.
M. The Disciples understood him that he spoke of the meat of the body: as
in other places also when he spoke of the Leven of the Pharisees: And when he
said that Lazarus sleepte, John. 11.11
they understood him that he spoke of bodylye sleep.

M. And because they saw him talk familliarly with the Woman, it may be that
they suspected her to have brought him some notable meat, which he had eaten.
But he said not, I have now eaten meat which ye know not of: but, I have
meat to eat which ye know not of. A. What marvel is it then, if sometimes
we be not able to understand the words of Christ, when we see that the same
happened here to the Apostles them selves? M. But in that they do not rashelye
demand of this matter, but say among them selves, Has any man brought him
ought to eat? It is to be imputed to the like modestye, whereof we spoke
before in the Seven and twentye verse, nay, rather the confyrmation of the
same: M. the which the Evangelist thought not good to omit.

34. Jesus says unto them: My meat is to do the will of of him that sent
me.

M. The Lord bears with the modestye of the Disciples, wyllinglye, and of
his own accord declaring unto them, that which they durst not demand, to
the end they might vnderderstande of what meat he spoke. The meat which he
had then to eat, he calls the execution of his Fathers will, signifying that
the same to him is not only most ancient, but also that there is nothing in
the which he more deliteth, or in the which, he would more wylinglye exercise
him self. As for example David, who to the end, Psalm. 19.11.
he might commend the Law of God, does not only say, that the same is
precious unto him, but also more sweet than Honye. Therefore to the end we
may follow Christ, we not only diligently must serve God, but also so
diligent to do his commandments, that the same should not be painful or
grievous unto us.

M. But Christ means here, that work and labor, which he had taken
already with the woman, namelye, that he might bring to this City, the true
knowledge of God, by the preaching of the Gospel. B. As if he should say, I
desire this above all things, that the will of my Father may be fulfilled,
which is, that many men may know and feel his goodness which is in me, and
by me. A. Even as he says in another place: This is the will of him that
sent me, John. 6.40
that every one which sees the Son, and believes in him, should have
everlasting life. And again he says, I must be Baptized with a Baptism,
John. 10.18
and how am I pained, till it be ended. By which words he declares, that
he earnestlye desires to do the will of his Father: that is to say, to dye
for the Salvation of his people, even as he had received a commandment from
the Father.

To do the will of him that sent me. C He does plainelye enough declare,
what was the will of his Father, which he sought to fulfill, namely, to
discharge that office committed unto him. Even so in like manner, every man
must have respect unto his vocation: least he attribute that unto GOD, which
he has rashelye taken upon him, after his own fantasy.

Moreover, what the office of Christ was, it is well enough known, namelye, to
enlarge the Kingdom of God, to restoore lost souls to life, and to set forth
the light of the Gospel: and last of all, to bring Salvation to the world:
Christ being weeryed and hungrye, with the excellencye of these things, quite
forgatte his meat and drink. And this is a singular consolation unto us, that
Christ was so careful, for the salvation of men, that he conceived most
pleasure in seeking the same.

And there is no doubt, but that he bears toward us the like affection at
this day.

M. Also Christ admonishes us, by this sentence, that whosoever are sent of
God, have only this care, to do the will of him that sent them, and to do
his work, for the which they are sent, and called. Let Bishops, and all
others, which say that they are called and sent of God, have respect unto this
example.

35. Say not ye: There are yet four months, and then comes Harvest?
Behold, I say unto you, lift up your eyes, and look on the Regions: For
they are white already for Harvest.

Say not ye. Bv. Here our savior adds certain arguments, whereby he may
stir up his Apostles, which should be the teachers of the whole world, to
Faith and diligence in their Apostleshippe. Some gather hereby, what time of
the year these things were done, affyrming that it was the beginning of the
Spring. But here notwithstanding, there can no such certaintye of time be
gathered, by reason of the inequallytye and difference of places and Regions.

C. By these few words, Say not ye. He meant to note how much more men
do seek after earthlye things, than after Heavenly things: For they so
earnestlye desire the coming of the Harvest, that they keep reckening of
every Month, and day: and in the mean time, they forestewe, and neglect the
gathering in of the Heavenly wheat. And daily experience teaches us, that
this wickedness is not only naturallye in us, but also so fast ingrafted,
that it can not be easelye pulled away. For when all men gape so greedelye
after the earthlye life, what small care or remembrance have they of heavenly
things? Even so Christ him self in another place, Math. 16.3
says, You Ipocrites, ye can discern the face of the Sky, and can ye not
discern the signs of the times?

Behold, I say unto you, lift up. M. The purpose of our Savior Christ was,
to call the minds of the Disciples from the care of the earthlye Harvest, unto
that which was more principal, and better agreeing with their calling and
profession. R. Therefore he uses here a certain kind of correction: as if
he should have said, Ye say, that Harvest is as yet, a far of, namelye,
four Months hence: but I say, that the same is nighe. I speak not of the
corporal Harvest, which is four Months of, but of the Spiritual, which is
already come.

Lift up your eyes. That is to say, behold and see, how that not the Jews
only desire salvation, but the Samaritanes also aspyre to the Gospel, and
thyrst after salvation.

So in like manner, he says in another place, Mat. 9.73.
The Harvest is great, but the Laborers are few: Pray therefore the Lord of
the Harvest, that he will rhrust out Laborers into his Harvest.

C. Therefore, even as soon as the Corn is ready and ripe, it may tarrye no
longer for fear of sheeding: even so now the spyrituall Corn being Ripe,
Christ says, that haste must be made, because delay is dangerous. So that
we see to what end the Similitude is brought, namelye, to express the cause
of making speed.

36. And he that reapeth, receives wages, and gathers fruit unto life
eternal: that both he that sows, and he that reapeth, might rejoice
together.

And he that reapeth. M. This is an argument taken of the reward of the
reapers. By the Reaper he means, not the Husbandman him self, to whom the
seed belongs, but the hired Labourer. To this man the fruit which he
reapeth, belongs not, and yet notwithstanding, he loses not his labor in
reaping the Corn, in that he receives his dew hyre, and reward. C.
Therefore by this argument he proves, how diligent the servants of the Lord
ought to be in the work of God: because there is a large reward laid up
in store, to requite their labor. For he promises fruit, and that neither
corporal nor momentany.

Howebeit, that which he adds concerning the fruit, may be expounded two
ways, either to be a declaracion of the reward, (and so he should speak one
thing twice in diverse words) or else to commend their labors which
enritche the Kingdom of God, even as he says in another place, I have
ordained you to go and bring forth fruit, John. 15.16
and that your fruit should remain. And truly, both these ought greatly to
encourage the Ministers of the word, that they faint not at any time under
their labor, when they hear that there is a Crown of glory prepared for
them in the kingdom of Heaven: and know also that the fruit of their reaping
shall not only be precious before God, but also everlasting.

M. Here also is offered to the Godly no small matter of comfort, when they
understand that they by the Ministers of the Gospel, the Lords Harvest men,
are gathered not to consumption, and the servitude of corruption, (as earthlye
fruits are) neither to be at the pleasure, or to suffer the tyranny of the
reapers, but from eternal death, to everlasting life. Let every man behold and
consider what he is, and from whence, and whereunto he is either gathered or
dispersed. And concerning the large reward of Sheepheardes, read the fifth
Chapter of the first Epistle of Saint Peter, 1. Pet. 5.4. 1. Tim. 4.7.
and the fourth Chapter of the first Epistle of Saint Paul to Timothy.

That both he that sows. M. This is an argument taken of the joy which the
Harvest commonly brings with it, and that not only to the Reaper, but also
to him that sows.

C. For by these words Christ teaches that it shall be without the complaint
and finding fault of any man, that the Apostles should reap the fruit of
other men's earing, and tyllage. R. For it is a comparison between the
Prophets of the old Testament, and the Apostles of the New. The Prophets
are the sowers, and the Seed was sown in the old Testament. For the sowing
was the Doctrine of the Law and the Prophets: for then the seed which was
cast into the ground, lay as it were hyd: but the Doctrine of the Gospel,
because it brings men to perfect ripeness, is aptlye compared to the
Harvest. For the Law was far from that perfection, which at the length was
offered in Christ. R. For the Law is our Schoolemaister unto Christ. Gal. 2.24.
Heb. 7.19.
And, the Law has brought no man to perfection. We know also the comparison
which Paul brings between the Age of a Child, Gala. 4.1.
and the full and perfect age: the which tends to the same effect. And yet
notwithstanding this lets not, but that the Fathers might be gathered into
the Lords Barn: but the manner of teaching was far otherwise: for as the
Childhoode of the Church continued until the end of the Law, and the
flourishing Youth succeeded the Preaching of the Gospel: even so then
salvation began to wax ripe, the which the Prophets had only sown before.

37. And herein is the saying true, That one sows, and another reapeth.

R. Therefore the Prophets are the sowers, and the Apostles are the Reapers.
That which the Prophets sowed, the Apostles reaped. Also, to sow, is to
Preach the Law, and to Preach the Gospel, is to Reap the offered Christ.
C. For this was a common Proverb, by which was meant, that many oftentimes
received the fruit of other men's labors. Howbeit this (namelye, that he
which labors, is grieved that another man should take away the fruit of
his labor) is otherwise, because, the Prophets and the Apostles, were
pertakers one of the others Joy. And yet nevertheless, it follows not
herevppon, that the Prophets, are witnesses, or priuye to those things, which
at this day are done in the Church: because the purpose of Christ tends to
no other end, than to show, that the Prophets taught with this mind and
desire, that they might rejoice over that fruit, which they had not leave to
gather. The comparison which the Apostle Peter uses, 1. Pet. 1.12.
is not much unlike this: saving that he generallye exborteth all the Faithful:
whereas Christ speaks to his Disciples only.

38. I sent you to reap that whereon ye bestowed no labor: other men
labored, and ye are entered into their labors.

Bv. As if he should say: The Prophets by their labors, made the fallowes,
and by their Doctrine prepared the world, being as yet unruly and stubborn,
for the Gospel: ye, now succeed them, and enter into their Labors, and
take a work in hand, already begone, the world even now wyllinglye
receiving the Gospel, and mortal men seeking violentlye to enter into the
kingdom of Heaven. R. In saying, I send you, he declares that they were
appointed Reapers, by his mere grace, and not by their merit. According to
that which he says in another place, Ioh. 15.16.
I have chosen you, and ye have not chosen me, etc. M. But here it may be
demanded how the Apostles were sent to Reap, when Paul says, I have
planted, i. Cor. 3.6.
Apollo has watered: but God has given the increase. Also he says, Ye are
Gods husbandrye. Again, I have laid the foundation, and another has builded
thereon. And in another place he says, i. Cor. 9.11.
If we sow unto you spyrituall things, think not much, if we reap your
carnal things. Therefore Paul was sent of the Lord, rather to Sow than to
Reap. Was then the Apostleship of Paul, Aunsvvere.
differing from the Apostleship of the rest? Surely, it was differing from the
rest, so long as they Preached to the Jews, and he to the Gentiles. For that
which Christ here speaks unto his Disciples, seems to appertain chieflye
to that first sending forth, in the which the Apostles were sent forth to ye
lost Sheep of the house of Israel: as we read in the tenth Chapter of Matthew:
in the which Nation the Prophets also labored. It was one thing to preach the
kingdom of God among the Gentiles, and another thing to preach the same among
the Jews, for the one knew not God, and the other were trained up in the Law
and the Prophets.

Bv. Moreover, these words of the Lord ought always to be before the eyes
of all Preachers of Gods word, that thereby they may be encouraged to be
faithful, and dilligent in discharging the office committed unto them, when as
they know that the Labor which they bestow in teaching, shall be so profitable
for them, and so fruitful to Christ and the Church.

39. Many of the Samaritanes of that City believed on him, for the saying of
the woman, which testified that he told her all that she had done.

Bv. The Evangelist now returns to the former Historye, and more fullye
describes the prompte obedience, and the growing of faith, of the Citizens of
Sychar, otherwise called Samaria. The calling of the Gentiles foreshewed.
R. And he declares how greatly the report, which the woman made of him
prevailed with them. Whereby it appears that they had a hope and desire of
the promised Messiah. B. Moreover, this soddaine conversion of the Samaritanes,
was a foreshewing of the calling of the Gentiles: and therefore the Lord would
have the same magnified: as may plainelye appear, when as at the testimonye of
one sillye Woman, scant of good name, many straight way, and that Samaritanes,
believed the Gospel, and embraced Christ. M. For what had she said of Christ?
Said she, that by the word of his power, he could command all things, as
Men, Spyrites, Death, Life, Diseases, the Sea, and the Wind: many of the which
things, the Jews saw, and yet believed not? She neither saw nor spoke of
any of these things, but this only she said, that Christ had told her all
things that ever she had done. Who therefore sees not how soon these
Samaritanes believed, and the readiness and maturity of this Harvest? What
else may we note here, but that when the hearts of mortal men, are made apt
by the inspiration of the holy Ghost, to receive the truth, Faith comes by
the holy Ghost.
the kingdom of God is set forewarde with little labor, and oftentimes, by
such persons as are very base.

The ripe apple often times falls from the tree, without much labor, yea, at
the only shaking of the same by a child: but such as are scant ripe, will
scarce fall with the hurling and beating of a Cudgel, and being by violence
shaken down they are so sower, that they were better untouched. Even so in
like manner, where the spiritual harvest is, there even a Samaritane woman
brings many unto Christ: The harvest of the spirit is easy.
but where the spiritual harvest is not, there the Apostles them selves sweat
and labor in vain. C. This word (believed) signifies herein properly, that
they were stirred up by the words of the woman, to acknowledge Christ to be
a prophet. For this is as it were but the beginning of faith, when men's minds
are prepared to receive the proffered Doctrine. Such entrance into faith, is
here called honorably, Faith, to the end we might know how reverently God
esteems of his word, in making their only docillity, so honorable, which
are not as yet taught. But in this, that Faith of theirs shows it self, that
they have a desire to profit: for the which cause they desire to have Christ
abide with them.

40 So when the Samaritanes were come to him, they besought him that he would
tarry with them: and he aboade there two days.

So when the Samaritanes were come. M. In these words is described the
quallity of faith, which comes by the ministry of the preached Gospel.

By this the mind of the believer is inflamed, first to see him, of whom so
great things are published and believed. Even so these Samaritanes, so soon as
they had heard the testimony of the woman concerning Christ, and did beeleue,
first of all they went out of the City, to see him on whom they believed.
Then having so done, and being not contented to have seen him once, they
desired to abide with him for ever: and therefore, they requested him to tarry
still with them. Phili. 1.23.
Thus are they always affected which truly know and love Christ.

So Paul desired to be dissolved and to be with Christ. The which Christ
also promised to his disciples, saying, Ioh. 14.3
I will come again, and take you to my self, that where I am, there may ye be
also.

Also Paul foresheweth that this shall not be without great consolation,
These. 4.17.
saying, And so shall we always be with the Lord. PAR. Therefore when they
had obtained their desire, and saw him standing before their face, they were
nothing offended at his base and contemptible form, having no manner of kingly
show, but they rather inuit him as the geuer of great benefits, and beseech
him that he would vouchsafe to lodge in their City.

And he abode there two days. M. Being entreated he tarried for a time: such is
his humanity and facilitye, by which he willinglye receives the petitions of
the faithful, specially when they do appertain to the corroborating and
confirming of their faith, even as this petition of the Samaritanes. did.

B. But notwithstanding, he gave commandment to his disciples, that they
should not enter into the Cities of the Samaritanes, because the time of his
full glorification was not yet come. But as the calling of the Gentiles
appeared in the Magi or wisemen, and after that in the Centurion, and in
others: so in this present occasion, he minded to manifest the calling of the
Samaritanes, The calling of the Gentiles. Acts. 8.5.
which were a certain kind of people between the Ethnikes, and the Jews, and
the first that received the Gospel after the Jews. Whereupon he tarryed only
two days with them, whereas he continually Preached the Gospel to the Jews.
Romans 15.8 Mat. 15.24
For he was the Minister of Circumcision, and was specially sent to the lost
Sheep of the house of Israel. M. He would not therefore give any occasion of
offense unto the Jews.

41. And many mo believed, because of his own word.

C. Here this word (believed) is used in another sense, than it was before in
the nine and thyrtye verse, because it does not only signifye that they were
prepared unto faith, but also endewed with a true faith. M. Here therefore we
see how true that is, which the Apostle speaks of faith, saying: Faith
comes by hearing, Romans 10.17
and hearing by the word of God.

R. Therefore, as the Samaritanes at the first believed because of the woman's
words, but afterward are confirmed in the faith, by the words of Christ,
even so all the faithful, at the first believe, because of the Apostles
words, and the words of the Preachers, but are not as yet confyrmed in the
faith, except Christ by his voice speak to our hearts, and seal us by his
holy spyrite, which is the earnest and assurance of our heart. For when the
spirit of truth shall come, Ioh. 16.13.
he will lead us into all truth. Also, Paul planteth, 1 Cor. 3.7.
Apollo waters, but God gives the increase.

42. And said to the woman: Now we believe, not because of thy saying, for
we have heard him our selves, and know that this is even Christ, the savior
of the world.

And said to the Woman. M. These things are not therefore spoken, to the end
we might think that the ministerye of this Woman, which they had well used, was
contemned. God forbid: but rather to extol those things which they had heard
of Christ him self, above the testimony of the woman.

Nay, they seem to know, and ackowledge well enough the Woman's Ministerye,
by which they at the first believed, because they talked with her: then they
call to mind her words, by which she had testified of Christ: neither do
they say, We never believed because of thy words, but: Now we believe, not
because of thy words.

Bv. As if they should have said, Thou have not spoken so largelye of Jesus,
as he has deserved. For now we our selves having had plain experience of
his Divine power, know what manner of person he is: neither as persuaded by
thy words only, do we believe him to be the Messiah, but being convicted
rather by his evident Doctrine, we know, and undoubtedly believe, and truly
confess, that the same Jesus, is not only the Savior of the Jews, but also
of the whole world. C. Therefore, the Evangelist here expresses what their
faith was, namelye, such a faith, as was conceived, by the word of God, in
so much that they might boast that they had the Son of God to be their
teacher, which is he alone, upon whose aucthoritye we may safelye stay our
selves. He is not now present before our eyes, that he might talk with us
mouth to mouth: but by whom soever we shall happen to hear him, yet our faith
can be reposed in none but in him.

M. The Samaritanes which speak here, speak not as doubtful, but as most
assured, and that which they believe with the heart, Romans 10.10
they most constantlye profess with the mouth. For with the heart we believe
to righteousness, and with the mouth we confess to Salvation.

But how come they to have this certain knowledge of Christ? They say not,
we have seen his Miracles, but, We have heard him our selves.

Therefore, they attain unto faith, not by Miracles, but by the hearing of the
very word of God. John. 8.17
He which is of God, hears Gods words, says the Lord. The unbelieving and
froward Nation, require signs, but the elect do not so, but by the hearing of
the word of God, come to the knowledge of Christ. So said Peter, John. 6.68
Lord, to whom shall we go? thou have the words of eternal life, and we
believe and confess, that thou art the son of the living God.

And know that this is even Christ our Savior. C. This no doubt they have by
hearing. Whereby we gather that the sum of the Gospel within these two
days, was more familiarlye Preached unto them by Christ, than before time it
had been at Jerusalem: Bv. Also, the prompte and ready faith of the
Samaritans shall condemn the invincible incredulitye and obstinacye of men in
our time.

For the continual Preaching of the Gospel amongst us, not two years, but
many years, can little or nothing at all persuade many of us.

Of the world. C. Christ testifyeth that the salvation which he brought, is
common to the whole world, to the end the Samaritanes might the better
understand that it appertayned also unto them. For he called not them to the
pertaking of the grace of salvation, as lawful heirs, but he taught that he
came, Ephesians. 2.17.
to admit forreyners into the householde of God, and to bring peace to them
that were far of.

43. After two days he departed thence, and went away into Galilee.

After two days. B. He abode two days only with the Samaritanes, because
as yet the hour was not come, for the kingdom of God more magnifycently to
be revealed unto them. First it was necessary that the Gospel of the
kingdom should be offered to the Jews, and then by the death of Christ, the
middle gate, which divided other Nations from the Jews, was to be broken down.

And went away into Galilee. M. The course or journey of Christ was dyrected
by the will of God, from Iewry to Galilee, but by the way as he went, he was
as it were stayed, abiding two days in Samaria: notwithstanding after two
days were past, he proceeded in the same. Hereby let us learn to know, the
certaintye of the course of the Gospel, which is begone and ended according
to Gods Divine will.

44. For Jesus him self testified that a Prophet has no honor in his own
country.

Bv. The Evangelist briefly, and therefore obscurelye tells the departure of
Christ out of Samaria: But if we confer with the other Evangelists, it shall
appear that he leaving the City of Nazareth, went another way into Galilee.
C. For when he saw that he was contemned in his country of Nazareth, he
thought good to turn out of the way to another place. A. Concerning this
co^tempte, read in the thirteen chapter of Matthew, verse fiftye and seven
Mark the sixth, verse four. And in the twentye and four verse of the fourth
Chapter of Luke.

45. Then as soon as he was come into Galilee, the Galileans received him,
when they had seen all the things that he did at Jerusalem, at the day of
the feast: for they went also to the feast day.

Then as soon as he was come. M. It appears that the Evangelist endeavors
him self to show how Christ found more favor and friendship, among these
abject and rude Samaritanes and Galileans, than among the Jews, which were
instructed in the law and the Prophets, and excelled others in the outward
show of holiness.

Even so the ignorant and ruder sort of men, are more ready to embrace the
truth, than they which boast them selves to know Religion, and to love
godliness. So that having made mention how the Samaritanes, received Christ,
he now commends the same also in the Galeleans, being a Nation so much
contemned, that the Pharisees boldlye said, that it could not be found in
the Scriptures, that ever any Prophet came out of Galilee: John. 7.52
and for this cause they rejected Christ as a Galilean.

C. Moreover, whether this honor continewed any long time, which the Galileans
gave unto Christ, it is not perfectlye known. For there is nothing more ready,
than the forgetting of Gods gifts and benefits.

When they had seen all the things. A. Of these signs it is spoken before in
the three and twentye verse of the second Chapter: these things wanted not
their fruit. C. For in seeking to prepare a way to Doctrine, they bring to
pass that Christ may be reuerentlye thought of.

For they went also to the Feast. M. The Evangelist puts not down this
without cause: for beside that it apertaineth to the purpose it has also a
commendacion of the godliness of this people, which so carefullye obeyed the
Law of GOD, that dwelling far of, they came to Jerusalem at the feast days
appointed. A. Hereof also we may take an example of the obedience and
diligence which is due to the word of God.

46. So Jesus came again into Cana of Galilee, where he turned the water into
Wine. And there was a certain Ruler: whose Son was sick at Capernaum.

Into Cana of Galilee. A. Concerning this City, and the Miracle there showed,
read in the second Chapter going before. M. The Evangelist makes mention of
this, in this place, both to call to memory, a fresh the Miracle of the
water, turned into Wine, and also to declare that Christ came for this cause
into that place, that he might as it were, water, and cause that to grow, by
showing his power and light again, which of late in the beginning of his
Miracles he had planted. Heavenly things are soon forgotten.


For such is our nature and corruption, that how soever we have attained, and
gotten heavenly and good things, except they be afterward caused to
prosper, of all other things they will most easylye be forgotten: But it is
not so with those things that are evil: and which are agreeable to our
corruption, the which, although they be lightlye gotten, they wyllingly
increase and go forward: insomuch that it is truly said, The first beginninges
see thou withstand,
For remeedye to late
thou do provide:
When euylles have
the upper hand,
By long delays
still to abide.


The which verses certainly cannot be veryfied of good things. A. For this
cause Christ him self a little before his death, John. 12.1.
went to see Bethany, where he had raised Lazarus from the dead. The Apostles
also were wont to see again the Churches which they had planted by the Gospel
of Christ, Acts. 15.41.
to confyrme them in the faith which they had received.

M. Wherefore by these examples let us learn to see, and ouersee again, and
by dilligent husbandry, to set foreward either in our selves, or in others, the
beginninges of good things.

And there was a certain Ruler. Bv. These things also which follow pertain
to that which went before: for they prove that Jesus is even the very same,
whom hitherto he preached him self to be, and whom the Samaritanes
acknowledged and received, namely, the son of God, the Messiah, and savior
of the world, and the Lord of all things, even of life and death: for this
thing, he most manifestly declares by his present act. M. It appears that
this Ruler, was one of the servants and Lieftenaunts of Herod, as may
appear in the three and twenty of Luke the seventh verse. C. And the
Evangelist plainly expresses his state and condition, because in such a
personage the miracle was more notable. M. For it comes very seldom to
pass, that such a one believes in Christ, specially being the Servant of
such a King as Herod was. These examples are very rare, and yet
notwithstanding, nothing impossible. Wherefore, we must not despair of such:
A. but rather pray that the Lord will bring them to the knowledge of his
truth, even as the Apostle exhorts: i. Tim. 2.1.
for great is his mercy.

47. As Soon as the same heard that Jesus was come out of Iewry, into Galilee,
he went unto him, and besought him that he would come down and heal his
son: for he was even at the point of death.

R. The Ruler is here descrybed to have a rude and a Childyshe faith. For he
requesteth Christ, that he would go down to Capernaum, and heal his son:
In that he prays Christ to heal his son, it belongs to a faith
conceived by those miracles which he saw to be wrought by Christ: (for he saw
him to be such a one as healed all men that were sick.) but in that he
prays him to go down to Capernaum, it belongs to imbecility, and a
Childishe faith: as though Christ could not restore to health by his word
only, or by the breath of his mouth. Such weakness of faith we may
behold in another place, in the Disciples of Christ.

For when the Ship was overwhelmed with Waves, they believed that Christ was
able to save them, but not except he were awake: for he slepte, and they
awooke him, Math. 8.
saying: Lord save us, we perish. C. This man therefore had conceived no
other thing, than that he was a Prophet, sent of GOD with this commandment,
and commission, that he should prove and declare him self to be the servant
of GOD, by showing miracles.

M. He requesteth that Christ would go down with him, and heal his Son.

2. King. 5.11
So Naaman the Syrian trusted that Elyzeus would have come down to him, and
have touched the place of the Leprosy with his hand, and standing would have
called on the name of his GOD, Christ imagined of the people to be but a
Prophet. Math. 16.14. Math. 22.46.
and so have healed him. And this Faith which imagined Christ to be a
certain Prophet, in the beginning was in many men, as may appear by the
answer which Peter made unto Christ. This also was the first opinion that
the Woman of Samaria had conceived of Christ: the which notwithstanding, the
Lord contempned not, but so increased the same, that not only she, but also
many of her Cityzens, knew him to be Christ the Savior of the world: Even so
here, he which does not quench the smoking Flax, Esai. 42.3. Mat. 12.20
enlarges and helps the Rulers faith.

48. Then said Jesus unto him: Except ye see signs and wonders, ye will not
believe.

M. In that the Lord here uses the plural number, saying: Except ye see
signs and wonders, ye will not believe. C. he seems generallye to reprehend
all the Jews, because they were to desirous of Miracles. M. As if he should
say, How long are ye so hard hearted to believe the truth, and by a true
faith to embrace the kingdom of GOD which is Preached unto you, that ye will
not believe at all, except ye be constrained thereunto by signs and wonders.
Their faith and trust is acceptaple unto me, which believe my bare word
confirmed by no Miracles: you believe not me, except ye see signs and
wonders. M. All they have this disease of distrust, which follow the
judgment and wisdom of humane reason, rather than the Oracles of God.

For such is humane reason, that except it be convinced by evident signs, and
persuaded by undoubted arguments, it will not believe. And this is the very
same which Paul says, The things that belong unto God, i. Cor. 2.14
seem foolish to worldly wisdom, and are not understood: Whereupon the
Apostle exhorts us to become fools, (that is to say, believers) to
understand them. For except they be believed, they shall not be understood.
But with this disease, were both Jews and Gentiles infected. Concerning the
Jews, this place speaks, and also the thyrtye and nine verse, of the twelfth
of Matthew. Concerning both Jews and Gentiles the Apostle says, The Jews
require signs, and the Greeks, wisdom: i. Cor. 1.21
that is to say, both are distrustful, and believe not the word of GOD in
the cause of the kingdom of GOD (where faith is required) requyring certain
perswations of signs and arguments.

C. But how comes it to pass, that Christ is so sharp now, who was
wont, gentlye to receive others which desired Miracles: as we may read here
and there of diverse blind and lame persons? He had then verylye some
certain reason which is hid from us, why he dealt more seuerelye with this
man, than he was wont to do with others. And peradventure he had not so much
respect unto this man, as he had to the whole Nation. He saw that his
Doctrine was little esteemed, and not only neglected, but utterly despised:
all men depending upon Miracles, and being rather amassed, than wondering at
them. Incredulitye a detestable vice.
Therefore, that wicked contempt of Gods word, which commonly reigned in
them, caused him to make this complaint. M. For most detestable is this vice,
incredulitye, by which, men refuse to believe the word of God, except they be
driven thereunto by signs. Very true it is, that some of the Fathers in old
time, have wished a confyrmation by signs, least they should doubt of the
truth of the promises: we see also that GOD was not offended with their
desires, as we may read of Gedeon, Judge. 6.7 Esa. 38.22.
of Ezechias, and of others. C. But Christ notes here a far greater
wickedness. For so the Jews depended upon Miracles, that they had no regard
unto the word of God. So that all their Religion, all their knowledge of God,
and all their Godliness, was in miracles. R. But that is no true faith, which
is conceived, either of miracles, of signs, or wonders. For miracles are only
seals and witnesses. Therefore they do not make him which is unbelieving, a
true believer, but they do confyrme him, which is first a believer, in his
faith. C. They therefore at this day greatly offend, which cry, saying: Let
us first see miracles, and then we will give ear to this Doctrine, as though
the truth of Christ ought to be so base in our eyes, unless it have some
other stay. But although god should heap upon them an innumerable sort of
miracles, yet notwithstanding they lie, when they say they will believe. Exodus
5. Ioh. 12.37.
There would arise a certain external admiration, but there would follow
never a whit the more attencion to Doctrine. The which we may plainly behold
in Pharao, and in the Jews. For the word of the Lord abides for ever, If
they will not hear Moses and the Prophets, Luke 16.31.
neither will they believe, though one should rise again from the dead. It is
no maruayle therefore, if the Lord do first of all seek to cure the diseased
Father with distrust, before he restore his Son to health. For they are more
dangerous sick, which are sick in mind, and ought rather to be healed,
then they which are sick in body. A. Christ therefore does the office in
deed, of a Bishop, of a Pastor, and of the Shepherd of our Souls.

49. The Ruler says unto him: Sir, come down or ever that my Son dye.

Because this Ruler was whollye occupied in mind to deliver his Son from
perryll of death, he answers nothing, but rather urges the Lord to make
haste, before his Son give up his soul. Fatherlye care and affection.
M. We see therefore in him first, an Image of the affection of Fathers toward
their Children, by which every Father naturallye desires the saving health of
his Children, the which the Children very seldom consider. Thou shall never
find in all the Evangelical Historyes, any one Son, which came unto Christ
and said, Math. 17.14. and.9.18. and.15.22.
Lord come down before that my father dye. But ye shall often read of this
affection, and care of Parents for their Children, which they have uttered
unto Christ.

M. Howebeit also, it appears in this man, what corrupt and preposterous
love, some Parents bear toward their Children. For he only seeks the
corporal health of his Son, neglecting the Spiritual and true life, which
the Lord had begone to teach. He says not, Lord help our faith, and the
salvation of our Souls, but as for our bodylye health, Love in many Parents
corrupt toward their Children.
let that be as it seems good in the eyes of God: But he says, and that
earnestlye, Lord come down before my Son dye. And, what Father at any time,
came to the Lord, and said, Lord, my Son has no fear of God: whereby I
perceive that he is sick in Soul, and in great peril: help him I beseech
thee. Also, they which at this day desire the Prayers of the Church, how
many of them is there I pray you, which desire the congregation to pray unto
God for them, that they may have faith, the fear of God, and patience.

50. Jesus says unto him, go thy way, thy son lives. The man believed the
word that Jesus had said unto him, and went his way.

Jesus says unto him. Bv. The Lord in very deed confesses that he can
do much more then the Ruler trusted he could do, being the Lord of life and
death, which can both retain the life when it is departing from the body, and
also, when it is clean gone, call the same again: For he says, Go thy
way, thy Son lives.

C. signifying that he is escaped out of the perrill of death. But seeing this
man proceeding and perseuering in entreating and praying Christ, obtained at
the leangth his hearts desire, thou may gather that Christ did not
reprehend him, because he would wholly reject him, and refuse his prayers, but
rather to correct that vice, which stayed him from coming to the true faith.
And we said already before that this reprehension belonged rather to all the
people, than to one man. Moreover, here the singular humanitye, and gentleness
of our Savior Christ appears, in that he bearing with the man's rudeness,
extended his power farther than he looked for. He requested that Christ would
heal his son by coming unto him.

He thought that he could heal his sick Son of his disease, but he did not
believe that he could raise his Son being dead, from death to life: and
therefore he urges him to make haste, least death prevent him: R. and by this
making of haste, he declares his incredulitye.

For unbelief makes haste, but Faith wayteth and tarieth the Lords leisure.
Faith taryeth the Lords leisure. Esa. 28.1^
And therefore the Prophet says: He which believes, shall not make haste.
C. Seeing then, Christ bears with both these infyrmityes, we may hereby
gather, of how great price he esteems even the least faith. This also is
worthy to be noted, that Christ in not satisfying his will and desire, works
by means which we thought not of to help us, to the end we might learn not
to prescribe unto him any thing.

The man believed the word. R. Therefore by this word of Christ, not only
the Son is healed, but also the Fathers faith increased and confirmed. And as
the Son by this word, as by a sovereign Medicine, receives health so also
the Father receives strength of Faith. For that faith is strong and firm,
which is conceived by the word, and not by Miracles.

A. But did he not believe at the first? How had he come unto Christ to
obtain any thing at his hand, except he had been endued with some faith? I
answer. Bv. He did at the first believe the Lord: for he had not come unto
him, if he had not first conceived some notable hope of his power, and
clemencye: but so soon as he heard his word, and understood his promise, he
believed more firmelye.

Therefore he troubled the Lord no farther, but went his way, and as he
believed, he found his Son restoored to health. C. For because he came with
this perswacion, that Christ was a Prophet of God, therefore he was so ready
to believe, that taking hold of one word, he printed the same in his mind.
And although he did not so reuerentlye esteem, and think of the power of
Christ, as it became him, yet notwithstanding, a short promise made him to
conceive sodainelye an assured hope: insomuch that he believed the life of his
Son, to be included in the only word of Christ. Promptness in believing
the word of God.
With this promptness and readiness, ought every one of us to receive the
word of God: but sildome or never shall such present effect follow in the
hearers. For how many be there which profit so much at the hearing of many
Sermons, as this profane man profited at the hearing of one word? Wherefore,
we must use the more diligence in shaking of our dullness and s^outh: and
especially we must pray unto God, that it will please him so to work in our
hearts, that we may be no less ready to believe, than he is gentle and
ready to promise.

51 And as he was now going down, the servants met him, and told him
saying: Thy son lives.

Bv. That which now follows, does set forth as well the power of
Christ, as the effect and nature of Faith, to the end the Miracle may be
more notable and more purelye purged from all evil suspicion, and also that
the force of faith, may more and more appear. A. For there is no doubt but
that all these things were done, by the providence of God. M. The Lad was
healed by the power of the word of Christ, otherwise he had dyed by the
contagiousnesse of his sickness. But this was known as yet to no man.

The Servants brought word that his Son was recovered: but how, and by
whose power he was reuyued, that they knew not. Therefore the meeting of the
servants with him by the way, and the glad tydinges which they brought unto
the sorrowful Father, served thus far to the setting forth of the glory of
Christ, that he might be said to have spoken the truth, concerning the son
restoored to health, though he were absent: the which seems to be done by
the spyrite of Prophecy, and also to be believed of the Father as a
Prophetical Oracle.

C. Moreover, with the efficacye of the word, here is also described the
effect of Faith. For as Christ restored the Son to life, which was now at
the point of death, even so the Father by his faith: in a moment, recovered and
received again his Son, safe and sound. Let us know therefore, that so
often as the Lord offers unto us his benefits, his power is ever at hand to
perform whatsoever he promises, so that our unbelief be not a let unto the
same.

We confess that this is not always, often, or commonly seen, that the Lord
by and by, stretches forth his hand to help us: but so often as he
differreth the same, he does it upon good consideration, and for our profit.

And although it does not always, by one manner of mean help his
servants, yet notwithstanding, no man's Faith shall be in vain, but we shall
know that it is very true, which the prophet teaches, that the promises of
God, Abac. 2.3.
when they seem to tarrye long, do then most speedelye come.

52. Then inquired he of them when he began to amend: and they said unto
him, Yesterdaye, at the seventh hour, the fever left him.

M. To the end it might appear whether his son were healed by chance or by
the singular power of Christ, the father inquired what time his Son began
to amend. C. The which he did, being moved thereunto by the secreete
impulsion of Gods spyrite, to the end the truth of the Miracle might the
moore euidentlye appear.

For we are to proane and ready by nature to obscure and darken the light and
glory of God, and Satan also seeks by all means possible, to keep from us
the sight of all his wounderfull works. Wherefore, to the end all his
works may have their deserved praise, it is necessary that they be made so
evident and plain unto us, that there be no occasion of doubting left. How
unthankful therefore soever men be, yet notwithstanding, this circumstance
will not suffer so notable a work of Christ, to be ascribed unto fortune.
M. Therefore the truth and power of the word of Christ is such, that it
never passes without a sure and undoubted experiment of it self: and the more
diligently it is examined, the more manifest and certain it is. Truth, the
more it is examined, the more certain it is.
The power which Christ showed in healing of this child, had been hydden, if
so be the curiosity of the father, had not enquired after the hour of his
healing.

Thomas would not believe them that toulde him of the resurrection of Christ,
Ioh. 20.28.
except he might have experiment, both by seeing and feeling the same. But
this kind of experiment was so far from detracting any thing from the truth
of Christ's resurrection, that it could not be made more manifest and certain
by any other way.

R. This Ruler therefore enquireth the hour, first to declare his faith,
which he had conceived before by the word: and secondly, to the end he
might draw his whole familye unto faith.

57. So the Father knew, that it was done the same hour, in the which Jesus
said unto him, Thy son lives: And he believed and al his household.

So the Father knew. A. Let us also learn after this manner to behave our
selves, that the truth of our words and actions, may appear more in deed
than in words, if so be they be examined. We see that the Lord used not
many words, to show and commend unto him the miracle, but left the same to
the truth of that which he intended to do, which should sufficiently
declare the truth of his word.

And he believed R. Did he not also believe before? What is it then which the
Evangelist says now? C. For this seems very absurd, to make mention of the
beginning of Faith in that man, whose faith he commended at the first: neither
can the word of believing in this place he referred to the proceeding of
faith.

But we must note that the man being a Jew, and trained up in the doctrine of
the law, had some taste of faith when he came unto Christ. And whereas
afterward he believed the word of Christ, that was a particular faith, which
extended no farther then to the life of his son: but now he began to believe
after another manner, because he having embraced the doctrine of Christ,
professed him self to be one of his disciples. So that now, he does not only
believe that his son is restored to health again by the benefit of Christ,
but also acknowledges Christ to be the son of God, and gives his name to
the Gospel.

M. Behold therefore the fruit of this miracle, namely the increase and
confirmation of faith.

And all his household. C. This Ruler had his whole household fellow professors
with him of the Gospel, who were witnesses with him of the miracle. Of the
whole household there was not one which knew what answer the Lord had made
to the good man of the house, but only he him self which heard the same: but
he toulde them all things, and revealed unto them the virtue and power of
Christ, Bv. to the end his whole family might come with him to Christianisme.

The which thing, not only the masters of houshouldes, but also their whole
families, ought to consider, thereby to learn, what is their duetye if so be
they will live godly in Christ: namely, to give themselves wholly unto God,
and to believe in Christ the son of God, M. and by mutual conference of the
word of God among them selves, to edify one another in the faith of Christ.

54. This is again the second miracle that Jesus did, when he was come out of
Jury into Galilee.

Bv. The Evangelist makes mention of this, to the end we might understand,
that the Lord would by this means build up the foundation of his kingdom,
which was laid among the Galileans: and herewithall he declares that his
purpose is to describe certain special, and notable miracles of our Lord and
savior Christ, to the setting forth of his power, and to the teaching of the
truth of faith.

M. Neither ought it to seem absurd to any man, that the Evangelist so
diligently declares this thing, seeing one only household or family, was won
by this miracle: for this is not unwonted or strange, if we way and consider
first of al, how much the Lord esteems the salvation of one, which is not
comparable to so great a household as this was: and also what small
beeginninges of heavenly things, and of the kingdom of God, are wont to
grow into a great mass. One house may be to a whole City, even as that
littell leaven of the number of the Appostles was to the whole world.

For in what great estimation the faithful are with God, though they be few
in number, and amount to the number of ten, the family of Lot may be an
example for ever.

The fyfth Chapter.
1. After this was there a Feast day of the Jews, and Jesus went up to
Jerusalem.

After this was there a Feast. Bv. THIS PREsent Historye does specially
teach and declare unto us, the corporal benefit which the Lord bestowed
upon the Lame Man, and how he took from him his disease, which by no art
was Curable, and therefore without hope of recouerye: whereby he declared
again, that he is the omnipotent Lord of all things.

Notwithstanding, before the Evangelist describes the benefit it self, or
miracle, he begins with certain things, according to the Historical manner,
by which he both notes the time, and also the place, when, and where it was
done: all which things pertain to the greater confyrmation of the History.
C. And although the Evangelist does not plainlye express what day this was,
of the which he makes mention here, yet notwithstanding, by conjecture it is
likelye that it was the Feast of Pentecost, if notwithstanding, this which is
here declared, were done straight after Christ came into Galilee. For he
departing from Jerusalem, straight after the feast of Passover, and passing
by Samaria, spoke unto his Disciples of the time of Harvest, Note here that the
Jews harvest was always ready at the feast of Whitsontide by reason of the
whotnes of the country.
(as you may read in the five and thirty verse of the fourth Chapter) and
coming into Galilee, he cured the Rulers Son: after the which the
Evangelist says, that this Feast day followed. Therefore the order of time
leads us, to understand the same of Pentecost. Howebeit, we ought not
greatly to contend about this matter.

And Jesus went up to Jerusalem. For what cause Christ went up to Jerusalem
at the Feasts of the Jews, is declared already in the thirteen verse of the
second Chapter going before.

2. And there is at Jerusalem, by the Sheep Markette, a Poole which is
called in the Hebrewe tongue, Bethesda, having five Porches.

And there is at Jerusalem. C. By the cyrcumstance of the place, we gather,
that this Miracle was not hidden or known to a few. For the place where this
miracle was wrought, was much frequented of many men, as may prove the five
Porches, and the neerenesse of the Temple. Moreover, the Evangelist says,
that there lay many sick persons.

Bethesda. M. Of this name, there are diverse interpretacions, and dicters
translations also. For according to the Hebrewe word, it is sometime called,
Betzaida, sometime Bethesda, and otherwhile Betheder: Whereupon some
interpret this word to signify the house belonging to the flock, and
othersome, the place of fishing. C. But their opinion is more probable, which
expound the same to be the place of effusion: For so much does the Hebrewe
word, (...) Eshed, sound. But the Evangelist, has pronounced, the two last
sillables thus, Esda, (as, Beth-esda), according to the Chaldee tongue, which
at that time was much used. It is very likely that the water was brought to
this place by Conduicte Pipes, that from thence the Priests might draw of the
same. It may also be that this name was given to the place, because the water
passed into the same by Conduicte Pipes. Also this place or Poole was called in
Latin, Probatica, Piscina, That is to say, The Ponde, where the Priests did
wash the sheep that should be Sacrificed: for the Greek word (...), or
Probaton, signifies a Sheep.

Having five Porches. M. It is lykelye that these Porches were erected for the
easement of the multitude of sick persons, which came thither to recover
their health: out of the which Porches they might go down by a pair of
Greeces, or Stayers, into the Poole. So that they, which were but mere
Hipocrites, and whose deeds had only a show of Godliness, had
notwithstanding this consideration and care, for those that were sick among
them, to provide that they might be helped and cured.

3. In which lay a great multitude of Sick Folk, of Blind, Halt, and
wythered, waiting for the moving of the water.

Jn which lay, a great multitude. C. It may be that the Sick persons lay
in the Porches, to ask the Alms of the people, which passed thereby to the
Temple to worship. Also the Beasts which were offered in Sacryfice, were
commonly bought there. M. But we must think, that there is nothing done in
human affairs, without the disposition of God. God could by other means
have cured the diseases of his people: but it pleased him so to order and
appoint this thing, that all manner of Sick and diseased persons should be
gathered together from far, into one place, and that, in the same City,
where there abounded Pride, and disdain, and to the which the people resorted
from far, and from every quarter of Judea: to the end, they having diverse
kinds of miseryes, The end of spittell houses.
set before their eyes, might be called to modestye, to humillitye of the
mind, and to true repentance And to this end and purpose, the Spitle houses,
which belong to all Cities, are appointed of God by his providence.

Of Blind, Halte, and Wythered. C. The Evangelist has reckened up certain
kinds of the diseases, to the end we might know that the Lord did not
heal the common and meanest sort of the diseases: For man's help can not cure
the Lame and the blind.

This undoubtedly was a lamentable spectacle, to see in so many men, so great
deformitye of members. But notwithstanding, the glory of God did there more
brightly shine, than in the beholding of a great, and well appointed army.

For there is nothing more magnificent, than when the wonderful power of God
does correct and repair the defection and decay of Nature: neither is there
any thing more excellent and pleasant, than when God, according to his
unspeakable goodness, helps man's miseryes.

4. For an Angel went down at a certain season into the poole, and styrred
the water: who soever than first after the styrring of the Water stepped in,
was made whole, of whatsoever disease he had.

For an Angel went down. Bv. It is uncertain, when or how often, the
Angel came down to the water, whether once in a year, or oftener. Some think
that he descended every Festival day, and that then some one sick person
or other was healed. Othersome, think that this was done only upon the day
of Pentecost. Notwithstanding, this is most certain, that the benefit is to
be ascribed unto God, who in working, has ever used the Ministry of
Aungelles, of men, and of Elements.

For that which the Angel did here, he did it as the Minister of God. For it
is a work proper to God, to cure the sick, but as he has ever used the
hand and work of Aungelles, so he has committed these parts in charge, to
the Angel.

For the which cause the Angels are called, powers, or virtues, Ephe. 1.21.
not because GOD resigning his power unto them, sytteth him self idle in
Heaven: but because he working mightily in them, mightelye declares unto us
his power.

Therefore, they do very wickedlye, which ascribe any thing to Angels
which is proper to GOD, or which make them such mediators between God and
us, that they obscure the glory of GOD: when as we ought rather directlye to
come unto Christ, that by his conducting, aid and commandment, we may have
the Angels helpers, and ministers of our Salvation. Furthermore, the Lord
could heal in one moment, all men at once, without any space between: but as
miracles have their end, so also they ought to have their mean. Even as
Christ also teaches, 1. King. 4.32. 1. Kin. 17.^ Luke. 4.25.
when he says that so many dyed in the days of Elizeus, and none were raised
up, saving one only Child: and that there were so many famished Widows, in
the time of drought, and one alone was relieved by Elias.

Even so the Lord thought it sufficient, to make declaracion of his presence
to a few sick persons. M. Moreover, the Evangelist shows that this was a
myraculous kind of healing of sick persons, in three things: first when
he makes mention of troubling of the water, to the end thou may know,
that before this styring, or troubling, the Poole had no force or virtue at all
to heal. Secondlye, he says that he was made whole, which descended first
into the water: to declare that after the said first, any other whatsoever,
descended into the water in vain. Thyrdlye, he adds, that he was made
whole of whatsoever disease he had: to the end thou may know that this
virtue of healing was divine, and most perfect.

C. But the manner of healing which is here described, does sufficiently teach
us that there is nothing more unmeet, than that men should make the works of
God subject to their judgment.

For what help or remedy may a man hope to have of troubled water? Fair and
clear water is more apt and meet to restoore health, than that which is
troubled. Wherefore then is it troubled? C. But thus the Lord does make us to
forsake our own judgment, and to yield to the obedience of Faith. We
follow to greedelye those things, which please our carnal reason, without
the word of God. Therefore, to the end he may make us obedient unto him,
he does oftentimes set before us those things, which are contrary to our
reason.

R. For the Lord executes and finisheth his works under a contrary show.
He works life by death, than the which there is nothing moore contrary to
life: he works joy by sorrow, liberty by Captiuitye, the which is most
contrary to liberty.

C. Example we have in Naaman the Syrian, (whom for the curing of his
Leprosy, the Prophet sent to Jordan, who at the first made a Jest of that,
which afterward he felt in deed) that God does so work contrary to humane
reason, that notwithstanding, he does never frustrate or deceive us. R. So
Elizeus healed the waters of Hierico, 2. Kin. 5.10
in casting salt into them, in which there was death, and barrenness, the
thing being quite contrary: for otherwise, Salt being put into water, 2. Kin.
2.20
brings barrenness and not fertillitye. But as the waters of Hierico were
not healed by Salt, even so in this place, the troubled water, healed not the
sick: otherwise it had healed all those that had come into it, at all times,
without respect of first or last.

C. But he so commends the external sign, that by the sight thereof, all
sick men might be constrained to have respect unto him, the only aucthour
of grace.

Bathes, without God are of no force or virtue.
Bv. If therefore the Bathes that be in Swicerland, in Iuliers, in Sicilie, in
Valeria, in England, and diverse other Countries, do help those that are
diseased, the same is to be attributed to the goodness of God. For there are
no earthlye things which have in them any force or virtue to help men, except
they be made effectual by the power of him that is omnipotent.

Nevertheless, those benefits which are given to us by means, are not to
be contempned, neither ought we to abuse them. For all the gifts of God
ought to be used to the glory of God, to our souls health, and for the
necessitye of our body. C. But we must always beware that we do not
ascribe that to creatures, which belongs only to God.

5. And a certain man was there, which had been diseased, thyrtye and eight
years.

Bv. After the description of the place, of the time, and the occasion of the
benefit of Christ, the benefit it self is now added, with the
circumstaunces, by which it was made more manifest. For the Lord did not take
at a venture some one sick person from among the multitude, to heal the same,
but he chose out one amongst all the rest, which was most miserable, both for
the daungerousnesse of the disease, and also for the long continuance of the
same, and finallye, such a one as especially wanted the help of others. R.
So that the Evangelist therefore makes mention of the continuance of the
disease, first of all, that the greatenesse of the Miracle might be commended:
secondlye, to teach that he was not by chaunse troubled with so grievous, and
languishing a disease, the space of eight and thyrtye years, and that his
grief was not prolonged by chance, neither that he was without any
consideration prevented by others which went into the water before him, neither
that without cause he wanted a man, which might put him into the Poole, after
the troubling of the water. For all these things were thus disposed and
ordered by the will of God, that Christ might be gloryfied.

John. 9.1.
A. The like may be said of him which was borne blind: And of Lazarus,
John. 11.39
which was not only sick, but also dyed, and lay four days in the Grave,
waiting for Christ: Also of the woman which was diseased with the bloodye
flyre, Math. 9.20
for the space of twelve years: and of that other woman which had the spirit
of infirmitye eyghteene years, and could not lift up her self aright, until
such time as Christ healed her. R. Even so, let us certainelye believe that all
our infirmityes, Luke 13.11.
and afflictions do continue with us the longer, especially by the will and
pleasure of God, that he at the length may be gloryfied. And the name of GOD
is gloryfied, when as by some deed or other the power, wisdom, or mercy of
God is manifested, that thereby the godly may begin to praise him, and
learn to trust in him, and to fear him: according as it is said in the
Psalm, Psalm. 50.15.
Call upon me, in the day of trouble, and I will deliver thee, and thou
shall glorifye me.

R. If therefore thou be afflicted, not with an hourelye, but with a
continual Cross, suffer the hand of the Lord, I beseech thee patiently,
which afflicts thee of good will, I would not have thee through
infidellytye to grudge, or to think the time long, but by Faith abide his
leisure, being assured that although the Lord tarrye long, yet
notwithstanding, when he comes, he will come quicklye, and will not be
slow. Habac. 2.3


M. But concerning the name of this sick man, there is no mention made: for
he had no manner of estimation in this world, by reason of his miserable
state and condition. For such is the manner of the world, that it makes no
accounte of any, but of those alone which excel in rytches, or dignitye.

Whereupon, Genesis 6.4.
among the Hebrews they were called men of renown. Also, what manner of
disease it was wherewith this man was troubled, there is no mention here made.
CHR. It is very likelye, that he had the Paulsey. M. But what disease so ever
it was, this is evident, that it was incurable, especially it having
continewed so many years.

6. When Jesus saw him lie, and knew that he now long time had been
diseased, he says unto him, wylt thou be made whole?

When Jesus saw him. Bv. Christ asks not this question as though he were
ignorant of his desire: B. but by this demand, the Lord went about to
stir up in this sick man, a desire of health: to the end he might the more
thankfullye, and with greater admiration, receive the benefit: C. to the end
also, he might make the witnesses which were present, the more attentive, who
being otherwise occupied, might have neglected the miracle, as oftentimes it
comes to pass in matters that are sodainelye done.

Bv. Furthermore, the purpose of the Lord was to declare, that no man could
have health, except he hated the disease, with the which before time he had
been grieved, and unless he earnestlye desired health.

R. As Christ therefore prevented the Supplication, and request of the Sick
Man (for he asked him the question before he desired health) even so by his
unspeakable goodness he preuenteth the Prayers of all those which labor
through faith, as he him self testifyeth, saying: It shall come to pass, that
before they call, I will answer, Esa. 45.24
and before they speak I will hear. CHR. He says not, Wylt thou that I
heal thee? Neither does he require Faith of him, saying: Do thou believe
that I am able to cure thee of thy Disease? For Christ was altogether unknown
unto him: as shall appear by that which follows.

7. The sick man answered him, Sir, I have no man, when the Water is
troubled, to put me into the Poole: but in the mean time, while I am about to
come, another steppeth down before me.

Sir, I have no man. Bv. The sick man according to his gross understanding,
not perceiving whereabout the Lord went, does at large declare unto the Lord
his calamitye, signifying nevertheless, that he wants not good will, but
rather abillitye, for that he could persuade no man when the water was
troubled, to ducke him in the Poole. M. In that he calls Christ, Ioh. 20.13.
Lord, he so does according to the manner of that Countreye. So Mary called
Christ, Lord, whom she supposed to be a Gardener. This man knew not the
Lord: therefore he said not, Lord, I would be made whole, help me: But
simplye he makes his complaint, what has hindered him hitherto from
receiving his health, hoping that peradventure it might come to pass by the
means of Christ, who spoke so friendlye, and familliarlye unto him, he might
in convenient time, be put into the water.

C. But this sick man behaueth him self, even as we all are wont to do, For
he includes Gods help in his own cogitation, not daring to warrant more
unto him self, than he could conceive in his mind. And whereas Christ
bears with his infirmitye, we have therein a spectacle of his clemency, of
the which every one of us daily has experience, when we staying our selves
whollye upon those means which are next unto us, he stretching out his hand,
contrary to our expectation, out of secret and hidden places, shows how
greatly his goodness, surmounteth the straites of our faith.

Furthermore, by this example, Patience.
we ought to learn sufferaunce. Long was the term of eight and thyrtye
years, all which time GOD deferred his benefit of healing this miserable
creature: the which notwithstanding, he had determined to bestow upon him,
from the beginning.

R. Notwithstanding, he does not accuse or complain, neither does he curse
those which prevented him: but quietlye and without the reprooche of others,
he tells that he has been prevented. Furthermore, he does not wish him
self forlorn, neither does he curse the day of his Natiuitye, but
patiently he bewayleth his callamitie. M. Finallye, we see how little pitye and
humanitye there was in this notable City, insomuch that there was not one
found, which would any whit help this miserable sick man to his health, and
yet notwithstanding, the true worship of God was professed in this City.
Whereupon Christ iustlye said to the Jews, Mercy is preferred before Sacryfice
1. Sam. 15.22. Math. 9.13
I will have mercy and not Sacrifice. And yet notwithstanding, this
inhumanity, and pitilesnes happened not to the sick man without Gods divine
counsel: for God had otherwise appointed for him.

Let them remember this, which in like manner, are destitute of man's help, that
they murmr not against the Lord, and that they accuse no man but their own
sins, of the which our outward calamities, ought to put us in mind.

8. Jesus says unto him, Rise, take up thy bed and walk.

Bv. The Lord minding to show him self to be even the very same, whom
Angels serve, by whose force the water is troubled and the sick healed, and
to be the very same in like manner, which at his beck only takes away
the diseases, both of body and Soul, says unto the sick man, Rise, take up
thy bed, and walk.

M. The sick man for this cause, said that he was miserable, for that he had
not a man to put him into the water, by and by, after the troubling of the
same: but the Lord going about to declare unto him by his Virtue and Grace,
that he is not miserable which wants man's help, if so be he may have
the help of God, says, Rise, take up thy Bed and walk. He might have said,
Be thou whole, and free from this Disease, but he thought it better to
command him to do that, which might be a manifest sign unto him of true
and undoubted health: and also a manifestacion of Gods power, in the eyes of
all men. So, to the Ruler of the synagogues Daughter, which was dead, he said
not, Daughter live, nor to Lazarus, Lazarus live: But he said, Daughter arise,
and he commanded meat to be given her: Mat. 5.43. Ioh. 11.43 Math. 9.6
Also, Lazarus come forth: and again, lose him, and suffer him to come
forth. So also he said to the man sick of the Palsy, Rise, take up thy bed,
and go home to thine own house.

These tokens took away, all suspicion of false and counterfaite health and
life, and gave testimonye of the truth without all contradiction.

9. And immediatelye the man was made whole, and took up his bed, and walked:
and the same day was the Sabbath.

And immediately the man. R. Here the efficacye of the word is declared, to
the end that we might know for a suerty, that the word of the gospel, Romans
1.17.
is the power of God to salvation to all that believe, how contemptible soever
it appear in outward show, and suffers persecution of the world. M. Here
the sick man is not only healed without all delay, but by the power of the
word of Christ, he is so restored to health, that without all help of man he
stands boult upright on his feet, takes up his Bed on his shoulders, and
stoutlye goes foreward on his way. By which tokens the power of the word of
Christ was sufficientlye declared. Otherwise, if he had abode still in his
Bed, how whole soever he had been, the restoring of his health had been
obscure. But when he rose up in the sight of all men, and went on his way with
his Bed on his neck, there appeared a most evident declaration of the power of
Christ.

And the same day was the Sabbath. C. Chrste was not ignorant how great
offense would follow, when the man should be seen to carrye a burden on his
neck. Ier. 17.21.
For the law expressly forbids to carry any manner of burden upon the
Sabbath day. B. But Christ intended to show by this miracle, that he is the
Lord of the Sabbath, and of al things else: whereupon he did this upon the
Sabbath day: and to the end it might be the more openly known, he commanded
him which so long time was carried of his bed, to take up the same now, and to
carry it in like manner on his shoulders. The which being such impiety as was
not woonte to be showed, it moved the minds of the multitude very much to
enquire of the cause of so great bouldnes: and so to learn the power and
aucthoritye of the Lord, who setting forth the glory of his Father so greatly
by that miracle, did a work belonging to the Sabbath day.

C. Therefore, he commanded the bed to be carried, that the miracle might be
the more generally known: secondly, that occasion might be given and as it were
a way prepared to that notable sermon which he made afterward. And, of so
great weight, was the knowledge of that miracle, that he ought not to regard
the offense of the people, especially, seeing he had so just a defense in a
redines, by which although he pleased not the wicked, yet notwithstanding, he
mightily refuted their cauils.

Therefore, we must hold this for a general Rule, That although the whole
world shall rage against God, yet nevertheless, we must publish the glory of
God, and must preach forth his woorks, so far forth as it shall be meet to
make his glory known. And we must not be wearye and discouraged, although this
our endeavor have not good success, so that we seek only the glory of God,
and go not beyond our bounds.

10. The Jews therefore said unto him, that was made whole: It is the Sabbath
day, it is not lawful for thee to carrye thy bed.

M. Hitherto the Evangelist has made mention of the power, and also of the
goodness of Christ declared by the miracle, and now consequently he declares
the blindness and malice of the Jews, by which reprobate and obstinate
persons, did caluminate and stander the deed of Christ, both in the man
healed of the Paulsey, and also in Christ him self. R. For in these Jews,
thou shall find neither faith nor charity. For at the sight of so great a
miracle, they should have confyrmed their faith, and wondered at the power of
God, glorified his name, and also have rejoiced through love with the man which
was healed: but the wicked are made more obstinate by the wonderful works of
God, Exodus 5.7. and.9.
as we may see by the example of Pharao.

M. These miserable men went about to obscure and hide the miracle of Christ:
the which to do, they take occasion of the circumstance of time. It is (say
they) the Sabbath day, it is not lawful for thee to carry thy bed. C. The
which thing they seem rightly and iustlye to condemn, for so much as the law
expressly forbad the same. But when the excuse which he brought would not
satisfy them, they began then to offend in that: for the cause being known,
he ought to have been borne withal. The bearing of a burden as is alredye
said, was the breaking of the Sabbath day: but Christ which laid the burden
upon his shoulder by his aucthoritye discharged him.

11. He answered them, He that made me whole, said unto me, Take up thy
bed, and walk.

M. He could not have answered better, nor more briefelye.

He does not dispute either about the observation or breaking of the Sabbath,
neither does he allege any thing to excuse him self: B. but goes about to
declare, that he does of right obey him which had healed him by his divine
power, in carrying his bed, yea though on the Sabbath day: as if he should
say, that he cannot command any thing against God, which had declared so
great power of God to be in him.

CRY Therefore, he refers all the whole matter unto him which had made him
whole, and seems to affirm stoutly, that he is rather to be honored then
the sabbath, in whom there is so great virtue and grace, that he could
heal this so old a disease with his word only. For it belongs only to
God and not to man to do such a deed.

Rash judgment.
C. We are taught therefore by this example to beware of rash Judgment,
until the reason and consideration of every fact do fully appear unto us.

Whatsoever is contrary to the word of God, deserves without all
controversy to be condemned: but because we are here often times deceived, let
us first modestly and quietly search out the matter that we may have a sober
and sound judgment. For, because the Jews were evil affectioned, they make
no enquirye, but fall to rash judgment.

Whereas if they had suffered them selves to be taught, the offense had not
only been taken away, but they had been brought with much more profit to
the knowledge of the Gospel.

12. Then asked they him, what man is that which said unto thee, Take up thy
bed and walk.

Then asked they him. Bv. It is likely that the Pharisees, understood the
plainness of his speech, and perceived that Jesus was the aucthour of this
matter, whom they knew well enough had done hitherto great miracles:
notwithstanding, dissembling the same with wonderful subtilty, and covering
their poisoned spite, they demanded what manner of man he is, which
commanded him to carrye his bed. By which words there seems to be included
an opposition between God and man. M. As if they should have said, seeing
God has so seriouslye commanded the observation of the sabbath, and has
plainly forbidden us to do any manner of work upon the Sabbath day, what
man is he that dare presume to set him self so rashly against God? They say
not, what is he that has made thee whole? because this served not their turn
to caluminate, but they say, What man is he that.

Thus blind and malicious flesh and blood is wont to deal. That which
serves their turn to cavil, they take: but that which took away all occasion
of cavil, they let alone. A. So in the cause of the blind man, the Pharisees
make mention only of the claye which Christ made on the Sabbath day: but of
so great a miracle, they speak not one word.

13. And he that was healed, wist not who it was: for Jesus had gotten him
self away, because there was prease of people in that place.

And he that was healed wist not who it was. M. A wonderful thing. Christ was
unknown to this sick man, which was the aucthour of his health. He remembered
nothing concerning Christ, but these two things: namely the word which he
had hard, the which he obeyed, and the health which he recovered by the virtue
thereof: but he was, he knew not, no, not so much as his name. C. Herebye
therefore we gather that it cannot be attributed to this man's faith that he
was made whole, who being made whole, knew not his Physician: and yet
notwithstanding in that he took up his bed at the commandment of Christ, it
seems to be done by the directrix faith. In very deed, as we must confess
that there was some impulsion of faith in him, so by the order of the text it
euidentlye appears that he was whollye expert of sound doctrine, and of the
pure light, upon the which he should have stayed him self.

Bv. Therefore at this time he answers nothing to their question, but
deliberateth with him self, and considers of more dilligent inquiry and
examination. But the Evangelist John adds the cause why many knew not the
aucthour of so great a miracle, saying, For Jesus had gotten him self away.

C. Christ would not have the glory and praise of so notable a work to
vanish away, and to be quite out of remembrance, but would have the same
known, before that he professed him self to be the aucthour thereof.

Therefore, he got him self out of the way for a littell while, that the Jews
might Judge of the matter it self without having any respect of the person.

M. And also that he might not seem to desire the common praise of the people,
thinking it better to suffer the matter it self, to praise and extol the
divine power. Vain glory avoided by Christ.
Thus they always behave them selves which seek not their own glory, but to
do good. Othersome say that he went apart lest he might provoke the malice of
the Jews to be more vehement against him by his presence.

R. Therefore, although he could have destroyed his adversaries with the breath
of his mouth, yet he abased him self, even to extreme impotencie, and went
aparte privily from among the multitude: not because his nature feared death,
but to the end we might learn by his example not to tempte God, but to shun
the madness of such as are angry until their anger be somewhat assuaged. For,
Heavy (says Salamon) is a stone, and the sand weighty: but a fools wrath is
heuier then them both.

14. Afterward Jesus found him in the temple, and said unto him, Behold thou
art made whole: sin no more, lest a worse thing comme unto thee.

Afterward Jesus found him in the temple. Bv. Hitherto the truth of the miracle
has been dilligently discussed: and now Jesus shall be declared manifestly to
be the aucthour of the miracle. For Jesus offers him self again to the man
that was healed, more fully instructing him, that he is even the very same of
whom he received his health. C. It appears therefore that Christ did not
hyde him self for a time, that the remembrance of his benefit might perish:
for now of his own accord he openly showed him self. In the former place,
he meant to have the work only known, and now he would have him self
proclaimed to be the aucthour. B. lest the divine work should be
oppressed through envy, but being received (as it was meet) it might prove
unto the godly that he is the son of God, and so they might be confirmed in
the faith: but the wicked, to whom al things turn to the woorst, might be the
more blinded.

M. Let us note here into what places the Lord got him self, when he was come
to Jerusalem upon occasion of the feast days. Before, it is said that he
came to that famous Lazarhouse, in which lay a great multitude of sick
persons. Here also we see that he entered into the temple: of the which is
spoken before in the fourteen verse of the second chapter. The Temple was the
house of God, the house of faith, and the house of worship. To this place he
came, not to offer according to the law, The temple is the place of worship.
but to advance the kingdom of God: nevertheless, we are taught by his
example, to come into Ecclesiastical places with reverence, that in them with
the rest of the members of the Church we may exercise those things which belong
to piety, and to faith, and to charity toward our neighbor. Also it seems
that the man which was restored to health, went straight way after he was
healed, into the Temple, to give thanks to God, (from whom he knew all good
things, to come) for his health.

A. Let us also therefore learn to give condign thanks for those benefyts
which God bestows on us, lest the same ingratitude which was found in the
nine Lepers that were cleansed, Thanks giving for Gods benefits.
do make us altogether unworthy of the favor of God.

And said unto him, Behold thou art now made whole. M. He which has cured
the sick, admonishes those whom he has healed (after the manner of
Physicians) to preserve their received health by good diet, lest by sinning,
they loose that which they have received through grace. What is the meaning of
this else, then to desire that we may constantly and firmly retain that
benefit which we have received at his hands?

And in very deed Curates have need to be very vigilant, lest the grace
received, be lost again by negligence.

C. Christ therefore declares by these words, that we do abuse the benefits
of God, unless we be thankful for them. For Christ does not cast the man in
the teeth with that which he had given him: but does only teach that he is
therefore healed, that being mindful of the grace received, he may woorship God
his deliverer, all the days of his life. And to this end God has redeemed
us, and bestowed an infinite number of other beenefits upon us, that we might
be thankful unto him. Bv. Furthermore, Sin is the cause of sickness.
let us learn by these words of our savior Christ, that the vices of the
mind, are the cause of the diseases of the body for the most part. For the
Lord does often times scourge our sins with the whip of sickness and
corporal griefs. C. What evil soever therefore we suffer, we must impute the
same to our sins: for the calamities which are incident to men, come not by
chanes, but are the stripes of chastisement, as affirms the Apostle Paul. 1.
Cor. 11.3^
B. For although some have diseases even from their birth, which they seem not
as yet to have deserved, yet notwithstanding that natural sin which cleaves
so fast unto them is the cause thereof. For those diseases which God sends
unto his children, he lays on them, not only to bring them into the way by
chastisement, but also often times to keep them within the compass of their
duty, and also to drive them from heinous offenses. C. First of all therefore,
when we are sick, we must acknowledge the same to be the hand of God, and
not the stroke of blind fortune: secondly, we must know that he is our most
merciful father, who delights not in our miseries, and therefore he deals
not with us extremely, except our sins provoke him thereunto.

Bv. Moreover, Christ is a Physician of body and soul. Math. 9.5.
hereby we gather that the Lord Jesus does not only take away the diseases of
the body, but also cures the sickness of the soul. As may appear in the
curing of another man sick of the paulsey in the nienth of Matthew.

C. When Christ forbyddeth the man here to sin, he does not require that he
should be free from all sin, but it is a comparison of the former life. For
the Lord exhorts him ever after to repent, and not to continue still in
sin. Bv. Wherein is declared the use of Gods benefyts: for mortal men are
not restored to health, to riot and surfeit in eating and drinking, but to serve
God more devoutly.

Lest a worse thing. C. If so be God cannot prevail any thing with us by
stripes, by which he does gently chastise us as a most loving father does his
tender children, he is constrained to deal with us after another manner of
fashion. Therefore, he takes the rod and scourge in hand, Leui. 26.14 Deuteronomy.
28.15 Psalm. 32.9.
to tame and bridel our wildenes, even as he prononceth in the law. Therefore,
when we are daily corrected anewe, we ought to attribute the cause thereof to
stubbornnes. For we are not only like to unbroken horses and Mules, but we are
also more then untamed beasts.

R. The Lord complayneth by the mouth of the Prophet saying, The people
turns not unto him that smites them, Esaias. 9.13.
neither do they seek the Lord of hosts.

C. Wherefore, it is no marvel if the Lord do use more sharp punishements,
and do bruise them as it were with Iron Maules, which will not be converted by
mean punishment: for it is meet that he be broken like a potters vessel,
which will not suffer him self to be corrected. To be short, this is the use
of punishments, namelye, that we may be made more ware afterward.

M Also this is to be noted, that the life of this manne was not unknown to
Christ. If this man's life were not known unto him, being a stranger, what
shall we think of our life, which are under the profession of his name?

A. Let us learn therefore, to walk in the fear of the Lord, even as if we
were always before his eyes, as we are in deed. Psalm. 7.10
For he is a searcher of the heart and reins.

15. The man departed and told the Jews, that it was Jesus which had made
him whole.

B. This man went to the Jews no doubt, to commend Jesus as a man of God, and
as a prophet of all men to be reverenced.

Bv. For he thought it to be very necessary that he should be known unto
many, which could with his word heal a disease incurable, because others
which were also afflicted, might peradventure come unto him.

C. Therefore, by this his act he intended nothing less then to cause Christ to
be hated, and he little thought that men would have been so outrageous against
Christ:

CYR. but he manifested the Physician to the Jews, not to the end they
immagining any evil of him, should burden him with impiety, but to the end
they should not be ignorant of the Physician, if so be any of them had
need to be cured.

C. So that this his act proceeded of a godly affection, when he would have
the Physician to have his due honor.

B. But they, the more they felt and perceived the Lords deuinity, the more
they raged against him, Satan Gods enemy provoking them thereunto.

M. Last of al, we must note that they which have tasted of the grace and power
of Christ, and have known the heavenly savior, are of this mind, that they
cannot choose but to set forth his glory by whom they are saved: also they
seek through love to help their neighbors, being in misery and afflicted, in
showing unto them the Physician and savior by whom they may be healed.

Let us also follow this example, that we may declare his power which has
called us into his wonderful light: 1. Pet. 2.9.
and let us seek the profit of our neighbor.

16. And therefore did the Jews persecute Jesus, and sought the means to sley
him, because he had done these things on the Sabbath day.

Bv. Here the preposterous and counterfeit devotion of the Jews is touched,
who thought that Jesus had broken the Sabbath day, because he had healed the
man of the paulsey, and had commanded him to take up his bed, for which cause
they conspire to murder him, and burst forth into extreme madness.

M. But seeing by order men ought to consider what is done, rather then when
any thing is done, they should first have considered what the Lord had done,
and then afterward of the time when he had done it. But their hipocriticall
disposition does here appear: for they took it in very evil part that
Christ had done such things. Therefore, when they could not condemn the
deeds of Christ as they were done, they objected, the breaking of the
Sabbath: by which pretense they went about to extingush the light of Christ's
miracles.

Thus malice persecuteth, and goes about to extingush righteousness and
honesty, and the enemies of the glory of God, seek the death of the Son of
God. So he which is borne after the flesh, persecuteth him which is borne
after the spirit. But why did they not kill him? Because his hour was not yet
come. Gala. 4.29
In another place he says, I was daily with you in the temple and ye took me
not: Mat. 26.55
but this is your hour and the power of darcknes. Whatsoever the wicked Jews
went about before this hour, was altogether in vain. Our life is not in the
hands (...) the wick^
Even so in like manner our life is not in the hand of the wicked, but in the
hand of God, insomuch that what soever they practice they cannot prevail, but
do only bewray their malice, and trouble them selves with vain counsels.
Herevppon the Prophet says, Psalm. 37.
The ungodly sees the righteous, and seeks occasision to flea him: but the
Lord will not deliver him in to his hand.

B. To conclude, it appears what it is to be a captive to Satan. Let us not
then marueyle, if so be the world at any time do persecute us for our well
doing. Satan is the enemy of God: and where he perceives most godlynes,
there he most rages.

17. And Jesus answered them, My Father works hitherto, and I work.

M. Thus far forth the Evangelist has noted the Supersticion, malice, and
cruel dealing of the Jews: and now he comes to the Appollogie of Christ: in
the which it is wonderful that the most meek and gentle Lord would
vouchsafe to answer these blind and perverse men to so dishonest and shameful
a Cavil, and not only to answer unto it, but also to reveal unto them the
misterye of the dispensation, and of his divine power. But this was not done
for the wicked cauillers sake to satisfy them, but for the peoples sake, which
attended upon him to be taught. Furthermore it was done, that we might learn
truth out of the mouth of the Lord to confirm and stay our faith.

C. Let us therefore see what kind of defense it is which Christ uses. He
does not answer, that the Law concerning the observation of the Sabbath was
temporal, and now to be taken away: but rather denies that he has broken
the law, because that which he had done was a divine work. That was a
shadowed Ceremonye, the which Christ ended by his coming (as the Apostle
teaches) but the whole state of the cause does not consist in this point.
Colo. 2.16.
For men are commanded to cease from their works only: and therefore
Circumcision which was a divine work, and not of men was not against the
Sabbath. Christ stands upon this point that the Sabbath, or holy rest, which
Moses commanded, was not broken by divine works. And by this reason he
does not only excuse his own deed, but him also, which took up his bed on
his neck: for it was an appendix, or as it were a part of the Miracle, because
it was nothing but an approbation of the same.

Furthermore, if so be the thanksegeuing be reckened among the works of God,
and the setting forth of his glory also, then it was not the profanation of
the Sabbath, to testifye the grace of God by feet or hands. Notwithstanding,
Christ speaks specially of him self, whom the Jews envied more than any
other.

Nevertheless, he testifyeth that the health which he had restored to the
sick person, was a proof of his divine power. He preaches him self to be
the son of GOD, and that his Father and he work all one manner of way:
PAR, as if he should say, As the Father because of the observation of the
Sabbath, on the which he is said to rest from the workemanshippe of the world,
ceasseth not to do good daily to mortal men, and to all other creatures:
even so I which am his son, having power and example from him to work those
things which pertain to the health of mankind, am not let by the observation
of the sabbath, to finishe those things which my Father has commanded.

CYR. For because the son is of the same nature that the Father is of, and
differreth nothing from him in unity of substance, therefore he cannot will
any thing contrary to the will of his father. For he is the living counsel,
and the subsisting power of his Father, and therefore he works all things
with the father. Bv. If therefore the father by preserving, governing, and
blessing, does not break the rest of the Sabbath, neither did Christ violate
the Sabbath in doing good to the miserable man. C. In six days the creation
of the world was finished, but the government thereof is perpetual, and GOD
does continuallye work in preserving and maintaining the order thereof. C.
Even as the Apostle teaches saying, Act. 17.28. Psalm. 104.29.
In him we live, move, and have our being.

Bv. So that place commends unto us Gods divine providence. Therefore when
thou see the Sun rising, the course of the Moon, and of the Stars,
Wells, Ryuers, the force of nature in seeds, and the increase of our bodies,
and of the bodies of brute Beasts, consider then the providence of God, and
the continual working of the father and the son. C Neither does God by his
general providence only defend the nature which he has created, but does
order and frame every part thereof. But especially he defends and
preserves the faithful, whom he takes into his protection. When he says,
And I work. He chalengeth unto him self that which is proper unto the
diuinitye: Heb. 1.3.
even as also the Apostle says, that he sustayneth all things by his
mighty power.

CHAPTER Therefore to the end thou might understand the son to be the
creator, and not the creature, he brought not an example of the working
creature, but of the father which has created al things. C. And therefore he
affyrmeth him self to be God, that being manifested in the flesh, he might
perform the office of Christ: so he affyrmeth that he came from Heaven,
because he would have men principally to know wherefore he descended into
the earth.

18. Therefore the Jews sought the more to kill him, not only because he had
broken the Sabbath, but said also that God was the Father, and made him self
equal with God.

Therefore the Jews sought. Bv. The minds of the Jews were so far from
being mitigated by the Apology or defense of Jesus, that they were the more
exasperate and outrageous, laying unto his charge not only the breach of the
Sabbath, but also blasphemy, for the which cause they thought him worthy to be
put to death, because he compared his works with the works of God, and
boasted him self to be the son of God, and so equal with GOD in all
things. C. But Christ was not ignorant of their malignaunt and dishonest
dealing, and of their steelye and flintye obstinacy: but he principally sought
for this, that he might profit that small number of the Godly, which were
there present, then, that he might be wray unto all men their incurable malice.

And he has taught us by his example that we ought never to give place to the
furor of the wicked, but to seek to maintain Gods truth, so far forth as
necessitye shall require in despite of the whole world. Neither is there any
cause why the servants of Christ should be grieved, if so be they profit not
all men, when as Christ him self the only begotten son of God, obtained
not thus much.

Bv. This is, also to be noted that the Jews well understood that Jesus did
not so call God his father, as we men call God our father. For ye Jews
themselves say afterward, we have one Father, John. 8^
even God, neither do they think that they offended any thing at all therein.
And in another place it is said, Iere. 3^
I am Isreal's Father, and Ephraim is my first begotten son. But Jesus called
God his Father after a certain singular fashion, namelye, because he was
naturally begotten of the Father from everlasting, to be the proper, natural,
and only begotten Son of God, coequall with the Father in all things, of
the same essence, glory, and power, and not his adopted son, as all the
Saints are called the sons of God. AV. Whereupon it is added.

And made him self equal with God. Otherwise we say all, Our Father which
art in heaven. Math. 6.^
We read also that the Jews said, Esa. 63.16.
Seeing thou art our Father. Therefore they were not angerye, because he said
that God was his Father, but because he did so call him after a far other
manner than men do. Behold the Jews understand that which the Arrians
understand not, who so confessed Christ to be GOD, that they did not
acknowledge him to be equal with his Father: as though there could be found
any inequallitye in one simple essence of God. AV. Therefore he being in the
form of GOD, Philip. 2.6.
thought it no robberye to be equal with God, that is to say, but he was in
that, in the which he was borne, because the Father had begotten him equal.

19. Then answered Jesus and said unto them, Verylye, verily, I say unto
you, the son can do nothing of him self, but that he sees the Father do:
for whatsoever he does, that does the son also.

Then answered Jesus, and said: C. That which the Jews objected, though it
were sclaunderous, yet notwithstanding, Christ is so far from confuting the
same, that he openly affirms it to be true. Bv. For he proves by strong
arguments, that he is the natural son of God, equal to the Father in all
things, M. affirming that his works are none of his, but the works of his
father, and that therefore the Sabbath is not broken by them. Neither does he
simplye affirm this, but that which is more, namely that it cannot be that the
Son should do any thing that the father does not. C. And first of all, he
stands upon this point, that the same was a divine work which the Jews
found fault withal, to the end they might know that they must contend
with God, if so be they condemn that, which of necessity must be ascribed
unto him.

John. 6.38.
B. And now these words, The son can do nothing of him self, I seek not
mine own will. Also, If I bear witness of my self, my witness is not true,
are spoken by imitation. Hitherto the Lord imitated the Jews, who thought him
not to be all one with the father, and yet notwithstanding he was of some
substance with the father, and made man after the will of his father, insomuch
that he neither thought nor did any thing, which was not both the will and work
of his father. Also this place the Arrian has abused, seking to prove hereby
that the son is less then the father. But there is no mention here made of
the bare divinity of Christ: neither does that which follows symplye belong
to the eternal word of God: but does only belong to the son of God, in
that he was manifested in the flesh. And his purpose is to declare by these
words, that they do greatly err, which think that they have to do with a
mortal man, when they accuse Christ concerning divine works. For this cause
he so vehemently affirms that he and his father wrought this work jointly
together. Bv. And, lest any man should imagine any other infirmity or
imbecillitie in the son, he adds by interpretation, saying: For whatsoever
he does, that does the son also: to the end that nothing might be left to
the working father, which the son in like manner works not.

M. This place ought well to be wayed and considered of us, to this end that
we might hear and way whatsoever our savior Christ has said or don, not as
the words and deeds of a man, but as the words of God the Father, that we
may know that the Father does speak and work in Christ.

20. For the father loves the son, and shows him all things that he him
self does: and he will show him greater things then these, because ye
should marvel.

For the Father loves. M. He speaks after the manner of men of Divine
matters, the which notwithstanding can never be properlye, and fullye set
forth by humane things. For who is so senseless, that he knows not how
weak, imperfect, and corrupt fatherlye love is, in humane nature, nor like in
any point almost to that divine love which GOD bears toward his son: and
yet notwithstanding, he has taken an argument from the same of his Fathers
love toward him: even as in another place speaking of the ungodly, Luke 11.13.
says: If ye, being evil, know how to give good things unto your
children, how much more shall your heavenly Father give his good spirit, to
those that ask the same? C. But Christ speaks here as a mediator, least any
man should refer it to that internal love of the diuinitye. For it agrees
very well, that Christ having taken upon him our flesh, should be loved of
his father. Yea, we know that he was disceuered as well from Angels, as from
men by this notable title, This is my beloved son. etc. For we know that
Christ, Mat. 3.17. Mat. 17.5.
in whom the whole love of God should rest, was elected, that from thence, as
from a flowing well, it might flow unto us. For Christ is loved of the father,
as he is the head of the Church. He teaches that this love is the cause why
the father brings all things to pass by his hands. Gods love comes to us
by Christ.
For when he says here that the father shows all things unto him, he
means that he does communicate all things with him. As if he should say.
As the father has made me partaker of his mind, so also he has powered
upon me his power, that in my works, the glory of GOD may shine: yea, and to
the end that men might seek for no Divine thing, which they should not find
in me. And verylye without Christ, Gods power shall be sought in vain.

CYR. Therefore the father shows unto the son those things which he
does, not as painted or written in Tables, or as teaching him being ignorant:
(for the son knows all things as God) but so expressing him self whollye
in the nature of his son, that whatsoever he has in him self, he shows
the same in his son.

Therefore it is said, Mat. 11.27.
No man knows the Father but the Son: and no man knows the Son but the
Father.

R. Therefore, if thou will know and understand the secrets of the father,
make haste to the Son, Heb. 1.3.
who is the lyuelye and express Image of the father. For the judgments of
God are unsearchable, and his ways can not be found out: but yet in Christ,
Romans 11.3^
and by Christ, his judgments are known, and his ways manifest unto us.

And he will show him greater things. M. This is to be understood of those
things which Christ did at that time, and which he intended to do afterward
until his ascension. C. For he declares by these words, that the miracle
which he had showed in healing the sick man, was not the cheifest of those
works which the father had committed unto him. For we must note that he had
given there a taste only of that grace, of the which he was properly both a
Minister and the aucthour, namelye, that he might restore life unto the world.

B. Therefore, where he speaks here of greater things, he means, the
raising again of men from death to life: the which was a lively Image, both of
the general resurrection of all men, which should be in the latter day, and
also of the internal justification of the elect by faith: both which we shall
enjoy by his power, as hereby he has declared: What greater works than
these, can the father do?

Because ye should marvel. Here he does give a secret nyp, to their
ingratitude, because they despised that so manifest a show token of the power
of God: As if he should say, Although ye be dull and senseless, yet those
things which God shall do hereafter by me, shall make ye to maruayle, whether
ye will or no. Notwithstanding, this seems not to be fulfilled, seeing ye
know that in seeing, they saw not, according to the saying of the Prophet.
Answer is made, Esaias. 6.9.
that Christ spoke not here of their affection, but only noted how
magnificently he would within a while after declare him self to be the Son
of God.

M. Wherefore he said not, That ye might believe, but he said, That ye
might marvel: because the wicked, of whom he speaks here, would easylye
be caused to wonder, but would not in any wise be brought to faith. They
maruayled when Lazarus being raised up, they said, This man does many signs:
Ioh. 11.47
but they did not hereupon by and by, believe on him, but consulted the more to
kill him.

AVG. They maruailed therefore, but they were not converted. M. But this kind
of admiracion brought to pass that they had no excuse for their malice and
impietye, as we shall see in the two and twentye verse of the fifteen Chapter
following.

21. For likewise as the Father raises up the dead, and quickens them: even
so the Son quickens whom he will.

For as the Father rayseth up. Bv. By evident acts, or by operation he
proves, that the Father, and the Son, do all one thing, and are therefore
equal in the unity of substance, being one true God.

C. Therefore, briefelye he here declares, what office was committed unto him
of the Father. For although he seems to chose one kind, yet
notwithstanding, his Doctrine is general, in the which he Preaches him self
to be the aucthour of life. For it contains in it, Life, Righteousness, all
the gifts of the holy Ghost, and all the parts of our Salvation. Bv. As if
he should say, It is proper to the higher substance, to raise from the dead,
to preserve, and to quicken: but I raise from the dead, preserve, and quicken:
I differ nothing therefore from the substance of the Father. Yea, by what
means and power soever the Father does quicken, by the same do I make alive
also. But we must note how Christ brings life unto us: for he found us
all dead, therefore we must needs begin at the resurrection. Nevertheless,
it is not superfluous, that he joins these two words, to raise, and to
quicken, together: because it is not sufficient that we are delivered from
death, except Christ fullye, and perfectlye restore unto us, life. M.
Furthermore, we ought not to gather out of these words, that the father
rayseth up some, and the Son othersome from death, when as they are not
only equal, but also do work a like, as is said before. Whereupon, John.
11.41
when he raised up Lazarus, he lifting up his eyes toward Heaven, gave
thanks to his heavenly Father, to the end we may behold in that work, not
only the power of the son, but the power of the Father also. Bv. This
Parcel, Whom he will, does challenge unto the Son, not only full and
free power, but also notes the order of redemption and Salvation. C. For he
makes not this life appertayning to all men, but signifies that he does
specially bestow this grace upon the elect. Thhe believing are the elect.
Bv. And they are the elect and chosen of God which believe. A. Therefore as
Christ when he was upon the earth, could have raised all the dead to life
again, if it had so pleased him, and yet notwithstanding, Math. 9.
is read to have raised only a few (as Iairous Daughter, the Widows son,
and Lazarus): Luke. 7. John. 11.
even so, although he has free and full power in him self, to quicken, yet
notwithstanding, he uses the same only toward the elect: for the Son
quickens whom he will.

22. Neither Judges the Father any Man: but has committed all Judgment to
the Son.

C. Now he more plainlye expounds the whole, affyrming that the Father in
the person of the Son does govern the world, and by the same rules all
things. B. For it is meet that as God made all things by his word, even so
also he does judge, rule and govern all things by the same.

C. For the Evangelist takes judgment for Rule, and Power, according to the
Phrase of the Hebrewe tongue. Now we have the same, namelye, that Christ
has received the Kingdom of Heaven, of the Father, to govern and rule Heaven
and Earth at his pleasure. A. For all things are given to him of the Father.
Also, all power is given to him in Heaven, Mat. 11.27
and in earth. C. But this is not spoken so much in respect of GOD, Mat. 28.18
as of men, least any man should Imagine that the Father having resigned his
imperial right, should be idle as a private man in Heaven. But there is
nothing changed in the Father, in that he has made Christ, King, and Lord
of all: Christ Lord of Heaven and earth, with the Father. Colo. 1.15.
for he is in the Son, and works in him. But so soon as we seek to
ascend unto GOD, all our senses fail us: Christ is set before our eyes, as
the liuelye invisible Image of God: in whose face GOD the Father, (who
otherwise is far from us) appears unto us, least the bare Majesty of GOD,
by his exceeding brightness should overcome us.

M. But the Bishop of Rome, that Antichrist, the Son of perdition, does
not without blasphemye, challenge to him self this power, of judging all men,
and with great impudencye, being a sinful man, neither Judging iustlye, nor
being exempted iustlye from the judgment of other men, The B^shoppe o^ Rome
(...) blaspheme^
says that he ought to be judged of no man. A. This is his Sacrilegious
Tyrranny, by which he is not ashamed, to take that to him self, which
belongs only to the Son of God. As though Christ ascending into Heaven,
had utterly forsaken this office, and ought not rather to raygne until he
have put all his enemies under his feet.

M. If therefore Christ be appointed of the Father, Psalm. 110.1.
to be the Judge of all men, 1. Cor. 15.25
he must needs be most wise, and such a one as no man can deceive.
Herevppon he is said to be a knower of secreetes, and a searcher of hearts,
M. that we having gotten such a Judge, may learn to walk before him all
the days of our life, in sinceritye of the heart, even as if we were always
before his face, and in his sight.

23. Because that all men should honor the Son: even as they honor the
Father, He that honors not the Son, the same honors not the Father,
which has sent him.

Because that all men. R. As the father has given all power of Judgment to
the son, so he will be honored in the person of his son. C. For he does
not so reign in the person of Christ, as though he him self lived idelye in
heaven, as slothful Kings are wount to do, but because he might declare his
mighty power and presence in Christ. For what other thing signifies these
words, Because that all men should honor the son, then that the father
would be known and woorshipped in the Son? God the Father in Christ.
Therefore, it is our part to seek God the father in Christ, there to
behold his power, and there to worship him. For the father has wholly poured
him self into the son. To what end? Surely to the end that al men might
honor the Son: that is to say, that whosoever will attain to salvation in
God, worship God, and believe in God, he might do this by his son Christ.
For no man can obtain salvation in God, without Christ, Salvation only in
Christ.
because Gods saving health is placed wholly in Christ.

In like manner, no man can worship God, but by Christ, because Christ is the
wisdom, and power of God. Moreover, John. 10.9. John. 14.9
no man can believe in God, but by Christ, because Christ is the Door, the
way, the truth, and the life. Wherefore, He that honoreth not the son, the
same honoreth not the Father.

C. All men will confess that God ought to be worshipped: insomuch that we
have this feeling and understanding ingraffed in us by nature, there is no man
that dare deny this honor unto God. Yet nevertheless men's minds err and go
astraie in seking after God.

Hereuppon come so many false Gods: hereuppon comes such abominable
Idolatry. Therefore we shall find the true God no where else then in Christ,
neither shall we otherwise rightly worship him then in kissing his dear son,
Psalm. 2.12.
as the Prophet David teaches.

Bv. Therefore if any man would worship the father without the Son, (as do
the Jews and Turks) as though he had not a son like and coequall with him
in all things, he misseth the worship of the father. For he cannot be a
father, which wants a son.

R. We must note therefore, that the name of God, when it is separated from
Christ, is nothing else but a vain fantasy and Imagination. Wherefore,
whosoever he be that desires to have his worship acceptable unto the true
God, let him not depart from Christ.

R. For whosoever rejects Christ by infidelity, rejects God. The Ethnicke
also affirms that he worshippeth God the creator of heaven and earth: the
Jew also says the like of him self, and the wicked man which is a Christian
only in name, braggeth of the same: but because Christ to the Ethnike is
foolishnes, to the Jew an offense, and to the wicked contempt, 1. Cor. 1 23.
none of them do truly believe in God, neither truly worship God: for he will
not be worshipped but by Jesus Christ. C. Whereupon the Evangelist Saint John
says in his Epistle, 1. Ioh. 2.22.
The same is Antechriste which denies the father and the son.

And the Apostle Paul writes that it is the will of God that every tongue
shall confess that the Lord is Jesus Christ to the glory God the father.
Philip. 2.11
C. Neither was the condition of the fathers otherwise under the Law. For
although they had an obscure sight of Christ under shadows, yet
notwithstanding, God never revealed him self without Christ. But now, so soon
as Christ was exhibited in the flesh, and was appointed to be our King, all
the world ought to have submitted it self unto him, as unto God the Father.
For seeing the father has commanded him to sit on his right hand, whatsoever
he be that imagines a God without Christ, he maymeth one half of him. R. But
what honor is that which appertains to the son? It follows.

24. Verily, Verylye, I say unto you, He that hears my word, and
beeleeueth on him that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come into
Judgment, but is escaped from death to life.

Verily, Verily, I say unto you. C. Here is expressed what manner of honor
is required, lest any manne should think that the same consists in some
external right only, or in vain ceremonies. R. For Christ seeks not
external honor, which superstitious men give unto him: but he seeks for
faith, because to believe, is to give the greatest honor that may be to the
father and the son.

The Gospel is the the Scepter of Christ.
C. Whereupon, the doctrine of the Gospel is as a Scepter unto Christ, by
which he governs the faithful whom the father has made subject unto him.
And this definition is first of all worthy to be noted. Nothing is more
usual and common then the false profession of Christianisme. For the Papists
which are the most sworn enemies unto Christ, do notwithstanding too
impudently brag and boast of his name, but here Christ requires of us no
other honor, then that we should obey his Gospel. Whereupon it follows,
that what honor soever hipocrits give unto Christ, it is nothing else but a
Judas kiss. How often times soever they call him a king, they do nothing but
spoil him of his kingdom and power, so long as they believe not the gospel.

M. Therefore, he which hears not the word of Christ (that is to say,
which receives it not as the word of the son of God sent into this world,
of the father for our salvation) he it is which greatly dishonors the son
and the Father. Ioh. 4.44
He said that a Prophet was not without honor saving in his own country. It
is a Discredit to the Prophet sent of God, if so be his word be not believed.
And in another place this discredit is said to be unbelief, the which happened
to the son of God among the Nazarites.

R. Moreover, Mar. 6.6.
because to believe seems to many to be a thing so easy, (In so much that they
think they believe when they only hear this name, thinking that to believe,
is nothing else then to understand, to remember, to know, and to think).
Faith is not an opinion.
M. we must note that to believe Christ, is by faith to receive his word:
and to believe the father, is to believe that he sent his son into this
world to be the redeemer of the same. Therefore, we must believe God, not
symplye as God, (of the which faith the Jews brag) but as the father in the
son, and as the sender in him that sent. He which wants this faith, may be
reckened among the blinded Jews, and not among Christians.

He that hears my word, Bv. Therefore, the first thing in the order of
salvation and justification is to hear the word, but not every ones word,
but the words of Christ only our Iustifier and savior. And herein is
required preaching. To. 10.14.
For how shall they hear with out a preacher? It is necessary therefore, that
the word of Christ do make us ready to hear: when as the Inventions of men,
and the constitutions of the fathers are excluded. For faith cleaves to the
word of God, and not to the word of men. C. Christ afterward commends the
fruit of obedience, saying, Has everlasting life, Life eternal the fruit of
faith.
to the end we might be the more ready and willing to perform the same.

For who can be so flinty hearted, but that he can be contented willingly to
submit him self unto Christ, when he sees the reward of everlasting life
set before him? And yet notwithstanding we see, how few he wins unto him
by this clemency. Such is our wickedness that we had rather willingly
perish, then to give our selves to the obedience of the son of God, that
through him we might be saved. Furthermore, the aucthoritye of the Gospel is
confirmed by these words of our savior Christ.

For Christ testifies that he came from God, and not from man. Even as in
another place he affirms that he speaks not of him self, but that which
the Father has committed unto him.

Ioh. 14.10
M. And it ought not to deminish any thing of the sons honor, that he is
sent of the father: (as the Ambassador of the Emperor is inferior to him
that sent him) Bv. But in that the son is sent, it belongs rather to
dispensation then to Imbecillitie. M. The Ambassador has deservedly less
honor then the Emperor, because he is neither the Son, nor the Lord, nor
yet of such power as the Emperor is, but a Minister and a servant. But Christ
was sent into this world not as a servant of his Lord, but as a son of his
father: not as one of less power, but as his equal in all things: not as of
another nature and substance, but as coequall and coeternall with him in every
condition, Christ equal to the father touching the Godhead.
and therefore worthy to be no less honored then the father, if the father
had taken upon him our flesh, and descended from heaven, as he has done.
Bv. For therefore the father sent the eternal word, that in him he might
manifestlye declare him self unto us. For the son is a most proper Character
of the Fathers substance. Heb. 1.3.


AVG. Therefore, the Son is sent of the father, but not separated from the
father.

And shall not come into judgment. M. Because God has not sent his son into
the world to Judge the world, but that the world might be saved through him,
John. 3.17
Christ here confirms the sentence going before concerning eternal life.
Math. 1.21
For he came to save his people from their sins. And sins being taken
away, the power of death is at an end, Romans 6.23. 1. Cor. 15.56
because the reward of sin is death, and the sting of death is sin.

C. We therefore are out of the peril of death, because we are delivered by
the benefit of Christ: Bv. as the Apostle teaches in the eight chapter to
the Romans.

But is escaped from death to life. Our savior Christ does not without deep
consideration affirm, that we are alredye escaped from death because the seed
of life by which we are called, 1. Pet. 1.23.
is incorruptible in the Sons of God, and because they are already through
hope with Christ in the heavenly glory, Ephe. 2.6. Luke 17.21
and also have within them the kingdom of God. For although their life is
hidden with God in Christ, Colos. 3.3
yet notwithstanding, they cease not to possess the same through faith: and
in that they are delivered from death, and do know them selves to be in
safetye through the protection of Christ, they do not therefore, cease to be in
peace. Nevertheless, let us remember that the faithful are so in life in this
present world, that they always carrye about with them the matter or cause of
death. But the spirit which dwells in them is life, which at the length shall
abolishe the relics of death. 1. Cor. 15 26
For that saying of Paul is most true, The last enemy that shall be destroyed is
death. And yet in this place the full deliverance from death, or the perfect
exhibition of life is not handeled. But although that life is but begone in us,
yet nevertheless, Christ pronounces the same to be so certain to the
faithful, that they ought not to be afraid of death: and no marvel, they
being ingraffed in him which is the bottomless well of life.

M. This place also makes very much to the confuting of their opinion, which
most impudently affirm, that the souls of such as dye, dye together with
their bodies: and of their opinion also which say that they sleep after death
until the day of judgment. For that which Christ speaks here, cannot be
understood of the body, The soul passes from death to life.
(because it passes from death to the grave) but of the soul, which passes
from the death of the body to life. Even as Christ in plain words said to
the Thief, This day shall thou be with me in Paradise. And the Apostle Paul
says, Luke 23.43 Philip. 1.23
I desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ: evidently showing that it
will come to pass, that he should be in spirit with Christ, so soon as he
should be discharged and loosed from the bonds of the body. Otherwise Christ
lived in him, insomuch that he had no need so greatly to desire the
dissolution of the body to this thing, Galat. 2.10
except he had believed that his spirit, being entered after death into
everlasting life, should speedyly come unto Chiste.

A Howbeit, this place ought properlye to be understood and expounded of that
escaping and passage from death to life, which is by faith, as we have declared
alredye. Bv. For so soon as a man truly believes the word of Christ, he
passes from death to life: Christ begins to live in him, which is the life
of the soul.

R. Therefore death in the faithful shall be swallowed up, and made the gate to
life.

25. Verylye, Verylie I say unto you, the hour shall come, and now is when
the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God: and they that hear shall
live.

Verily Verily J say unto you, the hour shall come. M. Now again the
third time he uses this earnest affirmacion, which greatly expresses his
mind: first of all speaking not only seriously, and constantly, but also of
serious, certain, and and weighty matters: secondly, requiring of the hearers
an undoubted faith also. C. For the Evangelist so often times setting before us
the son of God swearing in the cause of our salvation, we may thereby
perceive first of all, how careful he is for us: and secondly, how needful
it is that the credit of the Gospel be established and confyrmed.

The effect of faith, of the which Christ here speaks, seems to be
incredible.

Therefore, by an oath he affirms that the voice of his Gospel is of such
quickening power, that it is able to raise up the dead. B. There are some
which understand this word of Christ, of the resurrection or life of men's
bodies, and go about to prove the same by the example of Lazarus, and of the
widows son: C. but it is evident enough by ye text, that Christ does
speak of spiritual death. First of al, Christ admonishes us that we are all
dead, before he does quicken us. And hereby it appears what the whole nature
of man is able to do, concerning the attaynyng to salvation. It is very true
that there remains in the soul of man, some remnant of life (for
understanding, judgment, will, and all the senses are parts of life) but
because there is no part which may aspire to life eternal, it is no marvel
if the whole man, so far forth as appertains to the kingdom of God, be
counted dead. And of this death the Apostle speaks in more words, when he
says, that we were far from the pure and sincere reason of the mind, and in
the cogitacion of our hearts enemies to God, and his righteousness, and being
blind, erred in darcknesse, and were given to evil concupiscence. If this
corrupt nature have no strength to attain to righteousness, it follows that
the life of God is extinguished in us. The grace of Christ ye resurrection from
death
And so the grace of Christ is the true resurrection from death. Also this
grace is given to us by the Gospel. Not that the external preaching of the
same is of such force, (which often times goes in at one ear, and comes
out at the other) but because Christ speaks within to our hearts by his holy
Spirit, that we may by faith receive the life offered unto us. R. Therefore to
hear the voice of the Son of God, is not only to hear those carnal words
with our bodilye ears, but to believe with ye heart. Wherefore, they that
believe are justified. For to believe with the heart makes a man righteous.
Faith justifies. Romans 10.10 Genesis 15.6. Abacc. 2.4.
Also it is said, Abraham believed God, and that was imputed to him for
righteousness. Again it is said the just shall live by faith. For Christ
does not speak here of dead men, but he only understands the elect, whose
ears God does open, that they may receive the voice of his Son, which can
restoore them to life. Yea Christ distinctly in his words commends unto us
two kinds of grace, when he says, that the dead shall hear the voice of the
son of God, Two kinds of grace.
and live. For it is no less against nature for the dead to hear, then to be
restoared to life from which they were fallen. Therefore both these belong to
the secret powere of God. A. For experience teaches us that the Reprobates
have eyes, Esaias. 6.9.
but yet they cannot see, they have also ears, but yet they cannot hear: and
the Gospel of Christ is to the^ a savior of death unto death. 2. Co. 2.16.
When he says, The hour shall come, and now it is, he speaks as of an
unwonted and strange thing. And verily the preaching of the Gospel was the
new and sudden resurrection of the world. A. Whereupon when Christ taught,
Mar. 1.17.
many said, What new doctrine is this? And Paul Preaching the resurrection
of the dead, some said, Acts. 17.18.
This man seems to be a tydinges bringer of new Deuilles.

C. If any man demand whether the word of God has not always given life to
men, answer may be made, that the Doctrine of the Law and the Prophets,
being ordained for Gods people, had rather this propertye and office to
maintain those in life which were begotten to GOD, The office of the law and
gospel.
then to reduce from death. But the office of the Gospel was to bring the
Gentiles, which before were banished men from the kingdom of God, enemies to
God, and void of all hope of salvation, into the society of life: R. as also
the Apostle teaches in his Epistle to the Ephesians. Ephe. 2.11.


26. For as the Father has life in him self: so likewise has he given to
the Son to have life in him self.

M. In these words he gives a reason, why he said that the dead should be
raised up and quickened by the voice of the Son of God, C. and withal he
shows whereof it comes that his voice has so great efficacye: namelye,
because he is the well of life, and pours the same into men, by his voice.

For life could not flow unto us out of his mouth, except the cause and
original thereof were in him. Neither is God said to have life in him, only
because he alone lives by his own proper power and virtue, but because he
containing in him self the fullness of life, quickens all things. And this
belongs properlye to God alone, even as it is said, With thee is the well
of life. Psalm. 36.9.


Hereby we gather that this title is properlye ascribed unto Christ, in that
he was manifested in the flesh, M. and this he received of the Father, when
the word was made flesh. John. 1.14
Therefore in that he is the son of God, he has all things of him self:
but in that he is the son of man, he has received all things from the
Father.

27. And he has given him power also to judge, because he is the son of man.

And he has given him power. C. Again he repeateth that power is given to him
of the father, that he might have full power of all things both in Heaven and
in earth: for this word (Judge) is taken for rule and empire, as before. But
we must principallye note the reason which he now adds, Because he is the
son of man.

M. To be the son of man, according to the phrase of Scripture, is nothing
else than to be a very man, even as in that he is said to be the son of
God, is meant that he is very God: for every one is that naturallye which he
is, when he is borne. C. The meaning of Christ is, that he came forth unto
men, adorned with such power, that he might communicate and bestow that upon
them which he had received of his Father. And in that he is man, he was
ordained by the Father, to be the aucthour of life, least we should seek him
a far of. For Christ has not received any thing whereof he him self stood
in need: but rather to make us ritche with his abundaunt treasure.

The sum and meaning is, that in the man Christ, the same is revealed unto us
which was hidden in God: and the life which men before could not attain unto
is now at hand. M. Also it is worthy to be noted, that when he might have
said, Because he is man, he chose rather to say, Because he is the son of
man.

Let this serve our faith against those which teach that Christ took flesh,
not of the vyrgin Mary, that is to say, of the seed of Abraham, (which the
whole Scripture teaches) but that he brought the same with him from heaven.
But Christ here plainelye calls him self the Son of man, and not man only.

28. Marvel not at this: for the hour shall come, in the which all that are
in the graves, shall hear his voice.

Marvel not at this. B. It was great and wonderful which Christ arrogated to
him self, the admiration whereof that he might somewhat diminishe, and might
cause the same to be believed, he affyrmed that he would do that which was
much more wonderful, namelye, that he would with his voice, that is to say,
with his power, raise all the dead to life in the last day.

R. Before he spoke of the resurrection which is by faith, Resurrection by fa^
and the resurrection by the fle^
which is by justification, and now he speaks of the flesh.

C. But he seems to reason very vnfitlye, when he brings the confirmation
of that which he had spoken before from the last resurrection.

To this, answer may be made, Aunsvvere.
that there is not here of the matter it self comparison made which is
greater, and which is less, but of humane sense and understanding. For men (as
they are carnal) do wonder at nothing but that which is external and
visible. Herevppon it comes that they careleslye omit the resurrection of the
soul, but have the resurrection of the flesh in great admiration. Moreover,
this our gross desire brings to pass that those things do make more to the
confirmation of faith, which are seen with the eye, than those things which
may be conceived by faith only. Because he speaks now of the last day,
he adds not this restraint, And now it is, as he does before, in the five
and twentye verse: but does simplye pronounce that the time shall come.

Jn the which they that are in the graves. M. This is not so to be stretched,
that we should understand that they only shall be raised up in the latter day,
whose bodies are buried in Graves and Sepulchers: and to exclude those, which
either are drowned in the water, burnt to Ashes in the fire, or devoured of
wyld Beasts, as we have read of diverse Christian Martyrs, who have thus ended
their lives.

C. But because the dead are commonly for the most part buried, by a figure
called Synecdoche, he understands all which were dead, and this is of
greater force, than if he had said the dead only.

Shall hear his voice. M. By these few words the faith of Christians is
deserved from the faith of the Jews. For the Jews believe the general
resurrection of our bodies: but they do not believe that the same shall be by
the power of the voice of Christ the son of God. But this is here plainly
affyrmed in these words, when he says, Shall hear his voice. This voice the
Apostle attributes to the Archangel, as to the Minister of Christ, 1 Thessalonians. 4
16.
saying: For the Lord him self shall descend from heaven in a shoute, and in
the voice of the Archangell, and in the Trumpe of God: and the dead in Christ
shall rise first.

For this work he shall bring to pass and finishe by his power, Mat. 12.30.
Mat. 24.31
but yet he will use the Ministerye of Aungelles, as appears in Matthew: And
the Apostle makes mention of the last Trumpe, at the sound whereof the dead
shall rise.

Therefore the voice of Christ is that Angelical Trumpet, which by the name
and power of Christ shall raise up the dead. Even as that is the voice of the
King which is proclaimed by the Harold in the Kings name, so is that the voice
of Christ, which by the Gospel of grace is preached throughout the whole world
in the name of Christ.

M. Also this is not slightly to be passed over, that the hour of the last
Judgment is said to come. The last day of judgment.
This Judgment, while we are seeking to enjoy the vanitye of this world, and
spend the time, comes on a pace. Let us therefore be careful and vigilaunt
in the exercise of godliness, first because we hear that the hour of
Judgment shall come, secondlye, because we know not the time thereof. A. The
which two things are to be considered, Luke 21.36.
that we may learn how we ought to stand before the son of man. For we
must all be brought before the Tribunal seat of Christ, that every man may
receive the works of his body according to that he has done, whether it be
good or bad: as Christ consequently shows saying.

29. And shall come forth, they that have done good unto the resurrection of
life, and they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of dampnation.

And shall come forth. R. Because the resurrection of the flesh is common to
all men, as well to the ungodly as to the Godly, Christ now makes a
difference, speaking of the state of both in this resurrection: and be
points out the faithful by their good works, even as he teaches in a
another place that Mat. 7.7.
the Tree may be known by his fruit.

And he commends their works in the which they began to exercise themselves
from the time of their calling.

For the Thief, to whom Christ promised life, which all his life time was
given to wickedness aspired at the last cast to godliness. But because he is
become a new man, and begins of a bondeslaue of sin to be a servant of
righteousness, God calls not the whole raze of his former life to an account.

Moreover those sins which the godly daily commit, are not imputed to the^.
For without pardon and forgiveness, there was never any man in the whole
world, which can be thought to have lived well. Good works without grace, are
evil works.
Nay, there can be no good work reckened to be in any man, but in him alone,
whose sins GOD has forgiven: forasmuch as our best deeds are lame and
corrupt.

Therefore they are here called the doers of good works, whom Paul calls
zealous and lovers of good works. Titus 2.14
But this estimation and judgment depends upon the fatherly clemency and
acceptance of our God, who allows that freelye for good, which deserves to
be rejected as evil and imperfect.

M. Moreover here shall appear a doble end of human things in the
resurrection, even as also the very words of Christ do sufficiently declare:
and not without cause: for there is a diversity among mortal men, Elect and
reprobate.
some are elctted, othersome are reprobated, to the end that every part
might have his right end.

Therefore Christ says that when he has gathered together all Nations before
him, he will separate them as a shepherd deuideth the sheep from the Goats,
and will place the sheep on his right hand, and the Goats on his left hand.
Mat. 25.33.
Wherefore let it not trouble any man if he shall see in this life Tares mixed
with good feed, and the stinking Goats mingled among the sheep.

When that hour of judgment shall come, that is to say, when these ends
that are appointed from the beginning of the world shall come, every man shall be
separated and appointed to his proper end. For the reprobate shall go into
everlasting pain, that is, to the resurrection of judgment or condemnation,
and the Just into eternal life, that is to say into the resurrection of life.
For the Angels shall go forth, and shall separate the wicked from among the
Just, and shall throw them into the furnace of whot burning fire, where shall be
weping and gnashing of teethe. Mat. 13.41
Bv. All men therefore enjoy the common, natural, and sensible life, as well
good as evil, and they shall all rise from the same again, notwithstanding by
the judgment of the Just Judge Christ Jesus, the condition and state of their
life to come shall not be a like. Psalm. 5
M. For seeing he is a God which is not pleased with Iniquity. A. When he has
gathered the wheat into his barn (that is to say when he has called and
received the faithful which embraced Godlynes to possess his kingdom for
ever) he shall burn the chafe, that is, unfruitful men and workers of
iniquity with unquenchable fire. Mat. 3.12.
The which Saint John expressed in these words, He which overcomes shall
possess all things: and I will be his God, and he shall be my son. But the
fearful and unbelieving, and abominable, Apoc. 2^
and murderers, and whoremongers, and sorcerers, and Idolaters and all liars,
shall have their part in the lake which burns wiih fire and brimstone: which
is the second death. For there shall enter into it no unclean thing, neither
whatsoever works abomination, or makes lies, but they which are written in
the Lambs book of life. The which also the scripture sets forth in other
words, saying: Ver. 27 Esa. 66.24 Mar. 9.41
Their worm shall not dye, and the fire shall not be quenched.

M. The which manifestly makes against those which pronounce generally all men
to be saved. For as everlasting life is laid up for the elect, even so there
wayteth for the reprobate that eternal fire which is prepared for the Devil
and his Angels.

C. Mat. 25.^
And whereas the Papists of these places gather that everlasting life is gotten
by merits, they may easily be refuted: for Christ speaks not only here of
the cause of salvation, Merits deserve not everlasting life.
but also puts a noate and difference between the elect and the reprobate,
the which he does to win and bring his servants to holiness and innocencye.
And we truly do not deny but that faith joined with a desire to live well
and uprightly justifies: but do only teach that we cannot repose our trust
and confidence in any thing else, save in the mercy of God. A. But concerning
this we have spoken more at large, Mat. 16.27 and.25.34.
in our exposition of Matthew.

30. I can of my own self do nothing: as I hear I judge, and my iudgemen is
just, because I seek not my own will, but the will of the Father which has
sent me.

I can not of my own self Bv. After the confirmation and probation of his
divinity, and that he was the son equal to the Father, in all things, he
returns to the proposition and occation of the disputacion, from the which
he was digressed, and gathers all things into a certain particular Epiloge
or conclusion. M. And because he had arrogated to him self many things, he
shows that he has done the same iustlye, and upon good consideracion. As if
he should say, B. I have declared unto you what I am with the Father, and
what I have received of him, that I work all things with the Father, and that
with him I raise the dead to life. By these things you see that I am far
from doing any thing which is contrary or against him, either by breaking the
Sabbath, or else by orrogating to my self, that which is proper to him alone.
I confess that of my self, I can do nothing, being a man as you see: these
things are given to me of the Father, he brings all things to pass in
me. As I hear of him, and as I know by experience, so I judge in all
things: there is nothing in me, I say nothing, I do nothing which belongs
not to the Father. I know no part of my will which is not agreeing to the will
of my Father: I desire nothing, I go about nothing which is not according to
the good pleasure of my Father: so far I am from profaning the Lords
Sabbath, and that which is more, from blaspheming him: the which falselye ye
object against me.

C. Therefore Christ speaks not here of his bare divinity: but as he is
endewed with our flesh, he admonishes us not to esteem of him according to
the outward show, because there is more in him than there is in a man.
Secondlye, we must see and consider with whom he had to do. His purpose was to
refell the Jews which sought to oppose or set him against God. Therefore he
does deny that he does any thing as man, because God which dwelt in him was his
guide and moderator. This always we must remember that so often as Christ
speaks him self, he does only assume or take to him self that which is
proper to a man, because he had respect unto the Jews, which wickedly said
that he was a private person, and no better than one of the common sort of
people. After the same manner, he refers to the Father whatsoever is above
man. This word (Judgment) as it does properly belong to Doctrine, so also it
does appertain to the whole administration: as if he should say that he has
the Father his aucthour in all things, whose will is to him a rule in all
things.

And my judgment is just. M. This is not to be understood as though the
Father had one by him self, and the Son another, as we have also showed
before in the nineteen verse. C. For he does not compare his will and the will
of his father together as one contrary to the other, but only confuteth that
which they falsely Imagined, as, that he was rather carried by humayne
boldness, than led by divine aucthority. He does deny this to be his own
proper affection, and contrary to the commandment of his Father.

31. If I testify of my self, my testimonye is not true.

M. By these words our Savior preuenteth that which his adversaries might
have objected against him, to troble the minds of simple and ignorant men:
the which also they went about when they said, John. 8
Thou give testimony of thy self, but thy testimony is not true. Therefore
he shows that he does not lean to his own testimonye, nor to the
testimonye of any other man: but to the testimonye of his heavenly Father,
which cannot lie, and which in truth far exceeds all other testimonye. To
this end does those things appertain, which are spoken in this part of the
Apology. So that when he says, If I testify of my self, my testimony is not
true, he does not deminishe the credit of his own testimony (the which
mightily he defends in an other place) but it is a certain manner of
concession or granting. Because Christ was sufficiently instructed from
heaven, not to be credited he is contented. As if he should say, If my
testimony be suspectted of you according to the common manner of men, let it be
so, I make no account of it.

We know that nothing is counted true and lawful which a man speaks in his
own commendation, how truly soever he spoke: because no man may be a
sufficient witness in his own cause. And although it is wicked to deal thus
with the son of God, yet notwithstanding, he was content to depart from his
right, that by the aucthority of God he might convince his enemies.

32. There is another that bears witness of me: and I am sure the witness
which he bears of me is true.

A. There are some which by this other witness bearer understand John the
Baptist, making this to be the scence of Christ's words, It seems to you
that if I bear witness of my self, that the same is not true: but now there
is another which bears witness of me, the which I know to be true: but as
for you ye say that ye will not believe the same. But it is better by this
other witness bearer to understand God the Father, that it may agree with
that which is said in another place, John. 8.18.
I am one which bear witness of my self, and my father which has sent me
bears witness of me also.

B. So that the same which he says here is thus much in effect: My words are
far otherwise than ye take them to be. It is God and not this poor Carpenter,
which bears witness of me, and which does acknowledge his only begotten
and well-beloved son: the which testimonye is so sufficient for me, that I care
not what men think of me. M Neither does he say simply, His testimonye is
true, But he says that he knows his testimonye is true. By which words he
does not only declare that the testimony of his Father is true, but also that
he himself does know for a suertie, that he does arrogate nothing to himself,
which of right, and by the testimonye of the Father, appertained not unto him.

33. Ye sent unto John, and he bare witness of the truth.

M. Because he had made mention of the testimony of the Father, now to extol
the same, and therewithal to show that his adversaries are reprehensible, and
blameworthye, to the consolation and stay of simple minds, he brings in
the testimony of John concerning him, the which although it were very notable,
yet notwithstanding it was contemned and neglected of the Rulars of the Jews.
And this makes very much to convict them, that he says not simplye, John
bare witness to the truth, But, Ye sent unto John. C. For he urges them
with the answer of John, the which they could not without shame discredit.
For to what end should they have sent unto him, except they meant to stand
and give credit to his sayings? For they sent unto him, as to a Prophet of
GOD, and seemed to make account of his voice, as of some divine Oracle.

And although Christ here after a sort yielded unto his enemies, yet
nevertheless, very notablye he reproves them, and casts in their teeth
that nothing stays them from belief, but malice.

Therefore we see that this circumstance does make very much to the matter
that they sent unto John, and as it were with a mind desirous to learn they
went unto him, to know who was the Messiah, and yet notwithstanding, regarded
not his answer.

M. He says not, And he bare witness to me, but he says, He bare
witness to the truth: the which is more certain and farthest from suspicion.

And he calls the dispensation of the redemption of mankind, which he had
taken in hand, the truth, for the which dispensation, the son of God was
sent to take upon him our flesh: of the which he says in another place, I am
the way, the truth, John. 14.
and the life. But this truth is always condemned in the world for a lie.

34. But I receive not the record of man: nevertheless, these things I say
that ye might be safe.

J receive not the record of man. M. What means these words? John sent of
God, to bear witness of the truth? Also the testimonies of the Apostles,
were they not the testimonies of men? of whom he says, You also shall bear
witness of me because ye have been with me from the beginning. Ioh. 15.27.
Also he says, Ye shall be witnesses unto me, in all Iewrye, and in Samaria,
and to the utmost parts of the earth. To this we answer: Acts. 1.8.
Christ uses the testimony of John, not that he stood in need of the same:
Aunsvvere.
but because it was needful for us thereby to be confirmed. They which seek
their own glory, do not only testifye of them selves notable and excellent
things, but do also much esteem and brag of the testimonies of such others
as they them selves are.

But Christ, to the end he might teach that he sought not his own glory,
even as before he said he had no need to bear witness of him self, even so
here he says that he does not stand or depend upon the testimony of John
how great soever he be, nor of any other man, seeing he has testimony far
greater than the witness of man. As if he should say. Bv. I do not therefore
bring forth the testimony of John concerning my self, as though he had made
me any whit the better thereby, as that I might be such a one as I was not
before he gave testimony of me, that is to say, that I should not have been
God, except he had said, that I am the son of GOD: (for I am that naturally
that which he said I was) but for your sakes rather do I bring his
testimony. For, because he was of great auctoritye among you, I thought that
ye would the more readily have believed his words, and so through faith in me
have obtained everlasting life. C. Therefore Christ here declares that he has
not so much respect unto him self, as he has to profit men, when he rayseth
up Preachers of his Gospel, by whom he may certify us of his will. In the
which also his wonderful goodness does greatly shine, in that he seeks to
frame all things to our salvation. Wherefore we also must endeavor our selves
to see, that he be not careful in vain for our souls health. M. Christ
says not, I speak these things to make you ashamed, and to defend my
Innocencye against your blasphemy, the which undoubtedly, of all other he
might most iustlye have spoken: and those things which he did speak, might
of them selves have made them ashamed. He rather desired to speak that, which
both only appertayned to him, and also ought justly to have taken from them
all outrageous furye and desire to destroy him. For what man will seek his
destruction, whom he knows to be so friendlye unto him, that he seeks
nothing more than his profit and safetye? Let this be an example for all the
Ministers of Christ to follow, that in speaking they neither seek their own
glory, Ministers ought not to seek their own glory.
or revenge, but the salvation of their hearers. If this mind were in all
those that take upon them the office of teaching, the Church of Christ at this
day should be free from a number of contencions and perrilles.

And it were necessary that they should practice this not only in words
(as a number of Hipocrites do) but also in their conversation, and fatherly
affection toward the faithful servants of Christ, and also to instruct
those that resist the truth, with all meekness, if it may please God at any
time to give them repentance, that they may be converted and believe.

M. Furthermore we must yet a little farther discuss these words of our
savior Christ: for they do nothing derogate from the testimonye of John which
he bare to the truth: but Christ says that he has no need of man's
testimony, seeing he has the testimony of his father, which far excels
all other. Whereupon he says not, And ye shall not receive any man's
testimony concerning me. For that which John, and which the Apostles after
John, did testifye concerning the truth, was so directed by GOD to this end,
that all mankind might be brought to the knowledge of the truth and be
saved.

So that they have nothing here for their purpose, who to cloak their
unbelief, do derogate from the wrytinges of the Prophets, Apostles, and
Evangelists, under this pretense, that the Prophets, Apostles, and
Evangelists, were men. and that Christ him self does not allow the testimonye
of men concerning him.

These ungodly men do not consider what is the use of those testimonies which
are given to the truth by the instinct of the holy ghost in men.

35. He was a burning and a shining light: and ye would for a season have
reioysed in his light.

He was a burning. Bv. Least any man should think that this testimony of John
was elevated and depressed by these words of the Lord, he commends John
him self to the end he might make his testimony commendable also.

R. For he was not that true light, yet notwithstanding, John. 1.8.
he was a bright Candell, giving testimonye concerning the true light, he was
a famous preacher of the truth, being zealous in faith and truth, mightelye
seeking to advance the glory of the Gospel.

M. Therefore by this metaphorical speech he greatly praises and commends
the holiness of John, and therewith all also declares what was his office. For
not only this belongs to a burning light, that the same should be bright
and clear of it self, but also, that it should with the brightness of the
same illuminate all that is round about it. So, John Baptist a Candell.
it was not sufficient for saint John to be a holy man him self, but this also
speacially appertayned to his office, to bring the hearts of the Israelites by
the preaching of repentance and the kingedome of God, and by geuyng testimony
to Christ, to the knoweledge of the truth. Ministers ought to be burning
lights.
After this manner a faithful minister of Christ ought to be a burning
candell, which is lightened in a dark place, to the end that they which are in
the same might see. Not only this is required, that the minister be an honest
and Innocent man, but also that he be such a one as will show forth the light
which he has received, to those which are committed to his charge. Luke 8.16.
So says our savior Christ, No man lighting a candel puts the same
under a Bushel. But if the light be darkness how great is the darkness? C.
Moreover whereas our savior calls John a burninge light, he does thereby
the more reprove the Ingratitude of the Jews: for it follows that they were
willingly blind, when they refused the candel of God which was set before their
eyes As if he should say, God would not have you to err for he appointed
John to be a Candel. that by his light he might direct you in the right way.
Therefore in that ye, do not know me to be the son of God. your voluntary
error is the cause thereof. A. Euenso they which at this day are willyngly
blind in the midest of the light of the gospel, have no excuse For the Lord
seeks by the preachinge of his word, Mat. 5.14.
to bring men out of darkness into light (in consideration whereof he called
his apostles the light of the world) that the darkness of ignorance being
driven away, the hearts of mortal men may be illuminated with the knoledge of
god, and true piety.

And ye would for a season have reioysed C. Now follows the other reproach,
in that they did not only shut their eyes against the truth which was
offered to them, but also sought all the means they could by abusing the same
to oppress Christ. For in that they were so ready to extolle John above his
proper degree, that proceeded of an evil and wicked purpose, that the son of
God might have no place Christ very notablye compares this wicked abuse of the
heavenly light to lasciviousness: even as if the good man of the house should
light a Candle in the night for his servants to do that which he has
commanded them to do, and they then to use the same to banqueting, and to
wantonness. By this place we are admonished, not to abuse Godly teachers,
whom God has appointed to guide us in the right way, to wander at our
leisure whether we lust. Bv. For many are well affected in the beginning of
Preaching for the love of novelty, but within a while after do forsake the
gospel again, following pleasures and corrupt affections, which they esteem
more than the love of godliness.

For a season. C. By these words he reproves their folishnesse, because they
thought that the eternal light of God might be extinguished by vain way
wardnesse, and unconstant follye. Even so at this day the Papists abuse all
those godly teachers and Doctors, which the Lord has given to his Church as
bright Candelles, as though they went about to dasell their eyes by beholding
the light.

And they do not only abuse the Candelles to obscure the light: but they do
also oftentimes rejoice in darkness.

36. But I have greater witness, than the witness of John: for the works
which the Father has given me to finishe, the same works that I do bear
witness of me that the Father has sent me.

But I have greater witness. C. After he had shown in the person of John,
that the Jews had wickedlye corrupted the gift of God, now secondlye he
repeateth that which he had spoken, as, that he has no need of the testimony
of man, his own witness being sufficient for him self. Howebeit, because he
saw that he was despised, he cites them according to his manner before his
father. As if he should say,

Bv. Thus far forth ye have heard great things: but ye shall hear greater
things. Ye have John's testimony concerning me: but now behold a greater
testimony, namelye, the testimony of my works. For there can not be a more
certain testimony than the deeds them selves: the which I do, not in my own
name, but in my fathers name.

M. Let us note here how circumspectlye and wiselye he says not, I have a
testimony much more certain and true than the testimony of John, but he says,
Greater than the testimony of John: least he might so extol the testimony of
the Father, concerning him self, that the testimony of John thereby should
be quite discredited. For whatsoever John did testifye concerning Christ, the
same was of God, neither was it any whit contrary from that which the Father
by his works testified of him. But if ye compare the testimony of the works
of Christ which he had received of the Father, with the testimony of John, ye
shall find that it is much more excellent and notable. For as that Lucifer or
morning Star, though it be a true testimony of the rising of the Sun, yet
notwithstanding, is inferior, and nothing so evident as the Sun beams it
self which shine throughout the whole world* even so John, though his
testimony were true concerning Christ, yet notwithstanding, it was far
inferior, and more obscure than the bright show of Christ's works.

For the works which the father has given me. R. The second thing whereby
Christ proves that he was sent of the Father, are works or Miracles. M The
use whereof are here declared unto us, when Christ says, They testifye of me.

Therefore they are not dumb signs, but lyuelye signs, and therefore not
simply to be beheld, but effectuallye to be heard, according to this place,
The heavens declare the glory of God. etc.

These speak not, and yet notwithstanding, their sound has gone forth into
all lands, and their words into the utmost parts of the earth. Psalm. 19.1.
A. Even so the wonderful works of Christ, though they seem to be dumb,
yet notwithstanding, most euidentlye they set forth his mighty virtue and
power, but to them, to whom he has given ears to hear. M. Even as appears
in Nicodemus, who being moved by the power and testimony of Christ's works,
John. 3.
acknowledges that Christ is come a teacher sent from God.

For as a good Tree is known by his good fruit, even so the Lord Jesus has
sufficientlye by his works proved him self to be the son of God. John.
10.25
R. The works (says he) which I do in my Fathers name, they bear witness
of me. C. It may here be demanded whether miracles are sufficient enough to
prove Christ to be the son of God,

M. Furthermore neither the Jews nor the Turks do deny the miracles of
Christ: but yet neither of them do acknowledge the testimonye, whereof the
Lord here makes mention.

Aunsvvere.
C. We answer, Those signs and miracles which the Lord wrought by the
hands of his Prophets, went not beyond that end, for the which they were
appointed to be wrought, which was, that they might declare them to be the
Ministers of God, who otherwise could have had neither authority nor
credit. But God meant more highlye to extol his son. And this purpose of God
in miracles must be taken for the end and scope. Therefore if the Jews
through malice had not willingly shut their eyes, the virtue of Christ's
signs might sufficiently have declared, who, and what manner of person he was:
even as he himself says, If I had not done among them the works which no
other man has done, Iho. 15.24.
they had no sin: but now they have seen and hated, not only me, but also
my Father.

M. As touching the Turks, although after a sort they do acknowledge some
divine power to be in the miracles of Christ, yet notwithstanding they will in
no wise acknowledge him to be the son of God, being utterly blinded and
deceived by the false prophet Mahomet. The Turks deny Christ to be the son of
God.
They say that God cannot have a son, seeing he has not a wife. So foolish
and blind they are that they will not acknowledge the Image of the fatherly
goodness and power in Christ the son of God, the which notwithstanding his
works have made him more evident and clear than the Son.

37. And the Father himself which has sent me, has borne witness of me. Ye
have not heard his voice at any time, nor seen his shape.

And the Father himself which has sent me Bv. Some restrain this to the
voice which was heard in the Baptism of Christ: but it ought to be farther
extended. C. For in the preterperfect tence, or time past he says, The Father
has testified, to declare that he comes not forth unknown, because
aforetime in the law and the Prophets, the Father had made him manifest by
tokens, that he might bring his noates and marks with him whereby he might be
known.

For God did testify of his son, so often as he promised salvation to his
people the Jews, or the full restoring of the kingdom of Israel. So it
became the Jews to have the perpetual substance of Christ out of the
scriptures before he should be manifested in the flesh. Whereas they
contemn him he being present, and do reject him, thereby they do manifestly
declare, that they have no taste of the Law: the which also Christ casts in
their teeth. And yet they bragged of the knowledge of the Law, even as if they
had come out of Gods own bosom.

Ye have not heard his voice. M. Because the Jews challenged to themselves a
certain singular and peculier knoweldge of God, above all other nations that
were in the world, because their forefathers had heard his voice, and because
Moses had talked with him face to face, and had received the Law from his
mouth: and for the opinion which they had conceived of these men, they did not
only despise all other nations in respect of themselves, but also carelessly
rejected the doctrine and admonition boath of John and also of Christ: the
Lord by these words most aptlye takes away the opinion of divine knowledge,
which they thought they had, and plainelye affirms, that they are nothing but
plain Atheistes, that is to say, without mind and feeling of God, and have no
fellowshippe at all with him.

C. For here are three Metophoricall kind of speeches, by which he meant to
teach that they were far from the knowledge of God.

For as men make them selves known by countinaunce and by word: even so God
sends forth his voice unto us, by the voice of his Prophets, and has in
the Sacraments as it were taken upon him a visible form, that we may know
him according to our capacitye. Bv. For as God by his nature is invisible (for
God is a spirit) so he is neither seen with corporal eyes, Ihu. 4.24
not yet clarefied nor yet heard with these corporal, and corruptible ears.
Nevertheless he gives unto his servants certain signs of his presence,
and speaks unto men in such manner of speech, as may be understood. For
so he appeared and spoke to the Prophets. M. Wherefore that which we read in
Deutronomy, Deu. 4.10.
concerning the voice of God, which the Israelites heard, is no otherwise to
be understood, than that they heard the voice of an Angel, and not the
proper voice of God.

A. But when Christ was made manifest in the flesh, we had after a sort, in
him a visible Image of the invisible Father, he him self saying, He which
sees me, John. 14.9
sees my father also. C. He therefore which does not acknowledge God in his
liuelye and express Image, does sufficientlye thereby declare, that he
worshippeth no God at all, but a God of his own imagination. Therefore the
Apostle says, that the Jews have a veil before their eyes, 2. Cor. 3.14
least they should behold the glory of God in the face of Christ.

38. His word have ye not abiding in you: for whom he has sent, him ye
believe not.

M. That is to say, Ye neither understand his mind nor meaning: neither have
you grafted and rooted in your hearts, his word which was given to your
forefathers. Neither does he simplye say, And ye have not his word, But he
adds this, In you: for otherwise they had the word of God in Books, in
their mouths, and in their ears: but in their hearts, they had it not C. But
this is the true profit, when the word of God has root in us, and abides
in our hearts for ever. Christ says that the heavenly doctrine had no place
in the Jews, because they received not the son of God, whom the same
commended every where: and rightly he obiecteth this unto them. For God had
not spoken by Moses and the Prophets in vain. And the purpose of Moses is
nothing else but to call al men unto Christ the right way: whereupon it is
manifest, that they are not the Disciples of Moses which reject Christ.

M. Therefore Christ speaks here to the Jews, as he did in another place,
John. 8.9.
Ye neither know me, nor my Father. A. Also he says, John. 8.^7
Ye seek to kill me because my word has no place in you, C. For how can he
have the word of life abiding in him, which repelleth the life it self? How
shall he embrace the Doctrine of the same, which seeks all that he can to
destroy the soul of the law. For the Law without Christ is imperfect, and
void. The nerer therefore that a man comes to the knowledge of Christ, the
more he has profited in the word of God. Wherefore, how much soever the
Jews, Turks, Heretics, and Papists, do boast of the word of God, yet
notwithstanding, because they reject him whom the father has sent, and do
not believe him, their boasting is in vain: because they have not the word
of God, abiding in them.

39. Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think ye have eternal life: and
they are they which testifye of me.

R. The fourth testimony is brought from the Scriptures. M. The Jews had the
Scriptures, namelye the Law, the Prophets, and the Psalms, of the which
they did not a little brag: as though it were sufficient to everlasting life,
simplye to have, and to read the Scriptures diuinelye inspired, and not more
necessary dyligently to read the same, and to know and embrace by faith
Christ the son of GOD promised in them, in whom alone all salvation, and
life consists. C. Therefore Christ here reproves their foolish boasting,
because they professed that they had life in the Scriptures, when as they took
hold only on the dead letter. For he does not simplye reprehende us, because
we seek life in the Scriptures: seeing they are provided and appointed to us
for the same purpose: for the word of the Lord is called the word of life, and
salvation, The scriptures ordained of all men to be red.
because they which read the Scriptures by faith in Christ, are instructed to
salvation, and shall find in deed in them everlasting life but he commends
this, that the Jews thought that the Scripture was able to quicken them, when
as they were far from the true sense and meaning thereof: may when they
seek to suppress the light of life contained in them. For how could the
Law bring life without Christ, who alone brings the same? They therefore
which read the Scriptures without faith in Christ, Romans 7.7. 2. Cor. 3.9.
shall find nothing in them but the kylling Letter: as the Apostle Paul
teaches.

Moreover, we are taught by this place to seek the knowledge of Christ, out of
the scriptures. For they which Imagine of Christ what they list them selves,
shall have at the last nothing, but a vain phantasye. Christ known by the
scriptures.
First of all therefore let us noate that Christ can be truly known by no other
means, than by the scriptures. The which being so, it follows that we must
read the scriptures with this mind, that we may find Christ there.
Whosoever declyneth from this scope and end, how so ever he spends his
whole life, and wearyeth him self in reading, he shall never attain to the
knowledge of the truth. For what can we know and understands without the
wisdom of God. M. The Scriptures are given to us from above, not to the end
we might have them only in Books, and so laid up as our treasure, as we saee
many men do: neither yet are they given, that we might simplye and sleightlye
read them, as though it were sufficient to read: either that by a
supersticious opinion, the reading of them might be in steed of worship and
divine service, as we see the Papists do, and as the Jews continuallye do on
the Sabbath days: but they are given to this end, that they might be read
with diligence, and with a mind desirous to find out those things which
belong to true knowledge, and true godliness.

The readers of the Scriptures must be searchers, and not corrupters,
wresters, dreamers, or supersticious murmurers. How the scriptures ought to be
read.
And the Scriptures do not require any searching, but that which is godly,
humble, and desirous to know and embrace one truth only: otherwise a man
may find some which read the Scriptures, but not to search out Gods truth,
but rather to hinder the same. Even so, Herod inquired out the truth out of
the Scriptures concerning the place where Christ should be borne, not to the
end he might worship him, Mat. 2.4.
but rather to destroy him. Also the Pharisees said to Nicodemus, Search the
Prophets, and see how that a Prophet comes not out of Galilee. John. 7.52
They said not, And see what is written in the Scriptures concerning Christ. So
in like manner, wicked and ungodly men do search the scriptures, to corrupt
the same to their own destruction. C. By this word Scripture, is understood
the old Testament. For Christ did not first of all begin to be manifested
in the Gospel, but having testimony out of the law and the Prophets, he
openly exhibited him self in the Gospel. Therefore that which Christ says
here, agrees with that which he spoke unto his Apostles after his
resurrection, Luke 24.44.
saying, These are the words which I spoke unto you, when I was yet with you:
that all must needs be fulfilled which were written of me in the law of
Moses, and in the Prophets, and in the Psalms. But now it were an infinite
labor, to gather into one those testymonies of Scripture, which pertain to
the manifesting of Christ: notwithstanding, we may behold some of them in the
four and twentye of Luke.

40. And yet will ye not come to me, that ye might have light.

A. He means that men labor in vain in reading of the Scriptures, except
their only dryft be to find out Christ in them. M. He says not, And ye
come not, but, And ye will not come to me, that ye may have life: C. in which
words he again casts in their teeth, that nothing stay them from
obtaining that life which is offered in the Scriptures, but their own malice.
For in saying, that they will not, he assigns the cause of their ignorance
and blindness, to their own wicked obstinacye.

And verylye, seeing he so wyllingly offered him self unto them, it must
needs be that they were wyllinglye blind.

And, seeing they did seek by all means to shonne the light, nay, seeing,
they did seek to obscure and darken the bright son, with the darkness of
their unbelief, Christ does iustlye more sharpelye reprehend them.

M. And behold here what a false perswacion can do. They would not come unto
Christ that they might have life by him. And wherefore? Because they thought
that they had everlasting life already. Therefore, so many as did think that
they had already obtained salvation, come not unto Christ the savior. He
which thinks him self whole and sound, comes not to the Physician. So it
happened to the Disciples of John, who for the opinion of salvation which they
had conceived of John, were against Christ, when as John sent all men unto
Christ. After the same manner also, we see that the Papists at this day
reject the Doctrine of Christ, which is the power of God to salvation to every
believer, through the opinion of salvation which they have conceived in them
selves, in that they think them selves to be in the Church of Christ, but out
of the which no man can be saved: but the same Church does not draw away
men from the Gospel of Christ, but rather sends all men to his Doctrine. Let
them take heed which boast and brag of the Gospel and word of God, least
conceyuing the like opinion, they do not truly hear Christ, the Lord of
life, nor so truly follow him as they ought.

41. I receive not praise of men.

B. In these words our savior preuenteth the sclaunder wherewith the Jews
might have sclandered him to be ambicious, because he had cast them in the
teeth with their contempt of him, who was so manifestly commended in the
Scriptures. R. As if be should say, I would not have you to think that I call
you unto me, and that I will you to believe my word, because I am ambicious,
and desirous of praise. Be it far from me that I should seek the praise and
commendacion of men. For if I were any thing desirous of glory, I would never
have so abased my self, as to have taken upon me humayne flesh: but I speak
these things being desirous of your salvation: I seek not my self, but you:
C. neither am I grieved that I see my self contemned, but I seek the glory
of God the Father, and the safety of you all. And so he goes forward in
refelling the sclaunder that he extolleth him self above all men. For in deed
he is so great and mighty that he ought not to depend upon the Judgment of
men, when as the wickedness of the whole world, can detract nothing at all
from him, nor diminishe one heeres breadth of his power.

42. But I know you, that ye have not the love of God in you.

M. He now manifestlye declares, whereof he gathered the original of their
Incredulitye, namelye, hereof that they had no love of God in them.

As if he should say, It is not hidden or unknown to me, for what cause ye
come not unto me. Ye feign that ye have the love of God, and ye will seem to
persecute me, because I am against the commandment and glory of God, as a
wicked man, and a breaker of the Sabbath day, a blasphemer of God, and a
seeker of vaineglorye. But howsoever ye deceive and blind simple and ignorant
men, with this hipocriticall pretense, ye can not deceive me.

Ye are not unlike your Forefathers. For as they honored GOD with their
Lips, and despised him in their hearts: even so ye through Hipocrisye,
would seem to love GOD with your mouths, whom notwithstanding, ye love not
in your hearts: with your mouth ye speak of God, but with your heart ye seek
your selves. For I know you throughlye, who and what ye are, what ye do, and
whereunto also ye have respect.

B. For whosoever have any manner of love or feeling of GOD, do also receive
his word, so far they are from rejecting the Son of God.

Ioh. 6.40.
C. The love of God is here taken for the whole feeling of Godliness. For no
man can love God, but he must also honor him, and must submit him self
wholye unto him, even as where there is no love of God, there is no obedience.
In consideration whereof Moses makes this the sum of the Law, Deu. 6.5.
that we love God with our whole heart.

M. Let us here noate that all Hipocrites, how subtle soever they be, are
known well enough to the Lord, although mortal men can not espy them, they
having in their mouths continuallye, God, the love of God, the zeal of God,
the glory of God, Hipocrites are known to God.
the honor of God, the Church of GOD, and such like: none of the which
things they have in their hearts, but seek only vaineglory and their
bellyes.

43. I am come in my Fathers name, and ye receive me not: If another come in
his own name, him will ye receive.

I am come in my Fathers name. R. He shows what great ingratitude it is to
reject him, whom God the Father has sent to save. To come in the name of the
Father, is to seek the glory and will of God, and in his office to have
respect to the common profit of all men, and not to his own profit or gain.

A. And this is the will of the Father, that every one which sees the Son,
and believes in him should have everlasting life.

C. In this title, false Prophets brag and boast them selves, as does the Pope
at this day, who braggeth that he is the Vicar of Christ, yea, Satan has not
deceived miserable men from the beginning, but by this pretense: who
subtillye transformeth him self into an Angel of light: But Christ noateth
the matter it self, and not the coullor or pretense. For he testifies that he
came therefore in the fathers name, because he does both testify of the
Father, and does faithfully perform that which he has commanded. And by
this mark he does discearne and noate lawful teachers in the Church, from
those that are false and Counterfeyte. Whosoever therefore do extol them
selves, and do reign in the consciences of men, are bouldly to be rejected, as
this place teaches. For he which desyereth to be the servant of God, must be
in nothing contrary to God. Now if we examine the whole doctrine of the Pope,
The Pope comes in his own name.
the very blind also shall see that he is come in his own name.

M. Herebye we may noate that it ought not to seem strange to the minister
of Christ, if although he be a true teacher, such a one as seeks the glory
of God, Innocent, and faithful, he be not received of all men, specially of
the mightyer sort, seeing he hears the Lord him self the son of God,
which came not in his own but in his Fathers name, and declared him self to
come from Heaven by mighty signs and wonders was not received of those which
were the most myghtie and principal in in Israel. Ioh. 15.20.
The servant is not greater then his Lord. 1. Ioh. 4.6
A. Also, we are of God? he which knows GOD hears us, he which is not of
GOD hears us not, If an other come in his own name.

M. It comes to pass by the just Judgment of God, that they which receive
not the true Christ which the Father has sent into this world, False
Christ's receiue^ of the^ which reject the true Christ
shall receive false Christ's, coming not in the Fathers name, but in their
own name, neither seeking the glory of the father, but their own praise and
glory, The which happened to the Jews according to the words of Christ
here, For they received false Christ's boath before and also after the coming
of Christ. Concerning the false Christ's which came be fore Christ, Act.
5.36.
Galmaliel speaks in the Acts of the Apostles? Math. 24 24.
concerning those which came after. Christ himself speaks in the Gospel
after Matthew. And Josephus makes mention of a sertayne Aegiptian a Coniurer,
which drew after him thirty thousand men. Also in the Acts of the Apostles
we may read of Simon magus, whom such as were seduced called the mighty
power of God. C. If any man obiecte and say that this comes to pass often
times rather by error, then by malice, we answer that none are subject to
the deceites of Satan, but such as by a sertayne wicked desire, prefer lies
before the truth, For how comes it to pass that Satan fyndeth those prompt
and apt Disciples to whom the Lord is feign to cry as to deaf men, but only
because we having forsaken righteousness, willingly follow Iniquity?
Howbeit we must noat that Christ speaks properly of those whom God has
specially illuminated, as he had done the Jews who being taught in the law,
knew the right way to salvation. It is most certain that such do not
harken unto false Prophets, but because they desyer to be deceived.

Therefore says Moses that the Lord uses the rising of false prophets as a
mean to try and prove his people whether they love him or no. Deuteronomy. 13.^


But there seems to be in many guiltless symplicity: but there is no doubt
but that hypocrisy daseleth their eyes, which lurketh within their minds.

For it is most sertayne that God shuttethe not the Gate against those that
knock, and that they are neauer disapoynted of whom he is sincerely sought.

Truly therefore does the Apostle Paul ascribe this unto the vengeance of
GOD, Math. 7.7
when that the power the Apostle Paul ascribe this unto the vengeance of God,
when that the power of illusion is given to Satan, that they which rejecting
truth, and approving unrighteousness might believe Lies: and he says that
they perish, 2. The. 2.10
which have not loved the truth, that they might be saved. Even so at this
day the Hypocrisy of many is discovered, who being addicted to the deceites,
and wicked superstitions of the Pope, rage most furiouslye against the Gospel.
For if there were in their minds the fear of God, the same fear would bring
forth also obedience: Bv. But when they will not receive the Doctrine of
Christ, they are wrapped in errors, and perish in their sins. False
Prophets deceive, rob, and spoil them, to whom they are a very scorn and
derision: even as the Apostle very notablye has discribed their disposition,
1. Cor. 11.13
in the person of the Corinthians. The Jews would not have the most meek,
gentle, and loving Christ to reign over them: but they would have Cesaer,
John. 19.
saying: We have no King but Cesaer. And he stoutlye plagued and slew them,
aunswering his name in all things.

A. Even so they which at this day refuse to bear the sweet yoke of Christ,
are miserablye in subjection and thraldom, to the tyranny of the Pope.

44. How can ye believe which receive honor one of another, and seek not the
honor which comes of God only?

How can ye believe. Bv. Here he opens the original and cause of their
unbelief. C. Because it might seem very hard that they which were
domestical Disciples of the Law and the Prophets. from their Childhoode,
should be condemned of such gross Ignorance, and appointed to be enemies of
the truth: nay, it might seem a thing incredible: Christ shows what did
hinder them from believing, namely, Ambicion which possesses their whole
mind. For properly he speaks unto the Priests and Scribes, who swelling with
Pride could not submit them selves unto God. B. They which believe, give all
glory unto God: for they seek for all things at his hand. The which thing
they can not do, which seek and receive glory of men. For they seem to be
somewhat, Vain glorious minds are void of faith.
and attribute much unto them selves. And this is a notable place teaching all
men that the gate of Faith is shut up against those whose minds are desirous
of terrene and vaineglorye. For it must needs be that he which will be some
body in the world, must be a vacabonde and run away from God. But a man
comes to the obedience of heavenly doctrine, when he thinks that he ought
to seek all his life time to be in the love and fauoour of God. A. Herevppon
it is said, James. 4.
He which will be a friend of this world, is an enemy to God. If any man
love the world, 1. Ioh. 2.15.
the love of the Father is not in him.

M. Christ does not in this place condemn Civil honestye, when one man
honors another, but he speaks against such as are vain glorious, and
seek after honor. The Apostles commands the faithful to go one before
another in honor. Also Peter says, Romans 12.10
Honor all men. 1. Pe. 2.17.
But there is difference between honoring of other men, and seeking to be
honored of other men.

For the first belongs to Christian faith, the other not so. Nevertheless,
Ioh. 12.24.
among the Rulers many believed on him: but because of the Pharisees they did
not confess him, least they should be excommunicate. For they loved the
praise of men, more than the praise of God.

We answer, that there are two kinds of faith: Aunsvvere. Faith of two
kinds.
the first is that which comes by Miracles, or by a manifest declaration of
the truth: the other is that which comes by hearing the word of God,
through the grace of the holy ghost. Concerning these things, read that
which goes before in the end of the second Chapter. Verse. 23.


Faith that comes by hearing iustifyeth.
The first kind of faith does not iustifye the hearts: but the latter kind
does both justify, and also bring life.

Concerning the first of these the Evangelist speaks: but of the latter faith
the Lord speaks here, the which Faith they can not have, which seek moore
the praise of men, than they do the glory of GOD. For this Faith as it
believes, so it both speaks and lives. I believed (says the Prophet)
and therefore I spoke.

A. He therefore which wylbe a true Disciple of Christ, must of necessitye
both hear and follow the Apostle which speaks thus, 1. Cor. 3.18
Let no man deceive him self. If any man among you seem to him self to be
wise in this world, let him be a fool, that he may be wise. Galat. 6.3.
And in another place, If any man seem in his own eyes to be somewhat, when
in deed he is nothing, he deceyueth his own mind. To be short, if so be we
will be capable of Divine and Heavenly wisdom, i. Cor. 14.10
we must be little children, not in understanding, but in malice: because God
has hidden his secreete misteryes from the wise and prudent of this world, and
has revealed them to Babes. Mat. 11.24
For where Ambicion is, there can not be Faith.

45. Do not think that I will accuse you to my Father: there is one that
accuses you, even Moses in whom ye trust.

Do not think that I will accuse you. Bv. He concludes his demonstration
with a commination or threatening, the which he prosecuteth in few words,
but yet most effectual, threatening to the Jews eternal dampnation, if so be
they go forewarde in their unbelief and hardness of heart. Threatening ought
to be used when gentle admonition will not serve.
C. For toward the obstinate and stubborn, this way must be used, when
Doctrine and friendlye admonitions will not prevail.

There are very few which openly deryde GOD: but there are very many, which
being sworn enemies unto GOD, do dallye and trifle with him in their hearts,
fayning to them selves that he is merciful and favorable to them. Even so at
this day Gods enemies, which wickedly tread the Doctrine of Christ under
their feet, are notwithstanding, as proud as if they were Gods dear friends.
For who can persuade the Papists that there is Christianisme, any where, but
amongst them? Such were the Scribes, with whom our savior Christ disputed
here. When they were notable contemners of the law, yet they greatly bragged
of Moises, insomuch that they did not let to hold him out against Christ as a
buckeler. If he had threatened them that he him self would have been to
them a heavy and an intolerable enemy, he knew that they would have
contempned it. Therefore he says, that Moses will accuse them: the which
they much more esteemed than the other. For, because they little regarded the
Doctrine of Christ, and affirmed that they observed the discipline of Moises,
saying. We are Moses Disciples: John. 9.2^
we know that God spoke to Moses, But as for this fellow, we wot not
whence he is: necessarilye, now he affirms, that Moses of whom they
boasted, was of them despised also, and that they needed no other accusar, for
that all other holding their peace, the law of Moses was suffficient to
condemn all the Jews which believed not in him.

Bv. But nevertheless we must not here imagine a gross manner of accusation,
by which Moses now being in eternal bliss should be vexed. For, because
the Jews did not believe their Moses testifiyng of Christ, and threatening
everlasting destruction to them which believed not Christ, they are said to be
accused of Moses, whose own conciences do accuse them. C. For Christ had
no other respect than that he might quayle the trust of hipocrites, which
falsely gloried in the reverence of Moses. Even as if a man at this day
should say unto the Papists that they should have no greater enemies unto
them than the holy Fathers of the Church, whom so falsely they have
alleged. M. So it may be said to those which falsely brag of the Apostle
Peter and of his authority, that they shall have Peter, whose doctrine they
little regard, a bitter accuser before God.

A. And to be short, so it may be said to all those that worship dead
saints as Gods, that in time to come they shall have no greater enemies than
those to whom they presume to give that glory that belongs to Christ.

C. And hereby let us learn that we must not glory in the Scriptures: because
except we worship the Son of God in true obedince of Faith, there shall arise
in the latter day against us so many accusers, as God has raised up witnesses
unto him.

Jn whom ye trust. He does not accuse them of suspicion, as though they
ascribe the cause of their salvation unto Moses, but he means that they
leaned unto Moses amiss, as though they should have him a patron and defender
of wicked obstinacy: For after this manner they are said to repose their trust
in Moses.

46. For if ye had believed Moses, ye would have believed me: for he wrote
of me.

If ye had believed Moses B. By the holy Ghost only we believe the word of
GOD. Therefore if they had believed Moses, they had had the holy Ghost no
doubt the searcher of the profounde mysteries of God, by which they having
boldness could not choose but know and acknowledge God offering himself to
be known, much more plainly in Christ, than in Moses.

C. He shows therefore why Moses shall be their accuser, namelye, because
they reject his doctrine. And we know that there can be no greater injury done
to the servant of God, than to have their doctrine contemned and slaundered.

Furthermore look what Ministers the Lord has appointed for his word, of
the same word also they must be reuengers. Ministers are techers to salvation
and witneses to damnation.
Therefore the Lord has made his Prophets to represent two personages: as to
be masters and teachers of the godly to salvation, and sleyers of the
reprobate by their testimonye, For he wrote of me

Bv. Christ verily was the only scope of Moses, as they which know that
Christ is the end and the life of the law, can well enough testify also. But
if any man being not content therewith, desires to have probation hereof, let
him first of all dilligently read the Epistle to the Hebrews, Acts. 7.2.
to which also agreeeth the saying or sermon of Steeuen: than let him noate
what testimonies the Apostle Paul applies to this purpose.

A Let him also see those things which are noated in the xxiiii. Chapter of
Luke beginning at the.xxvii. verse. C To be short without Christ the whole
ministerye of Moses vanishes away.

47. But if ye believe not his wrightings, how shall ye believe my words.

M. What? was then the aucttoritye of Moses greater than the authority of
Christ? C. For Christ seems here to ascribe more credit to Moses than to
himself, and yet we know that by the voice of the Gospel heaven and earth
were shaken. But Christ frames his speech to those with whom he had to do.
For the Jews without all controversy greatly esteemed the aucthority of the
Law: So it could not be but that Christ should be inferior to Moses. To
this end pertayneth the Antithesis or secret comparison in this verse, of
wrightinges and of words: for hereby he does exagerate and amplify their
infidelity, that the truth of God being as it were written in tables, had
notwithstanding no faith nor credit among them. M. Therefore Christ being
compared with Moses: had scarce in the eyes of the Jews the place of a
shadow. A. But if we have respect to the condition and dignity of them
boathe, Christ is to be preferred before Moses.
there shall appear great difference. For look how much honor he has
that builds the house more than the house it self: so much more glory was
he worthy of than Moses. Also Moses was faithful in that house, as a trusty
servant for to give witness of those things which were afterward to be
spoken: Heb. 3.3.56.
but Christ ruled the whole house as the son himself. And he is not only
by right preferred before Moses but also before all other creatures.

M. Howbeit here is no question of the person, but of the doctrine.

Whereupon Christ says not, If ye believe Moses: But, If ye believe not his
wrightinges, least any man should think that this ought to be referred to
the person of Moses, and not rather to the doctrine which he sent forth by
the commandment of God.

So when Paul said to Agrippa, Act. 27
Do thou believe the Prophets O king Agrippa. I know that thou beleeuest:
the which is not to be referred to the Prophets themselves, but to their
doctrine.

Moreover let us learn to seek Christ and to know him by the scriptures, and
diligently to study and travail in them: not to follow the dead letter as
the Jews did: much less to persecute Christ as Herod did: but to seek to
come to the knowledge of God through Jesus Christ, Act. 1^
as did they of whom we may read in the Acts of the Apostles.

As touching the blindness of the Jews, which received no fruit or profit
at all, by the often reading of the Law and the Prophets, because they
rejected Christ the end of the Law, let us noate what great wickedness and
ingratitude it is willinglye to reject the proffered light, and to contemn the
son of God, sent of God to salvation. B. Howbeit there is yet another cause
of their ignorance, namelye because it seemed good to the Lord to prefer
the blindness of the Jews, until the fullness of the Gentiles came in: of
the which ye may read in the eleventh chapter to the Romans. Romans 11^
They which were elected and truly believed Moses, they undoubtedly believed
the Lord, 2. Cor. 3^
the vale being then removed with the which their minds are now covered.
For this is most certain, that they believe not Moses that believe not Christ.

The syxt Chapter.
1. After these things Jesus went his way over the Sea of Galile, which is
the Sea of Tiberias.

After these things. Bv. WHen the Lord Jesus had so faithfully, diligently,
and plainelye expounded the principal point of our religion, and had declared
himself to be the natural son of God, the savior of all that believe: the
Citizens and hearers of Jerusalem, should upon just consideration have
received the truth: but because they do reject it, the Lord also rejects
them, leaving them to their errors and to their darcknesse, and gets him
into Galile, as he had also done before.

C. But whereas John has vsuallye gathered those acts and sayings of Christ,
which the other Euaungelistes have passed and omitted, here in this place he
repeateth, contrary to his manner, the history of a miracle, which the other
Evangelists have declared: but he does it upon good consideration, namely,
that from the same he might pass to the sermon of Christ, which was made the
day following in Capernaum, because they were matters so nere joined together.
Wherefore, all this narration does agreee with that which the other three
Evangelists have, yet notwithstanding in this it differs from that which
they declare, namely that it tends to an other end, as we shall see.

But it is not necessary that we understand the histories of this present
Chapter, to be done straight after those things which are declared in the
Chapter going before, and which were done at Jerusalem at the feast of
Penticost: seeing that those things which follow in this Chapter, were done
when Passover was now at hand, insomuche that there was a whole year, lacking
seven weeks or there aboutes between, at which time, as may appear by the
other Euaungelistes, he went round about Galile after he had left Jerusalem:
from thence he came to Genazereth, and after that, to the parts of Tire, and
Sidon and returning again into Galile, he sent forth his Apostles by two and
two to preach the Gospel, and then last of al after their return and the
behedding of John the Baptist, he went over this sea of Tiberias. C. For the
other Evangelists say that this was done after the death of John the Baptist,
by which circumstance of time, they note the cause of the departure of Christ.
For tyrauntes, when they have imbrued them selves with the blood of the Godly
they are inflamed to greter cruelty no less then immoderate drinking makes
the dronken man more thirsty. Therefore Christ by his absence meant to pacefye
the fury of Herod.

Over the sea of Galile. B. This is a lake which is called in the Scripture the
sea or Lake of Cinnereth (which some interpret the sweet sea) and is called of
the Greeks Genezar, or Genazareth. M. Of this Josephus makes mention in his
third book of the war of the Jews and xviii. chapter. B. Saint John
calls it the sea of Tiberias, because the city of Tiberias (so called of
Herod the Tetrache for the honor of Tiberias Caesar) bounded upon the East
part of the same. C. Wherefore by this portion the Euangeliste does more
plainly describe the place whether Christ went: for the whole lake was not
called, the sea of Tiberias but only that part which lay nere to the shore,
upon which Tiberias was cituate. B. The Evangelist Mark, beside that which is
spoken before concerning the cruelty of Herod, makes mention of another cause
of this cut over the sea, namely, That Christ might take rest and be at quiet:
for he was much oppressed of the people howbeit they did not suffer him to rest
any long time: for straight way they followed him, and that not so much for to
hear the word of God, as to see the signs which he wrought, as Saint John
testifies here saying.

2. And a great multitude followed him, because they saw his miracles which
he did on them that were diseased.

M. The Eunagelist makes mention of this, because of that part of the History
which follows, in which he will declare what a great multitude of people were
satisfied and most miraculously fed: lest if there should be no mention of this
before, a man might doubt how so great number of people could be, assembled
together in a wilderness and desert place, He adds also the causes which moved
this great multitude to forsake the cities and to come into this desert place,
from far and to follow the Lord. C. For they were thus desirouse to follow
Christ, because they behoulding his power in the miracles, were persuaded that
he was some great Prophet sent of God. Whereupon they had so earnest a desire
to hear Christ, that forgetting them selves abode til night in a desert place,
void of all care. Care for eauenly things is to be preferred before a worldly
care.
How can we now excuse our sloth and negligence, in that we do not prefer
the heavenly doctrine of Christ, before the care for the satisfying of honger,
but are drawn away from the meditacion of everlasting life by every small
entisement? yea very seldom it comes to pass that Christ finds us free
and untied from obstacles and lettes of this world. All men for the most part
are so far from following Christ to the desert mountain: that scarce the
tenth man can receive him when he offers him self to come home to his house
in in the midest of his commodities. M. But in that so great a multitude
followed Christ because of the miracles which he wrought, it might be so for
diverse causes. For part, (as it is lykely) because they gathered by these
signs that this man was sent of God, followed him that they might hear the
doctrine of God at his mouth: part, being curiouse, desiered to see and hear
new and strange things: part, sought either for their friends or for them
selves corporal health. And thus this multitude was diversely affectioned,
although this which the Evangelist hear speaks concerning the seeing of the
Lords miracles belonged to all. This concourse and flocking of the commen
people to Christ, is like unto the coming of those which in the beginning of
the Gospel, greedelye embrace the Doctrine of the same, whose sondrye
affections are hard to be discerned.

C. Moreover, here the Evangelist omitteth that which the other three
Evangelists have, namely, that Christ spent part of the day in teaching, and
in healing the sick: and now that the Sun was ready to set, his Disciples
prayed him to send away the people. For he thought it sufficient brieflye to
handle the same, that by this occasion he might bring us to the rest of the
text, which follows hereafter.

3. And Jesus went up into a Mountain, and there he sat with his Disciples.

M. There is no doubt but that he went a part into a desert place, to
recreate also, and to refreshe his Disciples: for the which purpose this
mountain seemed a very fit place, both for the shadow which was in the same
against the heat of the Sun, and also for the convenient places of rest.
Read the sixth of Mark, in our exposition upon the one and thirty verse.

4. And the Passover, a Feast of the Jews was nighe.

Bv. At this Feast the Jews did celebrate the memory of those benefits which
their forefathers had received in old time at the hands of God in the Land of
Egypt. M. Therefore it may here be demanded, If the Passover were at hand,
why the Lord went up to Jerusalem (according to Moses Law) rather than to
this desert mountain: Deu. 16.16
Or, if he would not go up to Jerusalem, because of the crueltye of the
Scribes and Pharisees, wherefore he exhorted not the people which followed him
to ascend thither for the obedience sake which they ought to the Law. As
touching that which concerns the person of Christ, Aunsvvere.
we may easylye answer. He had oftentimes ascended thither, lest he might
seem to contemn and break the Law of God: but when the Jews hegan to abuse
the feast days as an occasion of cruelty, he did very well to absent him
self from them, least he should by his presence, provoke his adversaries
before the time. As touching the people, it may be that they had yet time and
space enough to ascend thither: for the feast day was not already come, but
was at hand. Furthermore it was not meet that the Lord should send the
people which followed him from the Sun to the shadow, and from the truth it
self to the figure.

Moreover in this matter, Christ the end of the Law. Romans 10.4
there was no offense committed against the Law of GOD: nay, that which the
Law required was fulfilled. For, if according to the most true saying of the
Apostle, Christ be the end of the Law, that is to say, all things which
are in the Law lead unto Christ, how did they any thing contrary to the Law
of GOD, and did not rather fulfill the same, who leaving that shadowed and
figurative Passover, followed the true Passover Christ.

Let us learn therefore by this example what we ought to do, if so be
shadowed and figurative constitucions be corrupted, and are rather against the
truth, than for the truth, which they ought to serve, and do rather appear
to be the constitucions of men, than the ordinances of God. If the Law of God
ought to give place here, how much more ought that to be despised and avoided,
which is established not by Gods law, but by the Law of man? What, and from
whence these Festival days are, which are celebrated in the Church with
Idleness and wantonness, it is evident enough to be seen. Bv. Moreover
Jesus him self, which at this appointed time declared his power, does show
him self to be the true Paschall lamb, whose blood spiritually sprinkled
upon the faithful, delyuereth them from the stryking Angel. The very self
and same Lamb is the food of our souls, which being eaten by faith, saves.

5. When Jesus then lift up his eyes, and saw a great company come to him, he
says to Philippe: whence shall we bye bread, that these may eat.

M. Matthew and Mark have, So soonne as he went forth he saw the multitud: This
going forth does sufficiently declare that the Lord had hidden himself and
his disciples as it were in certain Caves of this mountain, out of the which
these two Evangelists wright that he came to se the people: and then they add
that he was touched with compassion toward them. And the cause hereof Mark
shows, saying, Because they were as sheep not having a shepherd. Luke.
9.11.
Thirdlye, Luke says, that he received them: that is to say, he gently went
forth to meet them, and entertained them. Fourthlye, Mark adds, that he
began, to teach them many things and: Luke says, that these things
concerned the kingdom of God. Fifthly both Mathewe and Luke add this also,
that he healed all those that had need to be cured. Al these things went
before the working of the Miracle of ye five Loaves and two Fishes. Wherefore,
that which our Evangelist says here, When Jesus then lift up his eyes, and
saw a great company come to him, he says to Philip, whence shall we bye,
etc. is not so to be understood as though so soon as he saw the multitude,
he talked with Philip concerning the feeding of them, seeing the same was done
about the Evening (as we shall see) after al those things which we have
repeated out of the rest of the Evangelists.

He says to Philip. C. That which we read here to be spoken to Philip
aloane, other affirm was spoken to all the rest: but in this there is no
absurdity. For it is likelye according to the Judgment of all men, that
Philip spoke unto Christ: and therefore Christ specially, makes answer to
Philip. Even as strait after he brings in Andrewe, speaking, whereas others
assign the speech to all at once. He proves his Disciples in the person of
Philip, whether they looked for the Miracle which afterward they should see.

A. And wyllingly (such is his clemencye) he takes care of them, which
forgetting them selves followed him: Read concerning this matter the exposition
upon the fifteen verse of the fourteen Chapter of Matthew.

6. (This he said to prove him: for he him self knew what he would do.)

This he said to prove him. A. Concerning the manifold kind of temptacions,
read our exposition upon the fourth Chapter of Mathewe, beginning at the third
verse.

For he him self knew. M. This clause contains in it a noate of divinity,
which belongs to no man though he be a Saint. And in these daily matters
there is no man which knows certainly what he will do.

We do many things unadvisedly by occasion, the which things we knew not
we should do, before we did them: and again we purpose many things, the
which things notwithstanding, whether we shall do or no, we are ignorant,
and oftentimes, either our mind being changed, or else being let from our
purpose, we do them not.

And verylye he has done nothing in the dispensation of our redemption, The
foreknowledge of God.
by human counsel, but by divine counsel, neither was he ignorant of any
thing before he did it, nor yet did he leave any of those things undone which
he purposed before to do.

The purposes of the wicked are oftem tims let.
Nevertheless the purposes of the wicked are vnsertayne, and are oftentimes let
by God. For the Lord is in Heaven which brings the counsels of Princes to
naught, and makes the devises of the people to be of none effect. Psa. 33.10.
A.

The Lord therefore knew not only what he would do, but also what Phillip
would answer, before he demanded the question of him. But this purpose was by
this question, to prepare his mind and the minds of the rest, to wonder at
the miracle to come, that their faith might thereby increase, and be confirmed.

7. Phillip answered him Two hundred penniworth of bread are not sufficient
for them, that every man might take a little.

C. To this end tends all those things which the Disciples bring, namly to
dehort Christ, retaining the people. And it may be that they had some private
respect unto them selves lest part of the inconvenience might redowne to
them. R. For they knew what had happened to Moses and to Aaron the Captains
of the Hebrews. For when they had brought them out of Aegipt into the desert,
and there lacked bread and water, they murmured against them, and had well nigh
stoaned them with stoanes. Exodus 17.4
For it is a hard matter to talk and persuade with the belly which wants
ears: For honger and delay cause collar to arise.

And forasmuch as these two hundred pence are severally in vallue (according to
the supputation of Budaeus) four of our English pence, and two third parts of
a penny, the said two hundred pence amount to the vallue of five and thirty
Frankes: the which make of our English coin the some of three pounds
eighteen shillings and nine pence, and this some of three pound eyghteene
shillings and nine pence, being distributed among five thousand men, every
hundred part shall have for his share eyghteene pence three farthinges, Six
mites make a far thing.
and three mites, and three fifth parts of a mite. But now add to the five
thousand a thousand women and children mo, so shall you find that Phillip
here allows to every particular person of the general number of six
thousand, three mites worth of bread to eat. But it may be (as commonly it
commtth to pass in a great multitude) that there were thought to be a great
many more. B. Mark shows that they said, Let us go and bye two hundred
penny worth of bread. Mark 6.37


It seemed therefore that they had so much money. And thus loving they were that
they were ready to bestow all that ever they had for the use of the people.

C. Nevertheless Phillip went about to terrify Christ, with the greatness of
such a multitude, as if he should have said, that they had not monye enough
to feed the people. A. For Christ had said, give ye them to eat.

8. One of his disciples, Andrew, Simon Peter's brother says unto him.

9. There is a little Lad here which has five barlye loaves and two fishes,
but what are they among so many?

Read our exposition of the fourtenth Chapter of Matthew, beginning at the
seventeenth verse.

10. And Jesus said, make the people sit down. There was much grass in the
place? So the men sat down in number about five thousand.

Make the people sit A. Read thirty and nine verse of the sixth chapter of
Mark.

So the men sat C. In that the Disciples had no better hope and trust, and had
forgotten so worthily to consider of his power as they ought to have done, they
are to be reprehended, Obedience in the Disciples and in the people.
but yet notwithstanding their prompte obedience deserves no small praise, in
that they now obaye his commandment, not knowing what he intended to do, or
what success that which they did should have. The like obeydience also was in
the people: For they all satte down at one commanding word, being vnsertayne
of the end.

The like readiness of obayinge we may behold in the waiting servant which
seruid at the marriage in Cana of Galile: For when they saw that the wine
failed, and that there was water sufficient, yet notwithstanding at the Lords
commandment they filled up the waterpottes with water to the full. John. 2.7.
C. And this is the probation of a true faith, when God commands men to
walk as it were in darkness That we may thus obaye let us learn not to be
wise in our own conceit, but to trust for prosperouse success in confused
things, seeing we follow God our Captain, which will never disapoynt his
servants. B. Moreover the Euaungelist has set down to us the time, the
place, and other circomstaunces: for his purpose was with diligence and
faithfulness, seriously to set forth the truth. A. Concerning the number of
those that sat down, ye may read in the fourteen chapter of Matthew,
beginning at the one and twenty verse.

11 And Jesus took the bread, and when he had given thanks he gave to the
disciples, and the Discipls to them that were set down: and likevvyse of the
fishes as much as they would.

For the exposition of this verse, read the foureteenth Chapter of Matthew,
beginning at the ninteenth verse.

12. When they had eaten enough, he said to his Disciples, gather up the broken
meat that remains, that nothing be lost.

B. These things are not only spoken to commend and set forth the miracle,
but also to declare, that the works and benifites of the Lord Jesus are most
perfect. For although the multitude of people was fed to the full, yet
notwithstanding, there remained an overplus of the bread and of the fishes. M.
By these words also we are taught that the Lord would have none of his good
gifts to be vnprofitablely lost: C. And herewithall also the Lord admonishes
and exhorts his Disciples and followers to liberality and honest sparing.
For the great bountifulness of GOD, Riches may not ryotouslye be spent.
ought not to provoke us to riot, prodigallitye, and excess. Therefore let
them which have abundance, remember that they shall one day give an account
of their exceeding plentye, except they do faithfullye imploye the same to
honest and good uses.

13. And they gathered it together, and filled twelve baskets with the broken
Meat of the five barleye Loaves, which broken meat remained to them that had
eaten.

Read the exposition of this verse in the fourteen Chapter of Matthew,
beginning at the twenty verse.

14. Then those men, when they had seen the miracle that Jesus did, said,
This is of a truth the same prophet that should come into the world.

A. The other Evangelists make no mention of this thanksegeuing, but in steed
thereof, Mathewe and Mark put down the number of those which had eaten of the
Loaves and Fishes: of the which matter our Evangelist has made mention before
already. So that this seems to be some profit that proceeded of the
miracle, that they confess the Messiah, to be the aucthor of the same. And
this was all that Christ looked for. M. For the sight and sense of the Miracle
moved their minds to this, to think that this Jesus was not simplye a
Prophet, Den. 28.15.
but that Prophet whom Moses foreshewed should come.

The which place no doubt by reason of the Public reading of the Law, was
commonly known. C. But that knowledge which they have conceived of Christ,
they by and by turn amysse to another end. And this is no small fault in
men, that so sone as God has revealed him self unto them, they pervert and
corrupt his truth with lies: yea, when they have entered into the right way,
they do by and by degenerate from them selves.

R. Now Christ was counted a Prophet among the common people: because he had
fed them, and had filled their bellyes: but afterward, when he commanded to
give unto Cesaer those things which belong to Cesaer, he was a flatterer: and
when he bare his Cross, he was a seducer of the people, and not worthy to
live upon the earth.

For whether the fortune of temporal things do inclyne, thither the
Judgment and affection of the waueryng multitude is carried.

15. When Jesus therefore perceived, that they vvoulde come and take him, to
make him a King, he departed again into a Mountain him self aloane.

When Jesus perceived. R. First of all, we see by this deed, that the
disposition of the common sort of people is such, that they will sooner feel
the benefit of their bellye, than of their mind.

They had seen greater Miracles, and yet notwithstanding, they never gave unto
him so magnificent a name, thus much could the fullness of the belly prevail.
And now (being as yet but rude and gross) they loking for such a Messiah as
should challenge to himself a worldlyke kingdom, consulted among them selves
to take Jesus and to make him a King, persuading them selves that they should
have plentye of all things, stoare of Vitails, Riches, pleasure, the glory
of the world, liberty, and other worldly commodityes, if so be it were their
chance to have such a King.

C. But they greatly erred, first that they took liberty to them selves, to
make them selves a King.

For the Scripture appoints this only to GOD: even as it is said in the
Psalm, Psalm. 2.6.
I have appointed my King.

Furthermore, what King would they have him? Surely an earthly King, the
which was far disagreeing from his person. Ioh. 18.36.
A. For he says, My Kingdom is not of this world. M. But why rather did
they not consult to come, to hear the word of GOD, of his mouth, according to
the words of the Prophecy? the which truly had been more agreeable to this
confession, This is of a truth the same Prophet, than to seek a kingdom.

Carnal Christians.
And this is the manner of carnal Christians, to neglect that which pertayneth
to the saving health of the inward man, and carefullye to seek that which is
earthlye: that is to say, to disdain and loathe that which truly belongs to
Christ: and for which cause he came into this world: and greedelye to follow
that thing which is not comprehended in the dispensation of Christ, taken in
hand for our salvation, and for the which he descended not into the earth.

C. Hereby let us learn how dangerous a thing it is in Divine matters,
leaving the word of God, to follow our own sense and Imagination.

For there is nothing but it does corrupt the overthwart towardness of our
mind. And what does the pretense of zeal help, when as by our overthwart and
disordered worship, we are more injurious to God, than if a man should of
purpose and wyllingly withstand his glory?

It is also here to be noated, that it is said, that they would take him and
make him a King. C. For they meant violentlye, and against his will to make him
a King. The flesh more busye in his works there is the Spirit.
M. Thus the flesh is more vehement in the wicked and ungodly purposes
thereof, than is the Spyrite in those things which are just and godly.

So Judas labored, watched, made speed, and by no means rested, until he
had most wyckedlye finyshed that which he had trayterouslye taken in hand:
Mat. 26.16
In the mean time the Apostles slepte.

So we read of the builders of the Tower of Babylon, This they begin to
do, Genesis 11.6.
neither can they now be stopped, from whatsoever they have Imagined to do.
C. But, if we desire to have that honor acceptable to God, and to his Christ,
which we give unto him, we must always consider what it does require. And
verylye they which honor GOD after their own inuencions, do after a sort
violently withstand him, seeing the foundation of true worship is, obedience.

He daparted again into a Mountain. Jesus which desired a far better
kingdom, and who came to this end, to teach us to contemn Riches,
pleasures, and the glory of this world, being not ignorant what they went
about, withdrewe himself again out of the way to the Mountain, from whence
he came before to feed them.

And he alone went priuilye aside, in such manner, that it might not be
thought that he fled.

R. For his kingdom was not carnal, but spiritual, as it was notablye
discribed before by the Prophets. For the kingdom of Christ, is the kingdom
of truth, of righteousness, of peace, and of everlasting life. Kingdom of
Christ is not of this world
For these are the Cities and Towns (if we may so speak) over which Christ
has the rule. For although he does rule and govern in the whole world, from
the one Sea to the other, yet notwithstanding, he does not rule according to
the manner of this world, neither does he desire such a kingdom as the
Princes of this world have. Of the which kingdom ye may read more in the
first of Luke, and in the seven and twentye Chapter of Mathewe.

And this is not to be pretermitted, that Christ priuilye conveyed him self
away from those that would have made him a King, and wyllinglye offered him
self to those that sought to carrye him to the Cross: Leaving an evident
example behind him for those to follow, which should succeed him in the
Cross. For he can not sincerelye Preach the Gospel, whatsoever he be which
loves kingdom and glory among men. For the kingdom of heaven does not
agree with the kingdom of this world, no more than light and darkness agree
together.

A. What can that most impudent Antechrist of Rome, answer to this? Bv. Who
through ambicion and desire to rule, has oppressed so many in this world,
that he might exalt himself above all that is worshipped, These. 2.4.
boasting him self to be God.

16. And when Eeuen was come, his Disciples went down to the Sea.

C. There is no doubt but that Christ went to hyde him self, until the people
were departed away. We know how hard a matter it is to pacifye the
seditious multitude. And if that had been openly attempted which they had
conceived in their minds, the error thereof would now have been spread
abroad: and than the infamy thereof could not so easelye have been taken
away.

R. He would not therefore give any occasion of sedicion, least they should
falsefye with open mouth, have accused Christ to be the aucthor thereof.

C. All the time that he withdrewe him self he was occupied in Prayer, as
also the other Evangelists report. And it may be that his prayer was to his
Heavenly Father to correct and amend the intemperaunce of the people.

B. And whereas his Disciples went down to the Sea, that was not done without
his commandment. For he sent them away, nay, Mat. 14.22
he constrained them to go: for that was a good occasion to get away the
people.

17. And gatte up into a Ship, and went over the Sea, toward Capernaum: and
it was now darcke, and Jesus was not come to them.

M. Whereas John says that the Disciples went over the Sea toward
Capernaum, when Mark writes that the Lord gave them commandment to go
before him to Bethsaida, it seems to have no disagreement at all.

Yea, Mathewe and Mark write that they arrived at the Land of Genesar: the
which also seems not to agree with that which our Evangelist says here,
that they went over the Sea toward Capernaum.

But if thou dilligently consider thereof, thou shall find no disagreement at
all.

In that Mark writes that the Lord commanded them to go before him to
Bethsaida, it is not repugnaunt, neither with that which John says here, that
they went to Capernaum, nor with that which he says with Mathewe that he
arrived at the land of Genesar. For Bethsaida (as appears by Luke) is even
upon the brinkes side of the desert where the Lord fed the multitude.

For Luke says, that the Lord went a part by ship into a desert place of
the City of Bethsaida. Therefore the Lord commanded him to go before him
toward Bethsaida, to the side of the shore, either because this was the more
convenient place of passage, or else because by this commandment, he intended
somewhat else, which is unknown to us. That also which Mathewe and Mark have,
that they went over to the land of Genesar, is nothing contrary to that which
John writes, that they went to Capernaum, because they speak generallye of
the land to the which they arrived, and John perticularlye of the City
Capernaum, to which they came.

Therefore, there is no such disagreement between these places, as may at the
first sight seem to be.

And it was now dark. C. John pretermitteth many Circumstaunces, which the
other have: as by reading them ye may see.

18. And the Sea arose with a great wind that blewe.

This history is expounded in the fourteen Chapter of Matthew, from the fortye
and eight verse unto the fiftye and three verse.

19. So when they had rowed about five and twenty or thirty furlongs, they saw
Jesus walking on the Sea, and drawing nigh to the Ship, and they were afraid.

B. Because the Disciples of Christ did not sufficiently perceive and know the
Lords power, by the miracle of the Loaves, they were to be exercised by this
perryll and danger of the Sea. R. For the Tempest of the Sea was not raised
about the Disciples by chance, but by the wise dispensation of Christ, he
being absent, whereby his presence might the more earnestlye be desired of his
Disciples, and might learn how necessary Christ was in aduersitye. Afflictions
Euenso the godly are afflicted with Crosses, with afflictions, and with
calamities, that they might with more fervent prayer call upon Christ by
faith: Contrarywyse the wicked, the more they are afflicted, the farther they
go from God. For they do not acknowledge the Lord in tribulation, but Satan.

C. And it may seem very absurd, that the Disciples of Christ are so vexed,
when others have quiet sailing: but so the Lord oftentimes exercises his with
grievous perrilles, that they may the more familliarlye know him in time of
their deliverance.

A. Read for larger matter in the fourteen of Matthew, and in the sixth of
Mark also.

20. But he says unto them, It is I, be not afraid.

C. Here S. John sets before us, as in a glass, what knowledge of Christ it
is we can conceive without the word, and what it brings. For if he give unto
us but a bare show of his Diuinitye only, by and by we fall to our own
imaginations, and every man makes to him self an Idol in steed of Christ.
After the error of the mind, follows trembling, and confused fear of the
mind. Knowledge of God comes rather by the word than by Miracles.
But when he begins to speak, by and by, by his voice, we receive sound and
perfect knowledge, and then we have joy in our minds and peace of conscience.
For there is great weight in those words.

It is I, be not afraid. For we are here taught, that we have sufficient cause
of trust in the presence of Christ, in so much that we may be in peace and
safetye. But this pertayneth to none, saving only to the Disciples of Christ:
for afterward we shall see that the wicked, by the same voice were thrown
down at his feet. The voice of Christ will discern the wicked from the
Children of GOD, John. 18.6
for he is sent a Judge to destroy the reprobate and unbelieving: wherefore
they can not abide his sight, but they are by and by confounded.

But the godly, who know that he is given to them for a merciful Savior,
so soon as they hear his word, which is to them a sure pledge, both of his
Divine love, and also of their salvation, do recover their strength as it were
from death to life, and do ioyfullye behold the clear sky, after the
stormye tempest, and do dwell in the earth in peace, and being conquerers of
all evil, do set his defense against all perrilles.

21. And they would have received him into the Ship: and immediatelye the
Ship was at the land, whether they went.

The other Evangelists say that they received him into the Ship: the which
our Evangelist does not deny, but says that by and by the Ship arrived to
the land whether they went.

The Miracle consisted in this, that he walked upon the Sea, and that he
made the Sea calm, and thyrdly, that the Ship by and by arrived to land by
the power of Christ. Mathewe adds a fourth part concerning Peter, in the
fourteen Chapter.

C. Therefore we see here, that the Lord does not only erect and comfort
his Disciples with his word, but also in very deed delivers them from
fear, allaying the tempest.

M. Let us learn therefore by this example, to whom we are bound for this,
that being so oftentimes tempted, we are not overcome in temptacions.

22. The day following, when the people which stood on the other side of the
Sea, saw that there was no other Ship there, save that one whereunto his
Discyples were entered, and that Jesus went not in with his Disciples into the
Ship, but that his Discyples were gone away alone.

Bv. By little and little the Eangelist descends to more nygh occasions of that
most divine sermon which ye Lord made in the schole of the Capernaits
concerning the sum and brief Compendium of our Religion, namelye, that he
is the true Son of God, sent of the Father from Heaven into the world, to
quicken all mankind, of the which quickening the faithful that believe in him
are partakers. But the circumstances which the Evangelist puts down here,
pertain to this end, to teach that the multitude perceived that Christ went
over the Lake by his divine power, and not by Mariners skyll. That therefore,
which Christ did in walking upon the Water, did not only profit the Disciples
to confirm their faith, but was yet more fruitful: because the day following
the whole multitude might easilye gather, that he was carried over by his own
power, and not by Ship.

23. Howbeit there came other Ships from Tiberias, nigh unto the place where
they did eat bread, after that the Lord had given thanks.

After the Lord had given thanks. C. This repeticion of thanksgiving is not
in vain. For his meaning is, that Christ obtained by Prayers, that those few
Loaves did suffice to feed so many men: and because we are cold and slow to
Prayer, he does twice put us in mind of the same. Therefore we ought the
more to noate this saying, because we see at this day, a great part of the
world, like brute Beasts, to give them selves to security.

24. When the People therefore saw that Jesus was not there, neither his
Disciples, they also took Shipping, and came to Capernaum, seeking for Jesus.

25. And when they had found him on the other side of the Sea, they said unto
him, Rabbi, when came thou hither.

Capernaum was not situate upon the shore, which was on the other side of the
Lake. For Tiberias stands in that part of the Lake where it is broadest: next
unto that stands Magdalon, otherwise called Dalmanutha: then Bethsaida, and
then Capernaum, which lies at the mouth of the River of Iordane.

So that whereas John places the same on the other side of the Lake: we must
not so take it: as though Capernaum were set on the one shore, and Tiberias
quight cross on the other shore of the Lake: but because the Lake comes
compass or round like a bow, so that Tiberias standing toward the one
corner of the bow, and Capernaum at the other end (notwithstanding, all upon
one shore) it must needs be said, because of the bellye that comes in
between the two corners, that the Disciples went over or cross the Sea, when
they went from Tiberias to Capernaum. Therefore according to the common manner
of speech, the Evangelist says that he went over the Sea, because they
could not go the right and usual way, but by Ship: For by land they
should have fetched a far greater compass, by reason of the bellying in of the
Sea. M. Wherefore the multitude sailing through the same Lake, had a quiet and
calm Sea: for the Evangelist here makes no mention of any contrary wind, or
of any tempest.

The common multitude and carnal people, being carried with hired Ships,
sail in this Sea void of fear or care: but Christ's Ship is subject to
Tempests, as is said before.

Rabbi, when came thou hither. Bv. They ask this question not without
flatterye, declaring thereby that they did greatly marvel at this his
unwonted manner of sailing.

26. Jesus answered them and said, Verily, verilye, I say unto you, ye seek
me, not, because ye saw the miracles, but because ye did eat of the loaves
and were filled.

Bv. The Lord Jesus least he might seem, to receive, and to allow
flatterers, or to boast of his own power, answers not to the demand: B.
because he knew that of vain curiosity they enquired: C. but does rather
reprehend them, because they unadvisedly rushe after him. For they were able
to show no true or lawful reason of their deed, because they sought for
another matter in Christ, than for Christ him self.

B: Therefore he taking occasion of the Loaves, with the which he filled them
the day before by strange miracle, he began to exhort all that were in the
Sinagoge to faith in him, by which they might be filled with everlasting
benefits and graces.

Bv. And he conuerteth his whole speech, to those things which he thought to
be far more profitable: and much more necessary: and because his speech
might have the more credit with all men, he begins at the first with a
serious affirmation and oathe.

C. And because men persuade them selves, that they do notably seek Christ,
when as in deed they do counterfaite and falsefye his whole power: according
to his manner, he swears verilye, verilye, twice, even as though he would
by his oathe bewraye that vice, which by our Hipocrisy, is covered and hyd.

Ye seek me. M. For as much as this answer of Christ does consist of two
parts, first he opens to the Jews, and reprehendeth the disease and
corruption of their carnal mind, because they seek him not, because of the
signs, but for their bellies sake. Notwithstanding, it can not be denied, but
that they had respect unto the Miracle: yea, the Evangelist shows at the
first, that they were moved by the sight of the signs to follow Christ. But,
because they abused the Miracles to another end, he does iustlye cast it in
their teeth, saying: that they have more respect and regard to their bellyes,
than to signs: even as if he should deny them so truly to profit in the
works of God, as it became them. For this had been profit in deed, so to
have acknowledged Christ to be the Messiah, that they should have submitted
them selves to him to have been governed and taught, and so by him to have
aspyred to the Heavenly kingdom. But they looked for nothing more at his
hand, than to live and prospere well in this world. But this is to spoil
Christ of his principal power.

For therefore he was given of the Father, and revealed him self to men, that
they being endued with the holy Ghost, he might frame them to the Image of
GOD, and being endued with his righteousness, he might bring us to
everlasting life.

Therefore this is the first thing in seeking Christ, to contempne the world,
and to seek the kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof.

27. Labor not for the meat which perishes, but for that which endures to
everlasting life, which meat the Son of man shall give unto you: For him
has God the Father sealed.

Labor not for the meat. M. Christ adds to the foresaid reprehension and
admonicion, by which he does both dehort from that which is hurtful, and
also exhorts to that which is profitable and necessary: the which is a
manifest token of a mind reprehending without malice.

Reprehension and exhortacion must go together.
For they which for this cause only reprehende that they may bring the
offendour to ignominye and shame, and seek not his amendment to salvation, do
neither instruct, teach, reprove, correct, nor amend.

But this Schoolemaister of righteousness and life, does both reprehend the
offendour, least he should be ignorant of his fault, and then exhorts him
to amendment, least be should perish. This is the duty of a true friend,
of the which the Prophet speaks saying, Psa. 141.5
Let the righteous smite me, for that is a benefit: and let him reprove me:
and it shall be a precious Oil, that shall not break my head. 1. Cor. 4.14.
And Paul after reprehension, says, I write not these things to shame you,
but as beloved sons to warn you. 2. Tim. 2.24.
Also in another place he exhorts Timothe, to reprove others with patience
and meekness.

C. Christ therefore teaches whereunto he would have his Disciples bend
their studies, namelye, to attain everlasting life.

But because according to our gross disposition, we are always addicted to
earthlye things, therefore first he errecteth that natural diesase in us,
before he show what we must do.

This had been a simple doctrine, Labor not for the meat which perishes,
but because he knew that men's senses were tied and bound with earthlye
cares, first of all he commands them to be loased from those bands, that
they may arise toward Heaven. Labor is commended. Ephe. 4.28. These. 2.10.
Not that he forbids his Disciples to labor, by which they may get their
daily living (for as the Scripture condempneth Idleness, so it commands
honest labor) but admonishes them less to regard this earthlye life, than
that which is heavenly.

M. Therefore he says they must put from them that disordered care of the
bellye, and receive the present occasion of heavenly food. So when he said
to Martha, Martha, Martha, Lu. 10.41.
thou art troubled about many things: but one is necessary: Mary has chosen
the better part, which shall not be taken from her: he did not condemn the
duetye of Hospitallity, and diligence and entertayning of Ghostes (which is
commended in Abraham, and is commended to us in the Apostle) but that ouermuche
care about worldly things: Genesis 18.3. Heb. 13.2.
by which it came to pass that she neglected the present grace of Heavenly
Doctrine, which Marye more highlye esteemed, than to neglect the same by the
care of corporal things.

C. And Christ here by a Metaphor calls all that pertayneth to newness of
life, meat. For we know that our Souls are fed by the doctrine of the
Gospel, when the same is effectual in us by the power of the holy Ghost. The
Gospel is the food of out souls.
Therefore seeing faith is the life of the soul, whatsoever nourishes and
increases faith, is very well compared to meat.

But for that which endures. He calls this kind of meat incorruptible,
and says that the same endures to everlasting life, to the end we might
know that our souls are not fed for a day, but are nourished for the hope of
blessed immortallitye: for the Lord does heginne the work of our Salvation,
that he may profit and accomplish the same against the day of his coming:
it is meet therefore that we receive the gifts of the Spyrite, that they
may be pledges and seals to us of everlasting life.

For although the reprobate having once tasted of this meat, do perbrake it
up again, and can not retain it, yet notwithstanding, the Souls of the
faithful do feel his force abiding in them, when they do perceive that the
power of the holy Ghost in his gifts, is not corruptible, but ever abiding.

Heavenly things and earthlye things.
M. Wherefore they which have only regard to an earthlye life, are occupied
in earthlye things: but they which respect an eternal and heavenly life, are
whollye given to everlasting, and celestial things.

The sons of GOD also use earthlye things, being endued with the hope of
everlasting life, but they use them for the necessitye of nature, and so, that
thou may perceive that they look for a far better thing than this present
life.

C. Moreover, vain and wicked is their opinion, which by this word (Labor)
gather that we by our works deserve everlasting life: for Christ as is said
figuratiuelye exhorts men to apply them selves to the meditacion of a
Heavenly life, being most commonly affected to the world. Also Christ him self
takes away all doubt, when he adds, Which meat the Son of man shall
give to you.

For in that we obtain it by his gift, Heaven is not gotten by merits.
no man gets the same by his own industrye and labor. There is in these
words some show of contrarietye: but the reconciliation is easilye made,
because the spiritual meat of the Soul, is the free gift of Christ, and
because it becomes us to bend our whole heart and mind to be partakers of
so great a benefit.

M. He says not, which the son of man shall obtain for you: but, Which
the Son of man shall give unto you. 1. Pet. 2.25.
Therefore the Son of man is the Lord of life, and the Sheephearde of our
Souls. Otherwise how could he give unto us the meat of life?

But, to be the Lord of life, and the Sheephearde of our souls, is not such
a thing, that it can simplye belong to the Son of man, be he never so holy,
and never so mighty, no nor to that holy and mighty Moses.

It is necessary therefore that this Son of man be endued with divine
power, Christ the son of man, and the son of God
by which he may give this food of eternal life. Christ then, is boath the
Son of man, and the Son of GOD, that is to say, God, and man.

And whereas in speaking of so great a matter, he calls him self the Son
of man, and not the Son of God, it is not without cause. For he speaks as
the mediator between GOD and men, and frames him self to the weak capasity
of his hearers. Math. 9.6.
So in another place he says, That ye may know that the Son of man has
power in earth to forgive sins.

For him has God the Father sealed. C. He confirms the sentence going
before, because he was sent of the Father to that intent and purpose.

And by an apt Metaphor he alludeth to the ancient and usual manner of
sealing: for what so ever men would have confirmed by their aucthority, they
seal with their Ringes.

Even so Christ, that he might not seem to take any thing upon him,
pronounces that these duties were enjoined to him of the Father, and that this
decree of the Father, is made manifest as it were by a plain and express
seal. A. So that the Father has sealed him, that is to say, has anointed
him with the holy Ghost above all his fellows, that he might be the savior
of all men, and the Lord of Angels.

This is he which knows the Father alone, and makes others also to know
him by sending the holy Ghost into the hearts of his Disciples, the teacher
of all truth.

C. Herevppon it follows that their labor is not in vain, which commit
their Souls to Christ to be fed.

Let us know then that in Christ we have life set before us, that every one
of us might aspyre to the same, not by chance, but by assured hope of the
succes. Notwithstanding, we are herewithall taught that they are accounted
counterfaytes before GOD, which give this praise to any other, than to Christ.

Whereby it is manifest that the Papists are falsefiers of all parts of their
doctrine: For so many as place means of salvation in any other than in Christ
they do as it were cancel and race this seal of GOD, which aloane is
authentical, and wickedlye corrupt the same.

But we, least we should fall into this horrible sin, do learn to serve
Christ whollye and aloane, and to leave unto him all that the Father has
given him.

M. The Jews also in vain persuade them selves that they have life without
this Mediator, because they seek for that in GOD the Father which he would
have sought for in his Son.

The Turks also forsaking this Mediatoure, do admit the Intercescion of
Mahomet and others. Acts. 4.12.
But there is but one only way to the Father, namelye, Christ Jesus, and
there is Salvation in no other than in him.

28. Then said they unto him, what shall we do that we might work the works
of God.

B. By this that the Lord exhorted, to work, or to seek the meat which
abides to everlasting life, these men easelye gathered and understood, that
he spoke of Spiritual meat: C. and that they ought to have a farther regard
than to the commodityes of this present life.

B. But they thought that this meat might be gotten by their works: therefore
they demanded what they should do to work the works of God, that is to
say, which might be acceptable unto GOD, and which might bye that meat.

C. But they which thus demand are partlye deceived, because they know not
the way, how to work: for they do not consider that GOD does give unto us
by the hand of his son whatsoever is necessary to the Spyrituall life.

First of all they demand what they must do: then, when they come to speak
of the worckes of God, they wander they know not whether.

Thus they bewraye their ignorance of the grace of God. M. And this error
has been in all ages, and times, that men have thought to win salvation by
their works.

C. Howbeit these men seem here proudlye to reason with Christ, as though he
had reproved them unjustly: as if they should say, Do thou think that
we have no care for everlasting life? What is that then which thou requyrest
at our hands, more then that which we do? B. Have we not the Law of
Moses, by which we are justified? and by which we learn what works they
are, which GOD requires at our hands to be done. Do thou make a new
Law, by which we ought to frame our lives? What works can thou reckon to
us, which are not comprehended and expressed in the Law of Moses? R. We are
Circumcised, we offer Sacrifices daily, we eat no Swynes flesh, we keep
the Sabbath day, and we fast: are not these good works whereby we may be
justified? Does not GOD require these things at our hands by the Law? We
are called a holy people: but how should we be holy, but by the
righteousness of the Law?

Therefore, they seem not to question with Christ upon a Godly desire,
which they have to learn, but upon contempt, disdain, and presumption, as
though they were already sufficientlye instructed out of the Law, what works
God requires to attain to righteousness.

A. But they went far astraye, And therefore.

39. Jesus answered and said to them, This is the vvorcke of GOD, that ye
believe on him, whom he has sent,

M. He does not only answer the question of this people, but also
expounds that part of the admonicion, where he said, Labor for the meat
which perishes not.

B. And here is a figure called Imitacion. For, because they asked the question
concerning works, and no works can perform that which they sought for,
namelye, the food of everlasting life, the Lord Imitated them: the work he
called Faith, which is an assured persuasion of the goodness of GOD, and an
undoubted hope of salvation from him, the which faith the inspiration of the
holy Ghost works in the minds of the elect, Verse. 44.
which hereafter he calls the drawing of his Father.

C. Because therefore they had spoken of works, Christ puts them in mind
of one work, that is to say, of Faith: by which he declares that whatsoever
men take in hand without Faith, is vain and unprofitable: and that Faith
only suffices: because God requires this alone at our hands, that we
believe.

For there is here a secreete comparison between Faith and the works of men.
As if he should say, Men busye them selves in vain, when they seek to
please God without Faith, even as if they which coming out of the way, can
not attain the Goal.

R. For it is Faith only which iustifyeth, Faith only justifies.
and this work aloane God requires to the fulfylling of the Law. For faith
apprehends Christ, and Christ is the fulfylling of the Law to
righteousness, to all that believe.

And hereby we may learn that carnal strength, man's will, works, Romans
10.4
and humayne devises, the external observation of the Law, Sacrifices, and
the keeping of the Sabbath, are of no force to attain to righteousness, but
only Faith in Christ, which is the gift of GOD, and not to be gotten by
man's strength.

C. And yet notwithstanding, this place is not against love, as though other
works were superfluous. For Faith neither excludes Love, nor no other good
works, seeing it contains all good works in it self.

For faith is called the only work of GOD, because we possessinge Christ by
the same, are made the sons of GOD, that he may govern us by his spyrite.

Because therefore Christ does not separate from Faith the fruits thereof,
it is no maruayle if he place in the same, (if we may so speak) the Helm
and Rudder of the Ship.

M. But if this question had been proposed to any Pharisee, he would have
used another manner of answer, and rather have said, A. Pharisees.
This is the work of GOD, that ye be Circumcised, that ye be Purifyed, that
ye keep the Sabbath day, that ye offer Sacrifices, and that ye do such like
works as these.

Or if the same question had been proposed to any Papiste, he would by and
by have answered, A. Papist.
This is the work of GOD, to fast often, to Pray much, to hear Masses, to
go to Confession, and such like, with the which, ungodly men do daily
more and more defyle them selves, not regarding this only work of GOD,
without the which no man can attain to everlasting life.

C. Moreover, vain is their cavil, which by the pretense of this place
contend that we are justified by good works, seeing that Faith does
iustifye, and seeing the same is also called the work of God.

First of all it is manifest that Christ speaks improperlye, when he gives
to Faith the name of working, Romans 3.17.
even as Paul also does, when he compares the Law of Faith, and the Law
of works together.

Secondlye, when we deny men to be justified by works, we mean those
works, by the merit whereof men think they may win Gods favor. But as
for faith it brings nothing unto GOD, but rather sets a man naked and
emptye before GOD, that he may put on Christ, and be replenished with his
grace.

Wherefore faith is a passive work, Faith does not iustifye as a Meretoryous
work.
to the which no reward may be given: neither does it bring any other
righteousness than that which he receives of Christ.

30. They said therefore unto him, what sign show thou then, that we may
see and believe thee? What do thou work.

What sign. C. This wickedness does sufficientlye declare how truly it is
said in another place, Mat. 12.39
This wicked generation seeks a sign. They were at the first drawn unto
Christ by the wonderful show of signs: and being amassed at the sight of a
new miracle, they confessed Christ to be the Messiah, and upon hope hereof
they would have made him a King: and yet now they require a sign, as of one
whom they knew not, and had never seen before.

Whereupon comes such sudden forgetfulness, but because they being
unthankful to God, are stark blind at the sight of his power? And there is
no doubt but that they did disdain and contemn all the miracles which
hitherto they had seen, because Christ did not follow their wills, and
because they did not find him such a one as they imagined him to be.

If they had been put in hope of earthly felicity, they would daily have
extolled him, and without all doubt have saluted him by the names of a Prophet
of the Messiah, and of the son of God: but now, because he reprehendeth them
for that they were to carnally addicted, they think it good to hear him no
more, but do withstand him, saying, What sign show thou that we may see
and believe thee?

What do thou work. Bv. As if they should say, Thou speak much in
thine own commendation, as though thou were sent into the world, to save and
redeem mankind.

R. Thou requirest that we should believe in thee as in the Savior sent of
God: thou say that Faith in thee is the work of GOD, whereby the food of
everlasting life is gotten: but do thou think us so scencelesse and
foolish that thou speaking these things we will straight way believe thee,
and reverence thee alone, and forsake Moses, and the righteousness of the
Law? By what signs, by what miracles, do thou confirm the aucthoritye of
thy doctrine.

Bv. But if thou be that manner of man which thou would seem and be
accounted to be, show this unto us by some heavenly signs, by which we
being convicted as by invincible arguments, we may now boldelye receive thee,
and may believe thee as the Son of GOD, and Savior of the world.

B. To believe, here signifies wholye to depend upon him, whom thou
beleeuest. So also the people beeleeued Moses.

Exo. 14.31.
M. Here we see the disposition of carnal men, who so long as faith in Christ
is required, are enemies: of the which we have experience in many at this
day. C. For in the beginning, Carnal Gospeleres
because they persuade themselves that Christ will be favorable to their
sins, they earnestlye receive his Gospel, and require no probation of the
same: but when they are called to deny themselves, and to bear the Cross,
then they begin to forsake Christ, and to demand from whence the Gospel
had his beginning: to be short, Christ is no more their Master so soon as
he denies their desires.

M. Othersome require miracles as though the doctrine of Christ were not
sufficiently proved al ready, boath by miracles and also by the Scipturs. A.
But wisdom is justified of her Chrildren.

31. Our fathers did eat manna in the wilderness, as it is written, He gave
them bread from heaven.

B. Hereby it appears what these men sought for, namely, that they might
wander up and down with the Lord idelly, and be fed of him without labor,
even as the people long before had been fed in the wilderness forty years
with Manna. C. Therefore our Savior Christ gauled them, when he said that
they came like to brute beasts to fill their bellyes: for they bewraye this
their gross affection when they require such a Messiah as may feed them.

M. This is another argument of their witstandinge Christ. They object Moses
and the Fathers, and they pretend their authority to cloak their
incredulity wythall, as contrary to that faith which Christ required to be in
him.

B. As if they should say, What workest thou that we may believe thy thy
words.

Thou have once fed five thousand of us, with five Loaves and two Fishes:
but Moses fed six hundedered thousand of our Fathers, or there aboutes
with bread from heaven for the space of fortye years. But as yet thou have
showed us no such sign. It is better therefore that we be Moses Disciples
than thy Disciples, and to depend upon his word than of thine.

C. But whereas they extol the grace of GOD in the Manna, that they do very
subtly, to overthrow the Doctrine of Christ, by which he commended the
moderate desire of corporal meat. For on the contrary part they do oppose
the glorious name of Manna, which was called bread from heaven, and Angels
food.

But the holy Ghost does not call Manna bread from heaven, although GOD
fylling the bellyes of his people as men fill Hogs, gave them no better
thing.

Therefore they have no excuse at all, when they do wickedlye reject the
spiritual food of the soul, which GOD now offers to them.

M. For Moses does sufficientlye declare, why the Lord did feed the people
with Manna, saying, And he gave thee Manna to eat which neither thou nor thy
Fathers knew, to the end he might show to thee, that manne shall not live
by bread only but by every word which proceeds out of the mouth of GOD.

B. Manna is called the bread of Heaven and of Angels, because it rayned from
heaven, by the Ministerye of Angels.

A. There are some which interpret this to be the bread of Princes, or of
great men, because of the Hebrew word, which in another place, signifies
princes, and noble men.

32. Then Jesus said to them, verelye, verelye, I say unto you Moses gave
you not that bread from heaven: but my father gives you the true bread from
heaven.

Verelye I say unto you. Bv. The Lord knowing well enough how filthy their
affections were, answered nothing to the sign which they required partly
because he came not to fill the bellyes of the hungary, nor to play Pageants
before every one, Luke 23.9.
(for the which cause also he made no answer to Herod) and partly because
the day before he had showed so manifest a sign to the people, that there
needed not the repeticion of many words. The Lord had proved by that sign
that he was the same Prophet, whom hitherto the Fathers had looked for. And the
very same men which in this place require a sign, confessed then that truth
which now they doubt of.

For they had said, This is verily that Prophet which should come into the
world. Wherefore he faring as thoug he did not see the rudeness of the
multitude, their ingratitude, inconstancy, and their malice, goes about by
pure symplicity to bring them to true and perfect knoweledge of the mystery of
Faith.

M. And because he knew that this people did to much hang upon Moses, as
though he had given to the Fathers those things which pertayned to life, and
therefore did not ryghtlye judge of the miracle of Manna, nor truly
understand that celestial bread, much less desire the same, he uses an
earnest asseueration. But Christ seems to deny that which was cited out of
the Psalm: yet it is otherwise: for he speaks only by comparison. The
bread of heaven is called Manna, which nourishes the body only: but that is
truly and properlye judged to be the bread of heaven, which is the
spiritual nutriment of the soul.

Therefore Christ here opposes the world against heaven: because the
incorruptible life is only to be sought for in the kingdom of GOD.

Moreover truth in this place is not compared with figures, as oftentimes else
where it is: but Christ respects what is the true life of man: namelye by
which he differs from brute Beasts, and by which he excels among
creatures.

Bv. Moses truly gave corporal meat, which nourished men's bodies, and not
their souls, preserving the life natural, but nothing profiting the life
spiritual: neither came the same ^ut of heaven but rayned only out of the
clouds.

But my father gives you. C. As if he should say, The Manna which Moses gave
did profit nothing to heavenly life, but now the true bread of heaven is
offered to you. A. Before he had said, Which the son of man shall give unto
you: and now he makes the Father rather aucthor of this gift than himself:
but he means that the same is given by his hand. So the Antithesis or
comparison is not beetweene God and Moses, but between Moses and Christ.

But Christ names the Father here for more reverence sake: as if he should
say, Acknowledge me to be the Minister of GOD, by whose hand he will feed
your souls to everlasting life.

Bv. For the Father sent the son into the earth, for thk accomplishing of
man's salvation. So that no creature can give the true bread of life to men:

So impossible it was that Moses should give the same by corporal meat. 2.
Cor. 10


C. But this seems to disagree with the doctrine of Paul. For the Apostle
calls man spiritual food.

But we answer, Christ speaks here according to their capasitie with whom
he had to do: Romans 4.11
neither is this unwonted and siledome found in the Scripture. We see how
diuerselye Paul himself speaks of circumsition: when he handeleth the
Institution of the same, He confesses that it was the Seal of Faith: but
when he contendeth with false Apostles, he rather makes it the seal of
malediction

Let us here consider what was objected to Christ, namelye that he was not
proved to be the Messiah, except he did supplye the want of corporal food.

Therefore he does not set before their eyes, of what thing man was a
figure, but denies this to be the true bread with the which Moses filled
men's bellies.

33. For the bread of GOD is he which comes down from heaven, and gives
life to the world.

For the bread of God is he. Bv. Now more playnelye and fully he explayneth
that which he had spoken even now concerning the breeade:

C. And he reasons thus, The same is the bread of heaven, which came down
from heaven to give life to this world: In Manna there was noe such thing:
Therefore the same was not the heavenly bread.

Nevertheless he confirms that which he said before, that he was sent of
the Father to feed men after a far more excelent manner then Moses did.
Manna descended not from Gods kingdom
Man descended from the visible heaven, that is to say out of the clouds, but
not from the everlasting kingdom of GOD, from whence life flows unto us:
wherefore it was not the true bread of heaven, as was this bread whom GOD
sent for the life of the world.

He calls now that the bread of-GOD, which before he called the bread of
heaven, not that the same proceeded from any other then from GOD who sustaineth
us with bread in this present life: but because he is judged divine which
quickens souls to blessed immortality.

B. For this bread is GOD, who alone by his spirit, and by his and the
knoweledge of the Father feeds to life: that is to say, causes men to live
for ever in bliss.

Which comes down from heaven. C. In the descendinge from heaven two
things are to be noated, first that we have divine life in Christ, because
he is come from GOD that he might be to us the author of life: secondly
because the celestial life is nere unto us insomuche that we shall not need
neither to ascend above the clouds, nor sail over the sea to seek the same.

For therefore Christ descended to us because no man could assende to him.

And gives life to the world. This place teaches that the whole world is
dead to God, Life only in Christ.
so far forth as the same is not quickened by Christ: because life shall
never be found in any other than in him.

So that here all manner of worship belonging boath to the Jews, and also to
the Gentiles is rejected, all the Philosophye and wisdom of the Gentiles, and
all the rites and ceremonies of the Jews, with the whole Law, have no manner
of power to quicken: otherwise GOD had sent his Son in vain, which is this
heavenly bread to quicken and to save the world.

M. All men here for the most part by this word (world) understand the
elect, even as they do in this place also. John. 3 16.
So GOD loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son that all that
believe in him should not perish, but have life everlasting.

34 Then said they unto him, Lord evermore give us this bread.

C. There is no doubt but that they speak Ironice, that is to say meaning
the contrary, thereby to noate Christ of vanity, because he boasted that he
would give the bread of life, M. As if they should have said, we are so
far from gainsaying this bread of the which thou speak, that we desire
always to receive the same of thee, that we may never die, but live for ever.
R. Verily if thou would ever give us this bread, we would then acount thee
to be that great Messiah, and would worship thee for Christ. For if thou
would perform that which thou do promise, we should prosper well, we
should not sweat with labor, but should live in most pleasant ease. But can
thou give that to us which thou thy self want? Thou promisest bread of
life, and yet thou want boath a Garner and Wheat to bake corporal bread
with all: how then can thou give us that more precious bread?

Bv. After this manner spoke the woman of Samaria, Lord give me this water
that I thirst not, nor come hither to draw.

Even so flesh and blood derideth the Gospel, because the same being in
outward show very base and contemptible, promises all everlasting
goodness, when as in the mean time it suffers the faithful to hunger, to
thirst, to pine with cold, to be banished and to be slain.

Mat. 27.42. Luke 4.23.
So also it was said to Christ, He saved others but himself he could not save.
And in another place, Physician heal thy self.

Even so wicked men, when they reject the promises of God, being not content
with this one wickedness, make Christ the cause and aucthor of their
infidelity.

35. And Jesus said unto them, I am the bread of life: he that comes to me
shall not hunger: and he that believes on me shall never thirst.

I am the bread of life. B. The Lord who knew that there was in this
multitude his elect which heard him with fruit, and that the Gospel must be
openly preached to others also, that they might have no excuse, being nothing
at all dismayde with their wickedness, rashenesse, and disdain, which deryed
him, began openly to tell them, boath who was this celestial bread in deed,
and also how they might attain the same.

C. First of all he teaches that they have before their face that bread,
which mockingly they required: secondelye he reprehendeth them. But he
begins with doctrine, that he might declare them to be convinced of the
greater ingratitude. M. He might have said, I am the Savior and the
quickener: but there is more consolation and sweetness contained in this,
that he calls himself the bread of life. For first of all what other use
is there of bread, than to feed and nourishe? Even so verelye the Son of
God descended to us from heaven for no other cause, than that he might be to
us meat and life: furthermore, how precious bread is to the hungary, and how
greedely the same is sought experience teaches.

Euenso how greedely this bread of life Christ ought to be sought for of us,
it is declared by this metaphore of the bread: the which figure to teach the
rude and ignoraunte is more apt and meet, than simple and plain speech.

Howbeit we must noate, Bread does not give life.
that by this word bread, the quickening power of Christ is not to be
expressed as we feel the same: for bread does not give life, but does only
nourish and preserve the same in that state in the which it is.

But by the benifite and goodness of Christ, we do not only retain life,
but have also the beginning of life: Wherefore this similitude is improper in
some part. But there is no absurditye at all in this, because Christ frames
his Oration and talk by the circomstaunce of that which he spoke before.

He that comes to me. M. Now he shows how this bread may be taken to bring
life: and defines the manner of eating, which is when we receive the same by
faith.

For it does nothing at all profit the unbelieving that Christ is the bread
of life, because they always abide empty: but Christ is then made our bread,
when we come hungerye unto him that he may fill us. B. To come unto Christ,
is to receive him for our Savior, and to consecrate our selves wholly unto him.
To whom soever it is given to do this, he shall not hunger that is to say,
he shall want no good thing.

The very same also he now speaks by another allegory.

And he that believes on me. In like manner to believe in Christ is to come
unto Christ, and to acknowledge him our Savior: but not to thirst is to want
no good thing, but to be thoroughly blessed: the which begins to be here in
those, which have given themselves wholly unto Christ by faith, and it is
finished, when this body of ours, being restored again in the latter day by
the power of Christ shall bear his Image, 1. Cor. 15.49
which is the heavenly Adam.

Shall never thirst C. This seems to be added without reason: because the
office of the bread is not to quench thirst, but to put away hunger.
Therefore Christ attributes more to the bread than the nature thereof will
bear. But in that he takes the name of bread only, he does it to this
end, because he had so made his comparison with his heavenly power, by which
our souls are sustained in life: Nevertheless by this word bread, he
understands all manner of nutriment, and that according to the common manner of
his country. For the Hebrews by a figure called Sinecdoche (which is when
part is put for the whole) use to call dinner and supper, eating of bread,
and in the fourteenth Chapter of Luke. Also when we ask of God our daily
bread, we comprehend drink, and the other necessary parts of our life.

The scence and meaning thereof is this Whosoever shall come to Christ, to
receive life of him shall be filled with all manner of necessaryes to the full

R. To this also the prophets had respect, when they promised plenty of all
good things, at the coming of the Messiah: as when the Prophet says, They
shall not be hongary, neither shall they be thirsty, neither shall heat smite
them, nor the Son: For he that has compassion on them, shall lead them,
Esa. 49.1^
even to the Springes of waters shall he drive them. To be short: he has all
things, which by faith possesses Christ: For Christ is the treasure of all
good things: and on the contrary part: he has nothing, although he
possesses all the riches of this world, which has not Christ by Faith. If
therefore thou want, thou haste not faith: If thou have says thou want not.

36. But I say unto you, that ye also have seen me, and yet ye believe not.

M. In these words he strikes the hardenesse and obstinacy of their hearts by
which it came to pass that they seeing, saw not, neither yet believed?
affirming that this their incredulity was the cause that they could not taste
the virtue of this bread, and that the same would bring to pass that they
should hear in vain whatsoever was spoken concerning that bread: C. For they
do wickedly reiecte the gift offered to them and therefore he takes from them
all excuse.

For except he had declared unto them his power, and had made manifest that he
came from God, the pretense of ignorance might have mittigated their falt: but
in that they do reiecte his doctrine whom before they confessed to be the
Lords Messiah, it is extreme disdain and contempt.

It is most true that men would never have so wilfully resisted God if so be
they had known with whom they had to do: according to the saying of the
Apostle, 1. Cor. 2.8.
They would never have crucefied the Lord of glory if so be they had known
him: but because the unbelieving are blind in the clear light they are
rightly said to see that which by and by vanishes out of their sight: because
Satan darkeneth their minds.

This is without all controversy, that whereas he said they had seen, it ought
not to be understood of bodily sight, but ought rather to be taken for wilful
blindness, because they might have known who he had been, had it not been
that they were let by their own malice. B. Therefore he notes that which
he had said a litlle before.

Ye seek me, not because ye saw the signs: For by the signs they saw who
he was, namely, the very son of God: yet not withstanding they did not
believe because it was not given them from the Father, as straight way he
shows.

37 All that the Father gives me, shall com to me, and him that comes to me,
I cast not away.

All that the father gives me. M. By these words the Lord declares, that it
is no strange thing to him that the Capernaites seeing did not see, and
believe in him.

He came for no other cause into this world, than for their sakes whom the
Father had ordained to everlasting life, and had delivered to him to be saved:
and he is most sertainly sure of this, that they shall come to him, and that he
will reject none of them, but will willinglye embrace every on of them, but as
for other he will not regard them

And thus he shows the cause why the Capernaites did not believe in him,
namely, because they were not given to him of the Father. C. Therefore lest
their unbelief should derogate any thing from his doctrine, he says that the
cause of so great obstinacy is, for that they are reprobates, and none of the
flock of Christ. For this purpose therefore he puts a difference between the
elect and the reprobate, that the authority of his Doctrine might stand
nevertheless although many believed not the same.

For the wicked do detracte from the word of God, and do esteem the same as
nothing, because they are not touched with the reverence thereof: and a great
many weak and ignorant men do doubt whether that be the word of God or not
which is rejected of the most part of the world. For this stumbling block
Christ provides, when he denies those to be his, which believe not. If to
such the truth of God be unsavory: it is no marueyle but all the children of
God embrace the same.

First of all we gather out of this place, that the benefit of faith comes
of the free gift of God the Father, not of human strength. Whomesoeuer the
father has given to the son: come to the Son.

C. Therefore faith is not in the will of men that this or that man may believe
without exception, Faith is the gift of God.
as it were by chance but God choseth them, whom he delyuereth to the Son as
it were from hand to hand.

For when he says, All that is given we may gather, that all are not given.
Moreover we gather that GOD does work in his elect with so great efficacy of
the Spirit that none of them do fall away from him. For this word of giving
is as much as if Christ had said those whom the Father has chosen he does
regenerate, and addicteth them to me in the obedience of the Gospel.

Bv. They therefore which believe, believe through the grace of God: but they
which believe not have to accuse their own wickedness, and not to find fault
with God. Salvation comes through grace.
Those whom the father will have saved, he gives to the Son, and the Son
receives them. And the father gives when he drives and frames the wills and
affections of men, and gives them power and strength to believe the word and
miracles of the lord Christ. The son receives when he friendly entertayneth
all those that come to him, and joins them to him self. And this is the
meaning of the Apostle when he says, Romans 8.30
Those whom he has predestinate, he has called: and whom he has called he
has justified: and whom he has justified he has also glorified. M.
Furthermore we must noat that Christ speaks hear not according to that
dyuine majesty and excelency of the eternal word, to the which nothing can
be given that it has not, but according to the dispensation of the mediation,
reconcilliation, and humayne redemtion which he had taken in hand. For the
Father has given to his Son as to a mediator, Reconcilor and Redeemer, out
of that sinful multitude of mortal men those to be sauid, whom he has
chosen to life from everlasting. A We have already showed what it is to come
unto Christ. M. For we must not understand that which he here speaks of
every one which comes unto him: (for the unbelieving Capernaites came unto
him whom notwitstandinge the Father had not given to him, otherwise they had
believed in him) but he speaks of those which come to him as to the bread of
life, and to the known Savior revealed by the Father. Concerning those (I
say) he says.

And him that comes to me J cast not away. C. The which also partayneth to
the consolation of the Godly, that they may be sure that they have free
access unto Christ, and shall be gently received so soon as they commit them
selves to his faith and charge.

Whereupon it follows that the doctrine of the Gospel shall be helthfull to
those that are the children of God, because no man offers him self to be a
disciple unto Christ, but he which feels him, and has experience that he
is a faithful teacher. A. This place therefore agrees with that which we
shall see hereafter, Ioh. 18.47
He which is of God hears Gods word: therefore ye do not hear because ye
are not of god. Again, Ioh. 10.26.
My sheep hear my voice, and follow me: therefore ye do not believe, Act.
13.48
because ye are none of my sheep. M. For we read that they believed the word
so many as were ordained to everlasting life.

B. They therefore which are abiectes to the world, and are despised as
duste, may be of good courage: For Christ will lovingly receive them, if so
be they come to him in faith.

For he casts none away that come to him in faith, he preserves his to the
end, Ioh. 10.18.
and they shall never perish M. For they are Citizens with the Saints, and of
the household of God, wherefore they can never be excluded out of the kingdom of
God.

But seeing it is known to God alone who they are that are given to Christ to
be sauid, and who not: Ephe. 2
(for the Lord knows who are his) yet notwitstanding no man can be
ignorant whether he comes unto Christ by fayeth and with a desire of
heavenly grace, 2. Tim. 2.19.
or not.

For what can be more evident and manifest to our heart than that which our
heart most of all desiereth? 2. Cor. 13.5.
Whereupon the Apostle says Try and prove your selves whether ye be in the
Faith or no. Do ye not know your selves whether Christ Jesus be in you? So
that we are made sure by that which is manifest concerning those things which
are hidden from us, as whether the father has given us to the son, and
whether the son will cast us away or no. If we come to Chist no doubt we are
given to him of the Father, and we shall never be cast away.

B. But seeing none can be persuaded of these things but the elect, (that is
to say, such as are indewed with Gods Spirit, and are regenerate) who are so
far from being brought to security and sloth by the preaching of these
things that nothing can so much stir them up to the love of God, and to
every good work: it is plain enough that they know not what they say, which
affirm that these things ought not to be openly preached: Whereas the more
every one knows and feels the love of God toward him, the more he will love
him again.

If the reprobate be offended with these things it is no marvel for there is
nothing at the which they are not offended.

38. For I came down from heaven not to do that I will, but what he will
which has sent me.

This is a confirmation of the sentence going before, because christ is not
sought of us in vain. For faith is the work of God by which he declares that
we are his and has appointed his son to be the worker of our salvation. But
the son, seeks nothing else but to fulfill the will and commandment, of
his heavenly father: he will never therefore reject those which are sent of the
Father. Whereupon it follows that our faith shall not be in vain. M. But
whereas he says that he does not his own will, but the will of his Father, we
must not wickedly stretch the same as Heretics do, but must simply understand
it in that scence in the which it is spoken. C. For it is an Imitacion, by
which Christ does frame him self to his hearers. B. For in very deed the
Son has not his will by him self, but his will and his fathers will are all
one. Look what the father wills, the Son wills the same.

M. Therefore his purpose was to say nothing else, but that he is wholye
addicted to the will of his father, and that according to the same, he will save
those which come unto him, lest we should think that there is any thing done
here by man. A. But concerning this kind of speech we have spoken before, in
the fifte Chapter, and in the ninteene verse.

39. And this is the Fathers will which has sent me, that of all which
he has given me. I shall loose nothing, but raise it up again at the last
day.

And this is the fathers. M. Because it was obscure and unknown to the people,
what was that will of God, for the executing whereof he said he came down from
heaven he does more plainly explicat the same saying. And this is the fathers
will. etc.

C. By which words he does testify that this is the purpose of his Father
that the faithful may find assured salvation in Christ.

Whereupon it follows again, that they are reprobats which profit not in
the doctrine of the Gospel.

Wherefore, if we see that to many it tourneth to their destruction, there is
no cause why we should be discouraged, because they willingly bring euel upon
them selves, Let it suffice us that the Gospel shall prevail always to
gather together the elect to salvation I shall loose no thing.

M. This is the exposition of that which he had said, I will not cast away So
that our salvation is so committed to the son of God, that we should not
only perish (if it were possible we could perish) with our own harm, but
also by his transgression. Therefore as Christ cannot play by collusion and
transgress his fathers will, so he cannot destroy those, whom he has
received of the Father to save. C. But he does not mean that he is the keeper
of our salvation for one day or for a time, but that he has care for the
same even to the end, that he may at the last bring us out of prison, even
to the haven of rest and peace. B. For, because in the last day, and in the
end of the world, our consummation is looked for, this saying of our savior
Christ is rightly understood of the last resurrection. C. And this promise is
more than necessary to such as are in misery in this infirmity of the flesh,
the which every one of us feel and know well enough.

Every moment verily the salvation of the whole world might be made void and
of none effect, if so be the faithful being holden up by Christ's hand, did
not boldly look for the day of resurrection. For another cause also he
makes mention of the resurrection: because so long as our life is hydden we
are like unto dead men. For, what do the faithful dyfferre from the wicked,
but only, that they being overwhelmed with miseryes, The day of resurrection
^is comfort to the godly.
and being as sheep appointed to be slain, have always one foot in the
grave, yea and are very nere to be swallowed up of death? There remains
therefore one Pillar to hope and patience, if so be we omitting the state of
this present life, do behold and consider that last day, and do pass by
the mynifolde lettes of this world until the fruete of faith do appear,
that is to say the salvation of our souls. M. Let us also noate that the
general resurrection does depend upon the will of God, which is of all
things most sertaine. Therefore as impossible it is that the will of God
should be made frustrate, and that the perfect salvation of the sons of God
(which depends upon Gods will) should be by any manner of means hyndered,
as it is impossible that there shall be no resurrection: which Christ says he
will bring to pass by his power, when he affirms that he will raise up the
faithful,

For there is no other appointed to be the executor of his fathers will, but
this Christ alone, who shall fully perform and finish this our redemption,
which he has purchased with his death in the end of the world, insomuche
that so soon as he is a perfect savior, we also shall be fully and perfectly
redeemed. Of the which redemtion he speaks in another place, saying. when ye
shall see these things, look up, and lift up your heads, for your redemtion
draws nere. A. And although the reprobates shall rise again in their bodies
as well as the elect of God, yet nevertheless there shall be a large
difference between them, as it is showed in the fifth Chapter going before.

M. We are also admonished that there is and end appointed for this present
world, when we here mention made of the latter day which notwithstanding
mockers, and contemners of the word of God account for a fable.

40 And this is the will of him that sent me, that every on which sees the
Son, and believes one him, has everlasting life: and I will raise him up at
the last day.

M. There is nothing superfluous in this repetition, if so be thou rightly
consider those thing which are spoken. C. He had said that the office of
defending of our salvation, was committed to him of the Father: now also he
shows the manner how. This therefore is the way to obtain salvation if so
be we obaye the Gospel of Christ. He touched this even now, but now again
he does better express that, which before he had spoken somewhat obscurely. M.
And he declares that they are given to him of his Father, which believe in him.
R. For in saving men GOD observes this order, and does thus manifest that
eternal election, by which he has chosen his in Christ. First of all he
sends his only begotten Son to show his Fathers will, The manner how out
salvation is wrought.
he sends also his Aposteles, to preach concerning the Son of God: who
being sent preach and call, the Preachers are hard, the hearers are called,
by hering comes faith, Faith justifies the believing, the justified call one
the name of the Lord, and those callers are saved and glorified.

For whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be saved.

C. Wherefore if GOD will have those whom he has elected to be saved by
faith, Joel. 2.32.
and does after this manner confirm and execute his eternal decree whosoever
he be, that being not contented with Christ curiously inquireth of the
everlasting predestination, seeks all that in him lies to be saved otherwise
than God has determined. Gods election of it self is hyden and secret, but
the Lord has revealed the same by that vocation, wherewith he has called us.

Wherefore they are out of their wits which seek their own and other men's
salvation also out of the Labirinth of predestination, not regarding the way
of faith which is before their eyes. Nay, by this preposterous speculation,
they go about to overthrow the force and effect of predestination. For if God
have chosen us to this end, that we should believe, take away faith and our
election shall be meymed and imperfect.

And verily it is not meet in the counsel and purpose of God, to break the
tontinuall and appointed order of the beginning and the end. R. Be not
therefore carefall about predestination, neither be curious in this secret
which belongs to God: For thou can not, by reason of the heaviness of the
eyes, see by thine own wit into so high mysteries: But hear Christ, look
into Christ, in whom the fathe has opened the secret sentence of his
predestination, and in whom it was at the last revealed, which a long time
lay hid.

For by Christ we are assured that every one which believes is predestinate
for whom he has predestinate, Romans 8.30.
him he has called by his Gospel that he may believe, and that he may be
justified by faith. If therefore thou shall find thy self to be in the faith
of Christ, thou shall find also that thou art elected and predestined by
God.

C. For as election and Gods calling are inseparable and go together, even so
when God does effectually call us to the Faith of Christ, let it prevail so
much with us, as if he should confirm his decree concerning our salvation
with a sure seal. For the testimony of the Spirit is nothing else, than the
sealyng of our adoption, as Paul teaches. Therefore every man's faith is a
sufficient witness, 2. Cor. 1.22
of Gods eternal predestination: Ephe. 1.13.
insomuche that to seek farther is great wickedness: Because he does great
injury to the holy Ghost, which refuses to subscribe to his simple
testimonye. Seeing, and believing, Christ opeseth against the former sentence,
by which he had cast in the Jews teeth their unbelief, whenas notwithstanding
they saw: now in the sons of God is joined the obedience of faith, with the
scence and feeling of that divine power, which they perceive to be in Christ:
Insomuche that Seeing is plainly taken for knoweledge. For he which plainly
knows the Son, cannot choose but believe in him.

For he acknowledges him to be the only Savior, God, life, and all in all.
The wicked see and know him, but they do not thoroughly see and plainly know
him: therefore are they made inexcusable, because they cannot believe God, or
love him. M. And whereas he made mention of eternal life before the
resurrection, his meaning is that the faithful have already everlasting life,
even in this life, before they are raised, but through hope, by which they are
saved, and do sit with Christ in the heavens, and shall enjoy the same in
very deed after the resurrection: as we see before.

The which we must diligently noate, lest we think that we shall get life
by the merits of our good works straight after we have received faith: but
let us be sure that the same is attributed to faith, by which we are
regenerate into the dignity and inherytance of the Sons of God.

41. The Jews then murmured at him because he said, I am the bread of life
which came down from heaven.

R. Behoulde here, I pray you, the mutable and waueryng Judgment of the
people. A lytlle before they sought to honor Christ as a king: and now
because they have not their will and desyer, they murmr against him, they
conteinne, deryde, disdain, and reprove him of a lie. Bv. He had laid the
foundation of Christian faith, which was afterward to be repeated of the
godly, that it might the more firmly abide in their minds? but that doctrine
of piety is assalted and withstoode dyuersly, and by many enemies: Whereby we
learn how the world is affected toward the preaching of the Gospel. C. For
the Euaungelist teaches that the murmuryng aroase here hence, because the
Jews being offended at the baseness of the flesh, did conceive no divine or
celestial thing to be in Christ

R. They had required a sign of the Lord whereby he might prove that he ought
to be believed even as Moses had proved him self by many great signs and
wonders, to be such a one as was sent of God, and whom the people ought to
obaye and believe. But the Lord did not only give unto them no new sign
over and above those which they had seen, (for they were sufficient enough)
but also affyrmed that he was fare more excelent then Moses, and pronounced
himself to be very God: because he preached very often times of him self that
he would give eternal life to those that would believe in him, and also that
he would preserve them from death and in the last day place them in
everlasting bliss. These things when they understood not, they began to
murmr against him, because he extolled him self above a man. M. But this
people have as it were by inheritance this perverse and untoward disposition
that when faith is needful, they murmr.

And to murmr is nothing else than either by impatience, Murmuration.
or by disdain of the mind to complain and find falte with those things
which seem to be spoken or done unjustly. Thus often times they murmured in
the wilderness, that is to say they complained of God and Moses, as though
those things which were done were done unjustly. So to these men it seemed
that the Lord said Impudently, I am the bread which came down from heaven.

But wherefore are they not rather angery with them selves, that they
understand not these things so greatly necessary? Why do they not rather
murmr among them selves that they loved their belly so much? Wherefore do
they not pray for the gift of faith? why do they not beseech him more
plainly to instruct them concerning these things. This had been the part of
reasonable men.

But they do none of these things, but according to the disposition of flesh,
they murmr because the Lord said that he came down from heaven. For this
is the lot of Christ's doctrine, that it shall sooner find such as shall
murmr against it, and contemn and deride it before they know it, than such
as shall rightly understand it, and when they understand it earnestlye
embrace it.

42. And they said, Is not this Jesus the son of Joseph, whose Father and
mother we know? How is it then that he says I came down from heaven?

Is not this Jesus. Bv. They looked for some mighty, and victorious Messiah,
to reign over them as did Solomon, Cyrus, and Alexander: therefore they
despised the humility of Christ, not perceiving how this base man descended
from heaven. M. For they thought that he had so spoken of his discention from
heaven as though he had denied himself to have been borne in this world
among men, but even as he was present before them to have fallen as some
Angel from Heaven. Herevppon it comes that they say, Is not this Jesus the
son of Joseph? As if they should have said, does he think us to be so dule
and scenelesse that we will suffer our selves to be persuaded that he came
down from heaven, seeing we know from whence he came, who he is, of what
stock and kindered, and with whom he was brought up: what rashenesse then is
this that he says he descended from heaven, as though he spoke to strangers,
and to such as did not know him?

C. They had therefore a double let: The one was which they feigned to
themselves by a false opinion, when they said, This is the son of Joseph,
whose Father and mother we know: Two ^bling ^kes to ^ewes.
The other was ye which proceeded of a wrong Judgment because they did not
think Christ to be the Son of God, for that he descended to men taking upon
him our flesh. But we are to to wicked, if so be we therefore despise the
Lord of glory, because he did abase and emptye himself for our sakes, taking
upon him the form of a servant. For this was rather a manifest sign of his
unspeakable love toward us, and also of his wonderful grace.

Furthermore the divine Majesty of Christ did not so lie hid under the base
and contemptible show of the flesh, but that the bright beams of the divine
glory appeared: but those gross and scencelesse men wanted eyes to behold the
same.

Bv. So at this day, when Jesus is preached, and the same crucefyed, when
mortification and regeneration is taught, the preaching is contemned of proud
men, of covetous, ambitious, Carnal Gospellers follow Christ for gain.
and luxurious men, which cry, from whence have we this new doctrine, which
these new Apostles set before us? Let us noate therefore in this place the
nature of flesh and blood, which follows the Gospel so long as there is
hope of gain but that hope being taken away, it starteth aside. M. Moreover
the corrupt nature of flesh and blood is, to stand upon external things,
and to judge after the outward apparaunce, not only of the Son of God, but
also of all the elect, of whom it judges, not according to the quality of
the mind, which is heavenly, but according to the humility and baseness of
the flesh.

It does not believe that those, whom it sees in this world to be poor,
Idiots unlearned, base, weak, contemned, abiectes, and known according to the
natiuitye and conversation of the flesh, are borne of GOD, and are sons of
the heavenly kingdom.

This thing S. John expounds in another place, in these words saying,
Behoulde what love the Father has bestowed on us that we should be called
the sons of GOD. 1. John. 3.1
For this cause the world knows you not, because it knows not him.

43. Jesus answered and said unto them, Murmr not among your selves.

Bv. Murmuration against God and the truth, braules, also and contentions and
strifes in religion, are very displeasant to God, and the same are oftentimes
grievously punished. Wherefore the lord giving good advice to the multitude,
exhorts them not so to murmr and grudge. C. Notwithstanding he lays the
blame of murmuration upon them: as if he should say, my doctrine contains
no matter of offense, but because ye are reprobates, it proves your poisoned
minds, and is therefore vnsauorye because your mouths are out of taste. M.
The wisdom of the Lord is here to be considered, by which he is very
circumspect, least if he should hold his peace at those things whereat they
murmured among themselves, they might think that they had justly murmured. Let
us follow this wise diligence, by which we must beware least they which
murmr against the truth murmr not without reason.

44. No man can come to me, except the father which has sent me draw him: and
I will raise him up at the last day.

No man can come to me M. He repeateth that which he had said but in other
words. For he had said, All that my Father gives me, shall come unto me:
and now he says, No man can come unto me, except my Father which has sent
me draw him. As if he should say, ye murmr without reason of this, that I
said, I came down from heaven. For it is no meruell if ye know not me, but
are offended at this humility of my flesh. Did not I say unto you that they
shall come to me, whom my father has given me? Why do ye not rather
murmr of that among your selves? Now I confirm the very same unto you,
namely, that it is impossible that any man should know who I am, from whence,
and to what end I am come, except he be drawn to me by grace from my Father.
R. But your bellye draws you unto me and not my heavenly father: It is no
meruell therefore if ye believe not my words. C. Here Christ openly
pronounces that the doctrine of the Gospel, although it be preached to all
men alyke, cannot notwithstanding be of al men received, but they must first be
renewed in mind and in understanding.

Faith therefore comes not by the will of man, but by the will of GOD. Bv. To
come to Christ is to beeleeue and to cleave unto Christ, to receive Christ, and
to depend only upon him, as we have heard in the five and thirty verse
going before. C. He says they are drawn, whose minds God does illuminate,
and whose hearts he bends and frames to the obedience of Christ. R. For
GOD draws in that order as before we have described, For he has chosen
some before the foundation of the world was laid: and those whom he has
elected, he has called and does call by Christ through the preaching of the
Gospel.

And there is no cause why thou should feign, and Imagine to thy self any
heavenly voices, and descentions of the holy Ghost, which should happen
beside the preaching of the Gospel, as many dream.

To be drawn of the father is to be endued with faith and with the holy
Ghost, by which our hearts are sealed and confirmed toward Christ.

For the Father gives faith to whom he will: and on whom he will he has
mercy, Romans 9.18.
and whom he will also he makes hard hearted. C. It is no violent manner
therefore of drawing which draws a man with external hawling and pulling,
The holy Ghost draws men to God.
of the which our savior speaks here: and yet notwithstanding the motion
of the holy ghost is so effectual, that it makes men willing in despite of
flesh and blood.

Wherefore that is false and profane which some say that no man is drawn
against his will: as though a man were obedient to God by his own motion and
will.

For in that men willingly obaye God it comes of him, who frames their
hearts to his obedience. A. Therefore man's freewill is nothing.

And I will raise him up at the last day. Read the thirty and nine and
forty verses going before.

45. It is wrighten in the Prophets, And they shall be taught of God. Every
man therefore that has heard, and has learned of the father comes unto
me.

It is wrighten in the Pro. M. Because it might seem very strange that he so
greatly urged that no man could come unto him except he were drawn of the
Father, he brings the prophetical testimony concerning the same: not that the
same was more to be esteemed in it self then that which he had spoken, but
because the authority of the Prophets was of great credit and estimation
with them. C. He names Prophets, in the plural number because all the
prophecies were gathered together into one body, in so much that all the
Prophets may very well be comprehended in one book. But the place which is
here cited, is to be found in Esaias four and fifty chapter and the xiii.
verse, where the Prophet speaking of the repayring of the Church promises to
the same sons, which shall be taught of God.

Whereby we may easily gather, that the Church can be no otherwise restoared,
except God taking upon him the office of a teacher, do bring the faithful
unto him. B. And not only the Prophet Esaye teaches this but the other
Prophets also. For there is scarce one Prophet which has not foreshewed in
many words that this doctrine of the Father shall be, specially in the time of
Christ. For although the fathers were taught and instructed with this doctrine
yet notwithstanding it began to be more plentifully bestowed upon the elect,
so soon as Christ was glorified. Bv. If any man desire to have farther
testimony out of the rest of the Prophets let him read these places coated
in the margent. C: Ier. 31.33 Eze. 36.26. Joel. 2.28
But this manner of teaching of the which the Prophet speaks, consisted not
in external voice only, but in the secret operation of the holy ghost also.
God calls outwardely and inwardely.
To be short this instruction of God is the inward illumination of the heart.
R. Notwithstanding we may not hereby take occation to contemn vocal
predication and external hearing.

For God verily teaches, but yet by external means: for faith comes by
hearing. He gives his good spirit, but yet by the preching of the Gospel: he
gives increase, but yet by the planting of Paul and by the watering of
Apollo. Wherefore God teaches, man ministereth, and faith receives doctrine.
God gives his spirit, the Apostle ministereth, the believer receives? and so
those things are ministered and distributed by the service of the Apostles,
whereof God is the author him self. This particle (all) ought to be restrained
to Gods elect which only are the natural Sons of the Church.

Every man therefore that has hard. Bv. Three things are put down in order,
the latter has his original of the two first. For they come unto Christ
which believe in Christ, and they believe which have learned, and they have
learned of the father which have hard the Father. To hear therefore has the
first place, and it is properly referred to the institution or inspiration of
the father going before. For the father teaches externallye with his word of
truth by the ministers, as by instruments, and within he does inflame them by
his holy Spirit. B. This is to be drawn of the father.

For the father does not draw men to the Son as a man would draw a stoane
or a logge after him, but by teaching and persuading. C. As Christ therefore
at the first did deny men to be feet to believe except they were drawn,
euenso now he pronowceth that the grace of the spirit is effecttuall, by
which men are drawn to believe of necessity. Freewil ouerthrown
By these two members the whole power of free will is quite overthrown, of the
which the Papists so greatly dreme. For if we come not to Christ before the
father draw us, we have not so much in us as the beginning of faith, nor
readiness at all to obaye. Moreover if all do come whom the father teaches,
he does not only give a desire to beleeu, but also faith it self. Therefore in
that we willingly obaye, by the dyrection of gods holy spirit it is a token
of grace, and of our sealing: because God should not draw us if so be he
stretching out his hand as it were, should leave our will in the midest in
suspense. For he is properly said to draw us, when he extends the power of
his spirit to the full effect of faith. They are said to hear which with
all their mind submit them selves to God speaking within them, because the
spirit reigns in their hearts.

B. Therefore they which come not unto Christ, do not come, because, either
they have hard nothing of the father concerning him or else are not taught so
that they have thoroughly learned him.

For the wicked do learn somewhat that is divine but they learn thoroughly or
sufficiently.

46. Not that any man has seen the Father, save he which is of GOD, the same
has seen the Father.

M. He spoke to a carnal people: therefore by this adition he would provide
that they did not carnally understand that which he spoke concerning his
Fathers doctrine, forsomuche as God is invisible and can be seen of no man.

C. And as he has hitherto commended the grace of his Father, even so now he
calls back all the Faithful to him aloane. For boath ought to be joined
together: namely, that there can no knowledge of Christ be had until the
Father does illuminate us by his holy spirit, which by nature are blind: and
yet notwithstanding God is sought in vain before we have Christ: because the
majesty of God is so high, that man's scence and understanding cannot reach
unto the same: nay there is no knowledge of God without Christ. His words
dedepending on that which goes before are thus much in effect: All men must
be taught of the father: Holy ghost our schole master.
the which teaching must not be such that a man shall see the father in this
flesh: but the Children of God shall be taught by the inward working of the
spirit. 1. Cor. 2.10.
For they upon whom it breaths shall search out the profound mysteries of
God. Mat. 11.27
To this effect also pertayneth this sentence, No man knows the son but the
Father: also No man has seen God at any time! Ioh. 1.18.
the only begotten son which is in the bosom of the Father, he has showed
him to us.

C. When he says that the father is only known to him, he means that this
office properly belongs unto him self to manifest him to men, which
otherwise is hidden far from us.

47. Verily verily, I say unto you, he that puts his trust in me has
everlasting life.

R By this sentence our savior Christ declares how we are made the
disciples of his father, namely, by faith in Christ Jesus, by which it
comes to pass that we obtain everlasting life What it is to believe in
Christ, we have before declared For we must not immagine a confused and
vain faith, which spoyleth Christ of his power: such a faith is that which
the Papists have, who believe of Christ as they list them selves: for
therefore we obtain life by faith, because we know that in Christ all the
parts of life are contained.

48. I am the bread of life.

M. After that Christ had answered those murmurers, and had sufficiently
provided for that offense, which they had taken by the humilitye of his
flesh, and by the knowledge which they had of him: he now consequently
makes repetition of those things which he had spoken, and returns to that
which he had begone concerning Manna: R. showing by a notable comparison,
how much better this quickening bread which he offers is, than the oulde
Manna.

49. Your fathers did eat Manna in the wilderness, and are dead,

M. This verse is two ways expounded. Some understand it generally of all
those Fatheres of the Jews which did eat Manna in Moses time in the desert,
as well Godly as ungodly: insomuche that the Lord speaks here in this place
not of the death of the soul but of the body. But othersome expound it of the
wicked only, which did eat Manna without faith of the truth, in the which
is life, and therefore are also dead: that is to say, they perished
everlastingly.

But it seems not necessary that we here distinguishe between the
believing and the unbelieving Jews. C Only Christ says that Manna was a
corruptible meat to their Fathers, M. being food not of the soul, but of the
body, not sempiternall, but temporal, which could not save them from death.
C. It follows therefore that men's souls find food no where but in him,
whereby they may be fed into everlasting life. 1. Cor. 10.3.
For we must remember what was spoken in another place, that there is no
mention made here of Manna as Christ was a secret figure: (For in that respect
Paul calls him spiritual meat) but here Christ frames his speech to his
hearers, who being only careful for the feeding of their bellies, had no
farther consideration of any thing in Manna. He does therefore Justly
pronounce that their fathers are dead: that is to say, which were in like
manner addicted to their bellies.

50. This is that bread which comes down from heaven that if any man eat
thereof, he should not dye.

C. Christ inuiteth and calls those to whom he speaks to eat, when he
says that he came that a man might eat. For this kind of speech is as
much as if he should say, that he is to be eaten of so many as will eat.

Shall not dye. M. Christians dye as well as other mortal men: but they dye
only in body for a time, and not in soul for ever. And although the souls
of the unbelieving are immortal also, yet notwithstanding their condition is
mortal and miserable, insomuch that being alive in pleasure they are counted
dead. 1. Tim. 5.6
Even as the Apostle speaks of the Widow which lived in pleasure.

For the life of the unbelieving is not the true life, but a false imagination
of life, and a mere fantasy, by which they think themselves to live aloane,
when as indeed they are starcke dead.

We must also noate the universal forms of speaking, when he says, If any
man eat. For by this manner of speech he means that he is offered to all
men, insomuch that whosoever uses him, shall be preserved in life.

51. I am the living bread which came down from heaven: If any eat of this
bread, he shall live for ever: And the bread that I will give is my flesh:
which I will give for the life of the world.

The Lord does often times repeat this, that all that believe in him shall
have everlasting life: C. Because there is nothing more necessary to be
known, how hardelye faith takes place in us, and how soon it vanishes
away again.

We all desire life: but in seeking of the same, we foolishlye wander in by
ways: and the greater part despise the same when it is offered. For what is
he that does not feign and promise life unto him self without Christ? And
what is he that is satisfied and contented with Christ aloane? Therefore this
repetition is not superfluouse when Christ so often times affirms that it is
he which gives life to the world. For he takes unto him self aloane the
name of bread, that he might remove out of our minds al false and feigned
hope of life. Christ is the bread of life.
M. What can the glory and plenty of terrene things profit, in the which
there is no life, if so be we loose this bread in the which alone all
salvation and everlasting life does consiste.

C. He now calls that the living bread which before he called the bread of
life, and all in one sense. Afterward he says it came from heaven because in
this world (the figure whereof passes and vanishes away) the spiritual and
incorruptible life is not to be found: but only in the heavenly kingdom of
God. So often as he makes mention of this word (Eat) he exhorts us to
faith, which only brings to pass that we enjoy this bread to life.

And this is not in vain: because there are but a few which will voutsafe to
reach out their hand to put this bread to their mouth: nay, when the Lord
puts the same to their mouths they will scarce taste of the same: but some
fill them selves full of wind: and othersome being like to Tantalus, do
hungar and ar like to starve with meat before their mouths.

And the bread that I will give. C. Because this secret power of giving life,
concerning which, he spoke, might be referred to his divine essens, he now
descends to the second degree, and teaches that life is included in his
flesh that men from thence may draw the same unto them. Life is included in
the flesh of Christ.
It is the wonderful counsel of God verily, that he has set before us life
in that flesh, in the which before there was nothing but the matter and cause
of death

And thus he provides for our infir: mitie when he calls us not to seek
life above the clouds, but offers the same unto us in the earth, no less
then if he should lift us up to the gates of his kingdom.

Nevertheless he correcting the pride of our nature, proves the humillitie
and obedience of faith, when he commands such as are like to perish to
seek life in his flesh, which in outward show is contemtible and base.

B. For the salvation of the Saints could not be finished, except he had
given his flesh for us to death, As therefore he did profit and accomplish
our salvation by death, and was truly made our redeemer: euenso the Fayeth
of Christ cannot stand except we believe in the death, cross, and passion
of Christ.

Whereupon the Apostle testifies that he would not seem to know any other
thing, than Jesus and the same crucefied. For the satisfaction of our sins
was made upon the Cross, the which was the satisfaction of Gods
righteousness, the appeasing of the Fathers wrath, and the gate of
immortalitye. Hereupon to show, how he would finishe our salvation, and
with what faith we must eat him, he says that the bread which he will give
unto those that are his is his own flesh. C. But this seems not to belong
to the nature of flesh, that it should quicken and give life to men's souls.
I answer although this virtue does come from some other thing then from
flesh, yet notwithstanding there is no let, but that this name may be aptly
given to the same.

For as the eternal word of God is the well of life, euenso his flesh, as a
water pipe, does pour life into us, which rests in the divinity. And in
this sense, it is called living or quickening, because it does give unto us
that life which it does borrowe from another.

M. And we must noate that Christ speaks not hereof all manner of flesh but
only of his own.

And the bread which I will give (says he) is my flesh. Therefore life
consists not neither in the oblations of beasts, neither in any mortal man's
flesh, but only in the flesh of Christ. C. This word (Give) is dyuerslye
taken: the first giving of the which Christ at the first made mention, is
daily to be seen so often as Christ offers him self to us: In the second
place he noateth that donation only which was made upon the Cross, when he
offered him self a sacrifice to the Father, and an oblation of a sweet smell
unto God. Ephe. 5.2
C. For then he gave him self to death for the life of men: and now he
inuiteth us to taste the fruit of his death. For that offering once offered
should nothing at all profit us, except we did now eat the same in the
holy supper. Bv. Therefore when he says that he will give the same for the life
of the world, his meaning is this: I will give my self too death, that the
world by my death may live.

For the world is dead in sins but the son of God dyed in the flesh,
least the second death should reign over the faithful. And thus the son of
God does quicken. C. And this is to be noted that Christ takes unto him the
part of offering up his flesh.

Whereby it appears what abomination the Papists do commit, when they
usurp that to them selves in their Mass which belongs to that high Priest
only. M. For it could be done of no other than of him who offered up his
flesh to GOD his Father once for all.

52. The Jews then contended among them selves, saying: How can this fellow
give us his flesh to eat.

Bv. There aryseth again another contencion among the hearers, or auditorye of
Christ, by reason of his words, which were not rightly understood. M. For
always those that are carnal, carnallye understand the words of Christ, and
therefore they are oftentimes offended, and being offended fall to contencion
among them selves. For it offended them that he had said, that he would give
his flesh for the life of the world. C. And the Evangelist names the Jews
again, not for honors sake, but rather to cast in their teeth their
incredulitye, for that they received not the familiar doctrine, concerning
everlasting life: or at least because they do not modestly, enquire of a matter
doubtful as yet, and obscure unto them: for this is a sign of piuishe
frowardness and contempt, whereas he says that they contend among them
selves. And they which thus contentiously dispute, do hinder them selves from
attayning to the knowledge of the truth. Bv. They murmured before because the
Lord had said, that he descended from heaven, and that he was the son of
God: and now they openly contend because he said, And the bread which I will
give for the life of the world, is my flesh, Even as if his meaning had been
that his flesh ought to be eaten, as men eat flesh, which they bye in the
Shambles. Therefore they cry, How can this fellow give us his flesh.

C Notwithstanding, this is not simply to be reprehended in them that they
enquire after the manner how: for then Abraham, and the blessed Virgin should
deserve the same reprehension. Therefore they are either deceived by
ignorance, or else they do amiss, who forsaking braules and contencion,
(which the Evangelist only condemns) debate and curiously discuss this
question (How) as though the Jews ought not to have enquired of the manner of
eating. But verily this ought rather to be imputed to slothful negligence,
than to the obedience of Faith, if so be wyttingly, and wyllingly we keep
the knots of doubtfulnesse unknit, which are dissolved by the word of the
Lord. Wherefore we may not only enquire of the manner of eating of the
flesh of Christ, but also apprehend and take hold of him so far forth as
the Scripture offers him unto us. Away then with that vain pretense of
humillitye. We must only observe this moderation in the secreete works of
God, least we desire to know more than he has set down to us in his word.
B. It is lykelye that the Jews took hold of that only, which might give
them most easelye occasion to cavil. For they did not think in very deed
that the Lord would give his flesh to be so eaten as men eat beef: yet
notwithstanding, they contend and speak, even as Christ had so meant.

But this greatly troubled them, that Jesus by his allegoryes affirmed him
self, to be Christ, to be God, and the geuer of eternal life, and that he
being the Son of man would give the same flesh and blood which they saw,
and moreover (which sounded ill in their ears) that he would give the same
by that his flesh which he would give to the death: this verily was that
which troubled them, offended them, and drew them away from the Lord, and
gave them occasion to murmr. Dalying, therefore with the word of the Lord,
they wrested the same to another scence than he spoke the same.

53. Jesus therefore said unto them: verelye I say unto you, except ye eat
the flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood ye have no life in you.

C. Deep displeasure moved our savior Christ at this time to swear, when he
saw his grace with such proud contempt to be rejected. For he does not use
now simple doctrine, but to terrefie them mingleth threatenings therewith. For
he denownceth everlasting destruction to all which shall refuse to seek for
and to receive life from his flesh.

Bv. And that which they said was absurd and impossible to be done, that he
proves to be most necessary: but in sound scence, and not in that carnal
and gross scence. C. As if he should say, if ye contemn my flesh, know ye
for a surety that there remains to you no other hope of life. This
vengeance hangs over the heads of all such as are contemners of the grace
of Christ, that they and their pride shall perish together. And they are to be
urged with this precise severity, least they proceed in flattering
themselves. For if so be we threaten death to the sick which despise remedy by
Physic provided, what shall we say or do to the wicked, who seek to
abolishe life so much as in them lies?

The flesh of the son of man. B. He calls himself here the son of man,
that he might the more stronglye confound that false judgment which they had
of him? For in that he appeared to be a man and base in outward show, they
thought him to be mad and out of his wits to arrogate unto himself so
much. Therefore he acknowledged himself to be the son of man, a vile and
abject man: but yet, to show herewithall what lay hid in the contemned and
abject show of his manhod, he denied any man to have eternal life, which did
not eat of the son of man and drink his blood: that is to say, which had
not Christ living in him, being assured that he is redeemed by his sacrifice,
and made the son and heir of God.

C. The scence therefore is this, contemn me as ye list, the base and and
abject show of my flesh: yet notwithstanding life is included in this
contemtible flesh: of the which if you deprive your selves, ye shall find
nothing else where to quicken you. It was a gross error of the Fathers, which
thought that infauntes were deprived of everlasting life, except they give unto
them the Eucharist. For there is no word here of the Sacrament of the body and
blood of Christ, but Christ goes forward in the Metaphor of the eating of his
flesh, and of the drinking of his blood, which he had begone. Neither do the
Bohemians rightly proceed, when they go about to prove by this testimony
that the use of the Cup ought to be given to all alyke.

As touching Infants, the institution of Christ does seclud them from the
supper, because they cannot as yet prove and examine them selves, Infantes
ought not to be pertakers of the Lords Supper.
neither yet celebrate the remembrance of Christ's death: the which thing the
Apostle Paul teaches to be necessary for all those which come to the
communion of the Supper. The same Institution makes the cup as well as the
bread common to al men for it commands that we drink all of the same.
Math. 26 27.
R. Therefore to eat the flesh, and to drink the blood of Christ, is to
believe that Christ suffered for our sins. A. For him has God made a
reconciler through faith in his blood to declare his justice for the remission
of sins paste. Romans 10.4


Ye have no life in you. M. His meaning is that al they are dead which eat
not this flesh of the son of man and drink his blood A. For as we are
all dead through sin, so through faith in Christ we are made alive, as the
Scripture teaches.

54. Who so eats my flesh and drinks my blood, has eternal life, and I
will raise him up at the last day.

Who so eats my flesh M. He still bouldely repeateth that which went before
as commonly they do which speak the truth: C. and he confirms that which
is hard to be beeleued, as that men's souls are no otherwise fed with his
flesh and blood, than the body is sustained with meat and drink. M. For
he speaks more manifestlye than he did before, when he expresselye names
himself. Verelye to eat the Lord, is to abide in the Lord, and the Lord to
abide in us.

B. After this manner also we do commonly in these words, to Eat, to Drink,
understand not only the taking of meat, but also the nutriment, and
sustentation of life which proceeds of the same. These words pertain not to
the lords Supper.


Furthermore by these words of our Lord it does plainly appear that all
this place is vnaptlye and falselye expounded concerning the Supper. For if it
were true that this were to be referred to the Supper of the Lord, 1. Cor.
11.30
than all the that unworthily presume to the same, being made pertakers of the
body and blood of Christ, have therewithal life, but we know that many eat
the same to their own destruction and damnation. And verilye it were very
fond, and vntimelye then to speak of the Supper, when as yet he had not
instituted the same.

Therefore it is most certain that he speaks here of the continual eating
by faith. Notwithstanding we must confess that thereis nothing spoken here
which is not figured in the Supper and truly given to the faithful: and
therefore Christ made his holy Supper to be as it were a seal to this sermon.
And this is the cause why our Euaungelist John makes mention of this Supper.

And J will raise him up at the last day. M. He promises everlasting life
before the resurrection, to the end we might know that the faithful are
endued with everlasting life by Christ, while they are in this life: even as it
is said in another place. C. And Christ so often joins the resurrection to
everlasting life, because our salvation is hid, even until that day.
Therefore what Christ will give unto us no man can feel, but he which having
overcome the world, sets before his eyes the last resurrection.

55. For my flesh is meat in deed, and my blood is drink in deed.

This is the reason why he which eats the flesh of Christ and drinks his
blood has everlasting life. Because (says he) my flesh is meat in deed,
and my blood is drink in deed. C. As the body with hongar does languishe and
pine away, even so the soul does by and by perish if so be the same be not
fed whith heavenly food. For when he affirms that his flesh is meat in
deed, his meaning is that those souls are like to famishe, which want this
meat.

Therefore thou shall then find life in Christ, if so be thou seek the
matter and substance of life in his flesh. For so soon as we forsake the
Sacrifice of his death, there is nothing before our eyes but death, neither
does he bring us any other way to felyng of his divine power, than by his
death and resurrection. M. Therefore he speaks of the redemption of mankind,
which should be by his death, for the which cause he intended to offer his
flesh and blood a sacrifice to his father for the remission of the sins of
the whole world.

Aunsvvere.
I answer? Christ in this had respect and regard te our rudeness.

For when distinctly he expresses meat and drink by them selves, he puts
us in mind that the life which he gives is perfect and complete in each
point, lest we should feign and immagine to our selves some half and
imperfect life: as if he should say, that we shall want no part of life, if
so be we eat his flesh and drink his blood. Euenso in the supper, which
agrees with this doctrine, being not contented with the sign of bread, he
joins thereunto the Cup, that having therein a doule pledge of life, we
may be contented with him aloane: for he shall find no part of life in
Christ, which does not believe that Christ alone is his life.

56. He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I in
him.

He that eats my flesh. M. These words pertayne to the similitude of such
as eat and drink to this end, that he might more amply declare the
premises. Meat and drink is turned into the flesh and blood of the eater
and drinker of the same, euenso they abiding in him, and he in them have life.

Otherwise meat without the eater or not abiding in him that has eaten the
same, does not nourishe: insomuche that life cannot consist, if so be the
eater, and the meat be separated a sonder. These things are temporal and
incorruptible, and therefore imperfect to set forth the power of Christ, and
yet notwithstanding they do after a sort set forth a sertayne Image of him,
and do teach us this, that it is necessarily required that he which will have
eternal life, must have Christ the true food of life abiding in him in such
wise that he may by no means be separated. And whosoever eats his flesh
and drinks his blood, has Christ abiding in him, and he also in him. C.
Seeing therefore Christ aloane contains life in him self, he prescribes
unto us here a way how we shall inioye the same, namely if so be we eat his
flesh even as if he should deny him self to be ours otherwise then by
eating him through faith.

For he shall never come to the God Christ which neglects man. Wherefore if
thou will be pertaker of any thing with Christ, thou must first of al take heed that thou do not despise or disdain his flesh, Bv. Therefore in these
words the misterye of his Incarnation and passion is more evidently and fully
expressed: so that he eats the flesh and drynketh the blood of Christ,
which with a firm faith believes that Christ the true Son of the living
God was incarnate, crucefied, raised again, for him, that he washed us with
his dloude from all our sins, and has reconciled us to God his father.
Whosoever believes this, has life within him even the quickening spirit of
Christ, the power of righteousness and redemtion: and so Christ lives in
him, and he in Christ.

Dwells in me and I in him. M. Because this meat and drink are not subject
to corruption, but have always in them power to give life, therefore he used
the word quickening to this end that it may agree with that whereas he
promised everlasting life to such as eat his flesh and drink his blood. C.
For this is as much as if he had said that this is the only bond of unity,
and that by this means he does grow with us when our faith does rest and
stay it self upon his death.

Bv. This place therefore of the Gospel does agree with that of the Apostle,
where he says, Rom 3.
we know that a man is not justified by the works of the law, but by Faith
in Christ.

Furthermore hereby we may gather that he speaks not of the external sign
of bread, of which many of the unbelieving do eat, who notwithstanding are
far from Christ. Also their error is hereby confuted, which think, that
Judas did no less receive the body of Christ then the rest of the Disciples,
seeing that Christ gave the bread to all.

For this is most sertayne that Judas was never a member of Christ: and it is
most absurd to make the flesh of Christ dead flesh, and without spirit:
also they are very foolish which dream of any eating of the flesh of
Christ without faith, whenas only faith is the mouth of the soul.

A. Therefore where faith wants, Faith the mouth of the soul.
there is no eating of the flesh of Christ.

57. And the lyuinge Father has sent me, and I live by the Father: even so he
that eats me, shall live by the means of me.

And the living Father. M. This particle also serves for the declaration of
that which goes before. Bv. And that there might be no manner of doubt in so
great a misterye of our salvation, he does yet more strongly confyrme that
which he had said, namely that his flesh is meat in deed, and his blood
drink in deed: Insomuche that such as were nourished therewith should be
without all peril of death. C. Now therefore he passes to the principal
cause, because the principal original of life is in the Father.

And he preuenteth an objection: because he might seem to detract that from
God which belongs to God, in making him self the cause of life. So
therefore he makes him self the author of life, that he confesses that to
be given him from another which he ministereth to other.

As if he should say. R. The father is life in deed: so also am I the true
life, forsomuche as the Father has wholly inprinted him self in me. I will not
reserve this life which the Father has given to me, to my self aloane as a
spightfull and envious person: but I will also communicate the same with the
faithful: that every one which believes in me may have that life which I
possess through the Father.

For, For this cause am I sent into the world, that every one which believes
in me, may be pertaker of all those good things and graces, which through
the Father I possess by nature.

C. Let us noate that he framed this occasion also to their capacity, with
whom he spoke: For he compares himself with his father only in respect of
his flesh. For although the father be the beginning of life: yet
notwithstanding the eternal word it self is also properlye life. But the
eternal divinity of Christ is not here handeled because he propounds him
self as he being clothed with our flesh manifested himself to the world.

Whereas therefore he says that he lives by the Father, it does not belong
to the bare divinity, neither also does it simplye agree with the human
nature: but it is a title of the Son of GOD manifested in the flesh.

Furthermore we know that it is no unwonted thing to Christ, to ascribe to
the Father whatsoever is divine in himself.

Bv. It is also to be noated that he says, shall live by the means of me.

Justification comes by Grace.
For in that we are Justified, quickened, and blessed, it comes not by our
own merit but by the mere goodness of Christ. And therefore the Lord says
by the mouth of the Prophet I will redeem thee, Esec. 36.22 Three degrees of
life.
not for thy sake, but for my own sake. C. We must also John. 5.29
As the father has life in himself, so has he given to the Son to have
life in him self. For in diverse other places he calls him self life.

58. This is that bread which came down from heaven: not as your fathers
did eat manna and are dead: he that eats this bread shall live ever.

This is that bread. M. When the Jews objected unto Christ the fathers which
were fed of Moses by manna, he answered to the same three things, one was,
that Moses did not give unto them bread from heaven, and that the bread which
the Fathers did eat in the desert was not the true bread of heaven, because
the eaters of the same were subject to death The second was that the Father
gives the true bread of heaven, the which bread he him self is. The third
is that the eaters of this bread have everlasting life.

Now therefore to finishe this dialogue, he retourneth to the comparison of
Manna and of his flesh, where with he began. This is the sum of his words,
There is no cause why ye should prefer Moses before me, because he fed
your Fathers in the wilderness: seeing that I have far better meat to give
unto you than that was: for I bring with me celestial and everlasting life.
For that bread is said to descend from Heaven, which has no earthlye or
corruptible taste, but gives the Immortallity of Gods kingdom. This virtue
they felt not in Manna, which only sought to fill their bellye. For there
being two uses of the same, the Jews, with whom Christ here disputed,
respected nothing but the corporal food. But the life of the Soul is not
transitorye, but grows more and moore, till the whole man be renewed. Bv. And
it is manifest by these places that Faith in Christ iustifyeth all those that
believe.

59. These things said he in the Sinagogue, as he taught in Capernaum.

Bv. Now the Evangelist noateth the place where these things were done and
spoken, according to the Historical manner, thereby to declare the undoubted
truth and certaintye of the matter, C. and also that we might know that
there were then many present when these things were spoken.

Bv. For this talk and disputacion concerning Faith, and the effect of Faith,
was in a great assemblye of the Jews, that is to say, in a School, Temple,
or Church: because it pertayned to the right instruction of the whole Chuch,
and of the universal world.

C. He signifies that this Sermon was made as of a grave and serious matter,
M. and that Christ was found of the Capernaites in the Sinagogue, into the
which he entered to teach, that they might hear him speaking of so great
mysteries. For he would teach openly, Ioh. 18.20.
that he might have many witnesses of his Doctrine.

Even as he bouldlye affirmed before the high Priest.

As he taught in Capernaum. This is a notable prerogative of the City of
Capernaum, that they had Christ him self to be their teacher, and that
openly, not once or twyse, but oftentimes.

What thing more profitable could happen to this City than this, that the
Son of GOD should be the teacher of the same? It was justly said to be
lyfted up to Heaven. Those Cities wax proud, in the which sometime, certain
notable men have lived, or else have done some notable thing.

But how much more notable was that which happened to this City. Mat. 11.23:
But when it did contempne this singular grace, and abused the same, it was
iustlye said to be dejected to the pit of hell. The Romanistes brag of Peter
and Paul's seat, and under the pretense hereof have invaded and won the
government of the Christian world, and have exalted them selves even to the
Heavens. Good Lord, what would they have done if so be Christ had taught so
oftentimes among them?

But now, seeing they do not retain the Doctrine of Christ, and of his
Apostles in their proper place, what else remains for them now than the
greater condemnacion? All these Churches which have by the goodness and
mercy of God, the sound and wholesome doctrine of the Gospel, which other
Churches want, must have this example of the Capernaites always before their
eyes.

60. Many therefore of his Disciples, when they had heard this, said: This is
an hard saying: Who can abide the hearing of it.

Many therefore of his Disciples. M. All that which is contained between this
verse, and the end of the Chapter concerns the Discyples of Christ. C. First
of all it is declared, that there were very few among this great multitude
which received any profit: nay, this doctrine was the occasion that many
which professed them selves to be the Disciples of Christ, fell away. If the
Evangelist had said, that only a few had been offended, it had been almost
a wonder: but in that a great multitude, rise and conspire against him, what
example shall we say it is? M. It is no marvel therefore if the rude
multitude did not receive the mystical words of Christ's, when that his own
Disciples could not abide the hearing of them.

Wherefore let this Historye be printed in our hearts, least that at any time
we trouble Christ when he is speaking: and if we see the like to be in
others at this day, let not their pride trouble our faith.

Bv. Those gross hearers, not understanding as yet what Christ had taught,
murmr against the Divine teacher, saying: Who can abide the hearing of it?
C. But the hardness wherewith all they found fault, was rather in their
hearts, than in the word. But thus are the reprobate wont to gather
together, heaps of stoanes out of the word of GOD, to throw at others. And
when they resist Christ with their stubbornness, and hardness of heart, they
complain that his word is hard, which rather ought to mollifye them.

For whosoever humblye submits him self to the Doctrine of Christ, shall
find nothing in the same intolerable or hard: but to the unbelieving which
stubbornlye withstand the same, it shall be as a maule or hammer that breaks
the stoanes, Ier. 32.29.
as says the Prophet.

And seeing there is by nature the same hardness in every one of us, if we
judge after our own scence of the doctrine of Christ, every word shall be
unto us a dark sentence.

Wherefore every one of us must commend our selves to the dyrection of the
holy Ghost, that he may write the same in our hearts, which otherwise will
not enter in at our ears.

M. Notwithstanding, for consolations sake this also is to be noated that he
says not, All, but, Many of his Disciples were offended. Apostasy.
Although many were offended, yet notwithstanding, some remain which are
edifyed and saved through the grace of God, for whose sake the Ministers of the
word must constantlye abide in the office of Preaching, although the number of
them be small in comparison of those which go back. For, if the Aungelles of
GOD in Heaven rejoice over one sinner that repents, more than over ninety and
nine Just persons, and, if so be the good Sheepherd, leaving nintye and nine
in the wilderness, goes to seek that which is gone astray, and having found
it, brings it home with joy: of how great weight ought the salvation of a
few, yea, of one man, to be to the Ministers of Christ? Let him therefore
rejoice more at the Faith, sinceritye, and constancye of a few which are Gods
elect, than of the Inconstancye of a great many which are Reprobates.

B. For we see how rare a thing it is to find a sincere and true Disciple of
Christ, and how hard a thing it is to find any assemblye without Hipocrites.

M. This complaynt which the Disciples made concerning the hardness of the
words of Christ, was full of arrogancye, contempt, and rashness. For they
ascribe the fault of their unbelief, not to them selves, but to the words of
Christ, saying: Who can abide the hearing.

Such wisdom, Industrye, Honesty, and Godliness they ascrybe to them selves,
that they would have no man to understand those things which they them
selves understood not. But they which are of a modest nature, and humble
disposition, if they be offended in any matter, knowing their own
Imbecillitye, do first of all suspect their own dullness and negligence, and
do rather lay the fault upon this, than upon that which they hear, not
doubting but that a great many can comprehend those things which they them
selves cannot.

61. Jesus knew in him self that his Disciples murmured at it, and he said
unto them: Does this offend you?

B. Jesus, according to his wonted clemencye, seeking to help their offense
and foul error, knowing the cogitacions and secreetes of their hearts, knew
strayte way also, what it was that drew away those his hearers. C. Christ
knew that the offense which the Reprobates had conceived, could not be taken
away: For he does not so much wound them with his doctrine, as he does
detest the poisoned malice which lay hyd in their hearts.

Yet notwithstanding, he thought he would seek by all means possible,
whether there were any curable among those that were offended, and to stop
the mouths of the rest, saying,

Does this offend you. He speaks thus by Interrogation, to signifye unto
them, that it seemed strange unto him, that they should be offended at this
his doctrine: and also that they might understand that they were offended
without cause, C. seeing the doctrine it self contained no matter, in it of
offense.

M. And there is no doubt but that he had this communication apart from among
the assemblye of the Sinagogue, as it is manifest that he did in diverse other
places. Otherwise it had not been convenient that he should have gone about
openly, in the foresaid assembly to have corrected and reproved his murmuring
Disciples.

62. What and if ye shall see the Son of man ascend up thither, where he
was before.

C. Christ here seems not so much to take away the offense, as he does
seem to increase it: notwithstanding, if any man way the cause of the offense
throughlye, he shall find that it was in this, that they had conceived an
opinion, that he ought to do nothing but that which should please them.

The simple and base condition of Christ which they beheld with their eyes, was
a let unto them, that they could not give place to the power of his diuinitye:
but now drawing aside as it were the curtain or veil, he brings them to
the sight of his Heavenly glory.

B. As if he should say, This offends you, that I take so much to my
self, that I attribute so much to the eating of my flesh, that I affirm
that I am the bread of life which descended from Heaven: C. and because I am
without honor among men, ye despise me, and acknowledge no divine power to
be in me: But shortly it shall come to pass that GOD by his mighty power
shall exalt me from this contemptible state of mortal life, above the heavens.

For in the resurrection of Christ there appeared such power of the holy
Ghost, as openly proved him to be the son of God. Also, when it is said,
Psalm. 2.7.
Thou art my son, to day have I begotten thee, the resurrection is set forth
as a plain show token, whereby this glory of Christ ought to be known: as
the Apostle Paul does interpret the same. Acts. 13.33.
And the ascencion into Heaven, was the fulfylling of his glory.

Ascension of Christ into heaven confirmed.
M. Let us here noate how the Articles of the Lords ascencion is confirmed in
the Faith of the Son of God, by which we believe that this Jesus the Son
of man, is the Son of the living GOD, which came down from heaven for our
salvation. For his Ascension does confirm his descention. His descention into
this world was seen of no mortal eye.

It was meet therefore that his Ascension, that is to say, his return to his
Father, should be seen of such as should testifye of the same, whereby his
descencion which was invisible might be confirmed. John. 3.13.
For no man ascends up to Heaven, but he which came down from Heaven, even
the Son of man which is in Heaven.

And, that he ascended, what is it else but that he descended first into the
lower parts of the earth. He which descended is even the same also which
ascended above all heavens, Ephesians. 4.9.
to fulfill all things.

C. In that he says, he was first in Heaven, it does not properlye agree
to his humanitye, and yet notwithstanding, he speaks of the Son of man.
But this is no unwonted manner of speaking, when two natures in Christ do
make one person, and to attribute that to one which is proper to another.

63. It is the Spirit that quickens, the flesh profyteth nothing: The
words that I speak unto you, are spyrite and life.

It is the Spyrite that quickens. M. This parcel contains a declaracion of
those things at the which the Disciples were offended, because they seemed
hard. C. For Christ teaches that the Jews received no profit by his
Doctrine, because the same being spyrituall, they were but carnal hearers of
the same.

But because this place has been diversely expounded, first of all it is
needful that we have the true and proper sense of the words: whereby we
shall easily understand the purpose of Christ. In that he denies the flesh to
profit any thing, some do amiss refer the same to the Jews, which were
carnal. Neither do they well which affirm that the flesh of Christ does
profit us nothing, in that it is eaten, but in that it is Crucified: but we
must rather eat the same, that it may profit us when it is Crucified.

B. Othersome, understand this of the Spyrite, which the Apostles should
receive after the resurrection and Ascension of Christ, affyrming that they had
then the true sense of Christ's words, when that most excellent teacher of the
truth, had replenished them with most ample knowledge of Christ. But their
opinion seems far better, which think that these words (Aloane) or (Of it
self) ought to be joined therewith: as if Christ should have said, The
flesh aloane, or of it self profits nothing: the which is agreeable to the
matter it self.

C. For Christ has simplye respect to the manner of eating. He does not
therefore so speak as though there were no profit at all to be received by
his flesh: Flesh with out the spirit profits not.
but only pronounces the same to be unprofitable, if it be removed from
the flesh. For whereof comes it that the flesh has quickening power, but
because it is spyrituall? Therefore whosoever stays in the terrestrial
nature of the flesh, shall find nothing in the same, but that which is dead:
but they which lift up their eyes to the power of the Spyrite, with the which
the flesh is endued, shall feel by by their affection and by the experience
of Faith, that it is not called quickening in vain.

Now let us see how the flesh of Christ is meat in deed, and yet profits
nothing. Surely, it is meat, because we thereby have gotten life, because in
it God is pleased, because in it we have all the parts of salvation complete:
it profits nothing, if so be we judge and esteem the same according to the
nature and original thereof. For the seed of Abraham, which of it self is
subject to death, does not give life: but it does receive of the spyrite to
give unto us.

Wherefore it does become us also, that we may be truly fed by the same,
to bring with us the spyrituall mouth of Faith.

The words which J speak unto you are spirit. M. He does not speak of the
external sound of these words, but of the sense and meaning of them: and he
declares that he spoke not carnallye of the carnal eating of his flesh, in
the which there is no life, but spyrituallye of the power of the quickening
Spyrite, in the which there is life.

C. In few words, he teaches that his Doctrine is spyrituall: for this word
Spyrite, is put for the Adjective spyrituall. And that word is called
spyrituall, which calls us upward, that (the holy Ghost being our guide)
we may seek Christ by Faith, and not in carnal sense, in his heavenly
glory. For we know that nothing of those things which are spoken, can be
comprehended but by Faith. It is also worthy to be noted that he joins the
Spirit with life. He calls his word, life, of the effect: but he teaches
that the same shall give life to none, but to him, who spyritually receives
the same: for whosoever receives the same otherwise, rather draws to him
self death than life. To the godly this is a most sweet title of the Gospel,
that they are certifyed, that the same is ordained for them to salvation: they
are notwithstanding herewithall admonished to show them selves meet
Disciples. For the words being received by faith profit, but without faith,
profit nothing at all.

64. But there are some of you that believe not. For Jesus knew from the
beginning, which they were that believed not, and who should betraye him.

But there are some of you. M. The Lord is wont to upbraid men with their
unbelief, because there can no greater iniurye be done to God, than for men
to doubt of his Faith and truth. Christ again blames these men, because
they being deuoyde of the Spyrite, do wickedly deprave and corrupt his
doctrine, and by this means turn the same to their own destruction. For they
might have otherwise objected and said, Thou braggest that thy words are able
to give life: but we see no such thing. He says therefore that they are a
let unto them selves. For unbelief (as it is always proud^) shall never reap
any fruit in the words of Christ, Unbelief contemns Christ
because it does contemptuouslye despise them.

He says not, There are some of you, which understand not, but he shows
the cause wherefore they understand not. There are (says he) some of you which
believe not: and therefore they understand not, because they believe not.

By faith we are coupled together, and by understanding we are quickened:
first let us stick fast through Faith, that there may be somewhat to give
life by understanding. For he which stycketh not fast resists: and he which
resists, does not believe. For how shall he be quickened which believes
not?

C. Whereas, he says only some of them are unbelieving, when as almost every
one of them had his fault, he seems so to say to this end, least if there
were any which as yet were curable, they might thereby be brought to despair.

M. He meant therefore by more gentle admonition to bring them to a better
mind, and not so to cast them of, that every one of them might be made
careful to obtain the gift of Faith.

For Jesus knew from the beginning. Bv. This the Evangelist puts down to
amplifye the aucthoritye and magistye of Christ: C. Least any man should
think that Christ did rashlye judge of his auditors. Many professed them
selves to be of his flock: but their sudden falling away bewrayed their
hypocrisy.

But the Evangelist says that their unbelief which was unknown to others,
was manifest to our Savior Christ. The which the Evangelist notes not so much
because of Christ, as for our sakes, that we might learn not to judge, but in
such matters as are well known to us: For this which Christ is here said to
know from the beginning, is proper to his diuinitye.

Moreover, he noateth it for our sakes, Rash judgment forbydde.
that we which have not the knowledge of men's hearts, might learn to
suspende our judgment, until such time as impietye shall bewraye it self by
external signs, and so the Tree may be known by his fruit.

R. By this verse also he does fortifye the imbecility of the Apostles,
against the offense which was to come by the treason of Judas. For it is a
great offense and stumbling block to the weak, when they which seem to be
gods elect and chosen do betraye Christ.

Wherefore does he Prophecy long before that Judas should fall away, that
they might confirm their, Faith, and that they might not suspect the doctrine
of Christ for the fall of some.

M. Therefore the Evangelist meant in this matter to win great estimation
unto Christ, least he might be thought to be ignorant of this wickedness
of him which should betray him. R. This place also teaches the fear of GOD.
For if the Lord spared not the natural branches, take heed that it come not
to pass that he do not spare thee also.

M. Last of all, Romans 11.21.
it is here to be noated that there are certain degrees of unbelief, and
that one man, in whom there wants Faith, may be more wicked than another.

He knew (says the Evangelist) who were not believing, and who it was that
should betraye him. He makes special mention of the Traitor, as of a man,
of most monstrous wickedness. He also was unbelieving, but his unbelief was
not without notable malice.

Euenso at this day, there are many unbelievers in the Church, but so, that
one of them do far excel another in examples of unbelief. Some of these
unbelievers are supersticious: some Epicures: othersome are notable Traitors,
insomuche that for gains sake, they are ready under the coolour of
familliarity to betraye the Lords truth, the Church it self and all
godliness.

65. And he said: Therefore said I unto you, that no man can come to me, except
it were given to him of my Father.

Bv. Again he repeateth the cause of Faith, and of unbelief. They which are
drawn of the Father believe: but they which are not drawn of the Father,
believe not.

M. This he said before to the multitude of the Jews: but here he teaches
that his Doctrine is general, and appertayning to all those, which are void
of faith, and come not to the Savior. These Disciples came unto Christ
corporallye, and corporally followed him, and for this corporal cleaving unto
him, were counted for his Disciples, and they again for their parts would
seem to be his Disciples. But how they did follow him, and cleave unto him
in spirit, (which belongs to all true Disciples), it is already declared.

C. He shows therefore that Faith is a very rare and singular gift of the
spyrite of GOD, least we should maruayle that the Gospel is not generally
received of all men for the most part.

For we have the less estimation of the Gospel, because all the world
obeys not the same: for it comes into our mind how it can come to pass,
that the greatest part of the world should wyllinglye reject their own
salvation.

Christ therefore shows the cause why the number of the Faithful is so few,
namelye, because no man of him self. comes to the Father: for all men are
blind until they are illuminated by Gods holy Spyrite: they therefore are
partakers of so great a benefit, upon whom the Father bestows the
participation of his spyrite. For if all men had this grace, the making mention
of the same in this place should be out of time, and far from the purpose.
For we must noate the purpose of Christ, which is to show, how that many
believe not the Gospel, because faith grows not, but by the seecreete
reuelacion of the spirit.

A. But this verse is more at large expounded before.

C. But he uses here this word (Given) for (Drawn) to declare that there
is nothing to move God to draw us unto him, but his free grace and mercy. For
that which we have by the gift and grace of God, comes not by our own
industrye.

66. From that time, many of his Disciples went back, and walked no more with
him.

Bv. Now are joined to the former disputacion, notable examples of such as
eat the flesh, and drink the blood of Christ, and of such as eat it not.

For those which are starters away from Christ, do neither eat nor drink
Christ, because they want faith: but the eleven Disciples do truly eat and
drink. For they do believe in the Lord Jesus, whom they do confess with a
strong and liuelye faith.

M. Therefore we see no strange or unwonted thing come to pass, when many
do fall away from the kingdom of Christ, seeing that here it is said, that
many Disciples forsook Christ him self.

Mat. 13.20
A lyuelye description of this matter, is set before us in the Parrable of the
seed, which fell upon stony ground.

R. Man's nature follows Christ so long as he has any hope to be
rewarded, but his hope being once frustrate, he goes away and forsakes
Christ. C. But this is a horrible monster, that so gentle and loving
inuitacion, could withdraw the minds of so many, specially of such as had
before given their names unto him, and were his familliar Disciples.

But this example is set before us, as it were in steed of a glass, in the
which we may behold how great the wickedness and ingratitude of the world
is, which takes occasion to stumble even in the very fair and plain way,
that it might not come unto Christ.

That therefore which was foreshewed concerning Christ, Esai. 8.14
ought then to have been considered in his doctrine, and now also he must be
daily a stoane of offense.

For here could never be such dilligent taking heed, but that the Doctrine of
Christ must needs be, to many an occasion of offense: because the reprobats,
being ordained to destruction, do suck poison out of most wholesome meat, and
gaul out of Honey.

The Son of GOD truly observed that which was profitable, and yet
notwithstanding, we see that he offended many of his Disciples. Therefore how
much so ever many do abhor the pure doctrine, yet nevertheless they may
not suppress the same: only let the teachers of the Church remember the
admonicion of Saint Paul, 2. Tim. 2.15
that the word of GOD is rightly an offense, and they shall over stride all
stumblyng blocks void of fear.

M. Moreover, Saint John says in his Epistle, They went out from us, but they
were none of us, ^. Ioh. 2.i9
For if they had been of us, they had continued with us.

It is necessary that after this manner such as are proved may be known. i.
Cor. 11.19


C. When the Evangelist says that they walked no more with Christ, he
means that there was not a full Apostacye, but that they withdrewe them
selves only from the fellowshippe of Christ: notwithstanding, he condemns
them as Apostates. Whereby we have to learn, that we cannot go back the
breadth of one foot, but that we are ready to forsake Christ.

67. Then said Jesus unto the Twelve, will ye also go away?

M. He makes no mention of those which had forsaken him, neither does he
seem to be any whit angery with them, but turning him self with great
modestye to the rest which remained, namely, to the twelve Apostles, said,
unto them, Will ye also go away?

Bv. He does not ask this question as though he were ignorant what they
thought, or what they would do, but he demands it that he might set their
Faith, and the profession of their faith, as an ensample to the whole Church
to be followed and kept: M. and therewith also to declare that he does stay
none of his Disciples from going from him, if so be they be such as desire to
go from him, because this Apostleship requires such as come not compelled,
but voluntaryly, and desirous of heavenly grace.

C. He teaches also that there is no cause why they should suffer them selves
to be drawn away by the lightness and inconstancye of other men. For he
shows him self to them to be he with whom they should abide: and
therewithal exhorts them not to join them selves companions to Apostates.

And verylye if so be the faith be builded upon Christ, Faith in Christ never
shakes
it shall not depend upon men, neither shall it shake at any time, although
Heaven and earth should seem to go together. And the cyrcumstaunce is to
be noated, that Christ being deprived almost of all his Disciples, retayneth
only Twelve. By these and such like examples, every faithful man is
taught, to follow and serve God, although he have never a fellow.

M. Let no man therefore faint or be discouraged in this wicked world, where
very few are found which cleave faythfullye to the Lord, as though the
Lord had the less care of the faithful, because they are both abject and
few in number, but rather let us undoubtedly believe, that our Shepherd
Christ Jesus, will not neglect or forget one of the least of his sheep.

Multitud, does not avail to salvation.
For as the multitude of the wicked shall not save them from destruction, so the
paucitye or smalnesse of number of the Just, shall nothing let whereby they
may not be saved.

M. Also, because these were specially given to Christ of the Father, that
Gods election might take place, it was necessary that they should abide and
persevere with him unto the end.

Romans 11.29
A For the gifts and calling of God are such, that he can never repent him
of them. For he is wont to finishe the good work which he has begone in his
servants.

68. Then Simon Peter answered him, Lord to whom shall we go? Thou have the
words of eternal life.

Then Simon Peter. Bv. Simon Peter having always a fervent faith and zeal to
Christ Jesus, and now also making answer, not in his own name, but in the
name of all the rest, cried out with great courage, Lord to whom shall we go?

Thou have the words of life. C. This was the Judgment of them all, except
Judas, who had nothing that was sincere in him.

M. Peter might have said simplye, Lord we will not go away: but he
thought it better to express two causes of tarrying, why he and his brethren
would abide still with Christ. First because they understand and perceive
that his doctrine is wholesome, and of power to give life: Secondly, because
whether soever they go, leaving Christ, there is nothing to be found but death.

R. By this answer of Peter, we plainelye see the same to be true which the
Apostle writes, saying: The preaching of the Cross is to them that perrishe
foolishenesse: i. Cor. i.18.
but unto us which are saved, it is the power of God.

C. This is a notable commendation of the Gospel, that it ministereth unto us
eternal life: Romans i.16.
being the power of God to salvation to every one which believes the same.

For otherwise is life offered to us in the Gospel, when as God freelye
reconcileth him self unto us, 2. Cor. 5.19.
not imputing our sins to us. Hereby therefore we learn, that we must
follow our Master Christ aloane, and must cleave only unto him which can
bring to us everlasting life.

Bv. This life is not found in the Philosophy of Plato or of Aristotle:
neither is it to be found among the Pharisees and Monks. Death shows it
self in the Institucions of these men: death, deceyte, and destruction is in
the whole world, and falls upon the pate of such men as are careless, and
followers of foolish things: and he aloane escapes death, deceyte, and
destruction which faithfullye imbraceth Christ, and cries with Peter, Lord
whether shall we go? we will abide with thee, for thou have the words of
eternal life: In thy word, in the Scripture, in the holy Gospel, and in thy
self, is the light, the way, the truth, and the life.

69. And we believe and are sure that thou art christ the Son of the living
God.

M. To those that departed, the Lord said, But there are some among you, which
believe not: Verse three score and four. Peter here on the contrary part, to
put away all suspicion of unbelief from him self, and from the rest of his
brethren, and might separate him self from the fellowshippe of unbelievers,
says, And we believe and are sure that thou art Christ the son of the
living God. In these words Peter briefly comprehends the sum of Faith. And
he places Faith in the first place, because the obedience of Faith is the
beginning of true understanding: yea Faith it self is the true eye of the
mind.

But strayte after knowledge is added, which discerns Faith from erroneous
and false opinions. Faith is the eye of the mind.
For the Turks, the Jews, and the Papists do believe, but they know nothing.

Faith and knowledge tied together.
But Faith is tied to knowledge: because Gods truth is certainly and
undoubtedly known unto us, not such truth as man's knowledge is able to
apprehende, but such as the spirit of God does seal in our hearts.

M. Therefore Christian Faith, has this propertye above all other, to know
that which it believes, that which can never be said of any man's Faith,
that ever has been or shall be in the world, because their Faith is not of
true, but of false things.

R. So that first of all we must believe the word: then follows knowledge,
and the understanding of the truth of the word. B. In Peter the feruencye of
Faith, to confession is to be noated. Charity in favorable judgment
Charity also appears in him, in that he Judges well of all the rest of
his fellow Disciples.

For look what he him self thought of the Lord, he doubts not to think
the same of them, seeing he answers for them who were never asked before
any such question, saying, And we believe. etc.

But this confession seems nothing to appertain to the present cause. For
the question was moved concerning the eating of Christ's flesh. I answer
Although the twelve had not by and by the knowledge of all things that the
Lord taught, yet notwithstanding it is sufficient that they according to the
measure of their faith do confess him td be the Aucthour of salvation, and do
submit themselves to him in all things. M. For at another time they prayed for
the increase of their faith, saying, Luke. 17.5.
Lord increase our faith.

A. Moreover the answer of Peter does very well agree with the words of
Christ when he said, The words which I speak unto you are spirit and life,

And Peter confesses that he has the words of eternal life: whereupon
there is no doubt, but that Christ is the Son of the living God.

7. Jesus answers them have not I chosen you twelve and one of you is a
Devil?

Jesus answers them. M. These things were spoken by the Lord to singular
purpose. Peter being of a good nature, and disposition thought that all the
rest of his fellow Apostles, were endewed with the same sinceritye and
faythfulnesse of mind, that he was endewed with, of the which he seemed
after a sort to boast.

He knew that this number of the Apostles was singularlye and specially
chosen from among the rest of the Disciples, by the Lord: for the which cause
he could not otherwise think but that they were faithful and sincere whom
the Lord so specially had chosen the to dignity of the Apostleship: and
therefore bouldlye, as persuaded not only of his own Faith, but of the Faith
of the rest of his fellows, he fayde, And we believe.

Now, the Lord seeking to take away this securitye and perswation, not only
from him, but also from the rest, and further also to signifye unto them, that
it was no marvel, that among the multitude of the Disciples, which were not
chosen by him, but followed him of their own freewyll, many forsook him
through their unbelief, when as in that small number of the Apostles which he
had specially chosen, there was one to be found, which was not only
unbelieving, but also (which was a great deal worse) a Deuell, the Lord (I
say) seeking these things, says,

Have not J chosen you Twelve, and one of you is a Devil. B. The Greeks call
him the Deuell, whom the Hebrews call Satan. By this therefore that he
said, that Judas was a Deuell, he meant, that he was his aduersarye and
enemy, and not a Disciple, although he were chosen with others into the number
of the Disciples, by external calling, and was as yet among them.

C. For where Christ says, that he had chosen Twelve, it is not referred to
the external purpose of GOD, (for it is not possible that any of them should
fall away which are predestinate to everlasting life) but seeing they were
chosen to the office of Apostleship, it became them to go before others in
pietye and holiness.

Therefore he puts here chosen, for the most notable and excellent among
the common sort of people.

M. Concerning their election, read the third of Mark, and the sixte of
Luke. And Mathewe repeateth their names in order, in the tenthe Chapter.

And, when he calls Judas a Deuell, there is no doubt but that he meant by
this name, to make him very detestable. For they are deceived which extenuate
the odious title of this vice. And verylye, they which profane so holy an
office, cannot be sufficientlye hated and detested.

Those Aungelles are called teachers which do very well discharge their
Embassage, Rightlye, Mala. 2.7.
therefore he is called the Deuell, which being chosen into so honorable an
office, does by his own wickedness degenerate from the same.

There is also another reason, why such are called Deuelles, namelye, because
GOD does give more lybertye to Satan, to prevail against the Reprobate and
wicked Ministers, than against any other of the common sort of people.

Wherefore if so be they which are chosen to be Pastors be carried away
with Deuillishe madness, insomuche that they are like unto brute Beasts, we
must not despise the dignitye of the office, but must rather commend the same,
seeing such sharp vengeance follows the profanation of the same.

Bv. Judas is here called the Deuell, not so much because he was a Traitor,
as for that he made him self a Minister and instrument for the Deuell to
work by.

71. He spoke of Judas Iscariot the Son of Simon: for he it was that should
betray him, being one of the twelve.

M The Euaungelist seeks dilligently to defend the innocence of the rest of
the Apostles, and would not have any wrong or false suspicion to light upon
the true and sincere Apostles of Christ. Let all these imitate this diligence
which desire that the authority of the ecclesiastical ministerye may stand
safe and sound.

C. And although Judas conscience did accuse him, yet notwithstanding we do
not read that he was any whit moved So dull are Hipocrites that they do not
feel their wounds: in the sight of men they are so brazen faced, that they
will not let to prefer themselves before the best men. R. We see therefore
how that all which seem to be elected are not elected. Bv. Let no man
therefore to much flatter himself and be secure because of certain gifts
which he has received. For he which had obtained so great gifts that he
could work signs, by which he was grown to wonderful covetousness, could
receive no profit, neither by benifites, neither by gifts, neither by the
company of Christ, neither by the washing of his feet, neither by the
participation of the table, neither by the keeping of the money, but all these
things were means to bring him to destruction.

The seventh Chapter.
1. After these things Jesus went about in Galilee: for he would not go
about in Jury, because that the Jews sought to kill him.

After these things. B. IN THE FIFTE Chapter going before the Euaungelist
declares that the JEWS went about to kill our Savior Christ, for healing
the man on the Sabbath day which was diseased eight and thirtye years, and
because he made himself equal with his Father.

These things he repeateth here in one word, to show the cause wherefore
he went at this time into Galilee. Bv. For the Lord does willingly withdraw
himself from blood thirstye men, and from conspiratours of murder: and his
spirit shall rest upon the gentle and humble, and upon such as reverence his
word. M. The Nobilitye and fame of the land of the Jews by reason of the
Priesthood and temple seemed to require, Esaias. 66.2.
that Christ should rather have gone about in the same, rather than in Galilee,
which was an abscure and infamous land. Furthermore he might run into
suspicion, because he shonning the light, forsook Iurye because of the
Scribes and Phariseis, men learned in the Law, and rather desiered to go
about in Galilee among ignorant men and unskillful of the knowldge of GOD,
and to preach his doctrine there, than among the learned in Jury.

Necessarilye therefore the Euaunuangelist has showed the reason of this
matter, declaring that the malice and cruelty of the Jews was the cause that
the Lord leaving Jury went into Galliee. C. For he had no safe abiding among
the Jews. If any man think it absurd that Christ sought to hide himself,
which with a beck could break and disapoynt the devises of his enemies, let
him consider what person our Savior Christ did bear at his Fathers
appointment, for the which cause he thought it good to keep himself within
the bounds of a man.

For, because he had taken upon him the form of a servant, he fled and
shonned peril after the manner of men, until such time as his Father exalted
him. And although he knew the prefixed time of his death, yet notwithstanding
he behaved himself as a man subject to dangers.

Wherefore it became him not rashlye to cast himself into the midst of
dangers. But he so shonned periles, that nevertheless he swarued not from
the course of his Office no not the breadth of a nail. For wherefore have we
health, Health ^o given (...) to (...) God.
and the safetye of our life, but only to serve the Lord? Let us therefore
take heed, that we loose not the causes of living, for life.

B. It is lawful for us also to flee from perryll, so that we do not hinder
the glory of God by our flight. The Evangelist says not that the Lord Jesus
did forsake Iurye, because the Jews were sinners, for the Galileans also were
sinners, whom notwithstanding for this cause he did not disdain. Moreover,
he is oftentimes read to have eaten and kept company with Publicans and
sinners: Cruelty against Christ excludes the grace of God.
so far was he from forsaking the Jews, because they were sinners. Not every
sin excludes this grace of Gods kingdom: but this bloodthyrstinesse and
crueltye of the Jews excludes it.

2. The Jews feast of Tabernacles was at hand.

C. It is probable and lykelye that this happened the second year of
Baptism. B. This Feast of Tabernacles or Tents was so called because of
Israel aboade in their Tents seven days, Feast of Tents.
for a remembrance that God made their fathers to dwell in Tents, when he
brought them out of the land of Aegipt.

M. This feast is celebrated from the fifteenth day of the seventh Month,
(which we call October) unto the one and twenty day of the same, as is to be
seen in Leuitticus. C. We have showed before in the thirteenth verse of the
second Chapter that there were two causes which moved our savior Christ to
come to Jerusalem at the feast days. Leui. 23.34


But now the Euaungelist shows that Christ so rested in Galile, as though
he would not come at all to Jerusalem, A. although he was appointed to
ascend thither: as we shall see hereafter.

3. His Brethren therefore said unto him, Get thee hence, and go into Jury,
that thy, Disciples also may see the works that thou do.

B. The Euaungelist calls the Cosins and Kinsemen of our Savior, his
brethren, according to the manner of the scriptur. C. For by this name the
Jews comprended all kinsemen, in what degree of blood soever they be: Mat
i2.46
as we have showed in another place.

B. They therefore which did not beeleeue that he was the same whom he
preached himself to be, admonished him stronglye to go up to Jerusalem at the
Feast day and there where all Israel came together, to make himself openly
known what he was. For they knew that his abiding in Galilee was to shoone
the madness and wrath of the Jews, which he had provoked against him by
healing the man which was diseased eyghte and thirty years. C. For Christ was
deryded of those his kinsmen, because he fleeing as it were from the light,
lay hid in an abscure and base corner of Judea. By the name of Disciples
they understand, not enelye such as were domestical and his familyare
Disciples, but also such as he meant to get unto him from diverse places of the
whole Nation.

4. For there is no man that does any thing in secret, and he himself
seeks to be known openly: If thou do such things show thy self
openly to the world.

R. These words of Christ's Kinsemen may be understand to be spoken either
contemptuouslye, or else wisely, but howsoever, yet carnallye. If they be
words of contempt, then they have this meaning: Why do thou glory and
boast so much before us of thy self: if thou be such a manner of man as thou
braggest thy self to be, why do thou not go into Jury, where there are men
boath mighty, noble, and holy, and also learned and wise. If thou art
descended from heaven, what need thou fear the threatening of men? If thou
desire glory and praise, as we perceive greatly thou do, why do thou
lurcke in an obscure corner of Galilee? Go thy way up to Jerusalem, and there
thou shall have just occasion offered thee to seek thy praise and glory.

But if thou will have these words spoken wiselye for good advice, than this
is the scence: Because now the feast of Tabernacles was at hand, at which
time a great multitude came up to Jerusalem, according to the law the kinsemen
of Christ took counsel together among themselves, that when Christ should
seem to handle his matters fearfully and without discretion they would
exhort him for kindredes sake, not to neglect his fame, but to go up with
them at the feast day, whereby he should confirm his aucthoritye before the
Jews, which he had partelye gotten already by his miracles. Neither did they
only seek his praise, but their own fame also, which should come unto them
by the glory of their kisemen.

They say therefore, Why do thou lurk here so obscurelye? whom do thou
fear? why do thou so vndiscreetelye handle thy business? We for the
natural love which we owe unto thee, earnestlye exhort thee, that thou go
up with us to Jerusalem at the feast day, to confirm and approve thine
authority there, that thy glory may be more famous, and that thou may
win a greater number of Disciples, boath by thy doctrine and also by thy
miracles. For we see that thou do many great and wonderful things, but
yet not so wiselye as thou should, because thou withdrawest thy self from
the multitude and greatest company of men, and lie hid in a corner of
Galilee, where thou can have no glory or praise of men.

If so be the works which thou do be altogether divine, thou shall not
fear the light, but shall go with us to the feast, that thou may be the
more famous and honorable. C. For seeing thou art endued with so great virtue
and power that thou can win Fame by working signs and wonders, loose not the
same: for thou do in vain spend and bestow here, those gifts which GOD
has given unto thee, where there are no meet witnesses and Judges of the
same. B. For he which would have all men to speak freelye and openly of
him, must do those noble acts which he does openly, and not in secret.
Therefore make thy self known unto the world.

B. Hereby we perceive how great the dullness of men is, in waying and
considering the works of GOD. For the kinsemen of our Savior Christ would
never have spoken thus, except they had utterly contemned and despised those
manifest signs and proofs of his divine power, which they ought to have
received and reverenced with great admiration.

That which we here in this place concerning Christ does daily happen: For
they which ought to be friendelye boath for neerenesse of blood, and also for
other causes are more grievous and troublesome to the children of GOD than
strangers, oftentimes. For they are the instruments of Satan, to draw and
entise them, which would scincerelye and faithfully serve GOD, one while to
ambition, another whil to covetousness, to the love of the world, and to such
like. Concerning the which matter read more in our exposition of Matthew.

But Christ sharpelye repelling such Satan's, teaches us by his example, Mat.
10.36
not to follow the foolish wills and minds of brethren.

5. For his brethren believed not in him.

R. Now in this place that appears to be true, Ioh. 4.44
which our Savior Christ says in a another place, A Prophet has no honor in
his own country.

B. Hereby also we learn that all are not godly which appertain unto Christ
concerning the flesh. For what did it profit these men whom the Evangelist
noateth to be unbelievers, that they were the Lords brethren? C For the
Spirit of Christ does give unto them a perpetual noat of infamy, because
they being convinced by so many testimonies of works, did not for all that
believe. Therefore as says Saint Paul. Whosoever desiereth to be in Christ,
must be a new creature. 2. Cor. 5.i7.
B. For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision avails any thing, nor
uncircumcision, but a new creature. C. For they which give them selves wholly
unto God, are unto Christ instead of Father, mother and brethren, as for
others he puts them from him. Wherefore to ridiculouse is the superstition
of the Papists who in the virgin Marie, all other things set a part, only
extol the honor of blood: as though Christ did not reprehende the Woman,
which cried in the myddest of the multitude, Blessed is the womb that bare
thee, Luke 11.27.
and the Paps that gave thee suck. For Christ answered, Nay rather blessed
are they which hear the word of GOD and keep it. B. For the inward man
aloane framed after GOD, is acceptable unto GOD, and brings forth the
undoubted fruit of righteousness. M. Let us noate also in this place, how
that faith in Christ is the only gift of GOD, and comes not by any
prerogative of flesh and blood. For the faithful are borne neither of
blood, neither of the will of flesh, nor of the will of man, but of GOD. Also
flesh and blood reuealeth not the son of God, Ioh. 1.13
but the Father which is in heaven. A. Let us remember therefore what the Lord
answered to his kinsemen James and John To sit on my right hand, Mat. i6.17
and on my left, is not mine to give, but it shall happen to those for whom it
is prepared of my Father.

6. Then Jesus said unto them, my time is not yet come: but your time is always
ready.

CHR. Some interpret this of the time of Christ's death, but not aptlye. C. For
he speaks of the time of his departure and affirms that he differs from
his kinsemen in this, that they might without danger come forth at all hours
in the face of the world, because they have the world their friends: but he
had good cause to fear, for that the world was his enemy: And he gives
them to understand that they give evil advise in a known thing: as if he
should say, Bv. My time to go thither is not yet come: when time shall
serve, I shall need none of your admonitions: I know what and when to do every
thing: how also and when I must be made known to the world, does not depend
on man's counsel but upon my Fathers decree. M. Ye may ascend to Jerusalem
when ye will, but I have not always that liberty, you need not weight your
time, because ye may go when ye will: but as for me I must attend my time,
because all times to me are not alike. C. We are also here taught how
dilligentlye we ought to beware, that we do all things by the rule of Gods
word, and in due time: Bv. and also to take heed that we do nothing
rashelye, without warraunt from God. He talks with us in his word. We
consult therefore with him when we ask counsel at his word, when we
pray, and when we crave his holy spirit. Time ought to be considered,
according as ocasion serves.


M. Every man therefore ought to consider his time, and not to do any thing
out of due time, but patiently to tarrye for the opportunity of a convenient
time. The Lord would not go with his Brethren to Jerusalem, because his time
was not yet come.

At another time he commanded Passover to be prepared for him at Jerusalem,
saying, I will keep the Pasouer at thy house with my Disciples. And to his
mother he said, Mat. 26.18
My hour is not yet come. Let every one of us therefore learn by this
example, John. 2.4.
to frame our selves according to the conuenientnesse of the time, Rom 12.11.
A. even as the Apostle Paul teaches us, but so notwithstanding, that we
swerve not the breadth of a nail from our calling.

7. The world cannot hate you, but me it hates, because I testify of it,
that the works thereof are evil.

C. The word is here taken for men not regenerate, which retain their nature
and disposition. Whosoever therefore are not regenerate by the spirit of God,
are pronounced by our Savior Christ to be enemies unto him. And why? Surely
because they condeme his works. Wherefore if we will stand to the judgment
of Christ, we must confess that the whole nature of man is so vicious and
corrupt, that there can proceed from the same, no right, sincere or good
thing. M. Christ might have said The high Pristes, Scribes, and Pharisees
cannot hate you: but they hate me. But because his brethren, had used this
word world before, saying, Show thy self to the world, when as in deed they
understood those forenamed persons, he also rightly calls them the world:
but so that therewithal he noateth them of a worldly disposition. As if he
should say, ye inuit me by this word (world) to the high Priests, Scribes,
and Pharisees of Jerusalem, to show my self before them. Ye truly and justly
call them the world: for they are nothing else but worldely. And because the
world loves that which is his own, the world cannot hate you, which are
worldelye, and the children of this world, being pertakers of corruption and
of worldly wickedness. R. The Pharisees hate not you, the mighty men do not
persecute you, because ye are all of like impiety of like wicked manners, ye
embrace their doctrine as holy: and whatsoever they say ye accounte it an
Oracle. Wherefore they call you obedient children of the Sinagoge: so far
they are from persecuting and hating you: but the world that is, the wise,
mighty, and holy men of this world hate me, not only because I do disagree
with their impiety, but also do reprove, and reprehende all their works,
righteousness, holiness, wisdom, and power, as abominable in the sight of
GOD. A. For that which is highlye esteemed in the sight of men is abominable
in the sight of God. Luke 16.15.


C. Therefore he conuinceth them to be carnal, when he says that the world
cannot hate them. R. Christ therefore would not follow the carnal affections
of his kinsemen.

C. Furthermore, by these words the Lord Jesus does signify that the Gospel
cannot be truly preached, but that the whole world must be cited as guilty
before the tribunal seat of GOD, that so flesh and blood may be trodden
down, and brought to naught, John. 16.^
according to this saying, When the holy Ghost comes it shall reprove the
world of sin.

Herewithall also we learn that the pride which is naturallye ingraffed in
men is so great, that they flatter and like of themselves in their vices: For
when they are reprehended they would not be angerye, except they being blinded
with the ouermuche love of themselves, did flatter themselves in their evil.

Only Gods spirit does make us gentle and meek to abide reprehention
insomuche that willingly we offer our selves to be slain with the sword of
the Gospel. Humility rests where the spirit of God abides.


B. This also is to be noted, that we cannot have the love and friendeshippe of
the world, except we give our consent to the evil works thereof. For if so
be we seek to maintain the glory of God aloane, and do pronounce only
GOD, to be good, and do seek also to convince the world of sin, by and by
it persecuteth us, even as before time it persecuted Christ.

And to reprove the world, is not only to inuey against that groser sort of
sinners, (for that the world can bear) but also to testify that the works
thereof are evil: that is to say, that it is wholly void of righteousness and
goodness, and that it cannot attain to true righteousness but by Christ.

M. For the nature of the word is to enter through even to the dividing a
sonder of the soul and the spirit, and of the Joints and the marowe, and
discerns the thoughts. A. What pretense soever therefore the world has for
the hating of the professors of the gospel, there can be no other cause than
that which Christ has foreshewed: namely because the faithful do testify
that the works of the world are euel. Heb. 4.12
M.

The Jews those ypocrites went about to kill Christ, as a transgressor of the
Saboth but there lay a another mischife secret in their hearts, of the which
not so much as Pilat was ignorant: for he know that for envy they had
delivered him up to death.

Euenso they which at this day hate the Ministeres of the Gospel, ascribe the
cause to the love of the Church, calling them enemies and forsakers of the
churh when as they themselves are not lovers of the Church but sekers of their
own vain glory.

And they pretend that to magistrates which they know they cannot abide,
calling them seditious persons, as though they them selves wished well to
magistrates, when as in deed no men are, nor ever have been greater enemies
to magistrates then they themselves have been. John. 3.20.
B. But they will not come to the true light of Gods word, lest their evil
deeds should be reproved.

8. Go ye up unto this feast: I will not go up yet unto this feast, for my
time is not yet full come.

M. There is no doubt but that the Lord would have instructed them, and kept
them with him longar, if so be they had been of a sincere heart, and had erred
symply: but because they were led by the spirit of envy and had an euel
opinion of him, he left them to their own counsayles. They had herd and seen
many wonderful miracles they ought to have known who, and how great he was,
if so be they had not ben blinded with malice: furthermore for kindreds sake
they should have been better affected toward him. Justly therefore he
sends them away from him to go whether they will.

Thus does God always deal in his Justice with the unbelieving and obstinate
insomuche that when they will not be otherwise ruled, he leaves them to their
own immaginations, that they may either walk in them or else turn to him by
repentance.

Hear O my people, and I will protest unto the O Israel, if thou will harken
unto me let there be no strange God in thee neither worship thou any foreign
God. For I am the Lord thy God, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt:
open thy mouth wide and I will fill it.

But my people would not hear my voice, and Israel would not obaye me So I
gave them up unto the hardness of their heart and they have walked in their
own counsels. Psalm. 81.8


As therefore it cannot be gathered, by those words that the Lord does not
care for the salvation of his people, and does reject the infirm and weak:
(for he says afterward I would my people had harkened to me and Israel had
walked in my ways. I would son have humbled their enemies) so verily we
must not here gather that the Lord had not a care for the salvation of his
brethren because he so lightly sends them from him, saying Go ye up unto this
feast.

But we must rather understand how unmeet and inconvenient a thing it is to
constrain wicked and mallicious persons against their wills to be pertakers
of that grace, which with all their strength and might they reject and
contemn. John. 3.19.
For it is most just that they should err and wander in darckenesse which
love darckenesse more than light.

9. When he had said these words unto them he aboade still in Galilee.

M. In that Christ ascended not to Jerusalem, but aboade still in Galilee, when
others went, it may seem that his own conscience did accuse him, or else
that he tarried behind for want of manly courage: and in that he does not go
with his brethren as he was wont to do at other times, he seems to bear
unto them some privy grudge. But Christ is contented patiently to abide these
things, having the testimonye of an innocent conscience, the which also he
declared to his brethren, when he showed unto them the cause why he was hated
of the world.

Let us learn therefore by this example, not to be much careful and troubled
for any thing that man Judges of us, so that we know our selves to be
innocent in the sight of God, and do declare the same to those that seek it:
as we see our Lord and savior did here, It is not possible that we should
escape the sinister and wrong judgment of the reprobate in this world, the
which are every where at hand, which way soever we turn us or what soever
we leave undone.

1. Cor. 4
Whereupon the Apostle said, It is a small matter for me to be judged of you or
of man's judgment: Rom 12.17 1. These. 5.21
for it is the Lord that judges me. A. But we ought not hereupon to neclect
our fame or good report: for we ought to prouid for honest things in the
sight of all men, and if it be possible, so much as in us lies to live
peceable with all men, and to obstayne from all show of evil. But seeing we
cannot obaye God, except we displease men, we must void of care despise all
favor of men, to obaye God aloane.

Gallath. 1.
If (says the Apostle) I should please men I were not the servant of God. C.
For seeing there is nothing more miserable then to be drawn away from
Christ, curssed be that peace which is so preciouse unto us, that for the same
we should renounce Christ.

10. But as soon as his brethren were gone up, then went he also up to
the feast, not openly but as it were privily.

R. Here are two things to be noted. For in that Christ went up to Jerusalem
at the feast of Tabernacles, he shows obedience of his Fathers
commandment: and in that he ascends privily he shows the wisdom of
faith. Exo. 23.17.
For it becomes a christian man to fulfill the commandment of the Lord
with simple obedience, and yet nevertheless to take heed with good advice that
he tempt not the Lord. Rashness ought to be escued.
For Rashenesse as well in other things, as in divine matters, brings great
inconveniences with it. A. He might have withstand his adversaries (as is
aforesaid) with manifest power, but that should have little profited us. R.
Therefore by this deed he taught us that if so be we at any time be in like
perilles, we should with a strong faith fulfill the commandment of the Lord,
and yet in the mean time beware we tempt him not, Luke. 21.i8.
being sertaynly persuaded that not one hear of our head shall perish
without the will of our heavenly Father.

In that Christ does now assende, it is not repugnaunt with that, that he
said to his brethren, that he would not ascend.

For then he declared that he would not fulfill their evil affections, nor
ascend with them to the feast, of Tabernacles, until such time as the
necessity of his duty did constrayne him openly to show him self: but now
opertunity being offered he ascends aloane without the company of his
kinsemen, whom he refused as carnal to use in the business of the Gospel. C.
Therefore on the one part the Euaungelist sets before our eyes the kynsemen
of our savior, who according to the common manner of men, seem to like of
the worship of God, but yet notwithstanding are friends to the world, that is
to say, to the wicked, and therefore do walk void of care: on the other
part he sets before us Christ him self. who being hated of the world,
comes privily into the City, and abides in Galile, until the necessity of
his office which he had received of his Father, constrained him openly to
show him self.

11. Then sought him the Jews at the feste and said, where is he.

Bv. In these words the Evangelist reprehendeth the Judgments of the common
people, which they had concerning Christ and the Gospel, to the end he might
confirm the minds of the ministers of the word in like discencions lest they
should faint and be discouraged by the like Judgments, and forsake the
truth. C. By the Jews he understands the common people, which being now
accustomed these two years to hear Christ, required him, when they saw him
not as they were wont. For when they say, Where is he. they mean a man
known unto them: and yet notwithstanding this demand, shows that they were
not hitherto well affected, but hong always in doubt.

Notwitstanding there are some, which by the name (Jews) in this place,
understand not the people, but the Rulers of the Jews, the high Priests,
Scribs Pharisees, and elders of the people, being even the very same of whom
saint John makes mention in the first verse going before saying, Because the
Jews sought to kill him. M. and they say that it was oprobrious speech
which the Jews used here: as if they should have said, where is that
Galilean? Where is that seducer and deceyuer of the people.

Where is that blasphemer? where is that enemy of the Law and breake^ of the
Sabbath? For the did not voutsafe to name him, even as Saul did to David, when
he said, 1. King. 20 27.
Where is the Son of Isai? But the former exposition is more probable.

12. And much murmuring of him was there among the people: for some said he
is God: other said, Nay: but he deceyueth the people.

R. Here we see the great abasing of our Lord and savior Christ. For he is
Judge of quick and dead, yet notwithstanding, he hyding the same, suffers
him self to be Judged of the common sort of people. Whereupon there were
diverse Judgments given of him. C. For whersoeuer men gathered them selves
together in companies, privy vardits and judgments were given of Christ.
Bv. Many of the common sort of people which had heard his words, and seen
his miracles said that Jesus was a good man, and that his cause was good, and
therefore in his absenc ought not so to be misreported of: on the contrary part
the Scribes and Pharisees with their adherents both denied him to be a good
man, and also affirmed that his cause was evil. For they said.

He deceives the people. That is to say, he uses a new and unwonted kind of
teaching, which far differs from that which we have received from our
forefathers. R. And thus Christ seemed to some a good man, and to othersome a
Seducer of the people, and to some, such a one as was possessed with a Douell,
Every one in Judging of Christ declared his wisdom. For it is the manner of
flesh to arrogate to it self the wisdom of Judgment. C. Wherefore here we
may behold how great the rashness of men is in divine matters. In small
matters they were nothing so licentious. But when the son of God and his
doctrine came in question, by and by they give their sensure with great
rashenesse. For the which cause we ought diligently to observe the greater
moderation, lest unadvisedly we condemn our life with the eternal truth of
God. But if the world do account us for deceyuers, let us then remember that
Christ our Master was so called, in the mean time, let us show our
selves to be true teachers. M. Here also we must consider that the Seneoures
and Rulers of the Jews, had a worse Judgment of Christ then had the common
sort of people.

For they say not, He seduceth us, but he seduceth the people, that is, the
unlearned, the Ignorant of Gods Law, the common multitude, the rude and
simple, which were to be taught and instructed, and not to be seduced. But
this is the pretense of their wickedness C. Whereby we may gather what was
the state of the Church then. For the Jews as hongry and thirsty men desiered
the promised redemtion: And yet notwithstanding when Christ appeared unto them
they stood in suspense and in doubt.

Herevppon came that confused murmuring, and diversity of Judgments.

M. And they which should have brought the rude and simple to Christ the
true and only savior of the world account him for a deceiuer, and do drive
away the people with fear lest they should come to the doctrine of Christ
to be taught.

C. There reigned therefore in the whole body nothing but confusion and
disorder.

13 Howbeit no man spoke openly of him for fear of the Jews.

C. By the name of (Jews) he means here the heads of the people, to whom
the government was committed. They were so full of hatered against Christ that
they would not suffer one word to be spoken of him on either part: not that
they did mislyke to have him evil spoken of, but because they did perceive a
better way, then if his name were quight forgotten. So the enemies of the
truth, when they saw that their cruelty did not avail, they desired nothing
more than to have his name quight suppressed: the which alone they went about.

14. Now when half of the feast was done Jesus went up into the Temple and
taught.

Bv. The fifteen day of the month the feast of tabernacles began, and
continued the space of seven days. And conjecture is made that the Lord came
into the Temple of Jerusalem the fourth day of the feast of tabernacles,
which was the ninteene day of October. Leui. 13.36 Number. 29. and. 2i.
Concerning the order of this feste what things were then done, Moses
wrighteth at large. C. But whereas Christ assendeth, and teaches in the Temple
he declares that he did not so fear before that he would neclecte the doing
of his duty. For this was one cause of his delay at the first, that he might
preach when the greatest number of people were assembled together. R. For if
by nature he had feared death, he would not have taught openly in the Temple.
But he declares that the commandment of the Lord must be bouldly executed,
without fear of peril: Therefore it is lawful sometime to avoid peril, but
yet no opportunity to do good deeds ought to be omitted. R. And in that he did
not teach before the feast was half done, it proceeded of a wise foresight,
seeking hereby to have the greater number of people assembled together, and
also by this delay to mittigate the anger of the Phareseis. C. Whereas also he
teaches in the temple he observes the ancient manner and custom.

For when God gave so many ceremonies he did it not because they should only be
occupied in could and vain shows: but he gave them also doctrine that the
profit of them might be known: And after this manner external rites are
lively Immages of spiritual things so long as they have their form out of
the word of God. Eternal rightes are liuelye Images of spiritual things.
And because the Priests for the most part, were at that time dumb, and
because the Scribes did falsefy and corrupt the pure doctrine with their
Leven, Christ took upon him the office of teachinge as the chief high
Priest: even as a little after he testifies that he took nothing in hand
without the commandment of his heavenly father. This therefore was his hour,
this was his time to set forth his Fathers glory

Despysing therefore all peril, he got him into the cheifest place, and began
to teach when the feast was half spente and that the greatest number of
people were assembled together. And here he declared his power who a little
before showed his humility in fleeing. C. Yea the power of Christ did more
brightly and wonderfully shine, in that he defended and preached the truth in
the midest of his armed enemies: and openly inuayed against the Pharisaicall
traditions.

15. And the Jews marueiled saying, How knows he the Scriptures seeing
that he neauer learned.

B. The Jews having no occasion to speak evil of the doctrine of Christ,
seek notwithstanding to bring the same into discredit with the people,
marueiling seeing he was altogether unlearned (for he was never instructed in
the pharisaicall doctrine) where he had gotten those things which he uttered
out of the holy scripturs with great wisdom: as though he had don the same by
the power of the Deuell, or by some other Magycall Science.

M. They are therefore deceived which think that the doctrine of Christ was
so received, that it was had in esteemation and honor. C. For the Jews
marvel as you hear that they might thereby take occasion of contempt: for
such is the ingratitude of men, that in deuining and judging the works of
God, they draw unto them selves matter and occasion of error. If God deal by
usual means and acustomed ways, those means which appear unto our eyes
do keep us and houlde us back as a vale from behoulding the divine power: and
then we behold nothing but that which is humayne But when the power of God
does shine extraordinarily, and by such means as are unknown to the most
part of men, we are amassed insomuche that the same, upon the which al our
senses ought to be stayed, passes away as a dream or vain fantasye.

For such is our pride that we nothing regard that of the which we see
not some reason. This was a wonderful token of the grace and power of God, that
Christ being taught by no scoolemayster, had notwithstanding such
intelligence of the Scriptures: Nay, he which was never a Disciple or
scoller was the most notable master and teacher that ever was.

And for this cause the Jews despise the grace of God, for that it exceeds
their capassitie.

Euenso in like manner when the Apostels did speak the wonderful works of
God, some said that they were full of new Wine, Acts. 2.7.
because they understood not the power of the holy Ghost. Wherefore we
being warned by these examples, let us learn to give unto god more reverence
then commonly we do in considering his works. R. Here therefore appears the
contempt, which we read of in other places? Is not this the Carpentors Son,
is not his mother called Mary, Mat. 13.56
and his brethren, James, and Ioses, and Simon, and Judas? Euenso in this place
they say, Mar. 6.3.
how can this fellows doctrine be received as holy, when he has received no
degree of scoole? He is not our Rabby, he is not our master, how then should
his doctrine be worthy of credit. M. Here we are admonished that the
doctrine of Christ was not dispensed, with humane knowledge, but with divine
power.

B. But he which neclecteth learning when he may attain to the same by
means is unthankful and slothful. And he which in providing ministers to
teach the Church prefers rudeness before learning, contemns the gift of
God and is not moved with that spirit, with the which Paul was moved when
he would have the mystery of the Gospel to be committed to men meet to
teach: Tit. 1.9.
and with the which Aquila and Priscilla were moved, when they taught Apollo,
being an elloquent man and mighty in the Scriptures, that he might be more
meet to teach. Act. 18.24.
To this effect also pertayneth that admonition which saint Paul gives to
Timothy. 2. Tim 3.14
For this is agreeable to man's nature that one man should teach another. As
therefore no man will thus reason, Moses, Elias and Christ, lived for a time
contrary to the condition of man's nature without meat, therefore we must
refuse bodily food: and again, the Israelites in the wilderness were fed
from heaven without tilladge, and the benefit of men's labor, therefore we
must use no labor, nor till the earth: euenso verily by this example of
Christ no man will infer that the stoody of holy learning is to be despised,
and that we living Idelly ought to look to be taught by miracle.

16. Jesus answered them and said, my doctrine is not mine but his that sent
me.

R. The Jews do extenuate and dispraise the authority of Christ's doctrine,
because of his humility: wherefore Christ challenges the same from the
authority of his father which sent him brefely remoouing such wicked suspicion
and showing how he came by his learning, and that his doctrine proceeded
neither from man, nor from the Deuel, but from God the father, whose wisdom
word, and Son he was: My doctrine (says he) is not mine, that is, of man
but of God, who has sent me, of whose nature and substance I am. Whereupon
it is no marvel if so be I am taught and learned with out man's erudition.

If then ye desyer to hear God, hear me: for I am the voice, the speech, the
word and the doctrine of God the Father. C. In that he denies the doctrine of
his Father to be his, he has respect unto the capascitie of his hearers, who
thought him to be no better then a man. Therefore by concession he requires to
be accounted so much differing from the Father, as bringing notwitstanding
nothing but that which the Father has commanded him. R. Wherefore thou haste
no occasion here to expound this place of the humane nature of Christ, by
which he teaches other matter then divine things.

For his doctrine does differ nothing from the doctrine of his father: but most
symply in these words he does declare that he does not bring any forged or
counterfeit matter, but that which is divine, committed in charge to him by the
Father.

C. The sum is this, that seeing he teaches in the Fathers name, his
doctrine is not of man nor proceeding from man, so that the contemners thereof
can not escape vnponished. Bv. By this place we are taught what doctrine the
ministers of the word ought to bring, not humayne, but that which is divine
not taken from men, but fetched out of the word of God.

For they are the messengers and Legates of the most high God, and of the
Son of God, Christ Jesus. C. But that which the Jews accounted For an
offense, Christ teaches rather to be a Ladder, which should carry them upward
to behoulde the glory of God. As if he should say, when ye see a teacher not
trained up in the School of men, know ye that he is instructed from above.

For therefore the Father of heaven would have his Son, rather to proceed
out of the Handicraftes Shop, than out of the scooles of the Scribes, to the
end the original of the Gospel might more manifestly appear, lest any man
should think the same to be framed in earth, or should feign some mortal
man to be the author of the same. So Christ also chose unto him rude and
ignorant Apostles, and suffered them for the space of three years to be in
gross Ignorance that he might bring them forth in a moment learned men, and
as it were Angels come from heaven. Nevertheless Christ shows, from whence
we must seek the authority of spiritual doctrine, namely from God aloane.

17. If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine whether it be
of God or whether I speak of my self.

Bv. This seems to be a very convenient answer to an objection that might
be secretly made. For the Jews might have objected, thou verily say that
thy doctrine is divine and come from heaven: but how will thou prove it, we
denying the same? R. We hear thee speak, but whether thou speak the truth or not that we know not. C. What do thou brag unto us of the word of God,
from whom we do not know whether thou art come or no? Why do thou tell us
that thou teach nothing without his commandment, the which he will not
grant thee. Christ therefore here says that true Judgment comes from the
fear and reverence of God: and that therefore if their minds were endued with
the fear of God, they should easily know whether it were true or no, which
he preached. By which also he ouerthwartly nippeth them: For how came it to
pass that they could not understand, but only because they were without the
principal point of the true understanding, that is to say, piety and desire
to obey God.

Bv. This therefore shall be a rule to judge of doctrine: A rule to judge of
doctrine by.
first we must reject all our affections, then we must believe the word of
God (for faith is true obedience) R. and last of all we must frame our selves
to the obedince of Gods word. The which if we do, we shall easily judge what
is true, what is false, which is true religion, and which not. Illumination
comes by faith.
For God does illuminate our understanding through faith. Whereupon the Apostle
Paul said, if any man seem to be spiritual let him know what I write
unto you, i. Cor. i4.37.
that they are the commandments of the Lord: but if any man be ignorant,
let him be ignorant. He-which wants faith seeks not the will of God but
his own will, neither truly understands he any thing of matters holy and
divine. C. No other thing than does keep us back from a true and sincere
judgment, but our own indocillitye and stubbornenesse: and we suffer the just
punishment of our hypocrisy so often as Satan does deceive us, who daily
lies in wayght to beguile us, and lays trappes and snares to entangle us. So
Moses teaches us that when false Prophets do arise we are tempted and
proved of the Lord. Deuteronomy. 13.3
For they shall never be deceived which are of a sincere and upright heart.

R. For he which truly abides God shall easilye understand and know,
whether the doctrine which is taught, be of God, or proceeded from some vain
imagination of Fantasy.

Hereby it appears how foolish they are at this day, which fear the peril
of erring so much that they refuse utterly to read the holy scriptures, by
which fear they hinder themselves from all learning and knowledge: Math. 7.7
for it is not said in vain, knock and it shall be opened unto you. But let
us not doubt, but that if we give our selves wholye to the obedience of God,
he will give unto the spirit of discretion, which shallbe ever our guide and
directour.

18. He that speaks of himself speaks his own praise: but he that seeks
his praise that sent him, the same is true, and no unrighteousness is in him.

M. He adds a sertaine argument, whereby it is manifest whether he spoke of
God or of himself. C. For he puts to his doctrine another noate, whereby it
may be known whether it be of God or of man. For, whatsoever sets forth
the glory of God, is holy and divine: but whatsoever serves to the ambition
of men, and in extolling them obscureth the glory of GOD, does not only
deserve no credit, but also ought seuerelye to be rejected.

R. Now if so be we examine the doctrine of Christ by this rule, I pray you
what did Christ seek for in his doctrine? did he not seek the salvation of
men and the glory of God his Father? he sought not his own fame, or the
praise of the people.

Ioh. 6.15.
If so be he had sought these things, he would not have fled into the
desarte, when the Jews would have taken him and made him a King: Neither
would he willinglye have offered himself to the Cross, but would have
forsaken the same.

The doctrine of the Pope concerning the supremacy of the seat of Rome, and
concerning the superiority above all the kings of the earth, seeks his own
praise: it is not therefore of God. It shall be lawful also by this rule, to
judge of the sondrye contentations and interpretations of the holy Scriptures,
concerning merits, and the reward of works, concerning freewill, and such
like. For that doctrine which most seeks the glory of God, and deminisheth
human strength, is to be preferred and received before any other.

And we shall more glorify God, if so be we acknowledge him not to be
couetouse and a sertayne nigardly sparer, which gives nothing without price
and reward, but a certain liberal dispencer which gives and bestows all
his graces and benifites freelye: and we shall more gloryfie God, if we
confess our power and strength to be nothing (as in deed they are not) but
only God to be the worker boath of the will and also of the work in us.
Phil. 2.13.


Saint Paul also commands that prophecy, that is to say, Romans i2.6.
the interpretacion of the scripture, should proceed from the analogy or
proportion of faith. Therefore if thou bring diverse interpretations of
Scripture to the rule of faith, it shall be an easy matter to discern
between them. C. Hereby also we are taught that no man can faythfullye
discharge the office of a Teacher in the Church, but he which being void of
Ambition, seeks only to advance the glory of God. R. Lastly the end of them
is to be considered, which despising the glory of God seek their own praise,
flesh begins at glory and ends in contempt: but Criste begins with
Chrosse and shame, and makes an end with great glory and honor.

And no unrighteousness is in him M. The Lord speaks not here of every
kind of unrighteousness (for no man setting Christ aside is perfectlye
righteous) but he speaks here of sedusing unrighteousness and deceyte:
meaning him to be unjust which intrudeth himself into the office of teaching,
to deceive, and to seek his own glory. M. He says not, And no
unrighteousness shall be ascribed unto him: but, And there is no
unrighteousness in him, For the wicked and ungodly attributed to Christ himself
error and unrighteousness, although he sought nothing but the glory of GOD,
his Father by whom he was sent: but there was no unrighteousness in him.

19. Did not Moses give you a law, and yet none of you keeps the law? why
go ye about to kill me?

They which have well considered of the Euaungelicall histories, know that the
same do contain sertaine mixed matters, the which the Euaungelistes thought
sufficient so to join together, that of those few words and acts which they
have written, Christ might be known: neither were they curious to make mention
in order of all things which the Lord boath did and spoke. Herevppon thou
may see that an apt and feet beginning wants often times in their
writings, an end. Euenso in this place the Euangeliste does not show by a
continual order the words which our Savior spoke, but only takes out the
principal points of matters, which appertain to the sum of the whoale.

The Scribes and high Priests were inflamed with hatered against him, because
he had healed the man sick of the paulsey: the which they professed they did
of the zeal and love which they bare unto the law. To refell this their
hypocrisy he brings now an argument, not of the matter but of the person.
For because they all licenciously lived still in their sins, as if they had
never known or heard the Law of God, here thereby gathers that they were
touchid with no zeal or love of Gods Law. But this defense was not sufficient
to prove his cause. For admit that they use a false pretense to cover their
hatred, yet notwithstanding it does not follow that Christ did well if he
committed any thing contrary to the prescripte Law. For we cannot excuse our
own falts by excusing other men. But Christ here Joins two members together.
With the first he strikes the consiences of his enemies: and when they
proudly boasted them selves to be the Patrones and defenders of the law he
plucked from their faces this visor and hipocriticall show. For he casts in
their teethe, their sufferaunce in permitting the Law to be broken at their
pleasure: whereby it appeared that they had no care of the Law. Secondly he
descends to the cause it self, as we shall see anon. And thus he brings a
full and perfect defense of his cause.

Therefore the sum of this part is, that there is no zeal or love toward
the Law in such as contemn the same Whereupon Christ does infer, that
there was in the Jews some other provocation to madness, in that they went
about to kill him. Euenso at this day the Pope, Bishopes, Abbattes, Monks,
Friars, and the whole hellishe rabble, must be drawn out of their lourking
Dens, so often as they withstanding God and his wholesome doctrine, do feign
that they do the same of godly affection and zeal.

For if their life be disclosed, we shall find in the same nothing but
horrible wickedness coulleered with hypocrisy.

M. There is no doubt but that our savior Christ did greatly provoke and
gaul the minds of the Jews with this sharp reprehencion. They did glory and
boast of Moses, of the Law, and of God: and yet nevertheless they observed
not the Law which was given them, by which notwithstanding they looked to be
saved, And so those miserable and blind men found death in that, by which
they promised to them selves life.

20. The people answered and said: Thou have the Devil: who goes about to
kill thee?

B. Peradventure the people not knowing what their Rulers went about and
practiced against the Lord said that he had the Devil, because he
complained that his death was sought. C. As if they should say, Thou art
mad and lie: there is no man that goes about to kill thee. For this was a
common manner of speech among the Jews, when a man was moved to fury, or
when one was out of his wits, to say that he had a Devil. And verily as
soft and gentle chatisments, are the fatherlye strokes of GOD, euenso when he
deals more hardelye and sharpelye with us, he seems not to strike us with
his hand, but rather to use the Devil the Minister of his wrath. M.
Notwithstanding there are some which refer not this answer to the common
multitude, but to the Scribes and Pharisees, the enemies of Christ: but the
text is quight repugnaunt to their judgment. C. For because the purpose of the
high Priests and Scribes was not known as yet to the common sort of people,
they with a simple mind reprehended Christ. These foolish men therefore
attribute it to madness, that Christ complayneth that his death is sought.

Hereby we are taught to take dilligent heed, that we give not our judgment
of unknown matters: and if so be it fall out at any time that we be rashlye
condemned by simple and ignorant men, we must patiently suffer the same
after the example of Christ.

M. Seeing that he which came to tread down the Serpents head, and to
dissolve the works of the Devil, modestlye suffered this blasphemye.

21. Jesus answered, and said unto them I have done one work and ye all
marvel.

M. He prosecuteth his former complaint and makes no answer at all to the
blasphemye. C. And first of all he shows that the Miracle which he had
wrought was not repugnaunt with the law of GOD. M. When he says that he had
done one work, he speaks of the restoring of him whom he healed on the
Sabbath day at the Poole. C. The scence and meaning then is this I (ye say)
am guilty of one only fault for the which I am to be reprehended ye think,
namely for that I have healed a man on the Sabbath day: but as for you, ye do
more works every Sabbath day, and there is no faultefounde with them. For
there passed not one Sabbath day on the which many infauntes were not
circomcised. By this example he defends his deed. In this, circomcision, and
the healing of the paulsey were alyke, that boath of them were divine works:
but Christ shows that this his work was better than the other, because it
was a benefit pertaining to the whole man. because it was a benefit
pertaining to the whole man.

But if he had healed the man only of a corporal disease, than this
comparison would not have auayled. For Circumcision which belongs to souls
health, should have more excellencye. Christ therefore joins the spyrituall
fruit of the Miracle, with the external benefit done to the body. And
therefore he does rightlye prefer the perfect salvation of the whole man.

And ye all marvel. C. The maruayling of the which he speaks, signifies
that murmuring which rose of the deed of Christ, because they thought him to
be more bold than was meet.

Superstition in observing the Sabbath.
M. In the which appears a certain general supersticion of the people of
the Jews, by which they judged simply the Sabbath to be broken by works:
putting no difference between one work and another, according to their
several quallityes: insomuch that they accounted this myraculous healing of the
man sick of the Paulsee, Luke 13.14.
to be the breaking of the Sabbath.

The which they did not only at this time, but at diverse other times also: as
when the Rulars of the Sinagogue being angrye with the Lord for healing on the
Sabbath day, said to the people, There are six days for men to work in: in
these therefore come and be healed, and not on the Sabbath day.

This preciseness came upon these words of the Law, In it thou shall do no
manner of work. R. But these miserable men did not perceive that the Sabbath
was not fulfilled with bodily rest, for then upon the Sabbath day, men must
not lie, stand, walk, eat, drink, speakeheare, see, circumcise, nor help
his neighbors Ox, being fallen into a Pit: for all these are works.

But seeing human necessitye cannot want these works, therefore the law of
the Sabbath has another respect, not to the ease and rest of the body, but
to the rest of the Spyrite, the which is, when we rest from our nature, by
which we were borne in sin, and do suffer the holy Ghost, by a new
regeneration to fulfill his works in us: for he does truly keep the Sabbath
day which deuining his own strength, gives over himself wholelye to the
works of GOD. M. For the Sabis profaned by vain and trifeling works,
Sabbath observed spiritually.
which are repugnaunt to the holiness of the same. Whereupon it was objected
to the Jews that it was better for their women to spinne than to dance upon
the Sabbath days.

But they were trained up in those superstitions, and accustomed in the same
through the fault of the Priests and Pharisees. This superstitious admiration
is plentiful in the Papacye.

They marvel if a Priest marrye with a lawful wife, but they marvel not if
they live libidinously with every Harlot. They marvel if so be upon the
Sabbath day a man do any necessary and profitable work: but they do not
marvel if all fall to drinking, to gamning and to daunsing. They marvel if
a man eat flesh in Lent: but they meruell not if all man provoke GOD to wrath
with sin.

A. Read more concerning the observation or breaking of the Sabbath in our
exposition of the twelfe Chapter of Matthew, beginning at the second verse.

24. Judge not after the utter appearaunce: but judge: with a ryghteouse
Judgment.

After he had ended his defense, he uses also reprehension, because they
being carried away with evil affections, Deu. 1.16.
judge not rightlye of the cause. R. The Law commands Judges to judge with a
righteous judgment, and not to respect any man's person, because the judgment
is Gods.

Of this Law Christ puts the Jews in mind, that in this cause concerning
the breaking of the Sabbath, Just judgment.
they should not with respect of persons, neither with envy, nor with favor,
judge but with just judgment, that is to say, the only cause considered. Bv,
As if he should say, in judging of my deed, ye must not follow the
affection of anger nor of hatred, but equity, and the mind of the Law. Ye
should verilye be convinced of great injustice, if so be in one and the self
same fact ye justify Moses and condemn me: but your judgment shall be
just, if that be not imputed to me for sin, which was not hurtful to him.

Furthermore Circumcision was justly reverenced among them. When the same was
done upon the Sabbath day, they knew that the Law was not broken, because the
works of GOD among themselves do rightlye agree.

And why do they not so think of Christ's work, but only because a conceived
prejudice of the person, possesses their minds: therefore the judgment shall
never be right, except it be moderated by the truth of the matter.

For so soon as the persons come in sight, they bend their eyes and scences
upon them, Prejudice in judgment.
so that truth quight vanishes away. R. The Jews excused Moses because of
the authority of the person, of the breaking of the Sabbath, although by his
decree, and by the decree of the Fathers also, an infaunte might be
circumsised, and sacrifices killed: and they accused Christ, because of the
contempt and baseness of the person, who by the same example of Moses, had not
cut of a man's member, but had healed the whole man on the Sabbath day.

Therefore Chirst reuoketh them to the rule of right judgment. C. The which
admonicion ought to take place in all causes and matters, but most necessary
it is when we have to do with divine and heavenly matters. For we are most
easilye drawn from the same, by the hatred or contempt of men. M. For whereas
they which commonly are counted learned men are so great enemies to wholesome
doctrine, and are drawn away in judgment, who sees not that this is the
fault thereof, that they have more respect either to the Rulers, or to the
Bishops, or to the persons of the Princes, and to the outward show of
religion, which the common people best allow, than what is true or false in
these matters whereabout they contend.

And it is to be noated that Christ said not, I will not have you simply to
judge of my fact: for I am the Lord of all things, and am subject to no man's
judgment: but he said, Judge not after the outewarde apperaunce, but Judge
with a righteouse Judgment.

By which words verily he does not refuse to have Judgment given of his
works, but he requires that we Judge rightly of the same. What Insolency
and pride is it then which remains in the Bishop of Rome, who says not with
Christ (whose vicar notwithstanding he boasts him self to be) Judge not
after the utter apperaunce of my deeds? but simply he says I will not have you
to Judge of me, and of my deeds at all. A. So many Thieves. Robbers and
murderers would say, if it might be granted them. But Christ does not thus
although he were Lord of all, but sets his works and doctrine before the
wicked to be Judged, so that theey observe right judgment As we shall see
also hereafter in the eyghteene chapter. EVS. We gather also by this place that
Moses and christ do not disagree as the Jews thought: Moses and Christ
agree.
nay the Law and the doctrine of Christ as touching the Spirit, do very well
agree: A. As may also easily be proved by sondery places of Scripture:

25. Then said some of them of Jerusalem Is not this he, whom they go about
to kill.

These things show how the doctrine of truth preached to the world is
received, what troubles soever arise for the Gospelles sake. For after the
truth is preached the wavering and constante multitude, are divided into
sondery affections. M. These men of Jerusalem of whom the Euaungelist speaks
here were not of the Rulers, Scribes, Phariseis, and Seniours of the people,
but of the Citizens and Indwellers of Jerusalem, to whom the beginning of this
lyinge in weight was known, and who knew how greatly Christ was envied.

These men therefore kowing what great hatred the Rulers of their nation bare
to Christ, marvel not in vain they being now quiet, that Christ would
not only walk openly in the Temple, but also bouldly preach in the same: but
in this they offend that they do not way and consider the providence of God
in a miracle altogether divine.

Euenso carnal men, so often as they behoulde some strange work of God, do
marvel, but in the mean time there comes not into their mind any
consideration of Gods power.

But it is our part more wisely to expende and way the works of God:
specially when the wicked notwithstanding all their practices hinder not the
race of the Gospel as they desyer, because God with his mighty hand does
cast them down.

26. But lo he speaks bouldly, and they say nothing to him: Do the Rulers
know in deed that this is very Christ.

M. These Citizens seem to be grieved, that Christ preaches so freely, the
Scribes and Phariseis houlding their peace, whose lying in wait they knew
well enough.

Here is to be noated the liberty of Christ in teaching. For he did not
preach couldly in the Temple as some do, but openly, freely, and bouldly. So
must they speak which maintain the truth with a good conscience, knowing
that they do not speak their own fantasies, nor the dreams of other men,
but the word and truth of God in the Church, although the same be impugned
and withstoode by wicked Bishopes and Rulers of the people. It is not
sufficient to speak that which is truth, but this specially is required,
that those things be spoken which are true, that the same be spoken truly
and bouldely, not obscurely but manifestly, not fearfully, but constantlye.

R. Christ knew well enough the hatred and liynge in wait of the Phariseis,
(for he said before, Boldness in preaching the truth.
why do ye seek to kill me) and yet notwithstanding he speaks before them
void of all fear no man gaynsaying him.

A. This boldness of speech he promised to his Apostlles, that being armed
by their example, so often as we should preach the truth, at the
commandment of Christ, Ephe. 6.19.
we should not consider so much before whom we speak, as in whose name we
speak. Act. 4.29.
This boldness also the Apostle Paul desyered to be given him.

27. How be it we know this man whence he is, but when Christ comes, no
man knovveth whence he is.

R. As if they had said, we marvel greatly at the silence of our Phariseis,
who now suffer him publicly and freely to preach, whom before they lay in
wait to snare, and intrappe: peradventure they them selves are become
Christianes, and confess this man to be Christ. But yet we cannot think
that they are so far out of their wits, that they believe this man to be
Christ.

For some report that Christ shall be utterly unknown when he comes
insomuche that no man shall know from whence he comes: but we know that this
is the Son of Joseph, and that his kynsemen dwell in Nazareth. How then can
he be that Messiah promised by the Prophets, and looked for of the people?
Here we see not only how great the blyndnesse of men is when they come to
Judge of divine matters: Blindenes in understanding.
but also that this is a fault naturaltally ingraffed in them, namely, that
they are very skillful and wise to stop and stay them selves from coming to
true and perfect knoweledg. Often times by the craft and subteltie of the
Deuell it comes to pass that there are stombling blocks, which drive many
away from Christ: but if the way were never so plain and even, yet
notwithstanding, every man would make a stombling block to him self. So
long as the Rulers of the people were alienate from Christ, only their
Incredulity was a let to this people: now that impediment being taken
away, they feign unto them selves a new cause, that they might not come to
the Faith.

Yea, when it was meet that they should be monished by the example of the
Rulers, they are so far from following that which is right that they
willingly stomble in the first step. Euenso men are wont to fall away,
which begin well, except the Lord do direct their stoppes even till the
end. They took occasion of offense hereof, B. because all things which were
in the Loede, were so humble and base, that nothing seemed worthy of
admyration, and because all men knew from whence he was.

Hereby we are taught what a daungerouse thing it is to rent and wrest the
Scriptures, and so to divide Christ him self, that half of that which
belongs unto him is not Judged his. God promised a deliverer to come of the
seed of David: and Christ in diverse places challenges this to him self.
Therefore it was meet, that it should be God manifested in the flesh, which
should be the Redeemer of his Church. Mich. 5.2
So Mycheas names the place where Christ should be borne: but by and by
after he prophesies of more high degree, but yet the same to be secret and
hid. B. Herevppon therefore they looked for Christ to be such a one as his
coming should be unknown, and whose power and works should be from the
beginning of the world.

But these miserable men, respecting nothing in Christ, but that which might
be seen, rashly gather that he was not the same which was promised. R. Esaias.
42.1 Esaias. 53.3. Esaias. 62.11 Zach. 9.9 Dan. 9.26.
They should have red the rest of the Prophets, which foreshewed many
things concerning the humility of our savior Christ. C. Let us learn
therefore so to behoulde the humility of Christ in the flesh, that the same
humility which the wicked despise, may bring us to his heavenly glory. So
Bethlehem where he was appointed to be borne man, shallbe a gate to us where
we may enter into the everlasting Kingdom of God.

28. Then Cried Jesus in the Temple as he taught, saying, ye boath know me,
and whence I am ye know, and I am not come of my self, but he that sent me
is true whom ye know not.

Then cried Jesus. M. Now the Euaungelist adds the words of Christ, by
which he answered to the Judgment of the Citizens of Jerusalem concerning
him. Bv. Showing who, and from whence he is: the which he does with a more
loud voice, that not only they which were nere, but also all that were in the
Church might plainly hear. For that place was very feet to preach forth the
glory of God. C. But he does with sharp words inuey against their rashness,
because they proudly pleasing them selves in their false opinion, excluded them
selves from the knowledge of the truth.

As if he should say, ye knowing all things know nothing. And verily,
there is not a worse plague, then when the perswation of a little knowledge
which men have, does so bewitche them, that they carelessly reiecte whatsoever
they in their own sense understand. He speaks Ironice, or meaning the
contrary when he says.

Ye both know me, and whence I am ye know. B. For he means that they are
deceived, and that they know not the same whereof they boasted, namely from
whence he was.

And J am not come of my self. C. He opposes that which is true, against the
false opinion which they had conceived. As if he should say, While ye
fasten your eyes so steadfastly upon the earth, ye think also that ye ought
so to look upon me: and so ye despise me as a base Son of the earth. But
God shall testify that I came from heaven.

Wherefore, how soever ye reiecte me God will accknowledge me to be his Son.

M. This is a very familliar saying of Christ, by which he testifies that the
Father sent him, to the end we might know that there is nothing in him but
that which is divine.

But he that sent me is true. C. He calls God true, in that sense in the
which the Apostle calls him faithful.

If we be unbelieving (says he) he abides faithful who cannot deny him
self. For his meaning is, 2. Tim. 2.13
that the credit of the Gospel is never a white the less, howesoeuer the
world goes about to frustrate the same: and that Christ abides whole,
howesoeuer the wicked go about to divide him, and to detract from him, because
the truth of God does always abide sound, and like it self.

Christ seeeth him self to be contemned, and therefore he bears not with
them, but mightily withstandeth their arrogancy. With this invincible and
heroical fortitude all the faithful ought to be endued: yea our Faith shall
never be stable and firm, except we make a scorn of the perverse
frowardenesse of the wicked, when they rebel against Christ. But specially it
is mete that Godly teachers being hereby encouraged should go forward in
defending wholesome doctrine, yea though the whole world strive against the
same. So Jeremy, so Esaias, and so Paul thought it sufficient to set God only
against the raging world. R. Also this truth of God may be referred to the
promises, which the Scriptures testify to be made of God concerning Christ.
For Christ was sent of God, Romans 15.8
for the truth of God to confirm the promises made unto the Fathers.

Whom ye know not. C. He declares that it is no marvel if he were not
known to the Jews, Knowledge of God comes by Christ.
which knew not God. For this is the true beginning of wisdom to have
respect unto God. R. To know God, is not to have the Law or to know the Law,
or to speak and glory of God: but know Christ through faith, is truly to
know God.

For Christ is the face, form, Image, word, and purpose of God the Father.
Rejecting therefore Christ, they do glory of God the Father in vain, as we
shall see hereafter.

29. But I know him: for I am of him, and he has sent me.

C. He declares, that he is not thus boulde rashly or without cause. And by
his example he teaches us that we ought not lightly to use the name, and to
boaste of the same as of the patron and revenger of our cause. For there are
many to boulde in boasting of Gods authority: yea those men which boast their
own inuencions for divine oracles, will use nothing sooner to condemn the
Judgments of all other men then the name and authority of God. But by these
words of Christ we are taught to beware of vain confidence: Vain confidence
is to be estewed.
and we must then bouldly strive against men when the truth of God is
manifest unto us: and when we are sure that God stands on our side. M.
Therefore Christ speaks of the sure and undoubted knowledge of God, of the
which he aloane may truly boaste. R. Because no man has seen God at any
time, but his only Son, which is in the bosom of the father, John. 1.18.
Mat. 11.27
who has showed him unto us. For no man knows the Father but the Son and
he to whom the Son will reveal him.

For J am of him By this place may be gathered the celestial original of
Christ. M, And that he is the true Messiah. Bv. For he was not sent of God as
other prophets were but as the Savior of the whole world, and the true
Mediator between God and man.

30. Then they sought to take him: but no man laid hands on him, because his
hour was not yet come.

C. There wanted neither will, neither diligence, nor power to hurt our
savior Christ. How then comes it to pass that in so great malice and
spite they are astonished, even as if their hands and their feet were bound.
The Euaungelist shows the cause hereof, saying.

Because his hour was not yet come. By which we are admonished, that Christ
was protected and defended by God against their force, and outrageous
cruelty, And with all he takes away the offense which might come by the
cross, because there is no cause why we should be troubled when we hear
that Christ was not carried to Death at the will and pleasure of men, but was
appointed to be made such a sacrifice by the decree and will of his Father. Bv.
Therefore Gods divine protection and providence is here commended unto us, to
the which whosoever wholly commits himself, shall go forward void of all
fear in the Lords business. C. For hereof is gathered a general doctrine.
For howsoever we live from day to day yet notwithstanding with GOD every man's
hour of death is appointed. It is a matter Incredible, that we being
subject to so many casualties and haps to so many injuries of men, and of
wild beasts, and being besette with so many sickenesses and diseases, should
notwithstanding be without the gonshote of all dangers, except it be when it
is Gods pleasure to call us: but we must fight and strive continually against
our distruste. And first of all we must note here what doctrine we hear,
then the end whereunto it tends, and thirdly the exhortation that is taken
of the same that casting all our cares upon God, we may follow our vocation,
and not swerve from our duty through any fear.

Nevertheless, let no man pass his bounds. For it is not meet that the
trust of Gods providence, should be extended farther than God himself has
commanded. B. Wherefore let us only seek to set forth the Glory of God, and
as for other things he will care for, neither shall any thing happen to us
before our hour be come: and then whatsoever happens shall be for our
salvation: Concerning the which read the one and twenty chapter of Luke, the
eyghteene verse. R. This if we believe whenever any affliction aryseth, we
will not despair, we will not seek for vain help, we will attempt no evil
but will patiently abide the hand of the Lord, looking for Help from above.
Neither is there any cause why thou should distruste that God will deal
otherwise with thee than he has done with Christ.

Genesis 45.8. ^ kin. 24.5 Psalm. 18 25 4. kin 6.14 Act. 9.25 Act. 12.8
For look how the head fares so shall the members, As it as to be seen in
Joseph, in David, in Elizeus, in Paul, in Peter, and many other mo.

31. Many of the people believed on him and said, when Christ comes, will
he do more miracles than these that this man has done?

Many of the people believed. Bv. This also pertayneth to consolation, that as
the wicked are multiplied from day to day, euenso godly, simple, and good men
shall never be wanting to believe the Gospel. C. Christ might have seemed to
preach to deaf and obstinate persons: yet notwithstanding the Euaungelist
says, that there followed some fruit. M. Because the Kingdom of God cannot
be preached without fruit. C. Therefore howsoever some do fret and fume, some
deride, and othersome Cavil, whereof diverse discencions may arise, yet
notwithstanding, the preaching of the Gospel shall not be unprofitable,
Wherefore the seed must be sown, and we must patiently abide, until
continuance of time bring forth fruit.

When Christ comes B. These men having the seed of God might have seen
great things in the Lord, namely such great signs and miracles, as greater
could not be: herevppon also they knew Christ himself, being nothing
offended at his humility, at his stock and kindred, or at his conversation.
C. But because they rather depended upon miracles than leaned to doctrine, and
were not as yet fully persuaded that Jesus was Christ the son of God, this
word (believed) is improperly used, that is to say, because they wear ready
to hear him, and showed them selves apt to be taught of him as of a master,
such preparation of faith is called faith. Therefore in that the holy Ghost
voutsafeth to call a small spark of good affection by so honorable a title, we
ought thereby to be encouraged, and not to doubt but that the least faith shall
be acceptable unto God. M. Here we see that one and the self same preaching of
the Gospel, does profit the simpler sort to instruction, but to the other it
gives matter of contradiction. In like manner the signs and miracles of our
savior Christ were set before all men's eyes to be seen, by the sight and
diligent consideration whereof the elect believed on him. B. But the Reprobate
could behoulde nothing in Christ but base and contemptible things, whereat
they were offended.

32. The Pharise is heard that the people murmured such things concerning
him, and the Phariseis and high Priests sent servants to take him.

M. The more that the glory of christ did declare it self to the people, the
more the malice, the spite, and fury of the Pharisees increased, for the
Phariseis were appointed as Scoutes to seek all occasion to suppress Christ.
In the former place or room the Evangelist names them aloane: after he
joins with them the high Priests, with whom also they took part. There is
no doubt but that as these Phariseis were the most zealous obseruers of the
Law, so were they the most zealous enemies of al other unto Christ: but because
they were not able aloane to oppress Christ, they referred the matter to the
whole order of Priesthood. So that they which otherwise were enemies and at
contention between them selves, do now by the help of Satan agree
together, and conspire among themselves against the Son of God. A. Even as
we read of Herod and Pilate, when Christ was brought before them to be
Judged: Luke 23.12.
for then they were made friends between whom before there was hartburning
and grudge. Bv. And it greatly grieved the high Priests, that the people
neglecting the Religion of the Phariseis, and as it were despising those holy
men, followed Christ and his doctrine which was quight repugnaunt to the
doctrine of the Phariseis. Therefore the wicked Jews, mynding to stay this
rumore concerning Christ, suborned public soldiers which might bring him
bound. M. In the which we may noate the nature of wicked Hipocrites. At the
first when they sought to kill Christ, they pretended the breaking of the
Sabbath: when as notwithstanding, the breaking of the Sabbath: did not offend
them, but the obscuring of their own name. But so soon as they hear this
rumoure of the people concerning Christ, they were in such a rage that they
went about openly to lay violent hand on him. So impiety, somwhile seeks to
shed innocent blood privily: but when it has not success, then it openly
bursteth forth. So Saul at the first lay privily in wait to destroy David:
1. Kin. i8.i^
but when his rage was more hot, he began with open war and persecution to
seek his death Thus also are Hipocrites wont to behave them selves, who in
the Church seek not Christ, but either the estimation of their own name,
either gain, either kingdom, or else the impunitie of offenses, who at the
first, pretended the zeal of God but are so mad at the last, that all men
may see, what it is they look for, and what offends them.

C. Moreover if so be the Phariseis were so whoat, and so carefully diligent,
to defend the corrupt state of the Church howmuche more vehement ought we to
be in defending the kingdom of Christ For the madness of the Papists is no
less at this day, to extinguishe the gospel. M. Last of all it appears how
prepostourous the Judgment, and how perverse the counsel of the reprobate is.

The multitude murmr and Christ is commanded to be taken.

Why do they not rather instruct the murmuring multitude in the truth, or
reprehende them? But this is the manner of the world being void of the spirit
of God.

After this manner the upper Captain commanded Paul to be carried up into the
Castle, and bade that he should be scourged, and examined, that he might know
wherefore they cried so on him: Act 22.24.
whereas rather he ought to have stopped the mouths of those impudent Dogs,
which continually barcked at the little flock of Christ.

33. Then said Jesus unto them, yet am I a little while with you and then go I
unto him that sent me.

Bv. When Jesus knew what they priuilye went about, he declared unto them in
certain darcke sentences, boath that their conspiracies should be vain, and
also that he would in a short time of his own free will offer up his body
to the death of the cross for the redemption of the whole world: and so under
a sertaine hydden and dark speech, he declares unto them the mystery of the
dispensation, that he should shortly dye, after that ascend into heaven, and
so to come from thence to judge his enemies.

C. There are some which think these words to be spoken, to the asassemblye
of people which were present: and other some to the servants which were sent
to take Christ.

But there is no doubt but that Christ properly speaks to his enemies, which
sought his destruction. For he derydeth their practices, because in vain they
take them in hand, until the time came which his Father had decreeed. As if
he should say, M. I seem to you to be intolerable, and therefore you seek
with all your might and main to destroy me. Be quiet a while, for I mean
not to be with you very long.

R. There is no cause why you should be careful so take away my life, least
I should escape your hands. For seeing I am so welcome unto you, as smoke to
your eyes, and thorns to your feet, I mean not to trouble you with my
presence any long time. M. Only a little while I will be troublesome unto you.

R. For I will go unto him that sent me. Bv. I will not flee from you, but
will willinglye offer my self to the death, when the time shall come, that by
the cross and death, I shall enter into the glory of the Father, and shall
possess the kingdom over all creatures.

By these words he declares that neither his life nor his death was at their
will, but that there was a time appointed to him of his father, Luke 13.3 ^i
which must needs be fulfilled. A. Even as he made answer to certain in
another place, Go ye and tell that Fox, Behold I cast out Deuilles, and
heal the people to day and to morrow, and the third day I shall be
perfected.

I go unto him that sent me C. By these words he declares that death cannot
destroy him, but rather that so soon as he has put of his mortal body, he
will declare himself to be the son of God, by the glorious triumph of his
resurrection. Moreover, hereupon is to be gathered a general admonicion. For
Christ is presentlye with us, so often as he calls us by the preaching of
the Gospel, to the hope of salvation. Ephe. 2.17.
For the preaching of the Gospel is not in vain called the discention of
Christ unto us. If so be we will take hold of his hand when he reaches the
same unto us he will lead us unto his Father: and so long as we shall be
Pilgrims in this world, he will not only show himself to be nere unto
us, but will also for ever dwell within us.

But if we neglect his presence, he loses nothing thereby but we loase his
presence, whereby we shall be left without God and life.

34. Ye shall seek me and shall not find me: and where I am thither can
ye not come.

C. This is a grievous threatening against the mockers and contemners of his
truth. They sought to kill Christ, but Christ here in an ambiguous and darcke
signification of the word, derideth them: because shortelye it would come to
pass that they should seek him after another manner, namelye to find some
help and comfort in their miserye and destruction. As if he should say, Ye
cannot suffer and abide my presence for a little time: but it will shortelye
come to pass that ye shall seek me in vain: because I being far from
you, not only in body, but also in power will look for your destruction
from heaven.

R. For there are great calamities hanging over your heads, ye shall perish
boath in body and in soul. Then in desire of the Messiah ye shall lift up
your hands unto heaven, then you shall cry unto God, and he shall not hear
you.

C. For here the sorrowful sig^ of the wicked are noated, when as they being
constrained by necessitye flee unto God. But then also seeking, they do not
seek: for their unbelief and hardenesse of heart, does drive them from God

They would desire God to be their deliverer: but by their impenitencie and
hardenesse of heart, they keep back their deliverance. Example hereof we
have in Esau, Genesis 27.^
who for the loss of his birthright was not only sorrowful, but also
outrageous angerye: but in the mean time he was so far from the right way
of seeking benediction, that the same offended him, and vexed him much more.

Thus God is wont to take vengeance one the reprobate fer their contempt of
his grace, that either they being afflicted with sharp punishments, or held
with the feeling of their miserye, or being driven into some straightes,
complain cry, and howl: but without profit: because they being always like
unto themselves; retain their former wickedness: and therefore do not
truly seek God.

Therefore the wicked shall at the length know Christ, Vengeance for the
contempt of Christ.
and wish for salvation of him, but in vain: even then when deserved
vengeance lights upon him. This vengeance the Jews felt often, but
especially when they were destroyed by Titus: then they would have seen but
one day of the Son of man, and would willinglye have embraced his word,
but all to late.

C. Hereby we learn that Christ must be received in time, when he stands
before us as present: lest we loase the occasion to enjoy him: because the
gate being once shut, Mat. 25.10.
we shall seek to enter in vain.

And the Prophet says: seek the Lord while he may be found, Esaias. 55.6.
call upon him while he is nigh. Therefore we must run to GOD with speed,
while it is his good pleasure, Esaias. 49.8
as says the same Prophet: because we know not how long the Lord will
suffer our sluggishnesse.

35. Then said the Jews among them selves: whither will he go that we shall
not find him? will he go unto the dispersed among the Gretians, and teach
the Gentilles.

Bv. The gross Jews not understanding those greeuouse threatninges of the
Lord, construe his words I cannot tell how. C. For this the Euaungeliste
adds, to show how great the dullness of the people was. Euenso the wicked
are not only deaf to hear the word of God, but also make a ieste and scorn
of horrible thretninges, even as if they heard a tale or some vain thing
Christ had very expressly spoken of the Father by name: but they stay them
selves and have only respect to the earth, neither do they think that he
spoke of any thing else, than of his going into a strange country.

Will he go unto the dispersed among the Greeks. R. By the dispersed, here,
among the Grecians may be meant, the Israelites. C. that we may understand,
that Christ, came not to the uncircumcised, but to the Jews which were
dispersed through diverse parts of the world.

For this word (dispersed) will not aptly agree and appertain to those that
were borne and do inhabit their native country, but it does very well
appertain to the Jews which are ronagates and banished men. So Peter writes
his first Epistle to those that were despersed throughout Pontus, Galacia,
Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithinia. And James saluteth the twelve tribes which were
dispersed. The which manner of speech was taken out of Moses and the
prophets. Therefore the sense and meaning of these words is this. R. Will he
go to those other Jews which dwell not in this Region, but in Greece. Will he
go over the Sea to the Jews which dwell we wot not where.

It may be that they went about to vex our savior Christ with this mock. If
this be messiah, will he establishe the seat of his kingdom in Greece, when
as the Lord has assigned the Land of Canaan for the same? But howesoeuer they
mean, we see that they are nothing moved with the severe threatening of
Christ.

Moreover concerning these dispersed Jews, the Euaungelist has spoken in his
twelueth Chapter, the twenty verse. The exposition of the thirty six verse
following is included in this thirty five verse.

37. In the last day, that great day of the feast, Jesus stood and cried,
saying, If any man thirste, let him come unto me and drink.

B. This last day, was the eight day of the feast of Tabernacles, which was
the Principal day, on the which it is lykely: that the greater number of
people did assemble them selves together, and came into the temple, where Jesus
taught. C. Let us noate that Christ was not so terrefyed by any of the
conspiracies of the Jews, that he forsook his office, but as his perilles
increased so did his fortitude and courage increase that he might still more
bouldly go forward.

This thing boath the circumstaunce of the time, and the assembly of people
and the boldness in crying, do testify. For it is lykelye that then the
servants and soldiers which were sent forth to take him, were ready to lay
hands on him. Bv. Therefore in the greatest assemblies and in the most
daungerouse perilles Jesus comes fourth in the midst, and with a constant
mind gives Testimony to the truth teaching by his example, what is the
office of the servants of Christ, and of the ministers of Churches. C.
Furthermore we must noate that he withstoode their violent rage which were of
great force by the mighty power and defense of God only. Bv. He stood,
constantly to defend a seriouse and most grave matter, appertayning to all
men. M. At other times for the most part he was wont to sit and teach. Now,
because the end of the feast was come, and because that solemn and
Catholic Sermon of Israel was to be dissolved, he is more fervent, and does
with a strong and serious cry, commend to the people which were ready to
depart, that which they should carry home with them more deeply to consider
and to ruminate. Bv. For his crying now, was not only a plain and sencible
speech, but also a loud voice, thereby declaring that the matter was so
great, that all men ought to give ear to the same. C, This also is very
profitable for us, that the Evangelist brings in christ crying here with full
mouth, that all which thirst should come unto him, For herby we gather that
not one or two are called with some soft voice secretly, but that this
doctrine is so openly proclaimed to all men, that no man can be ignorant of the
same, but he which willingly stops his ears, and will not hear so loud
and shrill a cry.

Jf any man thirste. M. Christ comprehends the whole sum of our salvation,
in a Parabolicall kind of speech. For Christ speaks not of bodily thirste,
which is quenched with water, but of the thirste of souls, and of heavenly
grace. For the thirste of souls is that gredye desire of heavenly grace,
Thirste which belongs to souls.
by which consciences burdened with sin are afflicted and troubled.

C. Therefore he exhorts all to the participation of his goodness, so that
they knowing and feeling their own need desyer to be helped, For we are all
nedy, bare and void of goodness, but the feling of that need, does not move
al men to seek for remedy. Herevppon it comes to pass that many not once
moving their foot, do miserably perish: nay, many feel not their need,
until the Spirit of God with his heat do cause a hongar and thirst to arise
in their hearts.

Therefore the office of the holy ghost is, to make us to desire his grace.
He rather calls those that thirste than the hongary.

Bv. For we can worse abide thirste than hongar, because the heat which is
within us, whereby the thirst is kindled, does more vex and bite us than
dryness, whereby hongar dies, and is more weakened. Very well and conningly
therefore is the affliction of a troubled conscience oppressed with sin thus
described. Morouer there is nothing that does so much recreate and refreshe a
man pyning and withering away with thirste, as does clear water drawn out
of a lively spring: euenso that Joy of the mind which the faithful man
receives by the consolation of the Gospel, cannot be sufficiently expressed
in words. C. There is no doubt also but that he alludeth to the place of the
Prophet All ye that thirste come unto the water. etc. Esaias. 55.1.
For that which the Prophet there attributes to God, was necessary to be
fulfilled in Christ, Even as the blessed virgin Mary soong, that the rich
and full he sent empty away. Therefore he calls all men directly unto him:
as if he should say, that he aloane is sufficient to quench the thirste of
all men: and that they are deceived which seek for the least drop from any
other to quench their thirst. M. For he says not, if any man thirste, let him
Apostles: but, let him come to me. And he says not, If any man thyrst, let
him go to my Father: from whom notwithstanding, we have every good thing
coming down from the Father of lyghtes. Iam. i. 17.
Because Christ speaks here as the only Mediator between God and man,
whom the Father has sent into this world, that we might al receive of his
fullness, grace for grace: to whom we have testimony from heaven, saying:
This is my well beloved Son, Mat. 17.5.
in whom I am well pleased, hear him, he which comes unto him, comes
unto God himself. A. For he is the only way to the Father, even as he him
self testifyeth, saying, No man comes to the Father, Ioh. 14.6.
but by me.

C. Let no man therefore complain as uncertain what he should do to
obtain salvation. Christ the well of life, calls here all men to him,
saying: If any man thyrst, let him come to me, and he shall drink. To the
which exhortacion he adds this promise, And drink.

By these words Christ declares that he is not a dry spring, but a deep
and bottomless well: which gives drink plentifullye to all men, Whereupon it
follows that our desire shall not be in vain, if so be we seek for that
of him, which is wanting in us.

M. Seeing therefore we have Christ the true well of life, let us take heed
that we do not frame to our selves void Sesternes, which will hold no water
to quench our Thyrst, even as the Lord casts the people in the teeth by the
Prophet Jeremy. Ier. 2. i3.
And the Apostle says, If any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father,
Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the propiciation for our sins, i. Ioh.
2. i.
and not only for our sins, but for the sins of the whole world.

38. He that believes on me, as says the Scripture, out of his bellye
shall flow Ryuers of water of life.

M. Now Christ shows how those that are a thyrste, should drink of the
well of water of life, teaching, that to come, and to drink, is to believe.
Even as he says in another place, He which comes unto me shall not
hungar: Ioh. 6.35.
and he which believes in me shall never thyrst. Also it is said, I will
power water upon the thyrstye, and flooddes upon the dry ground: Esai. 44.3
I will pour my Spyrite upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thy buddes. C.
Therefore we must come in Faith, and not with our feet. For to believe in
Christ, is to embrace him so, as the Gospel sets him forth unto us, full
of wisdom, virtue, righteousness, puritye, life, and all other gifts of the
spirit.

As says the Scripture. Bv. There is some contencion among the Interpretours,
whereunto this parcel (As) ought to be referred. Some restrain it to the
former member, namely, to the word (Believes:) as if he should have said,
The scripture teaches to believe in me: for it testifyeth of me. Therefore,
he that believes in me, as the scripture teaches, out of his belly shall
flow Ryuers of water of life. But it is extended to the whole sentence.
Furthermore, Christ does not here name any certain place of Scripture: but
takes his testimony out of the commen Doctrine of the Prophets. For so often
as the Lord promising the abundance of the spirit, does compare the same to
living water, Water of life is Christ.
he has special respect to the kingdom of Christ, and thither directs the
minds of the faithful. Therefore what Prophesies soever there be extant,
concerning living waters, they are fulfilled in Christ: because he aloane has
opened and revealed to us the hydden treasures of God.

They are worthy therefore to perish miserablye, who being called gently and
lovingly of Christ, wander else where.

Out of his bellye shall flow Rivers. Bv. By this he means the plenty and
abundaunce of al gifts and good works. C. For in him he teaches is stoare and
sufficient, to fill us. The Metaphor in show seems hard, when he says
that Ryuers of water of life, shall flow out of the bellye of the faithful:
notwithstanding the scence and meaning, is plain enough, that the believing
shall never want any spyrituall goodness.

He calls that the water of life, which in springing shall never decrease or
wax dry, as is said before. The bellye of the inward man, is the conscience
of the heart. And by floodes, he means the manifold Graces of the Spyrite,
which are necessary to the spyrituall life of the Soul. To be short, here is
promised unto us as well the perpetuity of the gifts of the spyrite, as the
plentye of the same.

39. (But this spoke he of the Spyrite, which they that believe on him should
receive: for the holy Ghost was not yet there, because Jesus was not yet
glorified.)

But this spoke he. M. Because the words of Christ were to the ignorant
obscure and dark as Parabolicall, therefore it seemed necessary to the
Evangelist to expound the same. C. The name of water is sometime given to the
Spirit, because of cleanesse, because it belongs unto him to purge our
fylthinesse: but in this place and in such like, there is not al one manner of
speech, and that because, we are void of all humor and moystnesse of life,
until such time as the spirit of god does water us with his spiritual and
heavenly dew. And here is a figure called Synecdoche, because all the parts
of life are comprehended under this one word of water, whereby also we
gather, that whosoever are not regenerate by the spirit of Christ, are to be
counted for dead men, although they seem to them selves to have life.

For the holy Ghost was not yet. M. These words show the cause wherefore it
was said, Which they should receive, and not rather: Which they that believe
have received: Because (says he) The holy Ghost was not as yet. Bv. He
speaks not here of the essence of the holy Ghost, which is coequall and
coeternall with the Father and the Son. M. For it is written, By the word of
the Lord, the Heavens were made, and all the powers of them, Psalm. 33.6.
by the breath of his mouth.

And the whole Scripture of the old Testament does testifye no less of him
than of Christ the word of God. Neither does he speak simplye concerning his
working and gifts in the faithful, as though before Christ was gloryfied, the
holy Ghost did not work in the minds of the Godly, as well in the time of
the old Testament, as of the New: when as he manifestlye declared himself in
the Prophets, in the Patriarchs, in the Godly Kings, and in all those godly
men which began to cleave unto Christ, whether they were Apostles or others,
and that many ways. C. But the Evangelist does deny that the same grace of
the spirit, which after the resurrection of Christ was shed out upon (...)
was openly given, so long as Christ was in this world under the hum^^^ base
form of a servant.

And his forsakes comparatiuelye: as when the new Testament is set against the
old, God promises his spirit to the faithful, as if he had never given the
same to the Fathers. Then verilye the Disciples received the first fruits of
the spirit: for whereof came Faith, but of the Spirit? R. And did not the
Apostles cast out Deuelles, by the power of the holy Ghost, and confess
Christ to be the Son of GOD, before the Cross? And the confession of Faith
is a work of the holy Ghost, and not of flesh.

C. Therefore the Evangelist does not deny, but that the grace of the Spyrite
was given before the death of Christ to the Children of God: but he affirms
that the same was not yet so manifest and evident as it should be afterward.
For this is the principal ornament, and bewtye of the kingdom of Christ, that
he governs his Church by his holy spyrite.

But he took then the just and solemn possession of his kingdom, when he
was exalted to the right hand of his Father. It is no maruayle therefore if
he deferred the full exhibition of his Spirit, until that time.

Regeneration the feuite of the spirit.
But it may be demanded here, whether he mean the visible graces of the
Spyrite, or regeneration, which is the fruicte of Adoption.

I answer, The holy Ghost appeared (which was promised at the coming of
Christ) in those visible gifts, as in a glass: notwithstanding, properlye he
speaks here of the power of the holy Ghost, by which we are borne again in
Christ, and are made new creatures.

40. Many of the people therefore when they heard this saying, said, Of^
truth this is the ^^^phete.

Bv. Here is repeate^^ (...) the truth of the Gospel is receyue^^ the world,
For those things which he had spoken euidentlye and plainlye, made the
multitude diversely affected, in the which were both good and simple, and also
wicked and perverse hearers. C. Whereupon some thinking one thing, and some
another, there roase contencion among the people.

And there are reckened up three sorts of hearers of Christ. Three sorts of
hearers of Christ.
The first sort confessed Jesus to be a true Prophet: whereby we gather that
they did not abhor his doctrine: but how light and

For being thus apt to be taught they might easily have attained to Faith, as
is said in another place.

41. But other said, this is christ. But some said, shall christ come out of
Galilee.

But other said. C: These did better, which plainlye confessed Christ. M. For
they seem to profit better in the doctrine of Christ than others, and to be
better instructed and learned in the holy Scriptures than others.

Bv. For they acknowledge him to be the true Messiah promised before in the
Mat. 16.17
but of the spyrite of God.

But some said, shall Christ. C. The third sort resist, being evil and
unbelieving, and corrupted with M. Here we see how the confession of the
truth, is strayte way subject to the confession of such as err.

The sincerer sort, said, This is Christ: these by and by gainsaye them, not
simplye, saying: He is not Christ, but going subtillye about to prove that he
is not Christ, neither can be. This confession therefore of Christian Faith,
was no sooner uttered, but it was withstoode and gainesayde. This lot belongs
to the Doctrine of the truth for ever, against the which it is necessary that
we confirm and fortifye our consciences.

C. But least these wicked men might seem rashlye to reject Christ: they arm
them selves with testimonye of Scripture, which although they wrest amiss
against Christ, yet notwithstanding it has some show of truth. In this
only they are deceived, that they make Christ to be of Galilee.

But whereupon comes this ignorance but of contempt? For if it had not
been grievous to them to inquire, Christ had appeared unto them glorious under
boath titles, being borne in Bethleem, and the son of David.

But such is our nature: In trifeling matters we are ashamed to be ignorant,
but as for Heavenly matters we make no account of them.

B. This scruple also offended Nathanaell: but because he sought the truth,
he went nevertheless to the Lord without the sight of any sign, to hear
what he taught or promised. But these men had seen so many signs, and had
heard so many Sermons plainly Preached, by which if they had been of God,
without all doubt they would have been so addicted to him, that they would
never have thought of the place of his birth, or or have asked the Lord
concerning the same. But they did only ask to withstand the truth, and not
to learn.

Therefore by the just Judgment of God, they knew not where the Lord was
borne, which was to them an occasion of offense. Behold how men, of the
Scriptures them selves, which lead us by the hand to Christ, make a let and
stay, that they come not unto him.

M. It is no new thing therefore that the Adversaries of the truth at this
day, do falselye bring the testimonies of the Scriptures, against the Doctrine
of the Gospel. This is the old subtiltye of Satan, to bring that to a
contrary sense, Knowledge of scripture not sufficient without application
which was given of God to testifye of the truth. But it is not enough to
understand the places of Scripture in them selves, except also we know very
well, whereunto they are applied.

42. Says not the Scripture, that Christ shall come of the seed of David, and
out of the Town of Bethlehem, where David was?

43. So was there discencion among the people because of him.

44. And some of them would have taken him, but no man laid hands on him.

C. By this example we are taught that it ought not to seem wonderful unto
us at this day, if so be men be divided among themselves by contencions.

We see that there rose a Scisme by the words of Christ, and that not among
the Gentiles, which were alienate from the faith, but in the midst of the
Church of God, and in the beginning of the Church. Shall therefore the
doctrine of Christ be blamed as the aucthor of troubles? Bv. Shall it therefore
follow that Christ is the aucthour of dissension, and sedition. They rather are
to he counted the aucthours of strifes, who being Rebels to God, and
disobedient to the truth, do proceed to defend their lies, imaginations, and
errors, against the manifest and known truth.

C. Yea, howsoever the whole world be troubled, so precious is the truth of
God, Co^tentio^s among Gods people.
that it is to be wished that at the least it may be received of a few. Theris
no cause therefore why our consciences should be troubled, when we see that
they which would be counted the people of God, do diversely contend among
themselves. We know what Christ himself has foreshewed, Mat. 10.35.
namelye, that he came to bring into the world fire, sword, division, and
separation.

C. Howbeit we must noate that discentions have not properlye their beginning
of the Gospel: for there can be no firm agreement but in the certain truth.
Whereas therefore they have peace among themselves, which are ignoraunte of
God, that comes rather of dullness and scencelesnesse in understanding, then
by true consent.

To be short what contencions soever do arise when the Gospel is preached,
the first cause and original of them is in men: but then as awaked out of a
dream they begin to move and stir. R. For Christ which is the Prince of
peace, Esaias. 9.5
cannot be the aucthor of discention: But men being impacient at the preaching
thereof, are troubled by their own infidelitye. A. Wherefore the whole blame
of discention is to be laid, neither upon Christ nor upon his doctrine, but
upon the depraved and corrupt nature of man.

44. And some of them would have taken him, but no man laid hands on him.

C. By these words the Euaungelist declares, that Christ was not only
contemned of them, but also cruellye assalted: as supersticion is always cruel.
Also we see that the will and devises of wicked men is brought to naught,
except the will and consent of the Lord be joined therewith. For we must
ascribe it to the providence of God, that their practices are made void. For
because Christ's hour was not yet come (as it is said before) by the power and
might of his heavenly Father he overcame all perilles. A. Read the thirty
verse of this Chapter going before.

45. Then came the servants to the high Priests and Pharisees, and they
said unto them, why have ye not brought him?

Bv. Now John retourning to that which he began a little before to speak
concerning the servants of the high Priests, adds, what was done to the
Soldiers, whom they had sent forth to take Jesus.

M. No doubt there was a counsel called and gathered together, and this
return of the Soldiers was greedelye looked for.

For like ravening Wolves they gaped for the Lords death, PAR. hoping to
satisfy their ravenous desire and cruel hatred, with the innocent blood of
Christ: but the Soldiers bring not Christ.

And they said unto them M. They do not tarrye to hear what the Soldiers
would say, but because they see them to return empty handed and with lost
labor, they are not able to abide and refrain any longer, but burst forth,
and being disapoynted of their hope, they reason the matter with them why they
brought not him bound whom they commanded to be brought: saying, Why have ye
not brought him. M.

By these words they declare that they looked for nothing less, then their
void return, and therefore do marvel how it comes to pass that they
bring him not. C. Here we may behoulde how blind the arrogancy of the
wicked is. They have in such admiration and estimation their power, by which
they excel in the world, that they are not afearde prowdelye to contemn all
law and equity: and if any thing happen otherwise than they desire, than they
would confound boath Heaven and earth. M. For this kind of Tyrauntes,
Tyraunts.
as they desire nothing else than to extorte and obtain at the hands of their
subjects whatsoever they will or desire, without consideration of equity and
Law: euenso they can abide nothing less, than not to be obayed in all things
and that it should so come to pass that the thing which they command should
not be fulfilled. This one thing, they still object that the superiors must be
obayed: as though God were not above all, whose will all mortal men ought to
follow. M. So Pharao objected to the Midwiues that they had not fulfilled his
commandment. Exodus 1.18


Ioh. 19.i0
A. Pilate set his authority before Christ, when he made him no answer. M.
Also these reverend Lords said unto the Apostles, after the resurrection of
Christ, Did not we straitelye command you that ye should not teach in this
name? Act. 5.28.
And behoulde ye have filled Jerusalem with your doctrine, Act. 4
and intend to bring this man's blood upon us. C. The high Priests in
demanding why Christ is not brought unto them, do so far extol their power,
that they would have nothing to withstand their commandment.

A. They enquire, they complain, they are out of their wits, nothing
considering the mighty hand of the Lord by which he is wont to protect and
defend his servants. M. Euenso at this day Kings and Princes in their
Edictes complain, that they have hitherto in vain set forth so many
Edictes. Thanks be to God which so defends the cause of his truth, the
confusion of human arrogancy, that every where, yea in the very courts of
Princes, there are some found, which will not obey wicked commandments but
will rather make them frustrate.

B, being surely persuaded, that they ought rather to obaye God then men. Act.
5.29


46. The servant answered: Never man spoke as this man does.

R. As the heart of the King is in the hand of God, Pro. 2i.i^
that he may turn the same which way it pleases him: euenso the practices
and counsayles of their Ministers, are in the hand of God, neither can they
do any other thing than that which the Lord will suffer them. For the
Ministers of the high Priests in this place intended and purposed to take
Jesus, and for that cause went forth from the high Priests: but when they
intended to do most, their hearts failed them insomuch that they could not
lay hands on him: that we might learn in aduersitye to trust unto God,
being assured that our adversaries can do nothing unto us, but that which shall
please the Lord, and which shall turn to our profit.

So he preserved Jacob from the cruelty of Laban. Genesis 31.24
C, In like manner also we must consider the power and efficacy of the word
of God, which is wont to move and strike not only the godly, but also the
wicked. These men confess that they were stricken and tamed only by the word
of Christ, and yet for all that they do not repent, neither do they give
that due and lawful honors which belongs to the word of God. If it be true
that never man spoke after that manner, why does not the divine power which
they were constrained to feel, so affect their hearts, that they give them
selves wholly unto God? But thus verily ought that saying of the Prophet to be
fulfilled, Esaias. 11.4.
He shall beat down the wicked with the breath of his mouth. And we shall see
hereafter, that by the voice of Christ only, John. 18.6.
they which sought his death were so confounded, that they fell down backward
to the ground, even as if they had been beaten down with Clubbes. Let us
know therefore that there is so great force and power in the doctrine of
Christ, that it does also terryfye the wicked,

Such soldyers as these were, we may behold many at this day are, who
although they be constrained whether they will or not to wonder at the doctrine
of the Gospel, yet notwithstanding are so far from submitting them selves
unto Christ, that they abide still in the tents of his enemies: and other some
which are far worse, being in the favor of the wicked, do rail and speak
evil of the Gospel, although their conscience bear them witness that the
same is of God,

47. Then answered them the Pharisees, Are ye also deceived.

Bv. The wonderful counsel of God appeared in the former example of the
Soldiers. For he conuerteth the practices and counsels of the high Priests
to their own confusion and subversion, when as he discouraged the soldiers
with the only word of Christ.

For the Pharisees sought all that ever they could to subvert the Doctrine of
Jesus, and to bring him out of credit with all men: But their practice and
counsel having contrary success, they do confirm and set forth his
aucthoritye, when they seek by all means to extinguishe the same.

Nevertheless, their impietye increases more and more. So that they being
nothing moved with the answer of the Soldiers, but rather more inflamed
with anger, hatred and pride, do exclame, saying, Are ye also deceived.

M. Here let us noate the lot of Christ's doctrine. The force and power
seducing is attributed to the same, and in such wise that they which were not
sent to hear, but to take Christ, should be deceived by hearing.

So at this day many Papists are very wary and circumspect, that they off
hear not the pure and sincere Doctrine of the Gospel. For (say they) it is
so pernicious and ready to seduce, that if thou hear the same but once, thou
art by and by seduced. A. Whereupon also the persecutours of Christ, command
the professors of the Gospel, which are carried to death, to have their
tongues cut out of their heads, least in the midst of the flaming fire they
should win some, by the open confession of Christ Jesus. And it is no marvel
if they be so angrye at their tongues, seeing they could not resist them being
directed by the holy Ghost: according to the assured promise of Christ, Luke
21.15
I will give unto you a mouth and wisdom, the which all your enemies shall
never be able to resist. But the foolish and mad men are afraid of
themselves in vain. M. For if the wicked man hear the Doctrine of Christ an
hundred times, he shall not be taken: nay, if he come without a malicious
heart against the same, and come not with a mind to hear and to be taught, he
shall return again as he came. This is the glory of the truth which the
wicked go about to bear men in hand, that it is the doctrine of error. A.
But so many as are ordained to everlasting life do believe, and are gathered
into the shepefoulde of Christ.

48. Does any of the Rulers, or Phariseis believe on him.

The Phariseis do so blame their Ministers and souldyers, that notwithstanding
they may have them still at their commandment. For by these words they
signify that it is an absurd thing that they should not stand, though the
common multitude did fall. But let us see what argument they have to bear up
them selves why the should so proudly contemn Christ. He has (say they) the
common and rude sort of people on his side: but as for the chief Rulers and
Magistrates they are against him.

They name the phariseis for that they excelled others in knoweledge and in
holiness, so that they were counted the Princes of Princes. M. But first of
all they testify against them selves that they believe not in the Son of
God, when as they should have been the first of all other, which should have
embraced Gods truth.

Thus these miserable men glory and boaste in that, in the which they ought
rather to be sorrowful. C. For although this objection which they make unto
the souldyers seem to have some collar, seeing the rulers and Governors of
the Church ought to have their authority (as the Law commands) in this
notwithstanding these men offended, Deuteronomy. 17.8
because they arrogating to them selves the cheifest authority, would not be
subject to God. God in deed committed Judgment to the high Priest: but yet he
would not have him to pronounce the same without his Law. What authority
soever therefore Pastoures have, it depends upon the word of God that every
man from the highest to the lowest may abide in his calling, and God only may
have the praise, It comes often times to pass that the wicked bear Rule in
the Church: wherefore we must take heed that we attribute nothing unto men,
when they depart from the word of God. We see that all the Prophets almost
were thus molested and troubled: for to overthrow their doctrine, these great
titels of high Pristes, of Princes, and of the Church was objected unto them.
The Papists using the same weapons at this day, are no less outrageous than
were the adversaries of Christ and of the Prophets in oulde time.

This is horrible and fearful blyndnesse that a mortal man dare presume to
set himself against God. But to such madness has Satan brought them
that esteem more their own Ambition, than they do the truth of God.
Nevertheless it is our part to give that reverence to the word of God, which
may obscure and extinguishe the glory of the world, and may drive away the
vain smoke of the same. For it should go evil with us if so be our
salvation should depend upon the will and pleasure of Princes: and to
unstable should that Faith be, which should either stand of fall at their
beck. M, Here also we see how hard a matter it is for them to believe the
Gospel of Christ, which have rule and government in the Church of God and are
famous by the means of doctrine. Wherefore that which these men bring
against the doctrine of Christ does greatly make for the same.

For the same is more to be approved because such come not to the same, rather
than if they did embrace it. And this is manifest that it serves not worldly
glory and estimation but the glory of God: otherwise this kind of men would
have been the first that should have embraced the same. For it is very
incom Therefore we must have respect not unto men but unto god who can deceive
no man.

49. But this common people which know not the Law are cursed.

C. The first part was Pride, because they bearing them selves bold up on
the titell of the Priesthood, would have all men to be subject unto them: The
second is contempt or disdain, for that they despise the rest as of noe
price, even as they are always contumeliouse to others, which have to much
lyking of them selves: and always the contempt of our brethren follows the
overmuch love of our selves.

Which know not the Law. M. But if thou consider well, the common people came
nerer the true knowledge of the Law, than did these rulers and Phariseis. If
thou have respect unto their life, no doubt it was more conformable to the Rule
of the Law: If thou have respect to their faith thou shall find that they
were more obedient to the Law of God then the other were.

For it is the principal point of the Law to know sin, and to embrace the
grace of God propounded and offered in Christ. Furthermore if so be this
people were Ignorant of the Law, whose falt was it? Was not the falte in the
Rulers and Phariseis? For it was their parts to instruct and feed the people
of God with the word of God and of the prophets: but when Christ their chief
and most excelent teacher came, he found them (as they them selves confess)
ignorant of the law of God.

Therefore they bring this testimonye concerning the ignorance of the people
against themselves. So also let us answer those which at this day say,
ignorance in the people is through the Priests negligence.
The rude and unlearned multitude follows this new doctrine, by which
ignorant men are seduced. If so be the people of Christ, be rude, unlearned,
and ignorant of the holy Scriptures, and is therefore seduced, why have not
you that be Masters and teachers of the Churches, better instructed and taught
them? Why have you taken from them so many years the reading of the Scriptures,
and do also at this day deprive them of the same, by fire and sword?

C. There is also another cause why they pronounce the people to be accursed.
They pretend the ignorance of the Law: but there was another cause, namely,
for that they thought there was no hollinesse but in their own order.

Even as at this day the popish shaueling Priests, boasting themselves aloane
to be of the Church, do contemn the lay people (as they call them) even as
if they were profane.

But GOD to beat down this madness and pride, does prefer the humble
contemned, before those that are so highly exalted. And we must noate here
that they boast of the knowledge of the Law, by which they did not instruct
men in godliness, and in the fear of God, but of that knowledge, by which
they only were counted meet interpretors of the Law, Knowledge Gods law
does sane, tifie us.
and to answer doubts and objections: It is very true that they are
accursed which are not taught and instructed in the Law of God, Psalm. 19.9.
the knowledge whereof does truly sanctify us: but this knowledge is not
restrained to a few, that they being puffed up with a wicked trust and
confidence, might divide themselves from other men: but it does generallye
belong to all the Children of God, that from the least to the greatest, all
may be under the obedience of faith.

51. Nicodemus says unto them, (he that came to Jesus by night, and was one
of them)

51. Does our Law judge any man before it hear him, and know what he has
done?

Bv. Although a few of the Rulers claue unto the Lord Christ, yet
notwithstanding it was meet that the words of these Rulers which spoke against
Christ, should be conuinsed of a lie: the which was done by this demand of
Nicodemus. C. And this man the Evangelist discribeth unto us to be
indifferent, which neither seriouslye durst take upon him the defense of
Godly Doctrine, nor yet could abide that the truth should be oppressed. When
he says that he came by night, that is partly to his commendacion, and partly
to disprayse. If he had not loved Christ, he never durst to have set him self
against the fury and rage of the wicked. For he knew if a man did but mutter
or hiss, he was by and by hated and in danger. Therefore in that he durst
cast forth one word, though to small effect, he bewrays certain small
sparks of Godliness which were in his heart: M. for whereas he says
generallye that no man ought to be judged, he does not plainelye defend,
neither the Doctrine of Christ nor his Faith, for fear of eiection and
excommunication. C. The Evangelist therefore means by these words, that he
sauoured as yet of his night and privy lurking, and that he was not a true
Disciple of Christ. He says that he came once to Christ in the night, but yet
that he stood still among the enemies of Christ, and retained his place. This
is the more dilligentlye to be noated, because many at this day, while they
pretend that they are like to Nicodemus, think by this couller, that they
may dallye with God, and escape unpunished. But grant that which they
desire, namelye, that they differ nothing from Nicodemus, what does such
example I pray you, help them.

Nicodemus denies that Christ ought to be condemned before he be heard.
Thus much may be said for a Thief or Murderer. For this is a common
saying: Better it is that the guyltye should be set at lybertye, than that the
innocent should be condemned. Furthermore, to help the person of Christ, he
quite forsakes his Doctrine. What now shall we find here worthy to commend
him for a Godly and faithful man?

But we shall frame this example far more profitable to another end, namelye,
that the Lord does often bring to pass, that the Doctrine which seemed to
be lost, does by little and little take roate, then after process of time,
Ioh. 19.39.
spring forth, and last of all, floorishe and bring forth fruit: even as did
the Faith of Nicodemus, after the death of Christ.

B. Moreover, although he durst not here openly defend the Lord, yet
notwithstanding, it came to pass by this interruption and disturbing of them,
that this present pestilent counsel was dissolved, as we shall see anon.

R. We must also noate that among so many notable Pharisees, there was but one
only Nicodemus: so small is the number which believe.

52. They answered and said unto him, Art thou also of Galilee? Search the
Scriptures and see: for out of Galilee aryseth no Prophet.

They answered. Bv. The Pharisees being wholly blinded with envy and impietye,
according to their manner fall to sclaunder furiously crying.

Art thou also of Galilee. M. Reprochefully they called al those which embraced
Christ, Galileeans, C. as though he could have no man to hold of his side,
except he were of that barbarous and base corner of Galilee. Julian the
Apostata learned his lesson of the Pharisees.
Bv they thought that Christ should come out of Galilee, whereupon in great
contempt they called him a Galilean. Out of this Deuillishe School, Julian the
Apostata learned that reprochefull Lesson, whereby he called Christ him self
and all Christians by the name of Galileans. But that miserable Catife felt
him no impotent Galilean, but a most mighty King, by that just vengeance
which he cast upon him: at which time he was constrained to cry, Thou have
ouercom. And verylye, Christ shall overcome for ever, raygning in the midst
of his enemies.

C. And whereas we see the Pharisees to be so violently moved against
Nicodemus, we may noate thereby the furious hatered with the which they were
inflamed against Christ. And yet notwithstanding he did not plainly take upon
him the defense of Christ, but only affirmed that he ought not to be
condemned before he were heard. Thus deal the Papists at this day, who will
not suffer any man so much as to open his mouth in the defense of the Gospel,
but they will by and by exclame that he is an heretic. M. The Pharisees make
no answer to Nicodemus concerning the rashness in judging, but do reprove
him as one ignorant of the Scriptures.

As if they should say, Seeing thou art a Pharisee, and of our order, art
thou not ashamed to set thy mind upon the dregs and filthynesse of the
Galileans, as do the multitude which are ignorant of the Law, and are
accursed.

Bv. No scripture promised unto us that a Messiah shall come out of Galilee:
yea so unfortunate is Galile that it has brought forth unto us few or none
that have been notable Prophets so small hope there is to look for the
Messiah the Prince of all Prophets, to come out of the same. M. If thou be
ignorant of this, Search the scripture and see.

And thou shall not find that any one Prophet has come out of that base and
barbarous nation. Thus these blind men thought that they had sufficientlye
answered Nicodemus. But what reason I pray you has their objection
concerning Galilee. For admit that there came never any Prophet out of Galile,
how does it follow thereof that Christ is not a prophet, although he were
borne in Galilee, as he was not. But they are blind and quite out of their
wits.

Furthermore does not the Prophet say that this notable benefit was bestowed
upon the Galileans: Esaias. 9. i.
Galilee among the Gentilles, a people which walked in darkness saw great
light. Mat 4.^5
The which was fulfilled when Christ by the Preaching of his word visited this
people, as Matthew expounds the same. R. If so be they would truly have
known Christ, they should first of all have looked upon his Doctrine, then
upon his works.

For in Judging of Doctrine we must not have respect to the person, to the
country or to the apparel of the Prophet or Apostle, or minister, but to his
word and Doctrine, which these men did not.

M. But thus they framed their priestlyke argument. There has not risen a
Prophet out of Galilee, therefore there shall never any rise.

If there never rise any thence: then Jesus is not a Prophet. Thus also do
the Bishops of Rome reason, Apoca. i8.6
The seat of Rome never fell: therefore it shall never fall. But Saint John
denies this consequence.

53. And every man went to his own house.

C. Now follows the end and issue of all this platform. If any man
consider with himself what the kingdom of the Priesthood was at that time how
great their madness, and also how great their preperation, and on the other
part, how naked, bare, unprovided, and destitude of all man's help Christ was,
there is nothing to be seen but destruction. M. The Pharisees and hye Prists
conspired tegether, consulted, gave commandments, sent forth Soldiers, and
yet for all that, did not only bring nothing to pass, but also returned
home more troubled then before.

C. Therefore, in that so strong a conspiracy of it self came to nothing, and
all they as waves of the Sea brake them selves with their own violence and
force: who sees not that they were scattered by the mighty hand of God?

Bv. For there is no counsel against the Lord. Pro. 2^
M. And this is a lively Image of those counsels, and assembles, which are
not gathered together in the Lord. Esa. 4^
A. For only the counsel of the Lord shall stand, and his will shall be done.
C. For the Lord is never changed, but is always like himself.

So that so often as he will he shall frustrate the devises of his enemies, who
although they have all things at hand and are ready to bring their purpose to
pass, yet notwithstanding shall depart with loss of their labor: And we
have often times seen that whatsoever the enemies have practiced to destroy
the Gospel, has been by the wonderful grace of God by and by made frustrate
and void. M. And the knowledge of Christ more famous and manifest to all men.

The eight Chapter.
1. JESUS went unto mount Oliuet. R

THIS HISTOry concerning the adulterous woman, contained between this and the
twelve verse, C. was not known to the Greeks: whervppon many think that it
was borrowed from some other place, and here inserted. But because it has been
always received of the Lattine Churches, and is found in the most ancient
books of the Greeks, and contains nothing unworthy of the Apostolical
spirit, B. the same also may be read with great fruit. R. Eusebius in his
Ecclesiastical Historye, in the last chapter of his third book, says that
the same is wrighten after the Hebrews. But whatsoever he was that wright this
story, it was worthy to be kept from perishinge, For it teaches very notably
that al men how righteous so ever they seem to be in outward show, are
equalye and as much before the Judgment of God, ungodly and subject to sin,
as the manifest wicked.

Unto mount Oliuet. B. The Lord being in Jerusalem often times went aside into
this mountain to pray, and that most commonly in the night, for in the day
time he taught in the temple, preaching unto the people the grace of his
heavenly Father. Luke 21.37


For there was no other thing that became him better, or was more profitable
for men, seeing the knowledge of the father and of him is everlasting life.
John. 17.3.
Concerning prayer and his going aside to pray, read the sixst verse of the
sixst chapter of Mathewe.

2. And early in the Morning he came again into the temple, and all the people
came to him: and he sat down and taught them.

And early in the morning. M. The Euaungelist here commends unto us boath the
diligence of the Lord and of the people. He says not simply, he came again
into the Temple but he says, Early in the morning he came again into the
Temple. And he noateth the diligence of the people when he says.

And all the people came to him. The Euaungelist Luke more plainly says. And
all the people came to him into the Temple, Luke 21.38.
to hear him. Bv.

Therefore let slouthful and ydell men be ashamed of their negligence, to whom
it is sweet and plesaunt to sleep in the manifest daylight, and do seldom
or never enter into the Church or Congregation of the Godly.

Let boath the teacher and the Disciple learn, that the morning tide is the
most apt and convenient time to atchiue great matters, and to labor in
divine and holy things. M. The Popish Canons and monks do rushe early into
their Temples, but not with that mind and to that end that Christ did.

Christ went to see those Sheep, which he had begone to feed, early in the
morning: but what these men seek in their Temples, the whole world knows.

And he sat down and taught them. Bv. He shows that the Church has not a
more excelent Treasure than the doctrine of Godliness and that there is no
Ministry or service in the Church more acceptable than teaching. Teaching
most acceptable seruic to God.
In that Christ taught sytting, the majesty of his doctrine is expressed.

Howbeit, we read not that he always taught sitting, as we saw in the
seventh Chapter going before, the seven and thirty verse.

A. But it makes no matter whether he that teaches sit or stand, so that
he bouldely preach unto the people of God wholesome doctrine.

3. And the Scribes and Pharisees brought unto him a woman taken in adulterye,
and when they had set her in the midest.

C. The Euaungelist, means that this matter was devised among the Scribes and
Pharisees of set purpose, to entrap and snare our savior Christ.

B, They saw that the Lord was wonderful pitiful and gentle toward sinners,
and therefore they hoped that he would set this adulterouse woman at lybertye
contrary to the Law of Moses, and so to give unto them occasion to be revenged
on him as a breaker of Gods law.

C. He means the Pharisees, because they were principal in the order of the
Scribes. M, But what was the cause why they brought the Adulterouse Woman
aloane and not the Adulteror, Leni. 20.10 Deuteronomy. 22.22
seeing the Law was made as well for adulterouse men as for adulterous women
that boath might be put to death? It is not sertaine whether they took the man
with the woman, or no: and if they did take them boath together, why did they
not as well bring him as her, but only because they brought the woman aloane to
the Lord for some evil purpose. But if we behoulde the corruption of this
present age, we shall find it most evident, that at this day whoremongars,
and adulterouse men escape free, for the most part, and the women only are
punished specially if the men be of any countenance, substance, or great
parentage.

So that the weaker vessel is ponished and the strongar goes free. Adultery
ponished with death in the oulde Law.
This inequality the Law of God does not approve, which appoynteth as well
the man as the woman taken in adultery to be punished by death.

4. They said unto him, Master this woman was taken in adultery, even as the
deed was doing.

B. They salute him by the name of master: but with the same affection and
mind, that they had, Mat. 22.16
when they demanded of him the question concerning tribute: that is to say,
they call him Master, whose Disciples they would not be. This is the manner
of ypocrits to carry a show of that which is not in them. A. But not every
one that says Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of heaven, Mat. 7.21
but he which does the will of my Father which is in heaven.

5 Moses in the Law commanded us, that such should be stoned: But what
say thou.

M. The Phariseis knew the Law and also how to cite the same in another bodies
cause, and when they saw it serve for their purpose. They knew also what
ponishement the Law laid upon Sinners when other men's sins came into
Judgment: but when they them selves offended against the Law, then there was
not so much as mention made of the same. But the Law does not only command
this, that the haynouse offender should be ponished, neither was the Law only
made to this end, that we might know when other men sin and when they are
to be condemned: but it does also command that no man oppress the Innocent:
and (as Nicodemus said) that no man be Judged before his cause be heard, and
furthermore it was given to this end that every man might behoulde in the same
as in a glass, the deformity of sins, and the corruption of man's nature.

But ypocrites which desire only to Judge othermen, are blind in their own
sins, but more quick of sight than Linceus in behoulding other men's faltes.
Linceus a man who could see ships on ye Sea. 130. miles from him and could
number the^ and also could see through a stoane wall as so^e write.


C. Furthermore their dishonesty was so great in seking occasion to cavil,
the which also they bewraye with their own mouth.

For they say that they have a manyfeste commandment in the Law: Whereupon
it must needs follow that they deal maliciously in seeking and demanding
of the same, as of a doubtful matter,

But their purpose was to constrain Christ to forsake his office of preaching
that he might seem to be a man wavering and inconstant.

R. They cite the Law out of the twenty chapter of Leuitticus, where it is
said And the man that commiteth adultery with another man's wife because he
has committed adultery with his neighbors wife, Leui. 20.i0.
the adulterer and the adulteress, shall boath die the death. But the Law
does not therefore punish the sins and offenses of men, as though the
punishment of the sword were a satisfaction for sin: Ponishme^t of ye Law
does not satisfy for sin.
(for the death of Christ only, has made satisfaction for sin) but
offenders ar punished by the sword for examples sake, that the people might
fear to offend? and lest in time sin and wickedness might be counted for
virtue and righteousness. For the sin that is left unpunished is not known to
be sin.

If any man obiecte the deed of Phinees the which is commended to come as it
were from a deuyne zeal, Sin unpunished. is not known for sin.
and is said to turn away the wrath of God from the Children of Israel: I
answer that the deed of Phinees was not a satisfactorious punishment of
sin, Number. 25.
(for no punishment saving the only ponishment of Christ Jesus has satisfied
for sins) but by this cruel stabbing (as it may seem) of Phinees, the rest
of the Israelites were made afearde to commit Whordome with the Daughters of
Moab and Idolatry with Baal peor, that knowing their Impiety they might repent:
by which repentance the wrath of the Lord is pacefied.

Wherefore Phinehes is said by his fact to have appeased the Lords wrath not
that any death is so cruel which may satisfy for sin, but because hereby the
people was brought into the right way and to repentance: Magistrates appese
the wrath of God by ponishing sin.
by which the Lord is pleased if so be it proceed from faith.

So every faithful Magistrate, by punishing with the sword horrible offenses,
and by their punishments drawing the wicked people to repentanc is said to
appease the wrath of the Lord, and to take away sin.

6. This they said to tempte him, that they might accuse him.

But Jesus stouped down, and with his finger he wrote on the ground.

This they said to tempte. M. The Euaungeliste now expresses with what mind
the Scribes and Phariseis brought the adulterouse woman unto Christ, namely,
not to admonish him or to make him circomspecte, but to tempte, to accuse, and
to destroy him.

All temtation or trial is not evil. For God tempts his servants: one
friend is tempted of another: the child is tried by the Father, Temtatio^
generaly is not evil.
the Wife by her Husband, the Servant by his Master, not that they might be
hurt by trial, but rather that they might thereby be profited. The Devil also
tempts, Mat 4.3. i These 35.
whereupon also he is called a temptor in the Scripture.

M. Also enemies use to tempt, not to profit thereby, but to hurt, and to
destroy.

This kind of temtation is wicked and plain Deuelishe. Therefore the lord
has exhorted us to beware of those which tempt with an evil mind, when as he
wills us not only to be Innocent as doves, but also wise as serpents. Mat.
20 i6
R.

Therefore, because Christ preached him self to be gentle and lowly in heart:
Mat xi. 26. Mat. 9.5. Lu. 7.48.50
and because also they had heard him say so often times Go thy way thy faith
has saved thee: on the one side they set before him this sinful woman, on
the other side, the Law, C. to the end they might catch Christ in a trippe
by the providence of the Law. For it was not meet to absolute any whom the
Law condemned. If he should subscribe to the Law, he might seem after a
sort to be contrary to him self. R. And so they had taken occasion to
discredyt him with the people, and to convince him of a lie as one which
preached many things concerning remission of sins, which notwithstanding
he did not perform.

But Jesus stouped down. PAR. Jesus, who by his divine wisdom knew the
secret thoughts of the heart, so deluded the malice and subteltie of his
adversaries, that he delivered the sinful woman out of the hands of those
that went about to stoane her and yet notwithstanding did not discharge her of
punishment, lest he might seem to offend against Moses and the pollityke
Laws: and again that he might not condemn the cause of his coming into
this world which was to save sinners.

M. What it was that Christ wroate because the euaungelist himself does not
show, as we cannot define, so we may not to curiously search after the same.

Bv. It seems to some that he wroate these words upon the ground Ye are
earth, and ye Judge of the earth.

M. Othersome think that he wroate the very same which he answered
afterwerde in words. Many think that he wroate some more secret matter, as
many of their haynouse sins which tempted him. Bv. Some think that the Lord
used here only the Iesture of his body: which boath he and many other wise
men often time used. C. And some running to allegories, think that by this
means the difference between the Law and the Gospel was noated, because
Christ would not write in tables of stoane, but in man, which is dust and
earth.

But to omit all these we must rather say that Christ used this Iesture, to
show that he so little regarded their words, that he would scant vouchsafe to
give ear unto them. Even as If one, when another is telling a tale, should
with his finger draw lines upon a wall, or should turn his back, or by
some such like sign, should declare that he gives little heed to that
which is spoken.

Euenso at this day when satan by many ways goes about to draw us from the
right order of teaching, we ought in contempt to omit many things which he
obiecteth unto us. The Papists do seek to weary us so much as they may with
many vain Cauills: in discussing of the which if so be Godly teachers
should busily occupy them selves they should begine to weaue Penelopes
web. Penelope a woman who to delay her lovers desiered his liberti til she
had wouen a web which being grated her, she did ever onwea^e yt in the night
which she had wouen in ye day.


Such delays therefore, which do nothing hinder the race of the Gospel are
wisely neglected,

7. So when they continued asking him, he lift up him self, and said unto
them, let him that is among you without sin, cast the first stoane at
her.

So when they continued. Therefore they did not urge him once only, but diverse
times, and required an answer to the propounded question. They gathered that
the Lord did fear the snare which was laid to catch, and that he could not
make an answer without^ peril Herevppon they do more vehemently and
Instantly urge him to answer. For they think it impossible that he should
escape. If he answered but a little. Bv. When they thus abused the Lords
gentleness, and as conquerers triumphed over him, and went about to wreste as
it were an answer out of his mouth, the Lord erected and lifted up him self.

M. O how greedy, think you they were now to receive the words from his
mouth, when they saw that he lifted up him self and began to open his mouth
to give them an answer: Surely, the Wolf was never more greedye of his pray.
What then was his answer?

Let him that is among you without sin. R. A most wise answer, by which
Christ neither finds falt with the sentence of the Law concerning Adultery
nor yet retracteth his doctrine concerning remission of sins. M: His
adversaries looked for another manner of answer.

But Christ speaks according to the manner and custom of the Law. For the
Lord God commanded that the witnesses, by whose testimony Judgment was
given, should by their own hands stoane the malefactors and offenders, Deuteronomy.
i7.7
because men should have the greater conscience in geuyng testimonye.

For many men rashly take upon them an oath to overthrow their brother,
because they do not consider that a mortal wound is given unto them by their
tongue.

Howbeit in this, the words of Christ differ from the prescripte of the Law
because there God simply admonishes that no man ought to be condemned by
witness but he, whom the witnesses will kill with their own hands: but
here, Christ requires perfect Innocence to be in the witnesses, to the end
that no man might take upon him to convince another of any crime, but such a
one as should be pure and perfect and without all fault himself.

And that wiche he spoke then to a few, we must understand as spoken to us
all, namely, that whosoever accuses another, must set before him self the
Law of Innocence: otherwise we do not persecute the offense, but are rather
enemies to the persons of men. M. But this place seems to be such that it
takes away quight from among men all use of magistrates, of Laws, and of
punishments. C. For what Judge can there be found whose concience does not
accuse him in some matter or other?

M. Moreover if so be he should cast the first stoane at the adulterous woman
which was without sin, why than did not Christ him self this, when as beside
him there never lived any man in the world, which was not a sinner: Heb. 7.26.
He should therefore have done that him self which he answered to others in
words: because he was separated from among sinners, and had no sin, neither
was there any guile found in his mouth. 1. Pet. 2.22.


C. I answer. This is not a precise and simple interdict and prohibition by
which Christ forbids sinners to do their office in correcting and
punishing other men's offenses, Aunsvvere.
but he only reprehendeth ypocrites, who being to severe and cruel Judges of
other men, do quietly passover their own sins. No man's sins therefore
shall be a let unto them, but that he may correct other men's faltes, and
punish them also so often as need shall require, so that he hates as well in
him self as in another, that thing which is to be condemned. Yea every man
ought to begin here, and to ask his conscience, and to be a witness and
Judge against him self, before he come to other men.

And so it shall come to pass that we shall war against sins without
hatred against any man. Bv. In these words therefore due correction and the
authority of the sword against offenders is not taken away? only the malice
of the Pharisees and Elders, is reproved, and restrained.

They would seem to be just before men, and the maintayners of the Law when
as notwithstanding they were trasgressors of the same, and had neither love nor
zeal to observe and keep the same.

Wherefore the Lord did so frame his answer that he did boath admonish them
of their sins and also brouht the Adulterouse woman to repentance.

R. To the same effect also we read that he answered in another place to
some, which told him of the Galileans, whose blood pilate mingled with their
sacrifices: Think ye (says he) that those Galileans which suffered those
things were greater sinners than the other Galileans: Luke. i3
I tell you nay, but except ye repent ye shall all in like manner perish.

A. We see therefore that this is the drift of Christ to bring men to
repentance: the which cannot be except there go before a seriouse knowledge of
sin to the which he sought here to bring his adversaries.

8. And again he stouped down and wrote one the ground.

By this Iesture he declared that they had the answer which they deserved.

For even as they were careful to make this objection unto Christ, so by this
his answer they were not clean put out of doubt seeing they sought for
nothing else but to have occasion to accuse and to destroy Christ. R.
Furthermore Christ used this Iesture again, to the end that otherwise
busiyng him self, he might bring them to a consyderation of that which he had
spoken.

9. And when they hear this, (being accused of their own consciences) they
went out one by one, beginning at the eldest even to the last: and Jesus was
left aloane, and the woman standinge in the midest.

And when they heard this. M. The Euaungeliste in few words, but yet very
plainly and evidently, describes the confusion of the adversaries of Christ
the Scribes and Phariseis. For they came to this end and purpose that they
might ensnare Christ to the death with their traps, or if this failed, to
discredit him quight with the people. The first they obtained not: for he
answered not against the Law of Moses, as they thought he would have done:
as for the other (contrary to their expectation) they themselves sustained,
with shame ynogh.

R. For the most brief and pithie sentence of Christ did not only enter
into their ears: but also pearsed even the bottom of their heart. M. And their
conscience no doubt was so greatly wounded with this answer of Christ that
at the first they were quight dumb and had nothing to reply again, for it
had been to shamfull if they had denied them selves to be sinners, and again
reprochefull to their estimation and name if so be they had acknowledged the
same seeing they were counted of all men just and holy: and fearing lest they
should when he had lifted up him self again have hard more than they would
willinglye hear, by and by, while he was writing upon the ground again,
they withdrewe them selves secreetelye, one by one, out of the Temple, till they
were all gone: Bv. and the more honorable that any of them was among the
common people, the more haste he made, that he might not be one of the last.
For this is meant by these words.

Beginning at the eldest, even to the last. C. Hereby it appears how great
the force of an evil conscience is: for these wicked Hipocrites purposing with
their cauilles to delude Christ: so sone as they were wounded in conscience,
but with one word as it were, fled away. With this Maule the pride of
Hipocrites must be beaten down, to the end they may be brought before the
judgment seat of God. Howbeit, it may be that they being made ashamed before
men, it shall prevail more with them than the fear of God. Notwithstanding,
this is much that they willingly acknowledge them selves to be guyltie, in
starting away with shame. Furthermore we have here to noate how far this
feeling of sin differs from repentance, with the which the Scribes were
touched. For we must be so moved by the Judgment of God, that we must not
seek for starting hoales, to shonne the sight of the Judge, but must rather
go dyrectly unto him, Heb. 4.
and crave pardon, that we may find help in time.

And Jesus was left alone. M. This is not to be understood, that Jesus was so
left aloane in the Temple with the Woman, that not so much as one man aboade
with him still, seeing that this cause befell in the great assemblye of People:
C. But that all the Scribes, which brought the Adulterous woman, were no more
troublesome unto him. M. For not one of them remained beside to whom this
cause appertayned. B. For they were all worthy so to be confounded with
shame, that they should strait way draw them selves out of the sight of
others. This did the secreete efficacye of the spirit of wisdom in Christ
bring to pass: C. to the end we might not doubt, but that we shall be able
to overcome all the practices of our enemies, if so be we will suffer our
selves to be governed of the same spirit. But therefore it comes to pass
that we are oftentimes oppressed, because we neglecting their lying in wait,
are nothing careful to take counsel: or else trusting to our own wisdom
do little consider, how necessary for us the government of the spyrite is.

Lastly, when it is said that the Woman aboade with Christ, let us learn by
this example, that there is nothing better for us, than to be brought as guylty
before his tribunal seat, so that we obedientlye submit our selves to his
judgment. Luke 9.56.
A. For the Son of man came not to destroy men's lives, but to save them.

10. When Jesus had lift up him self, and saw no man but the Woman, he
said unto her, Woman where are those thine accusars? Has no man condemned
thee?

PAR. When Jesus by his divine pollicye and wisdom, had given those ravening
and cruel wolves the repulse, he speaks to the sinful Woman, and that
which he does, he does very surcumspectly. First he asks where are her
accusars, when as notwithstanding, he knew well enough that they were fled
away with great shame and confusion. Bv. He means therefore that they being
wicked and ungodly, and having their own conscience accusing them, distrusted
their own cause. M. Furthermore, as not knowing that she was yet uncondemned,
he demanded farther saying.

Has no man condemned thee. When as no doubt he was ignorant of none of these
things. But his purpose was by these demaundes, boath to comfort the woman,
and also to make manifest unto the standers by, how vain the Wisdom and
policy of man is against the truth.

11. She said, no man Lord.

And Jesus said, neither do I condemn thee: Go and sin no more.

no man Lord. M, The Lord demanded of her two things: but she only answered
to the latter, not greatly regarding where her accusers were. She affirmed that
she was condemned of no lawful Judge the which the Lord knew well enough: and in
deed the custom was not, noe more than it is at this day, that condemnation
should go before accusation: and the accusers them selves were gone for shame.

But it was necessary that this answer should be heard because of the
people which stood by, lest Christ might seem to resist the Judgment of
the Law.

Neither do I condemn thee. C. We have not here the simple absolution of
Christ put down, but that he sent away the woman free. And noe marvel for
he would do nothing but that which should become his person

R. As if he should say, I leave to the Magistrate his authority, but seeing
he has left thee uncondemned, neither will I condemn thee: for therefore am I
come, to remitte sins, My office is to save and not to destroy. C. For he
was sent of the Father to gather together the lost Sheep.

Therefore being mindful of his calling, he exhorts the woman to
repentance and, comfort her with the promise of Grace.

M. He says not, Neither shall any man condemn thee because he would not
abrogate the office of the Lawefull Judge. C. Therefore they which gather
herby that adultery is not to be punished by death, by the same reason it is
necessary that they grant, that an inheritance ought not to be divided,
because Christ would not make him self an Arbiter or vmpire in that business
between to brethren. Yea, let every wickedness be exempted from the
punishementes of the Law, Luke 12.13.
if so be Adulterers may escape unpunished, then open the gate to treason, to
murder, to rapine and theft.

Does not the Adulteress in bringing forth a bastard, does she not, (I say)
boath rob the name of the stock and family, and also transfer and carry
the heirs right, which comes by laufull inheritance unto others which are
strangers? This must needs be the root of all evil, when the wife which is
given to her husband, to his great reproach gives her self to be defiled,
whereby she breaks the holy covenant of God, without the which there can be
no holiness in this world. M. Therefore this saying of Christ ought not to be
taken for a defense of Adultery, as though the same ought to be unpunished
among Christians.

Bv. As though the Lord Jesus took upon him the defense of Adulterers, and
minded by the preaching of the gospel, to defend and maintain Adulteries.

But this is popish Divinity, namelye, that Christ in this place brought the
Law of grace, by which impunitye is geuento Adulterers. And going about by all
means possible to pull out of the hearts of all men the grace of Christ,
the which the Doctrine of the Gospel commends unto us every where, they
only in this place preach forth in some tune the Law of grace.

And why do they this but only because they may defyle other men's wives,
and escape unpunished?

And all this comes of their Deuillishe singleness and vowed chastitye, who
think it not expedient to have a lawful Wife.

But let us noate that Christ so remitteth men's sins, that yet
notwithstanding, he does not subuerte and overthrow Pollitique order,
Judgments and punishments appointed by Laws. Bv. For the offices of the
Judge and of the Preacher are discrepaunt. R. Not that the offices of the
Gospel, and of the sword, are contrary within them selves, but because the
one is Civil, respecting outward peace, the other Divine, administering true
peace of conscience.

Bv. If therefore the Magistrate had lawfullye condemned Adulterye, Christ
would not have absolved the same.

He absolved her from sin if she repented: but he took not away the
punishment and public example.

Even as also he receives the penitent and faithful Thief into the favor
and grace of GOD, Luke. 23.
but yet did not deliver him from the punishment which he had deserved for
theft.

Go and sin no more. M. Our Savior Christ does not here vpbrayde the
sinful Woman, neither does he exaggerate the fylthinesse of her fault,
but quietlye sends her away from him with few and gentle words. For her
mind was vexed and troubled.

Of such there must always a consideracion be had, least by hipocriticall
seueritye, we bring heavy and troubled minds in to the pit of desperacion.

But thou must deal otherwise if thou have to do with a styfnecked and
ostinate sinner.

Bv. Notwithstanding least any man should think that the same free remission
of sins, was a giving of liberty to sin, he by and by adds a restraint
from sin. C. Hereby we gather what is the end of the grace of Christ:
namelye, that the sinner, gods grace leads us to repentance.
being reconsiled to God, may worship and serve the aucthour of his
salvation in innocensie and holiness of life.

R. For the Gospel remitteth sins, not because it is lawful to sin, but to
the end we might repent and walk in newenesse of life. C. Romm. 6.
For by the same word of GOD, when pardon is offered unto us, we are called
to repentance.

Bv. They therefore which are received into the grace and favor of GOD, and
whose sins are forgeuen them, must take heed that they take not unto them
selves liberty: and being taken out of the hands of their enemies, let them
see that they serve GOD their delyuerer, in holiness and righteousness before
him all the days of their life.

M. And in that, that Christ says not, Gooe thy way, and commit no more
Adulterye, but, Go thy way and sin no more, we are taught how necessary,
Innocence, Righteousness, and holiness, is to those that repent: in so much
that we should not only abstain from sins, but also from all show of
evil.

C. Finallye although this exhortacion has respect to the time following, 1.
The. 5.22
yet notwithstanding it humbles sinners, by putting them in mind of their
life already past.

12. Then spoke Jesus again unto them, saying, I am the light of the world:
he that follows me does not walk in darkness, but shall have the light
of life.

B. Because all Godliness and salvation depends upon this, that we
acknowledge the Lord, to be one Christ and only Savior, he always in all
his Doctrine exhorted men unto the same, that he might provoke his hearers to
believe in him, and might persuade them that at his hands, life, and all
things else was to be sought for.

Herevppon he called him self the bread which gives life unto the world.
John. 6.51.
For he used Allegories and parrables for the common sort of people, that
they might the better remember that which was spoken. Hereupon also in the
Chapter going before he called all those unto him which thirsted, and promised
that all they which would come unto him, should never thirst. By all these
things he taught that everlasting life, and the holy Ghost, which works in all men, teaches all things, sanctifyeth, and profits all things, shall be
given to him which receives Christ, with a sure and undoubted Faith.

Now he calls him self light, the which whosoever follows he can not
err. This holy Ghost is that light of life, lyghting all men to that which is
profitable for them, least any man should stumble in this world, or least
he should go astraye in the darkness of fleshelye desires, and of carnal
judgment.

C. And this is a glorious title of Christ, when he is called the light of the
world. Christ the light of the world.
For seeing we are all blind by nature, there is set before us a remeedye, by
which, we being delivered out of darkness, may attain to the true light. And
this benefit is not offered to one or two aloane: for Christ preaches him
self to be the light of the whole world: that there might be no difference,
between Jew or Gentile, between Circumcised, and uncircumcised, between
learned and unlearned, or between bond and free.

M. Furthermore, if Christ only be the light of the world, then the whole
world is in darkness, subject to the Kin^dome of Satan, insomuch that
neither man's reason, nor strength has any light in it, except it receive the
same from Christ. Otherwise, it were but vain and superfluous to give light
unto light.

C. Therefore without Christ there is not one spark of true light. There may
appear some show of bryghtnesse, hut it is like to a sudden flashe, which
does nothing else but dasell the eyes.

Bv. Moreover, the Lord promised in the Scriptures long before that he would
give this light: as, when it is said, The Lord has sworn in truth to David,
and he will not shrink from it, saying: Psa. 132.11
Of the fruit of thy body, will I set upon thy throane. If they sons
keep my covenant, and my testimonies that I shall teach them, there sons
also shall sytte upon thy throne for ever. For the Lord has chosen Zion, and
loved to dwell in it, saying: This is my rest for ever, here will I dwell for I
have a delight therein. There will I make the horn of David to bud: for I have
ordained a light for mine anointed.

To this promise the Prophets had oftentimes respect, as is to be seen in
diverse places: As in Esaias, where the father says I have given thee to be
light to the Gentilles, 3. Kin. 11.36 3. Kin. 15.4. 2. Cor. 21.7 Esaias. 49.6
that thou might be my salvation to the worlds end. Whereunto that Just
man Simeon afterward alluding says that Jesus was given to be a light to the
Gentilles. Luke 2.32.
C. Furthermore we must noate that the parts of illumening, are not restrained
to the parson of Christ. For although he be far from our bodily sight, yet
notwithstadding he does daily illumen us by the doctrine of his Gospel, and by
the secret power of his holy Spirit. Notwithstanding, we have not yet a full
definition of this light, except we learn that we are illumined by the Gospel,
and by the Spirit of Christ, to the end we may know that in him is hydden
the well of all knowledge and wisdom, Therefore as Satan is said to be the
Prince of darcknesse, Satan is the Prince of darcknes
because the works that he works in the Children of unbelief, are evil and
corrupt, insomuche that by them the wicked fall headlong as it were blinded
into destruction: So Christ Jesus is set before us as the true Son of
righteousenesse, that by the benefit of his light, we may be illumined in the
midest of the darckenesse of this world, and may be brought to eternal life.

A. And by what reason the name of light may agree with the Law, with the
apostells also, and with the faithful we have showed in the eight verse of the
first Chapter.

He that follows me. C. Here is the exhortation of Doctrine, which the
promise straight after added, confirms. For when we hear that they are out
of the danger of erring which commit them selves unto Christ to be governed
it is meet that we should be stirred up to follow: Whereunto he himself
draws us, as it were by reaching out his hand unto us.

This large and great promise also ought very much to move us that we which
direct our eyes unto Christ, are sure to walk in the right way without
erring, through the midst of darcknesse. M. Therefore it is not enough that
Christ is the light of the world, that we might not walk in darcknesse, but
it is necessary that we follow him. They which turn themselves another
way, and which follow not this light, but are enemies to the same, as they
are not illumined by the beams thereof, so necessarily they walk in
darckenesse. Neither is it sufficient to know the same that darckenesse may be
shunned, but we must also walk in it. For he says not, He which knows
me, walks not in darckenesse, but, which follows me. He does not by and by
walk in the light which knows the light: he does not by and by follow
Christ, the light of truth, which has received the knowledge of Christ

R. To follow Christ in this place, is to believe in Christ. Bv. For by faith
that light is received, and Christ is made our light shining in our hearts.
Some in this world follows one thing, and some a another, as honors, riches,
pleasures, and I cannot tell how many such kind of vanities. But those which
are wise follow Christ by whom they receive great profit. For they which
follow him shall not walk in darkness, shall not wallowe in wickedness,
which are called the works of darckenesse, but shall have the light of life.
John. 6.4^
R. For he which believes in me (says our Savior) has everlasting life.
C. Therefore the faithful shall walk most constantlye until they come to the
mark. For this to them is an everlasting life. Wherefore there is no cause why
we should fear to faint in the myddest of our journey, seeing that he
leads us unto life.

And it is no marvel if there be such gross and palpable darckenesse of
errors and suspicions in the world, when as there are so few which behold
Christ.

B. For he which believes not in Christ, nor follows this light, as he
wants this his spirit, so it is necessary that he walk in darkness: that
is to say, that he follow carnal reason, the bond servant of evil desires,
whereby he follows always that which is hurtefull. For what hurtful thing
is it which he follows not, God set aside.

13. The Pharisees therefore said unto him: thou beareste record of thy
self: thy record is not true.

PAR. The Phariseis being swallowed up of the manifest light of the truth and
blinded therewith, neither feel nor see the light, nay, they renew the
contention, and begin anew altrication against Christ: by which notwithstanding
the doctrine and truth of the Gospel is rather more manifested than obscured.

These men feared least the people forsaking them, would have followed Jesus,
by which they knew that their auchoritye should not a little decay: yet
notwithstanding they could not hitherto by any reasons refell and confute the
true doctrine of Christ, and his mighty and wonderful deeds.

They fall therefore now again to their woonted cauilles, to prove if
peradventure they might bring the rude and simple people to have Jesus in
suspicion of arrogancye, and vain boasting.

C. They object a common saying, That no man is to be trusted in his own
cause. As if they should say, R. Thou commendest thy self: but that
commendation or testimonye which a man gives of himself, is of no authority
or credit. It is the part of an arrogant man, and not of one that speaks
the truth, to boast and commend himself: we believe not thine own
testimonye. But prove out of the word of GOD, that thou art the very same
whom thou preachest thy self to be, and we will believe thee.

Doeste thou think us to be so scencelesse, that we will by and by receive
thy word as divine?

We are Doctors of the Law: wherefore except thou prove thy preaching by the
Law, we will not believe thee, but will exclude thee out of the Sinagoge as a
lying heritique.

Behoulde here with what security and bouldenesse, impietye, and hypocrisy,
object unto the Prince of godliness and truth, the lie.

M. The malice of the Pharisees could not be at rest. Esaias 57.20
For the heart of the wicked is as the boiling Sea, that cannot rest, whose
waters cast up mire and dyrte.

The more the brightness of this light did reveal it self in Christ, the
more this wicked kind of men, was inflamed with malice. It grieved them much
that the temptation by the Adulterous woman had no better success. They
return therefore to the fight, and contention, even as flies to the flame of
a burning Candle. C. And rashlye they say that he speaks in vain, except
he bring better proof then his own words: M seeing it is written, Let
another man praise thee, Pro. 27.2
and not thy own mouth: a stranger, and not thy own lips. A. But
willinglye they were ignorant that Christ had said unto them, John. 5.34
I receive not testimonye from man: but I speak these things that ye might
be saved.

M. We are taught therefore in this place, that it is no marvel if so be
the Preachers of the truth are accounted as liars of the wicked and Children of
the Devil, when as these Doctors durst openly with such boldness resist
the truth it self.

But let this one thing suffice, Deuteronomy. 18. i9
That God one day will take vengance of those which despise the doctrine of his
Prophet, whom he sends unto them.

14. Jesus answered and said unto them, though I bear record of my self,
yet my record is true: for I know whence I came, and whether I go: but ye
can not tell whence I come, and whether I go.

Bv. Christ by this demonstracion plainelye proves that he is the son of
God, and very God him self, and that the Doctrine of the Gospel is most
certain: C. also that this testimonye has credit and aucthoritye enough,
because he is no private person taken from among the common sort of men, but
a far more excellent person.

M. He does not deny but that he testifyeth of him self: but he denies
that his testimony is false. And this he does by making a distinction. C. For
when he says he knows from whence he came, and whether he would go, he
exempteth him self from the common number of men. The sense and meaning
therefore is this: Although every man is suspected in his own cause, and
although it be provided by laws that no man speaking in his own cause should
be credited, yet notwithstanding this can take no place in the Son of God,
which is above the whole world.

For he is not to be reackenedin the order of men, but has this privilege
from the Father, to govern all men with his word aloane.

B. Here thou see that the Lord said by immitacion or concession, ^^hn. 5.31
If I testifye of my self, my testimony is not true. For, because he knew
from whence he came, and whether he would go, (that is to say that he was
the son of GOD, and the everlasting word of the Father, which took upon
him our humane nature, which also he would shortly after extol and
advance into the glory of his Father) knowing these things, he could not
but speak that which was most true, that is to say divine, and could
testifye nothing of him self, but that which was in like manner most true.

But the Jews knew neither of them boath: and therefore they could not
believe the true testimonye which he gave of him self.

C. For Christ in these words testifyeth that he had not his beginning of
the world, but that he came from God: and therefore not meet and right, that
his Doctrine, which is Divine, should be subject to man's Laws.

But because he then had upon him the form of a servant, and was humble and
meek, he was despised: for the which cause he puts them in mind of the
glorious Resurrection which he should have: which in deed was a manifest
show and proof of his hydden and unknown Diuinitye at the first. When he
says, that he knows and they know not, he gives us to understand, that
his glory is nothing diminished by their unbelief.

B. As for example, If so be an Ambassador should come from the Emperor,
promisyng great benefytes unto us in the name of the Emperor, if we will
obey his commandments: and we denying to believe him, he should say, I
know from whence I came, and whether I gooe: I am sure that I am the Emperors
Ambassador, sent for those consideracions which I have declared unto you, to
him also I will return, and show him how I have done my business, and will
receive the condign reward of my labors. Therefore what things soever I
testifye of my Embassage they are true: but you which know not from whence I
came, and whyther I go, refuse to give credit unto me. M. By this place also
Christ declares, that the Jews had falselye boasted before, saying: We
know from whence this fellow is: but when Christ shall come, no man shall
know whence he is.

15. Ye Judge after the flesh: I judge no man.

Ye Judge after the flesh. C. This place may be expounded two manner of
ways, either that they judged of him after the wicked sense and understanding
of their flesh, or else that they judged of him according to the outward
show of his person. For flesh is sometime taken for the outward show of
man: and boath senses do very well agree with this place, because whether the
affections of the flesh bear rule, or whether the beholding of the person do
prevail in Judgment, there neither truth, nor equitye take place.

Notwithstanding, the sense seems to be more certain, if so be we make here
a comparison between the flesh and the spyrite: as if he should therefore
deny them to be lawful and meet Judges, because they were not guided by the
spirit. As if he should say, Ye judge of my words and deeds after your
wicked affections, having no part of the Spyrite of GOD in you: therefore ye
err.

RV. And this is the only cause, why men err and judge amiss of Divine
matters.

I judge no man. A. Some distinguishe thus, that he judges not as man judges:
othersome refer it to the time, because he being in earth, took not upon
him as yet the office of a Judge.

C. But more rightlye it is joined with the sentence following: that the sense
may be thus: Christ Judges not: and if he do judge, his judgment is fyrme
and authentical, because it is divine.

So that the formar part, where he denies that he judges, ought rather to
be restrained to the cyrcumstaunce of this present place. For that he might
the better convince his enemies of pride, he uses this comparison, because
they usurped to them selves license to Judge preposterously, and yet
nevertheless could not abide him teaching simplye, and abstayning from the
office of a Judge.

16. And if I also judge, my judgment is true: for I am not aloane, but I and
the Father that sent me.

C. This is a correction of the formor verse, least he might seem utterly to
forsake his right. If I judge (says he) my judgment is true: that is to
say, it deserves authority. And hereof comes the authority, because he
does nothing but at the commandment of his Father. R. For he is the Son of
God: and therefore his testimonye is the testimony of God, and his commendation
is the commendation of God.

For these words, I am not aloane. is as much as if he should deny himself
to be from among the number of men, but rather to be considered with that
person which the father had put upon him.

But why does he not rather defend and maintain his deuinity, the which he
might truly and justly have done: Namely because his divinity lay hyd under
the veil of his flesh, he places before them his father, to the end it
might be the more manifest: notwithstanding to this effect tends his oration,
that whatsoever he did or taught might be thought to be divine.

17, And it is also written in your law that the Testimony of two men is
true.

M. Because he taulked with those which boasted very much of the zeal and
knowledge of the Law, he cites the testimony of the Law, lest he might seem
to arrogate to him self more then was right and meet. This place is to be
found in the seventeen and ninetene Chapters of Deutronomium. R. Not that the
testimony of two men is always true, but because it is to be counted for
true. M. For otherwise the testimony of two may be false, as is to be seen in
the twenty one Chapter of the third book of Kings, and in the twenty six
of Mathewe, and the syxst of the Acts.

C. But the argument of Christ at the first sight may seem infirm and
weak because no man is to be admitted a witness in his own cause. But we
must remember how we said even now, that Christ ought to be exempted from
among the common sort of men: because he is neither a private man, neither
handeleth his own pryuate business. M. We must also noate that he said not
here, But I and the Father which begotte me, lest he should make the Jews
to have a suspicion of Joseph, whom the most part of men thought to be his
father: Mat. 13.55.
but he said, I and my father which sent me, to admonish them that he spoke
of god his heavenly Father, by whom he was sent into this world. C. In that he
puts a difference between him and his father, he frames him self to the
capascitie of his hearers, and that for his office sake, because he was then
the minister of the Father: and therefore he makes him the author of all his
doctrine, as also he did very often at other times.

19. Then said they unto him: where is thy Father? Jesus answered, ye neither
know me nor yet my father: if ye had known me ye should have knoen my
father also.

Where is thy father. M. Because the Lord had the second time made mention of
the father by whom he was sent, and had made him the author of all those
things which he spoke or did, and said that he was not aloane, but that he
had the father with him, the Phariseis demanded of him where his Father is.

C. And there is no doubt, but that in the way of skoffing they demand this
question. R. as if they should say, thou do apeale to the testimony of thy
Father: but where or who is that thy Father of whom thou speak so much? We
know thy Father Joseph the Carpenter, but he is a man which is a liar as well
as thou. M. Do thou so much regard him, that for his sake, being a man,
and a Galilean, we should give more credit unto thy testimonies, than to
Moses.

R. Moreover the testimonies of the father concerning the Son are to be
suspected, because the Judgments of fathers for the most part which they
have of their children, are corrupt with blind love. C. So that by these
words they deny that they have any such estimation of the Father, that for
his sake they should give any credit to the Son.

And hereupon it comes that Christ is so presumtuously contemned at this
day, because few consider that he is sent of God.

Ye neither know me nor my Father. M. In these words the Lord casts his
adversaries in the teeth with their Ignoranceth, and voutsafe not to make them
a direct answer. They enquired after the Father: and yet nevertheless they
having the son before their eyes in seeing saw not. This therefore was the
just punishment of pride and wicked ingratitude, that they which famyliarly
despised the Son of God being familiarly offered unto them, should never
come to the father. For how should any mortal man assend unto the height of
God, except he be lifted up a loft by his hand.

But GOD in Christ has cast down him self into the base estate of men,
that he might reach unto us his hand. They which after this manner reject God
approchyng unto them, are they not worthy to be expulsed out of heaven?
Therefore the Lord does rightly make answer not only of the knowledge of the
father but also of the knowledge of him self saying, Ye neither know me nor
my father. R. As if he should say, ye enquire after the Father, to whose
testimony I have appealed, as though ye had sufficient knoweledge concerning
me. R. But when ye believe not in me ye cannot know my father.

For no man has seen God at any time: The only bogotten Son which is in the
bosom of the father has reveled him unto us. Wherefore if ye will know the
Father believe in me. For Christ is only known by faith. And he which knows
Christ knows the father.

For Christ is the very express Image of the Father, insomuche that in Christ
aloane we have the whole express will of God.

C. Moreover as they are deprived of all true knowledge, which forsaking Christ
strive to ascend into heaven, even so whosoever directs his mind and all his
senses unto Christ, shall be led the right way unto the Father: for the
Apostle truly says, that we do evidently look God in the face under the
person of Christ by the glass of the Gespell. This verily is an unspeakable
reward of the obedience of faith, 2. Cor. 3.18.
that he which humbles him self before Christ, does ascend above the
heavens, even to those mysteries which the Aungells do addore.

20. These words spoke Jesus in the Treasurye as he taught in the Temple: and
no man laid hands on him, for his hour was not yet come.

M. These words contain the description of the place, which the Euangeliste
adds to make the story of more credit and to the end we may know that
Christ spoke these words, in a great assembly of men. Bv. For the Treasury
was a large and frequented place in the temple, where the gifts that were
given to the temple were kept and the holy oblations laid up.

Of this place the other Euaungelists also have made mention. Mat. 27.6. Mar.
12.41 Luke 21.1.
The meaning therefore of the Euaungelist is that the Lord preached and taught,
not in an obscure place but openly in the temple otherwise how unnecessary was
it to make any mention of the Treasury. C. C. And herewithal he commends unto
us the wonderful power of God, in that they were constrained to suffer and
bear with Christ openly teaching in the Temple, whom a little before they
sought to kill. For seeing they had authority in the temple, insomuche that
they might do all things there as they listed, they might with lifting up
of their finger only have cast Christ out of the Temple.

Wherefore he presuming to take upon him the office of teaching, why do they
not by and by lay violent hand on him? We see therefore that God caused him to
be heard and defended him with his power, that the savage bestes might not
touch him, he being in the midest of them.

For his hour was not yet come. R. This is so often repeated for our
consolation. C. to the end we might learn, that we live and die at the will
and pleasure of God, and not of men. R. And may be sure that not one hear of
our head can perish without the good will and pleasure of God. Luke 2i.i6
Concerning the which matter, read the seventh Chapter going before and the
thirtye verse.

21. Then said Jesus again unto them, I go my way, and ye shall seek me,
and shall die in your sins: whether I go thither can ye not come.

Then said Jesus again. M The Euaungelist here gives us to understand, that
the Lord had respect to a sertayne deed and purpose of the Jews going
before, wherehe was moved to obiecte these things unto them concerning his
departure that is to say, because he knew the mind and purpose of the Jews,
who went about to take him, he makes mention here of his departure, C. and
seeing that he does nothing prevail with the obstinate, he denounces unto
them destruction.

And this is the end of all those which reiecte the Gospel. For the same is
not preached in vain, but must needs be either the sauoure of life unto life,
or else of death unto death as says the apostel. B. 2. Cor. 2.i6
In the words going before he had said that he should be unto his Disciples
the light of life, showing what success they shall have which follow him,
that is to say they shall know Christ, but in these words he shows what
shall be their reward which reiecte him, namely they shall dye in their
sins. C. For the sum of his words is, that the wicked shall feel at the
length how much to their incommodity they have rejected Christ willingly
offering him self unto them: but all to late when they shall have no time and
space to repent. For seeing it is he aloane which must deliver us from
iniquity in the which we are borne, it must needs be that they dye in their
sins which take him not to be their deliverer. M. He said therefore.

I go my way As if he should say, why take ye such secret counsel how
to take me and to destroy me? I will shortly depart, I will not tarry long
with you, but will ease you of this trouble. C. Wherefore to the end he might
the more terrefye them with the nerenesse of the punishment, he only shows
that the Gospel shall be preached unto them but a short time, and that if they
did let pass that occasion, they should have the like acceptable time and
days of grace. Euenso also at this day when Christ knocks at our gate, we
must go for the straight way to meet him, lest he being wearye of our
sloth, do withdraw him self from us. And verily the experience of many ages
has taught us how greatly this departure of Christ is to be feared.

M. This also is here to be noated that Christ offered himself to the death
willingly, the which he declares when he says I go my way, The wicked Jews
used violence at the death of Christ but yet he did not so depart out of this
world as do they which are deprived of this life by violent death against
their wiles but far otherwise of his own accord and voluntary will
retourning to his Father again. And thus stands it withal the Godly The
world knows not what injury to do unto them, and uses all manner of
violence against them at what time it does as it were banish them from life:
but they are not banished from life against their wiles, Violence in death
speedeth the godly to the kingdom of heaven.
but are ordaned for that place whether they go: and they are so far from
being hurt by any violence, that by the same they are rather hastened and
speeedely carried to the place whereunto they are in the way. C. When Christ
says.

And ye shall seek me. He means not that he shall be sought of them by the
right and true way of faith, but shows how carefully men shall by all
means seek their deliverance, when they are brought unto greeuouse straightes.

For the vnbeeleeuing would have god to be favorable unto them, and yet they
cease not to flee from him. God calls them, Faith and repentance is the way
whereby we have access to God.
and they have access unto him in faith and repentance but they resist God
with the hardenesse of their heart and being over come with desperation frette
and fume against him. But if so be their conversation had been true and
unfeigned, they had not sought him in vain: because he has not promised in
vain that he will hear the sinner so often as he cries and sygheth unto him.
E^chi 18.28


22. Then said the Jews, will he kill him self, because he says, whether I
go thither can ye not come.

Bv. The Jews according to their manner deride and scorn those things which
they understand not. C. and proceed not only in secure contempt, but also in
perverse peevishness: for they mock and scoff at that which he had said,
that they could not follow him to the place whether he went. As If they
should say, If he kill him self, we confess that we cannot follow him,
because it is not lawefull. Bv, For it may be that he will kill him self
being desperately minded. C. For they did both nothing esteem the abse^ce of
Christ and also thought them selves to excel him in all things. And therefore
they will him to go so far as he would. Bv. Thus does the wicked and
detestable presumtion and boldness of wicked men, dally and jest in divine
matters.

C. This verily is horrible dulnes: but so does Satan bewitch the reprobate
that they cast them selves headlong into the midest of the fire of Gods wrath.
Do we not see the same furye in many at this day, whose consciences having no
sense and feeling at all, do scofe and deryde, all that they hear spoken of
the horrible Judgment of God.

23 And he said unto them, ye are from beneath, I am from above: ye are of
this world, I am not of this world.

And he said unto them. M. Christ does so answer unto their secreete
whispering, that he declares boath wherefore, they can not come to the place
whether he is going, and also wherefore he said, that they should dye in
their sins.

Ye (says he) are from beneath. C. Because they were not worthy to be
taught, he only minded shortly and sharpelye to reprehende them:
pronouncing in this place that they do not understand his Doctrine, because
they were far from the Kingdom of God.

Bv. As if he should say. The cause of your error and blindness is, for
that ye are quite void of the holy Ghost, and are of this world: that is to
say, ye are earthlye and carnal, and savor whollye of this world: But I am
from above, and am not of this world, that is to say, I teach spiritual,
heavenly, and not worldly things. Except therefore as new borne ye change
your minds, ye shall never understand any whitte of my Philosophy. C. For
under these words, world, and, from beneathe, he comprehends all that men
have vy nature: For Sin, Death, Affliction, Glory, Pomp, Riches, Power, and
such like carnal things, are from beneathe, and of this world. C. And thus
he puts discrepaunce and difference between his Gospel, and the wisdom
and understanding of man's mind: because the Gospel is heavenly wisdom,
and our mind stays it self upon the earth. So that noane shall be a meet
Disciple for Christ, but such as he has conformed by his spyrite.

And herevppon it comes that Faith is so seldom found in the world,
because naturally all mankind is alienated from Christ, Faith syldom found in
the world.
except those whom he lyfteth up by special grace of his holy Spyrite. R.
For no man can attain to those things, which belong to the kingdom of
Heaven, that is to say, to righteousness, to Faith, to rejoicing in the holy
Ghost, and to eternal felicity, by his own reason and strength, but by the
power of Christ.

M. Moreover, Christ does not deny in himself the Natiuitye of the flesh,
when he says, that he is not of this world, but the communion and
partetaking of sin and of corruption, which comes through sin, and the
sugiestion of Satan. In this sense he denies his Apostles to be of this
world, because he exempteth them by the grace of his spyrite, from the spots
and pollusions of this world.

A. In like manner all the Godly though they be in this world, Ioh. i5.19.
mixte with wicked and ungodly men, yet notwithstanding, they are not said to
be of this world, because GOD has taken them out of this present wicked
world, Phili. 3.20.
and their conversation is heavenly.

24. I said therefore unto you, that you shall dye in your sins. For if ye
believe not that I am he, ye shall dye in your sins.

J said therefore unto you. M. The joining together of these sentences do
manifestlye declare, that so many as are of this world, are subject unto
death. For he says not simplye, I said unto you, that ye shall dye but I
said therefore unto you that ye shall dye. Wherefore? Because ye are of this
world. For he has respect to the declaration doing before. So Paul says
that the world is subject to damnation, saying, when we are Judged of the
Lord we are corrected, 1. Co. 11.i2
lest we should be condemned with the world.

That you shall die in your sins. C. Now he puts the plural number
(Sins) whereas he used before the synguler number (Sin) but in the same
sense, saving that in the former place his purpose was to noate that unbelief
is the well spring and cause of all euelles: not because Incredulity only is
sin or death, because the same aloane makes us guilty before God of
eternal death but because it does draw us away from Christ, and does
deprive us of his grace, by which we ought to seek for deliverance from all
our sins.

In that therefore the Jews through obstinate malice do reject the medicine
they give unto them selves a mortal wound: and herevppon it comes to pass
that they heap on sin upon another.

M. Furthermore, by this place we may gather that death is due unto sin as
the Scripture in diverse places teaches. Death reward of sin Romans 6.22. 1. Cor
i5.
We may also gather that our destruction comes of our own sins and not
of the sins of other men. It may be that we may be made pertakers of
other men's sins, and so also of their punishmente, but he which is free from
sin and does not dot defyle him self with other men's sins is also free
from the reward of sin, Romans 6.23.
that is to say death.

For the Soul which has sinned shall dye: E^ec. i8.4.
the son shall not bear the Iniquity of the Father nor the father the
iniquity of the Son, the righteousness of the Just man shall be upon him,
and the wickedness of the ungodly upon them, If ye believe not that I am he.
What? he has added nothing. And because he has added nothing it is much
which he has commended. For they looked that he should have declared what he
was and yet notwithstanding he did not show the same. C. There is therefore in
this manner of speech a great emphacis and force, because all those things
which the Scriptures attributed to the Messiah are to be understood.

Notwithstanding the sum and principal point is the repayring of the Church,
the beginning whereof is the light of faith whereof duly spring righteousness
and newenesse of life. Some of the Fathers have drawn amiss this thing to the
divine essence of Christ and do Join that with him which is wrighten in
Exodus I am that I am, Exodus 3
when as he speaks hear of the duty which he owes toward us. This sentence
is worthy to be noated: for men do, never sufficiently consider the euelles in
the which they are overwhelmed: and although they are constrained to acknowledge
their destruction, yet notwithstanding neglecting Christ, they seek for vain
remedies.

Wherefore we must here noate, that until the grace of Christ which is our
deliverer, do reveal it self, all kind of wickedness does abound.

25. Then said they unto him, who art thou? And Jesus says unto them, Even
the very same thing, that I said to you from the beginning.

Who art thou? Bv. Bv. Wonderful liberty of questioning, or rather carnal
license is granted to the enemies of Christ: and much more wonderful does
the patience and long suffering of our Savior Christ appear in all these
things.

M. Those things in the word of the Lord which concerned the Jews, they
still dissembled, as that they should dye in their sins: but those things
which appertained to Christ him self, or to his Father, they malliciouslye
prosecuted. R. For he said before, If ye believe not that I am: therefore
importunatelye they enquire who he is, when as before he said that he was
the bread of life, the light of the world, and had hitherto taught, that he
was the son of God: M. In so much that they said, thou testifyest of thy
self, but thy testimony is not true.

They had heard therefore enough whom he had said him self to be, if so be
they would have believed his words.

So that they do not ask with this mind and purpose, to know who he was:
but to intrappe and snare him again.

Bv. For they had seen and heard many things, whereby they might have known
who he was, if so be their unbelief and hardness of heart (which is the
root of all evil) had not let them. Maliciouslye therefore, and of the
contempt of the person of Christ, they ask him, Who art thou? M. As if he
should say, Thou say that we shall dye in our sins, except we believe
that thou arthe. Whom make thou thy self? Whom shall we think thee to be?
As though we were ignorant who thou art. Thus are we wont to speak
contemptouslye to those, whom we think do too much exalt them selves above
their state, and who forgetting their own imbecillitie and weakness wax too
proud, that we may say, Who art thou?

A. All the Godly ought so long as they are in this world to prepare them
selves against such questions as these be, which declare nothing but
contempt, after the example of Christ arming them selves with patience: and
not to be unmindful of the words of the Apostle, where he says, The
world knows not you because it knows not him.

For if Christ were unknown unto the world, what marvel is it if so be his
Disciples, whom he has chosen out of the world, are neither known nor
beloved of the same?

From the beginning. M. M. This answer of Christ to many men seems
obscure, and is diversely expounded of Interpreters.

Some understand it so as if Christ had called him self the beginning: Bv. but
it is put aduerbiallye, and is in steed of this which we say, At the first:
As if he should have said, I did not sodainlye arise: but am come forth in the
midst, even as I was promised long before.

And whatsoever I now speak, it is agreeing with that which has been
spoken in all ages. To be short, this answer consists of two parts: for
by this word beginning, he comprehends all that time, since the which the
Law of GOD was given to the Fathers.

In saying also that he spoke from the begnning, he joins his present
doctrine with the ancient Prophesies, and teaches that it depends upon them.

Whereupon it follows that the Jews had no other cause of their ignorance,
than this, that they believed not neither the Prophets nor the Gospel: for
every where Christ only is set before their eyes.

They fained them selves to be the Disciples of the Phrophetes, and to have
respect to the eternal covenant of GOD, and yet they rejected Christ which
was promised from the beginning, and offered him self before them.

26. I have many things to say, and to judge of you: yea, and he that sent
me is true: and I speak to the world those things which I have heard of him.

R. Now he uses a commination or threatening against the contemners and
deriders of his word. C. Because that he saw that he lost his labor, he
prosecuteth the matter no further, but only pronounces that GOD will be a
revenger of that Doctrine which they contemn: because he is the author of
the same: as if he should say, If so be I would accuse you, your malice and
wickedness gives me occation enough: Bv. I might cast in your teeth many
heinous offenses, but because I know that ye would be thereby the worse, C.
I will now omit them.

But my Father which has given me aucthoritye to teach, will do his
office, and will defend his word from the wicked contempt of men.

Bv. For GOD is the everlasting and infallible truth. C. To the same end
almost partaineth the saying of Christ, which that of the Apostle Paul does,
where he says, 2. Tim. 2.13
If we be unfaithful, he abides faithful, he cannot deny him self.

In fine he threatens the unbelieving with the judgment of GOD, which
discreedite his word, because it is necessary that he defend his truth.

And this is the true stabillitye of our Faith, when we make God aloane
sufficient to establishe the aucthoritye of his doctrine, although the whole
world do reject the same.

Whosoever they be that presuming of this defense, shall faithfullye serve
Christ, they may bouldlye convince the whole world of a lie.

And I speak to the world. As if he should say, Those things which I have
heard of GOD, with whom I was before I came into the world, I speak now in
the world: that now the contempt of my Doctrine may redounde to the Ignominy
of my Father. Therefore the Gospel is the word and revelation of GOD, uttered
by the mouth of the son of GOD to the world.

The which verily is a great commendacion of the Doctrine of Christ, or of the
Gospel, the like whereof a man shall seldom find: wherefore it deserves to
be written in the hearts of the Godly in goulden letters.

C. He says therefore that he brings forth nothing but that which he
has received of the Father, who enjoined unto him his office. Moreover, by his
example he prescribes a common Law to the whole Church, that no man might be
heard, but he which speaks out of the mouth of God.

M. For if Christ has spoken nothing in this world, which he has not heard
of GOD the Father by whom he was sent, what mortal man may teach any
Doctrine in the Church, which is not come from God.

They therefore are sincere teachers in the Church which can truly say,
Those things which we have heard of the Lord, whose Ministers we are, we
speak in the world: the reast are to be shunned and avoided as workers of
iniquitye and seducers.

C. Wherefore, as he noateth the perverse arrogance of men, which intrude them
selves without the word of God, so he instructs and armeth with invincible
constancy all Godly teachers which are assured of their calling, that having
God their Captain and defender they may bouldly withstand all mortal men.

27. Howbeit they understood not that he spoke to them of his Father.

M. These words are put down by the Evangelist in steed of a Parenthisis, to
noate the dull understanding of the hearers: As if he should say, The Jews
being blind and deaf, and therefore wanting their common sense, understand
not as yet, that Christ spoke these things of his heavenly Father.

C. Hereby it appears how dull of understanding they are, whose minds
Satan possesses. There could be nothing more evident, than for them to be
cited before the Tribunal seat of GOD: but they are stark blind: the which
happens daily to other enemies of the Gospel.

M. It is no maruayle therefore if so be the Ministers of the word are not of
many men easelye understood in matters of wayght, seeing we see here that the
same happened to Christ him self.

C. Nevertheless, such blindness in men ought to make us afearde. Bv. For
such is the dull understanding of all those, which bring not sincere minds to
the Preaching of the Gospel.

28. Then said Jesus unto them, when ye have lift up an high the Son of man,
then shall ye know that I am he, and that I do nothing of my self: but as
my Father has taught me, euenso I speak these things.

When ye have exalted. M. The Lord knew that whatsoever he spoke or wrought,
did so little prevail with the unbelieving Jews, that they neither believed
nor knew who he was, and that they sought only to deliver him up to death,
as though by this detestable deed they should greatly help their Kingdom?
the which should bring unto them undoubted destruction, and that then
especially it should be manifest that they had wickedlye behaved them selves
toward the Son of God. This thing the Lord threatening says, Then shall ye
know.

C. As if ye should say, All your senses are now as if they were bewitched,
and therefore ye understand none of those things which I speak: but the time
shall one day come, when ye shall know that a Prophet of GOD was among you
and spoke with you.

M. Ye bend your selves whollye to kill me, and ye think that all my
Doctrine, and my name also may be suppressed, if I be slain: but the
contrary shall appear, O miserable men. Ye shall exalt and Crucifye me, but
ye shall be so far from obtaining that which ye look for, that then ye shall
know that I have not lied unto you, but that he is the very same, whom a little
before ye could not abide to know.

And in this sense the words of Christ seame to contain a threatening either
of those things which happened after he was Crucified (as when the Sun was
darkened, the Rocks rent) or else of those things which happened after his
resurrection, and the sending of the holy Ghost, by the Preaching of the
Apostles, and the wonderful works of God which then were done.

For then they were constrained whether they would or no to acknowledge ye
power of God so mightily showing it self: even as we read, that they said:
What shall we do to these men, for a manifest sign is done by the^, Acts.
4.16.
and is openly known to all those that dwell in Jerusalem, and we cannot deny
it. But that it be noysed noe further among the people: let us threaten and
charge them that they speak henceforth to no man in this name.

C. Or else this commination may be extended further, that by the same they
might be precisely called of Christ to the Judgment seat of the most high
Judge. For so must the wicked contemners of Gods word be dealt withal. But this
is to late and untimely a knowledge of the which Christ here makes mention
when the wicked being drawn to punishment, do acknoweledg God against their
wills to be their Judge, whom quietly they ought to reverence.

For he does not promise unto them repentance, but pronounces that when they
are stricken with a new and unwonted horror sodainelye of the wrath of GOD,
they shall be awaked out of the sloth and securytye in the which they now
sleep.

Genesis 3.7.
So Adames eyes were opened, insomuch that being ashamed, he sought in vain to
hyde himself, knowing that he was in the midst of destruction. Howbeit that
knowledge which Adam had, being of it self unprofitable, by the grace of God
turned to his benifite. But the reprobates being overwhelmed with desperation,
have their eyes opened only to this end, that they may behoulde their own
destruction. And GOD brings them to this kind of knowledge, by diverse means.

For oftentimes they being driven thereunto with scourges, do learn that GOD
is their enemy: sometime using no torment he vexes them in mind, and
oftentimes he suffers them to sleep, until he take them quight and clean
out of this world.

By these words (Lift up) Christ noateth his death. B. For the Jews lifted up
the Lord when they thought that they had given him the greatest fall by the
most shameful death of the Cross. For by that death they ended his servile
and paynful office that so the father might exalt his abased Son to his right
hand

C. For thereby afterward it came to pass that Christ ascended out of the
Sepulcher into the kingdom of heaven.

The which also we at this day must hope for. For whatsoever the wicked take
in hand to oppress Christ in his doctrine and Church, shall not only appear in
despite of their teeth but also he shall turn their wicked practices to the
greter furtheraunce of his Kingdom.

That I am he. This is not referred to the divine essence of Christ, but only
to his office the which also does more evidently appear by the order of the
text, where he denies him self to do any thing without the commandment
of his father.

For this is as much as if he should say that he is sent of God, and that
he does faithfully discharge his office.

A. I do nothing of my self. Read the nineteen verse of the fifte Chapter
going before.

29. And he that sent me is with me: the father has not left me aloane:
for I do always those things that please him.

C. Again he boasts of GOD, by whose aid and help he did all things and
who never forsook him, least he should labor in vain, and without profit,
as if he had said that the power of the Spyrite of GOD was joined with his
office.

It is meet that all Godly teachers be endued with this trust, and not to
doubt but that the hand of God, will be nere unto them, so that they with a
pure conscience show them selves to be such Ministers, as he would have
them to be.

For GOD has not appointed them by his word to beat the Air: but by the
secreate efficacye of his spyrite, he gives success unto his word, and also
defends them with his power, that their enemies being put to the foil, they
may be able to stand against the whole world.

And, if they consider themselves and their goods, they must needs fall
every hour.

Therefore the only way to stand is, if they be persuaded that they are
holden up by the hand of God.

For I do always those things. M. These words have a double understanding:
either to be understood that he said* that therefore the Father has not
left him aloane, because he always did those things which pleased him: or
else, that he said, that for so much as he always did those things which
pleased his Father, it might certaynelye be gathered that he was with him,
and that he left him not alone.

Both these constructions are true: for the Father leaves not those alone,
which do always those things which please him: and hereby we may have an
assured judgment that God is with us, if so be we continuallye do those
things which please him.

C. Wherefore if we desire to have experience of the same presence of God, we
must confourme our selves wholly unto his will and government.

For if so be our sense and reason, have any rule at all, because the blessing
of GOD shall be wanting, all our studies and labors shall have evil success.
And if so be we seem to have good success for a time, yet notwithstanding the
end at the leangth shall be stark naught.

M. Many, boast of the presence of the grace of GOD, and thereby go about to
iustifye all kind of errors, because the presence of the holy Ghost is in
the Church, which will not suffer the same to err.

But how much better were it hereby to prove the presence of the holy Ghost,
namelye, by their Godly and virtuous life in the Church?

C. Furthermore, when Christ says, that he is not left alone, he does after
a sort complain of the unbelief of his countreye men, amongst whom he
found almost noane, which would be his Disciples. Notwithstanding, he
shows that he accounts this one thing sufficient for him that he has God
his revenger.

So we at this day ought to be of good courage, and not to fainte because
the faithful are few in number. For although the whole world withstand our
Doctrine, yet notwithstanding we are not alone.

Hereby also appears how foolish the boasting of the Papists is, who
setting God aside, boast of their multitude. Papists boast of multitude.
A. As though the inuinsible and everlasting truth of GOD* might be oppressed
by the contempt and multitude of men.

Therefore it is much better to hear the voice of Christ with his little
slocke, and to follow him, than to embrace the doctrine of Antichrist, with
the greatest part of the world.

30. As he spoke these words many believed on him.

Bv. Christ hitherto taught most plainelye, both that his Doctrine was divine,
sure, and infallible, and also that he was the Son of GOD, the light and
savior of the world, sent of the Father, to illuminate, iustifye, and save
all them which believe in him.

And this plain and effectual doctrine of the Lord, wanted not her fruit in
the Church.

For although the greatest part of the people, and the whole flock of the
Pharisees withstoode the Lord, yet notwithstanding, many of all sorts of men
believed on him. The which verylye is the end of all these things which
hitherto have been disputed of, namelye, that we also might believe in Christ
Jesus, the true son of the living God, the Messiah, the life, and light of
the whole world. C. Therefore when all hope is past, there aryseth some fruit
among so many lettes. B. For there are Bees never wanting, which suck honey out
of the flowers of Gods word, howesoeuer the Spiders draw poison out of the
same.

M. Let us learn therefore how that open contencion with the Adversaries,
concerning Religion, wants not fruit. if so be railing and taunting be
shunned, and all things dyrected and disposed to the setting forth of the
truth, and to this example of Christ. For although the minds of the obstinate
adversaries receive no profit, who seek not to know what is true, and what
false, but only hunt after their own private honor and gain, yet
notwithstanding, great profit may redoune to those, which are sincere, and
indyfferent hearers of the controuersye.

We have had experience of these things in our time in many places.
Whereupon our Adversaries, when such disputacions should be concerning
Religion, cause them to be holden in secreete without any publyke, auditory,
taking diligent heed, least any of the common sort of people, should hear
any thing of the same.

As therefore they are not to be commended or allowed, which with impudent
reproaches, and railing, more lyker players, than Divines, do not beutifye the
cause of Christ, but defourme it, do not manifest it, but obscure it, do not
commend it, but make the same more odious: even so their malice is to be
detested, which either altogether deny serious, sober, Godly, and moderate
inquisition, and discussing, publikelye to be had, concerning the
controversies of our Religion, or else do so limmite, and bound them, that
they serve nothing to the knowledge of the truth, least by any means the
miserable Church might be helped.

C. Moreover, the Evangelist here improperlye speaks of Faith, which was
only a certain preparacion to Faith: for he commends them no farther,
than that they were proane and ready to receive the Doctrine of Christ: to
which also appertains the next admonicion.

31. Then said Jesus to the Jews which believed on him: If ye continewe in my
word, then are ye my very Disciples.

Then said Jesus. Bv. Our Lord and savior, leaving the wicked Raylers, and
gently turning to those that believed, taught them very notablye, what was
needful, and what they should do. M. This example specially pertayneth to
the ministers of the word, that they also might seek with all their power
diligently to teach, and to confyrme in the Faith of the Gospel of Christ,
those whom they know to be newly come to the doctrine of the Gospel.

In this business the Apostle dilligently applied him self as a thing most
necessary to be done: calling it wateringe, taking a similitude of young
plants, which are often tims set in the ground in vain, if so be the
diligence of wateryng be not adjoined thereunto.

If ye continue in my word. B. It is likely that there were Ipocrites (as most
commonly it is seen) among those whom the Lord Judged to he believers.
Therefore to noate these and to confirm those which had truly believed, the
Lord said, If ye continue in my word, then are ye my very Disciples.

As if he should say? ye have now heard the word and believed: if therefore
ye perceuere in the faith of this word, and suffer not your selves to be
removed from the faith, either by the power of this world, or by the offense
of my cross, I will acknowledge you for my true dicsiples, for they are not
true Disciples which one while believe and within a little while after when some
offense or persecution aryseth, go away.

Perseueraunce.
C. Here therefore first of all Christ teaches, that it is not sufficient,
if so be a man begine well, except he proceed and persevere unto the end.
And for this cause he exhorts those which have tasted of his doctrine, to the
perseueraunce of faith, when he pronounseth those to be his very Disciples,
which take deep root in his word, and abide in the same.

R. For he which abides to the end the same shall be safe. Mat. 10.22.
C. Therefore by this noate, he puts a difference beetweene hipocrites and
his true disciples because they which have falsely boasted of faith, do by and
by faint in the midest of their race: but the faithful constantly go foreward
to the goal.

Therefore we must endeavor our selves to be constaunt, that we may be counted
the true Disciples of Christ.

R. To this effect partayneth the parrable of the seed, which Christ
propounds in another place, where the sundry and diverse conditions of such
as receive the Gospel, is manifestly declared. Mat. 13.3.


M. But by this notable exhortacion, Three things to be noted.
three things necessary to be known are signified: The first is, whereof
Faith in Christ does come. The second is, what we must believe concerning
Christ: and the third is, in what, faith in Christ is to be continued and
confyrmed: If (says he) ye abide in my word.

Therefore they had already joined Romans 10.17
As he spoke these things many believed on him. So the Apostle says, that
faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. Secondly,

If so be they were abiding in the word of the Lord, they should know what to
believe: But because they have already applied their ears and mind to humane
doctrine, it comes to pass that they being ignorant of Gods truth, are
carried about with every wind of doctrine: the which the Apostle forbids.

Thirdlye, this also is manifest, Ephesians. 4.14.
in what, Christian faith ought to be maintained and confirmed, when he
says, If ye abide in my word.

So that we must abide in that, from which we have conceived our faith. We
are begotten by the word of truth through faith, and by the same we are
strengthened and confirmed.

So the Apostle says, that some are ordained teachers, Evangelists, Iam.
1.18. i. Pe 1.23.
and Sheepheards, that not only we might come to the unity of Faith, but
might also be confyrmed in the same, Ephe. 2.13.
and may grow unto a perfect man.

Whereupon it follows that they which abide not in the word of Christ, but
are carried about with sundry strange doctrines, dispersed by offenses, and are
quite drawn away from the truth by the Cross, by threatninges, and
persecutions, are not the true Disciples of Christ Jesus.

Concerning these Saint John says, They went from us, 1. Ioh. 2.19.
but they were not of us. It is great glory to be a Disciple of Christ,
which is the Son of the living God. Some do boaste that they have been the
Disciples of Socrates, of Pythagora^s, and of Aristotle: but these were men,
and erred them selves, and led others also into error.

But Christ is the truth and the light of the world: whosoever follows him
walks not in darkness, but shall have the light of life.

M. Wherefore they which object unto us the love of Christ toward his Church,
as to his Spouse, and do thereby gather that it can not be that he should
forsake the same, and suffer the same to fall into error: and do also pretend
that ancient Faith of the Church of Rome, and of the Apostolical doctrine,
Romans 1.8.
of the which Paul makes mention (replenished at this day withal
supersticions, errors, and false worshippinges, and Ecclesiastical tyranny,)
do reason as if it were sufficient to the retayning of the truth, that Christ
abides all one for ever, and is not changed, and because the Church of Rome
long ago received the Apostolical Faith, and requires not of the Faithful,
that they also should abide in Christ and in his word, when as the Apostle
him self says, that there should come a defection and Apostasy in the Church.
2. The. 2.3.


But rather let them prove unto us that the Church of Rome, has constantlye
aboade unto this day in the word of the Lord, and in the Doctrine of the
Apostles.

32. And ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free.

Bv. But how did they believe, when as yet they knew not the truth?

Verylye, Faith leans to the truth, and apprehends the same: therefore
they are not ignorant of the truth which believe. I answer: C. He says
that they shall know the truth, Aunsvvere.
which come to any knowledge of the same.

As yet they were very rude and scarce entered, to whom Christ here speaks:
therefore it is no marvel, if so be he promise unto them more large
understanding of his doctrine: but it is a general sentence. Bv. For the
knoledge of Christians has degrees and steps, and the knowledge of the
truth increases in process of time, as may be gathered by many other
places of scripture.

C. Wherefore how greatly soever any of us have profited in the Gospel, we
must still proceed and go foreward daily. And Christ vouchsafes to give
this reward unto the constancye of his Disciples, that he makes him self
more famillyarlye known unto them.

For he it is which ingraueth his word into our hearts, by his holy spyrite:
he it is, which daily dryueth away the clouds of darkness out of our
minds, which obscure the brightness of the Gospel. Therefore to the end
the truth may appear unto us at the full, we must seriouslye and constantly
cleave unto the same.

M. Let us also noate to whom the truth is here promised, not to all, but
only to the true Disciples of Christ: and they are the elect, which are given
to Christ of God the Father: concerning whom, read the seven and thirtye
verse of the sixth Chapter going before.

The Reprobate therefore have no hope to know and understand the truth,
although they bear the name of Christ, and are under the profession of his
faith, and are learned and wise, according to this world. The secreate of the
Lord is revealed to them that fear him. The Apostle says that this truth is
the misterye of GOD in Christ Jesus, Psa. 25.14
the which is hydden from this world, To. 16.25.
that is to say, from the wisdom, reason, and understanding of all flesh.
And for this cause it can not be that any other should look for this knowledge
of the truth, than they which are the true and unfeigned disciples of Christ,
the which knowledge is gotten no otherwise than by the reuelacion of Jesus
Christ in the holy Ghost. Bv. Truth in this place is opposed or compared with
the shadows of the Law. And that is truth, Truth defyned.
according to the Hebrewe phrase, which is the most perfect essence of any
thing, and the very absolute perfection it self of a matter.

Therefore to such as persevere the Lord in process of time, will open all the
misteryes of pyetie, and of the kingdom of God, giving unto them all knowledge
and understanding, which may seem to appertain to true Godliness.

And the truth shall make you free. M. This place is excellent and worthy to
be noated. The Lord promises to his true Disciples, which abide in his
word, freedom by the truth which they shall certainly know, and so he
commends the knowledge of the Gospel, of the fruit which we receive
thereby, or of the effect.

Bv. The truth (I say) which is the Son of God Christ Jesus, is the
delyuerer of the world: or Faith it self, which cleaves unto the
everlasting truth, makes us free, if so be we be the Disciples of Christ
perseuering in his word.

C. This is an incomparable benefit: whereupon it follows that there is
nothing better than the knowledge of the Gospel.

All men feel the yoke of bondage and servitude, and do confess the same
to be a miserable thing: seeing then the Gospel does deliver us from the
same, it follows that the same is the treasure of the most happy and blessed
life.

Now let us consider what liberty it is which Christ here noateth unto us.
Bv. He speaks of the liberty of men's minds, which alters not the
state of Fortune, setting the body free from the Law and bondage of the
Master: but it delivers the mind from sin, Freedom of the mind.
from wicked and worldly desires, from the Tyranny of the Deuell, from the
fear of death, from the servitude of humane constitucions, and from the yoke
of the Law.

C. Wherefore seeing we obtain that liberty by the benefit of the Gospel,
it may thereby appear that we are by nature the servants of sin. We
must also noate the manner of delyueraunce. For so long as we are ruled by our
sense and reason, we are bondmen to sin: but when the Lord does regenerate
us by his spyrite, he does make us free, that being loused from the miserable
bonds of Satan, we may wyllinglye serve the Lord in holiness and
righteousness all the days of our life.

C. But regeneracion comes of faith: whereby it apeareth that freedom
comes of the Gospel. Now let the Papists brag of their freewyll: we
knowing our own servitude and bondage, will glory in no other than in Christ.

R. Christ therefore teaches in this brief sentence, after what manner we
are brought into the liberty of Gods children: First, we must here Christ:
Secondly, we must believe, that is to say, we must abide in his word, and
endure temptacion, and abide the Lords leisure: thirdlye, we must be Disciples
of Christ.

For he which believes, in Faith hears the word of God: he which hears
the word of GOD, he is a disciple of GOD: Fourthly, we must know the
truth. The word is the truth: and he which believes the word, he truly
believes the verity. Lastly, we must be free. And we must noate that liberty
has his degrees according to the manner of his Faith.

Romans 8.23.
Wherefore Paul being free, grooned still, looking for the full and perfect
delyueraunce.

33. They answered him, we be Abraham's seed, and were never bond to any
man: how say thou, Ye shall be made free?

C. This answer was confusedly made unto Christ, and that by such as were
contemners, and not believing. And this manner is much used in the scriptures,
so often as mention is made of the body of the people, generallye to ascribe
unto all men, that thing which belongs only to one part.

M. The unbelieving Jews therefore brake forth into the midst* and there
also gain said Christ, where there was nothing that appertayned unto them.
Bv. They swelled with the nobillitye of their auncetours according to the
flesh: but they understood not that the Lord spoke of the liberty of the
mind.

C. They could not abide that they being a chosen and holy people, should be
brought into bondage. For what had the adoption and covenant profited them, by
which they were segregated or separated from other Nations, unless they had
been counted the children of God? Therefore they think that they have iniurye
done unto them, when liberty is offered unto them, as a benefit coming of
favor and grace.

M. Therefore to the end they might stir up the minds of the simple against
Christ, they accuse him to be a sclanderer of the aucthour of the whole
Nation, as though he made both him and his posteritye contemptible with the
vile yoke of servitude.

Such spite and disdain Satan also uses, when he obiecteth to the ministers
of Christ, which preach the Gospel, the contempt of the Saints, as though
they did abase and discredit every saint, by exhorting men to repose their
trust only in Christ.

He knows that the Saints among Christians are in great estimation, and
that they are worshipped of some for gain, and of other some by simple
ignorance: and therefore neither part can abide that the Saints should be
contemned. For this cause to hinder the race of Gods word, he rayseth up
certain Pharisees which cry that the Saints are to be worshipped: whom
notwithstanding these Evangelists contemn.

And never were bond to any man. C. It may seem very absurd that they
deny them selves to have been at any time in servitude, seeing they were so
oftentimes oppressed of other Tyrauntes, and were subject at that time to the
Empire of Rome.

Hereby we may easily perceive how foolish and vain their boasting was, and
impudencye also in lying: notwithstanding, here was some pretense or color,
because the unjust domination or rule of the enemies was no let, but that by
right they might abide free. R. For they seemed to have respect unto these
notable promises: as where it is said, I have made thee a Father of many
Nations. Genesis 17.5.
I will make thee to grow exceedinglye, and will make Nations of thee: Yea
Kings shall proceed of thee. Also, Ge. 22.17.
Thy seed shall possess the gate of his enemies: And in thy seed shall all
the Nations of the earth be blessed.

C. But in this first of all they erred that they did not consider that the
right of their adoption was founded upon the Mediator only. For how came the
seed of Abraham to be free, but only because it was exempted from the common
servitude of mankind, by the especial grace of the redeemer?

Abraham's seed free by Christ.
The other error also is less tolerable, that for so much as they being
bastards would, not withstanding be reckened among the children of Abraham,
and did not consider that it was the only regeneration of the Spyrite, which
makes them the Lawful Sons of Abraham. And this fault has been to common
and general in all Ages, to refer to the oryginall of the flesh, the
extraordinarye gifts of God, and to ascribe unto nature those remedies which
God appoints to correct the same.

34. Jesus answered them, Verilye, verily, I say unto you, that whosoever
commytteth sin, is the servant of sin.

C. Here he uses an argument of the contraries. They boasted themselves to be
free: but he proves them to be the servants of sin, because they being
subject to the desires of the flesh do sin daily. Bv. Ye think your
selves (says he) to be very free, but in deed ye are servants.

For this is most certain that he is a servant to that thing whereunto he
is become obedient: ye show your selves obedient to sin: therefore ye are
the servants of sin, and so by consequent the Deuell is your Lord and
Master: for he rules here over such as are subject to sin.

And it is marvel that men are not convinced and constrained by their own
experience, to lay aside all Pride, and to learn to humble them selves.

Also it is too common a thing at this day that the more a man is overwhelmed
with sin, the more stoutly he braggeth and boasts of free will.

It is not true Captiuitye nor true servitude, if so be a man be borne a
servant of a Handmayde, or be taken in the war, or does by Law sell him
self into another power, or if he be shut into close prison: but he is a
Captyue which is under the power of sin and the Devil.

R. And such Captives and servant are all men by their own nature: Romans 5.12.
Because by one man sin entered into the whole world: and so by sin, death
came upon all, For by Adam all his posterity, became subject to sin to
affliction, death, hell, and to the cruel tyranny of the Devil. And the Law
and right of Sin is to kill (for the wages of sin is death) the Law of
death is to condemn, the Law of afflictions is to bring trouble and misery,
and the power and aucthoritye of Satan is to destroy.

To these powers Adam has made us and all our strength subject, by his
obedience. And this is so great captiuitye and servitude, as greater cannot be
devised.

For whosoever is in this servitude and bondage, he can do nothing with a
free will, he has no peace of conscience, he has no rest, how free soever
he be in body.

Out of this Captiuitye no Captive could ever deliver another. Man captiued to
sin.
Wherefore Christ the Son of GOD descended from Heaven, and was made man, and
by his Cross, Death, and Resurrection, has delivered us from the Law and
power of sin, least the same should kill us: from the power of death, least
the same should condemn us: from the power of afflictions, least they should
trouble us, and bring us to miserye: and from the power of Satan, least he
should destroy us.

And he has restored us to righteousness, Christ has made us free.
to joy, to life, and into the favor of the most mighty GOD, and has made
us the Sons of GOD, which were before the bondeslaues of Satan.

Also this true liberty, must not be drawn to carnal and to human
desires, but to faith and love, which are two works of the holy Ghost
setting us at liberty. Wherefore Faith is the Rular, and Mistres in Sins, in
afflictions, in death, and in hell.

Faith overcomes sin.
For it teaches that we are so delivered from them, that they have no power at
all in us, neither can destroy or condemn us. Moreover, the relics of sin
are purged away by faith, and in steed of sins, the righteousness of GOD
which is Christ, is set: In so much that whatsoever true faith commands,
being dyrected to the word, which is Christ, it cannot chose but be
righteousness, how much so ever it seem outwardlye to be sin.

Faith is the mistres in the liberty of spiritual things.
Now as Faith is the Mistres in the liberiye of spiritual things, so charity
is the Lady, in the liberty of corporal things, as of Food, Apparel,
Money, and such kind of earthlye benefits.

In these things we must be so free, as charity will suffer. For although by
the Law and liberty of Faith, all external things are free, yet
notwithstanding. the use of this liberty is left unto the dispensation of
Charity: as all meats by the Law of Faith are free. For all things are
clean: and that which enters into the mouth of a man does not the defile
the man: notwithstanding charity dispenses the use of this liberty.

Tit i.xv. Mat xv.xi. i. Cor 8 13. Charity is the mistres of corporal things.
Whereupon the Apostle Paul says, If so be meat offend my brother, I will
never eat flesh. Also he says, I may do all things, but all things are
not expedient. For we must have respect unto charity.

So also the whole earth, all heaven, and the whole Sea, and all things in
them, are free by Faith.

For the earth is the Lords and the fullness of the same, and we are the
Lords. Wherefore the whole earth is free for us, and ours also: but charity
dispenses the use of this liberty, which will not suffer me to benefit my
self to the iniurye and hurt of my neighbor.

For charity steals not, deceives not, plays not the Tyrant, neither
offends our neighbor in word: but if so be it stands in need of any
thing that is our neighbors, it seeks to win the same by intreatye, and
for money, taking nothing without the good will of our neighbor.

Brieflye by Faith we are called into the most excellent liberty of the
Children of GOD, and by charity we are called into the service of our
neigboure: as the Apostle says, Owe nothing to any man but this, that ye
love one another.

C. This therefore is the purpose of Christ, Romans xiij. 8
to show that all are subject to sin, whom he delivers not, insomuche
that they are servants, even from their birth, taking the contagion and
infection of Sin of the corrupt nature.

We must also noate the comparison between nature and grace, upon the which
Christ here stands: whereby it shall easilye appear that men are spoiled of
liberty, except they recover the same from some other. Bv. To this effect
partayneth the whoale sixth Chapter almost of the Epistle of Saint Paul to the
Romans, where he speaks of this servitude of sin.

C. Moreover this servitude is so voluntarye, that they which necessarily
sin, are notwithstanding not constrained to sin.

M. To sin here noateth and sygnifyeth not the simple act, but the very
purpose, indeauoure, and meditation of a corrupt mind, and the wickedness of
depraved and defiled nature, although the work of syn follow not, and is not
as yet come into action: insomuch that the Reprobates may be said to sin
even as evil trees are said to bring forth evil fruit. Ver. 37.
Also of the good Tree we say in the Winter, This Tree brings forth good
fruit.

John 13.27
So these Jews to whom Christ made answer in this place, did then commit
the sin of murder, not in act, but in thought, meditacion, and purpose,
when they spoke these things unto the Lord. For they sought to kill him, as
he shortly after said unto them, Ye seek to kill me, So the Lord said to
Judas in the time of the Supper, That thou do, do quickly.

And what was the miserable wretch then doing? In action he was at Supper, but
in thought and mind, he was betraying the Lord. The Lord speaks not of that
which he did in action, but of that which he did in heart, and in mind: and
yet notwithstanding the Lord said not, That which thou wylt do, but, That
which thou do do quicklye.

So to fulfill the Law and the commandments, is taken in the Scriptures for
a desire to do the Law and the commandments. Therefore to commit sin,
is not simplye to sin, but to have a desire to sin, although sin be not
finished in act. Even as to do good is not simplye to do good in act and
deed, but to have a desire to good, although the good work come not always
in act. Moreover although boath the elect and the reprobate do sin, yet not
withstanding the elect do not commit sin but the reprobate only. For they
which are of God, as they have seed of God in them, even so they detest sin
from their heart, and that which they detest, they cannot studiouslye meditate
and fynishe. This matter Saint John very notably handles in his first Epistle.
The which notwithstanding favors not the sect of the Annabaptistes, which
by these places go about to prove, that a Christian man symplye cannot sin,
affirming also because they will be counted true Christians, that they are
clean without sin, and that they can by no means sin: the which is a most
subtle practice of Satan in them, that he may bring the weak minds of the
godly, which do feel the force of sin in them selves, to desperation. But
there is no mention of sin made here generally, but of a willing desyer and
meditation to sin, as we have said.

35. And the servant abides not in the house for ever: but the Son, abides
ever.

Bv. Now follows the denouncing of punishment belonging to servants, under
the similitude taken from laws, and pollitique government. As the servant,
though for a time he rule and govern, is not nevertheless the master of the
house, but is thrust out of the Doors, or changed at the pleasure of his
Lord: euenso the bondeseruaunt of sin, though for a time he play the
Hipocrite, and counterfaite pietye, and seem to have God favorable unto him,
is notwithstanding, in due time excluded from the presence of God, and
fellowshippe of Saints: for the house figureth the fellowshippe of God, and of
the Saints.

C. Whereupon it follows that there is no liberty perfect and perpetual, but
that which is gotten by the Son of God. By this means Christ reproves the
Jews of vanitye, because they brag of a counterfaite show, as if they had
the thing it self. For whereas they were the carnal progeny of Abraham, they
were nothing but counterfaites.

They had aucthority in the Church of God, but such authority as Ismael
usurped to him self for a short time the servant exalting him self against
the true and lawful Son.

The sum is this, whosoever boaste themselves to be the sons of Abraham do
nothing else but make a certain colored and counterfayte show.

36. If therefore the Son make you free, then arre you free in deed.

M. Christ speaks here, of himself, but in the third person. Bv. As if he
should say, Whosoever truly desires to be free, and to be the heir of
everlasting life, let him seek to be made free by me which am the Son of
GOD: that is to say, Let him believe me, and abide in my words: and the
truth shall make him free. C. By these words he declares that the power of
freedom belongs to him aloane, and that all other being borne servants are
not made free, but by his grace only. For whatsoever he has proper by
nature, he gives unto us by adoption, when we are by faith ingraffed in his
body, and are made his members.

Therefore our goodness comes by the freedom of Christ: Freedom comes by
Christ.
but yet we obtain the same by faith. Which also brings to pass that Christ
does regenerate us by his holy spirit. M. This clause (in deed) rejects
all the freedom that comes by flesh and blood, because the same is not true
liberty. So that liberty is sought in vain without Christ, For he gives unto
us his Spirit whereby we being free follow with willing minds those things
that belong unto God, which only is true liberty.

For what does it profit in flesh to the rule the whole world, and in mind
to be the servant of death? For so long as concupiscence bears any rule inv
us, as it brings us to sin, so also it leads us to death. For the reward
of sin is death, Romans 6.26. Iam. 1 Romans 8.13.
Also S. James says Lust when it has conceived brings forth sin and
Sin, when it is finished, brings forth death.

And the Apostle Paul says, if ye live according to the flesh ye shall dye,

37. I know that ye are Abraham's seed but ye seek means to kill me,
because my word has noe place in you.

Bv. Now our savior Christ does more strongly confute the swelling and vain
glory and boasting which was in the Jews by which they boasted them selves to
be the seed, that is to say, the posterity of Abraham. As if he should
say, Admit I should grant unto you this thing in the which ye so greatly
glory, what notwithstanding does it profit them to be called the Children of
Abraham, which rage and fume against God and his ministers: who being moved
with wicked hatered against the truth are swiftly carried to shed innocente
blood.

R. Ye are in deed the posterity of Abraham but not the true and spiritual,
but the carnal seed: the which may manifestlye appear hereby, for that ye
go about to kill me, believing not my word. For so were the carnal sons of
Abraham wont to persecute the spiritual.

B. These things he spoke spiritually to those hipocrites and enemies the
Jews which believed not in him. Gala. 4.29
Howbeit he meant by these words to declare unto those men also, that God
nothing regards the liberty of the flesh.

He taught that boath true liberty and nobillitie, must be esteemed and
judged by works, and that it is nothing to be borne after the flesh of Abraham
if the spirit of Abraham be not also adjoined there unto, whereof follows
both the life and purpose of Abraham.

C. When he says that they sought to kill him, because his word had no place
in them, he means not that they were simplye murderers, but that they were
driven to such made outrage and outrageous madness, by the hatred of GOD and
his truth: which is much more worse. For then the murder is not only
committed against men but also against God. R. And because the Jews were
carnal, they believed not the word of Christ, which cannot be comprehended
by human reason but by faith only.

M. Therefore the preaching of the word of God, does reveal the quality of
the hearers, and discerns the elect from the reprobate. Even as it is said,
hereafter, He that is of God hears Gods word: ye therefore hear not because
ye are not of God. Furthermore the word of God must be heard not only with our
corporal ears, but must also be received inwardelye into our hearts. For
although thou hear the word of God, and understand the same, except thou
follow it and bring it to effect, it cannot be truly said, that it has place
in thee. Even so the word of Christ, has then truly place in us, when the
same has place in our heart, and works in us his effect, that is to say,
the word of faith to believe, the words of doctrine to understand, the
words of admonition to follow, the words of consolation to comfort, the
words of patience to bear, and so of the rest. Also the word of God works
by degrees insomuche that the word of GOD takes place in some, more than in
othersome, according to the measure of faith, which God gives to every man.
Bv. We see also that unbelief, is the very welspring of all wickedness: and
there it takes place, where the word of GOD is excluded.

38. I speak that which I have seen with my Father: and ye do that which
ye have seen with your Father.

C. He gathers an argument of the contraries, that they are boath enemies
unto God, and the Children of the Deuell, which resist his doctrine. I (says
he) bring forth nothing but that which I have learned of my Father. How
comes it to pass then that the word of God does so greatly offend you, but
because my Father does not favor you.

R. My heavenly Father is true. Now seeing my father has wholly expressed him
self in me, I cannot but speak the truth.

I have learned no other thing of my Father, of whom I was borne before all
worlds and from everlasting. I said that I am the light of the world, and
that I came to save the faithful, that I am the Well and the bread of life:
these things are no lies: for so my Father taught me to speak, because I am-
his natural Son. But ye do that which ye have seen with your Father. His
desire is to kill, to envy and to slay, the which things also ye do.

C. He says that he, speaks, and that they, do, because he executed the
office of a teacher, and they furiouslye went a boute to extinguishe his
doctrine.

Some traslate it, And do ye that. etc. As if Christ should have said, Go
to show your selves to be the Children of the Devil by resisting me: for I
speak nothing but out of the mouth of GOD.

M. Let us here learn by evident and certain noates, to put a difference
between the Children of God, and the Children of the Devil, the which shall
be very easy, if so be we well under stand the nature of those two
Princes.

The Elect are taught of the Lord, and do greedelye embrace and observe his
word which is the truth.

The Children of the Devil embrace lies, and seek with all their might to
extinguish the light of the truth, and to kill the preachers of the Gospel.
The which thing they learn of their father the Devil, Luke 8.12.
who wholly endeuoreth him self to pulle the word out of the hearts of men,
lest in believing they should be saved.

39. They answered and said unto him: Abraham is our father. JESUS says unto
them: If ye were Abrahames children, ye would do the works of Abraham.

They aumswered. Bv. They did smell well enough that the Lord thought their
Father to be the aucthor of wickedness the devil himself: now therefore with
subtle questions, they go about to draw out somewhat out of the answer of
the Lord which should be against the Patriarch Abraham, that thereby they
might stir up the people to destroy Jesus as a calumniator and slaunderer of
the holy Patriarch. M. Therefore they so frame their answer, that they do
not so much defend their own estimation as the estimation of Abraham, as
though the Lord had deminished the same when he said, And ye do that which
ye have seen with your Father. As if they should say, Take heed what thou
say: Our Father is Abraham, a man most holy and acceptable unto GOD, R.
which is an absolute example for us all to lead our lives. Why then do thou
speak evil of him as though he had taught us that which were wicked? Do
thou think that it is lawful for thee to slander all good men at thy
pleasure without punishment? We will not suffer such things. As we do
nothing that is evil, even so our Father Abraham has taught us nothing that
is evil.

Bv. We therefore desyer to know of thee whether Abraham did any thing at any
time which became not a good, a Just, and a holy man to do. C. This
altrication does evidently declare, how proudly they contemned all the
reprehensyons of Christ. Still they arrogate this unto them selves that they
are the Children of Abraham: and not only in that sense that they came of the
progeny of Abraham, but also that they were a holy people, the inheritance of
God, and the children of God.

But this trust was wholly in the flesh, and carnal, quight void of true
Faith: Euenso in like manner all ypocrites so soon as they have gotten some
cloak, they obstinately resist God, as though he could not see into their
hearts.

If ye were Abraham's children. M. The invincible truth wants not true and
evident arguments to defend it self, and to confute the contradiction of the
wicked, Here Christ conuinceth the unbelieving Jews to be none of the
children of Abraham, C And more euedently puts a difference between the
true and the unlawful children of Abraham.

For he takes from all those which are unlike to Abraham, even the very name.
It comes often times to pass that the Children ar unlike in manners their
Parents, who begat them, but Christ speaks not here of carnal offspring: but
only denies them to be counted for the children of Abraham before god which
do not retain by faith the grace of adoption.

For seeing the Lord promised to the seed of Abraham to be their God, all the
unbelieving which rejected this promise did cut of them selves from the stock
of Abraham.

The Carnal stock of Abraham was not altogether unprofitably and of no
moment, if so be truth were Joined to the same, For Gods election rests in
the seed of Abraham, but yet free, that they might be reckoned the heirs of
life whom he sanctifies with his holy Spirit. M. But seeing the Faith of
Abraham is so greatly commended, Abraham ye would have the Faith of Abraham but
if ye were the Children of Abraham ye would do the deeds of Abraham.

I answer: Because Abraham's faith was not dead and void, Aunsvvere.
but lively and effectual, the Lord speaks not of the works of Abraham
which were done without faith, but he makes mention of the works of Abraham
as of fruits witnesing and declaring his faith because he purposed by manifest
Argument to prove that his adversaries were degenerate from the piety of
Abraham.

For if they had had the faith of Abraham, they would have declared the same by
such works as differs not from the piety of Abraham. A good tree is known
by good fruit.

40. But now ye go about to kill me, a man that has toulde you the truth
which I have heard of God: this did not Abraham.

C. By the effect he declares that they are not the children of Abraham,
because they resist God. For what notable thing is commended in Abraham, but
the obedience of Faith? This therefore is noate of difference, so often as we
must put a difference between Strangers and the Sons of God. For vain
titelles howsoever the world do esteem of them, are of no estimation with God
M. Christ might have objected many other works to the Jews which they had
committed, whereby they declared them selves to be degenerate and unlawful
children.

For Abraham was liberal but they were couetouse: Abraham was sound and
perfect: but they were ypocrites Abraham worshipped God aright, but they made
the house of the Lords worship, a den of thieves: they devoured widows
howses, which Abraham never did.

Christ I say, might have objected some of these things: but leaving all
these things he only obiecteth this, that they went about to kill him. For
this was such a haynouse deed that no other was comparable unto the same.
Whereupon also in the parable of the vinyarde which was let out unto the
husband man in the latter end of the same it is said that they went about, to
kill the Son which the Father sent unto them as the heir of the vinyarde.
Mat. 21.38.
Furthermore we are taught by this place that the mind and purpose to do any
work is accounted for the work it self? yea if thou consider well, the
intent to do any evil thing is worse then the work it self: and the intent
to do any good work is better then the work it self. Intent to kill is worse
the^ slauter it self.
Better is the desyer to do good to those that are in misery, then the alms
deed it self: and the Intent to kill is worse than the murder it self: The
Alms deed may be so done that it may displease God concerning the which
read the first of Mathewe. A murderouse deed may be so done, that it may
please God, as may appear in the Levites, in Phineis, in Iehu and so refused
that God may be displeased for the not doing of it, as we may see in Agag.
Amalech, whom Saul kept alive, Exodus 32 29 Number. 25.7 4. Kin. 10. 1. Kin. 15
8. 3. King. 20.42.
and in Benadab king of Asciria, whom Achab sent a way alive. But the desire
and intent to do good cannot displease God, even as the desyer to kill cannot
please him.

A man that has told you the truth. This our Savior Christ adds to
show the wicked Ingratitude of the Jews and to make it openly known that
they are the Children of the Deuell because they were such sworn and mortal
enemies to true and wholesome doctrine.

This did not Abraham M. What? Did not Abraham kill a man? We read that he
slew four kings and delivered his kinsman Lotte out of their hands. But the
simple mening of Christ's words is, that Abraham was not so cruel as to kill
an Innocent man: Genesis 14:15
and that he was not so unthankful as to kill one which instructed him in the
truth, and so wicked, as to kill the Ambassodoure of God, as did his posterity.

41 Ye do the deeds of your father. Then said they to him, we be not borne
of fornication, we have on father, even God.

M. We may behoulde here great moderation in our savior Christ. As yet he
spares them, not by and by openly affirming that the Devil is their Father,
the which notwithstanding he afterward did, when they did not only
malapertly say that they were the sons of Abraham, but also the children of
God. Let us also immitate this modesty, that so long as it may be done with
the glory of God, we may spare the wicked, and to take heed that we do not
stir and move them so much as we may.

But rather let us with meekness instruct them, if at any time it may please
God to give unto them repentance, and grace to know and beeleeue the truth.

We be not borne of fornication. Bv. These men still obstinately go forewarde
to mayntaine their nobillitye, specially when they perceived by the order of
Christ's words, that he assigned the Devil to be their Father.

Therefore now on the contrary part, they do not only boast themselves to
be the children of Abraham, but also the children of God. C. Howbeit they
accounted it all one thing to be the children of Abraham, and the children of
GOD. But in this they did greatly err, that they imagined God to be tied and
bound to the seed of Abraham. For thus they reason: God chose the seed of
Abraham to him self: therefore seeing we come of the seed of Abraham, we
must needs be the children of God.

Now we see how they thought, that they received holiness, even from their
Mothers womb, because they came of a holy stock. Moreover, they go about to
prove them selves to be the Church of God, because they had their original of
the holy Fathers: even as at this day the continual succession from the
Fathers, does puff up the Papists, and make them too swelling proud. With
such delusions Satan beguileth them, that they might divide GOD from his
word, the Church from the Faith, and the kingdom of Heaven from the spirit.
But if so be the answer of Christ were auailable to refell the Jews, it is
of no less force to convince them at this day. For Hipocrites will always
falsefye the name of God: but they shall never bring to pass, but that they
shall be accounted liars, of such as lean to the judgment of Christ.

M. We see here that the wicked adversaries of Christ knew well enough that the
impietye of false worship was spiritual whoredom, and that the same was
filthye, and to be detested of the people of God, and therefore they would not
seem to be pertakers of the same.

By the which words, they challenge to themselves, both pietye and also the
true worship of God.

Therefore it is no rare and unwonted thing, that Hipocrites being far from
all true sincere pietye, and from the worship of God, should challenge unto
them selves both of them.

These men were so blind that they had no consideration of their parents which
came between Abraham and them, being by the testimony of the Scripture
Idolaters: but considered only the first original of their nation, and
boasted of the covenant which God once made with them.

So boulde also are the Papists at this day who although they be the
posterity of Idolaters, and Idolaters them selves, yet nevertheless because
of the pure beginninges of Christiamisme, and the sign of Gods covenant, do
say even as these Jews did, we are not borne of fornication.

42. Jesus said unto them, if God were your father, truly ye would love me:
for I proceeded forth, and came from God: neither came I of my self, but he
sent me.

Bv. Christ refelleth this wicked, bold, and impudent bosting of the Jews,
and for certain causes conuinceth them of a lie. M. And he reasons of the
nature of true Sons after this manner, C. Whosoever is the son of God,
knows and loves his first begotten son: but you hate me: therefore there
is noe cause why you should boaste your selves to be the children of God.

This place is dilligently to be noated that there is no piety, no fear of
God, where Christ is rejected. False and counterfayte religion, boldelye
boasts of God: but, what agreement can they have with the Father, which
disagree with the only son? what knowledge of GOD is this, where his lively
image is rejected? In vain therefore do the Jews, in vain do the Turks
boaste of the true worship of God, when as with obstinate mind they reject
al knowledge of the son of God. C. When Christ says that he came from God,
he gives the Jews to understand that they cannot object any thing unto
him, which is contrary to the will and pleasure of God: and that no
terrestrial or human thing can be found in his doctrine and office. For he
does not speak here of divine essence (as some think) but of his office.

43. Why do ye not know my speech? even because ye cannot know my word.

He adds another argument whereby he evidently proves that they are not the
Children of God, C. and withal casts in their teeth their obstinacye, which
was such that they could not abide to hear him speak. Herevppon he
gathers that they were carried headelonge with diuelishe malice and outrage.
As if he should say, M. They which are the true Sons of GOD cannot be
ignorant of the voice of their Fathers house. Bv. If therefore ye be the
Sons of God, what I pray you is the cause why ye know not my voice He
speaks unto you by me. Children commonly know their parents voice, even as
sheep know the voice of their sheepehearde. But seeing ye know not my
doctrine, which appertains to my father, it is out of all controversy that
ye are none of my Fathers Children.

44. Ye are of your father the Devil, and the lusts of your Father will ye
do: he was a murderer from the beginning, and aboade not in the truth:
because there is no truth: in in him. When he speaks a lie, he speaks of
his own for he is a liar and the Father of the same thing.

Ye are of the father. M. Thus far forth he has proved that they are
neither the Sons of Abraham, nor the sons of God, the which they falsely
challenged to them selves: and now consequentlye he shows who is their true
father. C. And that which before he had spoken obscurelye, he now openly
discovers, namely, that they are the children of the Devil. The Devil a
murderer
But we must understand here the Antithesis or comparison, that they could not
be such mortal enemies to the son of god, except they had a father, which were
a perpetual enemy to God. M. As if he should say, Now ye pretend God to be
your father, when as indeed ye are neither the true sons of Abraham nor of
God: in one word I will show you who is your father whom you express even as
his very sons, boath in disposition and in manners, yea, who are such as I
find you to be, whom soever you feign your selves to be, and whatsoever you
would be accounted of in this world, ye have the Deuell to your Father.

C. And he calls them the children of the Devil, not because they did
imitate him, but also because by his impulsion they were carried to war
against Christ. For as we are called the sons of GOD, not only because we
are like unto him, but also because he does govern us by his holy spirit,
and because Christ does live and grow in us that he might make us like unto
the Image of his Father: so again the Devil is said to be their Father whose
minds he blinds, and whose hearts he instigateth and pricketh forward to
all unrighteousness: in whom also he ruling mightily excerciseth his tirannye.

M. The Maniches have abused this place and such like, insomuch that they have
made two beginnings, one of evil things, and the other of good things: C.
But in vain. For as when the Scripture calls us the Children of God, the
same does not belong to the original of substance, but to the grace of the
spyrite, which does regenerate us to newness of life: even so this saying of
Christ, does nothing appertain to the original of substance but to the
corruption of nature, the cause and original whereof is the fall of man. In
that therefore men are borne the children of the Devil, we must not impute
the same to the creacion, but to the wickedness of sin. Christ proves this
of the effect, because they are prove of their own accord and mind to
follow the Devil.

M. After this manner he calls Judas the Devil, as we heard before in the
sixte Chapter, verse three scoore and ten, not in that he was a man, but in
that he was a Traitor.

A. And Saint John says in his Epistle, that Caine was of that wicked,
because he slew his brother. 1. Iho. 3.12
And he affirms him which sins to be of the Devil. All which things
are spoken, not in respect of the creation, but in respect of imitation least
any man should refer the same, unto the natural and substanciall original.

He was a murderer from the beginning. C. Christ expresses what those desires
are, which the ungodly of their own accord and mind follow and he repeateth
two kinds, namely Cruelty and liyng in the which things the Jews wear too
like to the Deuell. In that he says, He was a murderer, he gives us to
understand that he sought man's destruction. For so soon as man was created,
Satan had a wicked desire to hurt him insomuch that he went about with all his
might to destroy him, Bv. and working error and rebellion in our parents Adam
and Eve he slew all mankind. The same also within a while after armed Caine to
destroy his brother Abell.

And daily throughout the whoale world he stirs up wicked and ungodly men to
murder. For he rejoices in blood, in wars, in theft, and in the destruction
of men: and only because he enuieth the felicity and happiness of others.
But Christ means not here the beginning of the creation, as though God had
endewed the Deuell with a desire to hurt, but he condemns the wickedness of
Satan's nature which he has taken to him self. M. Neither ought it to seem
absurd to any man that the Deuell is said to be the author of death, when as
notwithstanding the Apostle seems to attribute the same to our first parent,
saying, As by one man sin enters into the world, and by sin Death. etc.
For these two went together, namely the Temptor, and the Obayer of Temptacion.
Satan was the Temptor and perswador to transgression and sin by envy mixing
with the same a lie: yet notwithstanding he had failed of his purpose, if so
be Adam had not harckned to his persuasion, and transgressed Gods
commandment, Therefore as touching that envy of the Deuell the root of
evil temtation, and also as touching the lie of perniciouse perswasyon, it is
truly attributed to the Deuell that he is the first author of death: again,
as touching the assent of Adam, and the transgression of Gods commandment, it
is rightly by the Apostle ascribed to Adam that he was the author of sin and
death to all his posterity, insomuch that there is no disagreement at all here
between Christ and the Apostle.

As for example, if so be among the enemies besieging a City one of them
do with sertaine false perswasyons persuade and entice one of the principal
Citizens to betraye the City unto them, insomuche that he harkeneth
thereunto, whereby be boath betrayeth his Country, and also makes the City
to be sacked and destroyed: boath the persuading enemy, and also the betraying
Citizen which contemning the false persuasions of the enemy might have kept
his faith which he did owe unto his country, are rightly said to be the
aucthours of this destruction. Euenso the mortality of mankind is aptly
referred to the malice and envy of the Deuell, but yet not without the falt
of our parents. And aboade not in the truth.

C. These words plainly express a chaung and alteration to the worse: and
therefore Satan is a liar, not from the creation: but because he fell from the
truth.

Therefore in that he is a liar, it is not because he has been always by
nature an ennemy to the truth, but because he fell voluntarily from the same.
Bv. God made the Deuell good in the beginning, for all his works are good. He
did set him in the truth, from the which he could never have fallen, except
he had sometime stood in the same. Of him was required by the most Just God,
Faith, or fidilitie, thankfulness, and the acknowledging of God the Creator
who had given him strength to persevere if he had would: for he might have
stand if he had would.

But through his own falte and wickedness he aboade not in the truth- that
is to say in the purity in the which he was made.

For by Infedilitie he fell. C. This description of Satan is very profitable
for us that every man may learn to beeware of his subtle snares, 1. Pet. 5.8
and to resist him. For he goes about continually like a roaring Lion seeking
whom he may devour and he has a thousand ways to deceive.

AVG. We have not red that the Deuell has at any time used any external
armoure to kill a man, neither that he has playde the murderer with his hand
but he has used lying and pernicious persuasion.

M. This is the worse and most Deuelishe kind of murder, when the body is
not only killed with the sword but also when both soul and body, with a
blasphemouse lie against the word of God, is made subject not only to Temporal
but also to everlasting death. C. So much the more therefore it behooves the
Faithful to be armed with spiritual armoure to fight, and to be sober and
watch. M. Therefore the Apostle when he feared this kind of murder said, I
fear lest by any means, that as the serpent beguiled Eve through his
subteltie, 2. Cor. 11.3.
euenso your minds should be corrupted from the singleness that is toward
Christ.

For the serpent had the false Apostles Ministers of this murder, by whose
diligence he sought to bring to pass that thing which he had begone in the
beginning to the destruction of mankind: such false Aposteles he has always
had among the Gentiles, among the Jews, and among the Christians.

C. Therefore if Satan cannot put of this affection, there is no cause why we
should he troubled as at some new or strange thing, when we see diverse
errors to spring up: for Satan sends forth his Instruments to trouble and
to deceive the world. And it is noe marvel if so be Satan seek so
dilligently to ouerwhelme the light of the truth: for it is the only life of
the soul Therefore he uses lying as a mortal darte to destroy the soul.

Because there is no truth in him. C. This is a confirmation taken of the
effect. For, because Satan hates, the truth, and cannot abide the same but
favors altogether of lies. Christ gathers thereupon that he was taken and
quight turned away from the truth.

R. Neither is it repugnaunt to this sentence of Christ, Job. 1.10. Math. 4.6.
when we read that Satan has sometime spoken the truth as when he said,
Thou haste blessed the work of his hands, and his substance is increased in
the Land. Also it is written he shall give his aungeles charge over thee.

Again. Thou art Christ the Son of God. Luke 4.41. Act. 16.17.
Moreover These men are the servants of the most high God which show unto
us the way of salvation: These (I say) and such like sentences are nothing
repugnaunt with these words of Christ. For it is one thing sometime to speak
the truth: and another thing to have the truth within one: Euenas it is one
thing sometime to tell a lie, and another thing to be a continual liar. The
truth is in them, which do not only sometime speak that which is true, but
do love the truth, and do speak those things which they speak for the love
which they owe unto the truth.

A man shall find some which speak the truth, not for the Love they bear
to the truth, but for the love either of glory or of gayn, or else for the
hatred which they bear to some man. Of those it cannot be said that the
truth is in them.

Although therefore Satan sometime speaks the truth, yet notwithstanding the
truth is never in him: because he speaks the same to no other end, then to
deceive and to destroy. Whereupon Christ suffered him not to speak though he
spoke the truth. Luke 4.41.


Paul also would not suffer the spirit of Southsaying, Act. 16.17
though he confessed the truth. For that is a daungerouss truth which brings
credit to a mortal lie. No heretic or false apostle at any time got credit
and favor among men by mere lies: but in mingeling some truth with his
doctrine, he has deceived the mind of the simple.

When he speaks a lie. Bv. First, this place teaches that the falte of a lie
is not to be laid upon God the author of nature, but it comes rather of
deprauation and corruption: C, Secondly, that the Deuell is accustomed to lie,
and that he can do nothing else but deceive.

For he is a liar and the Father of the. The deuell by his own nature is a
liar not that he was so created of God: but as he has by his own infidilitie
gotten the same.

Insomuch that he is the father of lying because he is alienated from God in
whom aloane all truth abides and from whom the same does flow as from a
springing well. R. For Satan is not the Father of Lying and the author of the
same because God is by him self (as Marcion dreameth) but because he aboade
not in the truth: Lies come of Satan.
for he having forsaken the truth, the lie succeeded of his own accord instead of the same.

Bv. Satan therefore is the welspring, original, and beginning of lying, of
eror, of Sin, and of all evil, even as on the contrary part, God is the
welspring of all truth and the truth it self.

45 And because I tell you the truth therefore ye believe me not.

M. He retourneth unto that which he objected unto them before saying, Why
do ye not know my speech: Because ye cannot hear my word. When therefore
he had opposed him self against the Deuell, as the teacher of truth, he
adds by and by, Because I tell you the truth therefore ye believe me not: To
declare that they hated his doctrine for no other cause, than for that he spoke
the truth: otherwise if he had spoken lies they would have believed him.

Bv. This he spoke that by the similitude and likeness of their manners and
disposition he might prove the Jews neither to be the children of Abraham nor
the Children of God, but of Satan.

C. Because seeing they had no cause to resist, but only for that they hated
and could not abide the truth, they openly declared them selves to be the
children of Satan. M, In this place we see that the truth to reprobate men is
the cause of unbelief, which contrariwise to the elect is the cause and
foundation of faith.

Neither does Christ simply vpbrayde the Jews with this that speakinge the
truth they would not believe: but for that they did not believe because he
spoke the truth and no lie. So in humayne matters nothing comes more often
to pass than this, that men give head and credit to such as tell the most
false and vain things, but when they should believe the truth, the greatest
part of men, believe not, and al because the truth is set before them, being
ready to receive a false lie.

If so be Micheas had told King Achab a lie, the king would easily have
believed him: but because he uttered the truth, the king could scarce abide to
here him.

Bv. So that hear the nature and disposition of the Children of the Deuell is
described. 3. Kin. 22.8.


These are like to their Father in quallitie, in word, and in deed: they
fear not God, they detest and abhor all faith, truth, and purity, they
despise and contemn the word of God, they follow Rapine, murder, and
bloodshed, they are enemies to all men, and good and profitable to none, but to
such only by whom they look to have greater profit and advantage again,
by hypocrisy they hide and discover all things. Whosoever frames and
orders him self by this glass, searching out the ground of his heart, and
judging of his own words, and deeds, he shall thereby learn whether he be
the Child of God or the child of the Deuell. For so many as have hated the
truth, and are endued with the spirit of lying, and are ready to lie, are of
the Deuell: and contrariwise they which are true, and which speak the truth
from their heart are endued with the spirit of God, And who hates not to have
fellowship with the deuell.

Again, who does not greatly esteem and desyer to have fellowshippe with God.

Wherefore let us detest this deuelish vice, that is, this aptness and
readiness of lying, and with our whoale heart let us love the truth: let us
consider that true religion is proved and declared by godliness, and not by
titelles. Therefore it does not profit us to be called in name, Christians,
except we be Christians in deed. A. Judas being advanced to the dignity of
an Apostle, loved lies more than truth, and therefore Christ who knows not
how to lie, called him a deuell.

For the wicked ypocrite was more like the father of lies, than the Father of
truth.

46. Which of you does reprove me of syn? And if I speak the truth why do
ye not believe me?

Bv. As hypocrisy is ever like it self, and has always one cloak or other
for it self, so hear the Jews consyderyng them selves: thought thus secretly
in them selves, We want not lawefull causes whereby we may refuse to beeleue
thy preaching. M. For in that we do not believe thee, it is not because we
cannot here the truth, and are of the Deuell, as thou say of us: but because
thou art a seducer, not preaching the truth, but withstanding us. To this
secret objection Christ answers by this Interrogation, C. which
proceeds of faith and trust. For when he knew that his enemies could
reproach him with nothing, he tryumpheth over them as victor. And yet
notwithstanding he does not say that he is free from their slanders. For
although they had no occasion to speak evil yet nevertheless they ceased
not to rail on Christ: but he knew that he had not deserved the same. And the
greek word, Elegcheim, sygnifieth to convince, which is when a man is not
only reproved of some falte, but also plainly convinced to be guilty of the
same. But this defense is not referred to the perfect Innocence of life, by
which as he was the Son of God he excelled all other men but it ought to be
restrained to the circomstaunce of the place: as if a man should say, that no
man could object any matter against him to prove him not to be a faithful
Minister of God, i. Cor: 4.
even as the apostle also boasts that he knows naught by him self. For
this Appollogy or defense is not extended to to the whoale life, but is a
defense of his doctrine only and Apostleshippe. Euenso Christ here defends
rather the cause of his doctrine then of his person. A. As if he should say,
If in all my office I show my self a faithful minister of God, ye have
nothing to cloak your incredulytie with all, and to excuse the same.

For I teach truly, I show the will of my father unto you no terrestrial or
human thing can be found in my doctrine, therefore ye cannot convince the
same of a lie. Wherefore If I tell you the truth why do ye not beeleue me? If
so be ye cannot Justly speak evil of my doctrine, why do ye refuse to
believe the same.

R. By this place we learn, that we ought to believe him that speaks the
truth without all contradiction. Certain of the Jews refused to hear
Christ, because he Preached without Ecclesiastical authority: othersome,
because none of the Pharisees and Rulers heleeued on him: many could not abide
to hear him, because he was a Galilean: and the reast could not away with his
doctrine, because he regarded not the decrees and customs of the Fathers.

But the Lord the aucthor of truth, urges against all these things, showing
that he knows no reason that should stay any man from believing the truth.
Wherefore then do not men in our time seek the truth? to what purpose do
they seek for so many excuses? If those things be not true which the
Ministers do teach, let them be confuted by evident arguments: if they be
true, why be they not quietly received? One says this doctrine is new:
another says that it is Scismaticall: another says that it appertains to
the Pope to refourme doctrine: others object the Fathers, others the
counsels, others Ecclesiastical ordinances, and some seek to set custom
against the Gospel. But what need these delays? Let them say simplye, This
doctrine is not true: but let them prove it also. If they be not able so to
do, why do they not subscribe unto the truth? Ye shall hear the cause,

47. He that is of God, hears Gods words: ye therefore hear them not,
because ye are not of God.

B. That is to say, He which has the spirit of God, he which is elected of
God, he hears the word of God, and receives the same by Faith. C. Now
Christ, more vehementlye inueyeth against the Jews, being assured of the
truth of his doctrine. For their impietye was not obscure, when they were so
obstinate in rejecting the word of God.

He had showed that nothing could be objected unto him, which he had not
taught out of the mouth of God: he concludes therefore that they have noe
felloweshippe with God, because they here not.

R, As if he should say, Therefore ye do not believe because ye are not the
children of God, but the Children of lying Satan.

Ye are not borne of God: and Therefore it is no merueile if ye receive not my
words which am the Son of God.

For he which is of God hears gods word: 1. Cor. 44.
but he which is of Satan contemns the truth of Gods word. Bv. There is
therefore no other cause, why ye hear not ye words of God which I speak,
neither receive nor believe them, than this because ye are not borne of God but
of the Deuell. M. To be of God in this place, is not to be borne or regenerate
by the Spirit and word of God: but to be elected and predestinate to life
before the Creation of the world, Act ^3.^
whereupon also the christian faith is called the faith of the elect.

And they are said to have believed so many as were foreordayned unto life. So
that although they are by nature blind, and the children of wrath, yet
notwithstanding when the time of their calling comes, they receive that grace
of the holy Ghost, which some call the preventing spyrite, and their hearts
are opened, that they may receive the seed of Gods word, through the which,
being apprehended by Faith, they are justified and regenerated.

Example of this we have in the Maid that wrought purple, of whom Luke
testifies in the acts of the Apostles.

C. By this place therefore we are taught, that there is not a more manifest
sign of a reprobate mind, than when a man cannot bear the doctrine of
Christ, although otherwise in the show he seems to be an Angel: Whereas,
if so be we willingly embrace the same, we have as it were a visyble sign
of our election.

For he which has the word, has God him self: but he which rejects the
same, depriueth him self both of life, and also if righteousness. Wherefore
we ought to fear nothing more, than least we fall into this horrible
Judgment. A. For it is no light commination where with Christ threatens the
Jews, saying: The kingdom of God shall be taken from you, Mat. 21.43
and given to a Nation that will bring forth better fruit of the same

48. Then answered the Jews and said unto him: Say we not well that thou
art a Samaritane and have the Deuell?

M. This answer of the high Priests, Scribes, and Phariseis, contains an
impudent and malicious sclaunder. C. More and more they bewraye how that they
are bewitched of Satan: who being plainlye convinced, yet notwithstanding are
not afraid to rushe forth, even through the midst of desperation. B. Thus
is convicted impietye wont to fare: when it is not able to answer to the
truth, then it falls to railing and sclaunder.

They were manifestly proved to be the children of the Deuell: therefore they
reply again without any show of truth, that the Lord was a Samaritane, and
had the Deuell: Meaning by this double sclaunder to declare that Christ was a
detestable man, and lead with an evil spyrite.

Because the Jews accounted the Samaritanes for Apostatas, and corrupters of
the Law, so often as they intended to defame any man, they would call him a
Samaritane. Now therefore because they had no greater crime wherwithall they
might defame Christ, they rashlye and without judgment use that common
reproach.

R. As if they should say, What? Dare thou defend the truth of thy
doctrine before us, seeing thou art worse than any Heretic or Apostata? For
thy doctrine is the doctrine of Satan, and not to GOD: thou speak of the
Deuell, and not out of the mouth of God. For we are holy people, a Priestlye
stock, a holy Nation, and such a Nation to whom God has whoally given him
self: but thou according to the manner of the Samaritanes, pronouncest us not
to be of God: it must needs be therefore that thy false doctrine is of Satan.

Bv. The like reproaches and sclaunders they cast forth at this day, who are
grieved at the Preaching of the Gospel. For they call the Preachers of the
Gospel, Apostataes, sedicious persons, Scismatikes, workers by Deuelles,
Seducers, and such like: R. least the wicked and ungodly might seem to have no
cause of their unbelief.

49. Jesus answered, I have not the Deuell: but I honor my Father, and ye
have dishonored me.

C. Seeing the two opprobries, with the which Christ was sclaundered, tended
to one end, Christ refelleth them under one, when he says that he seeks
the honor of his Father. For he must needs be governed by the Spirit of
God, and must also be the faithful servant of God, which does truly and
sincerelye honor him.

M. Let us here noate the most honest modestye, best beseeming a man that is
grave and innocent. The Lord Jesus could not more modestlye and simplye
defend his doctrine, than by this simple, plain, and manifest denial.

But they which will use this simplicitye of denying in putting away such
crimes as are laid to their charge, must win first, and get credit to
themselves by the innocensie of their life: otherwise they shall be far from
this example of Christ.

In time past honest and grave men have been believed without an oathe: but
now our innocensie shall hardlye win credit by many oaths.

B. Christ therefore held him self simplye content that he had withstoode the
sclaunder, saving that with all he put them in the mind of the judgment
which hong over their headdes, when he says:

But J honor my father, and ye have dishonored me. C. By which words he
joins his, and his Fathers glory together: As if he should say, I
arrogate nothing to my self that shall not turn to the glory of my Father:
for in me his majesty shyneth, whose power and rule I have. Seeing therefore I
am so evil entreated of you, ye are contumeliouslye against God him self.

M. We are taught here to look for nothing but ignominye and shame at their
hands, whose glory and Hypocrisy, we overthrow through the zeal of
maintayning the word and glory of God. We know well enough this saying of
Christ, Math i0.25
If so be they have called the Master of the house Beelzebub, how much more
will call the servants so. Whosoever therefore is not prepared to bear and
suffer all manner of reproach, shall manifestlye declare that he is not led by
the spyrite of Gods children.

50. I seek not my own praise: there is one that seeks and judges.

M. For they might have objected unto him ambition, saying: C. This greeueth
thee that thou art not honorably entreated of us: and therefore thou do so
vehemently inueye against us. Thou seeks praise in this world, thou would
be counted great: and yet thou would seem to be a careful seeker of the
glory of god. They might (I say) have objected these things, except he had
protested that he was not lead by the private affection of his flesh, to seek
his own honor, but rather the honor and praise of God. There is one that
seeks and Judges.

M. This clause contains a comminacion, least they should think that this
their sclaunder should escape unpunished. R. For he affirms that God will take
vengeance of this injury. C. As if he should say, Ye sclaunder my doctrine,
as if the same proceeded and came from the Deuell: think ye that ye shall
escape unpunished for this? For seeing my doctrine is the doctrine of God, ye
do not only sclaunder me, but God my Father also. Wherefore he shall defend
his own glory, which ye sclaunder and seek to discredit. I, as I do not
seek my own praise, so I am not a revenger of my own reproach. B. Therefore I
will not presently take vengeance on the same: A. but notwithstanding my
Father will not suffer the co^tumely of his doctrine to escape unpunished: Deuteronomy.
i8.i9
R. even as also he him self has promised. C. Moreover, though there be great
difference between us and Christ, let notwithstanding every one know for a
suerty, that if he seek the glory of God with his whole heart, he shall
receive great praise of God: for we shall always find this sentence most
true, He which honors me, will I advance to honor. If he be not only
contempned among men, but also sclaundered and reproched, let him patientlye
wait for the coming of the Lord.

M. Furthermore, Patience in adversity
so the faithful ought to behave them selves in bearing iniurye done unto them,
that thereby they may put the reprobate in mind of the judgment of GOD, and
also declare their innocencye. 1. Kin. 24.13
Thus we read that David did.

Let the Lord (says he) be a Judge, to Judge between thee and me.

And so Christ in like manner in this place. Whereupon the Apostle Peter has
written of him, 1. Pet. 2.23.
Which when he was reviled, reviled not again: when he suffered, he threatened
not, but committed the vengeance to him that Judges righteouslye.

51. Verilye, verilye, I say unto you, if a man keep my saying, he shall
never see death.

Verily, verily, I say. Bv. The contencion being ended at the last, the Lord
returns to that again, from whence he was digressed, repeating again the
sum of the Gospel, that is to say, of our salvation, the which hitherto, he
had so often times inculcated in that his disputacion. And there is no doubt
but that he knew some to be curable in that multitude, and also that
othersome were not enemies to his doctrine. Therefore his purpose was, so to
terrifye the minds of the wicked, that notwithstanding he might leave matter
of consolation to the Godly, or that he might allure those unto him which as
yet were not lost. Wherefore although the greater part do forsake the word of
God, yet notwithstanding a Godly teacher ought never to be so much occupied
in reproouing the wicked, but that he may also dispense to the Children of GOD
the doctrine of Salvation, and may seek also to bring such as are not
altogether incurable, to a good and Godly mind.

M. So that, because he had begone to commend his word, he returns to the
same commendacion of his word:

Bv. and he begins with an oath, that our Faith might be the more
confirmed, and that there might be no occation of doubting. M. So far is the
Lord from repenting him of that which he had most truly spoken, that he
repeateth and affirms the same again. As if he should say. Although ye make
account of me as of a Samaritane, and a Demoniake, although ye attribute my
sayings to the Devil, yet notwithstanding, I am the very same, whose words
are the words of life, insomuch that I dare bouldlye affirm, that he shall
never see death, which keeps my word: I say, which keeps it, and not
which only reads it, hears it, or knows it. And he keeps the word
of Christ which receives the same by Faith, and lays up the same in his
heart, out of the which he expresses boath words and deeds. C. For Christ
requires such Disciples, as not only hear his words, or profess with the
mouth that they like of his doctrine, but such as keep and lay up the same as
a most precious treasure. M. To be short, To keep the word of the Lord, is
even the same which he said before, namelye, to abide in his word. Bv. This
part, Faith quicneth man's soul.
(If a man) comprehends all mortal men, and excludes none, of what age,
sex, or condition soever he be of.

He shall not see death. C. Because so soon as Faith has quickened the soul
of man, death can wound and kill no more. B. And the Faithful by the
undoubted hope of the blessed Resurrection, when they dye, are rather said to
sleep than to dye, in the mean time being in soul, in everlasting life and
bliss with the Lord.

For what else is the meaning of this which Christ says, He shall never see
death: but, because he saw another death, from the which he came to deliver
us: that is to say, the second death, Death everlasting.
everlasting daath, death of hell fire, the death of dampnation, with the
Deuell and his aungelles? that is death in deed. M. Therefore, never to see
death, is nothing else, but to have everlasting life. So that we may noate and
learn here, that Faith is the way to Immortallity, Bv. And that Christians do
truly live, and never dye, although in this world they be more like to dead
men than to living men, and to dye in body like other men.

A. For the saying of Christ, here is most true, to the which also agreeeth
this place: Every one which lives and believes in me shall never die. Ioh.
11.26.


52. Then said the Jews unto him, now know we that thou haste the Deuell.
Abraham is dead and the Prophets: and thou say: if a man keep my
sayings, he shall never taste of death.

M. Leaving that which the Lord had objected for the defense of his doctrine,
the Jews again according to their manner craftily wrest those things which
they thought might serve their turn to cauell. C For the reprobate abide
still in their senclesnesse, and are no more touched or moved with promises
than with threatenings: insomuch that they can neither be allured nor drawn
unto Christ. They do falsely interpret the words of Christ, when they
transfer his spiritual doctrine to the body.

M. Christ spoke of that very and everlasting death of Hell fire, of the death
of body and soul together. C. For this death none of the Faithful shall see
because they being borne of incorruptible seed, in dying to live, because
they being joined to Christ their head, cannot be extinguished by death,
because death to them is a passage into the heavenly kingdom, and because the
spirit dwelling in them, as life for righteousness sake.

But these men, being carnal, understand no deliverance from death, but that
which openly appears in the body and do cavil at the words of Christ, as if
he had spoken only of the death of the body. C. And this falt is to common and
general in the world, many making no account almost of the grace of Christ,
because they only carnally judge of the same. Therefore lest we do the like,
we must awaken our minds, that they may feel the spiritual life in the
midest of death. A. The which shall come to pass if fo be by true faith we
keep the word of the Lord Jesus.

53. Art thou greater then our Father Abraham, which is dead?

And the Prophets are dead: whom make thou thy self.

M. Here it appears how these maliciouse men went about to make Christ to be
hated and envied of the people, by making mention again of Abraham and the
Prophets as though Christ had spoken somewhat that had been repugnaunt to
Abraham and the Prophets. This therefore was another falte in them that they
went about by the shyning brightness of Abraham and of the Saints; to obscure
the glory of Christ But as the brightness of the sun does obscure and
darken all the stars, euenso Christ: with his exceeding shine and glory does
make all the glory of Saints to vanishe away, therefore they deal unjustly
and preposterously in comparing the servants with the Lord: and they are
iniuriouse also to Abraham and the Prophets, in abusing their name against
Christ. M. Abraham verily, was great before God, and so were the Prophets: but
yet for all this why might not he come after them, which was much more greater
then they.

C. But this wickedness has been almost in all ages, and is also to be
found at this day, that the wicked renting and dividing the works of GOD,
do make him as were contrary to himself. God manifested and declared his
name by the Apostles and Martires: the Papists make Idols to themselves of the
Apostles and Martires, which they set in Gods seat. Do they not by this
means make unto themselves of the graces of God, instruments to overthrow
the power of God: For how little shall remain for GOD and Christ, if so be
the Saints may have that which the Papists so liberallye give unto them:
Wherefore we must know that the whole order of Gods kingdom is confounded,
Saints at infeeiour to God.
except the Prophets, Apostles, and Saints, be far inferior unto Christ:
and verily we cannot speak more reuerentlye and honorably of the saints,
than when we make them inferior unto Christ. B. The argument of the Jews
was, that not only they which believed Abraham and the Prophets were dead,
but also Abraham and the Prophtes themselves: and therefore that the Lord
spoke without reason, in preferring himself before the holy Fathers and the
Prophettes.

54. Jesus answered, If I honor my self, my honor is nothing: it is my
Father that honoreth me, which ye say is your God.

C. Before he makes answer to the foresaid unequal comparison, he
shows that he seeks not his own glory: and so he preuenteth their
cavil. For Christ in that he was a man did not gloryfye himself, but God did
glorify him.

B. Therefore he speaks this by Immitation or by concession, as he spoke
many things before. C. And he shows that he desires no glory, but that
which the Father gives into him- M. Here a common place may be handeled
concerning the vanity of glory which carnal men seek in this world This
glory the Lord says is nothing though he should seek the same.

If so be the glory of Christ were nothing, if he had glorified himself, I
pray you what mortal man will you show me, which may attain the true and
perfyte glory, in glorifying himself? Therefore that is true glory which is
given to God.

It is my father which honors me. Bv. That is to say, my Father testifyeth
me to be such a one, as I affirm my self to be. And he testifyeth the
same by Oracles, by signs, by miracles, and by many arguments. Therefore I
arrogate nothing unto my self by ambition: and in that I exalte my self above
the Patriarchs and Prophets, and do promise life and immortalitye, I do so
exalte my self and promise, as the son of GOD. By these words we are
taught, that when God glorifyeth his Son, he will not suffer that the world
shall contemn him, and escape unpunished.

But the faithful may be encouraged reverently to worship Christ by these
voices sounding from heaven, Psalm. 2.12. Psalm. 96.8. Phil. 2.10. Math. 17.5
Genesis 49.10
Kiss the son. Let all the Angels worship him. Let every knee bow to him.
Hear him. The people shall be gaehered unto him

55. And yet ye have not known him, but I know him: and if I say I know him
not, I shall be a liar like unto you: but I know him and keep him saying.

M. Because he knew that his adversaries boasted and bragged of the knoweledge
of God, whenas notwithstanding they were void of the same. C. He wresteth
from them the false pretense of the name of God. Bv. As if he should say, As
by false Religion ye worship God, so ye falsely challenge to your selves the
knowledge of him. He is spiritual but ye sauoure nothing but that which is
carnal.

C. By this place we learn, what is the lawful profession of faith, namely
that which proceeds from true knoweledge: and whereof comes that knowledge
but of the word. Therefore whosoever bosteth of the name of God without the
word of God, they do nothing else but lie.

But I know him. Christ opposes or sets the trust of his conscience
against the perverse peevishness of his adversaries. And thus ought all the
servants of God to be minded, and to houlde them selves contented with this,
that they have God on their side, yea though the whoale world rise up against
them. Thus Invincible stood all the Prophets and Apostles a, gainste the
Terrible assaults of the world.

But where the perfect knowledge of God is wanting, nothing may stay and
vphoulde us.

And if I say J know him not Bv. As if he should say, I am constrained to
speak these things with so great an oath.

C For the necessity of my office forces me to speak, because silence is a
false betraying of the truth. A notable place by which we are taught that God
does reveal him self unto us to this end, that we might profess the faith
of the heart with the mouth so often as need requires. And this ought not a
little to terrify us, that they which dissemble to please men, and do either
deny Gods truth, or do counterfeyte the same with wicked devises are not
lightly reprehended, but are sent to the Children of the Deuell.

56, Your Father Abraham was glad to see my day, and saw it, and rejoiced.

C. Now He makes answer to that which they had objected concerning Abraham,
and he grants to them in word only, that which before he had denied, namely
that Abraham was their Father, showing that Abraham was saved by faith. Bv As
If he should say Ye think that your Father Abraham is dead.

And I seem unto you to speak that which is wicked, in affirming that they
which keep my word shall live for ever and never dye: but I say truly that
Abraham lives, and that all his life time he desires nothing more then to se
my kingdom florishe: he desyered me being absent, and ye despise me being
present.

C. That which Christ speaks hear of Abraham aloane, belongs to all the
Saints.

But yet this Doctrine has more wayght and force in the Person of Abraham,
because he is the Father of the whoale Church. This word (Day) in this place,
signifies the time of Chistes kingdom, from the which, Christ having taken
upon him our flesh appeared unto the world, to fulfill the office of a
redeemer.

Some will have it to signify eternity, and othersome the Cross of Christ.

And this place nothing disagreeeth with that, where it is said, Many Kings
and prophets desiered to see those days which ye see, and have not seen
them: because, Luke 10.24
seeing faith, in the behoulding of Christ has his degreese, it came to pass
that the oulde Prophets behoulde Christ a far of, even as he was promised
unto them: and yet notwithstanding he might not be seen present: as he
revealed himself familiarly to men when he descended from heaven. Let all the
godly learn hear by the example of Abraham, to stay them selves upon Christ
aloane, and always to have respect unto him, that they may have continual
occasion of rejoicing with a godly Father.

57. Then said the Jews, thou art not yet fifty years oulde, and haste thou
seen Abraham.

M. The promises of God seem foolish to humayne reason. The Jews again
according to their wonted malice, make no answer to those things which
concerning them selves, but are so given to cavil, that they take hold only
of those things out of the words of Christ, which might have any show to
serve their turn to cavil. C. They go about to confute the saying of Christ
by an Impossibility, because he made him self equal in age to Abraham which
was dead many years before and he him self not yet fifty years of age. For
although Christ was not as yet four and thirty years oulde, yet
notwithstanding they grant unto him mo years lest they might seem to deal
with him to exactly and precisely.

As if they should say, Thou verily can not make thy self so oulde, that
thou canste Boaste thy self to be fifty,

Bv. Behold therefore thy great impudency in lying, seeing all men know how
that Abraham dyed many years ago.

58. Jesus said unto them: verily, verily, I say unto you, before Abraham was
I am.

M. That which the Jews did falsely discredit as unreasonable and as a
monsterouse lie, Christ himself constantly mayntayneth. C. And because the
vnbeeleuing and Carnal Judged after the aspect and apperaunce only, He
puts them here in mind, that he has somewhat greater and higher than
humayne show and reason, the which being hidden from the understanding of the
flesh, is beheld with the eyes of Faith only.

Therefore by these words. Christ exempteth him self from the common sort of
men and chalengeth to him self a divine and heavenly power, the sense and
feeling whereof has been shed forth upon all ages even from the beeginning
of the world. Also this place agreeeth with that saying of the Apostle, Christ
yesterdaye, to day, and for ever, Heb. 13.8
For he was known to be a mediatoure from the beginning in whom God the
father should be pleased. In that notwithstanding the grace of the mediator
has been showed forth in all ages this depends upon his eternal divinity.
So that this saying of Christ containing a notable commendation of the divine
essence. CHR. And the verb of the present tence or time, makes it of the more
wayght. For it signifies that the same state was equal and alike from the
beginning to the end. B, Therefore that which he says here, signifies the
same, John. 1.1
that this place does, In the beginning was the word.

59. Then took they up stoanes to cast at him: but Jesus hyd him self, and
went out of the Tempell.

M. They perceived that the Lord spoke that of him self, which, as it was not
humayne, so it set forth the glory of his divinity. And therefore to make him
to be suspected as a blasphemer of God, they begyne to cast stoanes at him. C.
And it is very lykely that they did this, Leu. 24.16.
as though Christ ought to have been stoaned according to the prescript of the
Law.

Whereby we may gather how great the madness of a rash zeal is.

Seal with out knowledge.
M. After that these men had contended a while in words, they turn them at
the last to stoanes, to unjust force, and to bloody murder, by which they make
an end of their disputacion. This happened not only to Christ, Act. 7.
but also to Steephen, and before Christ and Stephen, to the Prophets: and
after that to the rest of the preachers of Christ.

But Jesus hid him self. C. There is no doubt but that Christ by his secret
power delivered him self but yet notwithstanding under the form and show of
humility. For he would not declare his divinity at the full, but left
somewhat to his humayne infirmity. M. And he teaches that we ought to flee
the malice and cruelty of the wicked rather than to resist violence with
force. R. And that all Lawful means ought to be sought for, rather then that
God should be tempted.

And he went out of the Temple. M. This is most sure, that, Christ will not
abide in their Temples which go about to extinguishe the doctrine of truth,
and to shed the blood of the teachers, C Thehefore the wicked Priests and
Scribes having put Christ to flight in whom all the fullness of the deity
dwelt: kept the possession of the external temple, But yet they are far
deceived in thinking that they have a temple void of God, Even so at this day
the Pope and his Prelates when they have warred against Christ, and profaned
the Church foolishely boast in the counterfeyte show of the Church.

The ninth Chapter.
1. And as Jesus passed by, he saw a man which was blind from his birth.

And as Jesus passed by. C IN this chapter the Evangelist describes the
restoaring of the blind man to his sight, mixing there with the Doctrine which
commends the fruit of the miracle. B. The time was come for the Lord to
reveal his power more openly. And look how much this served for the
salvation of the Godly, so much also it served for the destruction of the
wicked: but yet thus far forth the glory of God was to be revealed to the
wicked, that thereby they might be the more blinded.

M. As Christ passed by he saw this blind man, not at adventure, or by
chance, but by the divine providence of GOD.

Which was blind from his birth. B. This circumstaunce is added, apartelye
that ye greatness of the thing might be considered, the newnes also and truth of
the miracle, and partelye to set forth unto us a misterye, putting us in mind
that we are all borne blind, and corrupted with original sin. AVG. For all
mankind is that blind man. For this blindness was in the first man by
reason of sin, from whom we all have our original, not only of death,
but also of iniquity.

Bv. Furthermore the Lord did the more dilligentlye behoulde him, because he
considered with himself, as he was God, that this was the same GOD by whom
the glory of GOD should be greatly manifested.

2. And his Disciples asked him, saying, Master, who did sin, this man or
his Father and Mother, that he was borne blind.

M. The Disciples were moved hereby to ask this question, because they saw
that the Lord did so dilligentlye behoulde this blind man. Bv. So soon as
calamities appear, we judge them by and by to be punishments for sin, C.
because the Scriptures testifies that all greefes and vexations, to the which
mankind is subject, do come of sin.

Bv. For so the friends of Job reasoned R. affirming that afflictions are
always the pains and punishments of sins. C. But here men do err three
ways. For seeing every one is a severe Judge, and a narrow searcher of other
men's faults, very few use the same severity and systing of themselves. If
so be my brother be in adversity and trouble: by and by I acknowledge the
judgment of God: but if God lay a more heavy burden upon my own shoulders,
I wink and will not see my own sins. But in waying and considering
punishments, every man ought to begin at himself, and to spare none less
than himself. The second error is in too much rigor: because so soon as
any of us are touched with the hand of GOD we interpret the same to be Gods
deadelye hatred, and so we heap sin upon sin, and do almost despair of
his saving health: but contrariwise in extenuating our sins, we scarce have
any knowledge or feeling of our sin, when we have committed a grievous and
heinous offense.

Thirdely we offend when without respect we condemn all those whom God
exercises with the Cross. Sin is the original of affliction
It is most certain that al miseries take their original and beginning at
sin: but yet God afflicts his servants for diverse causes For as he does
not take vengeance on some men's sins in this world, Affliction comes for
diverse causes.
but deferreth the punishments until another life, that he may then use them
with more severity: even so oftentimes he deals more hardlye with his
faithful servant, not because they have committed greater sins than other
men, but to mortefie in them the concupisences of the flesh. Yea sometime not
respecting their sins, he only tries their obedience, or else exercises
their patience. Even as we see that the holy man Iobe was afflicted, that by
his aduersytie, his godliness might be the better known. Wherefore there are
two things here to be noated: the first is, that judgment does often times
begin at the house of GOD: and that he ouerpassing the wicked does seuerelye
punish his servants, and does more sharpelye scourge in correcting the vices
of his Church.

The second is, that there are diverse ends why he aflicted men. For he
suffered Peeter and Paul to be executed by the cruel tormenter no less then
if they had been wicked thieves. Whereby we gather that in the punishments of
men the causes of the same, cannot be well discerned. M. Moreover this so
absurd a question of the disciples came of the common opinion at that time,
namely, that the soul of this blind man had sinned before in some other man,
by the desert whereof he was blind in body from his nativity. C. For it
euedently appears by other places of Scripture that the reiterated or second
generation which Pithagoras taught, was believed and received of them. Hereby
we see what a deep Labyrinth the curiosity of men is, specially when
presumtuouse boldness is joined therewith. They saw some to be borne Lame,
some sqinte eyed, and some stark blind, and other some monsterouse in body:
Now when they ought to have reverenced the Judgments of God, they would in
these works have seen a manifest cause, and they alleged that, of the which
we spoke even now. And the Jews are not ashamed at this day to maintain in
their Sinagoges such a foul error, for a divine and heavenly oracle. By the
which example we are taught, dilligently to take heed lest if we pass the
bonds of sobriety in searching out the Judgments of God, the wandering error
of the mind do carry and cast us into horrible confusion.

Psalm. 119 137
Let us rather say thus, Thou O Lord art Just, and thy Judgments are true,
although we cannot comprehend them.

M. Furthermore the Disciples had heard the Lord say unto the Lame man, John
5.i4
Behoulde thou art made whoale, see thou sin no more, lest a worse thing
happen to thee.

For where did they learn to ascribe such greuouse diseases of siners to their
deserts.

And they seem here to have the same opinion of this man, or of his parents
C. Ezee. i8.20
For although the Innocent child is not punished for the Fathers offense but
the soul which has sinned shall dye yet notwithstanding that denunciation is
not void, when the Lord casts the sins of the Parents upon the
Childrens backs, and takes vengeance unto the third and fourth generation.
Exodus 20
Therefore the wrath of God rests often times upon one family many ages.

And as he blesses the posterity of the Faithful for their sakes, so he
rejects the wicked offspring, by his just Judgment casting boath the fathers
and their children together into like destruction. Neither can any man by
this means complain that he is unjustly punished for another man's sin:
because where the grace of the Spirit is wanting, from euel birds, euel eggs
must needs come.

This made the Apostles to doubt, whether the Lord had punished ye or not the
Sins of the Parents upon their Son.

3. Jesus answered: Neither has this man sinned, nor yet his Father and
mother: but that the works of GOD should be showed on him.

R. What, did not the blind man sin when as he was conceived in sin, and
seeing no man living shall be Iustefied in his sight.

Did not his Parents sin, who notwithstanding, believed not in Christ. All
have gone out of the way, all are become unprofitable there is none that does
good no not one. M, I answer? Aunsvvere.
The sense and meaning of this answer, of Christ depends upon the
Disciples demand, which did not symply ask, whether that blind man or his
Parents had sinned but whether this blind man had not by his own sin
before he was borne, deserved to be blind: boath which to have spoken had
been very absurd. But the Lord declares unto them the true cause wherefore
this man was borne blind.

C. Neither does he symply deliver him and his Parents from all blame but
only denies the cause of the blindness to be sought in the sin. As if He
should say.

The special cause why this man was borne blind was, that occasion might be
given to set forth the glory of God, and not either his sin or the sin of
his Parents.

M. For this man was appointed from everlasting, to minister occasion by his
blindness to the Son of God, to manifest the works of his Father: the which
manifestation appertains to the glory of God. R. Christ therefore teaches
that although all men are sinners yet notwithstanding all afflictions come not
by the merit and desert of sins.

For God afflicts men for diverse respects: sometime he punishes them for
their sins, and sometime he afflicts them for his glory. Psalm. i30.
If he have respect to sins, and to the desert of Iniquity, there is no
punishment so great with the which we are not Justly afflicted, so many of us
as have had our original from Adam.

For if the Lord be extreme to mark what is done amiss, who shall be able to
abide it.

But if he have respect unto his glory, he afflicts not for sin, but to the
setting forth of his glory. So he afflicted Joseph, and the Israelites in
Egypt, that he might be honored in affliction: that is to say that God might be
openly known to be a helper and deliverer in trybulations.

C. So that when we know not the causes of afflictions, we must not be to
curiouse, lest we be boath iniuriouse unto God, and also toward our
Brethren.

R. Furthermore, we must noate, that calamities do not happen unto us by
chance, but by the will of God, that at the length he may be glorified.
Wherefore he which rejects the cross through impatience, rejects the
glory of God.

But that the works of GOD. C. He does not say, one work but works in the
plural number. For so long as this blind man was blind, Gods severity was
to be seen in him, whereby others might learn to fear and to humble them
selves. Afterward followed the benefit of deliverance, in the which the
wonderful goodness of God did appear.

Wherefore Christ by these words went about to make his Disciples to hope
for the sight of the Miracle: but yet he admonishes them generally, that this
cause ought to seem Just and lawefull enough in this world when God sets
forth his name.

And there is noe cause why men should dispute with God, seeing he has made
them instruments of his glory either way, whether he be merciful or severe.

4. I must work the works of him that sent me, while it is day: The
night comes when no man can work.

B. He calls the present time the day: and that rightly For he was that
bright Son of righteousness which shined with the bright beams of doctrine
and of the works of eternal life, And he calls that time in the which he
should by his Fathers decree, cease from such works and Doctrine, the night.
That night came to the Jews, when they were forsaken both of him, and also of
his Apostles.

C. He borrows therefore the similitude, of the common custom of life. For
when the Sun rises, man also aryseth to his labor, and shortly after goes
to his rest again: as you may read in the Psalm.

Psa. 104.22
And herevppon also we may gather a general rule, namelye, that the race and
course of every man's life, is, as it were a day.

Wherefore, as the shortness of the light does provoke the laborers to
diligence and industrye, least the night should overtake them before they
finishe their work: euenso, when we behold that we have a short time of life
given unto us, we should he ashamed of idleness.

To be short, so soon as God shines by vocation, that is, so soon as God
begins to call, we must not delay the time. least opportunity fail us.
Gala. 6.i0,


A. While we have time, (says the Apostle) let us do good. Also Christ
says, John. i2.35.
While ye have light, walk in the light, least the darkness comprehend
you.

R. For so long we have the day, as the word is presentlye Preached unto us.

5. So long as I am in the world, I am the light of the world.

C. This is spoken by a figure called Occupatio. For it might seem absurd,
that Christ does prefixe unto him self a time of working, least as though he
should be in perryll to be overtaken and prevented with the night as other
men are.

For he compares him self to the Son, which illuminateth the earth with
his brightness, yet notwithstanding, when it sets, it makes day to
cease. Therefore he gives them to understand, that his death shall be as it
were the Sun setting, not an obscuring or extinguishing of his light, but a
depriving of the world of the sight of the same.

Nevertheless, he teaches that when he was made manifest in the flesh, then
the day of the world was perfectlye light and shyning.

It is very true, that Christ having fulfilled and discharged his office, has
wrought no less mightelye by his ministers, than he did by him self when he
was in the world.

For Paul also does properlye apply this to the time of his Preaching,
namelye, how that God, which in the beginning commanded the light to shine
out of darkness, did then shine in the face of Christ by the Gospel.

And now also Christ does no less shine in the world, 2. Cor. 4.6
than he did when he was conuersaunt among men. The which is most true, but
it lets not, but that he ought to execute that by him self, which was
committed to him of the Father, at what time he was manifested in the flesh
to that end Also it lets not but that his corporal presence, might be the
true and singular light of the world, the brightness whereof has appeared in
all ages.

For from whence had the Fathers in old time light, and how also have we light
at this day, but by the bright beams of Christ offered? Whereupon it
follows, that whosoever have not Christ to be their directoure, they wander
as it were blind men, groping in the dark, confusedlye and without order.

A. You may read more concerning the light Christ, in the first Chapter, in
the third, and in the eight Chapters going before.

6. As Soon as he had thus spoken, he spatte on the ground, and made claye of
the spittle, and he anointed with the claye the eyes of the blind.

Bv. He joins to his words the deed, declaring by the very work, that
he is the light and the illumination of the whole world. But, by a new and
wonderful mean he opens the eyes of the blind. For he which anointeth
or wypeth a man's eyes with claye, does after a sort increase his blindness.

Who would not have thought that either he had mocked the poor man, or else
that like a mad man, he had dallyed and played with himself. But by this
means he thought he would try the Faith and the obedience of these men,
that he might be an example for all men to follow.

For this is a true experiment and trial of Faith, when a godly mind being
content with the simple word of GOD, does promise that unto him self, which
otherwise seems incredible. The readiness of obedience follows Faith at
the hard heels, insomuche that he wyllinglye submytteth him self unto God,
which is persuaded that he will be unto him an assured guide and stay. R.
Christ might have healed him with his word only, as he healed certain
others, but he thought good to heal after this manner, that he might try the
Faith and the obedience of the blind man. C. and might therewithal declare,
that as at the first, man was made of claye, so in opening men's eyes he used
claye, showing that power in part of the body, which the Father declared in
the whole workmanshippe of man.

Or it may be that he purposed to declare by this sign, that it was no more
hard for him to open the eyes of the blind, than to wipe of claye or dyrt
from any man.

7. And said unto him: Go wash thee in the Poole of Syloe, (which by
interpretacion is as much to say as sent,) He went his way therefore and
washed, and came again seeing.

B. The Lord to open the eyes of this blind man, used those things, in the
which no man could have thought any such power at all to have been, but
would rather have Judged it to be the work of his power.

Bv. Furthermore he declared that the elements are not to be despised, although
salvation and justification come not by them, which by his institucion serve
for a misterye.

Of the which kind is the Water in Baptism, and the Bread and Wine in the
Lords Supper, and such like. B. For he alone brings all things to pass by
his power. Therefore in that he vouchsafes to use certain Creatures in this
work, he does it not to finishe the work, but to honor his Creatures, the
which he admits to the Ministerye of his goodness, and to the working with
his power. C. But he commands to wash in the Poole of Siloe, paraduenture
to cast the Jews in the teeth with this, that they them selves were in the
fault that they felt not the present power of God: Esai. 8.6.
even as also the Prophet Esaye reproves the men in his time, for that they
refused the soft running waters of Syloh, and desired the strong and mighty
Rivers.

And this also seems to be the cause why Elizeus commanded Naaman the
Syrian to wash in Jordan. Hi^. The Poole of Siloh, was at the foot of mount
Sion, which did not break and spring forth continuallye, but only at certain
hours, and on certain days, and came through certain hoales and guts of
the hard Rock, with a great roaring noise. C. And the Evangelist upon good
consideration adds the interpretacion of the word, because that fountain or
spring being nere unto the Temple, did daily put the Jews in mind of Christ
to come: whom notwithstanding being offered unto them, they despised.

Bv. And the Lords mind was to declare, that he was that promised Messiah
which was sent, and the most plentiful and wholesome well of all goodness and
felicity, of the which, whosoever drunk should never thirste: even as it is
said before.

He went his way and washed. M. The blind man did not fall away from Christ,
when he saw that his eyes were anointed with claye, neither did he deryde
the commandment of Christ, when he was sent to the Poole of Syloh: but as
there he gave place unto the work of Christ, euenso here he wyllinglye obeyed
his commandment: although all these things seemed ridiculous to human
reason, yet notwithstanding he whollye submitted him self unto Christ.

C. If any man obiecte and say that the blind man knew not who Christ was,
that he might give unto him that due honor which belonged to the son of
GOD: that is very true: but, because he did believe that he was sent of God,
and submitted him self unto him, nothing doubting but that he was true and
just, he did behold and see nothing in him, but that which was divine: yea,
in that he having so small knowledge of Christ, gave and submitted him self
whollye unto him, his Faith and ready obedience, deserves the more praise.

Bv. Wherefore if we simplye believe the word of God, and contemn not the
Sacraments of the Lord, he will give and perform unto us all that he has
promised. A. For he is Faithful, 2. Tim. 2.13.
he knows not how to lie, and he cannot deny him self.

8. So the neighbors, and they that had seen him before, when he was
blind, said: Is not this he that sat and begged?

Bv. Here the Evangelist shows how this miracle was made known, first to
the common sort of people, and after that to the Rulars. M. The blind man after
he was restored to his sight, returned first of all from the Poole of Syloh, to
his friends and acquaintance with great joy. For his Parents were alive in
that City, as ye shall see anon.

And herevppon came the occasion of revealing and publishing this miracle. For
if he had aboade among strangers, and those which knew him not, the miracle
of his illuminacion had still remained unknown. C. Howbeit, the blind man was
not only known to his neighbors, but also to many of the inhabitauntes of
the City, because he was wont to sit begging at the Gate of the Temple: and
such among the common sort of people did the more behold him. B. And thus we
see, how all things serve the Lord. For in this, that this man was a beggar,
it served somewhat to the setting forth of the glory of God: for hereupon it
came that he was known to many, and so he was known more and more.

9. Some said, this is he: other said, he is like him: He him self said, I
am even he.

C. As impietye is cunning and expert enough in obseuring the works of God:
many thought that it was not the same man, because in him the unwonted and
wonderful power of God was to be seen: euenso the more bright that the
majesty of the works of God is, the less credit and faith it has among
men. But their doubting was a help and furtheraunce to allow and confirm the
Gospel: because hereby it came to pass, that by their proclayming of it, the
blind man did the more set forth the grace of Christ.

Bv. In whom we may behoulde the nature and disposition of such as are
illuminated by Christ. These men with him give testimony unto the truth, they
do simply and truly set forth the works of the Lord, and they do expreslye
confess Christ. M. Also, no Christian which is made partaker of the grace of
Christ by repentance, ought to deny what he was before his conversion, but to
confess him self, how evil soever he has been, to the glory and praise of
the grace of Christ. Math. 9.9
So Mathewe is not ashamed to confess that he was a Publicane before his
conversion. Paul also in diverse places of his Epistles, makes mention of his
condition before his conversion, that he might the more largely commend the
grace of Christ. i. Cor. 15.9 Galat. i.iij. Acts. 22.4. Acts. 26.9


At this day, they which from base estate, and as it were from the dunghill
are advanced to honor, do notablye dissemble their former condition, whereby
they deserve to be restored to the same again.

10. Therefore said they unto him, how are thine eyes opened.

M. They which thus demand, do testifye so far forth of the miracle of
illuminacion, that they declare, that they see not how it is possible that the
eyes of one that is borne blind, should be opened, and so by demanding,
they set forth the glory of Christ, will they, nyll they.

11. He answered and said: The man that is called Jesus made claye, and
anointed mine eyes, and said unto me, Go to the Poole Syloe and wash. And
when I went and vvashed, I received my sight.

R. He simplye opens the matter as it was, I went, and washed, and I see:
After faith comes health, and after health comes the confession of the name
of Christ. C. This good success and happy fruit of obedience teaches us, to
set all lettes and Impediments aside, and bouldlye to go forward whether
soever the Lord calls us: and let us not doubt, but that whatsoever we
take in hand shall have prosperous success, if so be we be lead and guided
by him.

13. Then said they unto him, Where is he? He said, I cannot tell.

Bv. This argues that the blind man had not as yet seen Jesus, neither knew
him by his Face or countenance. M. For Jesus did not abide in that place,
until the blind man returned from the Poole of Syloe with his eyes opened:
Bv. but as he did very often at other times, so here also, so soon as he had
sent him to the Poole, he went apart, that by his example he might teach us
humility and modesty. M. He had done the work of his Father after the which
he departed.

13. They brought to the Pharisees, him that a little before was blind.

C. The narration which now follows does declare, that the wicked are so
far from profiting by the word of God, that the more they are urged by the
power thereof, the more they spewe out their conceived poison. The restoring of
the sight to the blind man, ought verilye to have mollefied stoany hearts:
but the Pharisees being astonished at the newness and greatness of the thing,
should have stayed so long until they had tried and found whether it were a
Divine work or no: but the hatered of Christ made them so rash mad, that by
and by they condemn that which they heard to be done by him.

Bv. Therefore so soon as the miracle of Christ was known to the common sort
of people, it was also known to the Rulars. C. And the Evangelist names the
Pharisees, not because other sects were favorable unto Christ, but because
this sect was more boulde and stout, to defend the present state, than the
rest. For hypocrisy is always cruel and proud. Hipocrisy ever cruel and
proud
And it is uncertain, with what mind they brought this blind man to the
Phariseis. B. Some think, that they desired to tell them that the Lord whom
they so persecuted, was not an evil man, having done so great a miracle. C. It
may be also that many flatterers to please the Phariseis, sought to obscure
and overthrow the glory of the miracle.

Othersome think it more likelye that the greater part of the common people,
suspending their judgment, would have the Rulars and governors to be
Arbiters and Judges of the matter.

In the mean time they being wyllingly blind in the bright Sun shine, bring
darkness to them selves, to obscure his light. This is the preposterous
religion of the common sort of people, which adoreth and reuerenceth the wicked
tirants of the Church, under the pretense of divine reverence: but as for God
they contemn both in words and works, or at least have no regard at all
unto him.

Bv. They produce therefore him, who was restored from blindness to sight, and
set him before the Rulers of the people, in the court of the high Priest, or in
the Temple or Sinagogue.

14. And it was the Sabbath day, when Jesus made the claye, and opened his
eyes.

B. The circumstaunce of the time also did make very much to the farther
setting forth of the miracle. For then men were at rest, and resorted to the
Temple, before the which it is lykelye that this blind man did sit.

C. But Christ of purpose did chose the Sabbath day, which should give occasion
of offense unto the Jews. He had experience enough before in the lame man,
whom he healed, that this work also should be in danger of reproof. Why
then does he not avoid the offense (which he might easelye have done) but
because he would make the mallicious doings of his enemies serve, to set
forth the power of God?

The Sabbath day was unto them as it were a whetstoane, to provoke them to
inquire more narrowlye of the whole matter. And what profit had they by their
dilligent inquirye of the matter, saving that the truth of the miracle, did
more euidentlye appear?

By this example we are taught, that, to the end we may follow Christ, the
enemies of Christ must be exasperated and provoked: and that they do utterly
err, which do so win the world unto Christ, that they condemn al offenses:
when as rather Christ wittinglye and wyllinglye provoked his enemies. Therefore
we must remember the rule which he prescribes unto us in another place,
namelye, how that we must not follow the blind leaders of the blind. Mat.
15.i4
M. The state of the Pharisees was most corrupt, they thyrsted after the
innocent blood of Christ, and sought only after their own praise. B. It is no
marvel therefore if so be this miracle could not move them, to have a better
judgment of Christ.

15. Then again the Pharisees also asked him: how he had received his sight?
He said unto them, He put clay upon mine eyes, and I washed and do see.

Bv. Although the Pharisees were already certifyed of the whole order of the
miracle, by them which brought the blind man unto them, yet notwithstanding,
again they demand of the man, how he was restored from his blindness to
sight: the which their demand was not without the providence of God. For so
Mauger all the enemies of Christ, the power of Christ was plainlye and
plentifully preached.

C. The people had heard before this confession, out of the blind man's mouth:
and now also the Pharisees are made witnesses of the same, who could object
that this rumor was rashlye raised up of the common sort of people without any
ground, and no less rashly received. Bv. Therefore as truth is ever simple
and manifest, so also it is free. Hereupon it came to pass, that the blind
man setting all fear aside, declared the whole matter without dissimulation or
stay, even as he had done before.

16. Therefore said some of the Pharisees, This man is not of GOD, because he
keeps not the Sabbath day. Other said, how can a man that is a sinner, do
such miracles? And there was a strife among them.

Therefore said some of the Pharisees. C. First of all, they omitting the
question of the fact, dispute about the Law only. For they do not deny but
that Christ restored sight to the blind man, but they find fault in the
circumstance of time, and do deny that to be the work of God, by which the
Sabbath is broken. But first they should have demanded and sought whether the
breaking of the Sabbath, were a Godly work or no? What did let them that they
could not see this, but only because they being blinded with malice, and with
a wicked affection, saw nothing? Moreover, they were sufficientlye already
taught of Christ, that those benefits which GOD gave unto men, were no more a
breaking of the Sabbath. than was Circumcision. Ioh. 7.22.
And the words of the Law do command men only to cease from their own
works, and not from the works of God. Bv. Therefore they show their
unthankful caueling, Exo. 20.^.
spiteful and ungodly mind. C. For they have no cause at all to err, but
because they would wyllingly err.

Euenso the Papists, cease not to impudentlye to object their vain
cauilations, notwithstanding, that they have been answered a hundred times.
Bv. We have also here an example of false Religion, which thinks the Sabbath
to be broken, by well doing.

Other said how can a man M. Here we see that some of the Pharisees were not so
mallicious as other some were, neither were so great enemies to Christ as
others were. C. Euenso we see also at this day, that the good are oftentimes
mixed with the bad.

That is a sinner. C. This word (Sinner) in this place, as in many other places
also, is taken for wicked person, Mar. 2.16.
and contemner of God. Wherefore does your Master eat with Publicans and
sinners? that is to say, with wicked and naughtye men, which have an ill name.
For by the breaking of the Sabbath, the enemies of Christ gathered, that he was
a profane man, and void of all Religion. On the contrary part these men
which were Indifferent, and Judged more uprightly, think him to be Godly and
religiouse, which was endued with singular power of God to work miracles,
Howebeeit this seems not to be a sufficient Argument: For sometimes God
suffers false Prophets to work miracles: Miracles wrought by false
Prophets.
And we know that Satan like an Ape Immitateth the works of God, to deceive
the simple as it is written in Deuteronomie, chapter thirteen and in the
seventh of Mathewe.

C. Although therefore these men do well, in speaking so reverently of miracles,
in the which appears the power of god yet notwithstanding they show no great
reason why Christ should be thought to be the Prophet of God, For the
Evangelist would not have their answer to be taken for an Oracle: only he
sets forth the wicked contumacie of the wicked enemies of Christ, who
seeking maliciously to cavil in the manifest works of Christ, would not stay,
no not a little, though they were admonished.

And there was a strife among them. M, Again there aryseth a discencion for
the truth of Christ among them, who ought to be as one body. C. A most wicked
and daungerouse evil is a Scisme in the Church of God. How comes it to pass
then that Christ sows discord among the teachers of the Church? Answer
hereunto is easily made, that Christ had no other respect, then that by
reaching out his hand to all men, he might bring them unto God the Father but
the discencion rose of their own malice, who had no mind to approach to God
the Father.

Therefore al they do divide the Church by Scisme, Scisme deuideth the church.
which cannot abide to give place to the truth of God. And it is better for
men to disagree among them selves, then for all generally to depart from
godliness. Wherefore so often as discencions do arise, we must consider the
original of them. M. For they do amiss which at this day blame the gospel as
the cause of discencion and division.

CHR. For all Scisme is not by and by evil, even as al concord is not always
good. For we must Judge of the truth by the causes. But concerning this matter
read the tenth of Mathewe, beginning at the thirty four verse.

17. They spoke unto the blind man again What say thou of him, because he
has opened thine eyes: He said, he is a Prophet.

Bv. Lest the danger of the Scisme and strife should be more increased and
spread abroad the wicked do subtily break of the attrication. C. But the more
dilligent enquiry that they make, the more mightily does the power of God
declare it self. For they do, even as if on should go about to put out the
flame with the breath of his mouth. Therefore so often as we see the wicked to
seek all means to oppress Gods truth, there is no cause why we should be
afeard, or to careful for the success: because by that means they do most of
all kindle the light. Bv. By this question they do as it were supplye an
answer, and do prescribe unto him what he should say, as thus, Because he
has opened mine eyes on the sabbath day, he has broken the Sabbath day: and
a breaker of the Law cannot be the friend of God. By this answer they might
have stopte the mouths of those, which had conceived some mean and
indifferent opinion concerning Christ, as thus: What talk you of the power of
Jesus, seeing that he has such an evil opinion of him, which has felt his
power* C. But the Lord in this thing disapointed them: for in that a rude and
ignorant man, void of al fear, nothing regarding their threateninges,
affirms Christ to be a Prophet, we must needs impute the same to the grace of
God: that this trust may be as it were another miracle. Wherefore if he which
as yet knew not the Son of God, did so bouldlye and freelye confess Christ
to be a Prophets, how are they to be discommended, which through fear, do
either deny him, or else hold their peace, when they know that he sits at
the right hand of the Father, and shall come from thence to be the Judge of
the whole world?

Therefore seeing this blind man did not quench this spark of knowledge, we
must endeavor our self that a true and perfect confession may shine out of
the full brightness which has illuminated our hearts. Bv, Wherefore although
the blind man had not attained to the full knowledge of Christ, yet
notwithstanding, he being in great perrill, plainelye confesses the truth,
concerning his opinion which he had conceived of the Lord.

For the Hebrews call a Prophet, a man of God, a holy man, a true and
faithful man.

M. How far therefore does he differ from those which said, This man is
not of God, for he keeps not the Sabbath. And yet notwithstanding they were
called the most holy and learned men, and were the heads and Rulars of the
people: but as for this man he was a base beggar, an Idiot, and one ignorant of
the Scriptures.

A. Thus, that which is precious in the sight of men, Ioh. 16.15.
is an abomination in the sight of God.

18. But the Jews did not believe the man, how that he had been blind and
received his sight, until they called the Father and Mother of him that had
received his sight.

Bv. The Pharisees being disapointed of their hope, and not knowing also how
to bring their purpose to pass, are mad angrye and in chafe with themselves,
not knowing which way to turn them: notwithstanding at the leangth they find
out a new way, by which they give assault a fresh against the truth.

C. It is maruayle that the Evangelist says, that they did not believe the
miracle which Christ had shown. If any man asked a reason why they did not
believe, there is no doubt but that they were voluntarilye blind. For what
did keep them from the sight of the evident work of GOD, which was before
their eyes, nay, what did let them, being plainly convinced, why they did not
believe that which they saw to be true, but only the inward malice of
their hearts, which did so blind them, that they could not see, and also the
effectual working of Satan.

The same also Paul teaches to be fulfilled in the doctrine of the
Evangelist, saying: 1* Cor. 4. iij
If the Gospel be hyd, it is hyd to them that are lost: In whom the GOD of
this world, has blinded the minds of them which believe not. etc.

We being warned by such examples, let us learn not to bring lets and stays
to our selves, to drive us from the faith. M. They command the Parents of
the blind man to be called, hoping it would come to pass that they being
made afeard, they would deny him which was blind, either to be their son,
either deny him to be borne blind, or else would one way or other obscure
the miracle of Christ. R. But the more they sought to obscure it, the more they
made the same to be known. For the will and work of God is ever wont to
hinder the subtle practices of the wicked.

Gods will cannot be resysted.
It was the will of GOD that Joseph should be Lord over his brethren:
whereupon this his will prevailed against the wicked practices of his
brethren, so hardly can the will of God be restrained. Genesis 37.28
Bv. The same may be said of Mardochaeus, whom Aman hated to the death. For
the more that Aman sough to deiecte him, the more highlye did God seek to
exalt him.

Hes. iij.v.
And thus, Truth is very like unto the Palm Tree, the which, the more it is
pressed down, the more strongly it arises. It comes to pass therefore by
the Inquisition of the Phariseis, that all the circumstaunces of the miracle,
are more exactlye discussed, than if no Inquisition at all had been made. For
that which hitherto seemed obscure, doubtful, and not suffcientlye proved, is
now made most evident and manifest, and without all doubt and controversy.

C. The Evangelist calls those which were the Rulers of the people, the Jews
by a figure called Sinecdoche.

19. And they asked him saying: Is this your son, whom ye say was borne
blind? How does he now see then?

M. It seems that these words were severely spoken and by aucthority. As if
they should say, Take heed what ye report: ye babble and prate much
concerning one, whom ye say is your Son which was borne blind, and which
has now received his sight: do ye know him? If this be he, tell us how it
is possible that he should receive his sight.

Bv. They demand three things, the first is, whether there Son were
blind, secondlye, whether he were borne blind, and thirdlye, how he
received his sight.

C. They do subtillye include more in this their question, that they might
take away all occasion of answer: according to the wonted manner of all such
as are oppressors of the truth.

20. His Father and Mother answered them and said, We know that this is our
son, and that he was

21. borne blind: But by what means he now sees, we cannot tell: or who
has opened his eyes, cannot we tell: he is old enough, ask him, let him
answer for him self.

C. The Parents of the blind man, answer only to the one half of the
captious question which the Pharisees propounded unto them. They affirm him
to be their son, and to be borne blind also: whereupon it follows that
he did not naturallye see, but by miracle: but the third thing, which was,
how he received his sight, they clean omit because that was obious unto the
ears of the Phariseis, Bv. referring that unto their Son, saying: He is
old enough, ask him.

But by this their ungodly silence, they bewraye their ingratitude. For
verylye, they receiving so notable a benefit, should have been whollye moved
to set forth his name. But being made afearde, they bury so much as i^ them
lies the grace of God: saving that they appoint their Son to testifye the
same for them, which should both with less envy, and also with greater Faith
declare the whole matter as it was done. But yet for all this, the holy Ghost,
by the mouth of the Evangelist, condemns their softness, in that they did
not that which became them. How much less excuse then shall they have, which
by traiterous denial do quite and clean overthrow Christ with his Doctrine,
with his miracles, with his power, and with his grace.

22. Such words spoke his Father and Mother, because they feared the Jews:
For the Jews had decreed already, that if any man did confess that he was
Christ, he should be excommunicate, out of the Sinagogue.

Bv. In these words Saint John rendereth a reason why the Parents did not
answer to the third question of the Phariseis: not because they knew not the
aucthour, and manner of the benefit bestowed on their Son, vut rather
because they being afearde, durst not confess before the Phariseis the
undoubted truth. M. Therefore they knew more than they confessed. That which
they them selves had done, they freelye and without perrill confess (for they
had begotten and brought forth a blind man) but that which Christ had done,
they dare not confess.

Therefore this is a free confession of the blindness which is in men, before
the cruel Phariseis: but of the illuminacion which Christ works, not so.
Both are true: but both have not their true confession in this world.

Thou may confess without danger the evil that comes of men, as, that
thou wast borne in sin: but the grace and goodness that comes by Christ,
whereby this evil is taken away, the Pharisaicall tyranny will not suffer
thee freelye to confess.

For the Jews had decreed already. Excommun^cation is ancient.
B. Hereby it may easilye be gathered, that it began now to be reported,
that Jesus was Christ. C. Furthermore this place teaches us, that the custom
and manner of excommunication has been ever of old time. For excommunication
was not then first of all invented, but now that excommunication which was
used long before against Apostataas, and contemners of the law for a
punishment, was used and converted against the Disciples of Christ. It has not
therefore been the corruption of one time, or age, that the sacred
institucions of GOD have been corrupted by men.

The which also has been among Christians: For it can scarsly be expressed,
what barbarous tyranny the false Bishops have exercised in subduing the
people, insomuche that one durst scarce to mutter against them: and we see
also at this day what crueltye comes by this thunderbolt of excommunication,
against all the worshippers of God. But we bouldlye contemn excommunication,
when it is used at the will and pleasure of men, contrary to the institucion
of the same.

R. For as there is a double communion, so there is a double excommunication:
the one is internal, the other is external. The internal communion
consists of one holy Ghost, of one faith, of one Christ: and of one Lord
which is Father of all.

The internal excommunication is that, when man through infydelitye agrees
not with the Godly in one spirit, in one faith, and in one Christ, how Godly
outwardlye soever he seem to be. The external communion, is the communion
of the word and Sacraments. The external excommunication is the deprivation of
those things.

Now the wicked man which says in his heart, there is no God, is always
excommunicated: howbeit he is not subject to man's judgment, if so be he be
not an offense unto the Church by the fruits of impietye. Mat. 18.17 1. Cor.
5.11.


For if so be he do offend the Church of the Lord with the filthynesse of his
facts, he ought to be cast out. But if any man be cast out of the Church for
the word of God, or for the confession of Christ by excommunication, it is a
blessing and not a curse: Deu. 23.5.
for Baalam also cursed the people of God, but the Lord turned the same into
blessing.

A. Moreover, though the right of excommunication, was so notably corrupted in
the old Church, yet notwithstanding Christ by his coming, would not have the
same to be clean taken away, but restored the same to his puritye, that it
might remain with us still.

Euenso at this day, though in the Papacye, this holy discipline of the Church
be profaned and abused, yet notwithstanding, we ought rather dilligently to
restore the same to the former integritye, than quite and clean to abolishe it.

There was never any thing so well begun in the world, but that by the
wickedness of men, the same has been corrupted. Satan should have to much
liberty granted him, Good things corrupted ought not to be clean taken away.
if so be every thing might be frustrate, and clean taken away, which is
corrupted. For then should we have no Baptism, no Supper of the Lord,
neither any Religion: no part of the which he has left free from corruption.
I. In this place also we may noate how ill the world can suffer and abide
true righteousness.

What greater innocencye, at any time, what greater modesty, what greater
homage and service toward al men at all times could be seen, than was in
Christ. And yet notwithstanding the Potentates and Rulars of the world, could
with such hatered persecute him, that they judged all those unworthy of their
company, which testified any goodness to come from him, though never so
truly, and all under the pretense of righteousness, and of the love of God,

Wherefore then should we be troubled when the world hates us, and casts
us out of his Sinagogues? E. We ought rather to rejoice and be glad: because
we being not forsaken of Christ, hold fast the hope of everlasting life.

23. Then again called they the man that was blind, and said unto him, Give
GOD the praise: we know that this man is a Sinner.

E. The Phariseis are very careful and dilligente to obscure and hinder the
glory of GOD in Christ.

For as Satan never rests, but always goes seeking whom he may devour,
so the wicked being the instruments of Satan, do continuallye seek to
hinder the glory of Christ, and to hurt the godly. M. These Jews had labored
in vain, in calling and in examyning the Parents of the blind man. For they
failed so much of their purpose, that they more confirmed this miracle, than
they obscured the same.

Wherefore they return to the former practice, subtillye seeking to defame the
aucthour of this miracle, and for that cause, they call before them again the
man which had been blind, after they had sent away his Parents.

C. And there is no doubt but that they being ashamed called the blind man,
whom at the first they found to firm and constant. Thus, the more vehementlye
they strive against God, the more they entangle and ensnare them selves.

Bv. They seek now by another way, to draw this man from the confession of
the truth, that is to say, by fair speeches, and by the pretense of the
glory of God. C. For they exhort him by a special preface to give the glory
unto God: but by and by they forbid him imperiously, that he answer according
to the reason of his own mind.

Give God the praise. R. They used this solemn form of speech, when they
required any man to swear, as is to be seen in the nineteen Chapter of the
seventh book of Josephus.

R. By these words they gave him to understand that no small dishonor was
done unto GOD, if so be any man by his name went about to deceive.

And verilye so often as any of us shall swear, this preface ought to come
into our minds, that the truth may be no less precious unto us than the
glory of God.

But we see that Hipocrites, when they pretend the greatest reverence of God,
they do not only dissemble, but also impudentlye deceive: for wickedly they
go about to make the blind man to swear upon their words, to the manifest
dishonor of God.

B. For by the name of sinner they meant, that the Lord sought to transgress
the Law of GOD: As if they should say, It is plain that he is a dishonest
and wicked person.

M. And they speak upon their aucthoritye, when they say, We know. As if
they should say, It is not meet that any man should think otherwise than
we think, which have skill and knowledge of all things. Let it therefore
satisfye thee, that we so think.

After the same manner also at this day, our Bishops and Phariseis, taking
upon them the authority of Magistrates, do bouldly pronounce what they lust,
as though they having the keys of knowledge, ought to be believed whatsoever
they speak, as when they say, We know that this Doctrine sauoureth of
Heresy, we know that these, and these men are Heretics.

C. Thus God reuealeth the wicked counsels of the wicked, howsoever they go
about with diverse coullers and feigned shadows to cover the same.

25. He answered and said, whether he be a sinner or no, I cannot tell: one
thing I am sure of, that whereas I was blind, now I see.

M. The Evangelist does not in vain use so great diligence in putting down
unto us in writing the aunsweres of this blind man. For they are such, that no
man can choose but marvel more at the light and sight of the internal man,
than of the external man. The Phariseis had said, We know that this man is
a sinner, that is to say, a wicked and lewd person. What therefore say
thou? Give the glory unto God, confess the truth.

To these words the blind man answered.

Whether he be a sinner or no. C. The which words ought to be expounded
ironice, (that is to say, meaning that he was just) that he might more
sharply gaul them. A little before he had confessed him to be a Prophet: when
he saw he profited nothing, suspending his judgment of the person, he
propounds the matter it self. For he would not swerve one whit from the
true testimonye concerning him.

Therefore this granting unto them does not want a scorn and mock, as if he
should say, Bv. Whether Jesus be a wicked man or no, it makes no matter
unto me, it is not my part to judge him: this one thing I can truly
testify, the which also I have found true by experience, that whereas before I
was blind, I now see.

M. Wherefore that which ye require at my hands to be done, I cannot do with
a good conscience, by which I am constrained to think of him as of a notable
Prophet, and not as of a sinner and an enemy to God: and as I am constrained
to think of him. so also I will Judge and speak of him. This blind man was
moved nether with threatninges, nor with fair words, but does constantly and
bouldely proclayme that which grieved the adversaries, and which they would,
if they had could, have taken out of the hearts and mouths of all men. M.
Therefore this man although he were a lay man and unlearned, could not abide,
unwisely rashly, to subcribe and agree against his own conscience to the
opinion of the Rabbines and Pharisees. Bv. Thus the simple truth of the
Gospel, by imbecillytie and weakness overcomes the strong and mighty
things of this world.

26. Then said they to him again, what did he to thee? How opened he thine
eyes.

M. Now the Pharisees return to the straight examination of the work of
Christ, with the which they began at the first. And because they thought they
had gotten a simple man, and an Idiot before them, whom they might easilye
beguile with their craft and subtlety, they examine him by certain short
Interrogatories, that he aunswering the less circumspectly, might be by them
intrapped, and that they might thereby get occasion to blame and reprehende the
fact of Christ, whereby they might deprive him of the glory of the miracle.
C. Verilye, seeing we see the wicked to be so busy and careful to bring their
wicked actions about, we may be ashamed of our sloth and negligence, in
handeling the work of Christ so negligentlye.

27. He answered them, I toulde you year while, and ye did not hear:
wherefore would ye hear it again: Will ye also be his Disciples?

C. Seeing the enemies of Christ sought occasion by all means to speak evil
of him, and to darcken and obcure the miracle, the Lord does notablye frustrat
their devises, without the quayling of the blind man's constancye: for he does
only persist in his constancy, but does also freely and severely reprehend
them, for that they sought to ouerwhelme the truth which was sufficientlye
known unto them. For he casts in their teeth their peeuishe hatred of
Christ. Bv. As if he should say, I declared to you even now the act, and
the manner also most truly how the fame was done: the which ye have heard,
and no doubt do understand the same: to what end then should I now repeat
the same again, except ye therefore make such dilligent inquiry, that when
ye exactlye know the matter, ye also will be his Disciples. The which he
spoke ironice, skorning the madness of the blind Doctors. C. For by these
words he means that although they were convicted a hundred times, they were
so malicious that they would never give place. This verelye is great
boldness, that a contemptitible and base man, yea a very Beggar, durst take
upon him so carelessly to provoke against him the wrath and displeasure of the
high Priests. If so small a beginning of Faith only, when it is come to the
battle, made him so boulde, what excuse shall they have, which being great
Preachers of the Gospel hold their peace, and are starcke dumb, being out of
all danger and peril.

28 Then rated they him and said, Be thou his Disciple, we are Moises
Disciples.

Bv. The Pharisees being greatly moved and displeased with the boldness of
the Beggar, answered nothing, but only rated and reproved him. The
Euanngeliste does not express and name the reproaches and tauntes which these
holy men used against this blind man. M. But it is like, that whatsoever the
furious madness of anger might move them to speak, that they uttered against
him, in great displeasure. And amongst many this was one, that they called him
a forsaker of the Law. For in their judgment he could not be a disciple of
Christ, but he must forsake the Law of Moses. Setting these two as one
repugnaunt to the other: C. Even as do the Papists at this day, who let not
to oppose and set the mother Church against the Gospel of Christ. 2. Cor.
3.i7
A. Thus hipocrites are wont to rent and tear God, when they collerably
pretend his name. If so be Christ be the soul of the Law, as Paul teaches,
what shall the Law be, being separated from him but a dead body? By this
example we are taught that God is not truly heard of any man but of him which
gives attentive heed unto his voice, and understands what he speaks and
what he means. R. Wherefore we have the nature of wicked hypocrisy very well
depaynted to us in these words. For hipocrisy boasts of God, boasts of the
Fathers, observing nothing less than the word of God and the fathers. So also
the Phariseis professed them selves to be the Disciples of Moises, and yet
believed not the word of Moses, Deu. i8.i5
For thus he writes A prophet will I raise up from among your brethren, M.
Seeing therefore Moses was only A scoolmayster directing his Disciples unto
Christ, if so be they had been his very Discipls, they would have now
forsaken Moses, and cleaued unto Christ.

But they would neither be the Disciples of Moses, nor yet the Disciples of
Christ.

29. We are sure that God spoke unto Moises: as for this fellow, we know
not from whence he is.

As if they should say, There is no cause why we should make him our master,
Moses is our master and teaches us, whom we are sure that God has sent,
approving the same by many and sundry signs: but from whence this fellow is
come, we know not: nay, seeing he is lewd and wicked, we conjecture and
gather that he is not sent of God at all.

C. This therefore which they say, that they know not Christ from whence he
is, is not referred to his country or native place, but to the Prophetical
office.

For they allege that they have noe knowledge of this vocation, that they
might receive him as a Prophet sent of God.

M. They boast that they know how that God spoke unto Moses, but it was also
required that they should know what God spoke unto Moses, and that they
should not only know it but also should embrace it with Faith, and
obedience: and should embrace not such part thereof as pleased them, but
every whit of it: and should interpret the fame not after their own scence
and imagination, but according to the true scence of the Spirit. If they had
done these things they had not rejected Christ. Let them noate and mark this
clause, which grant that the scriptures of boath testamentes have the
aucthorytie of the word of God: and yet for all that do little regard those
things that are contained in them, except it be so far forth as they serve
for their turn. That which Nicodemus spoke differs far from this saying
of the Phariseis, which affirm that they know not from whence the Lord came.
For he said, We know that thou art a teacher sent from God. For no man can
do these signs which thou do except God were with him.

30. The man answered and said unto them: This is a merueilous thing, that ye
wotte not from whence he is, and yet he has opened mine eyes.

Bv. As they disputed, the faith of this Beggar increased, God increasing grace
in his heart: whereby he bouldely contemning all his adversaries, and
despising all perilles (as all the faithful are wont to do) publikelye took
upon him (when the matter so required) to defend the cause of our savior and
of the truth, and to confute the corrupt toys and tryfles of the Scribes and
Pharisees.

M. Concerning Moses he answers nothing at all: (for they made mention of
him beside the purpose) but he answers to those things, where they said
that they knew not from whence Jesus was, and that he was a sinner.

C. Therefore he ouerthwartlye robs them, for that they being nothing
moved with so notable a miracle, feign that the calling of Christ was unknown
unto them: as if he should say that it was not meet that so notable a proof
of the divine power, should be nothing regarded, and that the vocation of
Christ so confirmed and approved, should notwithstanding have no credit with
them. Bv. I marvel (says he) that ye know not from whence Jesus mine
illuminator came. R, I can hardly be persuaded to believe that ye know not
from whence he is, when his works declare that he was sent of God.

C. Also the more he urges their gross dullness and malice, the more he
reasons of the nature of God.

31. For we be sure that GOD hears not sinners: but if any man be a
worshipper of GOD, and obedient unto his will, him hears he.

Bv. As if he should say, Even now ye objected unto me that Jesus was a
wicked and lewd person.

Tell me I pray you, whether GOD hears godly or ungodly and wicked men.
All men say that GOD hears the prayers of the godly, and refuses the
prayers of the wicked. The godly by faith know God, by faith they call upon
GOD, and by faith they give thanks unto God, and obey his will. But God heard
the prayer of Jesus: for I have received my sight. Therefore Jesus cannot be a
wicked and ungodly man. C. They are deceived which think that this beggar
spoke according to the opinion of the common sort of people. For this word
(Sinner) here also sygnifyeth, as it did a little before, a wicked and ungodly
man. And this the scripture teaches always, that God hears none but such as
call upon him with a true and sincere heart. For seeing that Faith only
makes us to have access unto God, Faith makes us to have ac^esse unto God.
it is most certain that the wicked cannot come unto him: yea he testifies,
that he does abhore their prayers, even as he does boath their sacrifices. For
he inuiteth the Children of God unto him by a singular privilege, Esaias. 1i.xi
and it is the Spirit of adoption only which cries in our hearts Abba, Romans
8.i5. Galat. 4.5
Father. To be short no man is apt to pray unto GOD but he which has his
heart purged by faith.

But the wicked as they profane the holy name of God in their prayers, even
so they deserve rather to be punished for their sacrilege, Psa. 50.i6.
than to obtain any thing that appertains to their souls health. As we
are taught in the fyfteth Psalm.

Therefore this Beggar does not reason amiss, that Christ came from God, because
he heard and granted his petitions.

32. Sense the world began was it not heard that any man opened the eyes of
one that was borne blind.

C. Hereby this beggar does amplyfie the excelencye of the miracle, because so
far as ever any man could remember, the like deed was never heard of to
be done by any man. Whereupon it follows, that they are wicked and
unthankful, which do willinglye w^ncke at the manifest works of God.

M. And very warelye and wyselye he says not, From the beginning of the
world, the eyes of one that has been borne blind, have not been opened,
but, From the beginning of the world it has not been heard etc. For he does
not dispute whether God ever opened the eyes of one that was borne blind: but
he says that it was never heard that any man did such a deed. For this is
the drifte of his argument, that by this strange and unwonted miracle, by
which a man opened the eyes of one that was borne blind, it was evidently
proved, that this man was of God. Whereupon also he adds, saying,

33. If this man were not of God, he could do nothing.

C. Therefore he gathers that he is sent of God, because he was endued with
so great power of the spyrite of God, to win credit to himself and to his
doctrine. M. By these words therefore he confounds that which the Phariseis
had spoken, This man is not of God, for he keeps not the Sabbath day.

34. They answered and said unto him, Thou art altogether borne in sin, and
do thou teach us? And they cast him out.

They answered and said. Bv. The Phariseis were out of all hope that this
beggar might either be corrupted, or made afearde, whereby he might cease from
preaching of Jesus: furthermore our Rabbines and doctors were ashamed, that a
beggar and ydyot had stopped their mouths. Whereupon, they come to the
extremity, and last point: the which is the cruel contempt of all order, of
doctrine, and admonition, and the condemnation and execration of the truth.
Prou. 18.3
For when the wicked comes, then comes contempt: and with the vile man
reproach. C. And there is no doubt but that they alluded unto his blindness:
even as it is the manner of proud men to vex such as are in myserye and
calamitye. As if they should say, Thou vile beggar, and impudent Knave,
dare thou be so bold as to teach us, our Doctors, and our Rabbines. Our
labor is to seek out, and to teach that which we desire, and it is thy
part to hearken unto our commandments: we ought to be heard, and it
becomes thee to houlde thy peace: we are holy men, but thou art a miserable
sinner. Bv. For by thy wickednesses and heinous offenses, thou have provoked
Gods vengeance to light upon thee, thou vile wretch, insomuch that thou
being stricken with blindness have been iustlye punished of God, who has
openly plagued thee, and has marked thee as one abominable, and for all men to
take heed of. R. And dare thou being such a one dispute with us concerning
the holiness of religion and of Faith? M. And art thou so impudent, that thou
art not afeard in our presence to reason of divine matters, even as if thou
were a holy, just, and learned man, and we but ydiotes and sinners? R. Auaunt
with thy madness thou gross Knave, whom it beseems not to talk with us.

C. Therefore they do scorn and reproach him, even as if he had brought a
mark and show token of his wickedness, even from his mothers womb.

For diverse of the Scribes were persuaded that men's souls, so soon as they
were departed this life, went into new boddyes, and in them suffered
punishment for their former offenses. Hereupon these men thought that this man
which before was blind, was then defiled with his sins. This preposterous
opinion ought to teach us to beware that we always measure not men's sins
with the scourges, and punishments of God, as we heard before in the second
verse. M. Let us also noate the Pride of these Doctoures and Rabbines.

This blind man had with modesty rendered a reason of his opinion concerning
Christ, by which he believed that he came as a Prophet sent of God, unto the
which he was provoked by the demaundes of the Pharisees: also he answered
that which was agreeable with the opinion of all good men concerning GOD,
containing nothing in it which was either arrogantlye spoken, or impertinent to
the cause, of the which he was demanded: and yet notwithstanding the Pharisees
condemn this modestye of impudency, because it was boath free, and also
repugnaunt to their malice, as though he had been so arrogant that he would
have taken upon him to have taught godly and learned men in matters concerning
faith. To many such Doctors the Church of Christ has at this day, who judge it
to be great impudencye, if any simple and ignorant man, though he be asked, do
freelye utter his opinion before them, concerning matters of Faith. They judge
it to be contumelious to their dignity and order: asthough they were such as
ought only to be heard, and that others also ought not to be heard, and as
though God were not woonte to give to unlearned and simple men more faith,
fear of him, and religion, than to these great Doctors: wherehy he might
suppress the pride of men.

C. Wherefore seeing GOD ought always to be heard, by whomsoever he speaks
unto us, let us learn not to condemn them, that GOD may always find us apt
to be taught and meek, although he should use the most vile man in the
whoale world to teach us.

For there is no greater plague, than when our ears are stopped with disdain
lest we should voutsafe to hear him, who admonishes us for our profit.

And they cast him out. R. Behoulde how impiety is provoked by the confession
of the name of Christ: and what fruit hipocrisy brings forth being rightly
moved. For one while proceeded from the Phariseis, hatred, another while
envy, somwhile deceit, another time, anger, sometime railing and reproach, and
another while contempt of their neighbor, to be short, what wickedness
does not come of Infidelity, Christ the authoure of all goodness being
rejected? Bv. They curse and excommunicate the constant Confessoure of Christ,
they declare him to be an heritique, a wicked person, and one unworthy to be
heard, and not to be used in familliaritie and frendshippe, by good men. M.
But what had he done worthy of reproach and what was he? In their Judgment he
was altogether borne in sin: he began also in their presence to teach and
to divine.

But verily they knew well enough before they called him the second time, that
he was borne blind, and also that he was a beggar. Wherefore then do they
call such a one before them again. Verily they hoped to have abused his
simplicity. Euenso our Doctors and Rabbines, when they see opportunity, call
before them ignorant and unlearned men: but when they see that strive against
their purpose, they contumeliously reject them. C. But as concerning the manner
of objection, although it may be that by violence they cast him out of the
Temple or Sinnagoge, yet notwithstanding the meaning of the Euaungelist seems
to be, that they excommunicated him, and so their election bare a countinaunce
of Law and equity. And this does better agree with the text: because if he
had been cast forth by contumelye and reproach only, it was not of so
great weight, that the same should have come by fame unto Christ. Bv.
Therefore because they had excommunicated him they hoped that none would here
a man so excommunicated or believe his words and testimonies which was
accursed. C. But we are taught by this example, how friuilouse and vain the
curse of the enemies of Christ is, and how little it ought to be feared.

If so be we be cast forth of that congregation in the which Christ reigns,
we must account it a horrible Judgment against us, because we are given to
Satan, and because we are banished from the kingdom of the Son of god. But
we ought willingly and of our own accord to flee from that place where
Christ does not govern by his word and holy Spirit, although no man does
expel us: so far we ought to be from fearing that cruel Judgment, which the
wicked exercise against the servants of Christ. R. The godly believing in
Christ must be as the excrementes and of stouringes of this world.

35. Jesus heard that they had excommunicate him: and when he had found him,
he said unto him, Do thou believe on the Son of God?

M. The Evangelist here speaks simply and according to the common manner of
speech saying, when Jesus had heard that the Phariseis had cast forth or
excommunicate this blind, man, and when he had found him. etc. and he meneth
that this eiection and excommunication of the blind man was by and by known
abroad. Also, whereas he says that the Lord found the blind man, does it
more to describe unto us what happened abroad, than to declare that the Lord
did seek after the blind man of purpose to find him. If so be the blind man
had been kept still in the Sinagogue, it was to be feared lest he, being
drawn by little and little from Christ, should have fallen into the same
destruction with the wicked. Now christ meets with him out of the temple as
he wandereth abroad: he receives and imbraceth him whom the Priests had
cast forth: he erecteth him whom they had cast down: and offers life unto
him which was given to death. Of the like we have had experience in our time.

For when Luther and such like reproved in the beginning the grosser sort of
abuses of the Pope, he had small, or almost no feeling at all of pure
Christianisme.

But after the Pope had thondered out his curses against them, and when they
were cast forth of the Sinagogue of Rome by terrible Bulls, Christ reached
forth his hand unto them, and made him self fully known unto them.

Thus we see that there can be nothing better for us than to be farthest from
the enemies of Christ, that he may approach more nere unto us. C. For to be
eiected of the Phariseis is to be joined unto Christ.

Therefore they which suffer any reproach or evil for the truths sake of
Christ, are most specially honored of GOD. For as he which spends his
money for Gods sake, shall find them, and he which hates his soul does most
of all love the same: even so he which suffers reproach for Gods sake, is
much honored of God. Bv. Yea it is necessary, that they be first condemned
and cast forth of the company and congregation of infidels, which will or
desire to be received of Christ, and to be in the number of his Disciples. For
except thou depart from Antechrist and from the wicked, Christ will never
receive thee, and the congregation of the saints will not acknowledge thee,
For whom the Phariseicall pride rejects, Christ receives and imbraceth. For
to be secluded from the communion and fellowship of the wicked, is to be
joined unto Christ: and to be condemned of those which seeking to establish
false righteousness, do resist the true righteousness of God, is to be
approved: also to be reproched and abased by those which seek their own
glory, to obscure the glory of Christ, is great praise and glory: and to
receive cursings of the accursed, is to be blessed of Goo. Bv. Let them
therefore rejoice and be glad in Christ, whom the wrath of the Bishops of
Rome has cursed for receiving the Gospel. For the Lord will turn his
cursyng into blessing.

Do thou believe on the son of God. M. Christ does not ask to learn as
though he were ignorant of his mind, but to teach this man and the heareres
which stood by, the true manner of justification. C. And because he speaks
unto a Jew, who knowing the doctring of the Law from his Childehoode, had
learned that God had promised a Messiah, he exhorts him to follow him, and
to give his name unto him. Howbeit he uses a more honorable name, Mat. 22.42
than they were wont then to use. For the Messiah was only counted the Son
of David.

36. He answered and said: who is the Lord, that I might believe on him?

Bv. The blind man not knowing Jesus as yet by his face, yet notwithstanding
having an earnest desyer to know him, he asks him, Who is that son of
God: C. By which answer it appears that he was apt and ready to be taught,
although as yet, he knew little or nothing concerning Christ. As if he should
say. M. I am ready so soon as he shall be declared unto me to embrace him.

He calls him, Lord, according to the manner of his country, which called
the better sort of men Lords. And we must noate that the blind man desiereth
to be taught of the Prophet Christ: for now he was persuaded that Christ was
sent of God.

Wherefore he does not rashely beeleue his doctrine.

37. And Jesus said unto him, Thou haste boath seen him, and it is he which
talks with thee.

R. That faith which is conceived by miracles is not a true faith: but that
which comes by the hearing of the word of God, is the true Faith.

For miracles do not bring faith, but do only confirm that faith which was
conceived before by the word. Wherefore that the blind man which was now
restoared to his sight, might truly beeleeue, Christ creapeth into his heart
by his word, whereby he might be made a beleuer as one borne of new seed
which is immortal. Jesus would be acknoweledged of him for Christ, that from
this beginning of Faith he might bring him to more full and perfect knowledge of
him. Bv For faith has his degreese and his increasinges. M. The
Preterperfectence seems here to be put for the present tence. For before this
time this blind man had not seen the Lord.

Furthermore we must noate that the knowledge of Christ is not denied to those
that ask the same seriously and with their whoale heart, and which are ready
to believe, although in the sight of the world they be never so base and
abiecte.

38. And he said, Lord I believe, and he worshipped him,

Lord J believe. Bv. As if he should say, I believe that thou art the Son
of God: and I repose my whoale trust and confidence in thee.

M. Here we see that the true knowledge of the Son of God which is
conceived by his word, does not only beget faith, but also the confession of
Faith.

This blind man does not say, what I think of thee I will keep to my self
but by and by before them al which were present setting all shame aside and
fear, he confesses his Faith boath in word and in work.

And he worshipped him. C. It may be demanded whether he gave unto Christ
divine worship or no.

The word which the Euaungelist uses, sygnifieth nothing else but a sertayn
veneration declared by the bowing of the knee, or by such like outward signs.
Notwitstanding it is lykely that some rare and unwonted kind of worship is
hear noated, as that this blind man gave much more honor unto Christ than
belonged either to a man or to a Prophet.

Bv. For although we read often times in the Scriptures, that men have worcester,
shipped men, that is to say, that they have done their obeysaunce and dutiful
curtesey: yet notwithstanding here the circumstaunces do prove that this place
ought to be understood of that odoration which belongs to the Son of God
only. C. Although therefore the blind man had not profited so far, that he
knew Christ to be God manifested in the flesh: being persuaded
notwithstanding that Jesus was the Son of God, he, as one ravished of his
wits by admiration, prostrated him self before him. M. This place, plainly
enough proves the divinity of our savior Christ, seeing he requires men to
believe in him, and suffers him self at diverse times to be worshipped.

Bv. Let the Jews and Turks prate with the Arians at their pleasure, deniing
Jesus which was borne of Mary to be the Son of GOD. The truth which cannot
lie, the most mighty miracles, which cannot be denied, and the power which
sencibly works in the Faithful, testify Jesus the Son of Mary, to be the
true and natural Son of God, M. coessential with the father, and coequall
with him in Divinity majesty and honor.

39. Then Jesus said unto him, I am come to Judgment in this world, that
they which see not might see? And that they which see might be made blind.

I am come to Judgment. C. Christ in this place calls that Judgment by
which he restored things confounded and dispersed into their due and Lawful
order.

Notwithstanding he gives us to understand that this was done by the
wonderful counsel of God, and contrary to the sense and understanding of
men. And verily there seems nothing more contrary to human reason, than
that they should be blinded from the light of ye world which see. This
therefore is one of Gods secret Judgments, by which he casts down the
pride of men. B. And he alludeth to that sight which he had given to the blind
man. As if he should say, As I have made thee being starck blind to see in
body: so I give unto thee and to others also (which those wise men of this
world contemn in divine matters as blind) the eyes of the Spirit, that ye
may see, understand, love, and possess those things, which ye never saw,
and which seeing ye would not see and which things also make you blessed for
ever.

Thus those wise men which have seen many things unknown to the common sort
of people, and do think that as yet they shall see more, by the shining
brightness which I teach (because they being borne of the Deuel want the
eyes of the Spirit) do I bereue of all knoweledge of the truth, that they
may miss of all understanding of that which is right, and that they being
starcke blind may stumble and be broken upon me which am the head corner
stoane immoouable upon whom also I my self will fall at the Last and grind
them al to Poulder.

C. Also we must noate, that the blindness of the which mention is made here,
comes not so much of Christ as it does by the falte and corruption of men.
For he does not properly blind any man by his own nature: but because the
reprobate do desyer nothing more than to extinguish his light, it is necessary
that the eyes of their minds which are infected with malice and wickedness be
darckened and shut up by the light offered unto them. In fine, for so much as
Christ by his own nature is the light of the world, this is accidental that
some by his coming be made blind. By the way of granting he calls those
which see, Ironicee unbelieving: because they being blind, do think them
selves very quick syghted and wise, and being puffed up with this trust they
will not voutsafe to hear the voice of God: and without Christ the wisdom
of the flesh has a gloriouse show: because the world does not know what it
is to be wise in deed. Therefore Christ says that they do see which
deceiving themselves and others under the foolish trust of wisdom, are
carried away with their own sense and do make account of their own
Immaginations as of wisdom. Such, so soon as Christ appears in the
brightness of his Gospel, are blind not only because their foolishness is
uncovered which before lay hid under the darckenes of Infidelity but also
because they being plunged by the Just vengeance of God in deeper
darckenesse, do loose that little light which was left unto them.

We are all borne blind: but yet for all that in the darckenesse of corrupt
and defiled nature, there appears still sertain sparckes, that men may
differ from brute beasts.

Now if proud reason being puffed up with trust and confydence of it self,
do refuse to submit it self unto God, it shall seem to be wise without
Christ: but the bryghtnes of Christ at the length shall make the same
foolishness: because then the vanity of man's mind does begin to appear
when heavenly wisdom does reveal it self. But our Savior Christ had a
farther matter to express in these words. For ypocrites be fore Christ does
shine, do not so obstinately resist and withstand God: but so soon as the
Light does shine more nerely, they do make open war against God.

This wickedness and Ingratitude brings to pass that their blindness is
doubled, and that God which before had but taken away the light from their
eyes, does now thruste them out altogether

Now let us noate the sum of this place, which is that Christ came into the
world, to illuminate the blind, to bring those quight and clean out of
their wits which seem wise in their own conceits.

M. It is no merueile therefore if the Phariseis saw not that which this blind
man saw, when they said that Christ was of God, whom the blind man, and
simple Idiots, in the sight of the world, knew to come from God: because by
the just Judgment of God those wise men are blinded by the coming of Christ,
and those which saw not, of blind, are made to see. C. And in the former place
Christ made mention of illumination, because this is the proper cause of his
coming. For he came not to Judge the world, but rather that the world might
be saved by him. Ioh. 3.17
Also this vengeance or judgment is not restrained to the person of Christ,
as though he did not daily bring this to pass by the Ministers of the Gospel.
For the which cause we ought to take the more heed lest any of us by our
vain and mad opinion bring this horrible punishment upon us.

But experience does teach how truly Christ has uttered this sentence. For
we do see that many are stricken with the spirit of giddiness and madness
for no other cause, but only for that they cannot abide the rising son of
righteousness.

The wicked in the time of the Law received this punishment: for the Prophet
was sent to blind the people, Esaias. 6.9.
that seeing, they might not see.

40. And some of the Phariseis which were with him heard these words, and
said unto him, Are we blind also.

Bv. This beggar was made an example for them which in deed were stark
blind: notwithstanding they acknowledge their blindness and Ignorance and
are illuminated by the grace of Christ.

And the Phariseis are made an example, which thought them selves Just and
holy, seemed in their own conceit wise enough: and therefore they came not
unto Christ.

For the which cause they aboade in blindness and in the darckenesse of
erroures and sins: even as the Euaungelist shows afterward in plain
words.

C. They perceived that they were wounded by that saying of Christ: and yet
notwithstanding they seem not to be of the worste: because the open and
sworn enemies of Christ did so abhor Christ that they could not abide to
join them selves unto him. But these could abide to hear Christ, but yet
without profit: because no man can be a near disciple of Christ, but he
which forsakes him self: from the which these men were very far. M. They
would not seem to be blind though they were starcke blind. For they would
neither be reckoned among them whom being blind the Lord made to see, nor
amongst others which saw, whom the Lord made blind.

Wherefore (because they were puffed up with Pride) they thinking that they
should receive great injury, if so be they were reckoned among the blind,
burst forth and say.

Are we blind also. C. As if they should say, Can thou not make thy self
famous but by our reproach? Is this to be suffered that thou should get
honor to thy self by our contumely? And whereas thou dooest promise light to
the blind: get thee hence and auaunt with thy goodness: for we will not be
illuminated of thee upon this condition, that we should grant unto thee,
that we have been hitherto blind.

M. Do thou think no better of us than thou do of the common unlearned
sort of people? Do thou think us to be blind men like unto other unskillful
persons, seeing we have the key of knowledge, and are the masters and teachers
of other men? Thou came to give sight (thou say) unto the blind: but thou
art a seducer of the blind. Thou seducest the blind unlearned multitude: but
thou can not so deceive us which are not blind.

Hereby we may see that hipocrisy is always proud and spightfull. It is a
noate of pride that they standing in their own conceit would have no part of
their estimation deminished: and it is a token of spite, that when their
disease was discovered they were more offended at Christ even as if he had more
deeply wounded them. Hereof comes the contempt boath of Christ and also of
his grace which he offers. In this word also there is contained (we) a great
emphasis and force: thereby declaring, that although all others were blind,
yet they took it in evil part that they should be reckoned among the common
sort.

This is a fault to common in those which excel others, who being dronken
with disdain do almost forget them selves that they are men.

41. Jesus said unto them, if ye were blind, he should have noe sin: but
now ye say, we see: therefore your sin remains.

M. The Lord does so beat the Phariseis with their own rod that he
condemns upon them their own mouth, and proves that to be true which he had
spoken.

C. Howebeit these words have a double meaning and understanding either that
ignorance did somewhat mittigate their falt: except they being plainly
convinced did seek to resist the truth: or else that the disease of Ignorance
was curable in them, if so be they did acknoledge him.

The words of Christ hereafter confirm the former sentence, where Christ
says, John. i5, 22
If I had not come and spoken unto them, they had had no sin* etc. But
because it follows in the text, But now they say that they see, this seems
better to agree, if we say that he is blind, who knowing his own blindness,
seeks remedy for the disease. And then this shall be the sum, If ye knew your
euel, it should not be altogether incurable: but now because you think your
selves whoale, ye abide desperate.

M. They were therefore blind (whereupon in another place he calls them
blind leaders of the blind) but not as were the Idiots and simple sort: Mat.
i5.i4.
otherwise he would have said as he says here They should have had no sin,
if so be they had been blind and Ignorant of the sacred Scriptures, as were
the unlearned.

C. Notwithstanding when he says that they which are blind have no sin he
does not thereby excuse Ignorance, as though it were no sin: only he gives
us to understand that the disease may have a remedy when the same is felt in
time: because when the blind man comes to be restoared to his sight, the
Lord is ready to help. R. As if Christ should have said, if so be you knew
your blindness, the sin of unbelief would not abide in you, but puttinge
away infidellitie ye would believe in me: but because ye do not know
your blindness, therefore ye abide unbelieving. C. For they are incurable who
having no feeling of their sins despise the grace of God. R. Therefore that
is horrible blindness to be Ignorant of our blindness, even as not to know
our sickness is almost a disease incurable: the which we may behold in mad
men. And as the first step to recover health is to acknoweledge our Infirmity,
euenso the first step to Faith is, to know our impiety and Ignorance.

i. Ioh. i, 8
To this effect appertains that which saint John has written in another place
saying, If we confess our sins he is faithful and Just to forgeeue us our
sins, and the blood of Jesus Christ his son shall cleanse us from all
Iniquity.

B. We see also here plainly that he condemns this sin, namely the
refusal and contempt of the truth when men know the same: whereupon there
is no doubt but that they shall have pardon and remission with saint Paul
which sin only by ignorance and either neglect the truth or else persecute
the same. The truth shall be known at the length to the reprobate, in suchwise
that they them selves shall say they see, and shall have all collers and
pretense of Ignorance taken away from them. Such also were these Phariseis.
They had heard those things of the Lord, and saw such things in him, that
their minds were constrained to acknoweledge him to be a Prophet of God: and
yet for all this Satan did so carry them, that they did persecute him with
mortal hatered.

Therefore their sin remained, Sin against the holy ghost.
without pardon or remission: they having sinned against the holy Ghost,
setting them selves so openly against the words and deeds of the Lord.

Bv. We have also here a sure and infallible Judgment of the truth,
pronounced against the maintainers of free will.

For if these men were blind, that is to say, if they knew their servitude,
infirmity, and corruption by sin, they should be illuminated by the grace of
Christ: but now because they see, that is, because they boast of the strength
of the flesh, and do not only magnify the grace of Christ, blyndnesse and syn
remains in them. And he says plainly,

Your sin remains. For in saints also there is sin: but it is taken
away, it is not imputed it does not remain: in the wicked only there
remains sin and damnation. M. There is therefore a passing sin and a
remaining sin.

To this effect parteyneth this saying, He which believes in the Son, has
everlasting life: but he which believes not the Son, shall not see life but
the wrath of God abides on him.

Let us therefore believe in the Son of God, let us confess unto him our
sins, that we being illuminated by him, and absolved from our sins, we may
come at the last to that light which no man can attain unto.

The tenth Chapter.
1. Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that enters not in by the Door into
the Sheepefoulde, but clymeth up some other way, the same is a Thief and a
Robber.

Verily, verily, J say unto you. M. BECAUSE the Priests, Scribes, and
Pharisees, did not only submit themselves unto Christ, but also did chaleng
unto themselves power and authority over the people of God, even as if they
had been their true pastors and guides: and therefore could not abide that
the unlearned multitude should believe in Christ, and should follow him, as
sheep do their sheapehearde: the Lord does very well boath to the confusion
of false pastors, and also to the confirmation of the simple, propounde all
this whole matter after the manner of a Proverb, by which he does describe
what difference there is between true and false pastors, which take upon
them the office of feeding the Sheep. C. And because the fewness and small
number of the faithful, might much discredit his doctrine, he goes about
to prove that not all which usurp office in the Church are to be reckoned in
the number of Pastors and sheep: Sheep and the Sheaphearde.
but that the true Pastors are discerned from reprobates: and the true sheep
from those that be counterfaytes by this marcke, if so be that he be the
only scope, and the beginning and ending of all things.

This admonition is necessary for all ages and times, but especially for this
our age.

For there is not a more pestilent plague to the Church, than when wolves
creep in under the cloak of pastoures. Christ does plainly here deny them to
be counted for pastoures, which boast that they ought so to be taken and
accounted of or that they ought to be nombered among the sheep, which glory in
external signs.

He speaks here of the Judicial Church: and in this point there is noe
great difference between that and ours.

He that enters not in. R. Christ does not by naked and bare words even at
the first teach that he is a shepherd, but by this parable suspendeth the
minds of his auditoures, that afterward by the exposition of the same he
might make that which in the beginning they heard not without admiration and a
desire to know, to sink deper into their minds.

C. But they do foolishly which discus very curiously every part of this
parable Let it therefore suffice and satisfy to hold this sum, namely, that
for so much as Christ makes his Church like unto a shepfould, into the which God
gathers all his sheep together, he compares himself to a door, because
there is no other entrance into the Church than by him.

Hereupon it follows that they are good Pastoures which lead the right way
unto Christ: they which give them selves to Christ aloane, are rightly said to
be gathered into Gods shepfould, and to be of his flock. Moreover, all this is
referred to doctrine. For seeing in Christ all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge are hid, he which swerueth from him is neither in the right way nor
yet is like to enter in by the door. Therefore we shall easyly know which is
the true Church and who are to be heard* as true Sheapeheardes, if so be we
despise not the admonition of Christ.

2. But he that enters in by the door is the Sheapehearde of the sheep.

C. If so be therefore they which are called Sheapeheardes, do seek to draw
us away from Christ, they are to be shunned no less then Woolues and
Thieves, for such are not true sheepeheards, because they enter not in by the
Door. Neither must we have fellowshippe and society with any other flock
than with that which agrees and abides in the pure faith of the Gospel. For
this cause Christ exhorts his Disciples to separate themselves from the
vnbeeleeuing multitude, and not suffer themselves to be governed of wicked
priests neither to suffer themselves to be deceived by vain and frivolous
names.

A. Because false Prophets come in sheep clothing, being inwardelye ravening
Woolues.

3. To him the Porter opens, and the sheep hear his voice, and he calls
his own sheep by name, and leads them out.

C. This Porter or Doorekeeper is God, whose Judgment Christ seems to oppose
against the false opinion of men in approving Pastors. As if he should say,
Others the world does willingly receive, and does gladlye honor them: but GOD
who has power and authority, does acknowledge and approve no others than
such as lead the Sheep by this way. Then follows the obedince of the
sheep. For they hear the voice of the Porter.

This therefore ought to be referred to the mutual consent and agreement of
Faith, because by the only spirit of God the Disciple and the Teacher are
lincked together, that as the one goes before, so the other follows after.
Some notwithstanding refer it to the private knowledge, which the pastor
ought to have of every one of his sheep. But the former sen^e seems to be
more firm.

4. And when he has sent forth his own sheep, he goes before them, and the
sheep follow him: for they know his voice.

C. He means that the sheep do discern and know the Sheapheards from
wolves, even by their voice. This is that spirit of discretion, 1. Ioh. 4.1
by which the elect of God do judge and discern the truth from the false
inuencions of men. A. We are commanded to prove the spirits whether they be
of GOD or no: but that we may discern the spirits of truth, from the
spirits of error, it is necessary that we have the spirit of discrecion,
which may seal the truth of God in our hearts.

C. Therefore the knowledge of the truth goes before in the sheep of Christ,
and then follows a serious desire to obey: that they may not only know
what is true, but also receive the same with their whole heart, and may follow
the Sheapheard.

5. A stranger will they not follow, but will flee from him: for they know
not the voice of strangers.

Bv. Because the Faithful do neither know nor receive any other Doctrine
than the doctrine of Christ, (even as a chaste wife only obeys the
commandments of her husband) they do flee from him, which brings not the
word of Christ, C. neither do they harken to the voice of strangers,
neither are they scattered, when they are called upon.

6. This proverb spoke Jesus unto them: but they understood not what things
they were, which he spoke unto them.

R. The wisdom of God being hyd under foolishness, can not be known of the
wisdom of the flesh. M. If any man demand wherefore the Lord used a
Proverb, when no doubt he knew that his adversaries understood not the
same, let him read our annotacions upon the thirteen Chapter of Mathewe
beginning at the thirteen verse.

7. Then said Jesus unto them again: Verily, verily, I say unto you, I am the
door of the Sheep.

Bv. When the Phariseis understood not what this parable meant, it pleased the
Lord to add the exposition of the same: C. the which if he had not done, all
that he spoke, had been allegorical.

Bv. And he begins with an oath, lest we should make any doubt of the
present doctrine. C. For that which was principal in the similitude he now
plainelye expounds, Bv. and he opens certain things, by the conjecture
whereof, we may easelye open and dissolve the rest.

C. When he affirms that he is the door, he gives us to understand that
the principal part of all spiritual Doctrine, is contained in him. Whereupon
the Apostle Paul being one of the Sheepheards, thought it not needful to know
any thing, save Jesus Christ Crucified. And the words of Christ are in
effect, as if he should have said, that it is he aloan to whom we ought
to be gathred.

R. Christ also is the door, by which the good Sheephearde does enter into
the sheep of the Church: he is also the door by which every Faithful man
enters into his heavenly Father, and by whom the Father is revealed to the
faithful. Therefore first of all Christ is the door to the Sheep of the
Church, Christ is the door into the sheepefolde.
for the which cause no man can teach rightlye in the Church, except he
teach Christ truly, and except he preach the Gospel of Christ purelye
without mixing the same with human tradicions.

For the heart of the Faithful is not quickened, neither receives any
consolation, but only by the Gospel of Christ. C. Wherefore Christ inuiteth
and calls all which desire salvation, and exhorts them to come unto him: by
which words he declares that they wearye them selves in vain, which
forsaking him seek to draw nigh unto God: because there is but one only
gate open to come unto him, all other ways and passages being quite shut up.

8. All, even as many as came before me, are thieves and robbers: but the
sheep did not hear them.

All, even as many. A. This place has been diversely expounded, being
restrained of some to Judas of Galilee, and to such like. C. But Christ
generallye compares all false doctrines with the Gospel, and all false
Prophets with Godly teachers.

But yet this sentence is not absurdlye extended to the Gentiles, because
whosoever from the beginning of the world have professed them selves to be
teachers, and have not sought to gather sheep unto Christ, they have abused
this title to the destruction of souls.

But this does nothing at al appertain to Moses and the Prophets, who sought
nothing more, than to establishe the kingdom of Christ. R. For to come before
Christ in this place, is not to go before Christ in time, but to teach other
doctrine beside the doctrine of Christ. Moises was before Christ, the Prophets
also were before Christ: but they taught the Church of the Lord by the Spirit
of Christ, and preached Christ plainelye, though he lay hid under shadows
and Tipes. 1. Pet. i, 21*
A. For Peter says that the spirit of Christ was in them: also he says
that the holy men of God spoke being inspired with the spirit of Christ 2.
Pet 1, 2i,


R. Wherefore they are with Christ true Pastors, because, they entered in to
the Church by the word of the Lord, and fed the people of God in the pastures
of Christ.

C. Therefore we must noate by the words of Christ, that things contrary are
compared here together: but yet between the Law and the Doctrine of the
Gospel, there shall be so little difference and contrarietye found, that the Law
shall appear to be nothing else but a preparatiue to the Gospel. To be short,
Christ testifyeth that all doctrines, by which the world has been seduced
from him, were nothing but mortal plagues, because without him, there is
nothing but deadly destruction. R. therefore all the teachers of human
tradicions, and the carnal interpretours of the Law are Thieves and murderers:
for with their pestilent docttrine they murder souls. For they which believe
lies, do perish together with the lies which they believe. C. Nevertheless
by these we are taught, Antiquity proves not the truth.
how much God esteems of antiquitye, and how much also we ought to esteem of
ye same, so often as it is brought in, to contend with Christ. For to the end
no man might be moved herewith, that in all ages there have been teachers,
who have cared for nothing less, than to direct and lead men unto Christ,
Christ himself expreslye says that it makes no matter how many such there
have been, or how long ago they have been, because this is to be considred,
that there is but one door, the which whosoever leaves, and diggeth up gates,
and breaks up doors to enter in, is a Thief and a Robber.

But the Sheep did not hear them. M. By these sheep he means the elect:
C. and he proves that they were not of the Church of God, which have been
led out of the way by false teachers. First of all this is therefore spoken,
lest when we behoulde the great multitude of such as go astraye, we by their
example think, that we also may go astraye and perish.

For this is no small consolation and matter of trust, when we know that
Christ has always defended his sheep from the manifold lyings in wayght of
woolues and thieves. A. To this effect also pertayneth that which he says in
another place, namely, that false Prophets, and false Christ's should work
wonders, so that many should be seduced, and even the elect also if it were
possible. Mat 24.24
C. It may be, and often times it comes to pass, that the sheep do err
and go astraye, before they be gathered into the Sheepefolde of Christ, that
is to say, before their calling.

In like manner it comes often times to pass, that they which have been of
the household of Faith, are strangers for a time, and after a sort do cease
to be sheep: but these things are nothing repugnaunt with this sentence of
Christ for this is the simple meaning of Christ that all the elect of God,
though they have been tempted with an innumerable sort of errors, are
notwithstanding kept in the obedience of godly Faith, least they should be
made a pray for Satan and his ministers. And this work of God is no less
wonderful, when he gathers together the sheep that for a time have gone
astraye, than if they should have remained shut up in the sheepefolde for
ever. For this is always and without exception true, that they are not of us,
i. John i, i9
which go out from us: but they which are of us do abide with us to the end
of the world.

Bv. Therefore because the elect have always the marcke of Gods Children
and of the Lords slocke printed in their hearts, by and by they know that
the same which is set forth by false teachers, proceeds from another
spirit.

These sheep love Christ, desyer christ and seek after Christ: if any man
therefore preach him, if any man bring his word, they joyfully receive the
same: whereas they do not know a strangers voice but flee from the same. They
are strangers which differ from Christ, which want the spirit of Christ,
and which abhor the voice of Christ, that is to say they are strangers
which forsake the true Faith. The Bishop of Rome a false teacher.
Wherefore let not the Bishop of Rome marvel that we will not hear his voice:
For he preaches not unto us Christ the true Shepherd and in him all things,
but he preaches unto us him self.

For he would seem to be, and would be accounted in deed, the head of the
universal Church, he boasts him self to be the great Pastoure in earth, the
vicar of Christ, which can bind and remit our sins. Therefore seeing we are
Christ's and do know no man's voice but the voice of this our Shepherd, let
that Lycaon, with his deceyuours, and false teachers go to the place which he
has deserved. Lycaon was a King of the Archades who went about by murder to
deface the God Jupiter, as Ovid writes.
C. But if so be the number of the Faithful be less then were to be wished,
also if so be many out of a few slide away, the godly teachers have herewith
all to comfort them selves that Gods elect which are the sheep of Christ
hears them. A. He which knows God (says saint John) hears us. C. It is
our parts dilligently to endeavor our selves, and by all means to seek to
bring the whoale world to the unity of faith, if it might be: in the mean time
let us be contented with our number be it never so small.

9. I am the door: by me if any man enter in, he shall be safe, and shall
go in and out, and find pasture.

I am the door R. Twice Christ calls himself the Door, not by superfluous
repitition, but by a necessary explication of a double Door. B. For there is
a Door of true pastors, and another also for sheep, as we have declared
before in the seventh verse.

By me if any man enter. C. A notable consolation for the godly: For Christ
promises unto them health, and a prosperous state. Then he expresses two
parts: the first is, that they shall go safely whether soever it shall be
needful: the second is, that they shall eat to their contentation. By
egresse and regresse, that is to say, by going out and coming in, the
Scripture often times means all the actions of man's life. 2. Par. 2.10 Deu,
28.6 Psa 12i, 8
M. as in the first Chapter of the second book of Cronicles in the eight and
twenty Chapter of Deuteronomie, and in the hundred and one and twenty
Psalm. C. Therefore in these words a double use of the Gospel is commended
unto us: the first, that in Christ our souls shall find pasture, which
otherwise are ready to pine, and are fed with nothing but wind: the
second, that he will be a sure defense and forte to us, against the invasion
of Wolves and thieves. R. For the Gospel, the words of life, righteousness,
salvation, life, and all Gods graces, are pasture. And all these things are
found by faith in Christ. If any man by reason of sin, Faith finds Pasture.
does hunger after righteousness: If any man by reason of affliction, do
hungar after consolation: If any manne by reason of death do hunger after
life, he shall find pasture in Christ, that is to say, righteousness,
consolation, and life: M. he shall enjoy all the benifytes of the kingdom of
heaven, and shall be satisfied at the full.

A. This is even the very same which he expressed at a another time, saying,
Ioh. 6.35
He which comes unto me, shall not hungar and he which believes in me
shall not thirst. Bv. Read also the three and twenty Psalm.

10. A Thief comes not but for to steal, kill, and to destroy: I am come
that they might have life, and that they might have it more aboundantlye.

By a sertaine Antithesis, Christ compares his word and Gospel, with false
doctrine. C. And does as it were pull us by the ear, lest falling a sleep,
the ministers of Satan do circumuent us before we be aware.

For our overmuch security brings to pass, that being naked on every side
we are in the danger of false doctrines, because we are not circumspect and
fearful enough of so many false teachers. It is not without cause therefore
that our savior Christ affirms that false teachers, how smoothely soever
they insinuate them selves, do always bring with them dedly poison, to the
end we might be the more careful to drive them away.

A. The like admonition the Apostle Paul gives us, saying, Take heed that no
man spoil you through vain Philosophy: Again he says, now I beseech you
brethren, mark them which cause division, and give occasions of evil, Romans
6.i7
contrary to the Doctrine, which ye have learned, and avoyde them. For they that
are such serve not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own belly: and with sweet
and flattering words deceive the hearts of the Innocents.

Also he says, For such false Aposteles are deceitful workers transformed
into the Aposteles of Christ.

And no marvel: For Satan himself is transformed into an Angel of light.
2, Cor, 11.13
Therefore it is no great thing though his Ministers be transformed as the
Mininisters of righteousenesse whose end shall be according to their works. Bv.
These things are applied unto those, which seek not after Christ, and enter
not in by the door. These verily rob God and Christ of his honor: For when
they ought to have given the word of God and the Doctrine of the Gospel to
the Church, whereby they should have learned that al fullness is in Christ,
who is given to us of God to be wisdom, righteousenes, sanctification, and
redemtion, they in steed of these did set before men, 1. Cor. i.13.
human inventions, the decreese of the Fathers and of the Church, whereby
they might learn that men are Justified by works and merits, that they are
acceptable unto God by monastical vows, by the Intercession and worshipping
of Saints, by the cellebration of the mass, by Indulgencis and pardons, which
they sell for great sums of money, in the mean time defrauding and spoiling the
^oore.

R. They repeat the words of the Gospel, but withal they add their own
inuencions, concerning the satisfaction of works, the merits of Saints, the
pain of Purgatory, and concerning the toys of the Mass, by which they
deceive, seduce, and at the last slaye the consciences of men, which hear them.

Bv. For they them selves kill men's souls: as when they preach salvation
where no salvation is: life, where there is nothing but death: grace, where
there is nothing but wrath: kylling the sincere confessors of the Evangelical
doctrine. And above all things they take from the Sheep their lawful
liberty, and do oppress them with unjust and cruel Laws, showing them
selves in all things to be Tyraunts and not Sheepheardes.

Against Such Sheapheardes the Lord speaking by the Prophet says, Ezec, 34.2
zach. xii, 5
VVoe unto the shepheardes of Israel, that feed them selves: should not the
Shepherds feed the flocks? Ye eat the fat and cloth ye with the woll, ye
kill them that are fed, but ye feed not the Sheep. Now let all those which at
this day glory and boast of the title and name of Pastors try, and examine
their manners disposition, words and deeds, and let them Judge hereby whether
they be Sheepheardes or thieves and Murderers.

I am come that they might have life. Bv. This he adds to the words going
before by an Antitheses or comparison.

As if he should say, I came that the sheep might have life and the same
abundantly and eternally. And by life he understands al those benefits which
the faith and diligence of Shepeheards gives unto the Sheep, but especially
everlasting life, which Christ Jesus the Prince of sheapheardes only gives.
Ezec, 34, i6 22.
I will feed my Sheep (says the Lord) I will seek that which was lost,
and bring again that which was driven away and will bind up that which was
broken and will strengthen the weak C. This Christ applies to him self, and
gives us also to understand, that they only are given over for a pray unto
Thieves and wolves which will not be with in the reach and compass of his
Sheepehooke: and to comfort us the more he promises life, yea everlasting life
to those which will not fall away from him. And verily, ye more that a man
profits in the faith the more nere he comes to the fulness of life: because
the Spirit grows in him which is life. Notwithstanding there are some which
refer this more ample life, to that which immediately follows this present
life, when death has neither place, nor power.

11. I am the good Sheapheard: A good Sheapheard gives his life for the
Sheep.

Bv. Now the Lord goes forward to explicate the rest also of the propounded
parable.

He had said, He which enters in by the door is the Sheapheard of the Sheep
and straight after that he said, I came that they might have life, and that
they might have it more abundantly: and now more plainly he expounds all
these things and says, I am the good Sheapheard which enter in by the door*
and which do all things lawefully, and not by subtlety: I teach that truth
and salvation ought to be sought there, where in deed it is to be found, that
is to say with me which am the true lively, and most mighty Son of God. M,
For I am that good Shephearde of whom the Prophets have Prophesied in diverse
places. Esaias 40.11 Eze. 34.23


Christ therefore took upon him the person of a Shepherd, and preaches him
self to be the only Sheapheard: as in very deed this honor and title
belongs unto none but to him: For so many as are faithful pastoures of the
Church, because he raises them up, he endueth them with necessary gifts,
governs them with his spirit, and works in them: the which let not but
that he aloan should govern and be the true pastor of his Church. For
although he uses their Ministry, yet notwithstanding he ceasseth not to do
the office and duty of a Pastoure. To be short, seeing the name of a Sheapheard
does belong unto other men as well as to Christ, we may perceive that Christ
does communicate his honor with his ministers, insomuch that he abides still
as well their pastoure, as the Sheapheard of the flock.

R. And by this name Shepherd Christ teaches with how great care he feeds
his sheep. For the office of a sheapheard is very painful and careful as we
may read concerning Jacob who said, I was in the day consumed with heat,
Gen, 31.4
and with froste in the night and my sleep departed from mine eyes. Euenso
Christ watched day and night for his flock.

A good sheapheard gives his life. C. Christ was so careful for the health of
his sheep, that he spared not his own life: whereupon it follows, that they
are to unthankful, and worthy to perish an hoondered times, and to be in all
peril and danger, which refuse the custody and defense of so gentle and
loving a shepherd.

Therefore, Christ the good shepherde gave his life for his sheep. Esaias, 53.6
R. For he dyed for the faithful. And he is the better sheapheard, that he
dyed not for us when we were Just and godly, (for we have all gone astray and
are like to sheep that are lost) but when we were unjust and sinners.

For scarce for a Just man will any man dye, but paraduenture for a good man
some would dye. Romans 5.7
So that God commends unto his love that when as yet we were sinners, 1.
Pet. 3.28
Christ was offered to death for us.

A. Also, Christ suffered once the Just for the unjust. Mat. 15.24
And he him self testifies that he is not sent but to the lost sheep of
the house of Israel. R. But why did this good shepherd give his life for his
sheep? Surely, that he might overcome the wolf, that is to say, satan, and
the woluish Rabble also, that is to say, sin, affliction, death, and Hell. For
all these are vanquished and overcome by the death of Christ, and in steed of
those are set up righteousness, Joy, life, and heaven.

12. An hierling and he which is not the Sheapheard, neither the Sheep are
his own, sees the woolf coming, and leaves the Sheep, and the woolfe
catches and scatters the Sheep.

An Hyerling. C. Understand here those to be Hyerlinges, which embrace pure
doctrine, and which rather by occasion than of true zeal preach the truth:
Phili i.i5
seeking their belly, and the fleece of the sheep. C. Such though they serve
not Christ faithfully yet are they to be heard. For as Christ would have the
Scribes and Phariseis to be heard, because they sat in Moses Chair: euenso
we must so honor the Gospel, that we do not disdain the Ministers
thereof, though they be not so good as they ought to be. Hirelings.
If so be the Church might be purged from hyerlings it were far better: but
because it pleases God by this means to exercise the faith of the faithful,
and because also we are unworthy of that singular benefit, as to have Christ
shine to us in good Ministers, they are to be borne withal, howemuch soever we
dislike of them and think them unmeet. M. Christ therefore in this place
puts a difference between faithful Pastoures, and hyerlinges, saying that
the good shepherd does give his life for his sheep, but that the Hyerling does
flee when he seeeth the wolf coming. Bv. because he thinks that he
loses nothing when his flock perishes, over which notwithstanding the Lord
has made him ouerseer.

C. Notwithstanding there is great difference between this that Christ gave
his life for his sheep, Shepherds
and this, that other pastoures give their lives for their sheep.

For we know that there were many after Christ, which did not spare to shed
their blood for the health and benefit of the Church.

The prophets also before the coming of Christ spared not their lives. But in
this the difference consists that Christ gave his life to be the price of
satisfaction, shed his blood to pourge our souls, and offered up his body a
peace offering, thereby to pacify the wrath of his heavenly father. Now in the
ministers of the Gospel there can be no such cause, all which stand in need
of purgation them selves, and by that only sacrifice, are reconciled unto God.
But Christ disputes not here concerning the efficacy or fruit of his death,
that he might compare him self to others, but to prove what affection he
bears toward us: and than that he might inuit others to follow his example.
To be short, as it belongs unto Christ by his death to bring life unto us
and to perform whatsoever the gospel contains: euenso it is the general
office of all Pastoures, to defend the doctrine which they preach, even with
the sheading of their blood.

Neither the sheep are his own. These words contain some difficulty For if
they are not shepheardes in the Church of Christ, whose sheep are none of
their own, there shall be never a Pastoure in the Church but Christ only. What
means then the Apostle to say God has ordained some in the Church to be
Aposteles, some Euaungelistes, Ephe, 4, i2.
and some sheapheardes and teachers? Also Christ said unto Peter, John, 2i.i5.
Feed my sheep.

For he is the Pastoure which feeds, even as he is the teacher which
teaches,

Peter therefore was a shepherd, although he fed none of his own but the
sheep of Christ. C. But let us remember that they which are guided by the
Spirit of God they count that their own which belongs unto the head: not to
usurp power unto themselves, but faythfullye to keep that which is committed
unto their charge. For he which is truly joined unto Christ, will never
account that to be none of his own, which has been so dear unto him.

Leaves the sheep and flees. M. This proof plainly bewrays hyerlinges.

Because they have no care of the sheep and are not grieved at the dispersing
of the flock: they flee at the coming of the woolfe and forsake the sheep.

R. Are all therefore hierlinges which in time of persecution flee from their
Churches?

Act. 9.25
M. If so be we shall affirm this we shall condemn Paul, who, as it is well
known left the faithful at Damascus, and fled, and by flight, did escape the
mouth, as it were of the wolf. C. This question was handeled at full in oulde
time when the cruel tirauntes vexed the Church.

Some of the fathers were in this point to straight: othersome were more
Indifferent, who gave liberty to Pastoures to flee in such wise, that if so be
by their flight, they might do more good to all men than hurt their flock,
they might flee. And they Judged that this might be when the Church should not
be left destitude of able Ministers, and when the life of the Pastoure should
be so assaulted of the enemies, that their rage and madness could be appeaced
no ways else but by his absence. But in no wise they would permit this
liberty, if so be ye peril were general and appertaining to the woale ^locke,
Flight in time of persecution.
and that it were thought that the Pastoure fled more to save his own life,
being afraid of Death, then to do good: because the example of his fleeling
in this order shall do more harm, then his life shall profit or do good ever
after.

M. Therefore it makes great matter wherefore, how, and who it is that
fleeeth, euenas also it makes great matter wherefore, who, and how the sheep
be fed.

For as he is not by and by a true sheep heard which leads forth the sheep
unto Pasture euenso he is not straight way a hyerling, which in time of
persecution flees for a time. He which is a hyerling does not only flee when
he seeeth the wolf coming, but he also is a hyerling which in security
feeds the sheep because of his wages: he which in feeding has the
affection of a Pastor, is not made a hyerling by fleeing, seeing he was not a
hyerling before. Paul was not a Hyerling when he taught at Damascus and
preached Christ, therefore by fleing he was not made an hyerling. The hyerling
fleeeth for that cause (as says Christ) because he is a hyerling, and has no
care for the sheep. For this cause Paul did not slay, who, if it had so
plesed the Lord, was ready to dye: but because the Brethren did urge him to
flee insomuch that they did let him down in a Basket over the wall, he sled
that he might serve Christ longer. And this is that which the Lord says If
so be they persecute you in one City flee unto another. Mat 10.23


R Verily in this there can scarce any certain Rule be prescribed, when we
should flee, and when we should not flee.

For there is a time when Christ fled? again there is a time when he did not
slay; but willingly went to meet his adversaries.

There is a time when Paul was let down over the wall in a basket: again
there is a time when he said, What do ye weeping, and troubling mye heart?
for I am not, only ready to be bound, but also to dye at Jerusalem for the
name of the Lord Jesus.

For every man has the appointed time of his office, the which being not
finished, he may shoonne and avoid manifest perielles least God be tempted:
notwithstanding we must so flee that our office be not neglected.

Euenas our savior Christ says, There are twelve hours in the day. If any
man walk in the day, he stumbleth not: because he sees the light of this
world. But if any man walk in the night, he stumbleth: Ioh. 11.9.
because he has no light in him.

Act. 20.8
Bv. Satan and his ministers are the Wolves which scatter the flock: and
therefore we must beware of them.

13. So the hierling flees, because he is a hiereling, and cares not for the
sheep.

C. That is to say, He which has respect unto the fleece, and not to the
slocke, howsoever he deceive men in the quiet state and time of the Church,
when trouble aryseth, will show his falsehoode and treacherye.

PAR. For there are some which in time of prosperitye are careful enough for
the flock: but in time of perrill, they leave the flock to be dispersed and
made a pray of the Wolf. For they say within them selves, What if it
perish? I loose nothing: my hyer is sure enough: and if any part thereof be
lost, I had rather forgo the same, than to contend for other men's cattaile
with the Wolf.

14. I am the good shepherd, and know mine, and am known of mine.

M. He repeateth this, to declare in him self the conditions of the true and
good Shepherd, and so to show himself to differ in disposition from
hyerlinges.

And I know mine. C. In these words he commends his love toward us: for
knowledge comes of love, and brings also with it a care. 2. Tim 2.i9 Ioh.
13, 18
R. The Lord knows who are his, Also it is said, I know whom I have chosen.

M. There are two kinds of knowledge The one is, Knowledge of two sorts,
by which we know what a thing is. By this kind of knowledge al things are
known unto Christ, not only the sheep, but also the Goats, the Wolves, the
Thieves, and the Murderers, and that infernal Satan also. The other is that,
by which wknow such things as are our own, yea by which we know them, keep
them, and defend them. By this kind of knowledge the Reprobates are not
known, but the elect only. For to them it shall be said, Math 7.23
Depart from me ye workers of iniquitye. And again, Verylye, verylye, I say
unto you, I know ye not. Math 25.12
As Christ therefore has a special care over his sheep, because they hear
his voice, and follow him: even so he gives us to understand that he has
no care at all for those which obey not the Gospel: even as in the second
member he repeateth and confirms that which he had spoken before, namelye,
that he is in like manner known of his sheep.

15. As the Father knows me, so know I the Father: and I lay down my life
for the sheep.

M. There is a mutual knowlegde of familliars and near friends. The
heavenly Father has a son, whom he knows to be his, and of whom he is
acknowledged again to be the Father. Even so Christ has sheep which he
knows, and of whom in like manner he is known: C. Insomuch that it is no
more possible that he should forget us, than it is possible that the Father
should reject or neglect him.

M. The father seemed as though he had forsaken his son upon the Cross,
whom notwithstanding he acknoweledged to be most dear unto him. Euenso
although Christ sometime seems to leave and forsake his sheep in the midest
of afflictions, yet notwithstanding he will never leave them in peril, but will
have a continual care for them. C. In the mean time he would have us to do
our duty to him again, because as he does bestow all that power which he
has received of the father to help us, so he would have us obedient and
serviceable unto him again.

And I lay down my life. Bv. As if he should say, I have not without cause
called the congregation of the faithful my sheep. For I have washed them with
my blood, I have by my death brought them to life, and I have given my self
for them, not redeeming them with Goulde and Silver, but with my own life:
whereby Justly I affirm them to be mine.

Let them therefore consider what account they will make to the Prince of
Sheapheardes, which have used crueltye and tyranny toward another man's flock.

M. Christ uses the present tence, to declare that he is ready to suffer
death for his sheep.

16. Other sheep I have also, which are not of this foulde: them also must I
bring, and they shall hear my voice: and there shall be one sheepefould, and one
sheephearde.

Other Sheep I have. C. There is no doubt but that in speaking these words
he had respeect unto the Gentiles, Bv. minding to show that the Gentiles also
pertayned to the congregation of Gods people. But wherefore then, and how,
does he call them other sheep?

Which are not of this foulde. Of what fould I pray you were they not? were
they not of the Sheepfoulde of Christ? No verilye: but of the sheepfoulde of
the Iewishe Sinagogue.

C. For he calls the gathering together of the old people a Sheepfould, by
which collection they being taken from among other Nations of the world, grew
to one body, and the people of God.

For God did so severe the Jews to him self from among other people, that by
Rites and Ceremonies he did as it were hedge and fence them in, least they
should be mixed with the unbelieving: howbeit the door of the foulde, was the
free covenant of God concerning everlasting life, established in Christ.

Therefore he calls them other sheep, which had not the same mark, but were
of another kind. The sum is this, that the Pastoral office of Christ, is
not shut up in a corner of Iewrye, but is extended to the whole world. Bv. For
the sheep of Christ are not only in Iewrye and in Galilee, but in all places
of the world. For as there are many wolves within the Church, so without there
are many sheep.

C. For the unbelieving in them selves can be thought nothing less then
sheep. Wherefore this does appertain to the secreete election of the Father,
because we are sheep already unto God, before we feel him to be our
sheapheard: even as in another place, we are said to be enemies unto God at
such time as he loved us.

For the which cause also Paul says that God rather knew us, than we him.
Gala. 5.10


M. They therefore which at the first were far from God, are made neighbors
and Cittezens of the Saints, and of the houshoulde of GOD, by Faith.

Them also must J bring. C. He gives us here to understand that Gods election
is sure, insomuche that nothing can perish which he would should be saved.

For the secreete counsel and purpose of GOD, by which men are ordained to
life, is in due time made manifest by calling: and this calling also is
effectual, when GOD by his spirit regenerateth to him self those to be his
children, which at the first were borne of flesh and blood.

M. Furthermore Christ challenges this bringing or leading of the sheep to
him self, when as notwithstanding he does the same by the Ministerye of the
word, and by working of the holy ghost. Whereupon Paul also calls the
Apostles Ministers, and Ioynt-workers, or fellowelabourers of God.

i. Cor. 3.9.
Christ therefore brings his sheep by the ministerye of the word, and by the
operation of the holy ghost, by which he inspireth, opens, illuminateth,
regenerateth and governs the hearts of the elect.

C. Notwithstanding, here it may be demanded how the Gentiles were brought
that they might be infolded with the Jews. For it was not meet that the Jews
should reject and forsake the covenant which GOD had made with their Fathers,
that they might become Christ's Disciples: again, it was not meet that the
Gentiles should be under the yoke of the Law, that being ingraffed into
Christ, they might be associate with the Jews.

Here we must learn the distinction between the substance of the covenant,
and external accessions, Aunsvvere.
or commings to.

For the Gentiles could not otherwise come to the Faith in Christ, than by
embracing that everlasting covenant, in the which was founded the salvation of
the world. Thus were these prophesies fulfilled, Esai. 19.18
In that day shall five Cities in the land of Egipte, speak the language of
Canaan. And again, In those days shall ten men take houlde out of all
languages of the Nations, Zach. 8.23.
even take houlde of the skirte of him that is a Jew, and say, we will go
with you. Also it is said, that they shall come from far, and ascend into
mount Sion.

Therefore was Abraham called the Father of many Nations, Math. 8. xi.
because there should come from the East and from the West, and rest with him
in the kingdom of God.

And thus we are joined to the Jews in the unity of Faith, as touching the
substance: but the Ceremonies are abolished, least they should let him from
reaching forth his hand unto us.

And they shall hear my voice. Bv. That is to say, They shall receive the
doctrine of the Gospel. For, because they are of God, therefore they know the
voice of God.

M. Therefore, as it is the office of Christ to lead and govern us, so also
it is our duties to obaye him.

The sheep by nature hear the voice of the sheaphearde: and the elect have
the same propertye, not by the benefit of their first Natiuitye, but by the
gift of God. For he which before we were borne, chose us to life, the same
also endued our minds with this, that when the hour of our calling comes,
we should hear our heavenly Sheaphearde calling us, and should follow his
voice. Thus it is written: And they believed, Acts. i3.i4.
so many as were foreordained to life.

Notwithstanding, we must take heed least we judge any man rashly, as though
he should not appertain to the number of the elect, which does not come
without delay, being called to the kingdom of God. For the Apostle Paul did
strayte way believe and obey the Gospel. Gala. i, xlij.


It is most certain that they are Gods elect and chosen, which hear the voice
of this Sheapheard: but it is not by and by so certain that they are
Reprobates, which do not forth with hear, but make delay for a time.

And there shall be one sheapfoulde. Bv. When the Gentiles have received the
Evangelical Faith, they shall be associate and joined to the faithful people of
the Jews, and so of them both there shall be one foulde, that is, of the Jews
and Gentiles there shall be one Church: One God, (says Paul) one Faith, Ephe.
4.4
and one Baptism. Therefore we must be one, even as we are called into one
hope.

Unity of the Church.
M. Hereby we see whereof the unity of the Church of Christ consists, of the
which the Papists babble, and prate so much at this day. They place the
unity of the Church, in the Catholic obedience of the Bishop of Rome: as
though this were the true unity of the members of Christ, to be under the
Bishop of Rome, as under the universal head, and to use these Rites in the
Church, which were brought in by men for filthye lucers sake, to extinguishe
the Gospel.

But we have here a sheaphearde set before us, not the Bishop of Rome, yea,
neither Peter, nor Paul, but Christ the only begotten Son of God.

Bv. Furthermore, they which gather upon this place, that there shall be one
day a mutual consent and agreement amongst men, in the whole world, insomuche
that none shall remain an Infidel or ungodly, do err and know not the
Scriptures, neither do consider what is the state and drifte of this place.

R. Again there are some which gather of this place, that after the last day
of Judgment, all, both good and evil, shall be gathered together into one
place of eternal life: but the opinion of these men is most foolish.

For then shall the sheep be separated from the Goats, Mat. 25.46
and the judgment of the sheep shall be one, and the judgment of the Goats
another: as the Scripture plainelye testifyeth.

17. Therefore does my Father love me, because I lay down my life, that I
might take it again.

B. This is a digression, by which he declares how he would give his life
for his sheep, not that he ought death any thing, but because he would
wyllinglye suffer the same, that he might take his life unto him again by his
own power.

Whereupon it comes that he says, Herein is the love of my Father declared
in me: Herein it is certain that I am loved of my Father, that I give my
life, to take it to me again.

For this is divine power, the which being seen in me, who will not think
thereby that I am greatly loved of my Father? C. There is also another farther
cause why the Father loves the Son. For this voice was not heard in vain
from Heaven, This is my well beloved Son in whom I am well pleased. But
because for our sakes also he was made man, and because the father loved him
to this end, that he might reconcile us unto him, it is no marvel if he
affirm that he is therefore loved, because our salvation was dearer unto him
than his own life.

Bv. Hereby certainlye, it is evident that the Son dyed with the good will of
his Father, and that the will and purpose of them boathe was all one in
redeeming the world. C. This therefore is a wonderful commendation of the
goodness of God, which gives us just occasion to wonder at him, in that he
does not only power out his love into us, but also refers the same unto
us, as to the fynall cause.

And verilye Christ had no need to take upon him our flesh, in the which he
should be beloved, but only that in redeeming of us it might be a pleadge
of his Fatherly mercy.

M. And it is not without cause that the Lord makes mention here of his
fatherlye goodness. For he went about to beat down the malice of the
Phariseis, which went about to persuade the blind man, that Christ was not of
a God, but a sinner: that therewithal they might persuade that whatsoever he
spoke or did, was not acceptable unto God, That I might take it to me again.

C. Because the hearing of Christ's death might not a little grieve the
Disciples, and might also greatelye assaye their Faith, he comfort them with
the hope of the resurrection which should strayte after follow: as if he
should say, that he did not dye to be swallowed up of death, but that he
might by and by after arise a conqueror of death.

R. As if he should say, Therefore has GOD the Father glorified me above
all Creatures, because I am obedient to him, Phil. 2.8.
to the death, even to the death of the Cross.

For, because I have descended into the lower parts of the earth, and am made
the most abiecte and contemptible perform, therefore I will ascend above all
the Heavens, and God shall give unto me a name which is above all names, and
shall greatly honor me.

M. And whereas he arose not strait after he had suffered the death of the
Cross, but tarryed until the third day, it was done, to take away the
suspicion of a feigned death, and to set forth the glory of the unwonted and
miraculous resurrection.

Therefore in these words he declares, that his death was not after the
common manner of men, but dispensatorye: because life should presentlye
follow death.

C. And it becomes us at this day so to think of the death of Christ,
Resurrection of Christ.
that therewithal we remember the glory of the resurrection.

So we know that he is life, because he having fought with death, has
mightily overcome the same, and made a noble triumph.

A. For by death he has destroyed him which had power of death, that is to
say the Deuell, Heb. 2.i5.
and has made them free which all their life time were mere bondslaues.

18. No man takes it from me, but I lay it down of my self: I have power
to lay it down, and have power to to take it again: this commandment have
I received of my Father.

No man takes it from me. M. If so be to lay down his life signifies
nothing else but to dye, even as to take away the life, is to kill: How then
says he that no man takes away the same from him? Did not the Jews kill him?
Yes verilye. If then they killed him, they also took away his life from him.
In deed they took it away, but they did not extorte it from him by violence,
and against his will. For they could not have taken the same from him except
he would wyllinglye have dyed. Herevppon he adds this, saying: But J lay it
down of my self.

The which is not so to be understood as if he would kill him self, A. (as
the wicked Jews objected unto him,) M. but because the laying down of his
life was not in any man's power, but he him self of his own accord laid
down the same.

C. Therefore he does not only deny that men have power in them selves to
kill, unless he suffer them, but also exempteth him self from all force of
necessitye,

But it is otherwise with us, who of necessitye are subject to death by reason
of sin: Christ also him self was borne a mortal man: but this was
voluntarye submission, and not violent constraint.

This therefore pertains to the consolacion of the Disciples, least when they
should see him shortly after to be carried unto death, they might be
discouraged, as though he had been oppressed of his enemies, but might know
that the same came to pass by the wonderful providence of God, that he should
suffer death to redeem the flock.

And this is always a profitable doctrine, that therefore the death of Christ
was a satisfaction for sins, because it was a voluntarye sacrifice: according
to that saying of Paul, by the obedience of one man, many became sinners.

I have power to lay it down. R. This is even the same which he said
before, namelye, that he therefore suffered, because so it pleased him and the
will of his Father, not because either Caiphas or Pilate constrained him.
Whereupon it is said, The Kings of the earth, stood up, and the Rulers came
together against the Lord, and against his Christ. And of a truth, against
thy holy Child Jesus, whom thou have anointed, boath Herod and also
Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles, Acts. 4.27
and the people of Israel, gathered them selves together: for to do
whatsoever thy hand and thy counsel determined before to be done.

So, all the Godly are afflicted, not, because their adversaries can do any
thing by their own power against Godly, who are under the hand and most
mighty protection of GOD: but because so it pleases the will of their Father
which is in Heaven, the which will is executed by the wicked, to their
extreme destruction, but to the great profit of the Godly.

This commandment have I received. M. He now opens the well spring of his
power: namelye, his Fathers commandment. And by this commandment he
understands that will of God, and that eternal counsel, by which he had
determined to send his Son into this world, and to give him to death, for
the redemption of mankind.

C. Of the which counsel of the Father, he therefore puts us in mind,
that we might know that he has so great care of our salvation, that he
has given to us his only begotten Son, so dear and precious unto him.

And Christ him self which came into the world to show him self obedient
to his Father, confyrmeth this, that he has no other respect in all things,
than to do us good.

M. Therefore Christ in all things showed him self obedient to his Father.

Herevppon it is said, It is written in the volume of thy book concerning
me, that I should do thy will, Psa. 40.8
O my GOD I am content to do it.

A. And hereafter he says, The Prince of this world comes and finds
nothing in me: but that the world may know that I love the Father, John.
i4.i3
and as the Father commanded me so I do.

M. This is true obedience, which depends not only of the deed, but also
of the divine will.

19. There was a discention therefore again among the Jews for these
sayings.

B. The more that Christ bewrayed his diuinitye, the more euidentlye appeared
the difference between the elect and the Reprobate. Bv. And as truth and
pietye is always like it self, so falsehood and impietye, differs not a
straw breadth from it self.

C. This was the fruit of the Sermon of Christ, that he always won some
Disciples or other to him self: but because his doctrine had many adversaries,
thereof came the contencion, that they which at the first were as it were one
body of the Church, might be divided among them selves.

For with one consent all men professed that they worshipped the GOD of
Abraham, and that they followed the Law of Moses: Christ the hand of unity.
but now when Christ came among them, they began to disagree for his sake.

If so be that profession had been true, Christ, which is the most excellent
bond of Charity, and whose office it is to gather the dispersed together,
would not have dissolved and broken their consent and agreement: but by the
light of his Gospel he bewrayed the hipocrisy of many, who having only a
false and counterfaite show boasted them selves to be the people of God.

Contencions come by wicked men.
Thus also the wickedness of many men in these days brings to pass, that
the Church is troubled with dissentions, and that contencions are so fervent:
and in the mean time they which trouble the peace, lay the blame upon the
professors of the Gospel, calling them Scismatiks:

For, for this cause specially the Godly are offended at the Papists,
because their doctrine has shaken the quiet state of the Church.

But, if so be they would peaceablye submit them selves unto Christ, and
would subscribe vtno the truth, all contencions and troubles would strayte
way be appeased. But seeing they frete and fume against Christ, and will not
suffer the Godly witnesses of Christ to be at rest, except the truth of God
may lie hyd, and Christ may be banished from his kingdom, they falselye
object the fault of Scisme, which all men see, ought rather to be imputed
unto them.

Therefore we must always consider and see in Scismatikes, who they he which
depart from GOD and his pure doctrine. M. And the Evangelist in saying that
there arose a contencion again, sends the readers to those things which he
has declared in the Chapters going before, as in the seventh and ninth
Chapters. Ioh. 7.43. John. 9.16.


Bv. For there these very same Jews withstanding the manifest truth, do
cause no small troubles.

20. And many of them said, He has the Deuell and is mad, why hear ye him.

M. This Cavil also the adversaries of Christ used before. C. They do defame
Christ with the most odious reproach that they can devise, that all men might
abhor to hear him.

M. For they could not abide that people should hear him with delight and
admiration: for the which cause they went about to turn away the minds of
the simple from him, that they might not hear him any more afterward.

C. So the wicked least they should be constrained to give place unto GOD, do
furiouslye contemn him, and do stir up others also to the like madness,
least that the words of Christ at any time should be heard with silence and
quietness. But the doctrine of Christ is able sufficientlye to defend it
self against all Cauilles.

M. These wicked ones are very like unto them, which do priuitye sclaunder
the ministers of Christ, least they should be heard.

21. Other said, These are not the words of him that has the Deuell: Can
the Deuell open the eyes of the blind?

Bv. They which love the truth, constantlye defend the same, M. and do
defend Christ against the sclaunder of the wicked, by two arguments: the
first is, by his found and unblameable doctrine, the other is taken of the
present power of his miracles.

For he which has a Deuell can not hyde his madness, but bewrays the same
both by words and deeds. For a man which is possessed with a Deuell, can
neither speak nor do those things, which one that has his wits can do.

C. That therefore which these good men say, is as much as if they should
require that judgment might be given according to the matter it self. For
truth (as we said before) does always sufficientlye defend it self.

And this is the only buckeler of our Faith, that the wicked can never bring
to pass, but that the power and wisdom of God shall shine in the Gospel.

R. Also this varietye of judgments concerning Christ, is written for our
learning, that we might learn the nature of this world. For the world must
be judged of Christ: but behold now it usurps aucthority unto it self to
judge Christ.

How great therefore is the humilitye of Christ, who suffers him self to
be judged of others, when he is the judge of all men him self?

M. Christ is here condemned of madness, when he speaks the words of life
and of salvation: we are not better than he.

The same happened to Paul: Acts. 26, 24
Thou art mad Paul (says Festus) to much learning makes thee out of thy
wits. i. Cor. 2.i4.


So the doctrine of heavenly wisdom seems foolishness unto this world.
Bv. The rest which take Christ's part, leave unto us an example, that we might
do the like in contencions, which spring not of wholesome doctrine, but of
perverse judgments of minds.

M. For thus we may avoid and shake of the sclaunders of the enemies of the
truth.

Does the spiritual man run a whoring? Does the Vicker of Christ defend
Idolatrye? Does the Vicker of Christ seek after the power and honor of this
world? Does the Vicker of Christ sell all holy things? Does the Vicker of
Christ show tyranny upon the flock of Christ? Does the Vicker of Christ
hold war, shed blood, and tread under his feet the Magistrates which are
appointed of God?

22. And it was at Jerusalem the Feast of Dedication, and it was winter.

Bv. There follows now a notable and worthy disputacion, wherein Jesus is
proved to be Christ, that is to say, the Messiah, and the blessed Son of
the eternal God for ever.

And this serves to the confyrmation of that which went before, by which
Jesus taught that he was the Sheephearde, the Savior, and the life of all the
Faithful throughout the whole world.

The feast of Dedication C. That is to say, the Feast of innovation, or
renewing: because the Temple which was polluted, The feast of dedication.
by the commandment and aucthoritye of Judas Machabeeus, was consecrated a
fresh: and then it was appointed that every year there should be a Feast
day of new Dedication, to put the people in mind of the grace and favor of
God, who had taken from them the Tyrant Antiochus. R. Read the second
Chapter of the second Book of Machabees.

Bv. Notwithstanding there are some which refer this day of Dedication, to
that first day, when the people returned from Babylon, of which mention is
made in the sixth Chapter of the first book of Esdras.

Read Josephus in his two and twentye Book, the fourteen Chapter. But it
makes no great matter, of which Dedication, or Renouation, you say that this
was the Feast day, whether of the first, or the last.

And it was winter. M. The reason here was, for that the house of God could
not be finished and dedicated in the Summer, because of the wickedness of the
adversaries, insomuche that they were constrained to end the same in Winter.

23. And Jesus walked in the Temple, even in Salomons Porche.

C. Christ according to his manner went into the Temple, that having the
greater aucthoritye, his preaching might be the more fruitful.

Bv. Concerning Salomons Porche, read the nineteen Chapter of the third book
of Kings.

C. The Evangelist calls Salomons Porche the Temple: not because it was the
Sanctuarye, but a part of the same. M. Therefore this place in the which
Christ walked, belonged not to the Scribes and Phariseis, but to the common
sort of people.

Bv. For it is certain that this Porche, of the which mention is made here,
was not the same which is described in the book of Kings, (for that was
taken away by the Chaldeans, and quite overthrown) but the same which the
Jews strayte after their return from their exile into Babylon, builded
according to the pattern of the old.

24. Then came the Jews round about him, and said unto him, How long do
thou make us doubt? If thou be Christ, tell us plainelye.

Then came the Jews. M. No man need to doubt but that these Jews were of
the adversaries of Christ, and that they propounded this question unto him
subtly and maliciously. C. For the common sort of people could without
deceypt require Jesus to show him self openly that he was sent of GOD to
be a Savior: but these men captiouslye and deceyptfullye went about to
make him confess this before the multitude, that by a tumulte he might be
destroyed, or else that the Romans might lay hands on him.

M. Behold therefore how Christ the most meek Lamb is beset on every side
with cruel ravening Wolves, but, yet notwithstanding, being held up with the
divine providence, he does without fear Preach and set forth the truth.

How long do thou make us doubt? C. They complain that they are suspense
and doubt, and they affirm that they are so desirous of the promised
redemption, that they have a continual longing and desire for Christ.

And this seems to be a very godly affection: for Christ only can truly
pacifye and quiet our minds. Even as he him self says, Come unto me all
ye that travail and are heavy laden and I will refreshe you. Mat. 11.28.


But they unjustly accuse Christ, as though hitherto he had not stablished
their Faith. For the fault was in them selves, if so be they had not the
perfect and true knowledge of him. But this is always the manner of the
unbelieving, rather to wander in doubtfulnesse, than to be founded upon the
sure word of God. The which also we may behold at this day in many men,
who wyllinglye shutting their eyes, do scatter abroad their clouds of
doubting, thereby to obscure the clear light of the Gospel.

M. That which these men did was nothing else but mere hipocrisye. For if so
be they doubted whether this were Christ or no, why then had they conspired
already, John. 9.
that if any did confess him to be Christ, he should be cast out of the
Temple.

Tell us plainlye. C. There meaning is that he should not any more couertlye
insinuate him self. Thus they accuse his doctrine of obscuritye, which
notwithstanding was plain and evident enough, if so be the same had not been
preached to wylfull, deaf, and blind men.

M. They seem also to reprehende him, because he had said that he was Christ,
but yet couertlye, not before the Rulers, and Doctors, but before the rude and
unlearned multitude.

Therefore now they require, that he would not only speak the same
freelye, but also that he would speak the same unto them, namelye to the
Rulers, and Doctors.

C. This historye also teaches us that we cannot escape the lyinges in wait,
and sclaunders of wicked men, if so be we be called to preach the Gospel.

Wherefore we must not be made a fearde as with any new or unwonted thing,
when we see the same happen to us, which has happened already to our Master.

25. Jesus answered them I toulde you, and ye believe not: the worckes that I
do in my Fathers name: they bear witness of me.

I told you, and ye believe not. Bv. Christ modestlye makes answer unto the
question, and teaches that nothing has been hitherto neglected of him in his
doctrine, but that the whole fault and blame of ignorance rested in them which
were negligent and disobedient: and withal he proves him self to be the
Messiah, and shows the cause unto the Jews, why they did not believe the
same.

C. Christ does not make semblaunt, as though he were Christ, neither yet
does he teach them as though they were apt to be taught: but does rather
cast their malice in their teeth, in the which they were obstinate: because
hitherto they had profited nothing being taught by the word and works of God.

He imputes it therefore unto their fault that he is not known of them.

As if he should say, My doctrine of it self is easy enough to be
understood: but the fault is in you, because ye do maliciously withstand
God: By whose words only men are taught that I am Christ: Wherefore seeing
ye only behold my contemptible show and base condition, because I come not in
Kinglye Pomp, as ye looked for, it cannot be that ye should believe my word.

But go to, be ignorant of my person (as the Law commands that no
man's person should be known in judgment) and take houlde of my word, and
judge according to my word and not according to the outward show: and then it
cannot be but that ye shall believe.

The works that I do. C. He speaks of works also, that he might convince
them of double obstinacye. For beside his doctrine they had evident testimonye
in miracles, if they had not been to unthankful unto God. When he adds,

Jn my Fathers name. M. He gives us to understand, that to believe in
Christ, is also to believe in God the Father: and to reject Christ, is to
reiecte the Father.

Bv. The same argument also he used in the fifte Chapter going before.

26. But ye believe not because ye are not of my Sheep, as I said unto you.

M. Secondlye he says.

Ye believe not. For unbelief is reprehensible, when men believe not the word
of the son of GOD, the most excellent Sheapheard: the which in the words
going before he objected unto them. And this incredulitye is inexcusable, when
men believe not the works of God. Even as he him self will declare hereafter
in plain words, saying: Ioh. i5.
If so be I had not come, and had not spoken unto them, they had had no sin.
etc. But now he alleges a farther cause why they believed neither his
miracles nor his doctrine, namelye, because they were Reprobates. And, we must
noate the purpose of Christ. For, because they boasted them selves to be the
Church of God, least their unbelief should derogate any thing from the
Gospel, he pronounces that the gift of Faith is special.

And verily to the end men may know God, it is necessary that they first of
all know them selves, Galat. 4.9
as says the Apostle Paul: also they to whom God has no respect, must
needs be always far from him.

M. Whereby we gather that they can not believe Christ, Titu. i.i.
which pertain not unto Christ. Therefore the faith in Christ, is not the Faith
of Goats, of Dogs, or of Swine, but of Sheep, that is to say of the elect,
as says the Apostle. Bv. The Reprobate have no simple disposition and apt to
be taught, but a hard, variable, wanton, corrupt, and perverse disposition,
because they will not suffer them selves to be purged and restored. R. They are
the Sheep of Christ's which hear Christ's voice.

The Phariseis hear not the voice of Christ (for they know his person, but
not his word) therefore, they neither are his sheep, neither believe, nor are
saved. C. If any man should murmuringlye obiecte and say, that the cause of
unbelief rests in God, because it is in his power only to make sheep: we
must answer that he is free from all blame, seeing men by their own
voluntarye wickedness reject his grace.

God gets so much Faith unto him self as suffices, but the wyld Beasts
are never tame, until such time as by the spirit of God, they are turned
into Sheep.

They which are such shall seek in vain to lay the blame of their madness
upon GOD, which is proper to their own nature.

To be short Christ gives us to understand that it is no marvel, if so be
he have few that embrace his Gospel, because so many as by the spirit of GOD
are not subject to the obedience of Faith, are untamed and wild Beasts.

Wherefore it is much more unmeet and absurd, that the authority of the
Gospel should depend upon the faith of men: but rather let the faithful
way and consider, how much more they are bound unto GOD than they which
are blind, when as they them selves by the illumination of the spirit are
drawn unto Christ.

M. Hereby also we see that we must not by and by conceal the truth before
those which believe not. For although the unbelieving are unworthy to hear the
same, and are none of the elect: yet notwithstanding it is so appointed by God
that the Gospel of grace should also be preached to the Reprobate and
unbelieving, not because there is any hope that they should believe, but
because it is so meet that the light of the truth should above all other
things shine before the eyes of all men, as does this visible Son: and also
take from them all excuse, that the judgment of God may be just: by which
the unbelieving shall be damned.

Last of all, the Ministers of the Gospel have here wherewithal to comfort
them selves, if so be their labor be not profitable to all men.

27. My Sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me.

M. Christ does not in vain repeat the conditions of the Sheep, and of the
Pastor. For this is a great consolation in aduersitye, that Christ is our
Sheaphearde, and that we are his Sheep.

C. Now therefore he proves by the contraries, that they are none of his
sheep, because they believe not the Gospel. For those whom God has elected,
he effectuallye calls: and so by Faith the Sheep of Christ are proved. And
therefore the name of sheep is given to the Faithful, because they submit
them selves to be governed under the hand of the most mighty Sheaphearde, and
forsaking their former brutishe wildenesse, do show them selves tractable and
obedient.

B. By these words Christ plainlye teaches that all things depend upon the
divine election, and that they to whom it is given to be sheep, can never
perish.

For in this place we do hear that they only hear the voice of Christ,
(that is to say, do receive the same by faith) which are sheep.

Now whereof shall it come that some are sheep, that is to say, capeable of
the doctrine of Christ, and others not?

No doubt because the one are endued with the good spirit of God, and the
other not so.

For the Apostle Paul does attribute the knowledge of divine things, i: Cor.
2.i4
to such as are endued with the spirit of God. But whereof comes that they
are endued with the spirit of God, and the other not? This verilye is the
cause, that the one are ordained to life, and the other to death: that the one
are given to the Son to be saved, the other not so.

Let us give therefore this glory unto the Lord, that he may give his
Spirit, without the help of our works.

The which when he has determined to give, we our selves may work
therewith to instruct and teach: notwithstanding, if he give unto them the
understanding of our word by the same Spyrite, to whom we speak.

Bv. Moreover, in this place Christ speaks three things of his Sheep.

First, they hear, not every voice, but my voice: and they hear, not with the
ears of their body only, but also with the ears of their mind. Secondlye,
as they know the voice of the Sheaphearde, and receive their sheepehearde with
great pleasure, love him, and reverence him: so in like manner the Sheaphearde
knows them, receives, saves, iustifyeth, and sanctifyeth them. Thirdlye,
they do not lie Idellye in the mire, neither do they unadvisedly wander
through the fields and wooddes: but do follow the sheephearde, framing all
things after the prescripte example of the Sheapheard, upon whom only they
depend, upon whom aloane they look continuallye, following Heavenly and
everlasting things, and contrariwise forsaking earthlye and momentary things.

This is the disposition, these are the manners, and deeds of the Sheep of
Christ: from the which these unbelieving Jews were most void.

C. Furthermore this is no small consolation to all godly teachers, that how
little soever the greater part of the world does harken unto Christ, yet
notwithstanding, he has his sheep, which he knows, and of whom in like
manner he is known.

Let them study so much as in them lies to gather the whole world unto the
sheapfoulde of Christ: but when they have not success according to their
desire, let them content them selves with this one thing, that by their labor
so many as are sheep shall be gathered together.

28. And I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither
shall any man pluck them out of my hand.

And I give unto them eternal life. M. So he said before, I came that they
might have life. Bv. But all men know that none gives life everlasting but
God only.

Therefore it follows that Christ is natural God. So that more fullye,
plainelye, and firmelye, he shows him self to be the true Messiah, the true
Son of the true, liuelye, and euerlyuing God, coequall with the Father in all
things: M. seeing there is no mortal man found, which can give this present
life which is momentany, much less that everlasting life which is without
end: the which notwithstanding Christ gives unto his sheep.

This word (Give) excludes all man's merits. And the present tence or time
which he in this place uses, signifies that the faithful, in this world do
receive the right and scaling of everlasting life by faith in Christ. John. 17.3


A. For it is evident that everlasting life consists in the knowledge of God
and of his Son.

And they shall never perish. M. Therefore we receive from Christ, not only
everlasting life, but also perpetual defense and safetye: who by his
omnipotent power, delivers his from destruction, and from all euilles. M. We
must also noate that he says not, They shall never loose or lack any thing,
but, They shall never perish.

It is one thing if any of our goods perish, and another thing, if we
perish our selves.

Both happen to the wicked and unbelieving: they do destroy both their
Riches, and them selves.

From a Christian those things which are earthlye, may be taken away if it
seem so good unto the Lord: but he can not perish.

Satan also has no small power given him over the goods of the Godly, A.
yea, Job. 2.
and upon their bodies also, (as we may read of holy Job) M. but upon them
selves no power at all.

How happy then are they which cannot perish, although they loose much of
their external goods? Contrariwise, how miserable, and unhappy are they,
which so greedelye gape after corporal Riches, that they either fear or
bewail the loss of them, making no count at all, that they them selves may
be saved for ever.

Who sees not that this destruction turns most to our loss, by which not
our goods, but our selves do perish.

T. Of this loss our Savior speaks thus, What does it advantage a man if he
win the whole world, and loose his own soul?

Neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand. Bv. The Sons hand in this
place, is nothing else but his power, his Majesty, care, help, and defense. M.
He says not, Neither shall any man go about to take them out of my hand,
but, Neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand. For although the Sheep
which the Father has committed unto Christ, can not be taken from him, yet
notwithstanding they are subject to many snares and lyings in wait.

PAR. For sheep are simple, innocent, and destitute of all the helps of this
present life: Satan can never pull Gods elect out of the hands of Christ.
against these, the world with all his power sets him self.

But yet Satan shall never be of such power that he shall be able to pluck
them out of the hands of Christ.

The world has the aucthority of the Phariseis, the dignitye of the Priests,
it has armed Kings, Governors, Judges, Throanes, Prisons, Chains, scourges,
Axes, Banishments, Deaths, and whatsoever else to terrifye a constaunt mind.

It has on the contrary part^ pleasures, Riches, Honors, Dignityes, and
whatsoever else to corrupt minds that are incorrupted.

All these snares and baytes the world uses, to pluck the sheep out of the
hands of Christ Jesus: but no man can pluck them out of his hand.

M. Furthermore, Satan him self goes about like a roaring Lion, seeking
whom he may devour, and whom he may overcome by his temptacions and
subtle sleyghtes: to these are added sins, the torments of consciences, the
horror of death, and hell it self. But none of these shall pull the sheep out
of the hands of the sheaphearde.

C. This is the incomparable fruit of Faith, that Christ bids us to be
secure, and sure, when we are gathered hy Faith into his sheapfoulde.

But we must also noate with what stay this certaintye is vphoulden: that is
to say, because he shall be the faithful keeper of our salvation. For he
testifies that it is in his hand. And if this will not suffice, hear what
follows.

29. My Father which has given them me is greater than all: and no man is
able to take them out of my Fathers hand.

M. Because it seemed very rash that he should attribute so great power unto
him self, seeing he appeared to be no better then a man: he adds that his
power is not human, but divine, and that his sheep are not gotten by human
strength, but given to him of God the Father, and that therefore the whole
cause belongs as well to God, as to him self, and for this cause, that it is
impossible that any man should pull the sheep out of his hands, which his
Father has given him.

As if he should say, My hand is my Fathers hand, and my sheep are my
Fathers sheep. No man can take them from me, because no man can take them out
of my Fathers hand. C. A notable place, by which we are taught that the
salvation of all the elect is no less sure, than the power of God is
invincible. Hereby also we gather how vain the trust of the Papists is,
which rests upon free will, upon their own strength, and upon the merits
of works. Christ has far otherwise taught those that are his, that they may
know that they are in this world, as in the midst of a wood, and in the
hands of thieves: and furthermore that they are naked, and subject to the
pray, and carrye in their own bosom the dagger and cause of death, that
bearing themselves boulde upon the only custody and defense of God, they
may walk securely without fear.

30. And I and my Father are one.

M. As if he should say, I do nothing in this matter, I have nothing, I can
do nothing, I give nothing, and I am nothing of my self without my father.
All that are mine are his, and whatsoever he has or does it is mine and he
works the same by me. We do all one thing, neither are we divided. But
Christ does not dispute here concerning the unity of substance, but of the
consent and agreement which he has with the Father: as, that whatsoever Christ
does, is confirmed by the Fathers power.

Howbeit the ancient Fathers have referred this place to the divine substance
of Christ, against the heritiques.

31. Then the Jews took up stoanes again, to stoane him withal.

C. As piety is zealous in defending the glory of GOD, which the spirit of
God does moderate: so infidelity is the Mother of madness: and the Devil
does so prouoake the wicked, that they desire and seek nothing but murder. Bv.
The Jews being moved and stirred up with the words of Christ, took up
stoanes, as we read that they did at a another time, in the end of the eight
Chapter going before.

This success shows with what mind they questioned with Christ. For a
manifest confession, of the which they feigned themselves to be very desirous,
made them by and by to fall into outrageous madness: and yet notwithstanding
there is no doubt, but that when they were thus violentlye carried to oppress
Christ, they pretended the color and cloak of judgment, Deu. i3.5 Leui 24.16
as though they did the thing according to form of Law, where God commands
false Prophets to be stoaned to death.

32. JESUS answered them many good works, have I shevved you from my
Father: For which of them do ye stoane me?

M. To the end Christ might reprehande their unspeakable malice and
madness, he does not only object his innocencye, but also (which is more)
his notable and wonderful beneficience showed toward them: C. and he does
not only deny them to have any cause why they should so rage, but does also
accuse them of ingratitude, for that they so vnthankefullye requighted the
benifites of God: neither does he say that he had well deserved at their
hands for one or two works sake, but says that he had been benefyciall
unto them in many things. As if he should say, M. What cause have ye
against me, whereby I may seem worthy unto you to be stoaned to death? Bv.
Malefactors were wont to be punished and stoaned to death: but as for me,
what evil have I done? What have I deserved? which have hurt no man but have
showed an innumerable sort of benefits to every one of you, and the same,
from my Father, that is to say by my deuyne power.

C. For his meaning is, that God was the authoure of those works. And this
interrogation is of greater weight to prick their consciences, then if he had
spoken by a simple affirmative. To show good works is an Hebrewe phrase, in
steed of to do good works the which phrase is often times used in the holy
Scriture, as when it is said, Many say who will show us any good? Psalm 4.7
Psalm. 60, 5 Psalm, 71, 20
Also, Thou haste showed thy people hard things. Again, Thou have showed me
great trobles For the Lord had done many good works already, by which he had
brought health unto men, and had thereby showed what they ought to have looked
for at his hands namely, nothing but assured salvation and everlasting life.
This he exhorted the Jews to believe, and declared that all his works
belonged to the Father, that they might assuredly believe him. And these were
the things which so stirred them, being nothing but good and wholesome works.
Rightly therefore he deemaunded of them for which of his good works they went
about to stoane him.

M. It was extreme Ingratitude and wickedness to render evil for so many
benefits, and to go about to kill the benefactoure.

Psalm. 35.i2
Of such unthankful persons David complains saying, They rendered me evil
for good. Therefore if so be in like manner evil shall be rendered to any man
for good, let him comfort him self with the lot of Christ of the prophets and
of the Apostles

33. The Jews answered him saying: For thy good works sake we stoane thee
not, but for thy blasphemy, and because that thou beeinge a man, make thy
self God.

R. The wisdom of this world will not seem unjustly and wickedly to
persecute Christ and his Gospel. Wherefore they feign and Immagine causes
against the Gospel: and the setters forth of the same, which they think
worthy of punishment the which it pretends to cloak the envy against Christ
and the word of God.

C. Wherefore it is necessary that a good conscience be unto us as a brazen
wall, by which we may strongly repel the reproaches and sclaunders with the
which we are misereported of. For how soever they color and cloak their
malice, and what ignominy soever they bring unto us for a time, if we fight
for gods cause he will not deny him self, but will defend and maintain his
truth. R. Christ was accused of blasphemy against God and of Sedition
against Sesar: The Prophets were accused of defection, from the Law and of
seducing: The Apostles and Martires were accused, partly of sedition, and
partly of blasphemy against God.

And so great wickedness are spread abroad of the Godly before the reason and
wisdom of the world, that whosoever kills them, he thinks that he does
unto God good service, as shall be said in the sixeteenth Chapter following.

M. Here the enemies of Christ are constrained to acknowledge his good works.

For they say not thy works are evil: but they acknoweledg that to be true
which he said, I have showed unto you many good works: And yet
notwithstanding they do not give him thanks for these good works: but their
malice had so blinded them, that although they could not condemn the works
of Christ, yet nevertheless they went about to stoane him to death. Many such
enemies of the truth there are at this day, which condemn the lovers of the
Gospel, whose life and doings they cannot condemn. C. The name of blasphemy
the which profane wrighters use generaly for every kind of reproach, the
Scripture refers unto God, Blasphemy of two sorts
when his majesty and glory is defaced. And there are two sorts of
blasphemy, as either when God is robbed of his proper honor: ( R. as if so be
a man should arrogate that unto himself which is proper to God:) or else when
any thing is attributed and given to him, which his nature will not bear.
Therefore they call Christ a sacrilegious and blasphemous person, because he
being a mortal man usurped to himself divine honor. And this was a true
definition of blasphemy if so be Christ had been nothing more then a man.
Only they sin in this, that they refuse to behoulde the divinity whhich was
evident to be seen in his miracles.

34. Jesus answered them, is it not written in your Law, I said ye are Gods?

Bv. The Lord does wonderfully temper and frame his answer: C, And does
clear him self of the crime which was objected unto him, not denying him self
to be the Son of God, but defending the same to be truly spoken. And he uses
an Argument taken, not of the equalles but of the less to the more.

The scripture calls them Gods to whom God gives an honorable function: he
therefore is far more worthy of this titell of honor, whom God has chosen,
to excel all others. Whereupon it follows that they are evil and false
interpretours, which do admit the first, but in the second do take occasions
of offense B. he uses this word law here for Scripture, which often times is
called the Law.

C. But the testimony which our Savior Christ brings is taken out of the
eyghtie two Psalm where the Lord finds falte with the Kings and Judges of
the earth, Psalm. 28.6. Exodus 22
which abuse their Rule and power tyrannically to enjoy their own pleasure, to
oppress the miserable, and to commit all wickedness at their will. B. That is
to say, which Judge falslye.

C. And he vpbraideth them that they were so forgetful how and from whence
they received so great dignity, and because they profaned the name of God.
This Christ applies to the present cause, that they are honored with the
name of Gods, who are appointed ministers to govern the world. In the same
sense also the Scripture calls angels Gods, because by them the glory of God
does shine in the world.

35. If he called them Gods, unto whom the word of GOD was spoken, and
the Scripture cannot be broken.

C. By these words our Savior Christ means that Princes are ordered by the
sure commandment of God: Rule appointed of God.
Whereby we gather that government and rule sprang not up rashelye, or by the
error of men, but by the will and appointment of God: because he would have
politticall order among men, and government by equity and laws.

For the which cause Paul calls them Rebels unto God, which resyst power
because there is no power but the same is appointed of God. Romans 13. i


If any man object, that other callinges also are of God, and are allowed of
him, and yet for all that, Husbandemen, Neateheardes, Shoomakers, and such
like are not called Gods: we answer that this is not general, that whosoever
are called of God to some kind of life, should be called Gods: but Christ
speaks of Kings, whom God has advanced to a hyer degree that they might
rule and excel. To be short, we know that magistrates are therefore Gods,
because God has committed government unto them. M. And Christ might have
said, If so be he call Judges and princes Gods: but it pleased him rather to
say, If he called them Gods unto whom the word of God was spoken: that
he might also noate the subjection of Judges and Princes, and might extol the
majesty of GOD. For the word of God in this place, is taken for the
commandments, which GOD commands and inioyneth them to observe.

And the Scripture cannot be broken. C, That is to say, The doctrine of the
Scripture is inviolable, insomuch that it neither can nor ought to be dissolved
and broken of any man.

This place ought to be well noated that the Scripture may have his
aucthoritye. M. For the same is many ways defaced by wicked men, and by the
wisemen of this world, when they either add unto the same strange and forged
doctrine, or else corrupt the same by sinister and wrong exposytions, drawing
it into a contrary scence. But the Scripture cannot be broken or made
frustrate. And wherefore, because it is given by divine inspiration: and
leans not upon human, but upon divine authority.

36. Say ye of him whom the Father has sanctified and sent into the world,
Thou blasphemest: because I said, I am the son of God.

Say ye of him whom the Father. C. There is a certain sanctification which
belongs to all the godly: but Christ in this place chalengeth a far more
excelent snactifycation, namely for that he is one chosen out from amongst all
others, that in him the power of the Spirit, and the majesty of God may
appear: Ioh 6.27.
Even as he himself says that he was sealed of the same Father. M. He
says not, Whom the Father has begotten, because he thought it better to
signify unto us that he has received the dispensation of mankind, and the
state of a kingdom of his heavenly Father, as he is a man: Whereupon also
he added this.

And sent into the world. The Father has sent his Son, John ^.i6 Esaias 6i.i
Luk, 4.18
not only unto you Israelites, but into the world. For so GOD loved the
world that he gave his only begotten son. So that this sanctifycation in
other places is called annoyting. And this is properlye referred to the person
of Christ, Math, 3.i6.
as he was manifested in the flesh. M. And concerning this sanctifycation,
the aperition of the Dooue testified, which John the Baptist saw lighting upon
the head of Christ, when he baptized him in Jordan.

Therefore the father has sanctified the son, by whom we also are
sanctified, by whom he gives unto us the spirit of sanctifycation: by reason
whereof the Apostles in diverse places calls the faithful servants of Christ,
sanctified.

Thou blasphemest. C. The Arians have wrested this place to prove that Christ
by nature is not God. But Christ does not here dispute, who he is in him self,
but what men ought to Judge of him by his miracles being in humain flesh. For
we can never apprehend his eternal divinity, except we embrace him as he is
appointed a redeemer of his Father. Moreover Christ in this place did not
plainly testify who he was, but specially went about to refell and put away
the sclaunder which his enemies brought upon him.

Because I said J am the Son of God. M, He said not, Because I am God, but
because I am the Son of God, that he might bear with the infirmity of his
hearers who could better abide that he should call him self the Son of God
then to say, I am God.

37. If I do not the works of my Father believe me not.

38. But if I do, and if ye believe not me: believe the works that ye may
know and believe that the Father is in me, and I in him.

Bv. He calls the works which he did the works of his father, that is to
say divine works. For they are not therefore called the fathers works,
because the Son does not the same, but because he does them by the same
power and virtue, by the which he is equal with the Father. If so be (says
he) I do not such works as no man can do but God only, believe me not. C.
This is a kind of granting as if he should say, I would have you bound to
believe me for no other cause, then if the thing appear manifest enough unto
you: ye may bouldly reject me and escape unpunished, if so be God has not
openly testified of me.

M. I would to God they would speak thus, which boast them selves to be
Christ's vicars and the Successors of the Apostles. The Romish Anticrist says
in words, I am the vicar of Christ and he so violently requires him self to
be credited, that he threatens to such as deny it a thousand deaths, when as
notwithstanding by his works he shows him self plainly, not to be Christ,
but Antecriste, not the vicar of Christ, but the Minister of Satan. In words
he says, I am the servant of the servants of God, but by his works he
declares him self to be Lord of Lords. In words he says, I am the head of
the Church but by his works he declares him self to be the plague of the
Church, he would be counted most holy, when as his works show him to be
most profane.

What need many words? let him say, If I do not the works of the vicar of
Christ, of the servant of the servants of God, and of the most holy man,
believe me not.

Let the rest of the Bishopes say the like, which would be counted good and
true shepheardes.

If so be we do not the works of good Bishopes, believe us not. Let us also
say, which boast of Justification by faith If so be we do not the works of
those that are Justified, and of those that beeleeue, then believe us not.

But if J do and if ye believe not. C. As if he should say, To the end I
may suffer you to doubt of my doctrine I may not deny the miracles which I
have showed to be of God: therefore ye do willingly reject God and not man. In
this place we are taught not to be so discouraged with the baseness and
contempt of any man's person that we should refuse to believe those works,
which give evident testimony to the truth. For often tims it comes to
pass, that God works great things, by simple men.

That ye may know and. C. In that he places faith after knowledge, he does
it, because he had to do with unbelievers, who unless they were won and
constrained by experience, never would give place unto God. For such as are
rebelliouse and obstinate, will always know before they believe. And yet
notwithstanding God does so bear with us that by the knowledge of his works
he makes us apt to beeleeue.

But the knoweledge of God and of his secret wisdom, by order follows
Faith. Because the obedience of Faith opens to us the gate of the kingdom of
heaven. A. Concerning the conjunction of faith and knowledge, read in the
first Chapter going before beginning at the sixty nine verse.

That the father is in me and I in him. C. He repeateth the same which he had
spoken before in other words, saying I and the father are one. M. For that
unity is between the father and the Son that the Son is in the father, and
the father in the same. The father (says he) is in me, that is to say, the
power and virtue of God shows forth it self plainly in me, And I am in the
father, that is to say, I do nothing without the help of God: insomuch that
there is a mutual conjunction between me and my father. For he speaks not
here of the unity of escence, but of the manifestation of the divine power, in
the person of Christ, whereby it shall appear that he is sent of God. A. The
very same he repeateth in the tenth verse of the fowrteene Chapter following,
and that in the same sense.

39. Again they went about to take him and he escaped out of their hands.

Again they went about. Bv. Reason can take no place with mad men. M. The
Lord could not more plainly and expressly defend those things which he had
spoken in making answer against the sclaunder which they had devised: but they
were so far from yielding unto the truth, that they sought to lay hands
upon the Lord. They had thus behaved them selves often times before as we
may see in the fifte and seventh chapters.

C. But now they go about to apprehend him, that they might draw him out of
the Temple to be stoaned: For their madness was nothing mittigated by the
words of Christ. But this was a shameful thing that when they could not
answer his Arguments, they should use violence and stoanes by which they
seek to intercept him. M. They have now forgotten that their like practices
at another time took noone effect. But this is the nature of the wicked,
alwais to attempt that which they have falsely conceived, although that which
they go about be never so often made frustrate.

This thing appeared in the Jews, as also in Saul their predecessoure. For
although often times he found by experience, that he went about in vain to
apprehend David, and had sworn unto him that he would not persecute him any
more: yet nevertheless when he came again to his old disposition, he sought
to sley David. Esai. 2.3


And in these our days we have many of these examples.

For what man is ignorant, how busily the souldyers of Antichrist have
sought, and do dailye seek to subuerte the truth of Christ? To be short, this
is a most firm and true sentence, The heart of the wicked is like the raging
sea, i. King. 22.
which cannot be quiet.

And he escaped out of their hands. B. By his divine power he escaped out of
their hands which sought to apprehende him.

At the first he was as it were shut up in their hands. For the Jews had
beset him on every side to take him, first with words to see if they could
have brought it to pass: and then if they could not snare him with words to
lay hand on him.

Therefore Christ, although he seemed to be as it were taken already, yet by the
wonderful power of God escaped out of their hands. C. By which we are taught,
that we are not given as a pray to the wicked: whom the Lord does often
times bridell at his will and pleasure. M. Therefore it is not unlawful for
the Minister of Christ, to seek to escape out of the hands of the wicked.

40. And went away again beyond Iordane, into the place where John before
had baptized: And there he aboade.

M. Christ leaving Jerusalem went over Iordane, for because that Region, as a
sanctuarye served for his security and rest.

For such was the corruption and wickedness of the Citizens of Jerusalem
that ye farther any place was from them the more convenient the same was for
Christ: and again, the more near, the more perilouse it was for him to abide
in because of the wickedness of the Jews whenas notwithstanding if there
had been any place in the whoale world feet for the preaching of Gods
kingdom, Jerusalem, should have been the same. A. The Law (says the
Prophet) shall go forth of Sion and the word of the lord out of Jerusalem. i.
King. 24.
M Euenso the nerer that a man is to the City of Rome if he be a good man,
the more he is in danger.

C. Christ therefore taught us by his example to use occasion.

Where John before had baptized. Bv. He went aparte into that place, that by
his presence, he might bring in rememberaunce the testimony of John which he
bare unto Christ, and that he might draw many to Jesus the Savior of the
world, that is to say, to him self. Whereupon also it follows.

41. And many resorted unto him and said, John did noe miracle: but all
things that John spoke of this man, were true.

And many resorted to him. M. As the light set upon a Candelsticke cannot be
hid, so the truth of God, allthough it be condemned of the reprobate finds
many which follow the same though it flee away. Bv. faithful Sheep will
never forsake their sheapheard.

M. There was a tipe before of this matter in David to whom he fleeing from
the face of Saul, Esa. 57.20
many are said to come out of Jury.

Euenso the counsels of the wicked by which they seek to extinguishe the
truth, have so little success, that they rather serve for the furtheraunce of
the same.

A. A notable example whereof we have here, and also in the storye of the
blind man. The which I would to God they would marcke and consider, which
seek to extinguish the light of the Gospel in every City. C. Therefore this
concourse of people here shows that Christ sought not to be solitarye that
he might cease from doing of his duty, but that he might erect the
sanctuarye of God in the desarte, when as Jerusalem which was his proper seat,
had rejected him. And verily this was the horrible vengeance of God, that when
the temple which God had chosen, was become adenne of Thieves, the Church of
God should be gathered together in a profane place.

Ihon did no miracle. Bv. Many believed in Christ, being driven thereunto,
partly by the doctrine of John, and partly by the signs of Christ but
specially they were drawn by the spirit of God. C. They gather that Christ
was more excelent than John, because he had done so many miracles whereas John
had done no miracle.

Bv. God would have no miracles done by John, least the people should have
attributed to much unto him: and therefore he would have him only to teach
and to testify. R. For as the body of Moses and his Sepulcher are hid unto
this present day, Deu 34, 6
and that by the just providence of God, least that supersticicious flesh in
visiting the body of Moses, should commit Idolatry, even so, for just
cause John, than whom otherwise there arose not a greater among women's
Children, wrought no miracle. For if so be the gift of miracles had been
joined to his doctrine and holiness of life, the people could scarce have
been drawn from believing him to be Christ. For the gifts of God are
distributed according to his divine will not all to every one, but to every
one somewhat: even as the members of the body have not all one action. Neither
makes it any matter before God to be endued with many gifts: Romans i2
but to believe in Christ, is the acceptable work and labor. For faith is
that only necessary gift, which Justifies and saves: all other gifts
whether they be spiritual or corporal, serve not to justification, but to the
edification of the Church.

This is the cause why John wrought no miracle. Bv. But the Lord would have
his son to be famous with miracles. M. For this glory was due unto Christ,
who also being glorified wrought greater miracles, by the hands of his
servants, than ever he did by himself, when he was upon the earth.

C. Notwithstanding we must noate that we must not always judge by miracles,
although miracles, Ma 24, 24 2 These, 2.9 Math. 7.12.
being joined to doctrine, have no small wayght.

But all things that John spoke. C. This seems not to be spoken of them but
added by the Euaungelist, to teach that they were led by a double argument to
believe in Christ: because in very deed they saw that the testimony was true
which John bare unto him, and also because his miracles made him more famous.

M. We see here how the hearing of the word of God, though not presentlye
understood, serves in due time to know the truth. A. The word of God
seems sometime to be preched in vain but at the length it brings forth
fruit in due time.

42. And many believed on him there.

M. Where did they believe? In that place, into the which the Lord was fled by
reason of the maliciouse wickedness of the Jews. Therefore these men were so
disposed, that so soon as they saw the glory of the miracles of Christ, and
were admonished of the truth of the sayings of John, they were so little
offended by that flight, that they did not only still believe the truth which
Christ preached, but also condemned the malice of the Jews. I would to God
this present age had many such who knowing the truth, would still retain the
same in their hearts against all offenses and lettes which the wicked can
object.

The eleventh Chapter.
1. A certain man was sick, named Lazarus of Bethany, the town of Mary and
her sister Martha.

A certain man was sick R. THIS whoale Chapter almost makes only a
discourse of the raising up of Lazarus: howbeit a shorter discourse might have
been made of the same. But the Evangelist does not without cause so largely
describe the same: For all things are wrighten for our learning. M. For
among the rest of the miracles which Christ wrought during the time that be
preached, there was none more wonderful than this: and therefore he thought
it necessary to noate boath the name and also the kindered, and exactly to
describe the place with the rest of the circumstaunces, specially seeing he
knew that none of the other Euaungelistes made any mention of this miracle.
Therefore first of al it is worthy to be noated, and remembered. For beside
that Christ in this miracle left unto us a testimony of his divine power, he
also set before us an express Image, of our Resurrection in the end of the
world, to the end we might know the scope of our Faith, how that Death is no
Death, and that Christ is our resurrection and life.

C. Furthermore this was as it were the latter act and conclusion for now the
time of his death approached. It is no merueile therefore if so be he specially
set forth his glory in that work, the memory whereof he would have thoroughly
imprinted in the minds of his servants that it might be a sertaine sealing
of all those miracles that were done before.

Christ had raised up other dead folks at other times: but now he declared
his power upon a dead and putrified carcass.

B. For the nerer that the day which was prescribed unto the Lord drue
toward evening in the which he should finishe the office of a Redeemer, the
more plainly boath by words, and also by deeds, he revealed who he was and
wherefore he came in the flesh. R. And thus begins the hystory. M. When
Jesus was come over Iordane into the place where John at the first baptized
and had tarried there a while, a sertaine man named Lazarus fell sick. And to
the end we might know who this Lazarus was, John says, that he was of
Bethany the town of Mary and Martha his sisters, whose Brother he was.

C. The which is therefore expressed because the fame of Lazarus was more
obscure than the fame of his sisters. For these holy women were wont to lodge
Christ, as we may read in the tenth chapter of saint Luke.

2. It was that Marye which anointed the LORD with oyntmente, and wyped his
feet with her hear, whose Brother Lazerouse was sick.

Bv. Because the Gospel makes mention of many Mary's, here there is a
difference put between this Mary and the rest, namely that it was the very
same which anointed the Lord. M. And this is put down here by Anticipation: B.
For the Euaungelist declares this anointing in the chapter following, C.
Therefore there is great Ignorance in them, which immagine this Mary the
sister of Lazerus, to be that infamus woman of whom Luke makes mention in his
seventh Chapter, The making mention of the ointment ocasioned this error, and
also because in both places mention is made of Simon in whose house the act
was done: as though it were not manifest that Christ was often times anointed,
and that in diverse places.

The sinful woman of whom, Luke speaks, anointed Christ at Jerusalem wheare
she dwelt. Also Mary of Bethany did the like in her town. And the pretertence
(Anointed) which the Euaungelist uses, ought not to be referred to the time in
the which the same was done, of the which the Euaungeliste hear entreats,
but to the time in the which he wroate: as if he should say, this is that
Mary which afterward powered out her ointment, for the which cause there
arose a murmuring among the Disciples.

Bv. To be short, this woman is said to have anointed the Lord, even as Judas
is said to have betrayed Christ. M. Math. i0.4
Moreover in that, Lazarus, Mary and Mrtha dwelt together, we have an example
of brotherly amity, concord, and agreement. Unity of Brethren pleases the
Lord.


The Lord is delighted with such unity of Brethren and systers, insomuche
that it was not in vain that the Lord had company and felloweshippe with this
Lazarus, Mary, and Martha. It is a true saying, the love and unity of
brethren is seldom found. Such is the corruption of our nature, that
brethren very seldom well agree together. Very few remember this saying of
Christ, Blessed are the peace makers: for they shall be called the, Children of
God.

3. Therefore his sisters sent unto him, saying Lord beehoulde he whom thou
loueste is sick.

Therefore his sisters sent. B. For they trusted, that if the Lord had been
present, their brother should not have dyed: the which boath of them affirmed
to the Lord.

Lord, behold he whom thou love. C A short message, but yet notwithstanding
Christ might hereby gather what the two sisters would have. For under this
complaint they do modestly insinuate their Supplication, that he might help.

R. Hereby we may learn a form of prayer.

C. We are not forbidden to use any long form of prayer: notwithstanding this
is the sum, that we ought to cast our cares and whatsoever else disquieteth
us into the Lords lap, that he may help us.

Thus do these women deal with Christ: they do familiarly utter their
grief unto him, thereby hoping to have ease. B. They prescribe nothing unto
the Lord: they think it suficient to tell unto their loving, benificiall, and
wise friend, how the case stood with them, and in what peril they were in.
C. It is also to be noated that they have hope to obtain help, upon the love
of Christ.

M. In that they make no mention of their brother neither do crave in express
words that he would come and deliver him from his disease, they so did upon
trust and familiarity, whereby they made accounte that the disease of their
brother would move the Lord to have no less care for the same, than he had
for any thing that appertained to him self. C. And this is a rule always to be
observed in true prayer. For where the love of God is, there is undoubted and
present health: because he does not love and forsake. Bv. Therefore these
systers, Humanity toward the sick.
showing themselves to be natural and loving to their brother over and above
the example which they leave unto us of piety and humanitye, which we should
show toward sick persons, do teach us in all our necessityes, to run
first unto Christ, which loves us all most intyrelye, to whom we must
prescribe nothing: he knows when to help, and to whom it is needful. R.
Let faith only tie God to necessity, that help and relief may torn to the
glory of his name. For if so be the time and the manner how, be prescribed,
then the help is ascribed to human wisdom.

4. When Jesus heard that he said, This infirmity is not unto death, but
for the glory of God: that the Son of God might be glorified thereby.

M. Christ knew before that Lazarus was sick: but the Euaungelist describing
this matter in order as it was done, says that the Lord spoke these things,
when he had heard the message which Mary and Martha had sent unto him. C. And
his purpose was by this answer to take away all care from his Disciples,
least they should be grieved to see him so secure and careless in the peril
of his friend. He denies this disease to be deadelye, but rather affirms
the same to be a mean to set forth his glory. M. As if he should say,
Lazarus is not fallen into this sickness to dye of the same, as commenlye it
happens to others, but this infirmitye or sykenesse is sent unto him by the
secret purpose and counsel of God, to this end, that GOD may thereby be
glorified, occasyon being thereby offered to his Son by the same to declare
his power and to magnify his name. C. And although Lazarus was dead, yet
notwithstanding because shortelye after, Christ restoared him to life, he
having respect to this ishue and success, says that it is not a sycknesse
unto death. M. For Lazarus within two days after dyed of the same syckenesse,
but not to sleep in death with other dead bodies until the day of Judgment,
but that he might be restoared to life by the Son of God, and might by his
death minister occasyon to gloryfy him,

Therefore the Lord had more respect unto the consideration and cause of death
then to the death it self: and therefore more truly he ascribed this
sickness to the cause of death which made to the glory of God more then to
death it self. C. Moreover Christ in this place properly noated the glory of
God, which was Joined with his office.

For we know that when the Reprobate perish, the glory of God does noe less
shine in their death, then in the salvation of the godly.

That the son of God might be glorified. Bv. That is to say, he shall be
raised up by my power, whereby I shall be glorified. For by that work many shall
gather that I am the true son of the living God, the life, and the quickener
of them that believe. For it follows toward the end of the miracle, Verse. 45
Many therefore of the Jews, which came to Marie, and had seen the things
which Jesus had done, believed in him. C. By this place we gather that God
would be so known in the person of the son that what honor soever God
requiereth to be given to himself, should be given to his son. Bv.
Whereupon Christ said The Father has given all Judgment to the Son, Ioh.
5.23
that all might honor the son as they honor the father. He which honoreth
not the Son honoreth not the Father which has sent him.

C. Wherefore the Turks and Jews being contumeliouse unto Christ, in vain
profess them selves to honor God, nay by this means they go about to
banish God from them.

5. Jesus loved Martha and her Sister, and Lazarus.

M. This the Euaungelist adds because of the words of Mary and Martha which
they told by message unto the Lord, saying, Lord, behold he whom thou
love is sick. Jesus loved not only Lazarus but also his sisters, Bv. that is
to say all this houshoulde and family which were Godly disposed. M. For Christ
loved all men in that he came into the world to be the savior and redeemer
of all men and not only those which were then living, and which were in the
world before, but those also which should be upon the earth unto the worlds
end.

We read not that Paul had any familliarity with Christ in this world when
he was upon the earth: and yet nevertheless he says, Nevertheless I live:
Gala, 2.26,
yet now not I but Christ lives in me, and the life which I now live in the
flesh I live by the faith of the Son of God which loved me and gave him
self for me. And as he was a man living among men, he was led by humane
affections.

So he is said here to love this Lazarus, Martha, and Mary, and so also we
read that he loved John the Apostle: John i5.i4
and so no doubt, he loved all his Apostes and called them his friends.

6. when he had heard therefore that he was sick, he aboade two days still
in the same place, where he was.

C. These words seem contrary to that which went before, that Christ should
abide two days on the other side of Jordan as neglecting the life of Lazarus
and yet notwithstanding is said to love him and his sisters: for seeing love
causes care, he should have made haste without delay. M. But this delay
nether hurt Lazarus nor yet was offensive to the Law of love and frenship, but
(...) profyted him very much, agreed with frendshippe and amity, and also
served greatly for the glory of God. Lazarus was his frind, but more frenly was
the glory of his Father.

C. Therefore seeing Christ is the only mirror of the grace of God, we are
taught by this his delay, not to Judge of the love of God according to the
present state of things. Being entreated, he often times diferreth his
help, either to make us more fervent in prayer, or else to exercise our
patience and obedience.

Bv. Let no man therefore think much if so be the lovers of true piety and
godliness, be afflicted with the calamityes of this world, God faring as
though he cared not for the same: Gen 4.i0
either because so it is expedient for them which suffer, or else because it so
serves for the setting forth of his glory. B. So he left Abel in the hand of
his brother, but after his death his blood cried for vengeance. Gen 39.20
So he left Joseph a long time in the dungeon of the prison? but afterward he
advanced him to honor. So he left the Israelites a long time in cruel
bondage, whom notwithstanding at the length he delivered with a mighty hand
and outstretched arm.

C. Let the faithful therefore so crave help at the hands of God, that they
learn to suspend their desiers, if so be at any time he be more slow to help
and deliver then necessity requires. For howsoever he stays, he sleeps
not, neither is he unmindful of those that are his. In the mean time let us
be sure of this, that he would all whom he loves to be saved.

7. Then said he after that to his Disciples: Let us go into Iewrye again.

M. The Disciples being as yet but weak, stood greatly in fear of the
malice of the Jews: therefore Christ thought good to make them strong against
they took their Journey. For he knew that they could not abide to hear so
much as Iewry spoken of. But he might have gone into Iewry without them, and
never have told them of the matter: yet, he neither would return into Iewrye
without them, nor yet leave their minds unprepared for so perilous a iourneye.
And therefore he says: Let us go into Jury again.

C. By which words also be declares that he had a care for Lazarus, when his
Disciples thought that he had forgotten him, or at lest that he made less
account of the life of Lazarus, than he did of other matters. M. In that
therefore he sends not his Disciples into Iewry, but goes with them him
self, not sending them alone in so perilous a Journey, he does the duty of a
good shepherd, which brings not his sheep into danger, but guides them,
and takes part with them.

8. His Disciples said unto him, Master, the Jews latelye sought to stoane
thee, and wylt thou go thither again?

Bv. The Disciples greatly fearing death, and abhorring perilles, diswaded
Jesus from going again into Iewrye: M. the which notwithstanding they seem not
to do without lawful cause. For sometime it comes to pass, that for want
of foresight we fall into perils: but it is great rashness, if we so do
wyttinglye and wyllingly without any necessity. Both these two, namely, want
of foresight, and rashness, the Disciples in this place, seem to obiecte
against Christ.

Want of foresight, because he went before unto them of Iewry, who like mortal
enemies went about to stoane him: Rashness, because he would go again into
Iewrye, after by flight he had escaped the cruel malice of the Jews. R. but
this counsel of the Disciples sprang from the wisdom of the flesh. For it
seems foolish to humane reason, if so be a man put him self into present
perilles. For seeing we count him wise, whom other men's harms do make to
beware, what a mad man do we judge him to be, who will not take heed by his
own harms. C. Howbeit, whereas the Disciples do seek to terrifye Christ,
paraduenture they do it not so much for his sake, as for their own, because
they feared them selves. Therefore in seeking to avoid the Cross, and are
ashamed to confess the same, they pretend a care for their Master. The like
we may see daily in others. For they which for fear of the Cross, cease from
doing their duty, make many cloakes and delays, to cover their fault, least
they might seem without just cause to defraude God of his due obedience.

A. And now hereby apeareth a great and wonderful conflicte, between the
flesh and the spirit. For when the spirit seeks whollye to obaye God, the
flesh with all his might rebelleth against the same: insomuch that the godly
man, who only seeks to further the glory of God, is constrained to abide
many assaults of the flesh and the Deuell.

Bv. Therefore in these disciples of Christ, have a pattern of the infirmitye
drawing us from those things which make to the aduauncing of Gods glory.

A. The flesh shunneth the Cross, and desires rather ease and pleasure, and
seeks by all means to draw a man from the obedience of God. R. So Peeter
wisely in his opinion admonished Christ not to put him self into the hands of
the high Priests: but Christ said unto him, Come after me Satan, thou
sauorest not the things that are of God, but the things that are of men. Mat.
i6.22
But if so be we have no such external Satan, to draw us from the doing of
our duty, we shall whether we will or no carry an internal Satan with us, for
what is our flesh else but a certain Deuell, who a thousand ways
disquieteth and troubles us.

Galat. i, i7.
A. Even as the Apostle writes, saying The flesh lusts contrary to the
Spirit and the spirit contrary to the flesh: these are contrary one to the
other, so that ye cannot do what ye would. The flesh says Ministers of Gods at
Jerusalem are whipped, stoaned, burnt, therefore there is no going thither: but
the Spirit says That which I say unto you in darkness speak ye in the
light: and that which I tell you in the ear prech ye on the house tops. Mat,
i0.27


The flesh says If so be you speak the truth, ye shall have many enemies
for, Veritas odium parit, that is, truth brings hatered: but if thou canste
dissemble thou shall easily have the favor of men.

Iam, 4, 4,
But the spirit says, He that willbee a friend of this world is an enemy
unto God. The flesh says, he which shows him self a sheep, shall be
deuored of the wolf.

Luke, 2i.i9,
The Spirit says Possess your souls in patience The flesh says, To
confess Christ before men is not without danger. Mat, i0, 32,
The Spirit says, Every one that acknowledges me before men will I
acknowledge before my father which is in heaven. The flesh says, Take heed
how thou speak of the Gospel of Christ: for if thou be cast into prison for
the same how can thou then defend thy cause? The Spirit says, When they
deliver you up be not careful what to speak: Mat, i0.16
for in the same hour it shall be given you what to speak. The flesh says
Preach not the truth to every one, but to those only which will gladly hear
thee: for so shall thou not come in danger. The spirit says, Behold I send
you forth as sheep among wolves. Mat 28.i9


Go ye forth therefore and teach al nations. The flesh says. The Phariseis
expel and excommunicate all those that confess Jesus to be Christ. The
Spirit says, Luke, 6, 22
Blessed are ye when men hate you, and separate you from their company, and
rail on you and put out your names as an evil thing for the Son of manes
sake. The flesh says, It is a hard thing to fall into the hands of men.

The spirit says It is a horrible thing to fall into the hands of God. Heb.
i0:3i*
The flesh says, Let a man look well always to him self. The spirit says,
He which loves his life shall loose it. John, i2.25
The flesh says, The nature of man is to hate nothing more than the truth,
to what end shall the same be preached then unto them. Act. 5, 29,
The Spirit says It is better to obey God than men. The flesh says the
world is so obstinate, that it is never a whit the better for the preaching of
the word.

The spirit says If so be thou admonish the wicked man to forsake his wicked
way, Ezech. 33 6
and he convert not from the same, he shall dye in his iniquity, and thou
haste delivered thine own soul.

The flesh says, It is a shame for a man to be openly punished. The spirit
says, i, Pet. 4,
See that none of you be punished as a thief, as a murderer or as a
malefactoure. If any man suffer as a Christian let him not be ashamed: but let
him glorify God on this behalf.

The flesh says, It is plesaunt to enjoy the pleasures and lusts of the
heart and it is pain to mortify and kill them.

The Spirit says, woe unto you rich me^ because you have co^solatio^, Luke, 6,
24
woe unto you which are full, for ye shall honger: woe unto you that laugh, for
ye shall morn and weep.

The flesh says, There is nothing more precious than a good name, the which
notwithstanding is brought in peril through the confession of the name of
Christ. Luke. 6, 26
The spirit says, VVo unto you when all men praise you, for so did their
Fathers unto the false Prophts. The flesh says, He is a wise man and like to
come to promosion that will seek to please God and man. The Spirit says, Mat
6.24 Gal i, i0 i, Ioh, 2, xv.
No man can serve two masters. And again, If so be I should please men I
were not the servant of Christ. For if any man love the world, the love of
the Father is not in him.

To conclude, The flesh says, So many as have preached the word of truth unto
men, have been horriblely punished, and have myserablelye perished.

Apoca, i4, i3
But the Spirit says, Blessed are the dead which dye in the Lord: for they
rest from their labors. Wherefore fear not them which can kill the body, and
cannot kill the soul, but fear him which can cast boath body and soul into
hell fire.

9. Jesus answered, Are there not twelve hours of the day? If any man walk in
the day, he stumbleth not, because he sees the light of this world.

C. This place has been diuerselye expounded, but this is the true sense and
meaning of the same. First of all the Lord borrows a similitude from the
night and the day. For if any man walk in the darckenesse, it is no marvel
if he stumble, slyppe and go out of the way: but the light of the son in
the day time shaweth the way.

And the calling of God is like the day light, which will not suffer us to go
out of the way or to stumble.

Therefore whosoever obayeth the word of GOD, and takes nothing in hand, but
at his commandment, he shall have God his guide and director, and upon
trust hereof he may securely and without fear go on his way.

For whosoever walks in his ways shall have his aungelles to attend upon
him, and to keep him, that he dashe not his foot against the stoane. Christ
therefore bearing himself bold upon this defense, boldly goes forward into
Jury, not fearing to be stoaned: because there is no danger of erring, where
God taking upon him the office of the Son does illuminate our steps, and
moderate our course. B. This therefore is the scence and meaning of that which
Christ says, As there are twelve hours of the day, in the which men may walk
and do their business (for he which will walk or do any thing in the
night easyly stumbleth) so have I my day, which is ended by the hours
thereof: therefore in this day I must finish all those things which my Father
has committed unto me.

This day now draws toward night and is almost at an end, the hour is at
hand, when I must go out of the world to my Father, Wherefore how greatly so
ever the Jews are my enymies, I will finishe my works while I have day, and
for this cause I must go boath into Jury, and also to Jerusalem, and set
forth my Fathers glory: he shall take charge of us and defend us.

The like allegorye the Lord used in the ninth Chapter going before. C. By
these words we are taught, that so often as a man will follow his own
counsel and purpose without Gods calling, his whole ly^e is nothing else
but a wandering and straying course: and they which seem most wise in their
own conceytes, when they ask not counsel at the Lords mouth, and have not
their actions guided by his spirit, do like blind men groape in the darcke.

R. If any man object, Why does Christ then sometime flee, A. Even as he
plainly declared when he said to sertaine of the Pharise is which persuaded him
to shonne the fury of Herod For he said to them, Luke i3.3i
Go and tell that fox, behold I cast out Deuels and heal the people to day
and to morrow, and the third day I shall be perfited. Nevertheless I must
walk to day and to morrow, and the day following.

Aunsvvere.
R. I answer, Christ therefore fled because his office as yet was not
fulfilled the which being ended, he willingly delivered him self into the
hands of his enemies.

And he fled to teach us that we ought not to tempte God, but to use those Just
and Lawful means which God has set before us until the race and course of
our gospel be finished. That which is spoken of the ministerye of the
Gospel, ought to be understood of the whole life of every man.

For this corporal life is set and appointed within his bounds and limittes as
it is written Short are the days of man thou have the number of his months, Job.
i4.5
thou have appointed his bonds which he cannot pass. For if so be our hears
which are the smalest things are nombered in the sight of God, how much more
are the days and hours of our life nombered before God. Wherefore so long as
a man walks within the compass of twelve hours of the day, in the time of
his appointed life, and in his own calling, his life shall not be impaired by
any peril. C. And this knowledge is very necessary for us: for the faithful
can scarce move their foot to follow God, who must go before us in our
vocation, but Satan by and by casts in our way a houndered stombling blocks
and seeks by all means to stop us.

But so soon as the Lord by his bright Light wills us to go forward we
must go on with good courage, although we be beset with many deaths because he
never commands us to go forward, but he incourageth us with his promise,
that we may be assured whatsoever we take in hand at his commandment, shall
have good success. He is our Chariot which carries us without weariness,
through all tedious ways until we come to the haven of rest.

In fine we are taught that the eyes of the Lord are ever over them to keep
and preserve them which are ready to fulfill his will and commandment. Again
hereby also we gather that the whoale raze of that man's life is accursed of
the Lord, who neglecting his word follows his own fantasy, and does what
he thinks good in his own eyes.

Bv. Wherefore true fortitude of the mind springs from the faith in Christ, by
which careful fear is driven away, and by the love of piette is quight
rooted out of our hearts. C. And Christ here according to his wonted manner
deuideth the day into twelve hours. For although the days in summer and
winter do differ, yet notwithstanding the day has always twelve hours, and
the night as many. M, Christ used no curiosity in human matters, but took
all things in good part which common use mayntayned with impietye.

11. These things said he: and after that he said unto them, our friend
Lazarus sleeps: but I go to awake him out of sleep.

B. By this allegory the Lord gave his Disciples to understand that he would
raise Lazarus from death whereupon he did more rightly call the death of
Lazerus a sleep than death. C. But great was the rude Ignorance of the
disciples which understood Christ to speak of natural sleep. For although
it be a metaphorical speech, yet notwithstanding it is so commonly used in
the Scripture, that it ought to have been known to all the Jews. M. And he
could have raised up this Lazarus, being absent and a great way, even as he
restoared the Centurians servant, and the Rulers son to health: but the
consideration of this miracle did so require that he should be present at the
working of the same, least any occasion might have been given to the wicked to
obscure his glory: but that all men might know for a surety, that this Lazarus
which had been dead four days, was raised up by his presence, voice, and
power. And for this cause, he would not raise up, neither the ruler of the
Sinagogues Daughter, nor the Widows Son being absent, Math. 9.i5. Luke 7.14.
but present. In the end of the world also he can raise up all mortal men
with his power only, insomuch that he need not descend to us any more from
heaven: but the consideration of his glory and majesty requires the same,
that so great a wonder may be wrought before the whoale world. We must also
noate that the Lord said not, Let us go into Jury again, but, I go to awake
Lazarus out of sleep. He would have his Disciples companions with him in his
journey, but he would not have them fellows with him in the miracle. C. Here
also he commends his power in this, that he says he will go to raise
up Lazarus: by which w^rdes he shows himself to be Lord of death, when
he says that he rayseth those up, whom he restoareth to life.

Also seeing by this word (sleeps) he noateth only the sleep of the
body, some do very fondelye draw the same to men's souls.

12. Then said his Disciples, Lord if he sleep he shall do well enough.

M. The answer of Christ contains two things: First for what cause he
must return into Iurye, although the Jews were so cruel: Secondlye what he
would do in Iurye: To the first the Disciples make no answer, but to the
other they say, If he sleep he shall do well enough: by which they
persuade Christ not to go into Iurye. And yet notwithstanding they do not
subtly wrest the words of Christ to their own commodity: but because they
thought that he had spoken of a sleep, they redilye take the same as an
occasion to shoone the peril.

13. Howbeit Jesus spoke of his death: but they thought that he had spoken of
the natural sleep.

M. The Euaungelist adds the exposition of the words of Christ to declare
the rudeness of his Disciples, by which it came to pass that they understand
not the meaning of his words. It ought therefore to seem strange unto us, if
so be some at the first do not understand the Metaphorical and parabolicall
speeches of the Lord, seeing the same hapened unto them, which ought to have
understood them better by reason of their daily familiaritye and
acquaintance with the same.

Notwithstanding herewithall we must consider, how that we are more prone and
ready to receive and embrace those interpretations of the word of God which
seem to defend the imbecillitye of our flesh, than we are to agree unto those
things which with peril and danger serve to the setting forth of Gods
glory. And hereupon it comes that while we greedely embrace those things
which seem to agree unto our flesh, we oftentimes miss of the true scence
and meaning of the words.

A. When Jesus himself spoke of the excelency of his kingdom before his
disciples, Math i4
by and by there arose a contention among them who should be the greatest: and
when he spoke of the cross and of the euilles which he should suffer at the
hands of the Jews, they understood not what he said.

14. Then said Jesus unto them plainly, Lazarus is dead.

M. Because they understood him not, and therefore answered not to the
matter, he speaks now that thing plainly which before he had spoken
obscurelye. C. Great is the goodness of Christ, in bearing with so great
dullness in his Disciples. And verilye he did therefore diferre the time to
endue them with more ample grace of the spirit, that they being renewed and
changed in a moment, the miracle might be the greater. M. They decerued to
have been sharply reproved of the Lord (no less than was Peter by him at a
another time) but because this cowardlines was not in one or two of them aloane,
but in them all, Mat. 16.25.
he dealt more gentlye with them, and instructs them by a more plain and
manifest speech in the truth, that they might now have less cause to doubt.
A. And this he did to teach us also, by his example not to reject such
Disciples as are yet rude, ignorant, and carnal, but gentlye to bear with
them, until such time as they have attained to more knowledge of the truth.

15. And I am glad for your sakes that I was not there, because ye may
believe: nevertheless let us go unto him.

C. He means that this absence was profitable for them, because his power
should not have been so manifest, if so be he had helped Lazarus out of hand.
For the nerer that the works of God come to the ordinarye and common course of
nature, the less glory they have: the which daily experience teaches to be
true. For if so be he reach out his hand unto us at the first, we regard not
his help.

Therefore to the end his disciples might know that the resurrection of
Lazarus was verily divine it was necessary that he should differ the same that
it might be paste all man's help. Whenever therefore God does suffer us
being overwhelmed with misery, to ly and languishe, let us know that he does
it for our health.

Because ye may believe. R. What is it ye should believe? First, that I am
that very Christ, the Savior of the world, which raise the dead from the
grave, that so ye may be confirmed in that faith, by that miracle which I am
about to work: Secondly that I am ready in the mideste of afflictions, and
do care for your salvation when as ye your selves are Ignorant of the same.
C. So that his meaning is not, that this was the first rudiment and beginning
of faith in them but the confirmation of a faith already begone, as yet weak and
imperfect. Nevertheless he shows that unless God had declared his power they
would not have believed.

A. Here also we may behoulde the fruit and end of miracls. For miracls tend
to this end, that men may be won to the Faith or at least may be confirmed in
the faith.

But let us go unto him. M. To whom? To Lazarus, to a dead man: but what can
be done to a dead man that one should take a Iorny for him? A man that should
so speak, might seem to human reason very foolish. But the son of God
speaks another manner of thing when he says Let us go unto him. The coming
of the son of God to a dead man is not in vain: for he brings life with him.
In the end of the world he shall com to dead men and raise them up to life,
which the strength of mortal men could never do.

R. We see also how great care Christ has for those which are his, Lazarus
is sick, Dies, and feels not the help of Christ: but yet nevertheless
Christ speaks of him, and is very careful for him.

And his care is not in vain. For Lazarus shall be raised from death. A. The
life comes with speed to put death to flight.

16. Then said Thomas which is called Didimus, unto his fellow Disciples,
let us also go, that we may dye with him.

Then said Thomas. R. This exhortation of Thomas proceeded rather of rashness
then of faith. C. Hitherto the Disciples had gone about, to withhoulde
Christ: and now Thomas is ready to follow, but without Faith.

At least he does not arm and comfort him self with the promise of Christ,
to follow him joyfully and with a good courage.

For these words Let us also go that we may dye with him, show that he
rather despayred than believed, seeing they should have been assured of life.
M. The Lord said not, I go to dye in Jury, but I go to raise up Lazarus.
Thomas therefore should have said, let us go that we may see the glory of God,
rather then let us go and dye with him. Howbeit the pronoune Relative (him)
may be expounded as well of Lazarus as of Christ.

But if we expound it of Lazarus, then is it spoken Ironice, as if he had
said, What shall yt profit us to go thither except we cannot otherwise show
the duty of friends than if we dye with him.

But many, like better of another sense which is, that Thomas refused not to dye
with Christ. But this sprang of rash zeal, because he ought rather to have
been encouraged by the faith of the promise.

Moreover in that he says Thomas was called Didimus is not so to be
understood, as though Thomas were his proper name, and Didimus his sir name.
For the same which the greeks call Didimus, the Hebrews call Thomas.

17. Then went Jesus and found that he had lain in his grave four days
allreadie.

M. The Lord so appointed his Iorny that he came to Bethanie the fowrth day
after the departure of Lazarus. It is likely that Lazarus was dead too days
before Christ took his Journey, and that he spent other two days before he
ended the same.

He might have come sooner, but he rather desired to find him dead than sick
and to have lain four days in the Sepulcher than two days, that he might the
more evidently declare his divine power: and therefore he would not come unto
Bethany before the fowrth day after his disceasse.

18. Bethanie was nie unto Jerusalem, about a fifteen furlonges of.

C. The Euaungelist dilligently prosecuteth those things which serve for the
the sertaintie of the stoary. He shows how nere Jerusalem was to the village
of Bethanye, lest any man should marvel that many of his friends came from
thence to comfort the Sisters, whom the Lord would have to be witnesses of the
miracle.

For although they were moved hereunto by the duty of humanity yet
notwithstanding by the secret counsel of God, they were gathered there
together for another end, lest that the resurrection of Lazarus should be
obscure and unknown, or should have only domestical witnesses.

Bv. Therefore God by his wonderful counsel and forsight chose this place,
in the which the greatest miracles that ever Christ wrought was showed that
whether the Phariseis would or no, the very deed it self might proclaim and
prove Jesus to be the Son of the living God.

C. But hereby appeared the wicked ingratitude of that people, who by and by
forgot so manifest a show token of the power of God done in so open and known
a place in so great an assembly of men, and almost at the gates of the City.

Nay, the Jews maliciously shutting their eyes would not see that which lay
open before their eyes to be seen. And it is no new thing, that those men
which so greedely desyer miracles should be dull and senceles, when they come
to the consideration of them. The distaunce between Jerusalem and Bethany of
the which mention is made here, was less then two miles. For a furlong
contains syx hondered foot, that is to say, a hoondered and five and
twenty paces.

19. And many of the Jews came to Martha and Marie, to comfort them over their
Brother.

M. what manner of persons these Jews were, we shall see in that which
follows.

C. Their only purpose was to comfort the sisters for their dead brother: but
God (as we said before) had another purpose.

And hereby it does appear that the house of Lazarus and his sisters, was very
sumptuouse and well furnished for entertainment. Also because it is a natural
thing, that the death of kinsmen and friends should cause sorrow and mourning,
this duty of the which the Euaungelist speaks is not to be discommended,
except the same do exceed. i. These. 4


A. Necessary therefore is the exhortacion of the Apostle when he wills the
Faithful not to exceed in bewaling the dead.

M. It is also to be noated that the Jews knowing not how to benefit the
dead sought so much as they could to comfort the living. And this was the
manner of the Church of the faithful in old time at their funerals, but
after that the spyrite of errors of superstitions, and of gain crept into the
minds of the Bishopes and Prelates that which our Elders used to the
consolation of such as were alive, was turned to obsequi and help of the
dead.

20. Martha, as soon as she heard that Jesus was coming went out and met
him: but Marie sat still in the house.

M. The Euaungelist goes forward in the narration of the history. And he
begins the story of Martha: whereby it does appear that she was
principal in the government of the house, either for that she was the elder,
or for some other cause.

In this Martha we have an example boath of hospitallitie and also of reverence.

Martha met Christ boath as a gheste and also as her Lord, and thus are we
wont to go forth and meet our friends to entertain and welcome them friendly.

So Abraham and Lotte met and entertained their ghestes with Joy. So the
Subjects go forth to meet with kings and Princes. Genesis 18.i Gen, i9, i
First of all therefore let us be friendly in entertaining our friends and
ghestes, and loyal with reverence toward our elders and betters. C.
Notwithstanding it may be that Martha went forth of the house to meet Christ
that she might secretly entertain him: because he had but lately escaped out
of peril, and the fury of his enemies was scarsly appeased? which being a
little mittigated by his departure into Galile by the hearing of his return
again might have more violently burst forth.

But Mary sat still in the house M Mary knew not of the coming of Christ,
the which if she had no doubt she would have gone forth with her sister to
meet him.

21. Then said Martha unto Jesus, Lord if thou hadest been here, my brother
had not dyed.

M. It besemeth him which receives and entertaineth a ghest, to use frendlye
words in saluting and welcomming, that so he may declare his good will and
frenly heart.

So Martha here speaks unto the Lord and she begins with a complaynt:
howebeit by this means she does modestly declare her mind. As if she should
say, Thou Lord by thy presence could have delivered my brother from death:
yea thou can do it yet: because God will deny thee nothing. And speaking thus
she does rather follow her affection then keep her under the rule of faith.

For these words, partly proceeded from Faith, but the affections of the mind
were mixed therewith, which carried her yond her bonds, For in that she persuaded
her self that her brother should not have dyed if so be Christ had been
present, where learneth she so to believe? verily, it was not conceived of any
promis of Christ.

It follows therefore that she rather fulfilled her own desiers than obaied
Christ It proceeded of Faith that she attributed unto Christ's power and great
godnesse: but in that she persuades her self of more than she had received or
heard of Christ she passes the bounds of faith. For we must always observe
the mutual consent and agreement between the word and faith, lest a man
persuade him self of any thing without the warraunt of Gods word. Moreover it
may be that Martha leaned to much to the corporal presence of Christ.
Therefore the faith of Martha being mixed with immoderate desiers, and not
altogether free from superstition, could not perfectlye shine, only the sparks
thereof appear in these words. She reckened Christ among the men of God,
whose prayers are heard and who obtain many things at the hands of God. For
if so be she had had the true understanding of his power she would rather
have said, I know that nothing is impossible unto thee.

But the Lord was not ignorant of this imperfection of faith in Martha and in
others, neither did he severely reiecte the same: but bare patiently with it,
and when he saw convenient time increased the same. This meekness and,
patience the Apostle set before us to follow, saying, him that is weke in the
faith receive.

23. Jesus said unto her thy brother shall rise again.

M. The Lord made no answer to Martha complaining of his absence. For he
rather desyered to show, the reason of his absence by the power of the raising
up the dead man, than by his words.

C. But the clemency of Christ is wonderful who bearing with the infirmity of
Martha in those things aforesaid, of him self promised more unto her then
she her self durst openly and preciselye ask.

M. As if Christ should have said Be of good cheer I know what thou would
have, thou shall have thy desyer thou shall receive thy brother. Bv. Thou do
believe that I being a good man and one in the favor of God, can easily
obtain at his hands what I will yea if it were life for thy buried brother,
but I promise now unto thee, that thy brother shall arise again by ye power of
mine which I have of the father. M. Al they have to noate this word of
consolation which are sorrowful for the departure of their friends out of
this life.

Let them be persuaded that they hear this from the mouth of Christ, thy
Father shall rise again, thy son shall rise again, thy brother shall rise
again, and thy friend shall rise again. Moreover in that he says not plainly
I will raise him up, but He shall rise again it is to be attributed to modesty
and humility which the Lord teaches every where.

24. Martha says unto him, I know that he shall rise again in the
resurrection at the last day.

Again Martha bewrays the weakness of her faith. For a weak faith looks
for nothing but common chance and fortune: but true faith has not respect
unto common course but to Gods promise.

C. Here therefore the exceeding fearfulness of Martha bewrays it self, in
that she does extenuate the saying of Christ.

We said a litly before that she went farther then was meet, when by her
own fantasy she immagined a sertaine hope to her self: and now she is
slipte into the contrary vice, who when Christ reched forth his hand unto her,
stood still trembling.

Wherefore we must take heed unto our selves lest we being destitute of the
word of GOD, ground our hope upon this or that, when there is no cause: and
again least the Lord opening his mouth, should find our hearts to cloase and
straight shut. A. But we see that when Christ taught Martha she heard him not
without some fruit. M. Faith of ye resurrection derided by worldlings
For first of all she believed that the last day should one day come. This
faith the Children of this world do deride and mock, who think that this
world will continue and abide for ever. Secondly she believed that the
resurrection of the dead should be in the last day. This faith the Saduceis
did not allow, neither can human reason comprehend the same. And she does
not only say that the resurrection of the dead shall be, but, I know that he
shall rise again in the last day, So Job speaks, I know that my redemer
lives, and that I shall rise out of the earth in the last day.

M. And of the faith of the general resurrection of all men, she takes an
argument of the special resurrection of her brother. After the same manner
also let us gather, All men shall rise again, Therefore I also shall rise
again.

They shall rise again to everlasting life which believe in Christ therefore I
also shall rise again. God for Christ's sake does pardon and forgive the
penytent and believing: therefore also he will pardon and forgive me. God will
not forsake those that trust in him therefore he will not forsake me. God
resists the proud, therefore he will resist the pride of Antichrist.

C. By this answer Martha would have spoken more then she durst hope for,
by the words of christ as if she should say. If so be thou speak and mean of
the last resurrection, I doubt not but that my brother shall rise again in the
last day, and upon trust hereof I comfort my self: but I know not whether
thou give me to understand some greater matter yea or no.

25. Jesus says unto her, I am the resurrection and the life: he that
believes on me, yea though he were dead, yet shall he live.

Bv. Now Christ more plainelye revealing himself, says that he cannot only
by his prayers obtain life, but also that he is the life it self of all that
believe, yea the living God, which can raise from the dead, and preserve in
life. M. He knew that Martha had not as yet the true knowledge of him and
that therefore she thought of the resurrection as did the rest of the Jews
who although they believed that the same should be, yet notwithstanding by
whose power the same should be, they knew not, because they wanted the true
knowledge of Christ. Wherefore that he might signify unto Martha, that he
was the rayser up and quickener of dead men, by whom the resurrection of the
dead should be, and which could also at that present, restoare her dead
brother unto life, he says, I am the resurrection and the life: B. that is to
say, the author of resurrection, and life, and that power of GOD to raise and
to quicken. As if he should say, Why have thou respect unto the resurrection
to come, concerning the which thou have such an opinion, as though it were not
to be wrought by my power? If thou knew me, thou would also know that I
have power given me to raise up and to quicken: and therefore would now
desire me to raise up thy brother.

C. Therefore first of all Christ affirms himself to be the resurrection and
and the life: and afterward he expounds boath parts of the sentence
seuerallye. In the first part he calls himself the resurrection: because
by order men are restoared from death, before they are in the state of life.

And verilye all mankind is overwhelmed in death. Therefore no man shall have
life, but he which is first risen from death.

So Christ teaches himself to be the beginning of life: and afterward he
adds that the perpetuity of life is the works of his grace. And the
exposition which follows straight after, shows plainly that he spoke of
spiritual life, as, He that believes on me.

Wherefore then is Christ the resursurection? because he does regenerate the
Children of Adam which were alienate from GOD by sin, that they may begin
to lead a new life: of the which we have spoken in the fifte Chapter going
before. And the Apostle Paul very notabelye interprets this place, in the
second Chapter of his Epistle to the Ephesians.

Let them babble then what they list which affirm that men are prepared by the
motion of nature to receive the grace of God.

It is as much as if they should say that the dead walk. Faith is the
resurrrection of the soul.
For whereas men have life, breath, sense, understanding, and will, the same
tends to destruction because there is no part of the soul which is not
corrupted and maimed. And so it comes to pass that death every where has
the upper hand and kingdom.

For the death of the soul is an alienation from God. Therefore they which
believe in Christ, whereas they were dead before, begin to live: because
Faith is the spiritual Resurrection of the soul, and does after a sort
animate the soul it self, that it may live unto God, according to this
saying, The dead shall hear the voice of the son of God and they that here
it shall live.

It is a notable titel of faith verily, that Christ pouring life into us
delivers us from death. 3. King i7 4 Kin 9.4.
M. And that which Christ testifies of him self, can belong to no other.

We do read that holy men have raised up some from the dead: Romans i5.i7 i,
Cor i5, 21.
as Elias, and Elizeus. But yet none of them was the resurrection and the life,
but Christ only.

26. And whosoever lives and believes in me shall never dye: Beleeuest thou
this.

The Lord Jesus had spoken two things which he orderly expounds. He proved
him self to be the resurrection when he taught that life is restoared to the
dead by faith.

C. Now follows the exposition of the second member, namely how Christ is
the life because he never suffers the life which he has once given to decay
but preserves the same unto the end. For what should become of men in so
great fragillitie of the flesh, if so be they having once gotten life should
be left afterward unto them selves. Therefore it must needs be that the
continual state of life be founded upon the power of the same Christ, that he
may finishe that which he has begone. And the faithful are therefore said
never to dye because their minds being renewed with the incorruptible seed
have the spirit of Christ abiding in them, by which they live daily. For
although the body be subject unto death because of sin yet notwithstanding,
Rom 8.i0
the spirit is life for righteousenesse sake.

2. Cor. 4.i6
Yea though the outward m^n perish, yet the inward man is renewed day by day.

And death it self is to them a sertain deliverance from the servitude of
death. Death is a deliverance from the servitude of death. John. 5.
R. There is no cause therefore why they that believe should fear and
abhor death because they have passed already from death to life.

Beleeuest thou this C. Christ seems at the first sight to speak therefore
of the spiritual life that he might withdraw the mind of Martha from her
present desire Martha desiring that her brother might be restored to life.

Christ answers that he is the author of a far more excelent life because
by his heavenly power he quickens the souls of the faithful. But there is
no doubt but that he speaks of a double grace

Generally therefore there is no doubt but that he commends the spiritual
life, which he gives to all those that are his: but hereby he meant to give a
taste of that power which he would afterward declare in raising up of Lazarus.

M. And Christ knew what Martha believed, and what she believed not: he
does not demand therefore this question to the end he might learn, but that
he might draw from her a confession of that faith which he knew to be in her
at that time.

For it is not enough for us to beeleeue with the heart but it is also required
that we confess that with the mouth which we believe with the heart. A.
Furthermore Christ says not, understand thou this, But, Beleuest thou
this. For the ministers of God cannot be understood except they be understood
by faith.

27. She said unto him. Ye Lord, I believe that thou art Christ the son
of the living GOD, which should come into the world.

M. It seems that Martha understood not the words of Christ, and that she
knew not that which she said she believed namely, what it is to be Christ
the son of God. Nevertheless, there is no doubt, but that she had that
Faith in Christ, that she doubted nothing at all of his words. C. And to
prove that she believed the same concerning Christ, as, that he was the
resurrection and the life, she answers that she believes him to be
Christ, and the son of God: as in deed this knowledge comprehends in it
self the sum of all goodness. For we must always consider to what end the
Messiah was promised, and what office the Prophets always gave unto him. R.
And this confession is like unto that which Peter made in the sixteen chapter
of Matthew. C. And Martha in confessing him to be the same which should come
into the world, confirms her faith by the Prophesinges of the Prophets.
Whereupon it follows, that we ought to look and hope for a full reformation
of all things, and for perfect felicitye at his hands.

28. And as soon as she had so said, she went her way, and called Marye her
Sister secreatlye, saying: The Master is come, and calls for thee.

Bv. Thus far we hard the talk between the Lord and Martha: and now
follows the communication between the Lord and Mary: the which although it
be very short, and contains nothing which has not been spoken of before,
yet notwithstanding it has circumstances annexed to it, which are neither to
be contemned, nor yet unprofitable.

C. And it is likely that Christ stood still without ye village at the request
of Martha, least he should come among so great an assembly of men. For she
feared peril, because Christ had but latelye escaped the snare of death.
Therefore least the fame of his coming should be spread any farther, she
priuilye informed her sister of the same.

The Master is come. C. The name of Master shows, what estimation Christ
had among godly Matrones. Howbeit they have not as yet profited so much as
they should have done: and yet this was much that they had whollye addicted
them selves unto him as his Disciples.

29. As Soon as she heard that, she arose quickly, and came unto him.

C. This sudden and speedy coming of Mary to meet Christ, declares no small
reverence. M. There were many Jews present which came from Jerusalem, and sat
by very sorrowful, that they might comfort her, over her dead brother. She
leaving all these, so soon as she knew that Jesus was come, and that he
called for her, made haste without delay to come unto him, and not in vain.
For the Jews brought nothing with them but words, with the which they could
not satisfy a sorrowful mind: but this Christ brought with him the
resurrection and the life.

30. (Jesus was not yet come into the town: but was in that place where Martha
met him.)

Bv. Therefore he waited for Mary, whom he commanded to be called for,
seeking for a convenient place to work the miracle, because the grave was not
far from thence: for the custom was then to make the Monumentes of such
departed this life, by the hye ways side. M. And in this that the Lord would
not go into the house to ease and refreshe him self, before he had fynished
the work of the glory of GOD, in raising up Lazarus, for the which he came:
we have an example set before us to follow, that we also might execute and
finishe those things which concern the glory of God, before we do any thing
else: according to the saying of Christ, First of all seek the Kingdom of
God, and the righteousness thereof, Mat. 6.33.
and all other things shall be given to you.

He is scant a faithful servant to his Lord, which seeks the refreshing of
his body, and other private commodities, before those things which concern the
glory and profit of his Master.

A. The servant of Abraham would neither eat nor drink, Genesis 24.33
until he had faithfullye discharged his Masters errande and message.

31. The Jews then which were with her in the house, and comforted her, when
they saw Marye, that she arose up hastily and went out, follovved her,
saying: She goes unto the grave, to weep there.

C. Although by the sufferance of Christ, Martha went home again, that she
might priuilye call her Sister from the multitude, yet notwithstanding the
purpose of our savior Christ tended to another end, namelye, that he might
have them witnesses of his miracle. This thing they thought not upon: but it
was no new thing, yt men should be brought as it were out of darkness, by
the secreete providence of God, to a place whether they minded not to come. M.
For human matters are oftentimes so disposed by the purpose of God, that by
the occasion of those things which we purpose to do, we fall into those
things which we never thought upon.

C. They thought that Martha went to the grave, according to the manner of
those which seek occasions to provoke them to mourn. For this is a common
fault among men, that when the husband has lost his Wife, or the Wife her
Husband, the Father his Child, or the Child the Father, they by and by
ambiciously seek by all means possible, to increase their grief: And many
practiced diverse sleights, and subtle means to this end. Wherefore it was
the duty of these men to fetch back Marye, least by the sight of the
Sepulcher, she might be occasioned to mourn: but they durst not deal so
sharply with her, but bare with her intemperate grief, and went with her. And
thus oftentimes it comes to pass, that their consolations and comfortes do
little avail, which do to much flatter with their friends.

32. Then when Marye was come where Jesus was, and saw him, she fell down
at his feet, and says unto him, Lord if thou had been here, my brother
had not been dead.

M. The Evangelist in saying, that Mary fell down at the feet of Christ,
expresses the singular affection of love and reverence, which she bare
toward him. R. She is not afeard of the presence of the Jews, whom she
knew, not to be very gracious unto the Lord, neither did she regard their
friendship, which they declared in coming to comfort her, nor yet does she
fear their judgment: but as she bare a loving and reverent heart toward the
Lord, so she showed her self in the sight of all men without desemulation. C.
And herby we gather that the Lord was worshipped and served in that house: far
suppassing the common manner of men.

For although men were wont to prostrate them selves before Kings and Princes:
yet notwithstanding, because Christ in the outward show of the flesh had
nothing that was Kinglye and glorious, Mary fell down at his feet to another
end. The which she would not have done, except she had been persuaded, that
he had been the son of God.

Lord if thou had been here. M. She uses the same words unto the Lord,
which Martha had used before. C. And although she seems in show to speak
honorably unto Christ, yet notwithstanding, we showed even now, what fault
was contained in these words. For the power of Christ, which filled and does
fill heaven and earth, ought not to be restrained to his corporal presence.

33. When Jesus therefore saw her weep, and the Jews also weeping which came
with her, he groned in the spirit, and was troubled in him self.

Bv. The Lord answers nothing to the complaint of Mary: For he had reasoned
the matter sufficientlye with Martha, to whom he had promised notable things,
as that it would come to pass, that Lazarus should be raised from death to
life again. Wherefore, the time and occasion was now come, not to dispute
farther of the resurrection, but to perform that which he had promised. B.
Furthermore, when he saw Marye altogether in morning, and the Jews to mourn
and weep with her also, the present weeping so moved him, that he him self
wept also. B. Thus he did sorrow with those that sorrowed, and declared him
self both to be a very man, and also endued with true love.

The cause of such affection the Evangelist expresses when he says, that
he wept when he saw Mary, and the rest weeping. Howbeit there is no doubt but
that he had a farther respect, namelye, to the common misery of mankind: For
he remembered the charge committed to him of the Father, and wherefore he was
sent into the world, namelye, that he might deliver us from all evil. This,
as he did in very deed, so he would show that he did the same with the
serious affection of the mind. Therefore he going about to raise up Lazarus,
Christ lamented the miserye of mankind.
testified with groaning in the spirit, with grief, and with tears, that he
was no less affected and grieved for our miserye, than if he had been in the
same him self.

For the son of God having taken upon him our flesh, Heb. 4.
would also of his own accord take upon him our affections: that he might
differ nothing from his brethren, but in sin only. And herein he declared
him self to be our brother, that we might know that we had such a mediator
as knows easily how to have compassion upon our infirmityes, he him self
having had experience of the same in his flesh.

If any man object and say, Aunsvvare.
For therefore our affections are vicious, because they exceed and have no
measure: but the affections in Christ, because they tended to the obedience of
GOD, and did not exceed, were without blame or fault.

For if so be thou compare his passions with ours, thou shall find so great
difference between them, as there is between fair springing water, and foul
dyrtye puddle.

Christ greatly troubled him self, and was much moved, but so notwithstanding
that he kept him felfe within the compass of his Fathers will.

Bv. To be short when Saint John says: that Jesus groaned in his spirit, he
means that he was so moved in the bowelles of mercy, that for the time he
could not speak. This motion always goes before tears in such as are
vehemently affected. For the like also we read of Joseph, Ge. 43.30.
who being moved with compassion toward his brother sought where to weep.

34. And said, where have ye laid him? They said, Lord, come and see.

M. This is not to so be understood as though Christ knew not in what place
Lazarus was buried. For he, who being so far of, knew without any man's
report that he was dead, how could he also be ignorant of the place of his
burial? God forbid we should suspect this in Christ: from whom no man can
keep him self how secreetely soever he be hyd. He demanded therefore this
question, not to learn, but to avoid the wicked suspicion of the Jews, least
he might seem to do any thing fradulentlye in this matter.

35. And Jesus wept.

M. These tears came in very good order and time before the miracle, that the
infirmitye of the flesh might be joined in this work with the power of God,
that if so be the divine majesty showed in the raising up of Lazarus should
discourage any from coming to Christ, his weeping, pittye and compassion might
draw them back again: and also, that if so be any were offended at the
infirmity of weeping, he might be moved to believe in the Son of God, by his
power in raising up Lazarus.

36. Then said the Jews, Behold how he loved him.

37. And some of them said, could not he which opened the eyes of the blind
have made, that this man also should not have dyed?

R. Part construed the tears of Christ to the best, and part to the worst. C.
And Saint John describes unto us a double judgment concerning Christ: for
these former sort which said, Behold how he loved him although they thought
not so honorably of Christ as they should have done, as, attributing nothing
unto him but that which was human, do notwithstanding speak more
indifferently and modestly, of him than the other, who maliciously murmured
against him, for that he did not save and keep Lazarus from death. For
although they do commend the power of Christ, concerning the which the other
said nothing, yet notwithstanding they do not the same without a certain
reproach. Hereby it does euidentlye enough appear, that the miracles which
Christ had already wrought, were very well known unto them: but the more
filthy was their ingratitude, that they let not to make exclamation against
him, because in one part he ceased, and satisfied not their expectation. After
the same manner men have been always unthankful unto God, and are
unthankful still: Except he satisfye our desires in every point, we fall by
and by to murmuring and grudging, saying: Seeing he has been always hitherto
wont to help, why does he now fail me? So we read of the Israelites when
they were in the desert, Can God also give meat unto his people in the
wilderness? Behold he stroke the Roche, so that water gushed out withal: and
can he give bread also? But this their murmuring provoked the Lord to anger,
as we shall see, if we read the three scoore and eighteen Psalm, beginning at
the nineteen verse.

38. Jesus therefore again groaned in him self, and came to the grave: It was
a Cave, and a stoane laid upon it.

C. Because Christ came to the Sepulcher, not as an idle looker on, but as a
wrastler, which prepares him self to try maisteries, it is no marvel if he
groan again. For the violent tyranny of death which he went about to
overcome, was before his eyes.

M. There are some which think that this groaning proceeded of disdain, and
displeasure, because the unbelief, of the which we have spoken, did offend him.

But the former reason seems to be more apt: namelye, because he had more
regard to the matter it self, than to men.

M. We must also note here an example of patience. He answered not the wicked
ones, (as he might have done, and as they deserved) neither did he cease from
finishing the work which he had begone, because of their malice: but
although he groaned in him self for the cause aforesaid, yet nevertheless he
goes foreward to the grave of dead Lazarus.

Let us learn therefore in this place, not to answer by and by to all
speeches of wicked men, nor to cease from doing the work of God, either for
the blindness, malice, reproach, sclaunder, or ingratitude of wicked men, but
constantlye to go forewarde,

It was a Cave. A. Concerning the burial of the faithful, and the comeliness
observed in the same, read our exposition upon the fourteen Chapter of
Saint Mathewe, beginning at the twelfth verse.

C. There follow diverse circumstaunces in the raising up of Lazarus, which do
more set forth the power of Christ, as, the time of four days, that the
Sepulcher had a stoane laid upon it, the which Christ commanded to be taken
up in the sight of al men. For it follows,

39. Jesus said, take ye away the stoane. Martha the Sister of him that was
dead, said unto him, Lord, by this time he stinketh: for he has been dead
four days.

R. The beginning of the works of God, as it seems foolish, so also it
seems to be childishe. For, behold he which went about, to raise up a
dead man, commands the stoane to be taken away: as though by the same power
of the word, he could not remove away the stoane from the door of the
Sepulcher, or could not bring forth the live man through the stoane. Why then
does he that which is greater, and commits less matters to others to be
done? For afterward he commanded others to loose the napkins that were tied
about his face. M. He could in deed by the same power have taken away the
stoane, by which he went about to restore a dead man to life: but he thought
it better to use their labor (about all such like things,) which stood by,
reserving only unto him self the power to raise up the dead man. R. first,
that so many as were present, might be more assured witnesses of the miracle:
and secondlye to teach us to hope well in matters that fall out contrary to
our expectacion. For whereas he commands to take away the stoane, it
seems to argue some impotencye to be in him: but the same impotencye at the
leangth breaks out and shows it self mighty force and power.

Lord by this time he stinketh. The infidelitye of Martha served very much
to the commendacion of the miracle.

For so the Lord is wont to turn evil into good, not by our diligence and
labor, but by his most wise dispensation. M. This Sister confesses that the
dead Carkas does savor or stinks: affirming openly the same to have been
buried four days, that every one might have the power of Christ in greater
admiration. For Gods glory is oftentimes so set forth in us, that by our
miserye, corruption, infirmitye, and destruction, the majesty of Gods power is
made more manifest.

Acts 26. x. i. Cor. i5.9. ^. Tim i.13
So Paul, when he would commend the glory of the grace of GOD which was showed
in him, with open mouth confesses in diverse places, that he was a persecutour,
and an aduersarye to the grace of God. C. Notwithstanding, that which Martha
speaks here, is a sign of distrust, as is said, because she judges the
power of Christ to be less than it is: for, because nothing agrees less with
life than corruption and stincke, Martha gathers that there is now no hope
of remedy. Euenso when preposterous cogitacions occupy our minds, God after a
sort is driven from us, least he should finishe his work in us.

Martha verilye, did so little further the raising of her brother, that for her,
he might have lien for ever in the grave; because she being past al hope of
life, went also about to hinder Christ from raising him up: and yet
notwithstanding she had nothing less in her mind.

This the imbecillitye of Faith brings to pass, that we being drawn this
way and that way, might fight and contend with our selves. Martha lied not,
when she said, I know that whatsoever thou ask of God, he will give it
thee: but a confounded faith does little help, except the same be put in use
when we come to the present matter.

Moreover, in Martha we may behold how many defections of Faith there be
even in the best. She was the first that came to meet Christ: this was no
small testimony of pietye, and yet notwithstanding, she cease not to set and
lay stoppes and stays before him in his way.

Therefore that we may have success unto the grace of God, let us learn to
attribute unto him far greater power, than our senses can comprehend. And if
so be the first promise of God will not content and satisfye us, yet at the
least, when he confirms us the second and third time, let us be quiet and
content, after the example of Martha.

40. Jesus said unto her, said I not unto thee, that if thou did believe,
thou should see the glory of God?

M. By these words our savior Christ went about to erect and comfort the
sorrowful mind of Martha, which was also weak in the Faith, and to direct
and bring her to this, that she would with a steadfast and constant mind, have
only regard to the miracle to come.

C. And withal he does reprehend her distrust, for that she had not conceived
hope by the hearing of his promise. As if Christ should have said, Bv. Thou
do object the stink of the corrupted and putrifyed body, whereby thou do
gather with thy self that the stoane shall be removed from the grave in vain,
and a way made for him to arise which shall never come forth.

But the eyes of the faithful must not be fixed upon this earth, and earthlye
substance, neither must their ears be open to the reasons of flesh, which
always rebelleth against God: it is necessary to call to mind the word of
God, to remember his promises, have them always before thine eyes, and to
lean and stay thy self whollye upon them.

Remember Martha therefore my words. Has that failed which I said unto thee
even now, that if thou did believe, by the death of thy brother, the
glory of God should be declared?

Has that failed which I promised vnthee saying, Thy Brother shall rise again?

Therefore the stink, putrefaction, and corruption, neither does, nor can
hinder the glory of God any thing at all. Only, believe and thou shall find
God true and omnipotent.

C. And by this place it does appear that he spoke somewhat more unto Martha,
than John in words has expressed: how this same was the meaning of Christ
when he called him self the resurrection and the life. When he says.

Jf thou did believe, thou should see. His meaning is not that the
resurrection of Lazarus, which was done to the glory of God, depended upon the
faith of Martha: but he seems rather to mean thus, that Martha had not seen
the glory of God, if so be she had been void of faith. Upon just cause
therefore he says not, If thou believe, thy Brother shall rise again: but,
Thou shall see the glory of God. C And that not only because faith does open
our eyes, that we may behold the glory of GOD shyning in his works, but
because our Faith makes away for the power and goodness of GOD, to offer it
self unto us: as we may read in the four score and one Psalm, beginning at
the eleventh verse.

So again unbelief stops the access unto God, and does as it were keep
his hands fast shut: for the which cause it is said in another place, Jesus
could show no sign there, Mat. 13.58
because of their unbelief. Not that the power of God is tied to the will of
men: but because they which do withstand the same by their wickedness, so
much as they can, are unworthy to have him revealed unto them. M. He says,
The glory of God, when he might have said, my glory, (for it was meet that
the Son also should be gloryfied by this miracle, as is said before,) but
Christ thought it better to use this modestye, that he might seem rather to
seek his Fathers glory, than his own: although his Fathers glory and his,
are always joined together.

41. Then they took away the stoane (from the place) where the dead was
laid. And Jesus lift up his eyes, and said, Father I thank thee, that thou
have heard me.

Then they took. C. Now Martha being contented with this second saying,
suffers the stoane to be moved. She saw nothing as yet: but because she
hears that the son of God does not command the same in vain, she
willingly obeys him.

Where the dead was laid. M. The Evangelist thought that he could not
sufficientlye inculcate the death of Lazarus, that thereby he might make the
glory o^ the power of Christ, which is boath the resurrection and the life,
the more manifest.

And Jesus lift up his eyes. Christ talks with his Father before he
commands the dead man: and that he might declare that he talked with the
Father, he lifted up his eyes toward heaven: Bv. to the end that by the very
gesture of his body, he might declare to the standers about him, that the same
which he did, was by the power of God: who is the aucthour and geuer of all
good things. C. This therefore is the sign of a good mind disposed to pray.

For, if so be a man will truly call upon God, he must be joined with him: the
which cannot be, except he be lyfted up from the earth, and ascend above the
heavens. The which a man cannot do by lifting up his eyes only, For the
hypocrites also do the like, who being overwhelmed in the fylthynesse of the
flesh, do seem by lifting up of their eyes and by wrything of their faces to
draw heaven unto them: but that which they do hipocritically, the children of
GOD must do sincerely. Notwithstanding he which lyfteth up his eyes toward
heaven, ought by his cogitacion to include God there, who being in every place,
fulfilleth both heaven and earth: but because men's minds cannot be free from
groase imaginations, but that they will imagine some groase and base thing to
be in God, except it be when they are lyfted up above the world, the
scripture calls us thither, and testifies that the heaven is Gods seat.
Esaias. 66.i.
But this lifting up of the eyes is not such a ceremonye that true prayer shall
not be acceptable without the same: for the Publican, no doubt, which looked
down to the ground, did nevertheless by his faith pearce the heavens: And
yet this gesture is profitable, for it styrreth up men to seek God, and moves
the affections. For there is no doubt, but that Christ when he lifted up his
eyes toward heaven, was rapte thither with great vehemencye.

Father I thank thee, that thou have heard me. Bv. The Son is not so heard
of the Father as we are heard, but after a more certain special manner. For
the Father hears the Son, that is to say, he is of the same will and power
that he is of. The Son wylleth not any thing contrary to his father, neither
stands he in need of any other forreyne, or, external help. C. Now
therefore he begins with thankesgeuing, when as he had asked nothing: but
although the Evangelist make no mention that he prayed, yet notwithstanding
there is no doubt but that he first made his peticion: for otherwise he could
not be heard. And it is very credible that among those groaninges, of the
which the Evangelist speaks, he prayed.

Now having obtained Lazarus life, he gives thanks to the Father.

And in that he arrogateth not this power to him self, but attributes the
same to his Father, as received from him, he declares him self to be the
Minister of the Father. For to frame him self to the capacitye of men, one
while he proouing, and confirming his diuinitye, challenges unto him self
whatsoever belongs unto God: another while being contented with the person
of a man, he gives the whole glory of the diuinitye to the father.

42. Howbeit, I know that thou hear me always: but because of the people
which stand by I said it, that they may believe, that thou have sent me.

B. He was sure already that his Father would at his request, restoare Lazarus
to life. Therefore that he might seem to do all things by the will of his
Father, he gave him thanks.

C. And when he adds that he knew the same before, he so does, least any
man should think, that he was in so small favor with the Father, that he
could not do what miracles he would at the first, without stay.

Therefore he declares that there is such a consent between him and the
father, that nothing is denied unto him: and that he needed not to have
prayed, seeing he did that thing only which he knew was commanded to him of
the Father: but to the end it might the more evidently appear unto men that
this was a divine work in deed, he therefore called upon the name of the
Father.

B. To be short, he giving thanks unto the Father in the presence of the
people, testified that he wrought all things by the power of his father, that
he is always heard of the Father, and that his will and the Fathers will are
all one. C. If any man object and say, Why then did he not raise up all those
that were dead? We answer, that God by his wisdom and counsel appointed
so many miracles to be wrought and no more, than should serve for the
approbation and confirmation of the Gospel.

That they might believe B. Let us know that all the words and deeds of our
savior Christ belonged to this end, that we might believe Jesus to be the
son of God our savior. They which stood by, might in some sort know the
Father, and yet be ignorant of the Son, therefore he prays before them,
that they might know him to be sent of GOD, and to will his Fathers will, and
also to be equal with him in power. For he wrought other miracles also
without prayer: Mar. 9.25.
as when he said to the Deuell, Math. 8.2.
come forth of him: and to the Leprouse man which said, If thou will thou
can make me clean, Math. 9.6.
I will, be thou clean: And to him that was sick of the Paulsey, Arise, take
up thy bed and walk: Luke 7.8.
A. In like manner when he raised up the Widows son from death, we read
not that he prayed, but said only, Young man I say unto thee arise: Mar.
5.4i.
Neither yet when he raised up Iayrus Daughter.

Therefore although he could have raised up Lazarus with the wagging of his
finger, yet notwithstanding, thus it behooved all things to be done, because of
the people which stood by.

43. And when he thus had spoken, he cried with a loud voice, Lazarus come
forth.

M. He would have all men hear with what words he raised up the dead man,
least any man should think that he did any thing supersticiouslye, or by
magical art. Furthermore, it was also necessary that they should hear how
constantly, and without doubting with great confidence and aucthoritye, he
commanded the dead man to arise: and to this end he cried aloude.

C. And whereas he touches not the dead body with his hand, but cries only
with a loud voice, his power therein does more manifestly appear: and withal
he commends unto us, the wonderful and secreete efficacye of his word.

For how does Christ restore life unto the dead, but by his word? Wherefore
in the raising up of Lazarus, he used a visible sign of spiritual grace, the
which we feel daily by the scence of Faith, in showing his voice to be a
quickening voice. R. As therefore he made the world by his word: so by his
word he raised the dead man: to the end we might learn that the Gospel is
the power of God to salvation, to all that believe. For as Lazarus being dead
in body, was brought again by the word to corporal life: even so we being
dead in sins, by the word received, are restoared into the everlasting life
of righteousness. Read the five and twentye verse' of the fifte Chapter
before.

44. And he that was dead came forth bound hand and foot, with grave
clothes, and his face was bound with a napkin: Jesus said unto them, Loose
him and let him go.

And he that was dead. Bv. This is a manifest declaration of the diuinitye, of
our Lord and savior Christ, that his power is not void and ineffectuall, but
lively and quickening.

For now he performs that in very deed which he had spoken before,
namelye, that he is the resurrection and the life. For so sone as Lazarus,
which was dead and buried, heard the voice of the Son of God, he came forth
sound and whoale in body.

And his face was bound with a napkin. C. The Evangelist makes mention of
Grave clothes, and the napkin, to the end we might know that Lazarus came
forth of the Sepulcher, even as he was laid in the same. Also the Jews
retain this manner of burial at this day, wrapping the body in one piece of
Linen, and the head with a towell or napkin several, as we may read in the
ninteene Chapter following.

Grave clothes, is all the riches we carrye out of this world with us. i. Tim.
6.7.
Bv. And whereas Lazarus came forth bound hand and foot, all new writers
almost think it to be done by a new miracle. But hereby we may gather and
see what Riches we carrye forth of this world with us, namelye, our wynding
sheet, and grave clothes: according to the saying of the Apostle, We
brought nothing into this world, neither may we carrye any thing out of the
same.

Loose him, and let him go. C. This was also commanded to be done, to
amplifye the glory of the miracle, that the Jews might feel with their
hands the work of God which they saw with their eyes. R. For he which had
put away death with the power of his word, could either have made the
grauecloathes to have fallen of by their own accord, or else that Lazarus
should have unbound him self, but Christ would have the hands of the
standers by, Auriculer confession.
to be witnesses of the miracle. But to ridiculous are the Papists, who upon
this place ground their auriculer confession. Christ (say they) would have
Lazarus, after he had restored him to life, to be loosed by his Disciples:
therefore it is not sufficient for us to be reconciled unto God, except the
Church also forgive, us our sins. But whereupon do they define and gather
that the office of loosing Lazarus was enjoined the Disciples. We rather gather
by the text that it was enjoined the Jews, to the end they might have all
scruple of doubting taken from them.

A. Therefore this place serves no more their turn to auriculer confession,
than does that other of the ten Lepers in the seventeen Chapter of Luke:
the which also they have wickedly abused.

45. Then many of the Jews, which came to Marye, and had seen the things
which Jesus did, believed on him.

Bv. As in the former Chapters, it has diverse times appeared how the world is
affected at the works of God, and at the preaching of the gospel, so the same
apeareth to us again in this present Chapter. For some obey Gods calling,
receive the holy institucion of God, and judge rightly of Gods works: even as
did these men, who seeing the wonderful miracle, believed Jesus to be the
Messiah. But other some believe not, obey not the works and words of the
Lord, but do rather speak evil of the same, betraye the same, and go about
with all their strength, to obscure and ouerwhelme the manifest truth. M. Many
believed, but not all, because all were not chosen to life. C. Therefore Christ
did not suffer the miracle which he had wrought to be without fruit: because
by this means he brought some unto faith. For there is a double use of
miracles: namelye, that they may either prepare us unto faith, or else may
confirm us in the same. The former use, the Evangelist noateth here. For his
meaning is that they of whom he speaks wondered, and reverenced the divine
power of Christ, that they might be his Disciples: otherwise the bare miracle
could not suffice unto faith: Therefore by the word (Believed) in this place
we ought to understand nothing else, but the docillitye and readiness to
embrace the doctrine of Christ, as we have showed before. Therefore the Jews
which came to comfort Mary, and were brought unto faith by this sign, received
thereby no small consolation.

46. But some of them went their ways to the Phariseis, and told them what
Jesus had done.

M. Here the nature and disposition of perverse and obstinate persons is
discribed. They had seen no other thing nor less than the rest of the Jews,
who began to believe in Christ, because of so notable a miracle: but when they
had seen the very same, they were so far from believing, that because of
them they went about to betraye him.

C. In the which appears detestable ingratitude, or rather horrible madness.
Whereby we gather how blind impietye is. The resurrection of Lazarus should
have mollified their stoany hearts: but there is no work of God, which the
impietye of their poison, does not infecte and corrupt with bitterness.

Therefore to the end men may profit by the miracles of God, it is necessary
that their heart be purged: For whosoever have not the fear of God, although
they see heaven and earth confounded together, will not cease by ingratitude
to reject wholesome doctrine.

So a man may see at this day many of the frantike enemies of the Gospel to
fight against the mighty hand of God: requiring notwithstanding miracles at
the hands of the Ministers of Gods word: but to no other end than by
obstinate resisting to show them selves to be monsters of men.

M. A man shall find also many, who after the ensample of these wicked ones,
being either styrred up by envy, or else moved to please others, do report
those things which in them selves are good, and can not be blamed, to wicked
men, that they may provoke them more and more to lie in wait for good men.

C. And they brought news of the miracle unto ye pharisees, because they were
bitter enemies of the Gospel. R. They were the instruments of Satan, to whom
Christ was the savor of death unto death, the stombling stoane, and the rock
of offense.

47. Then gathered the high Priests and the Pharisees a counsel, and said,
what do we? for this man does many miracles.

M. The chief Priests and Pharisees, being in outward show, the Prelates
and chief pillars of the Iewishe Religion, hearing of so notable and
wonderful a miracle, and having regard to their name, dignitye, and
estimation, sought means and ways to hinder the glory of Christ, and to
defend their Lordshippe and government which they had over the people of God.

C. Verylye, if they had not been more scencelesse than brute Beasts, they
would have given some reverence toward Christ, after so notable a declaracion
of his divine power: but now they gather them selves together and take
counsel how they may overthrow the glory of GOD, the sight whereof ought
to have made them abashed,

What do we? Bv. As the wicked in all their affairs, are uncertain what to
do, amazed, and confounded, even so their counsels are not without great
care and trouble

C. In these words they seem to accuse their own sleuth and negligence, as
if they should say that Christ by their forbearaunce, had more fame and glory
whereas it lay in them to hinder the same. This is the confidence and trust of
the wicked, by which they perswad them selves that they can do all things: as
though it were in their hands to do what they list.

For this man does many miracles. B. Behoulde here how monsterouse mad
impiety is. They acknowledge that he does such signs and wonders that no man
can deny but that he has power over life and death: and yet they consider not
that if they withstand him they shall labor in vain. Therefore very
obstinately and wilfully they prepare them selves to oppress the glory and
power of God, which shyned in the miracles of Christ. But God in the mean time
is not a sleep: for although he let them alone for a time, and laugheth their
foolish arrogancy to scorn, yet notwithstanding at the length he powers
upon them the full measure of his wrath: as we may read in the twelfe verse
of the second Psalm. M. But what needed they to gather a counsel when as
they had already not only among themselves, but also by a public Edict, John.
9.22
condemned the doctrine of Christ But impiety though it be overcome a
hoondered times yet notwithstanding it will not give place unto the truth of
God.

48 If we let him escape thus, all men will believe on him and the Romans shall
come and take away boath our room and the people.

M. These men thought that it was by their permission that Christ wrought so
many miracles, and that it lay in their hands to stay him from working the
same. C. If so be Christ had been a deceiuer, their office had been to
withstand him, least she should draw away the sheep from the Lords foulde:
but in confessing his miracles, they plainlye enough declare that they care not
for God, whose power they so securely and disdainfullye contemn.

All men will believe on him. R. As if they should say, If so be we wink at
his doings, all Iewry will account him for a King and the Messiah.

M. Is faith then such a matter, that it requires the high Priests and
Magistrates to favor the same? Nay verily: for although ye should go about by
violence to constrain men to believe in Christ, yet nevertheless all men
would not believe in him. Faith in Christ depends upon election, and Gods
calling, which no mortal men can restrain. O ye blind guids, Faith depends
on election and Gods calling,
al men were not elected to this Faith: and therefore there was no cause why ye
should fear, that although ye did so suffer Christ, all men would believe on
him.

And the Romans shall come. C. These men to cover and cl^ake their
wickedness, pretend a love and care to wards the common wealth, and profit
of their country.

But they specially feared least their cruel government should decay: yet
they feign to be careful for the Temple, for the worship of God, for their
country, and for the state of the people.

Before they confessed that Christ wrought many Miracles: and now they are
afearde of the Romans, as though the power of GOD were not sufficient for
their safetye, which plainly declared it self in those miracles.

Therefore the Evangelist gives us to understand, that the cause of their
consultation was the peril which was at hand.

B. And this pretense of the enemies of Christ, had some show of truth,
because they had suffered already many things at the hands of the Romans, for
diverse seditions and rebellions.

Therefore they would have it seem, that it would come to pass that all the
people would believe on the Lord, and to receive him for Christ and the
Mesias, and make him a King: and that then the Romans would come, and beseege
the City, and carrye away the people captive.

Thus impyetie always finds somewhat that has some show of profit, to
beguile the simple withal.

C But that is an untoward consultation to avoyde perils, which cannot be
shunned unless we forsake the right course.

First we must seek what the Lord commands, and what he will have done:
this we ought to do what success soever we have.

But these men seek to destroy Christ lest any inconvenience happen, if so
be they suffer him to proceed as he has be gonne.

But what if he be sent of God? will they reiecte the Lords Prophet to have
peace with the Romans?

These and such like are their counsels which do not truly and with their
whole heart reverence and fear God.

They make no accoumpt what is meet and right to be done, because they hang
only upon the end and success. And this is one way to have godly
deliberation: first to seek what is pleasant unto God: secondlye to follow
without fear what so ever he prescribes to be done and not to be dismayde
with any fere, though we be be set with thousand deaths. For we must not
frame our actions according to every pu^e of wind, but according to the will of
the almighty God.

who so ever securely contemns perils, and simplye obayeth God, shall have at
the length happy success. For above the hope and expectation of all men,

God blesses that constancye, which is founded upon the obedience of his word,
but the wary advice and diligence of the wicked and unbelieving shall have
such evil success, that the more fearful they are, ye more they ensnare
themselves. M. For such is the condition of worldly wisdom, that seeking to
be wise and warye, it gathers amiss and says, if we suffer this, and this,
then this and that shall happen

But the chance of this Die fell otherwise If so be all men had believed in
Christ, the Romans had not come, but because through unbelief they rebelled
against God, and knew not the time of their visitation: and afterward they
rebelled against the Romans, not for Religion but for tributs sake it came to
pas by the just Judgment of God, that they were spoiled of the Romans, and
lost the City Jerusalem with the whole country.

Thus, is the wisdom of this world made foolishness in Gods matters, that
it might thereof be a fearde of destruction, whereof salvation might be gotten
and might thereby seek salvation, whereby nothing is gotten but undoubted
destruction. Pro. i0.24


C. And thus we see that to be most true which is spoken by Solomon.

That happens to the wiked man which he most of all fears.

C. Moreover in this History we have a liuelye description of the form and
manner of our age.

They which desire to be counted provident and circumspecte, have always this
one song in their mouths, that there must be always a care had for the
common tranquillity, and that the nouation which we seek, wants not many
dangers.

And after they have showed their spite and envy against us, they can find
no better way to withstand all troubles than to bury Christ.

As though all things should prosper well with them, notwithstanding their so
wicked contempt of Gods grace, when they seek to stay and pacefye troubles,
by abolishing the doctrine of salvation.

But that which the wicked fear shall happen unto them, as we said before.

By this word (Rome) it is uncertain whether they mean the Temple or the
country.

In both they feared their safety. For the Temple being overthrown the
Sacrifices ceased, the solemn worship of God, and the invocation of his name.

Therefore if they had any care for Religion, it was meet that they should
becarefull for the Temple.

And this might now move them greatly to defend the state of the Church lest
they should be carried again out of their Land.

They remembered as yet the exile of Babylon, which was the severe punnishment
of God. They gather therefore, that except Christ be destroyed, the state of
the Church cannot be in safety.

49. And one of them named caiphas, being the hihge Priest that same year,
said unto them, ye perceive no thing at all.

50. Nor consider that it is expedient for us that one man dye for the People,
and not that all the people perish.

M. The auctorytie of this high Priest is therefore spoken of by the
Evangelist, that we might know what moved other to consent and agree unto him.

He was the high Priest for the same year. Wherefore he might easily draw
others unto his opinion.

C. But he does not call him the high Priest for the same year, because it
was a yearly office only: but because the same being bought and soulde, was
given to diverse men contrary to the prescript of the Law,

God would not have that honorable office to be ended, but by the death of a
man, but all things being out of order and confounded it came to pass that
the Romans at their own pleasure placed and displaced the Priests. M.
Therefore this high Priest according to his pontifical majesty thus spoke.
First of all therefore he condemns the rest of ygnoraunce and want of
forsight, in that they know nothing neither consider what was expediente for
the order of Priesthood, secondly he gives his own Judgment what is
profitable for them and necessary for them to do.

C. And lastely propounds unto them on only remedy to be in safety, which
must com by killing an innocent.

Bv. He thinks it best not to consult long, but to destroy Jesus out of
hand: for (says he) it is better that one sedicious man should perish, than
that a great number should (he being safe) be over run by War.

C. Behold into what wickedness they burst forth, who without the fear of God
take counsel rather of flesh and blood, than of the word of God. For the
words of Caiphas are as much in effect as if he should say, that the
wrath of God must be provoked that they may have prosperous success in all
things.

Wherefore let us hereby learn never to separate that which is profitable
from that which is lawful, when as we can look for no good or joyful
thing, but only from the blessinge of God, the which is promised not to the
wicked and Rebelious, which seek for help from the Devil, but to the
faithful, who symplye walk in his ways.

A. Wicked therefore and deuilishe is this counsel of Caiphas.

51. This spoke he, not of him self: but being hye Priest that same year,
he prophesied that Jesus should dye for the people.

C. The Evangelist speaks this, not as though Caiphas spoke by chance, he
knew not what him self: (for he spoke according to his own proper sense) but
the Evangelist gives us to understand that his tongue was guided by God,
because God had a deeper matter to utter by his mouth, then came into his mind.

B. For he spoke by the instinct of God, though unwittingly. C. Caiphas
therefore was at that time as it were double tounged. For he uttered his wicked
and cruel purpose of killing Christ, which he had conceived in his mind.

But God turned his tongue another way, that in a doubtful speech he might
utter a prophecy. For God would have a Heavenly Oracle to prosede out of the
pontifical and Priestly seat, to the end the Jews might be free from excuse.

For although among that great assembly no man's concience was touched, yet
notwithstanding they felt afterward that their blindness was not to be
forgeuen. And ye impiety of Caiphas did not let but his tongue might be the
instrument of the holy Ghost: because God had more respect to the Priesthood
which he had appointed, than to the person of men.

Number, 2^ 8
After the same manner he blessed his people by the mouth of Balaam, whom he had
endued with the Spirit of prophesye.

B. For as God ordayneth and chooses good and godly Maiestrats, that by them
he may work many notable things, even for as much as he has the hearts of
al men in his hands, yet notwithstanding specially he is wount to move the
hearts of those men as we may read often times in the holy proverbs. Kings
heart are in the hand of god


Herevppon oftentimes they do and speak unwittingly those things which belong
to another manner of end, then they are done or spoken by them, and do bring an
other manner of matter to pass than ever they thought upon.

We are all the instruments of God, but speciailye they which are in
auctorytie: God therefore works much more by them than by others. Psalm, 82, 6
Whereupon also they are called Gods, and the sons of the most highest.

M. Hereby we gather that the gift of prophecy is given not only to good men
but also to the reprobat being set in public office: Prophesye comes out of
ye mouth of wicked men sometime.
even as oftentimes it is permitted to the wicked to work Miracles, as we may
read in the seventh Chapter of Matthew. So also we read of Saul, i, Kin, i0, i0
who being anointed with the kingly unction by Samuel, began to prophecy
with the rest of the Prophets.

B, But as Caiphas understood not his prophisie, so other Reprobates also, by
whom God reuealeth his mysteries, understand not those things which they
speak, but give only a sound without a mind: whereas the godly always
understand so much of those things whereof they prophesy, as is requisite for
their salvation, and necessary for the office which they discharge.

C. Moreover very fond are the Papists, and to ridiculous, who gather
herevppon, that we must count for an Oracle whatsoever it pleases the
Bishop of Rome to babble.

First if we grant unto them, that whosoever is a high Priest, is always a
prophet, yet notwithstanding of necessitye they must prove that the Bishop
of Rome is created by the commandment of God.

For the Priesthood of one man is quight abolyshed by the coming of Christ,
neither do we read that God at any time after that had appointed one man to
govern the whole Church.

Secondlye, if we grant unto them that the office and honor of the high
Priste was translated to the Bishop of Rome, let us see what it profited the
Pristes, that they embraced the prophecy of Caiphas to subscribe unto his
judgment they conspire the death of Christ.

Be such obedience far from us, which should draw us to horible Apostasy, in
denying the son of God.

Caiphas blasphemeth and prophecieth with on voice: they which obai his word do
contemn the prophecy and embrace the blasphemye. That the like happen not to
us, let us take heed that we hear not the Romish Caiphas.

That Jesus should dye for the people. B. This prophecy of Caiphas is the
sum of al prophesies, namely, that salvation comes to the elect by the
death of Christ.

M. The Jews did put Christ to death to get honor to them selves: but Christ
dyed that by his death he might redeem the world.

52. And not for the people only, but that he should gather together in one,
the children of God that were scattered abroad.

C. First of all the Euangelest shows that our salvation does consiste in
this, if Christ do gather us together in one.

For so he reconcileth us unto his Father in whom is the well of life. Whereby
we gather that mankind was disperced and alienate from God, Psalm. 36.9.
until such time as the Children of God were gathered together in one under
Christ.

Thus the communion of Saints, is the preparation to everlasting life: because
al they abide in death, whom Christ gathers not unto the Father, as we shall
see in the 17. Chapter followyng.

Paul also teaches that Christ was therefore sent of God, Ephe. i. i0
that he might gather together what so ever things were in Heaven and in Earth

Wherefore that we may enjoy the salvation which Christ has brought al
disagrement taken away, we must be at one with God, with Angels, and among our
selves.

The cause and pledge of this unity, was the death of Christ, by which he
brought all things to him self: but we are gathered daily by the Gospel into
the shepfould of Christ. The Evangelist also means that the reconcillyation
which Christ made is extended also to the Gentiles. R. For every one that
trusts in him shall not be confounded.

There is no difference between the Jews and the Greeks: Romans i0
For there is one Lord of all, who is rich to all that call upon him.

For Christ gathers the dispearsed sons of God together in one spiritual
body, and not into a corporal body.

For there is one faith, one body, and one spirit, even as ye are called in
one hope of your calling: one Lord, one faith and one Baptism. Ephe. 4.4


Therefore although the godly are by distaunce of place far asunder, yet
notwithstanding they are always gathered tegether into one in the Lord,

C. But how are they called the children of God, who being miserably dispearced
and in error, were the enemies of God.

Although they were by error ye enemies of God, and nothing less then Sheep,
yet notwithstanding in heart and mind, they were the Sons of God.

Therefore he calls them Sons of their election, before they were called,
who at the last by faith began to be manifested both to them selves and also
to others.

A. Concerning the which read the sixteen verse of the x. Chapter going
before.

53. Then from that day forth they took counsel tegether to put him to
death.

Bv. There seemed to be Just and Lawefull cause found, for the which Jesus as
the common troubler of the whole country might be put to death. Therefore now
they seek occasyon every hour that they might put the same in execution
which they seemed to have wisely consulted of. By which is to be noated the
nature, boldness, and perseueraunce of the wicked in a matter once cruelly
begone. A. For what greater cruelty and madness can there be devised, than
when the members with one consent seek the destruction of ye head.

Yet notwithstanding we see also at this day that the counsels of men tend
to this end that the truth of God may be oppressed (which al men ought to
desyer) specially of those which have the chief seat in the Church.

54. Jesus therefore walked no more openly among the Jews: But went his
way thence unto a country nigh to the wilderness into a City which is
called Ephraim, and there continued with his Disciples.

Jesus therefore walked no more openly. C. The Evangelist sh^weth that Christ
fled again, when he perceived the fury and madness of his enemies against him.
Notwithstanding let us note that he did not so flee that he might forsake his
Fathers calling: for he sought nothing else but to tarry the appointed hour of
his death that he might then willingly suffer the same. M. Moreover to walk
openly among the people belongs unto them who walk innocently and
unblameable: euenas they walk secretlye whose consciences accuse them and
cannot abide the light, but either for shame or for fear of the Magistrate
lurcke in darcknesse.

This comes to pass among that people where Justice and true Judgment is
showed: but where injustice and tyranny is exercised, there it is otherwise
they which do euel there, walk openly, they which lead an innocent life, and
live godly, are constrained to walk secretly.

This happened to Christ the most holy of all men, as may appear in other
places and that not among the Gentiles but among the Jews that is to say among
the people of God. What marvel is it then if so be it be not Lawful for a
Christian to walk openly among Christians, for the tyranny of wicked Princes
and magistrates. A. But in what state were the Jews then, when ye true light
of righteousness forsook them.

Into a City M. Christ went not now into the wilderness, as he did at the
beginning of his preaching, but into the City nere unto the desert.

Straight after Baptism he went into the wilderness but he did so at that time
for another consideration, Mat. 4, i.
as because of the conflict which he should have with Satan the tempter. But
he at this time so shonned the company of the wicked, that he did not abstain
from helping others that were more sound, and from preaching the truth. For
he came not to dwell among beasts but among men, for whose salvation he also
dyed. So, he said not to his disciples, Mat. 23.
If they persecute you, flee out of one City to the beasts into the
wilderness, or the mountains but, flee into another City, Let the ministers
of Christ follow this example in the time of persecution: Acts. 9.29.
for thus did the Apostle Paul and the rest of the Apostles.

Which is called Ephraim C. The name of the City which the Euaungelist here
puts down unto us was either then falsely pronounced, or else new.

For we know how the language was altered after the exile, into Babylon, and
the Cities and towns also: insomuche that it is no merueile if so be
certain places be reckoned up, of whose antiquity we have no knoweledge.

And there continued. C. The Euaungelist here calls not all those his
Disciples which received his doctrine, but which daily attended upon him, and
were companions with him in diet and fare: A. Whom he had chosen from the
time that he first began to teach and retained with him in the time of his
persecution. Whereupon in Luke he promised them a large reward when he said, you
are they which have abidden with me in my temptations.

Luk, 22, 28
And I appoynte unto you a kingdom as my Father has appointed unto me, that
ye may eat and drink at my table in my kingdom, and sit on seattes
Judging the twelve tribes of Israel.

55. And the Jews Easter was nigh at hand: and many went out of the
country up to Jerusalem before the Easter to purify themselves.

Bv. After that John had declared the cause, and fruit of the Lords passion,
he also declares the time of the same of the which we have spoken at large in
the twenty six Chapter of Matthew. Deuteronomy. i6, i5,
It was not Lawefull to cellebrate this feast but in the holy City according
to the prescript Law. There came therefore a great multitude of people out of
Galile out of Palestine, and out of all Iewrie and out of other parts of the
kingdom of Israel, to cellebrate this feast of passover.

To purify them selves. C. This was not precisely commanded that they should
purify them selves before the feast of Passover. Therefore the Euaungelist
says not, that there came all but many. For it was not lawful for any
unclean person to eat of the Pascall Lamb. Heb, 9.9
M. But we leaving all the pury f^yngs and washinges of the Jews, which
continued of right until the time of reformation (as the Apostle testifyeth)
2. Cor. 7.i
to the end we may cellebrate the Passover which is left unto the people of
God, i. Cor. 5.7
let us wash our selves from al filthynesse of the flesh and spirit working
holiness with the fear of God R. For Christ our Passover is offered.

56, Then sought they for Jesus, and spoke among them selves as they stood in
the temple, what think ye, saying he comes not unto the feast day.

There are some which refer these words to be spoken of the enemies of
Christ who only sought to destroy Christ. C. But seeing the purpose of the
Euaungelist is to show how notable the fame of Christ was throughoute all
Iewery, this place seems rather to be understood of those who sought Christ
not for any evil purpose, but with a sertaine Godly desyer, and desyered to
see him personally. All they which came into the Temple specially sought for
Christ, and had there communication of him. And although they sought him after
the manner of men, yet notwihstanding in seeking him they declare that the
tyranny of the Priests was the cause that he did not openly show him self.

57. The high Priests and Pharisees had given a commandment that if any man
knew where he were he should show it that they might take him.

M. They suspected that the Lord would hide himself in one place or other,
though he came to Jerusalem: and therefore by the virtue and aucthoritye of a
Synod, they gave commandment unto the Citizens, that if any man knew where
he was, he should bring them word, that they might take him, that is to
say, that they might bring the sentence of their Sinode and counsel to
effect.

Bv. This vncessaunt labor of the wicked to bring their evil purpose to
pass, does no doubt condemn our idleness in good matters. M. And we see here
the abuse of power. The authority of Priesthood verilye came from GOD, but
not to the end that he might make his subjects Ministers of unrighteousness
and betrayers of innocent blood. In this that the high Priests and Pharisees
commanded the Citizens that if any man knew where Jesus was, he should
bring them word that they might take him, we may perceive the power and
authority of commanding subjects. This the adjoined sentence of the
counsel confyrmed.

Boath of them were so great that it was lawful for no man to resist them.
Therefore wicked Prelates abuse them boath, neither do they abuse their own
persons only, but their subjects also. For so they make them, so much as in
them lies, the Ministers of murder and impiety, by commanding them to
betraye innocent blood. M. If any man by this place demand whether by the
obedience due to the Maigstrate, the subject is bound to betraye any man
whose death is sought, we answer in few words. First it is not lawful to betray
an Innocent: Secondly if he be guiltye and an offender whose death is sought
for, we must consider what he is. If he be sought for to this end that he
might be punished because he has offended once or twice, let no good man be
easily moved to bewray him: but if he be such a one which ought to be put to
death as an open enemy to the common wealth, then let no good man if he know
where he is, i. Kin. i9.i2.
be afraid to bring him forth. A. Consider the example of David and of the
Prophets, i. Kin. i8.3.
whom that faithful Ahab in time of persecution did hyde in Caves.

The.Xij. Chapter.
1. Then Jesus six days before the Passover came to Bethany, where Lazarus
had been dead, whom he raised from death.

THIS HISstorye the Evangelist Matthew writes in the six and twenty chapter,
and Mark in his fourteen Chapter But Luke makes no mention at all of the
same. And it seems that these three Evangelists. Matthew, Mark, and John,
seem to have al one cause to write the same: which is, that they might
reveal, wherev^on Judas Iscariot was moved to betraye the Lord: namelye for
that the occasion of gain was taken from him (which he looked for by the
precious ointment, if so be the same had been soulde) Satan so pricking him
forward, that straight after the effucion of this ointment, he being
reproved of the Lord went unto the High Prists, and made a bargain with
them for the betraing of the Lord. B. Therefore as the hour of the Lords death
approached, so also he drew near unto the place of the same. Thus the Spirit
of God, leads the children of God to those things which are appointed them
from above, Heb. i2.
in due and convenient time. Only let us follow this our Captain, and
finisher of our faith.

C. We see also that their judgment was to rash which thought that Christ
would not come. Whereby we are taught not to make such haste, but patiently and
quietly to tarry until the oportunitye comes which we know not of. Christ
comes first to Bethany, that three days after he might come to Jerusalem. In
the mean time the purpose of our Savior Christ was to give unto Judas
convenient time and place to betray him, that he might be a prepared Sacrifice
at the appointed hour. For he was not ignorant what should come to pass,
John. i0.
but he went willingly to be offered.

A. Before, when his enemies sought his death he fled, because his hour was
not come: but knowing now that the appointed time of his death was come, he
willingly offered him self to his enemies, such an earnest desire he had to
redeem mankind. C. And seeing he came six days to Bethany before Ester, we may
gether by Matthew and Mark that he tarried four days there.

M. His purpose was to erect and comfort those of Bethany before his passion.
For he knew that they were in peril because Jerusalem was so near.

A. The Evangelist makes mention of Lazarus, to bring in mind the late
Miracle.

2. There they made him a Supper, and Martha served: but Lazarus was one of
them that sat at the Table with him.

C. What day they made him the feast, in the which he was anointed of Mary,
John does not declare: but it seems that it was shortly after his coming
thither.

But Lazarus was one of them. M. This the Euaungelist adds to confirm the
truth of his resurrection. For by this feast it was declared, in the which
Lazarus sat at meat with others, that Lazarus, and not a phantasye or Spirit
instead of Lazarus, was come out of the grave and restoared to humayne life.

R. For this cause also he commanded meat to be given to the Damsel, whom
he had restoared to life. Mar. 3, 43
And he him self being risen again would eat with his disciples to the
end they might not doubt of the sertaintie of his resurrection. Luke 24.43


Whereupon Peter also uses this Argument to prove the resurrection of
Christ, Act. i0, 4i
as, that he did eat and drink with them after he was risen again,
Concerning the exposition of the rest of this stoarye until ye come to the
ninth verse following, read our Commentary upon the twenty six Chapter of
Mathewe, beginning at the seventh verse.

9. Much people of the Jews therefore had knoweledge that he was there:
and they came not for Jesus sake only, but that they might see Lazarus also,
whom he raised from death.

M. The Lord could not be hid in Bethanie a place boath nere unto Jerusalem,
and also now famous for the raising up of Lazarus. Therefore a great number
of the Jews specially of those which came from far from all places
thereaboute, for the feast at Jerusalem, which was at hand, to be purified,
knowing that he was at Bethany went out of the City thither that they might
see boath Jesus and also Lazarus. C. And verily the nerer that the time of
Christ's death approached the more famous it was meet that his name should be
in all men's mouths, that the same might be a mean to bring them to the more
fullness of faith after his death, Bv This people so little feared the Edictes
of the high Priests, by which they forbadde all men to Join them selves unto
Christ, and were so far from the obaying of the same, that they did the more
dilligently follow Christ and enquire after him.

M. Let us know therefore, that the doctrine of truth is such, that although
wicked Inquisytors go about to extinguishe the Gospel, yet notwithstanding the
same does more openly and brightly shine in the sight of all men. For as it is
light so also it loves to shine, C. When the Euaungelist says that those
Jews came not for Jesus sake only, but also to see Lazarouse, his meaning is
that they came to behoulde the wonderful power of Christ in Lazarus.

10. But the high Priests held a counsel, that they might put Lazarus to
death also.

Bv. This is a rare and new example of unspeakable madness, and beastly
cruelty, that the high Priests and Pharaseis consulted to kill Lazarus C. This
was outragiouse fury to kill him whom all men might see to be raised up by the
mighty power of God. But this is that spirit of madness by which Satan
provoke the wicked so, that they will never cease to be mad though God cause
heaven and earth to fight against them For this so wicked a consultation is
therefore described that we might know that the enemies of Christ were brought
to so great obstinacy not by error and foolishnes, but by brutish dogged
malice insomuch that they are not afeard to war against God. R. For admit
that Christ brake the Sabbath day, made him self equal with God, and had
caused sedytyon, what fault had Lazarus committed that he should dye? He was
raised from death. But is it a fault to receive a benifite.

M. What did Lazarus saving that he being raised out of the grave, lived to
the glory of Christ his qickener. This the high Priests thought suficient
cause to put him to death. What other thing do they at this day, which do not
only seek to extinguish the doctrine of Christ but also to kill those, who by
the same, are raised and quickened as it were from death.

11. Because that for his sake, many of the Jews went away, and believed on
Jesus.

Bv. Christ had wrought many myracls but neither the restoaring of the half to
his limbs, nor the giving of sight to the blind nor any other miracle, made
them so mad, as did this. For this was by nature more wonderful, and done after
many other.

And verily it was wonderful to see and hear a man which had been dead four
days, to speak and walk. Furthermore when he had given sight to the blind
man, he seemed to have broken the Sabbath: but seeing they had here no such
occation to complain, they are provoked against him that was healed Moreover
the blind man was a beggar but as for Lazarus he was a man of wealth: the which
may be gathered hereby, for that many of the Jews came out of the City to
comfort his sisters, and because the miracle was done in ye presence of many,
with admiration of all men.

Therefore many came to Christ to Bethanie. M. And the high Priests were not
offended so much that many believed in Christ as they were that they went
away: for this vexed them: for this going away was a clean forsaking of the
Phariseis. For they which believed in Christ, cast of their yoke. At this day
also the Bishops of Rome would easily be contented to suffer the doctrine of
the Gospel, if so be men by the same were not drawn unto Christ but unto
them.

A. But no man is to be reckoned among the number of the Disciples of Christ,
which will not follow his teacher.

For Christ's sheep hear his voice and follow. Therefore that we may hold
fast the doctrine of Christ we must reiecte the whoale doctrine of Antechrist
and forsake his wicked ceremonies. Ioh. i0, 27
For what felloweshippe is there between righteousenesse and
vnrighteousenesse, what communion between light and darcknes, what agreement
with Christ and Belial? Or what part has a faithful man with an Infidel? Or
how agrees the temple of God with Images. 2, Cor, 6, 4
C. Moreover seeing Satan wholly bends him self to overthrow the works of
God, or at least to obscure them, it is our parts continually to think upon
them.

12. On the next day much people that were com to the feast when they
heard that Jesus should come to Jerusalem.

Bv. The glory of the Lord Christ increased more and more, the Jews his
enemies, fretting and fuming in the mean time at the same. Concerning the
exposition of the two next verses following read our Commentary upon the
one and twenty Chapter of Matthew, beginning at the fifth, and eight verses,

16. These things understood not his diciples at the first: but when Jesus
was glorified: then remembered they that such things were wrighten of him
and that such things they had done unto him.

C. Even as the seed does not spring by and by after it is cast into the
ground, so the fruit of ye works of God does not straight way appear. The
Apostles were the Ministers of God to fulfill the prophesye: but what they did
they understood not.

They hard the cry of the multitude and that no confused cry, but such a
cry as proclaimed Christ to be a King: yet notwithstanding they knew not to
what end nor what it meant. It was therefore unto them a dumb and vain show,
until the Lord opened their eyes. M. Here also we are taught to obaye the
words of Christ, although we understand not by and by to what end they tend.

Then they remembered. C. Here the cause of that gross ignorance is noated
which went before knowledge because they had not then the Scripture their guide
and Scoolemaistris to direct their minds to right and pure consideration.

For we without we have first the word of God are starcke blind, neither yet
is it sufficient that the word of God does shine unto us, except the holy
ghost does illuminate our eyes. This grace Christ gave unto his disciples after
his resurrection: because as yet the full time was not come, in the which he
should power forth the riches of his spirit in ample manner, until he was
received up into heavenly glory. And we being taught by this example: let us
learn to Judge of all things which pertain unto Christ by the Scripture, and
not after the scence of our own flesh. Also let us consider that this is a
special grace of the spirit, to be instructed by the same in continuance of
time, that we might not be without sense and understanding when we call to
mind the works of God.

17. The people that was with him, when he called Lazarus out of his grave,
and raised him from death, bare record.

M. The Euangeliste cannot forgette the miracle of the raising up of Lrzarus C.
Therefore he repeateth again that which he had spoken before, that a great
many being moved by the fame of the miracle went forth to mete Christ. For
therefore they went forth by heaps, because every where the rumor concerning
the raising up of Lazarus, was spread abroad. These men therefore had Just
cause to attribute the honor of Christ unto the Son of Marye, seeing they
had such knoweledge of his wonderful power. M. And thus we see, that the more
the wicked desyer to have the truth buried, the more God does open the mouths
of the Godly to the manifestation and setting forth of the same: and gives
unto them such courage: that they do not only speak that which they know
to be true, but do constantly mayntaine the same.

19. The Phariseis therefore said among them selves perceive ye how ye
prevail nothing? behoulde all the whoal world goes after him.

Bv. The more the glory of the Lord increased the more the anger, wrath and
fury, of the enemies of Christ also was inflamed, notwithstanding they are
convinced and overwhelmed with the huge heap of Christ's gloriouse acts, and by
his evident preaching, insomuch that as mad men, and men wanting counsel they
are constrained almost to despair: for they cry with great fury and outrage.

Perceive ye how ye prevail nothing. C. By which words they provoke them
selves to greater madness. For it is a sertaine exprobration and reprehention
of their negligence: as if they should say that the common sort of people
did forsake them and follow Christ because they were to slow and favorable.

This manner of speech desperate men do use when they prepare them selves to do
any evil. Wherefore if so be the enemies of God are so sharp set to do that
which is evil how much more constant ought we to be in a good cause. The
Phariseis by their own voice condemn them selves, affirming that the more
they seek to intrappe, snare, betraye, and to excommunicate Christ the more
his glory encreaceth. Euenso the wicked not knowing their own Judgment are
condemned. M. Also we have hear to noate what fruit and profit the
adversaries of Christ and of the truth makes their account to have by their
practices, namely this that the world go not after Christ and his truth.

Christ is the light, he which goes after him disdayneth with his heart the
darkness of men's traditions and casts from him the yoke of human
mastershippe.

Therefore they bent their whoal mind to restrain the world from following
after Christ. When they could not bring this to pas and saw the feruente
desyer of the people they said.

Behold all the whoale world goes. And thus do the Bishopes and Phariseis of
the Antichristian Kingdom behave them selves, lest the world knowing the
truth should follow Christ But if it seem good unto the Lord to set forth the
light of his truth before this latter and corrupt world all the adversaries
that are shall not preuail against it: and they shall not only prevail
nothing, but also seeing the zeal and desyer of the world toward the truth are
constrained to say, Pro. 2i, 30.
ye see that we profit nothing: behold the world goes after this doctrine. A
For there is no wisdom, nor prudence, nor counsel against the Lord. Bv.
Therefore let those miserable wretches be mad so long as they list: Christ
the Lord does rain and shall reign in the midest of his enemies.

20. There were sertaine Greeks among them that came to worship at the feast.

C. Many interpret this place of the Barbarians

But because it follows afterward that they came to worship, we ought not to
understand the same of the uncircumcised.

For this was seuerly forbidden by the Romain Laws and the officers and
Magistrates of the Roman Empire gave straight charge and commandment that
no man leaving the religion of his country should follow Iudaisme. And the
Jews which were dispersed through Asya and Greece had liberty to go over the
Sea, to offer sacryfyces in the temple.

Furthermore the Jews would never suffer the Gentiles to be mingled with them
in the solemn worship of God: because by this means they thought them selves,
their temple, and their sacrifices, to be polluted. A. For we know what
happened in Paul's time. For when the Jews which were of Asia saw him in the
Temple, they caused a tumulte, and laid hands on him, crying: Men of Israel
help: this is the man that teaches all men every where against the people,
and the law, and this place: he has also brought Greeks into the temple,
Acts 21.27
and has polluted this holy place. (For they had seen before with him in the
Cittye Trophinus an Ephesian, whom they supposed that Paul had brought into
the temple.) These Greeks therefore of whom the Evangelist Saint John
speaks were Jews: notwithstanding because they dwelt far of on the other
side of the Sea, it is no marvel, if the Evangelist bring them in as
soiourners, and strangers, not knowing any of those things that were than
done in Jerusalem, and thereabouts. The scence therefore and meaning of this
place is, that Christ was received and acknowledged for a King, not only of
the indwellers of Iewrye, which came out of the Towns and Cities at the feast
day: but also that his fame was spread a far of, even to the men that dwelt on
the other side of the Sea.

That came to worship C. This also they might have done in their country: but
Saint John speaks here of solemn worship which was joined with
sacrifices. For although Religion and piety were not tied to the Temple, yet
for all that it was not lawful to offer sacrifices else where: neither had they
in any other place the Arc of the Testimony, which was a sign of Gods
presence. Every man daily spirituallye worshipped GOD in his house, yet
notwithstanding the Saints which were under the Law were bound to worship
eternallye, according as they were commanded by Moses: to the which end the
feast days were ordained. Wherefore if these men came so far, with great
cost, with labor and pain, and not without peril and danger, that they might
not neglect the external profession of their Godliness, what excuse can we
have at this day, except we can testifye that we worship the true God at home
at our house? The worship of the Law is at an end: but the Lord has
appointed Baptism, his holy Supper, and the use of prayer, which he has left
to the Church for the faithful to exercise them selves therein. Therefore the
neglecting of these things, does declare that we are to could in the exercise
of Godliness.

21. The same came therefore unto Philip, which was of Bethsaida a City of
Galilee, and desired him saying, Sir we would feign see Jesus.

M. In these men we have an example both of modestye, and also of providence:
of modestye in that they do not rushe rashlye into the Lords presence without
his will, but do seek to obtain that which they desired by his good will.
This declares that they thought humblye of them selves, and honorably of
Christ. Of prudence, in yt they come not to every one, but to such a one as
was a Disciple and familliar friend of Christ. In this matter they use not the
help of any Pharisey, or high Priest, who had nothing to do with Christ. C.
This therefore is a sign of reverence, that they do compel Christ, but do
seek to have access unto him by Philip. For reverence always begets
modesty.

M. By this example we are taught whose help to use, if so be we have a
desire to come to ye knowledge of Christ. Men can do nothing here, being
without the spirit and fellowship of Christ, whether they be doctors, or
Masters, or high Priests, or Pharisees: but we must common with the true
Disciples, by whose ministerye, access unto the knowledge and sight of Christ
may be gotten.

C. But whereas the Papists gather upon this place, that we must pray unto
the dead, that they may be patrones and Advocates for us unto the Christ, and
the Father, it is so rediculous and vain that it needs no refutacion.

Prayer to the dead grounded on this place.
The Greeks talk with Philip face to face: but he which calls upon the dead,
from whom he is far distaunt, does he (I pray you) the like? But these are
the fruits of human boldness, after that the same has taken liberty to
pass the bounds of Gods word. The Papists have rashly and without any good
ground, devised the Invocation of Saints, upon their own brain, and now to
have some false coullour out of the word of God, they corrupt and tear the
scripture.

Sirre we would feign see Jesus. M. These Greeks call Philip, Sir, and he
refuses not the same. It was the custom of those countries to call men of
wealth and countenance, by that name.

Whereupon also Mary Magdalen called Christ at the Sepulcher after he was
risen, Sir, when as notwithstanding, she took him to be a Gardener: Of the
which we have spoken in the fowrth Chapter going before. Ioh. 20,
M. The Apostles did not gainesay this custom, Men of countenance may be
called, Sir,
neither were they scrupulous in the same, as we see the Anabaptists to be.

23. And Jesus answered the^, saying, The hour is come that the son of man
must be glorified.

A. Many expound this of the death of Christ, because by the same the glory of
Christ was set forth. So that now according to their minds, Christ
pronounces the time of his death to be at hand. C. But it is better to
refer the same to the preaching of the Gospel: as if he had said, that the
knowledge of him must shortly be spread through all the parts of the world.
And thus he salued the, fear into the which he might bring his Disciples by
his death. For he shows that there is no cause why they should be
discoraged, because the doctrine of the Gospel shall be published nevertheless
throughout the whole world. And least this cogitacion of his glory might
shortly after vanishe away, when he should be judged to dye, hanged on the
Cross, and buried, he shows that the ignominy of his death should nothing at
all hinder his glory.

24. Verilye, verily, I say unto you, except the wheat corn fall into the
ground, and dye, it abides alone: if it dye it brings forth much fruit.

M. The purpose of our savior Christ by this similitude was, to draw his
Disciples and the Greeks which were present from the vain looking for earthly
glory. C. He compares his death unto sowing, the which when it seems to
tend unto the loss of the wheat, is the cause of great increase and plenty.
And although this admonicion was most necessary at that instant, yet
notwithstanding it has a continual use in the Church. And first of all it is
meet to begin at the head. That terrible show of malediction and ignominy
which appears in the death of Christ, does not only obscure his glory, but
does take away ye same quite out of our sight. Therefore we must not stick in
the death only: but the fruit which the resurrection has brought forth must
also be considered. And so it shall nothing hinder but that his glory shall
apeare and shine. From hence also we must come to the members. For we do not
only think that we do perish in death, Collos 3, 3
but we do also think that our life is like unto continual death. Therefore
we shall be utterly quayled, except we have this consolation by which Paul does
erect us, 2. Cor 4, i6
Though our outward man perish, yet our inward man is renewed day by day.

Let this therefore be the continual meditacion of the Godly, when they are
pressed with diverse sorrows, when they are hungerye, naked, sick, when they
are vexed with injuries: when they seem every moment to be swalowed up of
death, that this is the sowing which in due time will bring forth her fruit.

B. Therefore that which Christ speaks here has this scence and meaning: Ye
have seen with how great pomp the people of the Jews have received me:
now also ye see how these forreyners desire me: therefore learn ye to seek
for life and salvation by death.

For as a wheat corn, except it fall into the ground and die, brings forth
no fruit: even so I, unless I dye, remain fruitles. But when I am dead, I will
fructefye in the whoale world, by bringing many unto my Father. Then shall my
Gospel bring forth fruit with all creatures which are under heaven. So in
like manner your death shall be fruitful both to your selves, and also to
others. Therefore be not to desirous of this life, but after my example commit
the same unto the will of my Father.

25. He that loves his life, shall destroy it: and he that hates his life
in this world, shall keep it unto life eternal.

C. Christ joins to his doctrine exhortacion. For if so be we must dye to
bring forth fruit, we must patientlye suffer God to mortifye us: Bv. For the
faithful shall never come any other way to glory, than by affliction, and the
mortification of their flesh, seeing Christ the head of the faithful entered
not into his glory but by his Cross, and passion. C. And because he compares
love and hatered together, we must consider what it is to love and hate our
life. He which by the immoderate desire of this present life cannot leave this
world except he be constrained, is said to love his life: but he which by
contempt of this life goes with a good courage unto death, is said to hate
his life Not that we ought simplye to hate our life, which is iustlye reckoned
among the chiefest benefits of God: but because the faithful ought wyllingly
to forgo the same, when it hinders them from access unto Christ: even as if
a man should cast from his shoulders some waightye and heavy burden, when he
would go with speed to any place.

To be short, simplye it is not evil to love this life, so that we lead the
same only as pilgrims, having always regard unto the work that is set
before us. For this is the lawful mean and way to love this life, if so be we
abide in the same, so long as it shall seem good unto the Lord, and are
ready, at his will and pleasure to depart out of the same: or (to speak
brieflye) if we, as holding the same in our hands, do offer the same as a
sacryfice unto God.

Whosoever is otherwise addicted to this present life, loses his life, that
is, he casts the same into everlasting destruction. Concerning the farther
exposition of this place, read our commentarye upon the nine and thirty verse
of the tenth Chapter of Saint Mathews Gospel.

26. If any man minister unto me, let him follow me: and where I am there
shall also my Minister be: If any man minister unto me, him will my Father
honor.

Jf any man minister unto me. A. Because the Lord meant to send forth his
Apostles into the world to preach the Gospel of the kingdom of heaven, by
these words he prepares them valiauntlye and constauntlye to discharge so
notable an office, although the world should assault them many ways.

And this doctrine ought to be extended to all the Ministers of Christ. C.
For, that we might the less make account of death, Christ by his example
inuiteth us willingly to suffer the same. We may be ashamed verily to refuse
so great honor as to be his Disciples: but verilye he does admit us into
the number of his Disciples upon no other condition, than that we should
follow that way which he shows unto us. For he is our guide unto the way
of death.

Therefore the bytternesse of death is after a sort mittigated and made sweet,
when we consider that we are in but the same condition of death, that the Son
of God was.

Wherefore there is so little cause that we should forsake Christ, because of
the Cross, that we ought rather for his sake to desire death. R. This
therefore is agreeable to that which the other Evangelists report out of his
mouth, If any man will follow me, let him deny him self and take up his
cross, Mat. 16.24
and follow me. To the same effect also pertayneth that which follows.

And where J am there shall also my minister be. C. For he requires that his
Ministers would not refuse to submit them selves unto death, to the which
they shall see him go before them.

For it is not meet that the minister or servant should have any thing by
him self, which his Lord and Master has not. Bv. For Christ suffered for us
leaving us an example to follow his steps.

i. Pet, 2.21.
The which whosoever does, he shall receive that honor also which our savior
Christ promises here, saying:

Jf any man minister unto me, him will my Father honor. M. The which ought to
encourage all the Ministers of Christ. For they ought to consider, that when
they serve Christ, they serve the son of God, and the father will honor
them, though not for their own sake, yet for his sons sake. It is a great
matter to minister unto the servant of God, but much more is it to minister
unto the son of God, and to be honored of the father for the son.

27. Now is my soul troubled, and what shall I say? Father save me from this
hour: but therefore came I into this hour.

Now is my soul troubled. C. This sentence in the beginning seems to
differ much, from that which he spoke before. For before he declared a
heroycall fortitude, when he exhorted his Disciples not only to suffer death,
but also wyllingly and earnestlye to desire the same so often as need
required: and now he confesses his cowardlinesse in fleeing death.
Notwithstanding we read nothing here which does not notablye agree: even as
the proper experience of the faithful does teach every man. If so be such as
are scoffers and scorners do laugh it is no marvel. For this cannot be
understood, without action and practice. Moreover it is profitable for our
salvation, yea, and most necessary that ye son of God should be so affected.
In his death we must specially consider ye expiation, or appeasing of his
fathers wrath, by which he turned from us the wrath and malediction of God. The
which he could not have done, without the taking of our gyltinesse upon him.

Therefore it was meet that the death which he suffered should be full of
horror: because he could not make satisfaction for us; without the sense and
feeling of Gods horrible judgment. Whereby the stinge and heavy burden of
sin is better felt and known, the severe punishment whereof the heavenly
Father required of his only begotten son.

Let us know therefore that death was not a sport or play unto Christ, but
that he was cast into extreme torments for our sakes. And it is not absurd
that the son of God should be so troubled. For his divinity being hidden, and
not manifesting his force, did after a sort sleep, to give place unto the
sacrifice of pacification. And Christ him self had not only put upon him
our flesh, but also humane affections. For these affections were voluntary in
him: Fear of ^eath in Christ.
because he was not constrained to fear, but because of his own accord he
made him self subject unto fear. Notwithstanding, we must be sure that he did
not fear fainedlye, but truly and in very deed. Howbeit in this, he was
unlike to other men, that he had his affections stayed within the obedience of
Gods righteousness: as we have said before.

Another profit also which we have hereby is this: If so be Christ had been
nothing troubled by the fear of death, what one amongst us would have thought
that his example pertained unto us? For we suffer not death without the feeling
of grief and pain. But when we hear that there was no steely strength in
him, we take unto us courage to follow him: neither does the infirmitye of
the flesh stay us, which fears death, but that we follow our Captain to
the fight.

Bv. Therefore as he is man, he was troubled, grieved, and afeard of death. R.
Even as he said in another place, My soul is sorrowful unto death.

And what shall I say? Mat. 26.38
M. In this place we have an express example of a troubled mind, and that in
him which could not be capeable of so great perturbation, if he had would.

A troubled mind does many ways dispute with it self, one while in clyming
to this, another to that, uncertain what to say or do. C. Here therefore as
before our eyes we do see, how much our salvation cost the Son of GOD, who
being brought into extreme trouble, as he was man, knew neither in words nor
by counsel, how to express the vehemencye of his grief, and therefore his
last refuge was to fall to prayer, wherein he desires to be delivered from
death.

Moreover because he saw him self to be appointed by the eternal purpose of
GOD, to be a Sacrifice for sins, he by and by corrects that Prayer which
he made in great sorrow and trouble of mind, that he might whollye submit
him self unto the will of his Father.

R. Therefore the spirit prays and the flesh prays: but the spirit
overcomes the flesh. For the will of Christ was nothing contrary to the
will of his Father: but look what the Father willed, the Son willed the
same. Therefore, when he prays to be delivered from death, it is neither
properlye the voice of the Diuinitye, nor of the humanitye, but of a voluntary
emptying and abasing of himself, by which Christ took upon him the
affections of nature, sin excepted.

The flesh prays to be delivered from the Cross, and cannot wyshe the
same: but the spirit corrects and over comes the same, saying: But
therefore came I into this world: to suffer, to dye, and to be Crucified.

C. Wherefore in this place we must noate five degrees.

The first place contains a complaint, which bursteth forth of exceeding
grief and sorrow: secondly, he feels him self to be past al remedy, and
least he should be overwhelmed with fear he demands of him self what he
should say: thirdly he fleeeth unto the Father, and desires him to be his
deliueret: fourthlye he detracteth his prayer which he knew was against his
calling, and wishes to suffer any thing rather than he should not fulfill
that which was enjoined to him of his Father: lastly he being contented with
the glory of God only, he forgets all other things, and counts them as
nothing.

But this seems to be unmeet for the son of God, that he should unadvisedly
make his prayer, the which he must by and by renounce to obey his Father.

We confess verelye that this is the foolishness of the Cross, which is a
stumbling block of offense. Affections in Christ were pure.


A. Is it is said in the first Chapter of the first Epistle to the Corinthians.

But the more the Lord abaced himself, the more his unspeakable love toward
us is manifested.

Moreover we must remember what was spoken of before, that the human
affections from the which he was not fre were pure in him, and void of Sin:
the reason is, because they were framed and tempered to the obdience of God.

For there is no let, but ye Christ should fear naturally death, and yet
notwithstanding desire to obey God: but in diverse respects

Hereupon came the correction, when he says, that therefore he came into this
hour. For how soever he feared death, notwithstanding because he waied
wherefore he was sent, and what the office of a redeemer required, he offers
the horror conceived of the sense of nature, to his father to be corrected, or
rather that the same being restrained, he might make him self free and at
liberty to excute the commandment of God.

Wherefore if so be the affections of Christ which were pure from al sin,
ought so to be restrained that he might be obedient to his Father: Affections
in man enemies to God
how diligently ought we to seek to suppress our affections, seeing there is
not one of them but they are enemies unto God.

Let this therefore be the meditation of the godly, to strive against them
selves until they have denies themselves. We must also noate how that not
only those affections are to be brideled which are contrary to the will of God,
but also which do hinder the course of our calling although otherwise they are
neither hurtful nor vitiouse. To the end this may more evidently appear, we
must place the will of God in the first degree? in the second degree, the pure
and sincere will of man as the same was given of God to Adam, and as the same
was in Christ: In the last degree, our will which is infected by the contagion
of sin. The will of God is a Rule to the which whatsoever is inferior to the
same must be subject. Now the pure will of nature shall not of it self be
rebelliouse unto God: howebeit man has many impediments though he be framed
and bent neuersomuch to the right way, unless he subdue his affections unto
God, Christ therefore had one simple battle, that he might fear no more that
thing, which naturally he feared, when he knew otherwise to please God: but we
have a double battle, because we must fight against the stubbornness of our
flesh.

Herevppon it comes to pass that the most valiant soldiers do never get
the victory without a wound, We must also learn to observe this order, that
so often as we are vexed with fear, or opressed with sorrow, we by and by
lift up our hearts unto God. There is nothing worse or more hurtful than to
foster that within us which does vex us. And this is the just punishment of
sloth and negligence in all those, which will not come unto God.

28. Father glorify thy name.

Then came there a voice from heaven, saying, I have boath glorified it, and
will glorify it again.

Father glorify thy name B. These are abrupt and broken sentences, and not
spoken without silence and consealing of somewhat that should have been uttered,
the which are often used of such as have troubled minds. C But in these words
he testifies that he prefers the glory of his father before all other
things yea before his own life.

B. As if he should say, for this cause that I might cause thy name O father
to be gloryfied every where by my death I came into this hour: grant me of
thy goodness that this may always come to pass.

To have the name of God gloryfied, is to have God the Father him self in many
places preached and acknowledged. This began to be done more excelently then at
any time before after the death of Christ when the holy Ghost was sent: for so
it ought to appear what the death of Christ brought unto the world. C. This
therefore is the true moderation of our prayers if so be we so defyer the
glory of God that in them we prefer them before all other things.

I have boath glorified it and will glorify it. This is as much as if he had
said, I will finish that which I have begone. For God does not forsake the
work of his hands.

B. The father had glorified his name when he wrought such notable miracls by
the Lord yt in flesh he declared the testimonies of his goodness: again he
would glorify the same by sending the Comforter which should preach the
gospel of grace to the uttermost parts of the earth and should cause many to
believe the same. Or to speak more large, he glorified it when Christ was
borne of a virgin, when he wrought miracles, when he was worshipped of the
Magi guided by a Star, when he was acknoweledged of the saints full of the
holy Ghost when he was revealed by the descending of the holy ghost in the
likeness of a Dove, when he was declared by a voice sounding from heaven, when:
he was transfigured on the mountain. And he will glorify the same when Criste
should rise again from the dead, when death should never after have any more
power over him, when he should be exalted above the heavens and his glory above
all the earth when he should power out the holy ghost upon all flesh, and by
the preaching of the Apostles should turn the wh^ale world unto him. Bv.
Also the oracle, or voice from heaven, might thus be understood, hitherto thou
art my natural consubstantiall, and equal Son from the beginning and
everlasting: but when in the fullness of time thou hadest taken upon thee man's
nature thou did loose nothing thereby of thy divine majesty as I will
declare Thou shalt dye in deed as man but having overcome sin, death, and
hell, thou shall rise again as God and shall be worshipped with me throughoute
the whoale world. Moreover because it was the purpose of God to salve the
offense of the Chrosse and to take away the stombling stoane of the fame, the
father does not only promise that the death of Christ shall be gloriouse, but
does also promise to adourne the same so much as ^uer it was adorned before.
M. We have also to noate in this place that the prayers of the children of God
cannot but be heard of God, so that they ^ende to the glory of his name.

29. The people therefore that stood by and heard it: said that it
thoundered: other said an Angel spoke to him.

C. This verily is wonderful that the people which stood by should be amazsed
at so manifest a miracle, Some like deaf men Judged that to be a confused sound
which God spoke plainly, other, some not so senceles and dull, yet
notwithstanding diminishing much the majesty of the divine voice, feign an
Angel to be the aucthoure of the same. But the very same also is to be seen
at this day among men. For God speaks plainly enough in the Gospel and the
force and power of the spirit shows it self, which ought to shake both
heaven and earth, but the doctrine thereof is so could with many, even as
though it came from a mortal man only: to other some the word of God is
stammering speech a barbarouse voice and as it were a thonder.

But yet that voice was not heard without profit. For beside the apostles
there were some which did not interpret much amiss.

But the Euaungeliste thought good to noat breefely what is wont to be done
generally in the world: namely, for that the greater part, hearing God to
speak plainly and effectually hears not.

Therefore that which the Euaungeliste attributes hear to this multitude
belongs unto the same, but in part only.

30. Jesus answered and said, This voice came not because of me but for
your sakes.

M. The hearers thought that this voice came to comfort him. He therefore
expounds unto them the cause of the same saying, This voice came not because
of me. C. But had Christ no need of comfort and confirmation or had the Father
less care for him than for us? We must houlde this principle, as Christ for
our sake took upon him our flesh, even so what good thing soever he received
of the Father, the same was bestowed for our sake. Furthermore this also is
true that the voice came from heaven because of the people. For he had no need
of any external miracle. Also this is a secret reprehension, because the
Jews were as deaf as a stone to hear the voice of God. For seeing God spoke
for their sakes their ingratitude is void of excuse seeing they apply not
their ears to hear.

31. Now is the Judgment of this world: now shall the Prince of this world
be cast out

M. Christ in these words seems to expound the heavenly voice, which had
said, I have both glorified it, and will also glorify it again. For what else
is it to glorify the name of God in this world then to beat down and
overthrow the kingdom of Satan the Prince of this world.

C. Therefore the Lord having ended the battle already, does triumph not
only as the ouercommer of fear, but also as the conqueror of death. For
notably he sets forth the fruit of his death which might have been to the
disciples the cause of fear and trouble of mind.

This word (Judgment) signifies in some men's opinions reformation, to
othersome damnation. But the first signification is best, as that the world
shall be reformed and restoared to his lawful order. For we know that without
Christ there is nothing but confusion in this world. And although Christ had
begoone already to erect the kingdom of God, yet notwithstanding his death was
the true beginning of a princelye state in deed, and the full reformation of
the world. Notwithstanding we must noate that this reformation of the world
could not be made before the kingdom of Satan were abolished, flesh trodden
under foot, and whatsoeeuer else was against the righteousness of God. Finally
it was necessary ye mortification should go before the renewing of the world.
Wherefore Christ pronounces that the Prince of this world must be cast forth
because hereof comes confusion and deformity that while Satan usurps
tyranny Iniquity does abound.

Therefore Satan being cast forth the world is called from defection to
be subject to the gouernmente of God. B. For in Judgment, matters are wont
to be altered and reformed. Luke xi.xxi.
In the world Satan had quietly exercised his tyranny till a stronger than he
came and spoiled him. C. If any man demand how Satan was cast forth in
the death of Christ, ^unsvvere.
we answer that this eiection is not restrained to any short time, but that
the notable effect of the death of Christ is described which daily appears.

A. Therefore we must daily fight against the sondery assaults of Satan (for
he seeks like a roaring Lion continually whom he may deuowre.)
notwithstanding we must so fight that by Christ we may assure our selves of
the victory.

Satan the Prince of this world by Rapine. Psalm. 24
M, And he is called the Prince of this world not because he is the Lawefull
Prince of the same but by rapine, by which he has made mankind subject unto
him by sin. Otherwise the earth is the Lords and all that therein is the
compass of the world and they that dwell therein.

1. Cor. 4.4 Ephe. 2.2.
The Apostle Paul calls him the God of this world, which works in the
children of unbelief by whom they are held captive to his will and pleasure.
M. For his kingdom is in the hearts of the unbelieving: but by the power of
Christ he is cast out of the hearts of mortal men. And now we must take heed
lest he get enteraunce again into his old seat. Christ and the Princes of
this world cannot raygne together Christ being let in, erpelleth Satan: and
Satan being received, Ioh. 10.16.
Christ departs. For there is no agreement between Christ and Beliall.

32. And if I were lift up from the earth, I will draw all unto me.

In that our savior speaks here so generally that by his death he will draw
all men unto him, it is to be referred to the sons of God, which are of the
flock.

Also he used this general speech because the church of God was to be
gathered boath out of the Gentiles and also out of the Jews: 2, Cor. 6.16
according to this place, There shall be one Shepherd and one Shepfoulde.

33. This he said signifying what death he should dye.

There is no doubt therefore, but that the scence and meaning of this place
is, that the Cross shall be like unto a Chariot by which he should carry all the
faithful with him to his Father: as if Christ should say. B. ye shall exalte
me and set me in my true glory when ye lift me up upon the Cross. Ye shall
lift up my body from the earth, that it may dye with great Ignominy, and so
ye shall think not only to cast me down, but also utterly to destroy me.
Of the which your purpose ye shall so fail, that by the very same death, ye
shall exalt me in deed from the earth, into the kingdom of heaven to sytte at
the right hand of my father. From whence by sending the holy Ghost, I will
first of all bring that thing to pass which ye think to avoid by killing me
namely that the whoale world, that is to say all mankind, may follow me.
For I will draw all men unto me, they being persuaded by my spirit, that I
am the savior of the world.

34 The people answered him, we have heard out of the Law, that Christ bydeth
ever: and how say thou the son of man must be lift up? who is that
Son of man.

M. The people understood that the Lord spoke of his exaltation by which he
should be put to death. Therefore they object unto him saying.

we have heard out of the Law. C. There is no doubt but that there purpose
was maliciously to cavil at the words of Christ: therefore their own malice
blinds them, that they can see nothing in the clear light.

They say that they will not account Jesus for Christ, because he said he
should dye, whenas the Law promised everlasting continuance to the Messiah.
John. 8.17
As though boath were not exppressed in the Law, that so soon as Christ was
dead his kingdom should florishe for ever.

But these men take occasion to cavil of the last part. 2 Kin. 7.16 Psalm.
4.7 Psalm, 72.17 Psa. 89.30 Psa. 100.4 Psa. 127.2. Esai. 9.7 Esai. 40.8 Ezec.
37.25
M, Here they call the Scripture of the oulde Testament the Law euenas Christ
used this word Law before. But the testimonies of Scripture whereunto they
leaned, were these which I have coated in the Margent. C. But the original of
this error was for that they looked for worldelye Pomp to be in the Messiah
and in his kingdom. Hereuppon it came to pass that they rejected Christ
because he was not according to their fantasy and Immagination.

A. But verily they should first of al have considered this which Peeter
teaches namely, how that the spirit of Christ which was in the Prophets
testified the afflictions that Christ should suffer, i. Pet. i.xi
and the glory that should follow the same.

For what other thing did Esaias and Danyell prophesy of: Esaias. 53.2 Dan. 9, 26
Therefore the Jews are worthy of no excuse, which for this cause would not
receive Jesus to be Christ for that he was subject unto death. For it behooued
Christ to suffer and so to enter into his glory. Luke 24.26


Who is that son of man. This question contains a mock or scorn, as
though Christ by that short refutation had nothing to say. Whereby it
appears how arrogant Ignorance is. For it is as much as if they had said go
thy way now and boast thy self to be Christ when as thy own confession
argues that thou have no affinity or symilitude of the same.

35. Then said Jesus unto them, yet a little while is the light with you:
walk while ye have light, lest the darckenesse come one you: For he that
walks in the darcke wotteth not whether he goes.

Bv. He might in few words have made answer by the distinction of the two
natures, namely that one and the self same Messiah is boath mortal and
immortal: (for according to the divine nature he is immortal, and mortal
according to his human nature notwithstanding he thought it better in one
word to make an obscure answer, and more plentifullye to exhort them unto
the Faith.

Howebeeit by this answer he did friendly admonish us and sharply reprehend
them: for he reprehendeth them because they were blind in the light and also
threatens to take shortly his light from them.

When he says that yet a little while his light shall remain with them, he
confirms that which he had said before concerning his death. For allthough
he means not the light of his corporal presence but the light of the
Gospel: yet notwithstanding he alludeth unto his departure. As if he should
say, When I depart I will not cease to be light: so that I shall loose
nothing by your darcknesse. When he says that they have the light he gives
them a privy nippe, for that they being wilfully blind forsook the light, and
therefore he gives them to understand that they were unworthy to be answered,
because they sought to bring unto themselves occasion of error.

As if he should say, whatsoever I forshewe concerning the cross ye make a
laughing matter at the same and despise it.

Wherefore the Gospel shall be preached unto you yet a little while: and ye
shall not long have Christ with you which is the true light. For the time will
come when Christ and the Gospel shall be taken from you, and ye shall be cast in
utter darckenesse and blindness, It were better therefore that now while
occasion is offered you, ye would not neglect the harvest of your salvation.

For he which forsloweth the harues^e shall honger in winter: but he which
fetches his harvest in summer, is wise. Now is your harvest, now ye have
the light with you: see therefore that ye so walk that the darcknesse
comprehend you not, and when the night is come ye be blind. M. In fine he
shows them of that whereof he spoke in another place saying. Mat 21, 43
The kingdom of God shall be taken from you and given to a nation that will
being forth better fruit of the same.

C. Furthermore in that he says that the light shall shine unto them but a
little while, that belongs to all the vnbeeleeuing, for the Scripture
promises that the Son of righteousenesse shall rise and shine upon the
Children of God and shall never set: The son hereafter shall not shine unto
you in the day time: Esaias 60, 16
nor the moon in the night: but the Lord shall be your everlasting light:
Notwithstanding all men must walk warely because darcknesse follow the
contempt of the light.

The which also is the cause why such dark and cloudy night has been before
this time many ages in the world, because few would com to the bright shine of
heavenly wisdom.

For Christ does shine unto us by his Gospel, that we might follow the way of
salvation which he shows. Therefore they which use not the grace of God do
put out the Light so much as in them lies.

He that walks in Bv. he shows the discommoditye which the unbelieving
receive, and to terrifye them the more, he shows how miserable their
condition is who being destitude of the light, do err all their life long:
for they cannot move their foot without falling or the peril of stombling.

And Christ now pronounces us to be in darcknesse except he shine unto us.

36. While ye have light believe on the light, that ye may be the children
of the light. These things spoke Jesus and departed and hid bim self from
them.

Bv. This exhortation to Faith is very grave and weighty, to the which he
adds a most large reward. C. For he calls those children of the light, who
being the heirs of God in deed do enjoy the light to the end. When he
says,

Believe in the light No man must thereby gather that the works of light are
not required of the childeren of light, for by the works of light we are
declared to be the chidren of the light.

Bv. To the which effect pertains this saying of Paul, ye were sometime
darkness, but now are ye light in the Lord walk as childeren of the light
for the fruit of the spirit consists in all goodness righteousenesse, and
truth aprouing what is acceptable unto the Lord. Ephe. 5.8.
and have no fellowship with the unfruitful words of darcknes.

These things spoke Jesus. C. It may seem strange why he withdrue him self
from them who so ernestly desyered to see him. But by the other Euaungelists we
may easily gather, that the Euaungelist here speaks of the enemies of
Christ, whom the Godly love and desyer of good and simple men, did ver and
offend.

For the strangers that went to meet with Christ, followed him till he came
into the temple where he chanced to come among the Scribes and his ancient
enemies.

37. But though he had done so many miracls before them yet believed not
they on him.

M. This ought not to be understood only of that multitude which had moved the
question unto the Lord concerning the exaltation of Christ but also of all the
unbelieving and blinded Jews before whom ye Lord had done many miracles

C, Therefore let this hinder or trouble no man, that Christ was despised of
the Jews this offense the Evangelist puts away showing that he had many
evident testimonies, which brought authority and credit to him and to his
doctrine: but yet that the glory and power of God which evidently shined in the
miracles was not seen and perceived of the blind. M. Moreover the Euaungelist
does not without consideration make mention in this place of the vnbeelefe of
the Jews. For he has so ordered his history that now consequently he comes
to the declaration of the death and passion of Christ. Before therefore he
begins with the same he thought it necessary to admonish the reader before
hand why it came to pass, that the same nation and people remained still so
obstinate and unbelieving that they were not afraid to crucefy the son of
God: to take away the offense which might here come he lays the blame of
this matter upon the obstinacy of the Jews which could be reclaimed by no
miracles: and yet be iustefyeth Christ who by many miracles called them unto
the faith. B. Moreover when the Evangelist says according to his manner as it
were speaking generally, They believed not on him: John. 8.30.
he meant that very few believed on him. R. For he affirmed before that
sertaine believed on him.

38. That the saying of Esayas the Prophet might be fulfilled which he
spoke, Lord who shall believe our saying, and to whom is the arm of the Lord
declared:

C. Because that thing might trouble the minds of many men, how the Jews
could be so senseless and blind that the visible power of God could nothing
move them, John of him self goes forward to show that faith comes not by
the common sense and understanding of men, but by the singular and rare gift of
God, and that if was foreshewed long ago concerning Christ that few or none
should believe the Gospel. B. This Esayas prophesyed it was mete therefore it
should so come to pass, and yt the prophesy of the prophet should be
fulfilled. For he would not have prophesied of the same except it had been so
appointed of my father.

Bv. But the Jews were not such obstinate persons, because the Prophet did
foretell that they should be so: but he therefore foreshewed the same, because
they should be such.

Lord who shall believe. C. This sentence consists of two parts. In the
first part Esaias speaking of Christ, and foreseeing that whatsoever he had
spoken of Christ, and also whatsoever should be spoken by the Apostles, should
be rejected of the Jews, as one amazed at such as be in obstinacye, he
cries out, Lord, who shall believe our Preachinges. And in the second part
he shows the cause why the number of the believing is so small, namelye,
because God does not commonly illuminate all men, but bestows the grace
of his spirit only upon a few.

Wherefore, if so be the obstinate infidelitye of a great number among the
Jews ought not to hinder the faithful, although they be few in number, no
more ought we to be ashamed at this day of the Gospel, although the same
has few Disciples.

By this word arm it is evident enough that he understands the power of
God. The Prophet teaches that the arm of God which is included in the
doctrine of the Gospel is hid, until the same be revealed: and withal he
testifyeth that all are not partakers of this revelation: whereupon it
follows that many are left to their blindness, being void of inward light,
who hearing, hear not.

M. Therefore we have need of the Revelation of the power of God to believe
the word of Christ.

The high Priests also, Scribes, and Pharisees saw the power of God shyning
in the works of Christ, and so did the reast of the wicked Jews: but they
believed not: because they saw the same, not as the power of GOD, but as the
power of Satan: therefore also they said, He casts out Deuelles in
Beelzebub the chief of the Deuelles. Luke. xi.xv.


To cast out Deuelles was a work of the finger of God, but the wicked
attributed the same unto Satan. Wherefore? Because they were destitute of the
revelation of the arm of God: their eyes were blinded, and their hearts were
hardened. The arm of God in Christ, during the time of the Cross seemed to be
shortened: but in his resurrection again it declared it self to be a mighty
and outstretched arm.

Therefore we must pray unto God, that he will reveal his arm unto us in
Christ. R. The Apostle Paul cyteth this testimony to exhort the faithful not
to be discouraged because of the multitude of the unbelieving, and the small
number of the faithful, neither yet for the same to forsake the doctrine of
the Gospel. All (says he) obey not the Gospel. For Esaias says, Romans
x.xvi
Lord who has believed our words.

39. Therefore could they not believe, because that Esaias says again, He
has blin-

40. ded their eyes, and hardened their heart, that they should not see with
their eyes, and least they should understand with their heart, and should be
converted, and I should heal them.

C. This speech is somewhat more hard: because, as the words importe, the
way and power of believing was quyte stopte up and taken away from the Jews,
because the Prophesye of the Prophet had appointed them to blindness, before
they had either chosen blindness or faith.

I answer, that it is no absurditye, if it could not happen otherwise than
God had foreseen and appointed. But we must noate that the simple and bare
forknewledge of God was not the cause of these things: howbeit here we must
not have so much consideracion of the foreknowledge of God, as of judgment and
vengeance. Neither did God look down and consider from heaven, what men
would do, but he pronounces what he him self would do: namelye, that he
would stryke the wicked with blindness and giddines, that he might take
vengeance upon their wickedness. For here the inferior cause is noated why
God would have his word, which by nature is whoalsome, to be perilous and
deadlye to the Jews: namelye, for that they had so deserved by their
wickedness.

It was impossible for them to shonne this punishment, when God had once
determined to cast them into a reprobate scence, and to turn the light of his
word into darkness.

For this latter Prophesye is unlike to the first in this, because there the
Prophet affirms that no other do believe than those whom God does
illuminate according to his good pleasure, the cause whereof does not appear.

For seeing of right and equity all men are lost and dampened, God may
according to his goodness save whom he will from among the rest.

But here he makes mention of the obduration, by which GOD takes vengeance
upon the wickedness of an unthankful people.

Who so do not observe and consider these degrees, do confound amiss diverse
places of the Scripture. But we have expounded this place of Esaias in our
exposition upon the thirteen Chapter of Mathewe, beginning at the fowreteene
verse.

41. Such things said Esaias, when he saw his glory, and spoke of him.

M. This the Evangelist adds least any man should say. To what purpose
do thou allege this place.

The Prophet spoke of the men in his time, and therefore they serve nothing to
this purpose.

C. This cogitacion John preuenteth plainly, showing that the Prophet was sent
to be a teacher, not for one age, but rather that the glory of Christ was
showed unto him, that he might be a witness of those things which should
come to pass under his reign and kingdom.

For to what end did the Prophetical Revelations serve, but only to deliver
as it were from hand to hand to others, that which they had received from God?
And the Evangelist takes this as granted unto him, that Esaias saw the
glory of Christ. Whereupon he gathers that he applied his Doctrine to the
state of his kingdom, which was to come. A. As touching the time in the which
the Prophet saw the glory of Christ, some refer it to that time in the
which Vzias the King dyed. Esaias. 6.1
For then the Prophet saw the Lord sitting upon a high throane, and the
skyrtes of his clothing filling the Temple, the Seraphins standing upon it:
every one having six wings: with twain he covered his face, and with
twain he covered his feet, and with twain he did flee: And one cried to
another, and said, Holy, Holy, Holy is the Lord of Hoastes: the whoale world
is full of his glory.

By this vision the purpose of the Prophet was to show a vewe of the kingdom
of Christ. M. But this also may be referred to that which is contained in the
three and fiftye Chapter of Esai. For then the Prophet saw the glory of
Christ in the spirit, when he spoke of the arm of the Lord.

42. Nevertheless among the chief Rulers also, many believed on him: but because
of the Pharisees they did not confess him, least they should be
excomunicate.

B. Because the Evangelist had spoken of the obstinacy of the Jews, because
they could not believe on the Lord he does very well ad this, by which he
does show that all were not so rejected, but that many of the Rulers also
believed one the Lord: how be it they were but weak as yet, and lovers of the
glory of this world.

C. A worthy example verily of the grace of God: for impiety having once
gotten the upper hand, is a certain general plague which by the contagion
thereof infecteth all the parts of the body, Therefore it is the singular gift
of God when some remain sincere, among a corrupt people. Howbeit the same
grace of God is to be seen at this day in the world. For although impiety
and the contempt of God do abound, and although a great number go about to
banishe away quite the doctrine of the Gospel, notwithstanding,, it shall
find some sanctuaries and receivers. And so it comes to pass that Faith has
certain resting places, lest it should be quite driven out of the world.

Faith cannot be bani^^^ out of (...) world.
M. So in the time of Elias there seemed to be almost none which worshipped the
true God, so that Elias was thought to remain aloane, when as notwithstanding
there were seven thousand men in Israel which had not bowed their knee before
Baall. 1. King. 19.
C. This word (Also) betokens an Emphasys and vehemencye. For Princes and
Rulers for the most part wear such deadly enemies and haters of the Gospel,
that it was incredible that some one among them should have been found
faithful. The more wonderful therefore is the power of the spirit of God who
pierced in thither whether nothing else could come.

Howbeit this was not the wickedness of one age, only, that the rulars were
obstinate and rebellious against Christ: For honor, Riches, and dignitye,
have always Pride their handmayde.

Wherefore it is a hard matter to bring them to be humble and lowlye in their
own eyes, who being puffed up with Pride and arrogancye, scarcelye know them
selves to be men. Whatsoever he be that excels others in this world, will
not if he be wise, trust unto his mightiness, least the same be a let unto
him. A. Iam. 1.10
Let him that is Ritche (says Saint James) rejoice that he is brought low,
for he shall pass away as a flower of the field.

When he says that there were many, we must not so understand the same, as
though the one half, or the greater part of the Rulers believed: for they
being compared to others, of whom there was a great multitude, they were but a
few: but those same were a great many if they were considered in them selves.

But because of the Phariseis. This the Euaungelist misliketh in them for that
they did not bouldly confess their faith: C. And therewithal noateth how
great the imbecilitie of faith was in them, who were luke warm, or rather key
could. For a true and liuelye Faith cannot be divided from Confession. Faith
and Confession linked together. Romans 10.10


For with the heart we beeleeue to righteousenesse, and with the mouth we
confess to salvation. And it cannot be that faith being once kindled in the
heart should not burn and cast forth his flame. Therefore the Evangelist
gives us to understand that these Princes embraced the doctrine of Christ
because they knew the same to be come from God: but yet that this faith was not
lively in them, and not so virtuous as it beecame the same: because Christ
gives not unto his Disciples the spirit of fear, but the spirit of
constancye, insomuche that they dare bouldlye confess that which they have
learned of him.

And although it is not likely that these men were quight dumb, yet
notwithstanding because they made no true confession, the Euaungelist simply
denies that they professed their faith. For this had been true and lawful
confession, to have openly given their name and professed Christ. Wherefore
let no man flatter himself which in any part hydeth and dissembleth his
faith, lest he should incur the displeasure and hatered of men. For
although the name of Christ be odiouse, that fear is not excusable which
makes us slide from the confession of his name, though but the breadth of a
hear. Bv. A great number at this day have the very same disease that these
Rulers had. For they understand the doctrine of truth, they know the lawful
use of the sacraments, that papistry is contrary to the doctrine of the
Gospel, and that in the papacy the Sacraments are not ministered according to
the institution of the Lord, all these things they see and know: but yet
nevertheless for fear and the love of temporal things, they communicate with
the very same, they haulte on both sides and do not bouldly confess the
truth: All these men verily do greatly offend, and ought not to be confyrmed
in their error, to believe that it is sufficient, if so be they retain that
which is true in their heart, and do think well in their mind of the Gospel,
and in the mean time have a lyking of these abominations instituted against
the word of God: that is to say, they come unto the mass, not as to the
mass, but as unto the Lords Supper.

God hates that hipocriticall dissimulation, and loves truth and sincerity.

Concerning excommunication read the ninth Chapter going before beginning at
the.22. verse.

43. For they loved the praise of men more then the praise of God.

R. Thou may see in this place, the cause why few of the Rulers, mighty
men and wise men, do not sincerelye confess the Gospel. Because the Gospel
brings with it the Cross, and the forsaking of earthlye goods.

Now seeing the Rulers could not abide to forsake their tyranny, and seeing
it seemed foolish to the wise men, to resign the wisdom of reasone to the
bare and weak word of the gospel, it has ever to come to pass that very
few mighty and wise men, truly confessed Christ. According to the saying of
Saint Paul, Behold your calling brethren, how that not many wise men after
the flesh, not many mighty, not many of high degree are called, but God has
chosen the foolish things of this world to confound the wise.

C. The Evangelist lays no supersticio^ to these menes charge, but only
says that they sought to avoid the reproach and disprayse of men. For if so
be ambition prevailed more with them than the fear of God, it follows that
they were delivered by a certain light fear of concience.

Now let the readers noate, how greatly God misliketh and condemns their
fear, who dissemble their faith before men for fear of displeasure.

What worse thing can there be, yea what can be more beastly, than to prefer
the vain liking and commendation of men before the Judgment of God And he
pronounces all those to be such, who forsake the displeasure of men, when
they should confess a pure and true faith: and that justly: For the Apostell
commending the inuinsyble constancy of Moses, Heb. ^i. 27.
says that he endured even as though he had seen him which is invisible. By
which words he gives us to understand, that when a man fasteneth his eyes
upon God, his heart will be invincible and more fast than an Adamant stoan.
Hervpon therefore comes that cowardlines which makes us to fall to false
dissimulation, because we have wholly respect unto this world. For the sincere
aspect and behoulding of God does drive away all smoke and vanity of riches
and honors.

It is not therefore a small and venial offense as some imagine to deny
Christ, seeing the holy Ghost in this place says that those Rulers which
confessed not Christ, loved the praise of men, more than the glory of God. Bv.
And Christ himself says, He which denies me before men shall be denied of
me before my Father which is in heaven. Mat. 10.33
C. To love the praise of men in this place, signifies, to desire to be in
estimation and favor among men.

Therefore the Euaungelist means that these Rulers were so addicted unto the
world, that they rather desired to please men than God. R. The praise of men
is to be counted honest, good, and wise: the glory and praise of God, is to be
objected, contemned, scorned, crucified, and to be cruellye slain. For by
these means Christ entered into the kingdom of his Father, and the Father by
them was glorified in the world.

He therefore which prefers the praise of men before the glory of God is
vain, and miserable: seeing the praise of men tends to reproache and shame,
but the glory of God brings to everlasting life.

44. Jesus cried and said He that believes on me, believes not on me, but
on him that sent me.

M. All this place contains a serious and summarie declaration, by which the
Lord makes plain protestation concerning himself, and his dispensation, as,
that he does not defend his own cause, that he came not at his own
pleasure, but that he was sent of the Father, that he is the light of the
world sent to do good and not harm: that he spoke nothing of himself: and
therefore that they which believe in him, beeleeue not in him, but in the
father which sent him: and that he judges not the unbelieving, but that they
must be judged by the word which he has preached. And by this his serious
contestation his purpose was in plain words to give his last farewell to this
blind and obstinate people, to lay the blame of unbelief upon their own
heads, and manifestlye to testefie of his righteousness and innocence. And
this he did not symply and in the ears of one or two, but freely and with a
loud voice, which the Euaungelist noateth by these words, Jesus cried and
said. So did the saints of God in old time, protest before the people,
showing that they had omitted nothing, Deuteronomy 32 1. Joshua 23.4 King. 12 3. Act.
20.33
which pertayned to the office committed unto them: as Moses, Joshua Samuel,
and Paul, B. Also the purpose of our savior Christ was by his example,
speaking of him self with so loud a voice (than the which nothing grieved more
the Pharisees) to incourag those fearful Rulers which believed on him, that
with him they might despise the Pharisees in respect of God.

And that they might do this, he brings a most urgent and strong reasone,
affirminge that they do believe in God which believe on him, and that they
which know him know God also: the which is eternal life. C. The sum is
this, that faith in Christ rests not upon any mortal man, but upon God,
Ihon. 17.3.
because he finds nothing in Christ but that which is divine, yea in his
face he behouldeth God. For how shall we understand those things which he
here speaks, but only because a man appeared unto men when God was hid
and not seen. Also least they should think that he was the same only
whom they saw, he requiereth to be believed to be such a one, and of so
great majesty as is the Father, for says he whosoever believes in me, he
believes not in me (that is to say, in that which be sees) but in the
Father: and he which believes the father must of necessitye believe that he
has a son: and so consequentlye, he that believes in the father must also
believe in the son.

Therefore he does truly profit in the Gospel, who staying himsele upon
this Faith does believe GOD and not men, and does stand strong and steadfast
against all the assaults of Satan.

The faithful are said not to believe in Christ, when they do not persiste in
the human behouldynge of him. For he here comparing him self with the
Father, commands us to have respect unto the power of God, because the
infirmitye of the flesh, of it self has no strength. Here after when he
shall exhort his Disciples to believe in him, the seence shall be otherwise.
For there God is not compared with man, but Christ is revealed with all his
gifts which ought to be sufficient to retain our faith.

45. And he that sees me, sees him that sent me.

M. Seeing that God is a Spirit, and a Spirit cannot be seen, how does he
see God which sees Christ? John 4.24 John 1.18 1. Tim 9.19
Moreover no man has seen God at any time: for he dwells in the light that
no man can attain unto.

Aunsvvere.
I answer, C. Seeing in this place is taken for knowledge. For to the end he
might well and throughlye pacefye those conciences, which otherwise should be
much disquieted and troubled, he calls us to the Father. For therefore the
stabillitie of faith is sure and firm, because it is above the world.

And in that man, who truly knows Christ, the glory of God does shine: that
we might be assured that the Faith which we have in him does not depend upon
man, but upon the eternal God: because it arises from ye flesh of Christ
unto the divinity.

The which if it be so, it ought not only to be fixed continually in our
heart, but also it ought bouldelye and void of all fear to show it ^^^fe in
our tongue, so often as need requiereth: A according to this saying, Psalm.
116.10
I believed and therefore I spoke.

46. I am come a light into the world, that whosoever believes on me should
not abide in darkness.

C. To the end he might make his disciples more strong and valiant, he goes
forward still in preaching the assurance of Faith.

And first of all he testifies that he came into the world to be a light,
whereby men might forsake darkness and error, sin and death, and
condemnation, to the which all men are subject: and he shows also the mean
how to attain so notable a benefit saying.

That whosoever believes on me should not. Bv. For to the end he might
co^municat unto men al those things which he has, he came down from Heaven,
and was incarnate: but he gives them unto us by faith. Wherefore by faith
Christ with all that he has is ours.

Whereupon the second time he repeated faith, requiering his Disciples to
beeleeue in him. C. Also he accuses all those of ingratitude, who being
instructed and taught by his Gospel, do not divide them selves from the
unbelieving.

For the more notable a benifyte that this is, to be called from darckenesse
into light, the less excuse have they, who either by their sloth or
negligence choke and put out the light which is kindeled in them.

Therefore that we might have several degrees, first of all Christ teaches
that he is a light more for others sakes, than for his own: secondelye that
he is a light not only to Aungelles but also to men: thirdely that he was
manifested in the flesh, to give forth a bright shine. A. But how Christ is
called a light we have showed before in the first Chapter the fowrth verse, in
the eight Chapter the twelfe verse, and in the ninth Chapter the fyfte verse.

47. And if any man hear my words, and believe not I judge him not: for I
came not to judge the world, but to save the World.

C. After that the Lord had spoken of his grace, and exhorted his Disciples to
the constancy of faith, he now begineth to touch the Rebels, earnestly
reprehending them.

C. How be it here also he deals not so severely with them as their
wickedness deserved, who wilfully rejected God.

For he omitteth to judge of these men: because he came rather to save all. In
the first place we must noat that he speaks not here of every unbeliever, but
of those which willinglye and wylfullye reject the doctrine of the Gospel
preached unto them. M. For properly he cannot be said to be vnbeleeuinge
which has not heard, that is to say, to whom the Gospel has not been
preached.

He speaks therefore of those which do willingly despise the light of the
Gospel offered unto them.

C. Wherefore then will not Christ condeme them? because he hear laying au^d
for a time ye parson of a judge, to the end al I might be the more encouraged
to repentance, offers salvation generally to al and spreads forth his
Arms to embrace every one.

Howbeit he amplyfieth the crime by no small circumstance, if so be they refuse
so gentile and sweet a calling.

For it is as much as if he had said: Behoulde I stand present to call men,
and forgetting the parsone of a Judge I seek to draw all men unto me, and to
deliver them from destruction, which have bin twice lost.

No man therefore is damned for the contempt of the Gospel, but he which
dispising the amiable message of salvation, would willingly bring destruction
to himself.

This word (Judge) in this place signifies to condemn, as in diverse other
places also. ^^d to save, ought to be referred only to the proper office of
Christ. For in that ye unbelievers are more grievously and deply condemned for
the gospels sake, it is accentall, and of his nature.

A. John. 3.17
The like sentence we read when Christ said God sent not his son into the
world, to condemn the world, but that the world might be saved through him.

48. He that refuses me- and receives not my words, has one that judges
him: the word that I have spoken the same shall judge him in the last day.

C. Least the wicked might persuade them selves and think that they shall
escape unpunished for abusing Christ, he adds hear a horrible threatening,
that although he rest and suffer, yet his only doctrine shall suffice to condem
them: even as in an other place he said, that there should need no other
judge but Moises, in whom they did glory.

Therefore the sense is this, John. 5.45
I earnestlye desiring your salvation, do not use my auctorytie in condemninge
you, but do wholely seek to save that which was lost, yet think not ye
that you are therefore escaped the hand of God.

Bv. For they shall not escape unpunished, and go away without judgment which
contemn and reiecte the son of God.

C. For to speak of the least the only word which ye have despised, shall be
a sufficient and meet Judge.

And receives not my words. C. This latter part is an exposition of that
which went before. M. For in these words it is declared that it is to object
the Son of God, and what they are which rejected him.

C. For because men have hypocrisy ingraffed in them by nature there is nothing
more easy for them than in words to boste that they are ready to receive
Christ: and we see how common this vain boasting is, even among the most
wicked.

Wherefore we must remember this definition, namelye that Christ is rejected,
when we embrace not the pure doctrine of the Gospoll. M. even as to receive
Christ is nothing else, but to receive his word by a lively faith.

C. The Papists brag with openne mouth of the word of God, but so soon as
the same is preached, there is nothing more hatfull unto them. These kiss
Christ as Judas did. Therefore let us learn to include him in his word, and
give unto him that worshipe of obedience only which he requires.

The word that I have spoken. C. He could not by a more gloriousse title
extol the authority of the Gospel, than when he gives the power of Iudgeing
unto the same. For according to these words the last Judgment shall be
nothing else than an approuinge of the doctrine of the Gospel.

For Christ shall site upon his tribunal seat, but he affirms that he will
pronounce that sentence out of his word which he now preaches.

This threatninge ought to make the wicked much afearde when they cannot escape
the Judgment of his doctrine which they now so prowdly contemn. Again
hereby comes a wonderful consolation to the godly, that howsoever they are
now condemned of the world, they are notwithstanding already Iustefied in
heaven: because whersoeuer the faith of the Gospel has this feate the
tribunal seat of God is errected to save.

We bearing our selves bold upon this aucthoritye, there is no cause why we
should care for the Papists with their preposterous Judgments, because our
faith reaches above the Angels.

Bv. Therefore let us well remember this, and let us take heed that we despise
not the Lord speaking to us in his Gospel.

49 For I have not spoken of my self: but the father which sent me, he gave
me commandment what I should say, and what I should speak.

C. Lest the external show of man should deminish any thing of the majesty
of God, Christ calls us from the fame unto his Father.

And for this cause he makes mention so often times of his Father. And verily
seeing it is great wickedness to transfer unto any other, any part of the
divine glory, it is necessary that the same word come from God to which
Judgment is given.

Bv. Christ therefore in these words does very strongly maintain the whole
doctrine of his Gospel, and proves the same not to be humane, but divine,
undoubted and authentical.

C. Also here he puts a difference between him and his Father, not
according to the divine person simplye, but rather according to the flesh:
least the Doctrine being judged to be of man, should have the less weight and
auctoritye. Moreover if so be the conciences of men, should be subject unto
human laws, this reason of Christ should not serve, that his word shall be
a Judge because the same has not come from man according to the saying of
Saint James, There is one Law geuer which is able to save, and to destroy.

Moreover hereby we may gather what wicked and cruel sacrilege that is that
the Pope dare presume to bind men's consciences unto his immaginations: for by
this means he arrogateth more unto him self then does the son of God, who
denies that he speaks any thing, but according to the commandment and
prescript of his Father.

A. The which he does not only here affirm but very often also for the
commendation of his doctrine: as in the seventh and eyghte Chapters goinge
before.

50 And I know that his commandment is life everlasting: whatsoever I
speak therefore, even as the father badde me, so I speak.

C. Again he commends the fruicte of his doctrine, to the end al men might
the more willingly submit them selves unto the same. M. For he says not
simply And his commandment is everlasting life, but he says I know that
his commandment is everlasting life.

This is the testimony of the truth, and of the will of God toward mankind.
He knew what to teach and wherefore he was sent, namely to preach the
doctrine of eternal life, and for this cause was he sent of the Father that
he might be to the faithful the author of everlasting life. This certainly
also beecommeth the Ministers of Christ, who ought to teach no other thing then
that which they have received in commandment.

The which if they do, they also may say, We speak not of our selves, but
he which has sent us, has given us a commandment what we should teach,
and we know that his commandment is eternal life. An excellent title verylye
of the doctrine of Christ. For the Gospel of Christ is the commandment of
God to everlasting life: that is to say, it is the doctrine or preaching of
grace, committed by the Father to Christ the son of God, to eternal life,
which he promises to them that believe in him. R. For this commandment the
Father has given to the son, that he should descend into this world, and
save all those that beeleeue. For so God loved the whrlde that he gave his
only begotten Son, that every one which believes in him should not perish,
but have life everlasting. M. The Law also was commanded to Moses, but it
was given upon Mount Sina, with fear, trembling, and leading to death: but
the Gospel is the commandment of God, given to Christ the son of God,
preached in Sion, and spread from thence throughout the whoale world, being
peaceable and sweet, and wrighten by the spirit of God, in the tables of
their hearts which believe, offering remission of sins and everlasting life
to all that believe.

C. It is meet therefore that they feel the vengeance of God which are so
wickedly bent, that they now refuse him to be the Aucthor of life.

Even as the father bad me, so J speak. R. As if he should say, when I call
my self the Well of life, the quickening bread, the light of the world, the
resurrection and the life, I speak these things because my Father so
commanded me to the end, that he which would drink which would be filled,
which would, see, rise again, and live euerlastinglye, might come unto me, and
believe in me A. For these things I speak, that ye might attain to
everlasting salvation through me.

The.xiij. Chapter.
1 Before the feast of Passover, when Jesus knew that his hour was come,
that he should depart out of this world unto the Father, when he loved his
which were in the world, unto the end he loved them.

Before the feast of Passover. B. THE other Euangelystes in this place bring in
the History of the holy Supper. And the whole misterye hereof was ordained to
this end, that by the bread which we break, and by the Cup which we
bless, we are made pertakers of the body and blood of the Lord, and whereby
also the Lord does more and more live in us, and we in him.

Therefore seeing Saint John has already spoken of the Lords words
concerning the true perticipation of his body and blood, in his sixth Chapter,
he omitteth here the narration of the Supper: for the right of the Eucharist
began long before to be familier and well known to all Christians.
Pretermitting therefore those things which pertain to the Eucharist, C. and
many other things also which he knew were put down by Matthew and the rest,
he takes in hand to entreat of that thing, which they had omitted, as of
this stoarie concerning the washing of the Disciples.

When Jesus knew that his hour was come. M. The Evangelist writes this to
forewarne the Reader, that he think not that any of those things, which he
shall read in the Chapter following, happened without the foresight and
knowledge of Christ. For he was ignorant of none of those things which he
suffered.

A. Judas verelye the Disciples, not knowing of the same conspired with the
Rulers and high Priests to betray Jesus: but the same was not unknown unto
Christ.

Whereupon it is said hereafter, And Jesus knowing all things that should
come on him went forth. Therefore so often as the enemies of the truth shall
practice any thing against us, let us commit all things unto him, who can
provide for us and our matters well enough.

That J should depart out of this world. C. This is a speech worthy to be
noated for it is referred to the knoweledge of Christ, that he knew his death
to be a passage unto the heavenly kingdom of God.

Wherefore, if he making have thither did not let to love his Disciples as he
was wont, there is no cause now why we should think that his affection is
altered.

And now seeing he is the first beegotten among the dead: this difinition of
death pertayneth to the whoale body of the Church because it is a passage unto
God, from the which the faithful are as yet pilgrims. M. Therefore let us so
think and speak of our death, 2. Cor. 5.4.
that we may also call the same a passage out of this world unto the Father.
Let us consider who and what this world is and we shall desyer the death of
the body because by the same we go out of this world into a most happy
estate void of all trouble, sorrow, affliction, and pain.

It makes very much to the purpose that he uses this word father. To go out
of this world, which is a vale of miseries, and full of wickedness: and so
pass not to the worse, but unto the better and not simply to the better but to
the father also, is such a notable benefit that the son of God being
afflicted and oppressed in this world, could wish for nothing better.

Unto the end he loved them. C. Although the Euaungeliste does hereafter more
plainly declare to what end Christ washed his Disciples feet, yet
notwithstanding hear he beeginneth to show before hand in one word that by
this sign, he would have his constant and everlasting love declared, with the
which he once loved them, that when they had lost his presence and company,
yet they might be sertainly sure that he was not overwhelmed in death: the
which perswacion also ought now to clean in our hearts.

The words are that Christ had loved his Disciples, which wear in the world.

Wherefore although we seem to be far of from Christ, yet notwithstanding
let us know that he behouldeth us: because he loves his that are in the
world.

For there is no doubt but that he now bears the same affection toward us
which he retained even at this very point of death.

M. But the Original root and cause, is in Christ him self and not in his
Disciples. If so be the cause of this love had been in the Disciples, it had
not continued to the end. It is necessary therefore that the same rest in
Christ, who loves those that are his. with vnspeable love unto the end.

CYR. And verilye when he might have escaped the cruelty of the Jews and
the pain of the Cross, he so loved his, that he refused not to dye for the
life of all men.

And that this is the most perfect love our Savior Christ him self
testifyeth. This is my commandment, that ye love one another, Ioh. 15.13.
even as I have loved you. Greater love can no man have than this, that a man
should give his life for his friends.

2. And when Supper was done (and that the Deuell had now put into the heart of
Judas Iscariot, Simons Son, to betraye him.

M. There are some which think that it ought to be thus red, And supper being
prepared.

For it may be doubted whether these things were done after Supper or in
Supper time. AVG. It is very likely that Supper was not fully ended, that is to
say, that the Table was not yet taken away seeing it follows by and by that
the Lord took a morsel of bread and offered the same to Judas.

And that the Deuell had now put into the heart of Judas. C. This the
Euaungelist has added, not only to show the wonderful patience of Christ, who
voutsafed to wash such a wicked and false Traitors feet, but also that he
sought occasion to use that time in the which he should finishe the last act
of his life beeinge nere unto death.

And whereas he says, that Judas went about to betraye Christ by the
impulsion of the Deuell, he does it to express the cruelty and hainousenes of
the fault.

For this was more then a horrible and tragical fact in the which the
efficacy of Satan declared it self.

B. Insomuch that it may seem not to come from man's mind. C. It is very true
that man commits no manner of evil whereunto the Deuell does not stir
him: but as the offense is more detestable and haynouse, so the furye of the
Deuell in the same, must the more be considered: who caryeth those men which
are forsaken of God up and down at his pleasure. Morouer, although man's
concupiscence is set on fire by the Bellows of Satan: yet notwithstanding the
same ceasseth not now to be a furnace: for it has fire conceived with in: it
receives willingly the blowing of the bellows, that all excuse might be taken
from the wicked.

B. Therefore Satan the author and suggestor of all sin, put into the heart
of Judas to betraye Christ. M. And then he put it into his heart, when he
was angery in his mind for the oyntement which was poored upon the Lord, and
when he beegan to cast how to recover that gain which he saw he had lost.

So Satan assayeth men's minds when they are musing and careful.

R. But seeing the Scripture plainlye shows that Christ was betrayed by the
definite counsel and foreknowledge of God, Judas to betraye him: I answer.
God decreeed that his Son should suffer but so that by his passion he might
be glorified with the resurrection, Aunsvvere.
and by his cross might deliver the faithful from all curses. But Satan by
his wicked Instruments (as by Judas, the Phariseis, Pilatte, and Herod)
delivered Christ to the Cross to destroy him, and to blotte out his name
quite, from among the living. Therefore the heavenly Father executes his most
excelent purpose by most wicked Instruments, that the Faithful might not be
destitute of their salvation purchased by the Cross of Christ, and that the
unbelieving by the self same work through their own wicked practices, might
be destroyed for ever. A. Concerning the which, read the fourth Chapter of
the Acts, beginning at the twenty seuene verse.

3. Jesus knowing that the father had given all things into his hands and
that he was come from God and went to God.

C. This is therefore added that we might know whereof it came that Christ
was so quiet in mind, namelye, for that he being now the conqueror of death:
hoped for the triumph which shortly after followed.

Men which are amazed and stricken with fear, are commonly much disquieted:
but the Evangelist gives us to understand that there was no such motion in
Christ: because although he should shortly after be betrayed of Judas,
ngtwithstanding he knew that all things were delivered unto him of the Father.
Bv. For so John Baptist said, John. 3,
The Father loves the Son, and has put all things into his hand. C. If
any man demand and say, How then came it to pass, Lu. 22.44
I answer that boath these were necessary, namelye, that he should both
fear and abhor death, Aunsvvere.
and also nevertheless go forewarde without fear in discharging the office of
a Mediator. M. In this place also is commended unto us the modesty of Christ.

Ye see oftentimes that the Children of Princes do humbly and friendly play
with men of inferior sort: but it is before they know that they have
received full power of all things.

But this King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, although he knew that all
things were delivered into his hands, yet notwithstanding, he was never a
whitte the more insolent and proud, nay, he continued his humble, and modest
conversation with his Disciples, until the end. Let them noate this which are
of high calling.

4. He rose from Supper, and laid aside his upper Garments: and when he had
taken a Towell, he guirded him self.

B. The Evangelist according to his accustomed manner prosecuteth most
dilligently every part of that, which is worthy to be remembered and noated:
to the end we might the more deepelye consider of the same. M. Christ aroase
from Supper, his Apostles sitting still at the Table. He was not stayed with
deliciousness of meat and drink, from the performaunce of that which he
had purposed toward his Disciples.

And laid aside his upper Garments.

C. That is to say, his Gown, and whatsoever he wore above his Coat, but
not his Coat also. For we know that those of the East part used to wear long
garments.

And when he had taken a Towell he gyrded. M. This was the manner and form of a
servant. For he meant to minister unto others: the which no doubt made the
Disciples greatly to wonder.

5. After that he powered water into a Basen and began to wash the
Disciples feet, and to wype them with the Towell, wherewith he was gyrded.

A. That which he might have done by the service of another, he did him self
with great humilitye.

And began to wash. C. These words do rather express the purpose of Christ
than the external act. For the Evangelist adds that he began with Peter.
CHR. Howbeit there are some which affirm that he began with Judas, but what
moves them so to conjecture, I know not.

6. Then came he to Simon Peter: and Peter said unto him, Lord, do thou
wash my feet?

M. He might have called them all unto him: but he came unto them him self,
that he might omit nothing that appertained to servile duty, and humilitye.
In that Christ came first to Simon Peeter to wash his feet, the Papists
thereby gather an argument for their supremacye. Behold (say they) he
comes first to the Apostle Peeter, as to the chief of the Apostles. But the
purpose of Christ was far otherwise.

For the Lord did not this to appoint among his Apostles any superiority, but
rather to draw away their minds from ambition, and the desire of Lordship.
This cannot be tenyed. What wickedness then is this, to inuert the deed of
Christ, which he did against superioritye, to the defending of the same?

But rather let us say, that the Lord for this cause came first unto Peter,
that he might exhort him first of all to humilytye, against the desire of
supremacye.

Lord do thou wash my feet. C. This is a phrase of speech, abhorring an
absurd thing unmeet to be done. For in asking Christ what he does, he
does as it were withstand him.

This modestye were to be commended, if so be obedience were not more
acceptable unto God than any service or sacrifice beside: yea, if so be this
were not the true and only rule of humilytye, to submit our selves unto the
obedience of God, and to have all our scences tied unto his will: that we might
allow and like without controversy, whatsoever he affirms to be pleasant unto
him. Therefore the true way to worship God is, to subscribe and agree to all
that God commands.

R. We have in Peter described the nature of supersticious flesh: for Peter
rather of a supersticious than of a Godly reverence toward Christ, suffers
him not to discharge his servile and base office, fearing least that Christ
should be dishonored: But, yet afterward without any consideration at all of
reverence, he was moved not to deny.

Even so hipocrisy or supersticion, honors Christ with that part with the
which we are to be honored of him, and dishonors him with that with the
which he is to be honored.

For the Religion of supersticion is commonly preposterous: In sinning it is
moved with no reverence toward GOD: but in praying for remission of sins,
we will seem to show reverence toward God, confessing, but yet
supersticiouslye, (I will not say wickedlye) that we are so unworthy that we
should not presume to come into the presence of God, to crave help at his
hands.

And, as it is true, that we are unworthy to come into the presence of GOD, so
it is Godly to confess our unworthiness. But that pietye turns to
supersticion and impiety, if for our unworthiness we exclude the ministerye
of Christ.

7. Jesus answered and said unto him, What I do thou wottest not now: but
thou shall know hereafter.

M. The Lord declares that he does another thing beside the washing of
their feet. For otherwise Peter had not erred, when he said, Do thou
wash my feet?

For this thing the Lord did and yet he said not, I wash not thy feet, but
what I do thou wottest not now: but thou shall know hereafter. B. For he
did not wash the Desciples feet to make them clean but to the end they
might learn mutual love. This, Peeter knew not of, then: but afterward he
heard the same of the Lord: but truly he understood the same when he received
the holy Ghost, and called to mind all the words and deeds of Christ. C.
Furthermore by these words of the Lord we are taught to obaye Christ although
there appear no reason why he would have this or that to be done. In a house
well ordered the counsel rests only in the master of the house: to whom
the servants ought to submit them selves.

Therefore he is to presumtuouse which eschueth the power and neglects the
commandment of God, because he knows no reason of of the same.

Also this admonition does further extend it self as that we should not think
much to be ignorant of those things which God would have hidden from us so a
time. For this kind of ygnoraunce is better learned than any knoweledge when
we give place unto the Lord, to excel us in wisdom.

8. Peeter says unto him, Thou shalt never wash my feet. Jesus answered
him, if I wash thee not, thou haste no part with me.

R This wylfulnesse of Peter proceeded of the zeal of God, but not according
to knowledge: wherefore it is carnal affection and not spiritual worship.

C. Thus far forth his modestye was to be excused: howbeit the same wanted
not fault: but now it offended more, for that it being reproved gave not
place.

And this is commonly seen, that error and obstinate will, are joined
together. It is a notable color, that disobedience should spring of
reverence: but because he does not sipmly obey the commandment, he does loose
his labor in seeking to honor Christ. This therefore is the true wisdom of
faith, to allow and reverently to embrace as well and orderlye done whatsoever
comes from the Lord. For verilye otherwise we cannot sanctifye his name:
because except we judge the same to be excellentlye well done which he does,
our flesh will never obey, and give that honor which is due unto him, but by
constraint.

To be short, except man do forsake him self in judging of the worckes of
God, although he have a desire to honor God, pride will always lurk under the
show of humilitye.

C. Peter had heard the Lord say that there was somewhat in this washing,
which he should know afterward: whereby he should have been bridled from
resisting the Lord any further.

But he was to shamefast. It is not good shamefastness which exceeds so
much, that it resists the grace and love of God toward us.

Some are oftentimes so affected with this over much shame, that they dare not
call upon God in the time of need, but make intercessours of the Saints. Of
the which we have spoken a little before.

Jf I wash thee not. Bv. The Lord Jesus vehementlye reprehending the refusal
of Peter, shows and opens the misterye of this washing, which is the fruit
of his Passion, and of his coming into this world.

C. Yet notwithstanding he does not plainelye express, for what cause he
determined to wash his Disciples feet: only by a similitude taken from the
soul to the body, he teaches that he does no new thing, or unbeseeming his
person, in washing his Disciples feet.

Notwithstanding, the Lord shows what foolish circumspection Peter used.
The like shall happen unto us, so soon as the Lord begins to contend with
us. Because Christ was there Lord and Master. Peter thinks it very absurd,
that he should wash his feet.

But in repelling this office, he refuses the principal part of his
salvation. For this sentence contains a general doctrine, namelye, that all
of us are filthye and defiled before God, until Christ wy^e away our spots.

Now, seeing that he challenges to him self aloane this office of cleansing.
let every one offer unto him his uncleanness to be purged, that he may have
place among the sons of God.

M. Herevppon the Apostle says, Know ye not that the unjust shall have no
enheritaunce in the Kingdom of God? 1 Cor 6.9. Ephe. 5.5.
Be not deceyned, and so forth.

C. Moreover, there are some which refer this word (Wash) unto the free
remission of sins, and there are other some also, which refer the same to
newnes of life: and a third sort upon good consideration refer it to both.
For Christ washes us when he wipeth away our sins by the offering up of him
self, least they should come into judgment.

Moreover, he washes us, when by his holy spirit, he abolisheth the wicked,
and sinful desires of the flesh.

9. Simon Peter says unto him, Lord, not my feet only, but also the
hands and the head.

M. Peter hearing such a grave and intolerable threatening, submits
himself wholly unto the will of Christ, being now ready to suffer not only
his feet to be washed, but his hands and his head, that is to say, his
whoale body. As if he should say, Before I suffer my self to be separated
from thee, I will suffer whatsoever thou wylt.

Bv. I do give not only my feet to be washed, but also I offer my self
with all that I have unto thee. C. This necessitye was a meet Mistres to tame
him.

Therefore laying aside contencion, he gives place. But he will now be
washed every whitte. And he truly confesses that he is whollye in every
part defiled, and that therefore he is nothing profited, if so be one part
only be washed.

10. Jesus says to him: He that is washed needs not save to wash his
feet, but is clean every whitte: And ye are clean, but not all.

A. As by a certain obstinate will, Peter at the first resisted Christ, going
about to wash his feet, C. even so here again through rashness he erreth,
in that he makes small account of the benefit already received. For he
speaks as though he had received no remission of sin, and no sanctification
of the spirit. Therefore here also he is iustlye reprehended of Christ. For he
puts him in mind of that which he had bestowed upon him before: howbeit
under the person of one man, he also admonishes all his Disciples, that being
mindful of the grace received, they do consider what is needful for them as
yet in time to come. First of all he says that the faithful are wholye
clean: not that they are clean through every part, so that they should no
more have any spotte in them: but because they were cleansed in the special
part, the kingdom being taken from sin, that the kingdom of God might have
the right pre-eminence: even as if a man should say that the whole body is
sound, because it is infected with no general disease.

Therefore we must declare our selves to be the Disciples of Christ, by newnes
of life, seeing he preaches him self to be the aucthour of puritye in the
Disciples of Christ.

Moreover this other similitude also is brought to the present matter, least
the washing of feet should be rejected of Peter, as vain and absurd. For as
Christ washed from the head to the feet, those whom he made his Disciples,
euenso in those whom he has cleansed, the lower part must be daily purged.

For the children of God are not whollye regenerated the first day, that they
should desire nothing but heavenly life: But have rather the relics of flesh
abiding in them, with the which al their life time they have a contynuall
battle. Therefore all the affections and cares of this life, are
Metophoricallye called feet. For if so be the spirit possessed all the parts
of man, we should have nothing to do any more with the spots of this world.

Ecles. 3 5. Ephe. 4.22
A. But Christ shall always find matter in us to purge. For the which cause we
are commanded to mortifye our members which are upon the earth, and to put of
the old man, until such time as we be thoroughly cleansed.

C. Here therefore Christ speaks not of remission of sins, but of
renouacion, the which Christ by little and little, and by continual degrees,
delivers those that are his, quite and clean from the desires of the flesh.

And ye are clean, but not all. C. This proposition is as it were the Minor in
the Silogisme: Whereupon it follows that the washing of feet properlye
becomes them.

R. But how are they clean, which a little after denied Christ? We said even
now that this must be referred to the sanctification of the spirit.

Verilye those that believe and are elected in the blood of Christ, are always
clean: ^. Ioh. 1.7.
(for the blood of Jesus Christ the Son of GOD does make us clean from all
sin,) but in them selves they are sinners, ronneawayes, and Apostatas.

AV. For the very humane affections, without the which we live not in this
mortal life, are as it were feet, when we are affected with humayne things,
and we are so affected, that if so be we say we have no sin, we deceive
our selves, and the truth is not in us.

Therefore he does daily wash our feet, who makes intercession for us, and
we daily confess in the Lords Prayer, when we say, Forgive us our dettes,
as we forgive our detters, that we have need to wash our feet, that is to
say, to dyrect the ways of our spiritual treadinges.

But not all. C. This exception is added, to the end every man might examine
him self, if peradventure Judas might be touched with affection to repent:
Howbeit his purpose was to confirm and stay the rest of his Disciples
aforehand, least the cruel fact which should afterward appear, should
trouble them, as if it had been conceived in a heavenly heart endued with
grace.

Notwithstanding upon wise consideration he names no man, least he should
take away all occasion of repentance from him. But seeing in deed he was
past all hope of recouerye, this admonicion served only to increase his
fault: but it profited the Disciples very much, because thereby the divinity
of Christ was the better known unto them. Furthermore, they understood that
puritye was not a common gift of the holy ghost.

Bv. Wonderful therefore was the meekness and gentleness of Christ Jesus,
who neither bewrayed to others the known Traitor, nor yet secluded her from
the washing af his feet, nor from the holy Supper: nor yet from the Communion
of his holy body and blood: only he pricked his wicked Conscience, that so
he might repent, after he knew that the Lord was not ignorant of his
treason.

11. For he knew who it was that should betray him: therefore said he, Ye
are not all clean.

M. The Evangelist says not, For he knew who it was which believed on him,
but who it was that should betraye him. Therefore this treason by which Judas
bytrayed his Lord, was so filthy and unclean, that it cannot be in those,
which have been once washed.

He which is once washed of Christ, although he have never so foul feet, yet
notwithstanding, he is never so impure, as to betraye Christ his purifyer.
Therefore so many as for money and filthye gain sell Christ in the Church,
whether they be Apostles, or Apostolical, whether they be Popes, or
Pontifical Priests they are not of that number which has been once washed,
and are cleansed thoroughly, but are whollye unclean, with Judas the Traitor.
A. Concerning farther matter which appertainech to this place, read the
seuentye verse of the sixth Chapter going before.

12 So after he had washed their feet, and received bis clothes, and was set
down again, he said unto them, wot ye what I have done to you?

M. The Ceremony whith Christ used before his Disciples, had been to small
purpose, if so be he had joined doctrine to the same. C. Wherefore he now
declares to what end he washed his Disciples feet. Now therefore he
shows a reason of his doing: and when he says, VVote ye what I have done
unto you? M. he asks not the same as doubtful, C. but shows that he hyd
the same from his Disciples for a time, that proving their obedience, he might
in time reveal that unto them, which before was unmeet to be known. Neither
does he stay till they demanded the meaning of his deed, but he preuenteth
them him self. The like shall happen unto us, if so be we suffer him to lead
us by the hand through unknown ways.

13. Ye call me Master and Lord, and ye say well, for so am I.

M. The Lord taking an argument of his Disciples words, so teaches them what
they ought to do, that they cannot deny the same, except they would deny that
which they had spoken before. They had always in their mouths, Master,
Lord, Lord: but they little considered, how to behave them selves in their
conversation as his Disciples, according to those names.

Therefore he does argue very well of their own words, what they ought to
do. Thus also let us consider of our selves: We call Christ our Lord, and
master, but where is the obedience due to a Lord, and Master? We call him our
savior and redemer, but where is faith and trust? Where is love due to a
savior and redeemer?

We call God our Father: but we little consider what he speaks by a
Prophet. M. If I be your Father, Malac. 1.6
where is my honor? If I be your Lord, where is my fear? We are much
deceived in this, that we do not sufficientlye way, what those voices
require which came out of our mouths, whether they belong unto God our
Father, or to Christ our Lord, or to those with whom we have to do in this
life, whether they be superioures, as Magistrates, Ministers of the word*
Parents, and such like: or wheter they be our equals, as brethren,
kinsfolks, and neighbors or our inferioures, as children servants and
subjects.

And ye say well? for so am I. Therefore he says well which calls Christ
our Lord and Master: for he is our Lord and Master only, Euenas he him self
affirms in this place, and in the twenty three of matthew. He also which
calls him our only Redeemer Savior, Mediatoure, and Shephearde says well:
for he is so in deed. But he says not well which calls wolves, Shepheardes:
Antechrist, the vickar of Christ: the most filthy and abominable, holy and
clean: which calls a tyrant, a father: Simonicall Princes, and flow bellies
not seeking Christ but their own honor and bellies Bishops: which calls
the most carnal, Cardinals and spiritual persons: and the worship of
the belly, the worship of God.

14. If I then your Lord and Master have washed your feet ye also ought to
wash one another feet.

C. He uses here an argument from the more to the less. Pride will not suffer
us to have that equallity and felloshippe among us which we should have. But
Christ which is far above us all does humble him self to make the proud
ashamed who forgetting their state and degree, do exempt them selus from
brotherly felloweshippe. For whom thinks mortal man him self to be, if he
refuse to bear the burden of his brethren, to apply him self to the manners
of others and to do those duties by which the unity of the Church is
maintained? The sum is this that the same man does arrogate to much unto him
self who considers not that he does therefore live among his weak brethren
willingly to do those duties which seem uncomely. B. For Christ does not
only require the washing of the feet, but also all the duties of true due.

For it is a figure called Sinecdoche, by which we must understand by that
which is most servile, all other duties. For he which so humbles him self
that he is contented to wash his enemies fete what service and duty will he
refuse to do. C. We must also noate that Christ says that he gives an
example. For it is not meet that all his deeds should be drawn into example
and immitation. Popish imitacion of Christ.
B. The Bishop of Room too apishly follows Christ in many things: and in
this he would seem to follow Christ washing once in a year the feet of
sertaine poor folk which have been washed before and not only washed but
also perfumed with sweet odours and waters.

And thus by a bare and naked Cereremony they think that they have done very
well and when they have done it, they can be contented to contemn their
brethren, and cruelly to tear the members of Christ and to spitte in his face.
Wherefore that commicall Pomp is nothing else but a filthye scorninge of
Christ. And verily Christ does not hear commend unto us a yearlye ceremony:
but commands us al our life time to (...) ^ady to wash our brethrens feet
When Abiga^l said unto the messengers of David, i. Ki. 25.41
Behold let thy handmayde be a servant to wash the feet of the servants of
my Lord: she meant not such a counterfeit service, as the Immitating enemies of
Christ do use, but she meant that she would be so obediente loyal, and
serviceable to David that she would not refuse to wash even the feet of his
servants. So Paul understood washing of feet when he requires the good
and virtuous wydowe, i. Ti, 5. x
to be a washer of the faintes feet that is to say, to be serviceable unto
them in each point. M. Finally it is to be noated that Christ says not, ye
ought to wash my feet but, To wash one another feet. Therefore he does not
so much require that we should do the like unto him as that we should seek
one another profit. And peradventure every one of us would be ready if Christ
were present to wash his feet: yea none of us would think our selves worthy
enough to do that service unto him: but we shall hardly find one which will do
the same, nay which will acknoweledge that he ought to do the same to
another, as the brother to wash his brothers feet, the servant his fellow
servants feet, and specially they which excel others to wash their
inferioures feet. That Romish Bishop which calls him self the servant
of the servants. of God, thinks that Kings and Emperors owe such
reverence and subjection unto him that when he sytteth not in the Majesty of
Christ, but of Antichrist they ought to kiss his feet. But when will that
servant of the servants of God, submit him self at the feet of subjects
after the example of Christ who rydeth with to much Pride upon the shoulders
of those whom Christ has redeemed with his blood? This fellow boasts him
self to be the vicar of Christ, and the successor of Peeter. Concerning the
exposition of the fifteen and sixteen verses following read our commentary
upon the tenth chapter of Mathewe beginning at the twenty four verse.

17. If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them.

B. That is to say if ye rightly understand these things insomuch that ye
perform them, then are ye blessed. For, the more like we are unto God, the
more are we blessed.

And we cannot be more like to God in any thing then in liberallitie toward
all men. Math. 5.45


So we shall be perfect euenas he is perfect, who blesses the evil as well as
the good. And he is that goodness it self by whom al things live and have
their being.

A. For this is that, which Luke as it were expounding it, says, Luke 6, 36
Be ye merciful even as your father is merciful.

C. Therefore nothing deserves to be called true knoweledge, which leads
the faithful so far that they desyer to be like unto their head. It is
rather a vain Immagination and fantasye, which behouldeth not Christ and these
things which belong unto Christ inwardly.

Hereby thou may gather that until such time as thou have learned to submit
thy self unto thy brethren thou know not whether Christ be a Master or
no. But seeing a great many love their brethren very couldly, but none so
effectually as they ought, we may thereby perceive how far we are yet from
the perfect light of faith.

M. Moreover this place may specially be objected unto them, who when they
bear the doctrine of the Gospel, say who knows not these things? Therefore
let it be said unto them, If ye know these things blessed are ye if ye
do them. A. Contrariwise if ye know these things, and do them not, ye are
accursed and miserable. Iam. 4, 17
For to him that knows how to do good, and does it not to him it is sin,
Luke 12.47
And the seruante that knows his masters will, and does it not shall be beaten
with many strypes.

18. I speak not of you all, I know whom I have chosen: but that the
Scripture might be fulfilled: He that eats bread with me, has lift up
his heel against me.

C. Again he shows that there is one among his Disciples, which is in very
deed nothing less than a Disciple and this he does partly for Judas sake to
the end he might make him the more inexcusable, and partly for the other
disciples sake, lest the false Judas should make any of them to slide back. And
he does not only animate them to persiste in their vocation, notwithstanding
the fall of Judas but also because the felicity of the which he spoke pertained
not to all men he teaches that the same ought to be the more earnestly sought
for of all men, and when they have found it with the greater constancy to
abide in the same.

And now this their steadfast standing he attributes to their election. For as
the strength of man is weak and frail so it staggereth at every small puff
of wind and falls with the least thruste if so be the Lord stays not up
the same with his hand: But because be governs those whom he has chosen,
how subtily soever Satan seeks to work their destruction he shall profit
nothing at all but with firm constancy they shall persevere unto the end.
And not only perseueraunce is here attributed to election, but also the
beginning of pietye How comes it to pass, that one loves the word of God
more tha^ another. Surely because he is elected. Election is the cause of
pietye.
Again how comes it to pass that the same goes on still in Godliness of
life, but only because the purpose of God is sure which perfiteth that work
which he has begone? Furthermore this is the principal difference between
the Children of God, and the unbelieving, that the one are drawn to salvation
by the spirit of Adoption and the other by their unbridled and lasciuiouse
flesh to damnation.

Otherwise Christ might have said I know what every one of you shall be: but
lest they should arrogate any thing unto them selves but might know rather
that they differed from Judas by grace only and not by their own power, he
sets before them the free election, upon the which they were builded.

Wherefore let us hereby learn to way and consider all the parts of our
salvation. John. 6.70


And whereas in another place he reckneth up Judas among ye elect it is another
manner of speaking and not a contrary. For there the Temporal election is
noted, by which God does appoint us to some certain and spetiall work: (as
Saul who was chosen to be a King, notwithstanding that he was a reprobate) but
now Christ speaks of the eternal election by which we are made the sonns of
God and by which God has predestined us to life before the foundation of the
world was laid. Also sometime God does adourne the Reprobates with the gifts
of the holy Ghost to execute that office which he commits unto them.

So there shined in King Saul prin^ly virtues for a time: So Judas also had
notable gifts beseeming an Apostle of Christ.

But the Spirit of sanctification, which God gives only to his childeren is
another manner of spirit. For he renueth them by the same in mind and heart,
that they might be in his sight, holy and irreprehensible. Also they have in
them a lively root, which cannot be plucked up at any time because the
Adoption of God is without repentance, that is to say God never fails those
whom he has chosen.

Notwithstanding this abides firm, that it belongs unto the divine election
that we embracing the doctrine of Christ by faith, do also attain life: and
that this is the only cause of our blessedness by which we differ from the
Reprobate, that they being destitute of the grace of the Spirit come to
destruction, but we have Christ our watchman who governs us with his hand,
and defends us by his power.

M. We see also here how those things which concern only the good, are
commonly also spoken unto them amongst whom evil persons also are mixte.
Those things which the Lord had spoken unto his disciples to instruct them
he so spoke unto them as if they had pertained unto all, when as
notwithstanding they did not appertain to all, euenas he in this place plainly
testifies.

Therefore let no man in the Church be offended if so be he hear Christians,
(among whom as yet there are many wicked and profane persons) to be called
godly and holy men: if so be he hear the doctrine of life commonly preached to
all men when as faith and piety belongs not to all, if so be he hear all
Christians generaly reprehended of sin when as notwithstanding all are not
culpable euenas we see that the Apostle reprehendeth the Corinthians. Let him
always consider and say within him self, i. Cor. i.xi.
these things pertain not to all. Furthermore Christ here gives evident
testimony of his divinity: first of all when he affirms that he does not
Judge after the manner of men, secondly when he makes him self the authoure
of election.

For this knoweledge of the which he speaks in this place is proper only
unto God, but this other is more effectual when he says that they were
elected of him before the creation of the world, For this so notable a
declaration of his divine power, ought to move us more, then if the scripture
did call him God a hoondered times.

That the scripture might be fulfilled. C. It might seem very absurd that he
which was chosen to so honorable an office was not also endued with true
godliness for it might easily be objected. Why did Christ choose one to be an
Apostle, which should fall from his Apostelship? And why did he create him an
Apostle whom he knew should be such a wicked and naughty person? To this
therefore Christ answers that necesarily it was so because it was forshewed,
and known also aforhand to the Prophet David.

For some think that the prophesye is cited which properly belongs unto
Christ, othersome think it to be a simple comparison that like as David was
wickedly betrayed of his domisticall enemy, even so the like condition abides
for the Childeren of God. After these men's opinions this is the sense. In that
one of my disciples is a wicked traitor, it is no new or unwonted thing in the
world but rather that is put in practice at this day which the Scripture
testifies to be done long ago.

But seeing the same was shadowed in David, which was more fully afterward to
be seen in Christ, their Judgment seems better which affirm the same
properly to be fulfilled, which David had forshewed by the spirit of prophesy.

M. Thus therefore he seems to show a reason wherefore he chose Judas, for
that he was not ignorant what he was, least that which should come to pass
might seem to happen unawares unto him.

Moreover to lift up the heel metaphorically signifies under the cooller of
frendshippe to set upon one by deceit that he may be oppressed unawares.
Now that which Christ suffered being our head and example, we must also
patiently suffer being his members. M. In this place also the authority of the
Scripture is commended because all things in the same are necessarily
fulfilled.

Wherefore we must take heed that we do not doubt of the fulfilling of them,
because the holy Ghost, whatsoever he does in the Scriptures whether it be by
teaching or reprehending by threatening or promising by terrifiyng or comfortyng
cannot lie.

A. For as Christ says, the scripture cannot but be fulfilled: Ioh. 10.35.
Esaias. 40.8
because the word of the Lord abides for ever.

11. Now I tell you before it come, that when it is come to pass ye might
beeleue that I am he.

C. By this sentence he admonishes his Disciples that there is so little cause
why they should stomble or fall because a traitor shall come out of their
company, that they ought rather thereby to be the better confirmed in faith:
For except we did behold with our eyes the very same in the Church which was
forshewed concerning the troubles and contentions of the same we might have
Just occasion to doubt of prophesyes. But seeing the truth of the Scripture
does agree with our experience, then we have better intelligence that God has
a care for us and that we are governed by his providence.

M. Therefore let us noat to what end Christ went about to confirm the
minds of his Apostles in the faith toward him. They had seen many of his
miracles, and of late when he raised up Lazarus out of the grave (when he had
been dead four days) they stood by and yet notwithstanding it was so great
a matter to believe in him, that they had also need to be comforted and
confirmed in that faith by the Scriptures of the Prophets. C. Moreover by
these words.

That ye might believe that J am he. He gives us to understand that he is
the same messiah which was promised. Not that the treason of Judas, began to
bring the Disciples unto the Faith (for they knew him already, and had
confessed who he was) but because their faith profited more, John. 6.69
when they came unto the experience of those things, which they had heard
before out of the mouth of Christ. And now we may two ways understand the
same as, that he says that the Disciples shall believe when they see the
matter come to pass because nothing was hidden from him or else that none of
those- things should fail him which the Scripture testifies concerning Christ.
Both these sentences may serve well.

B, Therefore when they saw that he knew all things before they came to
pass and yet notwithstanding would willingly suffer the same they might
easily know that he was very Christ and God.

Howbeeit they did better way and understand these things, when they were more
amply endued with the holy Ghost, Concerning the exposition of the twenty
verse, read in our commentary upon the tenth Chapter of Mathewe beginning at
the forty verse.

21. When Jesus thus said, he was troubled in spirit, and testified and
said verilye verily I say unto you, that one of you shall betraye me.

C. The more holy that the Apostolical office is, and the greater the
excelency of the same the more filthy and detestable was the treason of Judas.
Therefore such and so great wickedness brought horror of mind into Christ him
self when he seeeth that holy office to be defiled by ye unspeakable witness of
one man in whom the Majesty of God should have shined. B. And this perturbation
constraned him to speak more plainly of the traitor and according to his
wonted manner to testify with an oath that it was one of his chosen Disciples
and Apostles which should betray him. As if he should say: Behold to what
great dignity I have advanced you: For I have made you so great that
whosoever receives you, receives my father also: but Oh, wickedness, Oh,
strange cruelty: one of you (I say) of you twelve, of you Apostls (whom,
whosoever hears, hears me and my father, to whom whosoever does good, does
it to me and to my Father) shall betray me to death. C. And this was not a
fained passion in Christ but he was in deed througly so affected and troubled
This is necessary to be known of us because his zeal is set before for
immitation, that we might seriously abhor these monsterouse sins which do
overthrow the holy order of God and of his Church. AVG. Away then with the
Arguments of the Philosophers which say that these perturbations come not into
the mind of a wise man. God has made the wisdom of this world foolishness.
i. Cor. i.20.
We may read the like words in the one and twenty verse of the twentye six
Chapter of Mathewe.

22. Then the Disciples looked one on another doubting of whom he spoke.

C. They whose consciences accused them not, were much agreeue at the saying of
Christ: only Judas was so obstinate and hardened in his wickedness that he was
not touched at al. So great was the authority of Christ with the Disciples that
they were sertainly persuaded that he did or spoke nothing rashly.

B. Therefore they looked one upon another, either because they were amassed,
or else because thereby they would see if they could find out the traitor by
his countenance. But Satan had banished out of the heart of Judas al
reverence that he might be more hard then the flint stoan to repel all
admonitions

Bv. For all the rest being wonderfully troubled and grieved, he
(notwithstanding he knew in his own conscience him self to be guilty) was
neither a feared neither ashamed, nor abashed to come to the holy Surper: and
could also abide without blushing that the Lord should look upon him, whom
he knew not to be ignorant of any of his thoughts. So great was the plague of
couetousenesse and such liberty he had to abuse the known liberty of the
Lord. And allthough Christ might seem to deal scarce friendly in suffering his
guiltless Disciples to be troubled for a time: yet notwithstanding because
such trouble was for their profit, Christ did them no injury at all for it is
good for the childeren of God to be troubled by hearing the Judgment of the
wicked, to the end they might try and examine them selves and beware of
hypocrisy: for thereby they have occasion given them to examine them selves and
their life. Also this place teaches that the wicked ought to be so handeled
that they be not at the first poynted out with the finger, until such time as
God does manifest them with his hand. For there are often times in the Church
secret diseases which may not behyd.

23. There was one of Jesus Disciples leaning on Jesus Bosom even he whom
Jesus loved.

M. This Dsiciple was even the very same Euaungelist which wroat these things
as we shall see in the one and twenty Chapter following. C. And the special
love with the which Christ loved him, does evidently testify that it is not
always contrary to charity, if so be we love some, more than other some: but
our love specially to consiste in this, that howesoeuer we love, we have
respect unto God. From this scope Christ went not the breadth of a hear. But
we are far wide, for such is our vain disposition, that there are few which
in loving men come any whit the nerer unto God. Verily, our love shall never be
rightly framed except the same be referred unto God. A. Of the which matter we
have spoken more largely before in the fifte verse of the leuenth Chapter.

Leaning on Jesus bosom C. This leaning at this day might seem scarce
mannerlye: but such was their manner of sitting at the Table at that time: For
they sat at meat as we do, but when they had put of their shoes, they went
up upon certain little beds made for the purpose, upon the which they being
boulstered up, lay half upward. Christ therefore did associate and join,
For humanity sake, the same Disciple, with him, whom he specially loved, and
made him lean after the same manner, upon his breast.

24 To him beckened Simo^ Peter therefore, that he should ask who it was, of
whom he spoke.

M. We may still behold a certain continual zeal in this Apostle, toward
the Lord. But in that he himself does not demand the question, we must
attribute the same unto modestye. Some think that he was stayed by fear,
least the Lord should reprehende him again before others. Whatsoever the let
was, that which he durst not him self, he seeks to demand by another,
namelye, by him whom he saw to lean familliarlye upon the Lords bosom.

Therefore modestly he required this disciple, priuilye to demand of the Lord
who this Traitor should be.

25. He the^, when he leaned on Jesus breast said unto him: Lord who is it?

M. This Disciple which was in the Lords favor, when he leaned upon the
Lords bosoome, fulfilled the request of Peter, and softlye asked Christ,
saying, Lord who is it which dare commit such wckednesse?

26. Jesus answered, he it is to whom I give a Sop when I have dipped it. And
he wet the Sop, and gave it to Judas Iscariot the son of Simon.

M. Matthew shows, that when every one of the Disciples said, Lord, is it
I? The Lord answered: Mat. 26.23
He which puts his hand with me in the dishe, the same shall betraye me.
And Luke says, And behold the hand of him that betrayeth me, is with me on the
Table. Luke 22.21


Also, this our Evangelist reported a little before, that the Lord said, He
which eats bread with me, has lyfted up his heel against me. But, by these
words the Traitor could not be easily known, because he aloane did not eat
with Christ. Yet this noate, of the which mention is made here, was so
specially given, that John might easilye perceive that the same appertayned to
Judas. C. Christ, if he would have had him openly known, might have pointed
him forth with the finger, but his purpose was ta give only such a sign, as
Judas might be known to one and no more. Moreover it was very profitable and
necessary that John was a witness of this matter, for that he should afterward
in due time reveal the same to others. And Christ upon wise consideration
differred the manifestacion of Judas, to the end we might be the better
content that Hipocrites should lie hyd, until such time as they be brought
forth into the open light. M. Also, the manner of Christ was to reach unto
everye one bread, and such like meat as was before him on the Table.

27. And after the sop: Satan entered into him: The^ said Jesus unto him, that
thou do do quickly.

R. Had not Judas Satan before? By Satan he murmured against Marye which
anointed Christ: By Satan he conspired with the Pharisees to betraye Christ?
Bv. Luke 2^.
And in the second verse of this Chapter we read, that Satan put into the
heart of Judas to betraye Jesus? How then after the receiving of the Sop, did
Satan invade Judas, Aunsvvere.
and enter into him.

Aunsvvere.
I answer. M. This must be understood of the more full and vehement
impulsion of Satan. C. For as they are oftentimes said to believe, which are
confirmed in that faith, which they had before, and so the increase of faith,
is called faith: even so now when Judas was whollye given to Satan, that he
might with violent impulsion be carried to all kind of wickedness, the Deuell
is said to enter into him. For as the Saints of God profit by degrees, and
in that they are increased with new gifts, they are said to be filled with
the holy ghost: euenso when the wicked by their ingratitude do provoke the
wrath of God against them, the Lord depriving them of his spirit, of the light
of reason, and of all humane sense, makes them mansions, of Satan. This is
the horrible vengeance of God, that when men are given over into a reprobate
scence, they might differ nothing from brute Beasts: and that they might fall
into such wickedness as even Beasts do abhor.

AV. The Deuell therefore by the Sop entered into the Traitor, that he now
being given unto him might more fully possess him, into whom at the first he
entered to deceive. C. Wherefore we must walk circumspectly in the fear of
the Lord, least if we abuse his goodness by our wickedness, he do at the
last deliver us to the will and pleasure of Satan. Moreover the Sop which
Christ reached unto Judas, gave not to Satan place and enterye: but rather
Judas receiving the same, delivered him self whollye to Satan. This Sop
verily was the occasion, but not the cause.

And this so great forbearaunce and long suffering of Christ ought even to
have mollefyed a heart of flint: but his incurable obstinacy deserved this,
that God by his just judgment, should by Satan more harden the same.

Eue^ so we by doing good to our enemies, do heap coals of fire upon their
head. Some have falsely judged this sop to be the sign of the body of Christ:
for that it was reached unto him without the action of the Supper.

But they do groslye err, which imagine that the Deuell entered essentially
into Judas: for the Evangelist speaks only concerning force and efficacye.
And we are taught by this fearful example, what grievous punishment abides
al those, which profane the benefits of the Lord by their abuse.

That which thou do, do quicklye. R. Christ commands not Judas to play
the Traitor: for how can righteousness command iniquitye? but it is rather
a voice of detesting. Hitherto the Lord had sought to reuoake him by diverse
means, but, he prevailed not: and therefore now he speaks unto him as to
one past care: as if he should say, Seeing thou art become so impudent, and
bear such a Traitorous heart against me, I give the leave to go, and that
which thou do, and seek to bring to pass, do and accomplish quicklye.
C. Thou shall perish, when the appointed time of thy destruction is come. And
in this thing he plays the part of a Judge, who judges not to death those
whose destruction he desires, but those who by their own fault have brought
them selves to destruction already.

R. For Christ speaks here as Parents commonly do to desperate and ungracious
children. For commonly they say to such, My son for so much as I can not
win thee by any gentle admonition, or bring thee to a better life by any
benefits (for the more I do thee good, the worse thou art) therefore go
whether thou wylt: go thou ronnagate: for thou shall not escape unpunished,
because thou abusest the goodness of thy Father, to thy iniquitye.

Are not these Prophetical words of callamitye to come, rather than of
commanding? Even so says the Prophete^, Drink and be dronken, spewe and
fall^, and rise no more.

M. Most true therefore is the saying of the Apostle, Despisest thou the
Riches of his goodness, and patience, and long sufferaunce, Iere. 25.27
not knowing that the kindness of God leads thee to rapentance. But thou
after thy stubbornes and heart that can not repent, Romans 2.4.
heapest unto thy self wrath, against the day of wrath.

28. That wist no man at the Table for what intent, he spoke unto him.

M. The Lord so spoke to the conscience of the Traitor, that the rest knew
not what he meant. C. For either John as yet had not told unto others what he
had heard of Christ, or else they were so amazed that they understood not: yea
it is lykelye that John himself was astonished at the hearing of ye same. But
that which happened then to the Disciples, we may see oftentimes in the
Church, namely, that very few of the faithful can discern Hipocrits, whom
the Lord in plain words condemns.

M. Furthermore a good man may so prycke the conscience of him that has done
evil, in the presence of others, to whom his wickedness is not yet known,
that he alone may understand what is spoken.

29. Some of the^ thought, because Judas had the bag, that Jesus had said
unto him: Bye those things that we have need of against the Feast: or that
he should give something to the poor.

C. It does evidently enough apeare unto all men, how great the poverty of
our Savior Christ was: yet notwithstanding he gave somewhat of that little
which he had unto the poor, to teach us to do the like. For the Apostle
would not have surmised that he had spoken of the poor, but because he was
accustomed to help them. How Christ and his Apostls used money.
M. We see therefore how Christ and his Apostles used money. One part they
employed to bye necessary things: and the other part they bestowed upon the
poor. Compare herewith the treasures of the Church of Rome, of the Bishops,
and of the Monasteries, and see how they are bestowed.

Bv. This place also makes against begging Monks, who counterfaiting
beggerye, will seem to have nothing of their own, and yet gather together
great heaps of Riches. In like manner also against the Anabaptists, who
trouble the consciences of simple men, Anabaptists would have their neighbors
goods common.
and do exclude them out of the fellowshippe of the godly, except they make
their goods common to their brethren, that is to say, to erronyous Anabaptists.

30. As Soon then as he had received the Sop, he went immediately out: and it
was night.

B. This seems to be added by the Evangelist, boath to declare the wicked
crueltye of this miserable man, and also that Judas by receiving the Sop, and
by the words of the Lord, was as it were by a certain force of his goodness
cast forth, insomuch that he could neither change his wicked purpose, nor yet
abide the unspeakable lenity of Christ. After the same manner the Reprobate,
the more the goodness of God is showed toward them, the more wicked and
outrageous they are.

And it was night. Bv. That is to say, it was now Euentide. The circumstaunce
of time in this place, noateth the earnest desire of the Traitor to atchieue
his purpose, who could not be stayed by the unseasonable time of the night.
John. 3.20.
But the Prince of darkness, delights in darkness, and they which do evil
hate the light.

M. Whereupon Christ when he was taken, said to his enemies, This is your
hour, and the power of darkness. Luke 22.53.


Bv. Judas therefore chose the night and darkness, as a convenient time for
his purpose. And thus are all Reprobates carried with whom no admonitions can
prevail.

And this end has the contempt of Gods word, and an impenitent life.

31. Therefore when he was gone out, Jesus said, now is the son of man
glorified: and God is glorified in him.

M. Now the Euaungelist consequentlye shows what the Lord spoke after the
departure and defection of Judas the Traitor, unto the Disciples to the
confirmation of their faith.

C. The last hour was at hand, he knew how weak the minds of his
Disciples were therefore he sought by all means he could to stay them up,
lest they should quail. The only rememberaunce of the Cross does make us
a feared, except we also remember this consolation, that Christ triumphed as
conqueror of Satan and death upon the Cross.

What therefore might happen unto the Disciples, when they should shortly
after see Christ carried unto Death, and reprochfully entreated: might not such
a heavy and sorrowefull sight have a hondered times overthrown them? Wherefore
Christ provides for this peril, and brings them from the behoulding of the
external aspecte of death, to the spiritual fruit. Therefore how shameful
soever the Death of the Cross seems to be, which being considered aloane,
may confound the faithful, Christ notwithstanding testifies that the same
to him is gloryouse saying.

Now is the son of man glorified. M. He speaks in the preter tence,
whenas notwithstanding he mente the glorifycation which was to come shortly
after, the which he seems to do because the traitor was already gone forth
to finishe his Trayterouse act, whereupon came shortly after the beeginning
of his glorification. B, As if he should say, the time will come anon, to
finishe by my death, my base estate, and to begin the time of my glory. This
is so nere, that me thinks I am already glorified, me thinks I am Christ
already worshypped throughout the whoale world.

And God is glorified in him C. This is added in steed of confirmation.
Therefore he now shows how he should bring glory unto him self by such a
death: namely because he should gloryfy God his father, For in the cross of
Christ, the vnspeable goodness of God appeared unto the whole world: for by the
same sin was abolished, Death destroyed, the power of hell vanquished, and
everlasting salvation given to men.

32. If God be glorified in him, God shall also glorifye him in him, self,
and shall straight way glorify him.

He means that the glory of the Son is the glory of God the Father. The
glory of Christ is the glory of God,
And the Father was glorified by the son, first of al by the obedience of the
cross and death. So Peter also glorified God by his death. Secondly because he
was made known to the world to be the son of God. So also God is glorified by
us when by our good works, occasion to gloryfy him as our father, is given to
mortal men. Thirdly God is glorified by Christ, because he brought this
world to the knoledge of him, boath by his heavenly doctrine, and also hy his
miracles. So all they glorify God, which set forth the knowledge of him in
this world. C. Christ therefore gathers that he shall have a glorious triumph
by death: in the which he sought only to glorify his father. For the Father did
not so seek his glory by the Death of his son, but that he made him
pertaker of the same with him also.

should suffer for a short time, great glory should apeare in his death: yt
which was fulfilled. For the death of the Cross did so little obscure the
glory of Christ, that thereby the same did more brightlye shine: for thereby
apeared his unspeakable love toward mankind, his exceeding righteousness
in making satisfaction for sin, and in pacifying the wrath of God, and his
wonderful power in subduing death, and destroying Satan. This doctrine is
also to be applied unto us: because although the whole world do conspire our
infamye, yet notwithstanding, if we seek sincerelye and with our whole heart,
to glorifye God, there is no doubt, but that he also will glorifye us. i. Kin.
2.30.
For he says, Him, which glorifyeth me, will I glorifye.

And shall strayte way glorifye him. C. Christ increases the consolacion by
the shortness of the time, least that delay should cause the disciples to
doubt. And although this glory began at the day of his resurrection, yet
notwithstanding that propagation is noted which followed strait after, when
by the power of the Gospel, and of the holy Ghost, he raising up the dead,
created unto him self a new people.

33. Little children, yet a little while am I with you. Ye shall seek me: and
as I said unto the Jews, whether I go, thither can ye not come: also to
you say I now:

R. Some writers affirm that Swannes a little before their death sing very
sweetelye: even so Christ having at all times most gentlye dealt and spoken to
his Disciples, yet notwithstanding being near unto death, he handeleth them
more friendlye, calling them little children: than the which name, what can be
more acceptable and sweet to a Godly man? C. By this gentle speech he
declares that he does not therefore go away from them, because he had less
care for their salvation; seeing he loved them tenderlye. He took upon him
our flesh to this end, that he might be our brother: but in that other name
there is greater veheme^cy of love expressed. And because it could not be, but
that ye departure of Christ would be a great grefe unto the Disciples,
therefore he told them before hand that he should not be long with them: and
therewithal exhorts them to patience. As if he should say, Bv. Very
shortly, little children, the wicked shall lay hands on me, and carry me unto
death. R. For the Cross wayteth me at the doors, and by the Cross I will
go out of this world unto the Father, and obtain, righteousness salvation,
and everlasting life, for all that believe.

Ye shall seek me. M. That is to say, It will shortly come to pass, that ye
shall desire my presence, and have a wonderful longing after me,

And as J said unto the Jews. C. He repeateth unto them the very same words
which he had spoken unto the Jews, but in another scence. For he says that
they cannot follow, patientlye to suffer his temporal absence and he does as
it were bridle them, that they might keep them selves, within their compass,
until they had finished their battle in this earth. He does not therefore
seclude them for ever from the Kingdom of God, as he had done the Jews: but
only commands them patientlye to abide his leisure, until such time as he
might bring them unto him, into his heavenly kingdom. Read the seueth and
eight chapters going before, beginning at the.34. and.21. verses.

34. A new commandment give I unto you, That ye love together, as I have
loved you, that even so ye love one another.

M. After he had foretold them certain things concerning his departure, C.
he adds to the consolation an exhortacion to love one another.

As if he should say, When I am absent from you in body, show by your
mutual love, that ye have not been taught by me in vain: let this be your
continual study, let it be your special meditacion, that ye be far from
all disdain, loftiness of mind, Ielousye, Envy, vaineglorye, and from
strifes, and contencious.

C. Why he calls this a new commandment, there are diverse opinions. Some
think this to be the reason, that for so much as all that was prescribed in the
Law concerning love, was lyteral and external, Christ writ the same in the
hearts of the faithful by his holy spirit. And so in their opinion the Law
is new, which he sets forth after a new fashion: that it might have his
full strength.

But this seems to be far fetchte, and contrary to the purpose of Christ.
Other some expound it to be called a new commandment because although the
Law does command love, yet notwitstanding, because it is mixed with many
Ceremonies, and circumstaunces, depending upon the same, the doctrine of love,
does not there so evidently appear: and contrariwise, in the Gospel, the
perfection of love is appointed without any shadows.

This interpretacion is not to be despised. Howbeit Christ seemed to speak now
simply. For we know that Laws in the beginning are kept diligently, but are by
little and little forgotten again, till at the leangth they grow out of use.
Therefore Christ, the better to imprint the doctrine of love in the minds of
his disciples, commends the same of newness. As if he should say, I would
have you always to remember this commandment, even as if it were a Law
newlye made. To be short, we see that the purpose of Christ in this place was
to exhort his Disciples unto love, least at any time they should suffer them
selves to be drawn from the love of the same, or suffer the doctrine thereof
to go out of their minds. And how necessary this admonicion was, Love
commanded to the Disciples.
daily experience teaches. Therefore Christ gives unto love this title of
newness, to stryre us up always to embrace the same. A. And for this cause
Saint John in another place calls the same new. i. Ioh. 2.7.


That ye love together. C. Love is extended, even to strangers and
forreiners: because all are of one flesh, and all are created after the Image
of God. But because the Image of God does more evidently shine in those that
are regenerated, it is meet that the bond of love be much more strait among
the Disciples of Christ: Gala. 6.20 i. ^e. i. 22 i. Ioh. 3. i4.
even as the Apostle Paul exhorts. Love has his original from GOD, and is
referred unto him. There can be no mutual affection of love, but only in
those that are governed by one spirit. Christ therefore noateth here to ye
first degree of love: Love extendech it self to all men.
But we noate also, that as the goodness of God does extend it self to the
whole world, even so we must love all men, yea, even those which do hate us,
that we may be the children of our heavenly Father, which suffers his son
to shine upon the good, and en the evil.

35. In this shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye have love one
to another.

C. Christ confirms again that which he had spoken before, that they were
taught in vain in his school, which love not mutually among them selves. As
if he should say, Not only your selves shall know that you are my Disciples,
but your profession also shall be proved true before others.

Bv. The Disciples of other masters, are known by their titelles by their
Apparel, and by diverse other noates.

R. The Disciples of Antichriste are known by their rounding and shauing, by
their disguised apparel, and by their external Ceremonies: The Disciples, of
Moses are known by Circumcision by their holy and Sabbath days, and by their
sacrifices: Love is the badge of Christ's Disciples.
but all men in the whoale world shall know by one noat and badge that ye are
my very and true Disciples, if so be ye retain such love among you as I show
unto you. Therefore seeing Christ has prescribed this to be the only and
sertaine noate to know his discipls by, are they not fools and mad men, who
forsaking so plain and absolute a commandment seek other noates? For there
are some that think they shall be true Christians, if so be they can creep
into a Monks Cool, if so be they build Temples, and erect alters, come to
Masses, and do observe such like traditions of men. Therefore seeing Christ
discerns his Disciples by love from other Disciples they weary them selves in
vain who forsaking love forge unto them selves new worshippes: the which
vanity is to be seen at this day in the Papacy, And it is not superfluouse
that Christ stands so much upon this point. For selfloue does so rule us for
the most part, that true love is clean banished away.

Wherefore whosoever desiereth to be a true Disciple of Christ, let him frame
and direct his whoale life to love his brethren and daily practice the same.

Neither is there any cause why the enemies of Gods truth should by this place
extenuate the free justification which comes by faith.

For we our selves do acknoweledge and confess that there is no faith without
love: but we know that love springs from faith: For the which cause the
Apostle Paul commends to the Churches of Galatia faith which works through
love. Gala. 5.6


36. Simon Peeter said unto him, Lord whether goeste thou? Jesus answered
him, whether I go, thou can not follow me now, but thou shalt follow me
afterward.

M. Again the love of Simon toward the Lord bewrayed it self. He was very
loath to be separated from him whom he so entierly loved being ready to follow
him whether soever he went. Therefore when he heard the Lord say whether I
go, thither ye cannot come, with a troubled mind he demanded saying.

Lord whether go thou C. Whereby it appears how great the rudeness of
Peeter was who being so oftentimes admonished of the death and departure of
Christ, was now troubled as if he had never heard any whit of the same.

Howebeeit in this we are to like unto him. For we hear dayelye out of the
mouth of Christ, all things apt and meet for this life, and necessary to be
known but when we come unto the matter we are no less astonished than
nouices which never heard of the same.

M. Peeter makes no answer to those things concerning mutual love which
the Lord had commanded: But leaving that, demands whether Christ went. C. By
which words he declares that he had to great a desyer of the carnal presence
of Christ. For he thought this very unmeet that Christ should go to another
place and he be left behind.

Whether J go thou can not follow me. Now he more plainly utters yt
which he had spoken before, whether I go thither can ye not come. C. And
withal he brideleth the importunate desire of Peeter. And he speaks
precisely as it became a Master: notwithstanding strayt after he mittigateth
the sharpness of his words teaching that he shall be separated from them but
for a short time.

M. Hear we must noate that there are certain times and momentes appointed of
God to every faithful man in the which they departing out of this life may
follow their Lord, before the which times noane may follow him. Peeter in
deed had his time coming to follow the Lord, as here also it is said: but he
had his moments and appointed time of the which mention is made in the
eyghteenth verse of the one and twenty Chapter following. C. In this place
therefore we are taught to submit our prayers unto God, lest they pass their
bounds: the which if they do, we must suffer them to be restrained with this
brydell.

Moreover lest we should faint or be discouraged let us remember the
consolation, which straight after he adds. promising that we shall one day
come unto him. For he means that Peeter as yet was not meet to bear his
cross but as a green and untimely plant: yet notwithstanding, that in
continuance of time he should be made apt for the same.

Wherefore we must pray unto God that he will encreace that which he has
begone in us. And we must creep before we have strength given to us to run
swiftly. And as Christ does bear with us in our imperfection, euenso let us
learn not to cast of our weak Brethren which as yet are far from the marck.
It is to be wished that al did run with good courage: but If any do run
slowely, so that he keep the way, let us hope well. CYR. Some think that by
these words it was meant that Peeter after the assention of the Lord should be
crucefyed: but it makes no matter what kind of death the Apostle of Christ
suffered.

37. Peeter said unto him Lord why cannot I follow thee now? I will ieoparde
my life for thy sake.

C. Peeter by these words declares that he was grieved at the answer of
Christ.

He understood that he was put in mind of his own infirmity: whereby he
gathred that his own fault was a let unto him that he could not presentlye
follow Christ. But yet he was not fully persuaded of this. For by nature
mankind is puffed up with trust of his own strength. M. He does not demand
and say, when shall I follow thee, if I cannot follow thee now, but he
says, Why cannot I follw the now? As if he should say R, Do thou think
that I having received so many benifits of the, will be so unthankful, that I
will forsake thee? Thou have chosen me to be an Apostle, I have tasted of the
heavenly Joy upon mount Thabor I have wrought miracles in thy name, and what
benefit is it that I have not received of thee: how then can I forsake thee
being in great peril of thy life? I will ventur^ my life for thee yea I will dye
for thee, so far am I from forsaking thee.

C. These words of Peter show what an opinion we have conceived of our
selves, and how we trust to our own strength, where upon it comes that we
dare do any thing without calling for the help of God, when as
notwithstanding we can do nothing. But concerning this read more in the twenty
six chapter of Matthew in the thirty three verse.

38. Jesus answered him will thou ieoparde thy life for my sake: verily
verily I say unto thee, the Cock shall not crow, till thou have denied me
thrice.

M. Peeter seemed to prove Christ a liar in denying that so bouldly which the
Lord declared unto him. Therefore Christ seeks more and more to beat down
the arrogance of Peeter lest he being puffed up above measure, should be
to proud of his own strength. And Christ would not contend with him, but
thought it better to let him have experience of his own strength, euenas
fools are served who are never wise but when they are punished. Peter
promises invincible constancy, and he speaks according to the sincere
affection of his mind: but it is blind and presumptuouse boldness because he
considers not what was given unto him. Therefore the Lord corrects that
rashenesse. As if he should say, R. What is that I hear? Will thou Peeter dye
for me, who came to dye for thee? M. But I say unto thee that thou shall be
so aferd and discouraged that thou shall not only forsake me with the rest,
but shall also deny me. even as if thou had never known me: and that,
not once, but twice, yea thrice, and with such speed, that thou shall deny
me before the Cock crow.

But because this example pertains unto us, let all men learn to way and
consider their own infirmities and imperfections lest they be to proud upon
vain confidence. We cannot presume to much upon the grace of God: but here
the secure presumption of the flesh is reprehended, seeing that faith brings
forth rather fear and carfulness. He suffers the due and condinge
punishment of his arrogance: wherefore that God may stay us up by his power
let us learn to forsake our own strength and to flee to him in time.

The.Xiiij. Chapter.
1. And he said unto his Disciples, let not your hearts be troubled: ye
believe in God believe also in me,

Let not your hearts be troubled. THIS whoale Chapeter is mixed with
consolations, with doctrines witht exhortacions and with promises. The Lord
comfort his sorrowefull and troubled Disciples, instructs them concerning
the father: exhorts them to believe in him to love him, to keep his sayings
promises them place in heaven, the gift of the holy Ghost, the hearing of
their prayers, his return unto them again, the love and grace of his Father,
and last of al his peace. And he does not without cause use so many words to
confirm his Disciples who had so daungerouse and fearful a battle prepared
for them.

For this was no small temptation, that which in a little while after they
should see him hanging upon the Cross: in the which sight there was nothing
to be seen but matter of utter desperation.

Seeing the hour of so great trouble was at hand, he shows them a remedy
lest they being overcome should quail M. In him we see the Image of that
Priest, Heb. 4.15
who being him self tempted in all things can have compassion upon all
those that are tempted, euenas the Apostle describes him unto us. He knows
that his disciples are men, and ar easily troubled with sorrowful things I
would to God that they which are of some estimation in the Church, were thus
affected toward the weak, euenas Christ was affected toward his, whom he
wills not to be troubled. C. We must always consider the circumstance of
time, in that Christ would have his Disciples to stand strong and without
fear, when all things might seem to bring present death and desperation.

M. For he knew that none of those things should hurt him, how dangerouse and
mortal soever they seemed to be. Therefore we must always use this Buckler
to withstand such conflictes. It cannot be but that we shall feel diverse
motions: but we must be so affeard and troubled that we do not fall. The
faithful therefore are said not to be troubled, because they leaning unto the
word of God, although they be oppressed with great troubles, yet
notwithstanding they constantly go forward.

Ye believe in God believe also in me. C. Christ does not only encourage his
Disciples by exhorting them unto constancy, but does also teach from whence
they must seek for their strength, namly from Faith by which he is
acknoweledged to be the Son of God, who is able enough of him self to defend
those that are his.

This is the true way to stand, if so be our faith be reposed in Christ, and
if so be it does behold him when he helps us, even as if he were present.
For this is the meaning of that which as says, There is no cause why ye
should be troubled for my departure.

Bv. For if so be ye have grounded your faith upon God, he shall save you and
I also will save you euenas I have promised oftenne times heretofore. For he
which believes in God believes also in me, which am the true God, of one
essence, power and glory, with the Father.

C. But it is marvel why he places here faith in the Father, in the first
place. For he should rather have said unto his Disciples, that they must
believe in god, so soon as they had beeleued in Christ.

Because as Christ is the express Image of the Father, euenso first of all
they should have beheld and considered him: and for this cause also he
descended unto us, that our faith beginning at him might reach unto the Father.
But Christ had a farther meaning. For there is no man but he will confess that
we must believe in God: and this is a general Rule, to the which all men
without controversy will subscribe: and yet notwithstanding there is scarce
one among a hondered which in very deed does believe in him: both because the
bare majesty of God is to far from us, and also because Satan does set
between us and it all the darcke clouds he can to keep us from the syghte
of the same. And so it comes to pass that our faith seking God in his
heavenly light and glory, vanishes away.

Also the flesh of her own accord brings a thousand Immaginations, to
draw us away from the right behoulding of God.

Therefore Christ sets forth him self as the scope and marck, whereunto if
we direct our faith, it shall find by and by where to rest.

For this is that true Immanuel, who so soon as he is sought by faith,
answers within us.

This is one of the Principal points of our faith that the same ought to be
directed only unto Christ, and to be reposed in him, least it shake in
temptations.

And this is a true trial of faith when we will not suffer our selves at any
time to be drawn away from Christ and the promises mad in him.

2. In my fathers house are many mansions: If it were not so, I would have
toulde you, I go to prepare a place for you.

Bv. He adds now another place, of consolation most evident taken of that
blessed kingdom, and of the end or fruit, of the Lords death. C. Because
the absence of Christ might be the of sorrow, he testifies that he does not
therefore go from them to the end he might abide from them still: because
there was place provided for them in the kingdom of heaven. For this suspicion
was to be taken away, that Christ ascended to the father to leave his
Disciples in the earth carlesly behind him.

This place has been drawn amysse into another scence as though Christ had
taught that there had been several degrees of honor in his heavenly
kingdom.

For he says there are many mansions not differing or one unlike another, but
such as were, (and are) sufficient for many: even as if he should have said:
There is place there, not only for me but for all you also. R. There is noe
cause then why ye should be grieved for my corporal departure: for the
kingdom of my Father is prepared for you from the beginning of the world, and
ye were chosen thereunto before the foundation of the world was laid.

Wherefore there is nothing that can hurt you, whether it be sin, the world
Death, Ioh. 10.29.
Hell, or Satan. For no man can take the elect out of my Fathers hand.

Aunsvvere.
we were elected before the foundation of the world, but yet in Christ and by
Christ. For none is Adopted of the Lord to be his son, but by Jesus Christ.

And thus dwelling places were prepared, before the foundation of the world
but by Christ the Mediatoure, and Intercessoure. Wherefore Christ came into
this world, to reveal those dwelling places unto us before prepared, to open
the gate of election, and also to make us ready and apt by his holy spirit,
to receive those mansions. For what shall it profit to be elected, and yet
either to be Ignorant of the gate of election, or else not to enter into the
same: But whereas there are said to be many mansyons whenas few are chosen
(as says our savior in another place, Mat 20.16
many are called but few are chosen.)

We must not lightly ouerpasse it. For there are said to be many in respect of
Christ: that this might be the scence: Heaven is not prepared for me aloane, I
aloane am not elected from everlasting of my father but many others has my
father elected by me, the kingdom of heaven is prepared for many others by
me, through the faith which they have in me.

I aloane am the true and only son of God, and only naturally elected of my
Father, from whom aloane the kingdom of heaven is prepared naturally: but
there also many others, whom the Father has chosen in me, and which shall
possess by me the kingdom of heaven prepared from the beginning insomuch that
by me they are made the children of God by adoption, and heirs of all his
blessings, graces, and benefits. For I have given al those power to be the
sons of God, which believe in my name.

Jf it were not so, J would have told you. As if he should say: C. If so be ye
kingdom of heaven were prepared for me aloane, I would disapoynte you of your
hope.

I would therefore have told you, that there is no place in heaven with my
father, but for me alone. Notwithstanding hear a question may be demanded,

For many Immagine that the souls of the righteouse were in Limbo, because
Christ says that he will prepare a place by his ascension into heaven. But
answer is easily made here, Aunsvvere.
that a place is said to be prepared against the day of resurrection. For
mankind is by nature banished out of the kingdom of God, But the Son which
is the only heir of heaven, is gone to take possession for us, that by him we
might have access thither. For in his person we possess heaven already by
hope? Ephe. 2.3
as the Apostle Paul teaches. Here therefore he puts not a difference
between our state, and the state of the Fathers after death, because Christ
prepared a place for boath together, into the which he shall receive all in the
latter day. Before the Reconciliation was finished the souls of the
righteouse, were as it were in a watch Tower waiting for the promised
redemption, and do enjoy blessed rest, until the redemption be fulfilled.

3. And if I go to prepare a place for you I will come again and receive you
even unto my self that where I am there may ye be also.

C. This conditional sentence ought to be resolved into an Aduerbe of time:
as if he had said, after I am gone I will return to you again. R. For I
will not so go away that I will be quite separated from you: I will not so go
away, that I will not return again I will not so enter into the kingdom of
my Father, that I will retain the same to my self aloane, but for your cause
I go, and I so go, that I will come again and receive you unto me. C.
Moreover this coming again hear ought not to be understood of the holy
ghost as though Christ would give unto his Disciples a new presence of him
self in the spirit. It is very true that Christ dwells in us, and in us by
his holy spirit, but he speaks here of the last day of Judgment, in the
which he shall come at the length to gather those that be his together. And
verily he does daily prepare a place for us, if so be we have respect unto
the whoale body of the Church. Whereupon it follows that the full time of
our enteraunce into heaven is not yet come, This the Apostle does notably
express in the fourth Chapter of his first Epistle to the Thessalonians. M.
Let us remember therefore that Christ is come again into this world. The
world believes not this. The cause of his first coming was, that all they
which were elected unto life from the beginning, might be called unto the grace
of the kingdom of God. The second cause of his coming shall be that the
foresaid elected may be taken up into Everlasting mansions. This shall be
brought to pass by the ministry of Angels. Math. 13
And this second coming of Christ is desired so long until a place is
provided in heaven for every one. And this caling of the elect shall be
fulfilled here in earth the which being once ended and fulfilled this most
corrupt and wicked world shall have an end. This wicked world shall have an
end, when the number of Gods elect is full.
A. Read the twentyth six verse of the twelfth chapter going before.

4. And whether I go ye know, and the way ye know.

B. Because he would comfort his disciples concerning his departure, it is
necessary that we understand this of that way by which his disciples should
follow him unto the Father. C. Howebeit withal Christ teaches that his death
is not destruction but a passag to ye father

Therefore we have here to noate two things: The first is, that we behold
Christ in his heavenly glory and blessed immortallity with the eyes of faith:
Secondlye, that we know him to be the first fruits of our life, and the
way which was shut up against us, is now opened unto us by him. This he
utters more plainlye in another place, saying: Mat. i6, 24
M. He which will follow me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross,
and follow me. Christ him self is the way to heaven, that by him and after
him, we may come to heavenly things.

5. Thomas said unto him, Lord, we know not whether thou go: and how is
it possible for us to know the way.

Bv. The Disciples being much grieved, marked not what the Lord said unto
them, and judging to groslye of the words of the Lord, understand not his
mind and purpose. C. And although at the first sight, the answer of Thomas
seems to disagree with the saying of Christ, yet notwithstanding his purpose
was not to discreedite his Master.

Notwithstanding it may be demanded how he denied that which the Lord had
affirmed. We answer, that there are oftentimes in the Saints confused
understandings: because they do not way and consider the manner and reason of
that which is plainlye set before them. So the calling of the Gentiles was
prophesied by the Prophets to come of the true scence of Faith: Ephe. 3, 9
the which notwithstanding the Apostle Paul affirms to be a misterye hydden
from them.

Therefore when the Apostles should believe that Christ went unto the Father,
and yet notwithstanding knew not how he should get that kingdom, Thomas
justly affirms that they knew not whether he went: Therevppon he gathers
the way is more obscure.

For before we enter into the race, we must know whether it tends. M. By
this place we gather that no man knows the way to heavenly things, except
he first know that Christ our savior and Mediator is gone thither.

6. Jesus says unto them, I am the way, the truth, and the life: no man
comes unto the Father but by me.

R. This is the principal point and sum of the whole Gospel, that Christ is
the way, the truth, and the life.

C. Christ does not dyrectlye answer unto the question: yet notwithstanding
he omitteth nothing which is necearye to be knewne. The curiositye of Thomas
was to be bridled: therefore Christ does not show what his condition shall be
with the Father: but stands upon a more necessery point. Thomas would
wyllinglye have heard what Christ should do in heaven: even as we oftentimes
do to much wearye our selves with such subtle and curious points.

But we ought rather to apply our minds, how we shall be partakers of the
blessed resurrection to come. Wherefore the sum of this sentence is, that
whosoever gets Christ, shell want nothing, and that therefore he goes
beyond all perfection, which is not contented with him alone. And he speaks
of their degrees, as if he should say, that he is the beginning, the midst,
and the end.

Whereupon it follows that we must begin with him, go forewarde in him, and
end at him. We must not seek for higher wisdom than that which leads us to
everlasting life. This he affirms shall be found in him. And he also
pronounces that the same must be sought for in no other. He teaches
moreover that he is in the way, by which only we must come thither.
Therefore, least he should fail us in any part, he reaches out his hand to
those that go astray, and does humble himself so far, that he directs
sucking Children: he having professed him self to be a Captain, forsook
not his servants in the midst of their race, but made them partakers of the
truth. At the last he made them partakers of that truth, than the which
nothing more excellent can be devised. Bv. Therefore in these words all the
Mysteries of the Gospel are comprehended, and from hence the ryuers of life
do spring. C. Seeing therefore that Christ is the way, there is no cause why
the weak and ignoraunte should complain that they are forsaken of him:
seeing he is the truth and the life, he contains in him self wherewithal to
satisfye even the most perfect. Truth in this place is taken of some to be
the wholesome light of heavenly wisdom. And of othersome, to be the substance
of life, and of all spiritual graces, which is compared with figures and
shadows. Even as when it is said, Grace and truth came by Christ Jesus. But
more rightlye it is taken for the perfection of Faith, John. 1.7
even as the way is taken for the beginning and first rudiments. This is the
sum, That if any decline from Christ, he can do nothing but err: if so be
any rest not in him, he shall find notsting but wind and vanitye: if so be any
go beyond him, he shall find death in steed of life. B. Therefore Christ in
this place preaches him self to be God and the only savior: even as he
has done in other places when he called him self, the bread of life, the
light of the world, the door, and the sheepfould of God, the good Shepherd,
the resurrection and the life, and such like.

No man comes unto the Father. This is an exposition of that which went
before: For, he is therefore the way, because he leads us unto the Father,
and the truth and the life, because in him we behold the Father.

R. All other things do discourage us that we dare not appear unto ye father.
As, first of all human reason: for the same knows not God, and by how many
benefits soever the same is constrained to know that there is a God, yet
notwithstanding, it knows not how to come unto him, nor how to worship
him.

Secondly Sin and the Law, by which is declared that God is angery with us
wherefore by them we are driven from coming unto him, Lastely, Sin and the
Law drive us from God.
the Majesty of God* which is higher than by human strength we can reach
unto the same.

Only Christ, only the word, is the only way to reach unto the father. Bv. By
this sentence also all Jews and Turks are excluded from the company and
presence of the father, because they come not unto the father by Christ. For in
Christ only consists righteousenesse, reconcilliation, and our life. Let us
therefore go forward in the right way Christ, and let us not suffer our
selves to be drawn from the same, because it leads to everlasting life, C.
Finally Concerning invocation this truly may be said, that God hears no
prayers but these which are made in Christ.

7. If ye had known me, ye had known my father also: and now ye know him,
and have seen him.

C. He confyrmeth that which we said before, that it is hurtful and
foolish curiositye, when men being not contented with Christ, do seek by
overthwart ways to come unto God. They confess that there is nothing better
tha^ the knowledge of God: but when he comes nere unto them, and does
familliarlye insinuaty him self, than they begine curiously to search, and
seek for him above the clouds, whom they will not behold being present.
Christ therefore reprehendeth his Disciples, for that the do not acknowledge
the fullness of the Deity to be exhibited in him.

I see (says he) that ye have neither rightly nor truly hitherto known me,
because as yet ye know not the lively Image of my father which is expressed in
me.

R. For no man has seen God at any time, the only begotten son which is in
the bosom of the father has declared him.

And now ye know him. C. He adds this, not only to mytygate the sharpness
of the reprehention but also to accuse them of unthankfulness and sloth
except they way and consider what is given unto them.

For he rather spoke this to the commendation of his own doctrine, then to
extol the faith of his disciples.

His meaning therefore is, that God is now to be seen, if so be they would
open their eyes.

In this word (Seen) the sertainty of faith is expressed. How be it some
refer the same to the sertainty of miracles.

For look how many miracles Christ wrought in his Fathers name, so many
testomnies he had of his divine power.

8. Phillip says unto him Lord show us the Father, and it suffiseth us.

M. The Apostles as yet were not sufficiently exercised in sprituall matters,
and therefore because they had hard Christ speak very much of his father, they
seemed to desire to se him so, as they had seen the son with their corporal
eyes face to face, as though God might be seen as a man is seen.

B. Thus therefore Phillip as one more desierous to learn than the other
Disciples, interrupteth the Lord desiring to have some corporal and visible
sight of God, the which being seen they would desire nothing more. C. But it
seems very absurd that the Apostles should thus disturb the Lord.

For to what end had he spoken, but only to teach the very same thing of the
which Phillip demands?

Notwithstanding there is here no fault described to be in them, which is not
to be found in our selves,

We profess that we seek after God ernestly: but when he comes into our
sight we are stark blind. R. For humane reason is not contented with the
word, by which the Father and his will is learned, but will be satisfied by
signs and by palpable feelyng,

The Apostles had before their eyes Christ the Image of the Father: and yet
notwithstanding they desire to see the Father: Wherefore their unbelief is
reprehended as follows.

9. Jesus says unto him, Have I been so long time with you and yet have thou
not known me? Phillip, he that has seen me, has seen the Father: and how
say thou then, show us the Father.

C. Justly Christ reprehendeth Phillip because he had not the pure eyes of
faith.

He had God present before him in Christ: and yet notwithstanding he did not
behold him.

What did hinder him but his own ingratitude. The which Christ casts in his
teeth, as if he should say, have I so lost my labor in teachinge you and in
workyng Miracles before you? I have been now a long time with you, I have
wrought many Miracles, many ways I have taught my self to be the son of
God, I have taught that no man has seen God at any time, that I am he alone
which has expressed God: I have taught that the will of God is good and sweet
toward them that believe in him. That is to say.

I have plainly taught that God is the Father of the faithful through me:
and do not ye yet know the father.

Even so at this day, they profit little or nothing in the Gospel, who being
not content with Christ only, curiouslye seek after God, whereby at the
length they are brought into error.

This foolish desire springs of the humilytie and baseness of Christ: the
which is far amiss, seeing in the same he setteh forth the unspeakable
goodness of his Father. M. But because Phillip might say in his heart, I
said not show unto us who thou thy self art, but show unto us the father: and
thou obiectest unto me that I know not thee: whereas I speak not of the
knowledge or sight of thee, but of the father: To this cogitation which Christ
was not ignorant of, he answers saying

Phillip he that has seen me. Bv. As if he should say, Phillip thou do
desire to se my father, as though I did differ from my father in essence and
nature, and were not all one with him: know thou therefore that I and he are all
one in divinity, and divine majesty which cannot be seen with corporal eyes.

10. Beleeuest thou not that I am in the father, and the Father in me? the
words that I speak unto you, I speak not of my self: but the father that
dwells in me, is he that does the works.

C. Some refer this to the divine essence of Christ. C. But they do better
which refer it to the manner of revelation.

For Christ in respect of his secret dietie, is never a whit more known unto
us than the father.

But he is said to be the express Image of God: because God has wholly
revealed himself in him, by his exceeding goodness, wisdom, and power.

Neither have the ancient Fathers done amiss, which bring testimonye from
hence to defend the Divinity of Christ: but because Christ does not simplye
dispute who he is in him self, but whom we ought to acknowledge him to be, it
is rather a tytell of his power, than of his essence.

The father therefore is said to be in Christ, because the full divinity
dwells in him, and again Christ is said to be in the father, because by his
divine power, he declares him self to be all one with him.

The words that I speak Unto you. B. He proves of the effect that God ought
to be sought for in no other than in him. M. As if he should say, My very
doctrine proves me to be in the father, and the father in me. For it is not
humane but divine, and such that it plainly sets forth the sone of God.

Also you your selves have confessed before, that I have in me the words of
eternal life, and that ye knew and believed that I am the son of God.

R. If therefore my word be the word of my father, and my works, the works of
the Father, he which will know the Father, must of necessity believe my
word, and behold my works in faith. For no man knows the father but by the
son, and no man knows God but by his word.

C. If any man object against this, that all the Prophets are to be counted
the sons of God, because they spoke by the inspiration of the spirit, and had
God the author of their doctrine: we may easly answer, yt we must consider what
the doctrine contains. For the Prophets send their Disciples to an other:
but Christ retains them in him self.

We must also remember what the Apostle wrighteth, namely, how that God
speaks now from Heaven, by the mouth of his son, who speak as it were out
of the earth by Moses.

By works he understands not only Miracles, but also the declaration of his
divine power.

11. Believe me that I am in the Father, and the Father in me: or else believe
me for the works sake.

C. First of all he requires his Disciples to believe his testimony, when he
affirms himself to be the son of God. Notwithstanding because they had bin
hitherto to slow, he does priueli nip their negligence. If so be (says he) my
affirmation be not of credit enough with you and if ye make so small account of
me, that ye think my words are not to be believed, at the lest consider my
power, which is the visible Image of the presence of God. It was very strange
that they should not depend upon the mouth of Christ, seeing that every word
which he spoke ought to have binne believed without doubtyng.

But Christ here reprehendeth his Disciples, for that they being so often
toulde of one thing profited so little.

He does not teach what is the nature of Faith, but testifies that he has
that which may suffice to reprove the unbelievers. In that he says again, I
am in the father, and the father in me. It is not superfluous, for we see by
daily experience how nature pricketh us forward to vain curiosity.

12, Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that believes on me, the works that I
do, the same shall he do also, and greater works than these shall he do:
because I go unto the father.

B. The purpose of Christ in these words is that he might persuade his
Disciples not to be sorye for his departure from them which should hapen unto
them for the best, but rather to prepare them selves, stoutly and dilygently to
discharge the office of the Gospel.

C. For what so ever Christ had spoken of him self hitherto, unto his
disciples, it was temporal in respect of them.

Therefore without the adding of this part the consolation had not bin full and
perfect, specially seeing in remembering the benefits, our memory is frail.

In the which matter we need no other examples. For when God has heaped upon
us all manner of benefits, if he cease but half a month, we will think that
he is dead.

In consideration of this, Christ does not only speak of his present power,
which his Apostles at that time beheld with their eyes, but also promises
that they shall have a perpetual feelinge of the same ever after.

And verily, he did not only while he was on the earth declare his divinity:
but also after he was gone unto the Father, the faithful had experience of the
same. But we are either dull or so wicked, that we nether consider God in his
works, nor Christ in the works of God.

And greater works then these shall he do. A These words are diversely expounded
by Interpreters.

Some restrain these works unto the miracles which the Apostles wrought
after the resurrection of Christ: the which, that they might prove to be
greater then those that Christ wrought, they allege that which Luke writes of
the shadow of Peter. But the rising of Lazarus, was a more wonderful work,
than the simple helyng of sick persons. Other some refer it to the number of
miracles saying, that the Apostles wrought greater miracles, because they
wrought more in number, Act. 15.16
both in Jerusalem and in other parts of the world: and they affirm this
place to agree with that in Mark.

And these signs shall follow them that believe: Mat. 16.i7
In my name they shall cast out Devils. etc.

C. But this is the simple meaning of Christ, that his power was so little tied
to that presence of his body, by which he proved him self to be the son of
God, that the same should be set forth by more and greater experimentes, he
being absent. For straight after the assention of Christ, followed the
wonderful conversion of the world, in which the divinity of Christ more
mightily declared it self than when he lived among men. Thus we see that the
approbation of the diuinitye of Christ was not shut up in his parson, but
spread throughoute the whole body of the Church. But to do this of the which
he speaks here, is neither proper to the Apostells aloane, nor common to all
the Godly, but belongs to the whole body of the Church.

Because I go to the father. C. The reason why the Apostles should do greater
Miracles than Christ him self is, because he going to take possesion of his
kingdom, would more fully show forth his power from heaven.

Whereby it appears that nothing of his glory was deminished, in that his
Apostles wrought more excelentlye after his departure who were only his
Instruments Yea, Philip. 2.
hereby it appears that he sits at the right hand of his Father, that
every knee might bow before him. R. For to go unto the father in this place,
is for Christ being now not only God, but also man, by his death and
resurrection to enter into the kingdom of his father, to sit at his right
hand, and to take upon him the rule of all cretures. The which appeared then
to the world, when the Apostles and their true successors, preached the
Gospel in diverse parts.

13. And what so ever ye ask in my name, that will I do: that the father may
be gloryfied in the Son.

Bv. Now he utters an other Argument of his deuinitie* the which being
rightly waied, wonderfully comfort. I will do (says he) for you what so
ever you ask in my name. For I am God.

And it belongs unto God alone to hear the prayers of al men, and to grant
and fulfill all men's desires.

B. Therefore he gives a reason of that which he had said, that the believing
in him should work greater works than he wrought, which he specially promised
to his Disciples at that time present. His meaning therefore is this, think not
that incredible which I have promised unto you: Wherefore what soever ye shall
ask in my name I will give unto you. But he spoke of those works and
Miracles, by which the Father should be gloryfied in the Son.

That is to say, by which he was acknowleged to be the savior of the world
lest any man should draw this promise to every thing.

The glory of God is the health of his Saints, Prayer according to Gods glory
and therefore before all other things they pray that his name may be
sanctified, and that his kingdom might come: neither do they pray for any
thing unto the which they are not moved by the spirit of God.

M. To ask in the name of Christ, is to pray for somewhat, which either
pertayneth to his name or kingdom, Act. 4.
or else by the prorogatiue of his name may be hoped to be obtained. After the
first manner the Apostles prayed to God the father, as we may read in the
acts of the Apostles. After the other manner all the faithful pray.

J will do it. By these words he declares that he is not only a mediator,
but also the Lord of all things, who can grant al things that we ask: yea,
and as he can, so also he will.

He teaches also what the end is, whereunto all our prayers must be directed,
namely, that the Father may be gloryfied by the Son.

Therefore those things which are such, that they cannot be done to the glory
of the Father by the Son, are neither rightly asked of us, nor yet can be
obtained.

So that this place agrees with this saying of Paul. That every tongue should
confess that the Lord Jesus Christ, Phil. 2. xi.
is to the glory of God the father.

The end of all prayers is, the hallowyng of Gods name. But the lawful way to
sanctify is here expressed, namelye in the son and by the son. For when the
majesty of God is hidden from us, in it self, it shines in Christ: when his
hand is hidden, we have the same visible in Christ.

Therefore in those benefits which the father bestows upon us, we must not
separate him from the son: according to this saying. He which honoreth not
the son honoreth not the father. Ioh. 5.23.


14. If ye shall ask any thing in my name I will do it.

R. Christ repeateth one thing twice, that those things might be more assured
which he promises. For we obtain nothing at the hands of the father but by
the son. C. The repeticion thereof is not superfluous.

All men see and feel that they are unworthy to approach unto God: yet
notwithstanding the greater part rush forth like madd men, and bouldly, yea
rather proudly talks with God.

Afterward when that unworthiness, of the which we speak even now, comes in
their minds, every man deuiseth for him self new means. But God calling us
unto him, sets before us one Mediator, by whom he will be entreated and also
favorable unto us* But here again the corruption of human wisdom
triumphs, because the greater part forsakyng the true way, wearieth it self
in crocked and by ways.

This therefore comes to pass, because the power and goodness of God is not
apprehended as it should in Christ.

There is also a second error, namely, the not remembering that we are al justly
driven from the access and coming unto God, until we are called of him: and
that we are not called but by his Son. Wherefore if we think one testimony
insufficient, yet not withstanding let us know that for as much as Christ
does the second time entreat that the Father must be prayed unto in his name,
he does as it were lay his hand upon us, lest we should travail in vain in
seeking after there patrones and helps.

A. For there is one only Mediator of God and men, the man Christ Jesus. 1.
Tim. 2.5
Therefore if any man sin we have an advocate with the Father the righteous, 1.
Ioh ^.1.
and he is a propitiation for our sins, and not for our sins only, but also
for the sins of the whole world. Concerning the which matter read more in
the.vii. of Matthew, beginning at the seventh verse.

15. If ye love me keep my commandments.

M. This verse contains an exhortation, joined with comfortable promises. Bv.
The spirit of the Lord throughout the whole scripture does not only show and
teach plainly the truth, but also most vehementlye urges, that we should
receive and retain the same when we know it: whereupon our Lord also in this
present place, joins an exhortation to the consolation and divine doctrine,
by all means urging his Disciples, and in them the whole Church, to receive
and retain these things and to exercise them selves in them.

C. It was true and sincere love with the which the Disciples loved Christ, the
which notwithstanding was somewhat mixed with supersticion, the which also
happens oftentimes unto us.

For they were out of the way in desiring to retain Christ still in the world.
That he might correct this vice, he commands them to bend their love another
way, namely, to the observing of those commandments which he had given them.

As if he should say, I have taught you by this my word, that I go to my
father: I have taught you why I go, and what fruit comes unto you thereby
and to the whole Church. But because ye here that I shall dye, ye are greatly
troubled, even as men are wont to be for the departure of their friends: and
ye declare (I confess, by that your great sorrow, how familyerly ye love me:
but I will that ye show your love by another Argument.

For if ye love me indeed, show that your love toward me, by the observation
of my commandments.

B. Therefore he wills them diligently to observe those things which he had
commaudded them: that is to say, constantly to believe in him, to contemn the
world, bouldly to confess Christ before the world, to have mutual love one
toward another, and ye rest which are contained in these things, C. This is
profitable doctrine, because among those which seem unto them selves, to love
Christ, there are very few which truly serve him.

But here contrary wise the true love of Christ is required to the observation
of his doctrine, as the only rule.

M. He says not, if ye love me, dispute of my commandments, or see that
others observe and keep my commuandements. For the declaration of love
consists not in disputations, nor in the urging of others to observe and
keep them: for this may be done even of those which seek not Christ, but
them selves, but it consists in this, if thou thy self be an obseruer of
them.

A. Furthermore Christ sends not his Disciples unto the commandments, or
vain constitutions of men, but to his own commandments. For he has not
appointed them to be Servants of men, but to be faithful Ministers unto him.

C. Moreover also we are put in mind, how vicious al other affection are, when
as not so much as our love toward Christ is without fault, except it be
framed to pure obedience.

16. And I will pray the father and he shall give you another co^forter, that
he may bide with you for ever.

C This remedy he adds to mitigate sorrow which the Disciples might conceive
by the absence of Christ: notwithstanding therewithal Christ promises that he
will give strength and abillitie that his commandments may be kept.

For otherwise his exhortation had been to small purpose.

Therefore he provides for the same in time, and teaches that how far soever
he was distant from them in body, yet notwithstanding he would not suffer
them to be quite destitude of help: because he would be present with them by
his holy sprite.

He calls here the gift of the father, the spirit, which he himself will
obtain by his prayers.

In an other place he promises that he will give the same. Ioh. i6 7
Both are truly and aptly said.

For in that Christ is our Mediator and advocate, he obtains at his hands
the spirit of grace: In that he is God, he gives the same of him self unto
us.

The meaning of this place is this, I was given of the Father, to be a
comforter unto you, not for a time, but to abide with you for ever.

R. For Christ by his death and passion purchased to the faithful the holy
ghost, which is nothing else but the inspiration of God, by which he inspireth
our hearts and moves the same to holy, godly, just right, and divine things,
that we might think, speak and do nothing day and night, but that which is
holy and divine.

C. This name of comforter, is as well given unto Christ as to the holy Ghost,
and that by right, for it appertains unto them both to comfort and exhort
us, and also to defend us.

Christ was the patron and defender of his Disciples so long as he was in
this world: afterward he then committed them to the tuition and guard of his
spirit. If any man demand whether we at this day are not under the protection
of Christ we may answer, that Christ is our everlasting defender, but not
after a visible manner.

So long as he was in the world he openly showed himself unto them to be a
defender, but now he defends us by his spirit.

A. For he says, I will be with you unto the end of the world.

C. He calls the same an other comforter, by reason of the difference of
benefits which we have from them both, it was proper unto Christ to make
satisfaction for the sins of the world, to pacefie the wrath of God, to
redeem men from death, to bring unto them righteousness and life: but it
belongs unto the spirit to make us partakers as well of Christ him self, as
of all his his own benefits.

How be it the distinction of the parsons is not hereby gathered amiss. For it
is necessary that the holy Ghost do differ from the son.

R. But had not the Apostles the holy Ghost, before the death of Christ? yes
verily had they: for they could not have believed in Christ but by the workyng
of the holy Ghost: but they had the same more abou^dantly and plentifully, when
Christ was gloryfied, even as we have showed in the seventh chapter going
before: in the xxxix verse.

17, Even the Spirit of truth whom the world cannot receive, because the
world sees him not, neither knows him: but ye know him, for he dwells
with you, and shall be in you.

C. Christ now gives a new tytel unto the spirit, calling the same the master
of truth. B. Whereby he means that the holy Ghost is by his own nature,
truth: because he is God.

The same spirit is true, and the reueler of truth: it is pure, sound, sincer,
constant, fyrme, and faithful, without all deceit, till such time as we are
taught of him, all our minds are full of vanity and lies.

Whom the world cannot receive. C. To the end be might the more comfort his
Disciples, he shows the excelency of this spirit, and with all the vnspekabl^
love of the father toward them, in giving to them his holy spirit, which the
whole world could not receive.

C. For by this Antithesis, or comparison, he amplyfieth the excelencye of his
grace, the which God gives only to his elect,

For his meaning is that it is no common gift, of the which the whole world is
deprived.

In the which sense also the Prophet says, Behold darkness shall cover the
earth, and a thick miste the people: but the Lord shall arise upon thee, and
his glory shall be seen in thee.

For the mercy of God deserves the more praise toward the Church, when by a
singular privilege he extolleth the same above the whole world.

Bv. For as the Devil dwells in the world, and by his uncleanness casts
the wicked into destruction: even so the holy Ghost dwells and works with
the Saints, that by his pur^ty and holiness, he may bring the faithful to
eternal and blessed life.

Nevertheless withal christ exhorts his Disciples, that they take heed lest
they put from them that grace of the spirit, being puffed up with
understanding of the flesh. Worldly wise men count all that the Scripture
speaks concerning Christ to be as a dream: because they presuming upon their
own reason, do despise heavenly illumination.

Nevertheless the words of Christ do declare, that no man can have any
understanding of the Spirit by humane sense and reason, but by the onley
experience of Faith.

The world (says he) cannot receive the Spirit, because it knows not the
same: but ye know it because it abides with you. Therefore it is the Spirit
only, which dwelling in us offers it self to be known, whereas to other it
is unknown, and incomprehensible. R. And by the name of world, all the most
wise, holy, mighty and rych of the same are understood: for these are called
the pillars of the world whom the world only receiuith and has in admiration.

Wherefore the spirit is never les found than among the most mighty of this
world. For they love lying, and hypocrisy, they are blinded with their
gifts. They cannot therefore abide ye spirit reproving them of lies, and
drawing them from their gifts unto the geuer. M. By this place we are also
taught that the world is altogether wicked and an enemy unto God and subject to
the spirit of lies.

And this is the fountain, from whence so many heresies, errors, false
worshippyngs, and such like do come into ye world. It is much that he says
that the spirit of truth cannot be received of this world, as if a man should
say, that the spirit of sobriety, The world is the welspringe of Herely.
cannot be received of droonkards: the spirit of humilytie of proud men: nor
the Spirit of shamfastnesse of impudent persons.

For this world is so blinded with the spirit of lying, that it can neither
see nor understand the truth of God.

Finally we must noate that the faithful are therefore called the temples of
the holy Ghost, because in them the holy Ghost does truly dwell and abide.

18. I will not leave you comfortless, but will come unto you.

M. Some understand this of the return of Christ unto his Disciples after
his resurrection.

A. But other some a great deal better refer the same unto the coming of the
holy Ghost.

Bv. As if Christ should have said, ye shall think when I am gone from you
in my bodily presence, that you are Orphants without a father: but if you
consider the matter well, I will never leave you: R. For I will come unto you
with the Spirit of consolation, which shall help you with fatherly affection
in all adversity.

So beneficial shall my departure be unto you, so great profit shall my death
bring unto you.

C. This place teaches what men are, and what they can do, being without the
Spirit of consolation: they are Orphants which are reddy to suffer all deceits
and iniures, unmeet to govern them selves, and apt of them selves to do
nothing.

The only remedy hereof is, for Christ to govern us by his spirit: the which
he promises he will do.

First of all therefore the Disciples are put in mind of their own
imbecility, to the end they distrusting them selves, may depend upon the
defense of Christ alone. secondly he promising unto them a remedy puts them
in good comfort because he promises that he will not leave them.

19. Yet a little while, and the world shall see me no more: but ye shall se me,
because I live, and ye shall live also.

M. By this thretning Christ declares that the unbelieving ar unworthy to enjoy
his sight any more, C. and withal prosecuteth the commendation of his spetiall
grace, which ought to suffice the Disciples to ease them, and to take away
their sorrow.

When (says he) I shall go out of the sight of the world, I will
nevertheless be with you. R. For shortly after my death, I will go out of the
sight of the world, that it shall see me no more: but I will be always
present with you. Bv. By the world he means carnal men, and such as are not
regenerate, which are unbelieving, and live in the world, after the manner of
the world. Also this word (shall see) is by a Metaphor transferred from the
body to the mind. Therefore carnal men and unbelievers do not see, do not
understand, nor believe Jesus to be the Son of God, and yet nevertheless
very man, who by his death brings to life, and redeemeth all mankind from
damnation. C. Therefore to the end we may enjoy the secret behoulding of
Christ, we must not Judge of his presence and absence according to the reason
of the flesh: but we must behold his power with the eyes of our faith. And
thus it comes to pass that the Faithful do always behold and have
present with them, Christ in spirit, though he be far from them in body.

Because I live and ye C. These words may be construed, two ways, either
that this sentence is a confirmation of that which went before: or else that
it ought to be red severally: as, that therefore the faithful shall live,
because Christ loves. But the former scence seems best to agree: out of the
which we may gather this Doctrine, that Christ is the cause of our life. M.
For we are dead and our life is hid with Christ in God. Colos. 3, 3.
In the beginning he noateth the cause why he would be seen of his disciples,
and not of the world: because Christ cannot be seen, but according to the
spiritual life, of the which the world is quite void. The world seeeth not
Christ, and no marvel: for death is the cause of blindness. But so soon as
it begins to live in Spirit, it has eyes to see Christ.

20. That day shall ye know that I am in my Father, and you in me and I in
you.

R. Many by this, Day, of the which Christ speaks hear, understand the
feast of Penticoste. C. But he rather understands all that time, from the
first declaration of the power of his spirit, unto the last resurrection. For
then they began to know: but it was a sertaine sciender instruction: because
as yet the holy Ghost had not so effectually wrought in them. For to this
effect his words tend, that it cannot be known by a certain trifeling
speculation and vain curiosity, what the sacred and mystical union betwixt
him and us is, and again, what manner of union is betwixt him and his father:
but rather that this is the only way to know him, when he powers into us, his
life, by the secret efficacy of his spirit. And that is the experiment of
faith, of the which we spoke a little before. Bv. But the Son after one manner
is in the father, and after another manner in us. For by nature he is in the
Father, and in us, by participation, by grace, or by the felloweship of the
spirit. Concerning beath we have spoken before in the sixth and tenth Chapters.

And Saint John in the Epistle says, Hereby we know that we abide in him,
i. Yoh. 4, 1^
and he in us, because he has given to us of his spirit. C. Therefore we are
said to be in him, because we being graffed into his body, ar made pertakers
of righteousenesse and of all goodness he is said to be in us, because he
declares by the efficacye of his spirit, that he is the cause and authoure
of our life.

But whereas the Arians have in time past abused this testimonye, to prove
Christ to be God, by participation only and grace, their cavil may easily be
confuted.

For Christ does not simply defend his eternal essence, but commends that
divine power, which was revealed in him. For as the Father left all fullness of
goodness in his son, so in like manner his son has powered him self wholly
into us.

21. He that has my commandementes and keeps them, the same is he that
loves me, and he that loves me shall be loved of my Father: and I will
love him, and will show my own self unto him.

Bv. Hear the Lord repeateth that again which he had otherwise propounded
before saying, If ye love me keep my commandments: C, And again, he
exhorts the Faithful, and teaches that the true proof of their love toward
him, consists in this, that they observe and keep his commandments of the
which matter, he so often times admonishes his Disciples, lest they should
swerve from the same: because we are more proane to nothing, than to carnal
affection, insomuch that under the name of Christ, we love somewhat beside
Christ.

To the which effect pertains this saying of saint Paul, Although we
have known Christ after the flesh, 2, Cor. 5, 16
now yet henceforth know we him so noe more.

Therefore if any man be in Christ he is a new creature. M. He says not
simply, if any man keep my commandments, but he says, He that has my
commandments and keeps them

C. And to have the commaundemen^s, signifies to be rightly instructed in
the^, to frame him self and his life unto them. Bv. And by the commandments
he understands faith and love.

A. For this is his commandment that we believe his name, i. Ioh, 3.23.
and love one another. And then he adds the reward or fruit of faith and of
perseueraunce in the love of God, by which he encourages those that run well
to go forward.

And he that loves me shall be loved. Bv. To beloved of the Father is, to be
received into the frendshippe of the most high God, and to be preserved and
defended by God. M. But hear it may be demanded how Christ says that he is
loved of the Father which loved him, as though we must first love him,
before we can be loved of the father. C. Rom, 5, i0,
for at such time as we were his enemies he reconciled us to himself. Also S.
John, says, In this is love, not that we loved God, but in that he loved us.
i, Ioh, 4, i0


But hear is no controuercy concerning the cause or the effect. Terefore it
is gathered amiss that the love wherewith we love Christ, must needs go
before that love, which God bears unto us.

For this only is the purpose of Christ to show that al they shall be blessed
which love him because they shall be loved of the father in like manner again:
not that God begins then to love them but because they have the testimony of
his fatherly love written in their hearts To the same effect pertains also
that which follows in the next member where he says,

And will show my own self unto him. C. knoweledge verelye goes before love:
but this is the purpose of Christ, that he will give unto the true imbracers of
his Doctrine, strength to profit daily in the faith: that is to say, I will
bring to pass that they shall come nearer, and more familliarlye unto me:

Bv, I will increase in them my gifts, that from thence forth they knowing more
rightlye and fullye the misteryes of Gods kingdom, may be joined at the last
by the same perfect faith unto me, and may also enjoy me, to their souls
health. For faith and the knowledge of Christ have their degrees, which
increase more and more, till they grow unto the full measure. C. Hereby we
may perceive that the fruit of Godliness is the going foreward in the
knowledge of Christ. For he which promised to give unto him that has,
rejecting Hipocrites, makes all to profit in the faith, who unfeignedly
embracing the doctrine of the Gospel, frame them selves wholly unto the
obedience thereof. And hereupon it comes that many going backward, we do see
scarce the tenth man to go forewarde in his right course: because the greater
part is unworthy to behold Christ. Also we must noate that more ample knowledge
of Christ is here set forth as a singular reward of our love to Christ:
whereupon it follows that it is an unspeakable treasure.

22. Judas says unto him, not Judas Iscariot, Lord, what is done that thou will show thy self unto us, and not unto the world.

B. Because the Disciples had not received as yet the spirit of truth, they
understood little or nothing of all those things which the Lord spoke:
Whereupon Judas here demanded a question no more to the purpose, than Thomas
and Philip had done before.

The Lord had showed unto them that his departure should profit them more
than his carnal presence: and yt therefore there was no cause of sorrow, but
rather occasion offered them dilligently to observe and keep his
commandments. Now Judas (but not Judas Iscariot the Traitor, but Judas whose
sir name was Thaddeus, whose Epistle also is called the Epistle of Saint Jude)
as knowing none of these things, said: Lord what is done.

C. It seemed unto him very unmeet that Christ which was and is the son of
righteousness, by whom all the world ought to be illumined, should lyghten
only a few, and not spread forth his beams upon all.

Bv. As if he had said, How may it be, seeing thou art now known unto all
men, that thou should manifest thy self only unto us, and not to the
world? R. Are not we also in the world? are not we a part of the world?
Wherefore if thou manifest thy self unto us, art thou not also manifest to
the world?

23. Jesus answered and said unto him. If a man love me, he will keep my
sayings: and my Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and dwell
with him.

C. The answer of Christ does not explicate the whoale question: for that
there is no mention in the same of the first cause, why Christ showing him
self to a few, did hyde him self from the greater number of men. For at the
first he found all alyke, that is to say, quite gone astraye from him.
Wherefore he can choose none which love him: but the chooses some out from
among his enemies, whose hearts he may bend to love him: but he thought it
not good at this time, to touch that difference which was far from the
purpose. His purpose was to exhort his Disciples to the earnest desire of
Godliness, that they might profit more and more in the faith. Therefore he
thought it sufficient, to put a difference between his Disciples and the
world, by this noate, that they should observe and keep the doctrine of the
gospel. And that this noate belongs unto the beginning of faith, because it
is the effect of calling. And Christ shows by these words how we shall
rightly obaye the Gospel, namelye, for when our duties, and external actions,
do spring from the love of the same. For our arms, and force, and our whole
body also labors in vain, except the love of God do reign in our heart,
which governs the external members.

Now seeing it is sertayne that we keep ye sayings of Christ, if so be we love
him, and contrariwise we love him, if we keep his commandments, it
follows, that we cannot find in the whoale world the true and perfect love
of him because there is no man which perfectly keeps his commandments.
Notwithstanding their obedience is acceptable unto God, who do all that they
can to reach unto this perfection

And my father will love him. R. In this place we have the great and wonderful
benifits of God, which proceed from the fruits of the Gospel. The first
is, that God the Father loves the faithful, Now if God be with us, Rom, 8,
3i,
who can be against us? If the Lord love me I will not care what man, or
Satan can do unto me. The second is that boath the Son and the Father, will
dwell with him that believes the word of God.

Than the which benifits what greater can be devised. For the Father and the
son are very bountiful and benificial ghuestes: they, came not empty handed
neither do they go away without saluting their host: but as they bring with
them the treasure of all goodness, euenso they leave behind them the blessing
of all goodness.

C. And he speaks not hear of that eternal love with the which God loved us
before the foundation of the world was laid: but of the same with the which he
seals our hearts, when he makes us pertakers of his adoption. And he means
not that first illumination, but those degrees of faith, by which the
faithful must go forward daily, according to this saying, to him that has
shall be given.

Therefore the Papists do draw amiss from this place two sorts of love, with
the which we love God. They immagine that we love God naturally, before he
does regenerate us with his spirit, by which aptness and readiness (say
they) we deserve the grace of regeneration. As though the Scriptures did not
teach, and experience plainlye prove, that we are quite turned away from
God, and are haters of him, until such time as he change our hearts. We
must remember the purpose of Christ, that he and his Father will come to
confirm the faithful in the everlasting assurance of grace, in such wise
that they may feel the grace of God to rest upon them, and may be daily
increased more and more with the gifts of God.

A. Therefore we ought to desire this spiritual presence of Christ in our
prayers, and not that carnal and corporal presence of the which the Papists
dream. The Lord dwells in the hearts of his saints by faith: whom the
heavens must receive until the time come that all things be restoared, which
God has spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets, since the world began.

24. He that loves me not, keeps not my sayings: and the word which ye
hear, is not mine, but the Fathers which sent me.

C. Because the faithful are mixed in this world with unbelievers, and because
of necessitye they must be troubled as it were in the tossing and raginge waves
of thesea: Christ again confirms them by this admonition, lest they should
be drawn away by evil examples. As if he should say, Have no regard unto
the world, neither depend upon the same: because their shall be all ways
some, which shall contemn me and my doctrine: but constantly retain ye to the
end, that grace which ye have allwaye embraced. And herewithall he declares
that the world does suffer Just poonishment for his ingratitude, when it
perishes in his blindenes, when by the contempt of true righteoussnes, it
bewrays his wicked hatred against Christ.

B. To keep the sayings of Christ is nothing else, but to believe that the same
is true and wholesome, and also to cleue unto the same with our whole heart:
even as we may gather by the Scripture, Hear O Israll the ordinances and the
Laws which I propose to you this day, that ye may learn them, and take heed
to observe them.

If by keeping the commandments of God, ye understand the fulfilling of them,
no man shall keep them: but if ye understand it for seeking to fulfill them,
then all the godly keep them. For he cannot choose but give him self to the
keeping of the commandments of God, which truly knows the same to be of
God. A. Contrariwise, not to keep the Lords sayings, is to reiecte the doctrine
of Christ, and to contemn his commandments: which all the wicked are wont
to do.

And the word which ye hear is not mine. C. Lest the disciples should fall or
slide away, for the obstinat wickedness of the world, Christ seeks again to
confirm his doctrine, when he testifies the same to be of God, and not
devised in earth by man. And in this consists the stedfastnes of our Faith,
if so be we know God to be our guide, and are grounded upon nothing else but
upon his eternal truth

Therefore how much soever the world does rage in his madness, let us follow
the doctrine of Christ, which far surmounteth heaven and earth. In dividing the
world to be his, he frames him self to his disciples: as if he should say
that the same was not of men, because he faithfully delivered that which was
committed to him of his Father.

Nevertheless let us know, that for so much as he is the everlasting wisdom of
God, he is the only well spring of doctrine, and that they have spoken by his
spirit which have been Prophets from the beginning.

A. Diverse like sentences unto this we have heard before: as, My doctrine is
not mine but my fathers which sent me. Also, Those things which I have heard
of him I speak in the world.

25. These things have I spoken unto you, being yet present with you.

26. But the comforter which is the holy ghost whom the Father will send in my
name, he will send in my name, he shall teach you all things, and bring all
things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you.

The Lord knew well enough how rude and ignorant his Disciples were, and that
they were not capeable of those things which he spoke: the which they suff
cie^tly declared by questioning with him, as we have heard, first in Thomas,
secondly in Phillip, and thirdly in Judas. For this cause less they should be
discouraged, he promised unto them now the second time the holy Ghost, the
spirit of truth, which should be unto them a continual teacher, and which
should abide with them in their minds, and should teach and tell them all
those things, which they had so often times all ready heard but not plainly
enough for them to understand, partly because of their rudenes and partlye by
reason of the sorrow of their hearts.

C. The Lord at that time sowed the seed of doctrine, which for a time lay
as it were choked in his Disciples. Therefore he exhorts them to hope well
until such time as ye doctrine brought fruit which as yet might seem
unprofitable. In fine he affirms unto the^ that plentiful matter of
consolation was in that doctrine which they had heard. The which although it
did not by and by appear unto them yet nevertheless he wylleth them to be of
good cheer, until the Spirit the internal Scoolemaster, spoke the same in
their hearts. A very profitable admonition for all men. Except we have by and by
all that Christ teaches, we are weary, and count our labor lost in trauelyng
about obscure matters. But we must bring with us prompt docillytie and aptness
to be taught, we must give dilligent ear, and be attentive, if so be we
desire to profit in the Scoole of God: but specially we have need of
sufferance, until such time as the spirit does reveal that which as we think
we have red and hard very often.

This poonishment Esaias threateneth to the unbelieving, that the word of God
should be unto them as a shut book: but the Lord does after this manner
oftentimes humble his servant. Therefore we must patiently and quietly way^e
for the time of revelation, and must not therefore reject the word.

R. First of all we learn by this place, that the holy Ghost is given to the
Church of God the Father through the Mediator Christ, who has purchassed the
same of the Father that we might be the sons of God by adoption.

C. Secondly we learn that the external preaching of the Gospel shall be to no
purpose, except the derection of the spirit be Joined therewith. Therefore
God uses to teach by two manner of ways, namely by the outward sound of his
word proceeding out of men's mouths and by the inward operation of his holy
spirit: and this be does at diverse times according to his goodwil and pleasure.
T. Example here of we have in the- Acts of the Apostells, of whom Saint Luke
wrighteth thus: Whose heart the Lord opened so that he gave dillygent heed
unto those things which Paull preached. M. For we shall be always taught in
vain, without the Spirit of God be our teacher: and except he teach inwardly
in the heart, al doctrine is in effectual, yea although Christ should preach
the same with his own mouth.

Moreover we are taught that the Doctrine of the Apostles is not of men, but
proceeding from the Spirit of GOD. For what other thing did they teach than
that same which they had received from the holy Ghost? R. This place is
wonderfully construed by the wicked. For they say, that Christ taught not all
things, but reserved many things for his Apostles to be revealed by the holy
Ghost: of the which number they Judge those wicked ceremonies of the Mass to
be. But what does Christ speak here? C. What are all those things, the
teacher whereof he promises that the Spirit shall be? He shall (says he)
teach you al things, and bring all things into your remembrance what ye shall
do.

Whereupon it follows, that there shall no new revelations. In these few
words all those things are confuted which Satan has brought into the church,
under ye pretense of ye holy ghost. The Mahumetes and the Pope have all one
beginning of religion: they boath affirming that the perfection of doctrine is
not contained in the scripture but proceeds from the revelation of the
spirit. With these also agree the Anabaptists and the Libertines. But they are
led by a sedusing Spirit, and not by the spirit of Christ, who thruste in
straung Doctrine contrary to the Gospel. For Christ promises the holy
Ghost, which should as asubscriber confirm the doctrine of the Gospel. M.
For the holy Ghost delivered no other doctrine to the Apostles, than the very
same which they had heard before, out of the mouth of Christ. Let us
therefore take heed of those which boaste of the revelations of the holy
Ghost, if so be they offer unto us strange Doctrine, contrary to that which
we have received of Christ.

27. Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you: not as the world
gives, give I unto you: let not your hearts be grieved neither fear.

Peace I leave with you. Bv. The Lord persisteth still in all one argument of
consolation: M. And he observes the manner of friends departing away, who
when they take their leave of their friends, are wont to leave somewhat with
them in stead of a blessing, and do wish them peace and health. C. By the
name of peace he means prosperous success, alluding to the manner of his
country: as if he should say, I leave with you my farewell. M. And very
aptly he placed this word (leave) to give his Disciples to understand that
he left his peace with them after his departing.

Peace wished and given by christ to his Apostles.
C. But straight after he adds, that this peace is far more excelent than
that which is commonly among men, who often times for an outward show and
fashion only, have peace in their mouth: or if they do wish peace from
their heart to any man, yet notwithstanding are not able in very deed to give
the same. But Christ shows that his peace does not consiste in bare wishing
but that it is also Joined with effect.

As if he should say, I have toulde you already that I will not leave you
comfortles, and that ye shall not dwell in the earth destitute of my help. For
although I be absente in body, yet notwithstanding I will be present with you
as God delivering you from all euells, in such, wise that your enemies shall
never be able, notwithstanding their great malisse, to dawnt your courage.
Thus ye shall be free from fear, and Gods power shall protect you, which shall
reveal such secret mysteries to your quiet mind, as other men's minds are not
able to comprehend. And now I give unto you peace, not simplye, or the common
peace, but my peace. And because there is great difference between the peace
of the world, and the peace of Christ, he adds by and by these words.

Not as the world gives, give J unto you. For the world calls that peace,
which the truth calls war, as the idle and secure life in pleasures, not
troubled with adversity. For many misfortunes calamities, and the just wrath
of GOD also follows this. A. For when the wicked shall say Peace, Peace of
this world
and all things are safe, then shall sudden destruction come upon them, even
as upon a woman trauayling with Child, 1. These. 5.3
and they shall not escape. Bv. But the peace of Christ is benediction,
salvation, justification, prosperity, health, peace of conscience, constancy
in adversity, and the spirit of the Lord it self, pacefying and confirming
our hearts. M. Hereupon the bestower of so great a benefit, Ecay. 9 ^^
is called the Prince of peace. And they which enjoy this peace, Bv. howsoever
Satan does rage, and the world stir, yet notwithstanding they shall be in
saftie in the midst of the garboyle.

M. Of this peace the Apostle speaks when he says, We being iustefyed by
faith, Rom 5.1 Phil 4.7
have peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ. A. And in another place,
The peace of God which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds
through Jesus Christ our Lord. This peace the world can neither give nor
take away.

Let not your hearts be grieved. C. Again he seeks to take from them that
grief which his Disciples had conceived of his departure. M. For it is not
meet that they should be grieved or fear, which are consecrated to the
kingdom of God, and guarded and protected by the highest. Again, the fear of
the hear^ causes Gods cause often times to be forsaken: whereas a stout and
invincible mind i^ apt for the kingdom of god and constantly serves him.

28. Ye have heard how J said unto you, I go away and come again unto you.
If ye loved me, ye would verily rejoice, because I said, I go unto the
Father: for the Father is greater than I.

C. He denies that they have any cause to fear, because they wanting only
his corporal presence, had nevertheless his true presence by the spirit. Bv.
As if Christ should have said, Ye understand that I go away, and why I go
away, (namely for your salvation) and that by my death and departure, I will
neither forsake you nor neglect you.

For I will come unto you by my resurrection, showing my self unto you a live
again. And although then I shall be with you, only the space of fortye days
and shall straight after ascend into heaven, yet notwithstanding I will send
from thence the holy Ghost, by whom I will abide even in the midst of you,
so that ye have no cause to fear that I will leave you comfortelesse. C. With
this kind of presence let us learn to houlde our selves contented, and let us
not follow the flesh, which always tyeth God to her external imaginations.

If ye loved me, ye would verily rejoice. R. Carnal love takes it very
greeuouslye that a loving friend should be taken away but spiritual love is
otherwise affecte. C. No doubt the Disciples loved Christ, but otherwise than
became them. For they were somewhat carnal, insomuch that they could not
abide that he should be taken from them.

Whereas if they had loved him spiritually, they would have desiered nothing
more than his return to ye father.

For the father is greater than J. C. This place has been diuerselye wrested.
The Arians to prove Christ to be a cartaine secondarie God, objected that he
was less than the Father. The ancient Fathers to cut of all occasion of
this cavil, said that this ought to be referred to the human nature. But as
the Arians wickedly abused this testimonye, even so the answer and solution
of the Fathers was neither true, nor agreeing to the purpose of Christ. For
Christ speaks here, neither of his humane nature, nor yet of his eternal
deuinytie: but according to our weak capascity, he made him self a mean
between us and God. And, because we are not able to reach unto the highte of
God, Christ descended unto us, that he might lift us up unto the same.

Ye should rejoice (says he) for that I return to the Father: because this
is the last mark where unto ye ought to tend. He does not show in those
words what he differs from the Fathere, but wherefore he descended unto us
namely to unite us unto God until we be come unto this, we stand as it werein
a race. We also immagine but a half and torn Christ, except he lead us unto
God.

Like unto this is that place of Paul where he says, That Christ has
delivered up his kingdom to God the Father that God might be all in all.
Christ verily reigns, not only in humane nature, but also as he was
manifested God in the flesh. How then shall he leave his kingdom.

Surely thus, because the Diuinitye, which we may now behoulde only in the
face of Christ, shall then be openly seen in it self. This is only the
difference, for that Paul in that place describes the last perfection of the
divine glory and brightness, whose beams began to shine so soon as Christ
ascended into heaven

But to the end this mistrie may more evidently appear, we must speak yet more
grosely. Christ compares not here his Fathers divinity with his: neither does
he compare his human nature with the divine escence of the Father: but rather
the present state with the heavenly glory, into the which he was shortly after
to be receyuid. As if he should say, Ye desire to have me still in the world:
but it is better for me that I ascend into heaven. B. For his purpose was to
give them to understand that GOD the Father was infinitelye greater than he:
that is, that he should enjoy with him the most excelent felycity, where as he
had lived here in misery and calamitye. R. For by death he entered into the
kingdom of the Father. C. Therefore let us learn so to behold Christ aba^ed
in the flesh that he may bring us to the well of blessed immortality. For he
is not made our Captain and guide, to lead us only to the spear of the
Moon or Son, but to make us one with God the Father.

29. And now have I showed you before it come: that when it is come to pass,
ye might believe

M. What said he? All those things verily which he had spoken concerning
the Comforter, of the true felicity, which they should have by him, and of
the unspeakable power, by which they should do greater works than the Lord
him self had done. C. It was meet that the Disciples should be oftetnimes
admonished concerning this matter: because it was a misterye far surmounting
the capacity of men.

And he says that he foresheweth what shall come to pass, that when it is
come to pass, they might believe. For this was a profitable confirmation of
their Faith, when they should call to mind the prophesies of Christ, and
should see that with their eyes fulfiled, which they had hard out of his mouth
before. As if he should say.

R. I know that ye do not now enjoy these things of the which I speak:

B. notwithstanding I thought good to foreshewe you of those things which
shall happen unto you after my departure, and which shall profit you much
more than my carnal presence has done, that when they shall come to pass, ye
may the more firmly believe that I am Christ the savior of the world.

C. Therefore although he seemed to speak unto deaf men, for a time, yet
notwithstanding afterward it appeared, that he did not spend his wind in
vain, but that he sowed the sede in the ground, which was afterward to bring
forth fruit. And as Christ speaks here of his word, and of the fulfillinge
of things, even so his death, Resurrection, and ascension into heaven, do
grow together with doctrine, that they may bring forth Faith in us.

A. Moreover he speaks here almost the same, which he did when he made
mention of the treason of Judas, Now I tell you before it is come, that when
it is come to pass ye might believe that I am he. John 13.16
And in the sixtene chapter following, But these things have I spoken unto you,
that when the time shall come, ye may remember that I toulde you.

By which words he shows a plain Argument of his diuinitye to the
confirmation of his disciples Faith.

38 Hereafter will I not taulke many words with you: for the Prince of this
world comes and has naught in me.

Bv. Now in plain words he shows that be would die for the salvation and
Redemption of mankind For he showing that death and bonds waited for him
says: Now shall my first ministry cease, by which I abased my self even to
the form of a servant. For the hour of my passion is at hand. By which
saiing he minded to make his Disciples more attentive, and more deeply to
printe his doctrine in their minds. For fulness often times brings
loathsomenesse, and that is more earnestly desired which is hard to be gotten,
and that which tarieth but a while is most set by. Therefore he tells them
that he will shortly go from them, to the end they might be the more
desierouse to hear his doctrine. And although Christ should teach us all our
life time without ceassing, yet notwithstanding this sentence might be applied
to our use also: because seeing the race of our life is but short, we must use
occation, A. lest we being blinded in our own wickedness do contemn his voice
which talks with us at this day.

For the Prince of this world. C. He might simplely have said that he should
die, and that now the hour of his death was at hand, but he speaks by
circomstance to confirm their minds lest they being terrefied with so
horrible and fearful a kind of death, should fall away. For to believe in
him being crucefied, is nothing else but to seek life among the dead.

First of al he says that this power shall be given to satan: then he adds
that he suffers the same, not be cause he was thereunto constrained, but that
he might obey his Father.

A. But why the Deuell is called the prince of this world we have showed in the
twelueth chapter going before.

C. And by the name of world be comprehends all mankind, For there is but
one redemer which delivers us out of this horrible servitude.

But seeing this poonishment came by the sin of the first man, even as daily
it encreasseth more and more through new sins, let us learn both to hate our
selves and our sins also. For we are so captive under the Rule of Satan,
that notwithstanding this servitude which is voluntary, shall not excuse us,
and make us blameless.

We must also noate thot the same is attributed here to the deuell, which is
done by wicked men. For it is no unwonted thing to attribut that to the
captain, which was done by the whole army of the Captain. Satan was the
Captain of Judas and of the murdering Jews, who caused them to commit such
horible wickedness.

C. Therefore when the wicked are carried by the motion of Satan, whatsoever
they do is justly said to be his work. M. Also this place teaches what they
ought to look for of this world, in the which the Deuell is Prince. secondely,
how he uses wicked men as his soldiers to persecute Gods elect.

And has naught in me. B. Satan has power over those that are subject to
sin: For he works in the children of disobedience. Therefore seeing the
Lord was pure from all sin Satan had no power at all in him.

C. Howbeit these words may have a farther meaning. For Christ speaks not
here of his pureness alone, but also of his divine power which was not subject
unto death. For it was mete for the Disciples to know that he was not
obnoxious to infirmytye, lest they should think to basely of his power But in
this general sentence that former sentence is concluded, that in subduing
death he was not bound to Satan. Whervppon is gathered that he took upon him
our turn when he submitted him self to death.

Bv. R. Othersome also noat here, that Satan had no power in Christ, because
the members and instruments of Satan could not obtain that which they
desired. For they purposed to destroy Christ, and to blot out his name for
ever but he when he hoong upon the cross and was even in death, shook the
earth, and wrought such wonders as beseemed the Son of God, straight after
he arose from death to life, and assended into heaven, where he reigns over
the whole world.

Satan had no power in Christ
Therefore the power of satan could prevail nothing against the Lord of
light and life. This is no small consolation to the faithful, For the Lord
Jesus has over come for us, sin, death, and satan. Wherefore if satan had no
power in the head, neither shall he have any power in the members. For the
victory, life, and innocencye of Christ Jesus is ours by Faith.

Therefore if at the hour of death the Prince of this world, come unto thee,
be not afraid: consider that he has bente and used all his force against the
Savior, and prevailed not, but was overthrown him self, when he thought to
have gotten the victory.

The Lord Jesus got the victory for thy sake, and thou shalt overcome in him.
R. But if Satan had no power over Christ, why then did he preuail so much
that he brought him to the death of the Cross? For shortly after Christ died,
and that the most shamful death of al others, even the death of the Cross.
Hear now the cause hereof in these words of our Savior following.

31. But that the world may know that I love the Father: and as the Father
gave me a commandment: even so do I* Rise let us go hence.

But that the world might know. B. That is to say. Therefore I will give place
to the power of Satan, and deliver my self into the hands of sinners, that
the world may know that I love the Father, C. We have in this to noate that
Gods decree here stands in the hiest place, lest we should think that christ
was so carried to death by the violence of Satan, that some thing happened to
him beside the purpose of God.

For it is God which has ordained his son to be the prepitiatory, and which
would take away the sins of the world by his death. The which to bring to
pass he suffered Satan for a short time to triumph over them as conqueror.
Therefore Christ did not resist Satan, that he might obey his fathers will
and decree, and might so offer his obedience a^ a price and ransom for our
righteousenesse.

M. To this effect partaineth that which Paul wrighteth saying, That Christ
was obedient to his Father to the death even to the death of the cross. John
i0.i8
A. Also Christ a little before testified, that he received this commandment
from the Father, that he should give his life for his sheep.

M. Therefore in that we are redeemed by the death and blood of of Christ
Jesus, it was done at the commandment of the Father. Obedience in Christ
declared his love toward his father.
Furthermore saying the obedience of Christ declared how greatly he loved his
Father, let us also learn after his example, not only by the observation of
his commandments, but also by the pacient bearinge of the Cross laid upon
us, to declare how greatly we love God the Father.

It is a hard matter to love such a Father as lays the cross upon his
Children: but he does the same for our health, And although we do patiently
bear the Cross, yet notwithstanding we cannot reach to that perfection which
was in Christ's example, who not for his own but for our benifite, bare the
cross which the Father laid upon him. Furthermore in these words we are
taught that this love and obedience of Christ declared in the passion of the
Cross, is to be proposed and set before the world. He says not symply, That
ye might know, but, That the world may know that I love the Father. This
knowledge serves greatly to the learning of salvation, which is purchased for
us by the blessed blood of Christ.

Rise, let us go hence. B. R. Bv. Many think that Christ when he had spoken
these words, went to another place, and that he spoke those things which
follow as he walked: C. But seeing saint John says hereafter that Christ went
forth, it seems more lykelye that the purpose of Christ was to exhort his
Disciples* to show the same obedience toward GOD, of the which they had so
notable an example in him: not that he led them forth at the same moment

The.XV. Chapter.
1 I am the true Vine, my Father is the Husbandeman.

CHRIST our Savior in this Chapter exhorts his Disciples to abide in him,
and to love him: then he encourages them against the hatred of the world, to
the which they should be subject. R. After therefore he had taught who he
was, and wherefore he went by the Cross to the Father, now he teaches what
benifites he possesses by and in his Father, not to retain them to himself
aloane, but to communicate them with the faithful. And this he teaches by an
excelent similitude and fine allegorye, ^ B. the which he playnelye explicateth.

C. Also the sum of this similitude is, that we are barren and dry by
nature, saving that we being ingraffed into Christ, do draw from him new
strength, and moisture.

But it is needful to discuss every property of the Vine, but only
summarily to consider to what end Christ applies this similitude.

Therefore there are three special parts: The first is, That we have no
strength of our selves to do good but from him: the second, That we having
root in him, are purged and garnished by the father: the third is, that he
cutteth of the unfruitful branches, that they might be cast into the fire
and burnte. All men almost are ashamed to deny, that whatsoever good thing
they have it comes from God: but afterward they feign that they have a
universal grace given unto them, as though it were naturally ingraffed in
them. But Christ specialy stands upon this point that vital Moisture does
spring from him aloane: whereupon it follows that man's nature is unfruitful
and void of all goodness: because no man knows the nature of the vine
until he be ingrafted in the same. But this is given by spetial grace to the
elect alone. The first authoure therefore of all good things is the father
who planteth us by his hand: but the beginning of life is in Christ, out of
whom we begin to take root in him. When he calls him self the true vine,
it is as if he had said I am the vine in deed. Therefore men do weary
themselves in vain in seeking for strength from any other: because profitable
fruit comes from no other than from the branches springing from me.

For Christ compares him self to the vine growing in the earth, and us to the
branches springing out of the same.

Bv. This allegory is taken out of the writings of the Prophets, who in
diverse places compare the Church to the vinyarde, and men in the Church, to
vines, Psalm, 8.9, Es, 3, 13, 57 Ier, 2, 21, Ier, i2, i0 Osee, i0. i,
and the works of faith, of love, and of righteousness, to grapes. Therefore
when the Lord calls him self the true vine, we must not so understand him
as if he were naturally and substantially a vine. For naturallye and
substantially he is God and man, and not a vine: but represents the true,
comely, fruitful, noble, and plentiful vine. AVG. Therefore he is called a
vine by a similitude, not by proprietye even as he is called a sheep, a Lamb,
a Lion, a Rock, a corner stone, and such like, from which such similitudes are
brought.

And my father is a husband man. CYR. He calls the Father a husband man,
lest this might seem to be done of the Son aloane, which is the wonderful
work of the whoale Trinity. For the father planted Christ the true vine, when
he made the word to become flesh, that the same might be perfect God, and
perfect man. M. Therefore the Mystery of our Mediation and salvation, depends
upon the counsel and providence of our heavenly father, who like a husband
man planted and trimmed this vine for us, and does also at this day plant the
same in the hearts of the faithful. In the which matter his Aposteles are
workers with him. Most aptly therefore when he called him self a vine, i, Cor,
3, 9.
he made mention also of the husband man, showing that by the care, providence
and gubernation of God, we are brought to virtue and continued in the same. For
as the vine tree nourishes her branches, even so the husband man visits,
veweth, and proyneth his vine.

2. Every branch that bears not fruit in me, he will take away and every
branch that bears fruit will he purg that it may bring forth more fruit.

M. By these words he expresses the husbandry of the father, to the which
the faithful servants of Christ are subject euenas the branches of this
vine. And he declares that the end and drifte of this husbandry is that the
branches might bring forth fruit. C. But because some do corrupt the grace of
God, and others by sleuth choke and suppress the same, and othersom by
malice, by these words he seeks to make men careful, when he pronounces
that all they shall be cut from the vine which are unfruitful branches.

Bv. For as the husband man does proyne and cut of the unfruitful branches,
even so the heavenly Father does cut of and cast away unfruitful men.

And the fruits, or clusters of Grapes hanging upon the boughs or branches
are the works of faith, of the spirit: and of charity: euenas the prophet
Esaias and the Apostle Paul do plainly expound the same.

Esaias, 5, 2, Gala, 5, 22, Ephe, 5, 9,
C. But it may be demanded if he can want fruit which is ingrafted in
Christ. We answer, Many are thought to be in the vine by the Judgment of
men, which in very deed have no root at all in the same. Euenso in the
Prophets the Lord calls his people of Israel his vine, which by external
profession had the name of the Church

B. Therefore even as tares are in the kingdom of God, and corrupt fishes in
the net of the Gospel, and the man wanting the wedding garmente in the
Marriage of Christ: euenso there are some (but in name only) which are said to be
in Christ, having only an out ward show, and not a true faith. Wherefore at
the length these are cut of, and are cast into hell fire as unfruitful and
unprofitable branches. R. Moreover this sentence answers that curiositye of
the flesh which is wont irreverently to reason of predestination, and
according to the disposition thereof togather, that none whom the Lord has
elected to everlasting life can be dampened, although he live never so
wickedly: and in like manner that none of them whom the Lord has appointed to
eternal fire can be saved, yea though he live never so well: and that
therefore he will live at his own pleasure: for, says he, how carefully
soever I work the Lords decree cannot be altered. To this Christ here
answers, saying, Every branch that bears not fruit in me, he will
take away. As if he should say, What have thou to do with the secreat
predestination of God? See thou to this, that thou abide in me and bring forth
fruit.

The rest are to be committed to the dispensation and wisdom of God. For
although thou seem to be predestinate to everlasting salvation, and yet
notwithstanding bring not forth fruit thou shall be cast into the fire as
are commonly unfruitful branches. It is wrighten of Saul that he was elected
to be in the Lords vinyard, and that he was a good man, and that a better
then he was not found in Israel: yet notwithstanding he was rejected euenas
the Lord said to Samuel, i, King, i6,
How long will thou mourn for Saul, seeing I have cast him away from
reigning over Israel? In like manner the Lord says, Ier, 2^, 24
If so be Ieconias the son of Ioachim were the signit on my right hand I
would pull him of. Esaias, 5, 7,


The Tribe of Judah also was a chosen people, yet notwithstanding it was
rejected.

And the Apostle says, thou which stand steadfast in faith be not high
minded but fear for seeing that God spared not the natural branches take
heed lest it come to pass, Rom, xi, 2i,
that he spare not thee.

A. The which things are not therefore spoken that the faithful might take
occasion to doubt of their salvation, but to the end carnal security and
sloth might be taken away from men. R. For it is most sertaine that Gods
decree can not be altered by any man. For the gifts and calling of God are
without repentance: because he is not as a man, which repents him and
calls back, Rom, xi, 29,
the sentence which he has once decreed Therefore this stands as a firm
decree, that whomsoever God has chosen before the foundation of the world,
Gods election abides firm, Ioh, i0, 29
he cannot perish (for no man takes the sheep out of this shepheerds hand)
and that whom soever he has rejected he cannot be saved although he do all the
works of saynctes: so irretractable and vnmoouable is the sentence of God.
Fear therefore and have respect to the only hand of him that chooses, that
thou may enjoy salvation through our Lord and savior Jesus Christ.

And every branche that bears fruit, C. By these words he teaches that the
faithful least they should degenerate, have need of daily purging and
proining, and that they can bring forth no good thing, without God set to his
hand. For it will not suffice yt we were once made ye children of adoption,
except God do profit ye course of grace in us. He speaks here of Purgation,
because our flesh abounds with superfluous and hurtful vices, in bringing
forth of the which it is to fruitful, increasing and budding forth without
end, except we be purged and proyned by the hand of God. R. The proyning of
the Tree is not to the destruction of the same, but that it might bring forth
more fruit: for otherwise, the same growing to high, and spreading forth his
branches without pruning and cleansing, would ouergrow, wyther, and bear no
fruit.

Purgation of the flesh by the heavenly Physician.
Euenso the flesh, in the most holy, if it might have liberty to do what it
lusts, God if it were possible, should be drawn out of the divine throane
of his Majesty. Hear what the King of Babell says, I will ascend into
heaven, I will be like to the most high: Esai. 14.i3
The King of Tire also spoke the like, I am God, and I sit in Gods seat. Eze.
28. ij
How greatly does the flesh swell being stuffed with benefits, and never
proyned with the Cross. Therefore the Father which is the husbandman, purges
the branche, that is to say, beats down, and humbles the faithful man
with the Cross, renueth his heart, washes the feet of his affections, and
mortifyeth the relics of the flesh. Therefore we must consider in this
similitude of proyning, the fruit of the Cross. For the Lord afflicts not
to destroy, but to save: even as the husbandman proyneth the branch, not to
cut of all, but to purge and cleanse the same, that it might bring forth fruit
more plentifullye.

Bv. Therefore these words agree with this sentence of the Lord, He that is
washed needs not to save to wash his feet, Ioh. i3. x
but is clean every whit. For the Saints so soon as they are holy, have
need of farther and more ample sanctification.

C. Therefore when he says that the Vines are purged, that they may bring
forth more fruit, he shows how greatly the godly ought to go frreward, and
to profit in all Godliness.

3. Now are ye clean through the word, which I have spoken unto you.

M. He having hitherto spoken of him self, the Vine, and of his Father the
husbandman, and now consequentlye he expounds the allegorye, and speaks
concerning the branches his Disciples. C. And tells them that they have felt
already in them slues that which he had said, because they were both planted
and pourged in him. M. As if he should say, You my Disciples, which are as
branches, are clean through the word which I have spoken unto you, B. that is
to say, through my doctrine which ye have received. For by the same ye are
borne again. C. And there is no doubt but that he spoke of the external
preaching, when he expreslye names the word which they had heard from his
mouth. Not that the voice uttered by man, has only in it self such
efficacy, but in that Christ works in the heart by his spirit. The voice it
self is the instrument of purging. B. Therefore they are clean which believe
the Gospel: and yet notwithstanding are purged that they may bring forth
more fruit: because by the gift of the Father they profit in the Faith, by
which they are made the sons of God: in the which the more they profit, the
more they are like unto God, and the more they fructefye above others.

Nevertheless Christ means not that his Apostls are without al fault, but
sets before them an experiment, whereby they may learn how necessary the
continnacion of grace is.

R. Therefore they were clean, not for their own righteousness sake, but for
the word, which being revealed by the spirit after the resurrection, wrought
cleanness in the believing Apostles.

So all Christians in them selves, and in their own righteousness are
sinners, but in Christ through the word which they have received by faith, are
just and clean. R. We must also noate how the sanctifycation and purgation of
the faithful, as in the Scripture attributed to diverse things, Purgation
attributed to diverse things.
in diverse respects. For the Father pourgeth by his spirit as the aucthour:
the word purges, as the hand and power of the aucthour: the Sacrament
purges as the instrument, and appendix of the word: and faith purges, as it
receives purgatirn from the Father, by the word, whereunto the Sacrament is
tied. For thou shall believe in vain if thou believe not the record. Rom x, 17
A. Because true faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God.
Therefore we must noate all those sayings which seem to attribute purgation
to diverse things: as when it is said that God has purifyed the hearts. Also,
Acts. xv.ix
Ye have cleansed your hearts, by obeying the truth. Again, Christ has
sanctified the Church, i. Pet. i. xxij
cleansing the same by the fountain of water, in the word of life. Ephe. 5.25
Also, He has saved us through the lauer of regeneration, Titus, 3.5
and of the renewing of the holy ghost. All these places spring from one
ground, and tend to this end, that we might understand the manner of
purgation, and the doctrine of of the Gospel: C. the which Christ in this
place commends unto his Disciples of the fruit, to the end they might be
the more provoked to the meditacion thereof, seeing it is as it were the
husband man's knife to proyne and cut of rotten and fruiteles twigges.

4. Bide in me, and I in you: As the branch cannot bear fruit of it self,
except it abide in the Vine: no more can ye, except ye abide in me.

C. Again he exhorts his Disciples to studdye and care to retain and keep
that grace with the which they are endued. For the securitye of the flesh can
never sufficiently be awaked. And verilye Christ sought nothing else, but to
gather us (as a Hen does her Chickins, under her wings) under his protection:
least by our lightness we being crept away, might flee from him to our own
destruction. Therefore to prove that he had not begone the work of our
salvation, to leave the same imperfect, he promises that his spirit shall be
always effectual in us. Abide in me (says he) because I am ready to
abide in you.

R. We abide in Christ by faith: and Christ abides in us by his word. A.
Herevppon Saint John says, i, Ioh. 3, 24
He which keeps his commandments, abides in him, and he in him. And
hereby we know that he abides in us, even by the spirit which he has given
us. Concerning farther matter, read the six and fiftye verse of the sixth
Chapter going before.

As the branch cannot bear fruit of it self. Bv. More largelye and
plainlye he declares by sentences, what was the conjunction of Christ, and of
the Saints in the Church: and what fruit sprang from the same in the Church.
That is to say, that of that only conjunction and knitting tageather good
fruits do spring, and that without him no good fruit does come from any
man, And the sentences or collations are these, As the branch of it self,
that is to say, of his own nature and proper strength, being taken away
from his vine, cannot bring forth any good fruit, euenso except we abide in
Christ, we cannot bring forth of our own strength any good works.

For it is Christ which waters and norisheth us by the grace of his spirit,
as it were by water, that we might easilye bring forth the fruits of
godliness.

And to the end we might the more truly understand the collation, he adds,
saying.

5. I am the Vine, Ye are the branches: he that abides in me, and I in him,
the same brings forth much fruit: for without me can ye do nothing.

M. He declares and shows unto his Disciples who they are, and what he him
self is, lest that should be attributed to the brannches which belongs unto
the Vine. Bv. As if he should say, Least ye should be ignorant what I mean
by the Vine, and what be the branches, Know ye that I aloane am that Godly
Vine, which bear branches, and by my sap and moisture, do cause the same to
fructefye: but you my Disciples, and so many as believe in me, are the
branches, who of them selves, that is to say, of their own strength, bring
forth no good fruit.

For without me can ye do nothing. This is the conclusion and application of
the whoale parrable: So long as we are without him, we bring forth no good
fruit acceptable unto God, because we are not apt to do good. R. What can be
spoken more plainly against free will, Free w^l ouerthrown
and against al humane strength be it never so strong? For as the branch
being cut from the Vine, brings forth no fruit, but wythereth away: even so
man can do nothing at all to attain to righteousness and salvation, if so
be through unbelief he be separated from Christ. Bv. This place therefore is
very notable and strong against the defendours of free will, affirming that it
is in our own strength and power to work that which is good.

C. The Papists notwithstanding do not only extenuate this sentence, but
also wreste, and dallye with the same.

For although in word only they confess, that we can do nothing without
Christ, yet notwithstanding they feign a certain power in us, which of it
self is not sufficient to work, except it be helped with the grace of God.
For they will not abide that a man should be so empty and free from power and
strength to work that which is good, but that he may do somewhat of him
self.

But the words of Christ so plainlye spoken, cannot in such wise be colloured.
Such therefore is the imagination of the Papists, that they affirm, that
without Christ we can do nothing, and yet notwithstanding being helped by him,
that we can do somewhat of our selves without his grace. But Christ
pronounces the contrary, as, that we can do nothing of our selves. The
branch (says he) brings forth no fruit of it self. Therefore he does
not only here commend the help of his grace which helps ioyntlye with
him, but also depriueth us whollye of all virtue and strength, saving that
aloane which he gives unto us. Bv. Wherefore these words (Without me) may
be thus resolved, Ye can do nothing that is good, except ye have strength and
power from me? So that a man can do no good thing by humayne strength: but as
for evil he can do of him self.

C. They have yet another cavil: For they pretend that the branch has
somewhat by his own nature: because if so be another unfruitful branch be
grafted into the Vine, it will bring forth nothing. But this is easilye
refuted: because Christ does not show here what the branches have in them
before they be in the Vine: but he rather shows that then we begin to be
branches, when we grow together in him. Also, the Scripture in another place
shows, that before we are in him, we are dry and unprofitable wood.

M. Therefore we must noate that he says not, Without you I can do
nothing, but, Without me ye can do nothing. The Vine although he loose his
unfruitful branches, can nevertheless bring forth of him self other
braanches, by which he may fructefye. Therefore let no man glory and beast
against Christ, as though we being destroyed which bear his name, he could
not have branches and Cittezens of his Kingdom. God can raise up of stones
Children to Abraham. But rather let us consider this, that we can do nothing
without Christ, Mat. ij^.ix
which is profitable for our salvation. Bv. These things therefore do agree
with the Euangelical and Apostolical doctrine. For the Apostle says that we
are not able, as of our selves to think a good thought. 2, Cor. 3.5
And again he says, It is God that works in us, both to will and to work.
M. Whereupon, Phil. 2, 13
Christ says not, Without me ye can do little, But, Without me ye can do
nothing: least that any goodness without ye grace of God should be
attributed to human strength.

And whereas he says not simplye, Ye can do nothing, but adds also
(Without me) it is dilligentlye to be noated.

For although a man can do nothing of him self without Christ, yet
notwithstanding, with Christ ye shall do very much, as with his life, from
whom he receives strength and spirit to work.

Therefore let no Faithful man, nor branch of Christ say simplye, I can not
do good, but let him add therewithal, (of my self) that is to say, without
Christ: and to the glory of Christ let him say, Phil. 4, 13
I can do all things by him which comfort me.

Ephe, 2, 10
A, For we are his workemanshippe builded in Christ Jesus, to good works
which GOD has prepared, that we might walk in them.

6. If a man bide not in me, he is cast forth as a branch, and wythereth, and
men gather them, and cast them into the fire and they burn.

A. This is an exposition of that which he had said, calling his Father the
husbandman, and saying: Every branche that bears not fruit in me, he will
take away. C. And when he had set before his Disciples, the punishment of
ingratitude he adds this also, to stir up his Disciples to perseverance.

It belongs verilye unto God to continewe us in him: but yet this is not a
superfluous exhortacion to fear, least our proud flesh do destroy us.

They are said to wyther like dead brauches, which are cut of from Christ:
because as the beginning of strength and life comes from him, even so does
the end and countinuaunce of the same.

Not that any of the elect at any time are given over and blinded: but because
many Hipocrites are green and do florishe in outward show, which
afterward in yelding their fruit, do frustrate the hope of their Lord and
Master.

Bv. For they do not abide in Christ which have not a sound and constaunt
Faith, but are wrapped in the filthynesse and uncleanness of this world.

And such shall not be cast forth, but are already cast forth out of the
societye, and inheritance of Christ, and of the Saints: John, 3.36
even as the faithful in the Gospel are said to have life already. M.
Finallye, this place concerns the condempnacion of Reprobates, Mat. 3. xij.
Math. 13.24.
and degenerate Christians, whose punishment is boath here and in other places
set forth.

7. If ye abide in me, and my words abide in you, ask what ye will, and it
shall be done for you.

Bv. He prosecuteth farther the conjunction of Christ and of the Saints, to
the end it might be a more effectual consolation: and withal he encourages
them to perseueraunce.

C. For, because the Faithful do oftentimes feel them selves to be leave,
and far from that notable fatness, which may serve to give plentiful
fruit, therefore this was added, that, whatsoever things they have need of,
which are in Christ, the same is prepared for them, so soon as they ask it of
God.

R. This is like unto that which Christ says in another place, And all
things whatsoever ye ask in prayer, Math. 21.
believing, ye shall receive. C. A very profitable admonition. For to the end
the Lord might exercise us in prayer, he suffers us oftentimes to hungar:
but if we come unto him for relief, he will not fail us, i. Cor. i. 5,
but will give unto us out of his most plentiful treasury, whatsoever we have
need of.

M. Yet notwithstanding we have not such liberty given us here, that we may
ask what we will simplye without any farther regard. For it is not meet that
we should ask according to our own will, but according to the will of God.
For so we read, And this is the trust that we have in him: that if we ask
any thing according to his will, he hears us. Therefore these words of the
Lord are not simplye and seuerallye to be understood, but ioyntlye with that
which goes before, where he says, If ye abide in me, and my words abide in
you. For he means that they which abide in him, and have his words abiding
in them, shall be so disposed that they shall not disagree from his will, and
shall seek no other thing than that which pleases him: secondlye that they
shall be so dear and acceptable in the sight of GOD, that whatsoever they
will, by his clemencye, they shall receive. So also says the Prophet David,
He will fulfill the desire of them that fear him, Psalm. 145
he also will hear their cry, and will help them.

And my words abide in you. Bv. In these few words he expounds who they
be which abide in Christ: namelye, they in whom the words of Christ do
abide. And the words of Christ do abide in the Faithful. For these by faith
do receive the Evangelical doctrine of Christ, and retain the same. C.
Therefore when they forsake the doctrine of the Gospel, they seek after.
Christ in vain. M. Lastly, we must noate, that Christ said not, Whatsoever
ye will ye shall do, But, Ask what ye will, and it shall be done for you. For
although the faithful servants of Christ are acceptable unto GOD, yet
notwithstanding, they have not power to do what they will, or no attribute any
thing to their right or merits, but ought to depend upon the grace of God
only, and to ask those things of him which are necessary.

For the Lord knows what things they have need of, and is ready to do
and to give unto them, whatsoever he knows to be profitable unto them: but
to nourishe faith and trust in their hearts, he gives unto them the spirit of
prayer, that they may require all things at his hand by humble peticion.

Bv. Therefore to what end should we retain Christ corporally, if so be
otherwise he give unto his faithful servants that which they require, and is
always ready to help them? Does he seem to be absent, which fulfilleth the
desires of his servants? Wherefore we ought not to be discouraged from
prayer, though we have not the corporal presence of the Lord.

8. Herein is my Father glorified, that ye bear much fruit, and become my
Disciples.

C. This is a confirmation of the sentence going before. For he shows that we
must not doubt but that he hears the prayers of his servants, when they
desire to be made fruitful: because this specially appertains to the
setting forth of his glory. R. But, is not the Father glorious by his own
nature? How then can we glorifye him? The Father verilye is glorious in him
self from everlasting, but yet he does not always appear manifestlye to be
glorious. Even as he is wonderful, most wise, and liberal from everlasting,
yet notwithstanding, he has not so appeared before the condition of the
world.

For his wisdom, power and liberallitye, was showed afterward in the
creation of the world. Thus he was always glorified by his own nature, yet
not manifestly. His glory is declared when he sanctifyeth the elect, and makes
them to bring forth fruit: that is to say, to believe, and to love.

Faith vanquisheth the Deuell. And love, the world.
For by faith all the deceites of Satan are overcome: and by love, all the
iniuryes of the world are subdued. For who would have known that the power of
God over Satan had been so great, and all the rule and principallity of this
world, if so be the same had not been manifested in the faithful, when they
overcome Satan and the world? Therefore the Father is glorified, God is
glorified by faith.
when one believes, and by Faith is made a Disciple of Christ, that is to
say, the son of God by adoption. He is also gloryfied when faith brings
forth the fruit of love in the believing. For it is the glory of God to
overcome sins by Christ, and to boast of the righteousness of Christ. The
Father is not gloryfied by ceremonies, by man's inuencions, by free will, and
by human strength: but he is gloryfied by Faith and charity. Wherefore if we
will glorifye the Father, let us believe in the son, let us abide in the
word of the son, and let us love one another, even as Christ has loved us.
C. For he pronounces here, that he has none in his flock, but such as
fructefye to the glory of God. Bv. To the which effect pertains this saying
of Christ, Let your light so shine before men, Math, 5.16
that they may see your good works, and glorifye your Father which is in
heaven.

And become my Disciples. M. This ought not so to be understood as though by
fructefying, we were made the Disciples of Christ: because we must first be
true Disciples of Christ, and then to do the works of Disciples.

His words are as much as if he had said, And declare your selves to be my
true Disciples, by abiding in my word. For if ye abide in my word, then are ye
my very Disciples, John. 8, 31.
and ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free.

9. As the Father has loved me, even so have I loved you: continue in my
love.

M. He goes forewarde in exhorting his Disciples to abide in his love.

And in this place he takes an argument to persuade by his own example, and
the example of his Father.

C. By which words his purpose was to express a far greater matter, than
the common sort do deny or judge. For here they make a long discourse (but
beside the purpose) concerning the secreete love of the father with the which
he has been always affected toward his son, when as rather the purpose of
Christ was, to lay as it were in our lap the sure pledge of his divine love
toward us. Therefore that which they imagine appertains nothing to this
present place. But the love, of the which mention is made here, is to be
referred unto our selves, because Christ testifies that he is loved of the
Father, in yt he is the head of the Church. For he which seeks to know how he
is loved of God without a Mediator, brings him self into a Labyrinth, in the
which he shall find no way to get forth. Therefore we must cast our eyes upon
Christ, in whom we shall find the pledge of Gods love. For upon him the whole
love of God is laid, that from him it might flow to his members. For this
cause he is said to be the well beloved son, in whom the Father is well
pleased. But we must noate the end, Math. 3.7
which is. That we may be acceptable unto God. So that we may behold the
Fatherlye love of God toward us all, in him, even as in a glass because he is
not loved for his own sake but to Join us with the Father unto him. R.
Therefore as the Father loved the Son, and gave unto him all good things,
sustained him under the Cross, and delivered his soul out of hell, so the
Son also loves the Faithful, and gives unto them all those graces which he
has received from the Father bears them up under the Cross, brings them
from death to life, and delivers them out of Hell.

Abide ye in my love. Some expound these words, that Christ required of his
Disciples mutual love. But othersome much better, who take and understand the
love of Christ actiuely.

For he would have us to enjoy for ever the love wherewith he has loved us:
and therefore he wills us to take heed least we deprive our selves of the
same. For many do reject the grace offered unto them and many cast away that
which they have in their hands. So soon therefore as we are once received
into the grace of Christ, we must take heed lest through our own fault we
fall from the same.

M. He is the vine and he powers his nature and goodness into the branches
so long as they abide in the stock that they may be partakers of the liuelye
blood and Juice of the same. Whosoever abides not in him, they perish not through
his, but by their own fault.

C. Notwistanding whereas some infer upon these words, that there is no
efficacy in the grace of God, except the same be helped by our constancy, it
is but vain. For we do not grant that the spirit does only require of us
those things which are in our power, but does also show what ought to be
done: that if so be we lack strength, we may seek for the same from him.
Euenas when Christ exhorts us here to perseverance, we must not leave to our
own Industerye and strength: but we must pray him which commands that he
will confirm us in his love.

10. If ye keep my commandments, ye shall abide in my love, even as I have
keapt my fathers commandments, and abide in his love.

A. Lest any man should abuse this place, we must noat that Christ says not,
if ye keep my commandments ye shall deserve my love, but, ye shall abide in
my love. M. For the obedience and keeping of the commandments of Christ, is
not the cause wherefore we are loved, but rather the conceruation of his grace
which happens even to the unworthy.

He did not therefore begin to love us, Merits are not ye cause of Gods love.
because we have kept his commandments, neither has he chosen us because we
deserved the same, but he has both loved and chosen us freely, and without al
manner of desert on our part.

That we might abide in this grace, he requires at our hands that we keep his
commandments. C. For this is the best manner of perseverance to follow him
whether he calls us. Romans 8.1.
For they which are in Christ walk not after the flesh but after the spirit.
For these are always joined together faith which apprehends the free love
of Christ, a good conscience, and newenes of life. And in deed Christ does
not reconcile the Faithful unto the father that they might do what they list
but to the end he guiding them with his spirit might keep them under his
fathers hand and subjection.

Whereupon it follows that they do reject the love of Christ which prove
not them selves by true obedience to be his Disciples.

But it seems a very straight and hard matter that the observation of the
commandments of Christ should be required at our hands, in ye which is
contained the exact perfection of righteousenesse which is more then we are
able to do.

For thereof it comes that the love of Christ is void except we be as pure
as Angels. This may easily be answered* for seeing Christ speaks hear of
a desire to lead a holy and godly life, he does not exclude that which is the
principal point in his doctrine, namely, the free imputatio^ of
righteousness, whereby it comes to pass that by acceptance and grace our
works which being of them selves lame, and impure, deserve to be rejected,
are pleasant unto God. Therefore the faithful are said to keep the
commandments of Christ when they apply their wh^ale studyes and mind to
keep them, although they come nothing near the mark: because they are loosed
from that rigor of the Law, Deu, 27.^6 Gala. 3, ^
where it is said, Cursed be every one that continues not in all things
contained in this book to fulfill them. M. For whatsoever imperfection comes
by the infirmity of the flesh, is freely forgeuen by the grace of the
mediation of the blood of Christ.

Even as I have kept my fathers co^mandeme^nts. C. As we are elected in
Christ, euenso in him is expressed at the full the Image of our calling. Good
cause therefore he has to set him self hear before his Disciples for an
example to be followed to the Immitation whereof all the Godly will frame them
selves. In me (says he) ye may behoulde the very same which he requires
of you. For you see how truly I am addicted to the obedience of my father,
and in the same I will continue. He in like manner has not loved me for a
little or short time but his love toward me abides for ever.

This conformity of the head and the members must we have always before our
eyes, not only to the end the faithful may seek to conform them selves, to
the example of Christ: but also that they may trust to be better reformed
daily by his spirit, that they may walk in newenesse of life to the end. R.
Therefore Christ is the only example of life, the which every one must follow,
if so be he desyer to live a Christian man's life. The Godly also may be
examples of life but no otherwaye than in Christ that is to say, so far forth
as they follow Christ. Whereupon Paul setting him self before others to be
followed, says, i. Cor. 4. i6 i, Cor, xi.i
Therefore I exhort you that ye be followers of me: And in another place he
expounds him self sayng, be ye followers of me even as I follow Christ. For
such an example whereby our life must be framed, must be perfect in every
point. But we cannot have a more perfect example of life than in Christ: for
he does not only go before us and teach us with his voice, but also by his
virtue in us through Faith he brings to pass, that we may follow his
example, otherwise we are most weak and unapt to do the least good work.

11. These things have I spoken unto you that my joy might remain in you,
and that your joy might be full.

A. As Christ a little before left his peace with his Disciples, putting a
difference between the same worldly peace, euenso now he offers unto them
the true and perfect Joy, far more excelente than the Joy of the world. Bv.
He speaks not of that Joy which he him self has in him self, but of that
which we conceive of him by faith. The same springs from the Faith, which al
they yt are justified by grace have with God.

Therefore so often as we hear of his fatherly love toward us let us know
that we have great occasion of Joy, insomuch that with quiet consciences we
may be assured of our salvation.

A. This Joy the Apostle wishes that that we may feel in our hearts, saying:
Let the peace of God have the victory in your hearts. Colo. 3.15
And in another place, The peace of God which passes all understanding keep
your hearts and minds through christ Jesus. Phili. 4.7
C. And there is said to be the Joy of Christ, and our Joy, in diverse
respects. That is the Joy of Christ which is given of him unto us: for he is
the author and cause of the same. Esai. 53.5
The cause of our Joy for that we are delivered from sin and death the
chastisement of our peace being upon him: And he is the Authore: because by
his spirit he takes fear and sorrow out of our hearts, whereof comes this
exceeding Joy. Our joy is said to be in another respect: because we inioye
him so soon as he is given unto us. Joy in Christ and in us.
Now when our savior Christ pronounces that he therefore spoke these
things that his Disciples might have Joy, we gather that whosoever do
truly profit by this sermon. shall have matter whereby to quiet themselus.

And that your joy might be full. Bv. He means the most perfect Joy the
which wants nothing: so that Christ promises unto his Disciples, Joys,, and
the fullness of all Joy.

C. Not that the faithful shall be free from all heaviness and sorrow, but
because they shall have exceeding cause of Joy in such wise, that no fear,
care, and sorrow shall ouerwhelme them. For they to whom it is given to Joy
and rejoice in Christ, shall be exceeding Joyful and merry, whether it be in life
or in death, in prosperitye, or in miserye. Notwithstanding there are some
which refer this Joy in the second place, to the fruition of eternal life.
Othersome say, that this is the meaning, these things have I spoken unto you,
that my joy might be in you: that is to say, that ye might only rejoice in
these things in the which I rejoice. For so ye shall be strong to fight, and
upon hope of saving men, ye shall willingly suffer perils, rejoicing not a
little because the will of the Father (who would have all men come to the
knoweledge of the truth) to the uttermost of my power shall be fulfilled. This
joy therefore have I chosen: this also if ye shall have, ye shall have sincere
and perfect Joy. A. But the first exposition is best to to liked.

12. This is my commandment, that ye love together as I have loved you.

M. Because he had spoken of the keeping of his commandments, he repeateth
by occasion his commandment and more largely speaks of the vsinge of mutual
love, of the which also he spoke a little before. C For seeing it is meet
to direct our life according to the commandment of Christ, we must first
of all consider what he wills and commands to be done. And he says that
above all things he delights to have mutual love among the faithful By
order we must have first the love and reverence of God but because the true
probation thereof is love toward our neighbor, he specialle makes mention
of the same. Bv. As if Christ should say, Some command one thing and some
another, and there is neither form nor end of commandments: but I commend
unto you only love: love one another.

C. And as before in a general form of doctrine, so now in a particular he
sets before us an example to follow. For he loved all his Disciples to the
end they should in like manner love one another. B. And al his commandments
are finished in this only commandment of mutual love.

13. Greater love has no man than this: that a man bestow his life for his
friends

C. Christ sometime commends the greatness of his love toward us, that he
might thereby the better establishe and confirm the trust of our salvation:
but now he goes farther, that he might inflame us by his example to love
our Brethren.

Notwithstanding he Joins boath together.

For he would have us to taste by Faith the exceeding sweetness of his
goodness: then by this reason he allureth us to the study and desyer of love.
Ephe. v.ij,
So in like manner the Apostle Paul, says, Walk in love even as Christ
has loved us, and has given him self an oblation and a sacrifice of a sweet
smell unto God. i. Ioh, 3.16
A. Also saint John says, Hereby know we love because he has given his life
for us, and we ought to give our lives for our brethren. C. God might have
redeemed us with his word, in a moment, if so be for our sakes it had not
seemed better unto him, by not sparing his only begotten son. to declare in
his person, what great care he has for our salvation. Now they must have to
hard and stoany hearts, which will not be mollefyed with such unspeakable
sweetness of Gods love. Bv. Man has nothing in this world more pretiouse
than life.

He had rather hasard his riches and whatsoever else he has in this world
rather then to suffer his life to come into peril. Math. i6, 26.
Whereupon the Lord says in the Gospel, what does it profit a man if he
win the whoal world, and lose his own soul? Or what shall a man give to
redeem his own soul withal? Wherefore among men there is not a greter token
of love then if a man give his life for his friend. Therefore great and
unspeakable is the love of the son of God toward us by which he voutsafed to
dye for us. Romans v.x.
C Notwithstanding it may be demanded how Christ dyed for his frindes, seeing
that we were his enemies before he reconciled us, euenas the Apostle Paul
testifies. C. For he having satisfied for sin by the sacrifice of his death,
put away quite the enmity which was between God and us. The solution of this
question may be taken out of the sixteen verse of the third Chapter going
before: where we said, that in respect of our selves there is enmitye beteene
God and us, until such time as our sins are abolished by the death of
Christ: but we then said that the cause of this grace exhibited in Christ, was
the everlasting love of God, by which also he loved his enemies. A. Christ
therefore dyed for his freindes who notwithstanding were unjust. For so says
Peter, Christ dyed once for sins the just for the unjust to bring us unto God.

14. Ye are my friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you.

Bv. Christ requires in the faithful a notable love and desyer of Godliness
lest they should boaste in vain that Christ dyed for the salvation of the
world they in the mean time living to the world: which they are wont to do
which are persuaded that the Gospel bears with sins, and that Christian
liberty, is leave to sin. They Judge and do far otherwise, who truly love
Christ.

C. But Christ means not, that we have gotten such honor by our own
merit: but only shows upon what condition he receives us into his favor
and votsafeth to account us as his friends: euenas he said, a little before,
If ye keep my commandments, ye shall abide in my love.

For the helthfull grace of God has appeared to all men, teaching us that
denying ungodliness and worldly lusts we should live soberly and righteouslye
and Godly in this present world. But profane and wicked men, who by wicked
contempt of the Gospel do wax wanton against Christ do renounce his
freinshippe.

If ye do whatsoever I command you. M. He says not If ye do whatsoever I
do, but If ye do whatsoever I command you. Christ did many things which
he has given to us in commandment. He fasted forty days: but he did not
command us to do the like.

Bv. In these words therefore he commends unto us the Euaungelical
precepts, Math. 15.3
and not the traditions of men which in another place he sharpelye reprehendeth.

15. Henceforth call I not you servants, for the servant knoweeth not
what his Lord does: but you have I called friends for all things that I
have heard of my Father, have I made known unto you.

C. By another argument he declares his love toward his Disciples namely, for
that he made him self wholly known unto them, euenas there is always familliar
communication among friends As if he should say, I have brought much more
unto you than a mortal man commonly brings unto his servants.

M. For that which friends were wont to do, that I have done unto you. For I
have hid none of those things from you, which I have heard only and secretly
of my Father, but have revealed them all to your conscience.

C. Therefore let this be a pledge of my love toward you, that lovingly, and
friendly, I have declared unto you those secrets of heavenly wisdom wiche I
have heard of my father. Bv. This serves greatly for our consolation and
comfort. For by our nature and nativity we are enemies unto God, servants of
the Deuell and of sin, men ignorant of God and of his counsels, yea, and of
our own salvation, but the son of God dyed and suffered for us of enemies he
has made us friends and of servants he has made us household Sons? to whom
by the spirit and the preaching of the Gospel, he opens all the mysteries
and secrets of the Father, in such wise that they can be. Ignorant of none of
those things which appertain unto sons to know. Otherwise there are many
counsails and works of God which are neither profitable to be known nor yet
of men to be desyered. C. Therefore it is certain that Christ did not make
all things known to his Disciples which he knew him self: neither was it
possible for them to attain to the heith of such misteryes. And seeing the
wisdom of God is incomprehensible he has given by measure to every one so
much as is necessary to knoweledge. Therefore when he says that he has
revealed all things it ought to be restrained to the person and office of a
Mediatoure. He has made him self a mean between God and us. who has
received all out of the secret sanctuary of God, by which he has delivered
unto us as it were from hand to hand. Therefore Christ left nothing vntoulde
unto his Disciples which appertains to our salvation, or which were
necessary for us to know: but faithfully dispensed them euenas he had received
them of the father.

C. It is then a notable title of the Gospel which we have here of the Gospel
that the heart of Christ is there said to be revealed that we need not to be
doubtful of his love. There is noe cause why we should desyer to ascend above
the Clouds, or wish to go down into the deep to seek the sertainty of our
salvation: let this testimony of love satisfy us which is contained in the
Gospel: because the same will never deceive.

Moses said unto the ancient people What nation is so great unto whom the
Gods come so nere unto them, Deuteronomy. 4.7.
as the Lord our God is nere unto us in all that we call unto him for. Bv.
But we are much more noble and excellent in that God has wholly expressed him
self in his son. Bv. Where are then those good fellows which falsely affirm
that the Lord has not given all things unto his Church? Hereupon also they
take occasion to establishe and appoynte what they list in the Church: as
though he would reveal that by them unto us which he would not reveal by his
own son.

A like matter I warrant you. Truth says that all things are delivered unto
us: Godliness tells us that the Apostle conceleth nothing from the church
but that they faithfullye delivered all things unto the same, and left them
afterward in writing least they should be forgotten. A. For Paul also
testifies that he delivered unto the faithful all the counsel of God. C. By
which their wicked ingratitude is condemned who being not content with the
wonderful wisdom of the Gospel, Acts. 20.27
proudlye run to new speculations.

16. Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and ordained you to go and
bring forth fruit, and that your fruit should remain: that whatsoever ye
ask of the Father in my name he may give it you.

Bv. Now, lest the Disciples should over, Joy, and wax proud, for that they
had heard, them selves of enemies to be made friends: and the sons of of God
by the death of Christ, C. He more plainly shows that it ought not to be
attributed unto their own merit but to his grace, that they are come to so
great honor. For when he denies himself to be chosen of them it is as much
as if he should say that whatsoever they have it is not gotten by their own
strength and Industery. The common sort do feign here a certain concourse of
the divine grace: and also of human will: but this Antithesis or comparisonne
e have chosen you, I am not chosen of you, does wholly callenge thae unto
Christ aloane which they were w^nt to divide between him and man: as if it
had been said that man is not moved of his own accord to seek after
Christ, until he were first sought Here is nothing spoken concerning the
common election of the Godly, by which they are adopted the sons of God? but
of that particular election, by which he had chosen his Disciples to the
office of preaching the Gospel, Luke 6. xiij
as is to be seen in Luke, and in another place it is said Have I not chosen
you twelve and one of you is a deuell. John. 6.70
C. But if so be they were chosen freelye without any desert one their part to
the Apostolical office, it is most sertaine that the same election is much
more free, by which of the sons of wrath and of the cursed seed, we are made
heirs of everlasting life. Moreover Christ in this place so commends his
grace by which the Apostles were chosen, that therewithal he Joins that
first election, by which they were grafted into the body of the Church and in
these words he generallye comprehends all that dignity whereunto he had
advanced them. But yet nevertheless we confess that ge speaks specially
of the Apostleship. For the purpose Christ is to stir up his Apostles
faithfully and constantlye to discharge their office,

He takes occasion of exhortation from that free favor into the which he
received them. For the more we are bound unto the Lord, the more fervent we
ought to be to do those duties which he requires at our hands: otherwise
we cannot escape the vice of wicked ingratitude.

Whereby: there is nothing which ought to move us more to live a holy and a
Godly life, then when we know that we have al things from God, and nothing of
our selves, and that as well the beginning of our salvation, as all the parts
that come of the same, do flow from his free grace and mercy. A. For every
good gift, and every perfect gift is from above, coming down from the
Father of lyghtes. C. And how true this scentence of Christ is, it may hereby
apeeare, Iam. i. 17
that Christ choose them to be his Apostles, which might seem of all other to
be most foolish. Howebeit in their person he would have a perpetual monument
of his grace to be seen. ^ Cor, 4, 2
For as the Apostle Paul says, What man shall be found meet to go on that
message, by which God reconcileth mankind unto him self? And what man is he
which can bear the person of God? Therefore it is only Christ which by his
election makes us meet.

For this cause Paul brings his Apostleship from grace. Romans i, 5.
By whom (says he) we have received grace and the office of the
Apostleshippe. Also he says that he was chosen to be an Apostle, Gala, i, 15
even from his mothers womb. And because we are unprofitable servants, they
which seem most to excel, shall be unmeet for the lest part of their
calling, until they be chosen. So that the more he is advanced to honor, the
more let him know he is bound unto God. B. And this is a manifest place
against such as are enemies unto the grace of God, i. Cor, 4, 7
and do mayntaine merits. For what have thou (says the Apostle) which thou
have not received.

And ordained you to go. C. Election is secreate until it be manifested in
deed, when a man is enjoined an office to the which he was ordained before:
Election to Apostleship.
even as the Apostle Paul, after he had said that he was chosen from his
Mothers womb, strayte after adds, Gala, i. i5
that he was made an Apostle, when it seemed so good unto the Lord.

So the Lord testifyeth that Jeremy was known unto him, before he was in his
Mothers womb, whom notwithstanding in his time he called to the Prophetical
office.

Notwithstanding it may be that some man may come rightly prepared for the
office of teaching: and it is already ordained in the Church, that no man be
called but he which is endued with necessary gifts. i, Tim 3, 2 Titus, i, 7
A. Even as we may see by those things which Paul requires to be in a
Bishop. But in that Christ makes him self the aucthour of boath, it is no
marvel: for so much as the Father works not, but by him, and he works
with the Father. Therefore as well the election as the ordination is common to
boath.

To go and bring forth fruit. C. Now he shows wherefore he made mention of
his grace, namelye, that he might make them more cherefull unto their work.
The dignitye of the Apostleship was not an idle office, and therefore it
behooved them to fight and strive with great perrilles. Christ therefore
pricketh them foreward, lest they should shonne labor, perrilles, and
troubles. M. He says not, I have ordained you to be Princes, and Kings, and
to have domination of the whole world: but, To go and bring forth fruit.
Neither does he make any difference between them and others, but makes all
subject unto his calling. The Bishop of Rome has ordained such in the Church
at this day, as go not to bring fruit to the kingdom of GOD, but gather
tribute and taxes, and to be nothing else but burdens to the earth, and
consumers of fruit. These are Trees ordained not to bear, but to devour
fruit. And this ought not to seem strange to any man, for they are not
branches of the true vine, but of the wild vine. C. Furthermore, Christ
reasons here of the effect when he says, To bring forth fruit, meaning
hereby that their labors shall not be vain and unprofitable, if so be they be
ready and wylling to obaye.

For he does not here only prescribe what their vocation does require: but
also, least they should be wearye and could, he promises unto them
prosperous success. For it cannot be that any man should use pains and
diligence at his work, except he hope that his labor will be profitable.

It can not be uttered how necessary this consolation is against so many
temtations which daily happen to the Ministers of Christ. Therefore so
oftentimes as they seem to loase their labor, let them remember this, that
Christ will at the leangth bring to pass that their labor shall not be in
vain. For then specially this promise takes place, when there appears no
fruit.

And that your fruit should remain. C. Here it may be demanded, why Christ
says that this fruit shall be perpetual. Because the doctrine of the Gospel,
wynneth fowls unto Christ, that they may inherit everlasting life, this
seems to be the perpetuitye of the fruit. But this sentence may be farther
extended: as, that the Church shall stand unto tee end of the world.

For the labor of the Apostles at this day also does fructefye: and the
preaching of Ministers belongs not unto one age, but the Church shall
increase, insomuche that after their death, new profit shall come.

A. Whereupon Peter speaks thus, I will ever give my diligence, that ye may
have wherewith to stir up the remembrance of these things after my
departure. 2. Pet. i, 15,
C. When he calls it their fruit, he speaks as though it were gotten by
their industrye, i, Cor. 3, 7,
whereas notwithstanding Paul says, that they which plant, and they which
water are nothing.

And in deed the creation of the Church is such an excellent work, that the
glory thereof ought not to he ascribed unto men. But because the Lord
declares his power by the hands of men, lest they should labor in vain,
he is wont also to ascribe that unto them which is proper unto him self.

That whatsoever ye ask in my name. M. This serves greatly to the comforting
of the minds of the Disciples, when they know that they are not only called
of Christ to go and to bring fruit, but also in fructefying to have free
access unto the Father.

C. Therefore this part was not added as, not appertayning to that which went
before, as it may seem to be. For seeing the office and labor of teaching
does far surpass the strength of man, Satan gives many assaults against the
same, which they are never able to abide, but by the strength and power of God.

Thereforee ^st the Apostles should be discouraged, Christ stays them up
with a notable comfort: As if he should say, If ye shall have more work than ye
shall be able to finishe in your office, my Father will help you, whose hand is
pressed and ready to help you, so often as ye desire the same in my name. And in
very deed, whereas some teachers give over their office, either for that they
are sleuthful, or else because they despair and are discouraged, it comes so
to pass because they are not exercised in fervent prayer.

Wherefore let this promise of Christ stir us up to call upon God. For
whosoever knows that the success of this work comes only from God, he
will offer his labor unto him with fear and trimbling: and contrariwise if a
man distrusting his labor, do neglect the help of God, or when he comes to
the pushe, does cast away his spear and shield, he shall profit nothing.
Finally these two vices must be shunned, namelye, arrogance and distrust:
because as they do carelesl^ye forsake the help of God, who think that they
have already the matter in their own hand, so also in many straites they
faint, because they do not consider that they fight armed with the power of
God, under whose banner they fight.

17. This command I you that ye love together.

C. This also was added in due and convenient order, to the end the Apostls
might know that mutual love was specially required to be in the Ministers,
Concord builds up Gods Church
whereby they might build the Church of God, with concord. For there can be
no greater let, than when every one labors by himself, and do not ioyntlye
confer and labor together in one work. Except therefore the Ministers have
brotherly love among them selves, whatsoever they take in hand it shall not
prospere, so that the building of Gods Church shall not go forewarde.

Bv. Therefore the words of the Lord are thus much in effect, I would not
have you which are my Disciples, to follow men which are given unto the
world, which do hate and devour one another, for the love of Riches and
honor: I would not have you after that sort to contend among your selves,
because the world always conte^deth with you. But rather I will and command
you, to clea^e and join together in the sweet bond of love. That love and
mutual concord shall bring to pass, that ye shall the more easilye and
stronglye bear the hatered and persecutions of the world.

R. Let this therefore move you to love one another, because ye shall have none
in the world which love you truly and sincerelye: no, the world shall rather
hate you. Wherefore see that ye love one another.

18. If the world hate you, Ye know that it hated me before it hated you.

M. The dilligent reader may hereby perceive that the Lord omitted nothing at
his departure, which might either instruct, either move, either exhort, or else
confirm and comfort his Disciples. Hitherto he had taught, admonished and
comforted them diverse, and sundry ways.

C. After therefore he had armed them to the battle, he also exhorts them
to patience. For the Gospel cannot so soon be preached, but the world is by
and by on a roar. Wherefore it can never be that Godly teachers should be
free from the hatered of the world.

A. For if so be so many as will live Godly in Christ Jesus, 2. Tim, 3, i2
shall suffer persecution, how can they escape the Cross, which preach the
word of truth which is hated of the whoale world. C. Christ therefore in good
time gave this admonition to his Apostls, lest the same might have happened to
them which commonly befalls unarmed and ignorant Soldiers, who for want of
skyll, are very boulde before they see their enemies, but when they come to
the battle, they turn their backs and run away.

And Christ does not only forewarne his Disciples, lest any new or soddaine
matter should happen unto them, but also confirms them by his example: as if
he should say, I have exhorted you that above all things ye seek to love
one another: the which shall cause you dillygently to execute your office, to
the which I have chosen you. But I know that the world will be as troublesome
to you as it has been to me. Therefore, when the world shall requite you
with deadly hatered for so great a benefit* which you bring unto them,
consider that it has also hated me, which am your Master, and far more
excellent than you.

Bv. By the world he understands men living in the world, and following the
desires of their flesh, judging all things after the fashion of this world,
who are ignorant of God, and of the misteryes of the kingdom of God.

And these men are of two sorts: Some are Hipocrites, who would seem to be
followers of virtue, to hate unrighteousness, and to be the true worshippers
of the true God, by the stoodye and love of true Religion: when as in very
deed they are dissemblers, neglectours of virtue, supersticious men, and vain
worshippers of God by traditions of men. Such were the Pharisees among the
Jews.

Othersome are Epicures, which neither embrace righteousness, nor regard
honestye, only following the flesh, and the pleasures of the same: and if any
among them seem to be honest, yet notwithstanding, they are worshippers of
Idolles, and contemners of the true worship of God.

Such were the most part of the Gentiles. And this world, or rather worldly
men, cannot choose but hate the preaching of the Gospel, and the Preachers of
the same. For they do greatly accuse and condemn supersticion, false
righteousness, pleasures, good intencions, hypocrisy, and impietye: they
preach Christ the true righteousness, and saving health, they exhort to
holiness: and they them selves live purely and Godly, repose their trust in
God, and look for the life of the world to come. C. But such must be armed by
the example of Christ. For it is not meet that seeing he was hated of the
world, they which represent his person, should have the world their
friend.

Before it hated you. A. Concerning the hatered of the world against Christ and
his Ministers, read the seventh Chapter going before, beginning at the seventh
verse.

19. If ye were of the world, the world would love his own: Howbeit,
because ye are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world,
therefore the world hates you.

B. Although worldly men do never truly love one another, because every
one seeks only for him self: yet notwithstanding they detest nothing more
than the sincere love of God. Hereunto they are driven by Satan their Prince,
that oulde enemy of God. Whereupon if so be the Apostles had not been chosen
out of the world, and endewed with the spirit, which is an enemy to the
Prince of this world, although they had not been beloved of the men of this
world, yet notwithstanding they had been borne withal, and loved of some.

But they seeking the glory of God, styrred up the whoale world against them,
that is to say, all those which were not endued with the spirit of God.

C. This therefore is another consolation, that the Apostles were therefore
hated of the world, because they were selected and chosen out of the same. And
this is their true felicitye and glory, because after this manner they have
escaped out of destruction, for this world is even vowed to destruction. i.
Cor. xi, 32
Herevppon the Apostle says, When we are judged, we are corrected of the
Lord, lest we should be condemned with the world.

Now if they were elected out of this world, it follows that they were part
of this world, and that they were separated by the only mercy of God from
the rest: Gala. i. 4,
A. Even as the Apostle Paul shows in these words, Which gave him self
for our sins, to deliver us from this present evil world, according to the
will of God, and our Father.

M. Here we see the cause, for the which false and counterfaite doctrine, is
more easilye received of men, than that which is true. For the world loves his
own. But every one is a liar. Psa, 116, xi


It is no marvel therefore if the world favor the teachers of lies and
errors, i. John, 4, 5
and be envious to the rest. A. Whereupon Saint John says, They are of the
world: therefore the world hears them. Therefore it cannot be but that they
shall have continual war with men, which will show them selves to be the
faithful Ministers of Christ.

C. Yet notwithstanding that exhortacion of Saint Paul is not repugnaunt with
this Doctrine, Romae ii, i8
when he says, So much as in you lies, have peace with all men.

For the exception which is added, is as much as if he had said, that we must
look what is lawful and meet for us to do, lest we seeking to please the
world, suffer corruptions and abuses of the same. For the same Apostle says
in another place, Do I seek to please men? For if I had hitherto pleased men,
Gala. i. x
I had not been the servant of God. But there may yet another question be
moved. For we see that the wicked which are of this world, are not commonly
hated, but also detested and abhorred of the greater part. Here the world
loves not his own. I answer, Earthlye men which are lead by the scence and
motion of the flesh, do never truly hate sin, but only so far forth as
they have a care for their own commodity and loss. Howbeit, the purpose of
Christ was not to deny but that there was mortal war and contencion among
those of the world: only he minded so show that the world hated nothing but
that which belonged to God in the Faithful. And hereby also it does appear:
how fondly the Annabaptistes do err, who gather by this argument aloane, that
they are the servants of God, because they displease the greater sort of men.

20. Remember the word that I said unto you, The Servant is not greater than
the Lord: If they have persecuted me, they will also persecute you. If they
have kept my saying, they will keep youres also.

Remember the word that I said. M. Concerning this word of Christ, read the
sixteen verse of the thirteen Chapter going before. C. This is a confirmation
of the sentence going before, where Christ said that he was hated of the
world, who notwithstanding was more excellent than his Disciples. For it is
not meet that the condition of the servant should be better than his
Masters.

M. By this place we are taught, how much it becomes us not only to hear
the word of God, but also to remember the same. For as it is not sufficient to
have money for the present time, except thou keep the same also for necessary
uses: so also we must think of the word of the Lord. To hear the word of
Christ, and not keep the same in mind, is as if a man should get money, and
by and by wast and spend the same. The words of Christ must be kept for
necessitye to come. Also we see that the Apostles were the servants of
Christ, although he made account of the^, not as of servants, but as of
friends.

If they have persecuted me. Bv. As if he should say, If they have not spared
me, which am your Lord and Prince, excellent and mighty boath in word, and
also in power, but have greatly persecuted me, it is not like that they will
spare you which are far inferior unto me.

If they have kept my saying. C. When he had spoken of the persons, he makes
mention also of doctrine. For there is nothing that troubles the Godly more,
than when they see the doctrine of God to be prowdlye contempned of men. M.
He must needs be a very proud Disciple, which persuades him self, that
he can so deliver the doctrine of truth unto the world, that those things
which he teaches shall be received and kept: when Christ him self missed of
the same. If any man demand saying to what end then preached he, and why did
he command his Disciples to preach this word so hated and despised of the
world? We answer First there were many of the elect which had received the
same word of truth, for whose sake it was meet that the Gospel should be
publicly taught.

Secondlye, it was necessary that the truth should be set before the
Reprobates, to the end they might have no excuse of their unbelief: even as
it shall be showed in the two and twentye, and four and twenty verses
following. When Christ says your doctrine, and mine, it is to be referred to
the Ministerye. There is but one only teacher of the Church which is
Christ: but he would have his Doctrine of the which he was the first
Minister, to be preached by his Apostles.

A. Whereupon in the seventeen Chapter following, he calls his word
theyrs, when he says, Nevertheless, I pray not for them aloane: i. Pet. 4.
i5
but for them also which shall believe on me through their word.

21. But all these things will they do unto you for my names sake, because
they have not known him that sent me.

M. He now shows the principal cause of the hatered and persecution of his
Disciples by the world, namelye, the mousterous madness that is in the
world, being so outrageous against the doctrine of salvation, through
ignorance. For no man could wyttinglye presume to withstand GOD.

Therefore it is ignorance and blindness, which makes the world so boulde
as to resist Christ.

We must always then have a consideration of the cause: and there is no true
consolation any where else in the testimony of a good conscience.

Bv. For it is a glorious thing for Christ's sake, and the profession of the
truth, to be in perrill, to be hated of men, and to suffer persecution.

Again, it is a foul thing to be afflicted for evil doing.

For therefore says the Apostle Peter, See that none of you be punished as a
murderer, or as a Thief, or an evil doer, or as a busye body in other men's
matters. If any man suffer as a Christian man, let him not be ashamed, but let
him glorifye God on this behalf.

For herevppon we ought to be moved to give GOD thanks: because when the
world perrisheth in his own blindness, GOD gives his light unto the
Faithful: even as the palpable darkness compassed the Aegiptians round
about, when the Children of Israel were in the manifest light.

Also we must noate, that the hatred of Christ comes for want of
understanding, when GOD is not known. For unbelief is always blind. Not that
the wicked understand nor know nothing: but because all their knowledge is
confounded, and sodainlye vanishes away.

For my names sake. M. Here let us consider what difference there is between
God and the world.

Before God those things which the Apostles ask in the name of Christ, they
receive: before the world the name of Christ is the cause why the Apostles are
hated. Both these, the Apostle felt, and after them the true Ministers of the
Gospel.

Because they have not known him that sent me. CYR. By this word sent, is mente
the whoa^ mystery of the Incarnation.

Bv. And it must needs be that boath the Father and the Mystery of the
Incarnation be unknown when his name is odiouse, by whom the Father is known
and the causes of the sendinge understood.

M. But who sent Christ? God the Father. Therefore the high Preistes, Scribes
and Phariseis knew not God They could not know the Father, because they
knew not the son whom he had sent.

R. They bragged of God, and bosted that they were the true worshippers of God:
but they knew not God. For he which will know God, must know him by his
word, and not by his own Immaginations and dreams. i. John. 3.1
M. Even so before he said unto them. Ye neither know me nor my Father, if ye
had known me ye would have known my Father also.

Seeing therefore the world is ignorant of God, it ought not to seem
strange if so be the name of Christ be odiouse unto the childeren of this
world and if for his sake the Faithful are made a mocking stock. But let this
saying of saint John comfort them, Beehold what love the father has bestowed
on us, that we should be called the sons of God.

For this cause the world knows us not, because it knows not him. What is
Christ I pray you, in the eyes of the world without the knoweledge of God the
Father, but mere blasphemy: And what are the faithful servants of Christ,
but a superstitiouse people. For the which cause the unbelievers and wise men of
this world, have made them always a jesting stock. But concerning the
ignorance of God in the Jews, read in the seventh chapter going before and
the twenty eight verse

22. If I had not come and spoken unto them, they should have had no sin:
but now have they nothing to cloak their sin withal.

M. He seemed to excuse the unbelief of the Jews and also their hatered which
they bare against him and his disciples by this that he said, But al these
things shall they do unto you for my names sake because they have not known
him who has sent me as though they had not done all things of malice but of
Ignorance.

For this cause he added these words, C. lest any man should think that
this served to excuse their falte: and he shows that they were maliciouslye
blind: euenas if a man should shut his eyes that he might not be
constrained to see the light.

For otherwise it might have been objected, unto Christ, if so be they know
not thy father, how comes it to pass that thou do not remedy their
error? Why dyddest thou not prove whether they wear unapt to be taught
ye, or not?

He Answers that he has done the duty of a good and faithful teacher,
but without profit, because malice would not suffer them to come unto a
sound mind.

Bv. As if he should say: If I had not come, and had so expresselye and
plainlye opened unto them the misteryes of the kingdom of GOD and the
counsel and love of my Father, they should have had no sin: but now,
seeing I the son of God have descended from heaven, and have expounded all
the mysteries of Gods kingdom, and they them selves have heard and
understood all things, and yet would neither know nor understand them, it
cannot seem ignorance which is maliciouse obstinacy and most wicked contempt
of the known truth.

C. In these words also Chrrst seems to affirm, that only unbelief is
sin. And there are some which so think. For because Faith remitteth and
wypeth away all sins, they say that there is but one sin of unbelief
which damneth.

This is truly spoken: because unbelief does not only keep men from being
delivered from the desert of condemnation, but also is the well spring and
cause of all euels. But all that disputation appertains nothing at all to
this present place. For the name of sin is not taken generally, but for the
circomstaunce of the cause in hand: as if Christ should have said, that their
ignorance was inexcusable, because they had maliciously rejected God in his
person: euenas if we should call him giltlesse, just, and pure, whom we would
absolve from one only fault, of ye which he was guilty Therefore this
absolution of Christ: is restrained to one kind of sin because he takes
from the Jews the pretense of ignorance in the contempt and hatered of the
Gospel. Notwithstanding there aryseth yet a new question: as thus.

Was not the unbelief which was before the coming of Christ, sufficient to
condemn men? And they are mad men which gather amiss of this place, that
whosoever dyed before the coming of Christ without faith, were in a doubtful
case, until such time as Christ manifested him self unto them. As though
there were not many places of Scripture which testify that the only testimony
of conscience was sufficient for them to condemnation. Romans 5, 14,
Death (says Saint Paul) rayned in the world until Moses. Romans 2, 12
And in another place he says that they shall peryshe without Law, which
have sinned without the Law.

What then is the meaning of Christ? There is in these words a concession or
granting because he means that the Jews have now nothing any more to excuse
their fault withal, seeing that wittingly and willingly they had rejected the
life offered unto them. And so the excuse which he grants unto them, does
not quyte absolve them, but does only extenuate the greatness of the
wickedness according to this saying, Lu. i2.47.
The servant which knows his masters will and does not the same shall be
beaten with many stripes.

For it was not the purpose of Christ to promise pardon unto others, but to
keep under his enemies which had obstinately rejected the grace of God,
whereby it might plainly appear that they were unworthy of all pardon and
mercy.

And we must noate that he speaks not of his bare coming, but of that
coming which was Joined with doctrine. Neither was it the presence of his body
that did so much condemn them as did the contempt of his doctrine, the which
made them clean without excuse And under their person he minded to make all
others afeard, which do either reject the truth of God offered unto them, or
else do opugne or withstand the same when they know it. But although terrible
vengeance hangs over their heads. Christ notwithstanding has rather
respect hear unto his Disciples, that he might encourage them with the
undoubted hope of victory, lest at any time they should give place unto the
malice and wickedness of the wicked. For when we hear that such destruction
shall be, we may then tryumphe, euenas it were in the midst of the battle.

23. He that hates me, hates my Father also.

M. Here seems to be a transposition of matter. For this sentence seems to
appertain unto those things which he speaks by and by concerning the hate
of him and of his father: and therefore not to be set in his proper place.
But whether it be transposed or no it is a notable place, by which we are
taught that no man hates the doctrine of the Gospel but he hates God him
self also Many profess otherwise with their mouth.

For when they abhor the Gospel they will seem notwithstanding to be
excelent worshippers of God: but they are dissemblers: for in their hearts
lurketh the contempt of God. Thus it comes to pass that by the light of his
doctrine he bewrays the wickedness and hipocrisy of many. Concerning the
which matter read the third and fifte Chapters going before. M. And this is
the common error of the whole world that men think that they know, love, and
worship God without Christ: and that they are not ignorant of GOD that they
do not reject him, and hate him, when they are Ignorant of his son, when
they reject and hate him. Therefore by this saying of Christ they are
condemned as haters of God which detest the truth of Christ's doctrine, worse
than they do a Dog or serpent whether they be Jews, Turks, or false
Christians. C. This place Therefore agreeeth with those which we have seen
before as this, He which euel does hates the light. John. 3, x John. 5.23.
Also, He which honoreth not the son, honoreth not the father which sent him.

24 If I had not done among them the works which noe other man did, they
should have had no sin, but now have they boath seen, and hated not only
me but also my father.

M. Christ takes away from the Scribes and Phariseis his enemies all excuse,
not only for that he came unto them and spoke unto them, but also because he
had wrought so many wonderful works in the midst of them, even before their
face, Euenas if Christ should have said.

Bv. My works which I have wrought among them do manifestly prove that I am
the true Son of God the father, from whom I am not divided in escence Neither
has there been any from the beginning of the world which has wrought so many
and so great miracles. Moses truly wrought many great miracles in Egypt, so
did Elizeus, and so did other of the Prophets, but yet no man was ever
comparable unto Christ.

For he did all things by his own power, neither did he hurt to any man but
profited al men C. For in this Christ excelled in miracles, because he was not
a servant as were the rest, but was properly the authoure himself. For he
used his own name, his own empery, and his own power to work miracles.

Moreover by the name of works, he comprehends all those tokens of his
divine glory which he showed. For both by miracles, and by the power of the
holy Ghost and by other documentes also he plainly proved him self to be the
Son of God.

But now have they both seen. C. Now he concludes that his enemies cannot
escape by any manner of excuse because they had despised his power which plainly
apeared to be divine. For God had revealed his Majesty in his son: wherefore
they should say in vain that they had to do only with a mortal man.

If he had only said, But now they have seen and not believed, their falt
had been the less but when he says that they saw and hated boath him and
his father he takes from them all excuse. C. This place teaches us how
attentive we ought to be in considering the works of God, in the which when
he declares his power, he would have that honor given unto him which is due.
Whereupon it follows that they are unthankful unto God, which obscure his
gifts, or contemptuouslye over pass them.

25. But this comes to pass that the word might be fulfilled that is
wrighten in their Law. They hated me wih out cause.

C. That which is supernatural, seems to be Incredible. But there is nothing
more unreasonable than to hate God. Therefore Christ says that their minds
were so stuffed with malice, that they hated without a cause, to the end he
might amplifye their wickedness. And he alleges a place cut of the Psalm
which he says is now fulfilled: not that the same had not happened before unto
David: Psalm. 35.19
but because he would reprehend the obstinate wickedness of that nation, which
continued from age to age without end, as if he should say, that they were
nothing better then their Fathers, which wear enemies unto David without a
cause. M. The Prophet often times complains, as well in his own as in
Christ's name, Psa, 25, 19. Psa. 69.5.
yt he was hated of his enemies without a cause. And this is not without great
consolation, if so be our conscience bearing us witness, we being giltlesse
and innocent, are subject to the unjust hatered of wicked men, so that we can
say with the Prophet and with Christ, They hate me without a cause, Bv. For
that which is spoken of Christ must also be understood of his members. For as
he was hated of them unjustly, and with out deserte, who ought to have loved
him, euenso the world persecuteth the godly for no other cause then for that
they give good counsel, condemn unrighteousness, and commend sanctimony and
a blessed life: for the which they were to be beloved, and not to be hated.

CYR. For no man can tell what cause they had to hate. For what thing worthy of
hatered, did the most meek and loving Lord Jesus commit? He delivered from
destruction, he delivered from the tyranny of the Deuell, he extinguished the
strength of sin, he brought manking out of seruitud and bondage into the
gloriouse liberty of Gods childeren, he has given unto men the participation
of the holy Ghost, and the kingdom of heaven to be our dwelling place.

Wherefore he was rather to be commended of all men than to be hated. But none
of these things could move them For they hated him without any cause, whom
they should most entirely have loved. B. That which is written in the Psalm he
says was written in the Law, because by the name of Law, he understood the
whoale Scripture.

C. Also the whoale doctrine of the Prophets was nothing else, but an Appendix
of the Law. And we know that the Ministry of Moses, continued but till
Christ's time: of the which we have spoken in the seventeen verse of the
eight Chapter going before. Also, he calls it their law, not for honors
sake, but that they might be more sharplye nipt with a familiar title.

As if he should say, they have a Law given unto them as it were by birthright
in the which they see their manners lively drawn forth unto them. M. Where we
have to noate how the wicked, by their wickedness fulfill those things which
are foreshewed in the holy Scriptures.

The Jews knew this place of Scripture: and yet notwithstanding they were so
blinded that they did not perceive that they fulfilled the same by hating
Christ, yea, and if any had toulde them of the same, they would in no wise have
acknoweledged it.

26. But when the comforter is come whom I will send unto you from the father
(even the spirit of truth, which proceeds of the Father) he shall testefie
of me.

Bv. This also pertains to the consolation of the saints in persecutions
which they suffer for the confession and preaching of the truth of the
Gospel. C. For after Christ has showed, that the Apostles ought not to
esteem any whit the less of the Gospel, because the same has many
adversaries, even in the Church it self, now he sets against their wicked
madness, the testimony of the Spirit. As if he should say, the world shall
rage against you, to some your Doctrine shall be a iestinge stock, and othersome
shall deteste and abhor the same: but there shall be no such violent motions
which shall shake the strength of your faith, when the holy Ghost is given unto
you, which shall stablishe you by his testimony. Bv. For I know how hard a
charge it seems unto you to be which I now commit unto you: ye your selves
feel how unapt and unprepared ye are, to take a matter of so great weight
upon you: ye fear I know, this world armed with wisdom, policy, and with
all manner of helps and strength. But I would not have you careful: the holy
Ghost shall be given unto you, which shall give testimony of me in this world,
and that with so great power, that though this world rage never so mightily,
yet it shall prevail nothing.

And this verily is our only comfort and stay, when the world is on a roar
on every side, that the truth of God, being sealed by the holy Ghost in our
hearts, it regards nothing, that is in the world. For if so be it were
subject unto the Judgment of men, our Faith should daily be overthrown a
houndered times,

Therefore we must diligently noate how we must stay our selves in the midest
of so great troubles, namelye thus, because we have not received the spirit of
this world, but the spirit of God, we know what things God gives unto us.
This only witness does mightily repel, disperse and overthrow whatsoever the
world extolleth to obscure and beat down the power and glory of God. Whosoever
shall be endued with this spirit, they have so little cause to be discouraged by
the hatered and contempt of this world, that every one of them shall be
conquerers and ouercommers of the same. A. For this is the victory which
overcomes the world, 1. Ioh. 5.4.
even our faith. In the mean time we must beware yt we do not depend upon men.

For so soon as Faith begins so to wander, yea, so soon as the same
begins to go forth of the sanctuary of God it must needs be miserably
tossed Therefore it must be revoked and brought to the inward and secret
working of the spirit, which the faithful know to be given them from heaven.
And the spirit is said to testify of Christ because it retayneth and keeps
the same faith in him aloan, that we might not seek any part of our salvation
in any other. Moreover he calls the holy Ghost the comforter (that is to say
our Instructor our advocate, and patron,) that we bearing our selves bold
upon his defense should never fear. For Christ went about by this title to
confirm and strengthen our faith lest it should quail in temptations.

whom J will se^d unto you C. He says that he will send his spirit from his
Father, and that the same shall proceed from the Father to make the same of
more authority. For the tstimony of the spirit could not suffice against so
many strong assaults, except we were persuaded yt the same proceeded from god.
Therefore it is Christ which sends his spirit, but out from the heavenly
glory: to the end we might know that the same is not a human gift, but the
assured pledge of Gods grace. But whereas in this place it is called the spirit
of truth, it is to be applied, to the present circumstance. For we must under
stand an Antithesys or comparison, for because without this witness men are
diversely carried this way, and that way, and know not where safely to rest: but
wheresoever he speaks, there he delivers men's minds from all doubting and
fear of error. A. Whereupon the Apostle says, It is God which stablisheth
us with you in Christ, and has anointed us: which has also sealed us, 2. Cor.
i. 2i,
and has given the earnest of the spirit, into our hearts. B. This spirit
works all righteousness and truth in the saints, it gloryfyeth Christ,
making them bold to confess him to be the only savior: yt teaches all
things and makes all those things which Christ has spoken to be
understood: to be short, it leads into all truth, and therefore it is
properly called the spirit of truth.

27. And ye shall bear wittenesse also because ye have been with me from the
beginning.

C. The meaning of Christ in these words is not, that the testimony of the
spirit is such that the Apostles should have the same privately and aloane,
but that he would by them spread the same farther: because they should be the
Instruments of the spirit, euenas he had spoken by their mouth. As if Christ
should have said, Bv. When I say, that the spirit shall bear witness of
me, I would not have you so to understand the same, as though he should
testifye of me, and you hold your peace. By you he shall do al things as by
chosen instruments. For I have chosen you from the beginning to preach, the
Gospel, therefore have I taken you unto me, that ye might testefye of all my
words and deeds. Therefore he shall give testimony of me, and ye shall give
testimony also, insomuche that look what he says, ye shall say the same: he
in your hearts, but you in words, he by inspiring, but you by speaking.

C. Now we see how faith comes by hearing, and yet notwithstanding it has
his certainty from the seal of the spirit. They which do not sufficiently
know the darcknesse of men's minds, think that faith is conceived naturally
by preaching only.

And contrarywyse there are some so far out of their wits that they cannot
abide external preaching. But we see how Christ joins these two
together. Therefore although there be no faith until the spirit of God do
illuminate our minds, and seal our hearts: yet notwithstanding, we must not
seek for visions and Oracles from the clouds: but the word which is near
unto us, in our mouth, and heart, ought to have all our scences occupied and
fastened to the same: Esa, 59.21.
euenas says the prophet Esaias as: I will make this my couenaunte with them
(says the Lord) my spirit which I have put upon thee, and my words which I
have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth
of thy seed, etc. R. So that this place confirms the authority and doctrine
of the Apostles. For the Comforter suffers the Apostles which are men to be
weak still in the flesh: but it makes them mighty in doctrine that their
word might not be humayne but the word of God: for they preach the word of
Christ. C. This clause, Because ye have been with me from the begin. was
therefore added that we might know that the Apostles deserved the more
credit, because they were eye witnesses of those things which they spoke. A, As
we may read in diverse places but specially in the Acts of the Apostles. Acts.
x. 41 2. Pet. i. 16. i. John. i. 1.
C. For the Lord would have us to be so provided for, that nothing which
apertaned to the confirmation of the Gospel might be wanting unto us.

The.xvj. Chapter.
1. These things have I said unto you, because ye should not be offended. C.

CHRIST IN these words shows wherefore he forewarned his Disciples of the
persecution to come, declaring that nothing of those things which he had
spoken was superfluous. For seeing that contencions and battles were prepared
for them, it was meet and convenient that they should be armed and prepared
for the same. And withal he gives them to understand that if so be they were
well instructed in this Doctrine, they should be able to fight. R. Therefore
before Christ comforted his Apostls with the promise of the comforter, which
comfort and confyrmeth the heart in all adversity: and now he wylleth them
to prepare themselves for the Cross to come, lest the wanes of aduersitye
flowing upon them, they should be offended and slide from the truth of the
Gospel. For thus flesh and blood is wont to reason, If this doctrine were
true, it should not have so many adversaries and persecutours: again, if he
were the son of God, and the beloved of God, he should not be overwhelmed
with so many euilles. Against this offense Christ fortefyeth al his Apostles
with his word, foreshewing that they and the Faithful shall suffer
proscription, persecution, excommunication, and be killed, least they should
say as ignorant men are wont to do, I wist not of it.

For this is an oulde custom that the Kings, Princes, and Prelates of this
world, should persecute the word of truth, and by all means afflicte the
Preachers of the word. Luke. 6, 23,
So did they (says he) unto the Prophets which went before you. C. Therefore
that which Christ said then unto the Apostles, is also spoken unto us. And
first of all let us noate that Christ sends not his Apostles into the field
unarmed, and therefore none perish in this warrefare, but through the fault of
their own cowardlinesse. Neither must we differ the time until we come unto
present necessitye, but must rather endeavor our selves, that we being
acquainted and familiarlye accustomed with these words of Christ, may go to
the battle when need shall require. For there is no doubt but that we have
the victory in our hand so long as these admonitions of Christ shall be fast
imprinted in our minds. For when he says, Because ye should not be
offended. he gives us to understand that there is no perryll, least any
thing should turn us out of the right course.

But hereby it appears how few there are which rightlye learn this
doctrine, because they which think that they have this at their fingers ends
without all danger, when they should come to fight hand to hand, fail and
slide away even as ignorant men that know nothing.

Let us therefore arm and fortefye our selves with such weapons as will not
fail in time of need.

M. He is offended, which has had any thing happening unto him contrary to
his expectation.

He which is offended does easylye go back and change his mind. Because
therefore the Lord Jesus sought wholly to exhort his Disciples to constancye
and perseueraunce, lest they should forsake him, but rather should abide in
him the true Vine, as good and fruitful branches, he does very well
foretell them of the persecution to come, lest when the same should come they
might be offended, and so fall away.

Therefore we are here taught that they do reason amiss of Predestination,
which do exclude all dilligent taking heed, to shonne evil. If so be (say
they) the matter be so in destenies, that I shall be offended and fall, it cannot
be let by any means but that I shall be offended and fall, although I shonne
every stombling stoane of offense: if it be not in destinies, then also it
shall not come to pass: and so al caution or taking heed is but vain. If
these things have reason, then is that vain which the Lord has here spoken,
These things have I spoken unto you, because ye should not be offended. But
it is not in vain, because offense may and ought to be avoided.

Therefore this admonition is very profitable, and necessary, if so be we
way and consider how proane we be to fall at every offense and stombling
stoane.

If so be the Apostles ought to fear offense, who had seen so many wonders
done by Christ, what is it that we ought to fear, being inferior unto them?

2. They shall excommunicate you* yea, the time shall come, that whosoever
kylleth you, will think that he does God service.

M. Here he speaks of excommunication, by which the Apostles were to be cast
out by the Rulers of the Jews, out of the Church of God.

C. This was no light offense to trouble their minds that they should be
driven out of the company of the Godly as wicked and naughtye men: and that of
those which host them selves to be the people of God, and gloryed in the
title of the Church. Therefore in that he says they shall be excommunicated,
his meaning is this, They shall cast you out of their Sinagogues, they shall
condemn you of impietye and heresy, they will restrain you of water and
fire, and such necessaryes, they will banishe you and sell your goods, and
they will account you, not for Israelites, but for Gentiles, and Athiestes. C.
For the Godly are subject, not only to persecutions, but also to ignominy
and reproach: Even as says the Apostle Paul, Me thinks that God has set
forth us which are the last Apostles, i. Cor. 4.9.
as it were men appointed unto death: For we are made a gasing stock unto the
world, and to the Aungelles, and to men.

Christ notwithstanding commands to stand fyrme and steadfast against this
temptacion, because though they be thrust out of Sinagogues, yet
nevertheless, they shall abide in the kingdom of God.

The sum is, that we ought not to be discouraged by the perverse judgments of
men, but rather stronglye to bear the opprobrie and shame of the Cross of
Christ: being contented with this one thing, that our cause which men
scornfully condemn, is allowed of God.

Also hereby we gather that the Ministers of the Gospel, are not only evil
entreated of the sworn enemies of the Gospel, but also sometimes sclandered,
and evil spoken of, by those which seem to be of the Church, and of the
houshoulde of Christ, and Pyllers of the Church. The Scribes and high
Priests, by whom the Apostles were condemned, boasted that they were appointed
of God to be the Judges of the Church. And in deed the ordinarye government
of the church was in their hands: and the office of Judging came from God, and
not from me^. But by their tyrrany they had corrupted the whoale order
instituted of God.

Thus it came to pass that the power which was granted unto them to
edifycation, was nothing else but siuyll oppression of the servants of God:
excommunication which should have been a medicine to pourge the Church, was
converted to banishe all impietye out of the same.

The which seeing the Apostles perceived in their age, there is no cause why
we should be afraid at this day of the Popes curse with the which he
thretneth us because of the testimony of the Gospel.

For they can do us no more harm than these old excommunications did unto
the Apostles: nay we ought to desyer nothing more than to be out of that
company, from whence Christ is banished.

But concerning excommunication and the abuse of the same, read the ninth
Chapter going before.

But the time shall come M. Christ shows what great hatered of the world the
Apostles were like to sustain. It might seem a light matter to be expelled
and cast out of the company of some men. For what hurt was it to the Apostle
to be expelled out of the Sinagogues of the Jews? As though they should not
shortly after have gone out of the same, though they had not been expelled.

R. Therefore paraduenture it was tolerable enough for them to suffer
proscription and exile except the wicked should have utterly killed the Godly.
And peradventure it was tolerable that they might also be slain except the
world should acknowledge without blushing that they do wickedly, and should
openly confess that it does therefore kyl the Godly, because they believe in
God and because they have taught that which is godly: but the world is so far
from confessing this that it will rather be thought to do well, and to do
God good service by slaying the godly. This is the true cross.

C. For now of it self it is a very hard matter for the Godly to be cruelly
vexed. but it is much more sharp and greeuouse, that the Iniuryes, which are
done unto the childeren of GOD by the wicked should be counted for just and due
punishments belouging to their faltes But we must be so strong and boulde in a
good conscience, that we must patiently suffer our selves to be so oppressed,
till Christ shall appear from heaven, to defend our and his cause, who will
take vengeance upon those which have not known God.

C. But it is merueile that the enemies of the truth when their own
conscience does accuse them, can bear such a fair show not only before men,
but also challenge unto them selves praise before God, for their most wicked
crueltye.

We answer. Hipocrites although their own conscience does accuse them yet
notwithstanding they always flatter and deceive them selves. They are
ambitiouse, cruel, and proud, but yet they cover all these vices with the
pretense of zeal, by which they promise unto them selves impunitye. To this
also is joined a sertayne furiouse drunkenness, after they have imbrued them
selves with the blood of martyrs.

R. Wherefore the world being wise, will not seem to do evil, to persecute
the word of the Lord nor to kill the true Euaungelistes.

For it professes that it loves and honoreth these, it professes that it
believes the word of the Lord: but it says that it will not bear with
bringers in of new things, with the disturbers of the peace and with the
contempners of human and divine righteousness: and that it does not believe
their word to be the word of God, but rather a fained immagination found out
to trouble and disturb all Religion and love of honestye.

And thus are the godly slain of the world as the authors of all evil, and
that not without show of perswation, and probable reasonne

For Christ also him self was fastened to the Cross, not as the son of God,
but as an enemy unto him.

R. So his disciples were thought unworthy to live upon the earth. A. Wherefore
we being in such straytes, let us embrace the word of the Lord Jesus with a
lively faith, let us in patience possess our souls.

3. And such things will they do unto you: because they have not known the
Father, neither yet me.

C. Christ does not in vain bring his Apostles unto this consideration, that
there is one only cause why the unbelieving do so rage against the godly,
namely, because they know not God. Notwithstanding this is not spoken to
extenuate their fault, but rather that the Apostles might with a good courage
despise their blind madness. R. As if he should say, They boaste of GOD: but
they knew not GOD because they persecute the word of God: And he which
persecuteth the word of God, persecuteth God himself: and knows not God,
although he boaste of him.

For God is known by his word, which is the Son of God. C. Moreover by
these words we are taught, what great wickedness the ignorance of God is,
which makes them to commend and praise murder.

A. The like sentence is to be read in the Chapter going before, which is the
one and twenty verse, the exposition whereof may be applied to this place.

4. But these things have I toulde you that when the time is come, ye may
remember then that I toulde you: These things said I not unto you at the
beginning, because I was present with you.

C. He repeateth that which he had spoken already, that this was no shadowed
Philosophye, but such as was to be practiced and put in use: and that he now
speaks unto them of these things that they might perceive in very deed that
the^ had not been taught in vain. When he says, Ye may remember. first of al
he wills them to lay up in their minds those things which they have
heard, secondly that when use should require, they would be mindful of
them: last of all he gives them to understand, that there was weighty
consideration in this, that he prophesyeth of matters to come.

A. For he did this, to the end they might sertainely believe that he was the
true son of God.

These things said I not to you in the beginning. M. It seems that these
things were spoken to prevent that which might be either spoken or thought.
For they might have thought: If so be these so sharp and greuouse afflictions
shall happen unto us, why did thou not tell us of them before? If so be thou
hadest foretoulde us of these things at the first when thou did call us, we
might have better provided for our selves. He so preuenteth this thought,
that he declares wherefore he told them not in the beginning of these
troubles to come. C. For the Apostles being as yet but young scholars and
weak so long as Christ was with them in the flesh, there gentle and loving
Schoolmaster bare with them, and would not burden them with more then they
might well bear. Therefore they had then no great need of confirmation,
when they lived in peace, and were free from persecutions.

Now he shows that their state must be altered, and therefore exhorts them
to prepare themselves unto the battle: As we may see more at large in the two
and twenty Chapter of Luke.

5. But now I go my way to him that sent me, and none of you asks me
whether, goeste thou?

M. The former part of this verse, may appertain to that which goes before,
and so to be read thus, But these things toulde I you not in the beginning
because I was with you: but now I go unto him that sent me. As if he should
say, But now because I go unto him that sent me, I thought it now a
convenient time to foretell you of these things.

A. But if so be any man desire rather to read it as it lies, then we must
say, C. that the Lord by a notable consolation sought to mittigate the
grief, which the Apostles might conceive by his departure from them: the which
was very necessary. For they which until now had lived peaceablelye and at
ease, were appointed afterward to abide grievous conflictes. What then might
have come to pass, except they had known that Christ was the head of their
salvation. For to go unto the Father is nothing else, but to be received into
heavenly glory, to reign with imperial power, This therefore was set before
them for a solace and remedy of their sorrow, because Christ being absent in
body, shall site, notwithstanding, at the right hand of his Father, to defend
the faithful by his power.

But this seems to be falsely objected a against the Apostles, that they do not
ask whether their master goes: seeing it was the first question which very
earnestly they demanded.

M. For Peeter said unto him, Lord whether go thou? And be him self also
had much talk with them concerning his de parture, not without their
demands, which seemed to tend to this end, that he would plainly show unto
them whether he went.

C. But the solution is easy, namelye, that they so demanded, not to confirm
their minds in Faith, which they ought most chefely to have. Therefore the
sense is this, You hearing of my departure are affeard, not considering whether
I go, nor to what end I go.

M. The very mention of my deperture troubles you, in such wise that you are
very sorowefull in heart.

B. And as for that which I spoke of my kingdom, and glory to come, it does
nothing move you, ye are nothing careful, neither do ye demand any thing
concerning the same: only ye consider this that I shall forsake you in the
flesh, and that the world shall persecute you. C. For he reprehendeth these
to vices in the Apostles, that they were to much addictede to the visible
presence of his flesh, and also because the same being taken from them, they
were exceeding sorowefull, not having any farther respect. The like also
commonly hapeneth unto us. For we always tie Christ unto our senses: and if he
appear not unto us according to our desire, we take occasion to dispayer.

M. For such is our nature and disposition, that when any solace or joy which
we have used for a time, and upon the which we holy depend, is taken from us
by God, to the end we might have better in steed of the same, we are so
discouraged, that we consider nothing at all why and to what end GOD deals
so with us.

The which is even as if Children should so depend upon their Fathers
presence, that they are very sorrowful if at any time they be deprived of
the same for a time: not considering whether their Father goes, and that he
goes for their profit.

A. So at the death of our wife, of our child, and of our friend, we must
always consider whether and wherefore they depart this life.

9 But because I have said such things unto you your hearts are full of
sorrow.

M. As if he should say, because I have spoken unto you of my departure, and
of the hatred with the which the world shall hate you, your hearts are full of
sorrow: the which contrariwise should be comforted and erected, if ye would
rather ask whether I went and would enquire of the glory and power which I
shall receive in going to my Father.

R. But these things seem contrary to that which went before. For a little
before he left with his Apostles his peace and joy, and behoulde now sorrow
arises. But the Lord fulfilleth his promises under a contrary show. He
promises righteousness, but he suffers the faithful to be condemned of
the world of unrighteousness: he promises life, and behoulde death. So he
promised peace, but behoulde trouble of the mind arises, he promises joy,
but there follows sorrow. But this comes not to pass without the secret
counsel of God, that boath the godly might be proved, and the wicked also
blinded.

7. Nevertheless I tell you the truth, it is expedient for you that I go
away: for if I go not away, that comforter will not come unto you: But if I
depart, I will send him unto you.

B. He brings them from the consideration of his departure, to think of his
instante kingdom: M. to the end they considering the profit which they shall
have by his departure, might put away all sorrow and heaviness of heart. C.
Therefore he testifies that his absence shall be profitable, that they might
cease to desire to have him present before their eyes: and he uses the form
of an oath. For because we are carnal, thereis nothing more hard, than to
pluck this preposterous affection out of our minds, by which we pull Christ
out of heaven unto us. And he said that this was profitable for them, because
they could not be endued with the holy Ghost, except he forsake the world.

For this presence of Christ is more profitable and to be desyered of us, by
which he offers himself unto us by the grace and power of his spirit,
than if he were present before our eyes. M. Also let us noate that he says
not, It is good for me that I go away, but It is good for you. Let us well
remember this saying of Christ. For it is proper unto him to do all things
for us, and for our profit, and nothing for himself. The voice of Caiphas
that false high Priest was far otherwise. Ioh, xi. x^
For he said according to his own faction, It is good for us that one man dye
for the people. On the contrary part, the voice of Christ is, It is good for
you. So the Apostle said, Phil, i, 27
I am in a straight betwixt two: having a desire to be loosed, and to be with
Christ: which is much far better: Nevertheless to abidein the flesh is more
needful for you.

Seeing therefore Christ the Son of God was so careful for our profit, let
no man hereafter seek that which is his own, i, Cor, i0, 24
but every man another wealth. M, Therefore Christ ascended to his Father for
our profit, even as for our profit he descended from heaven. For he is
entered into the very heavens, to appear now in the sight of god for us. Heb,
9, 24


But he being in earth, Math 3. i6
could he not send his spirit the which as we know came and rested upon
him when he was baptized, and which was never separate from him? We answer.
C. Christ takes this as granted unto him, that what soever the father has
decreed shall stand. And verily, when the Lord has once showed what he will
have done it is but foolishness to dispute about the possibilitye.

Therefore let it content us to know, that Christ departing corporallye, not
only the holy Ghost, but also the Father and the son, are spirituallye
present with the faithful. R. For Christ had preached much of his kingdom
of life, and of righteousness: but so long as he was present in body, the
Apostles looked for nothing that was in him but that which was carnal: as for
a carnal kingdom, corporal life, and for external righteousness. But after
he was risen again, and ascended into the heavens, it was manifested by the
revelation of the spirit, that the kingdom of Christ is not corporal, nor
his life carnal, i. Pet 2.25
but that his kingdom and life are spiritual, that is, divine and
everlasting. A. For he is the true Shepherde and Bishop of our souls.

8 And when he is come, he will rebuke the world of sin, and of
righteousness, and of judgment.

C. Omitting the variety of expositions, which the obscurenes of this place
has occasioned, we will dilygently and brefely declare the meaning of
Christ in these words. He had promised his spirit unto his Disciples: and
now he commends the excelencie of the gift by the effect, because this
spirit shall not only govern, sustain, and defend them alone: but shall
also more largely shed forth his power and efficacye.

He will rebuke the world of sin. That is to say, he will not remain shut
up in you: but his power shall show forth it self in you to the whole world
Therefore he promises unto them his spirit which shallbe the Judge of the
world, and by which their preachinge shall be so lively and effectual, that it
shall rule and subdue those which before by unbridled liberty went at randam
without fear or awe.

But we must noate that Christ speaks not here of secret revelations, but
of the power of the spirit, which appears in the external doctrine of the
Gospel, and in the outward voice of man. For whereof comes it that the voice
of a man should pearce and enter into men's minds, take root there and
fructefie, making of stoanye hearts fleshie hearts, and renewing men, 2 Cor 3 6
but only because the spirit of Christ quickens the same? Otherwise it
should be a ^ead letter and a vain sound: even as Paull plainly teaches,
when he calls himself the Minister of the Spirit: because God wrought
mightily in his doctrine. The sense and meaning therefore is, that when the
Apostles should be indewed with the spirit, they should also be armed with
heavenly and divine power, whereby they should have jurisdiction and Rule over
the whole world.

But this is rather attributed to the spirit than to them, because they shall
have nothing of their own power, being only ministers and instruments: but
the spirit oenely shall rule in them. Under this name (world) he cemprehendeth
as well those which should be truly converted unto Christ, as hipocrites and
reprobates. For the spirit rebukes men by to ways in the preaching of the
Gospel. For some are seriously touched insomuch that they humble them selves
of their own accord, and do willingly yield them selves unto the Judgment
by which they are condemned.

Other some, althouge they cannot clear them selves, yet notwithstanding they
do not yield with their whole heart, nether submit them selves to the power
and rule of the holy Ghost: but being rather constrained do fret and f^me
inwardely, and being convinced and confounded do not cease notwithstanding to
be obstinate. To rebuke in this place, signifies to convince. As if he should
say, he shall make manifest, that the wrath of God is reveled from heaven
against all flesh, against all mortal men, who although for the most part
they feigned and counterfeyted godliness have held notwithstanding the truth of
GOD revealed unto them, in all impietye and unrighteousness, as says the
Apostle.

C. And the saying of Saint Paul in his fourteen Chapter of his Epistell to
the Corinthians, serves greatly to the understanding of this place: where he
speaks of a lively kind of rebukeing: as when God brings his elect by the
preaching of the Gospel to repentance. In fine, we have here described unto us
in Christ the singular excelency of the holy Ghost: because God by his means
will erecte his tribunal seat to judge the whole world.

9. Of sin because they believe not on me.

C. He says that the judgment of the Spirit does begin at the demonstration
of sin. For this is the begininge of spiritual doctrine, that men are borne
in sin, that they have nothing in them selves but the cause of sin,

As if he should say. The Spirit when he comes shall show and convince,
that sin reigns in the world without me. Wherefore infidelytie is here
named, because it does separate us from Christ, and so brings to pass that
there is nothing left in us but sin.

To be short in these words is condemned the corruption of humane nature,
least we should think that we have any drop of perfection in us without
Christ. M. Therefore we see here that it is expressed by a manifest sentence,
that not to believe in Christ is sin, For it is the commandment of God that
we believe in his son,

10. Of righteousenes be cause I go to my Father, and ye shall se me no more.

C. We must noate here the order of degrees which Christ utters. Now he
says that the world shall be rebuked of (...) righteousness: for men do not
hoongar and thirste after righteousness, nay they disdaynfully reiecte what so
ever is spoken of the same, except they be touched with the feeling of sin.
Specially, we must thus judge of the Faithful, that they cannot profit in the
Gospel, except they be first humbled: the which cannot be without the knowing
of their sins.

It is the proper Office of the Law to call men's Consciences to the Judgment of
God, and to wound them with fear: but the Gospel cannot be rightly preached,
but it must bring from sin to righteousenes, and from death to life. Therefore
it is necessary that it borrow from the Law this first part, of the which
Christ speaks here. Moreover by righteousenesse in this place Christ
understands that righteousness which is given to us by his grace.

Christ says that he gives not this without his fathers consent: and that not
without cause.

For as he rose again for our justification, so now he sits at the right
hand of the Father, that he might use that power which is given to him, and
might so fulfill al things.

In fine, he never sends from his heavenly glory, the odore of his
righteousenesse unto the world: but the Spirit pronounces by the Gospel
that this is one way by which we are counted just.

Therefore this second degree of the conjunction of sin, that the Spirit
might plainly prove and show unto the world what true righteousenesse is:
namely that Christ by his assencion into Heaven, has appointed the kingdom
of life, and now sits at the right hand of the Father, that he may stablish
true righteousness.

A. Therefore there is no other way to obtain true righteousness, than to
embrace the Gospel with true Faith.

For he which truly believes, is truly justified.

11. Of Judgment because the prince of this world is judged already.

C. Judgment in this place signifies right and equity, as in diverse other
places of the Scripture also: and it is the contrary to that which is
disordered, dispersed and confounded. This therefore is the sense, That Satan
so long as he has rule, does mix, disorder, and trouble all things, that
there might be a foul and deformed order of the works of God: but when he is
put from his tyranny by Christ, that then the world is repaired, and good
order begins to appear.

Thus the Spirit rebukes and conuinceth the world of Judgment.

That is to say, Christ having overcome the Prince of Iniquity, restores into
good order those things which before were confounded and out of frame.

M. Satan therefore was overcome by the coming of the sone of God, as by the
more mighty, but that is then known, when by the power of the spirit, the
kingdom of Christ shines in the hearts of mortal men.

A. Concerning the which read in the twelfth Chapter going before, and the
xxxi. verse.

12. I have yet many things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them away
now.

13. Howbeit when he is come which is the spirit of truth, he will lead you
into al truth: He shall not speak of himself, but whatsoever he shall hear
that he shall speak: and he will show you things to come.

M. It appears that the Lord among all other consolations proposed this
before his Disciples as chief, and that he afterward doubled the same,
because they should receive the holy Ghost to be their teacher, comforter, and
Advocate, by whom they should be led and governed in all things.

By this promise he incourageth them to reveal the sorrow and heaviness of
their heart, by which it came to pass that they could not well understand
those things which were spoken.

C. And because there was no other stay but doctrine, upon which they might
rest, he gives them to understand that he has tempered the same according
to their capasitie: As if he should say, If that be not sufficient to
stablishe and stay you which ye have heard of me, stay a while. For
heareafter you being taught by the instruction of the Spirit, shall want
nothing: he shall profit and finish that in you, which is as yet but newly
begone.

M. Here the Ministers of the word have an example to follow, namely that they
them selves might have a consideration of the weakness of others, whom they take
in hand to instruct either in Doctrine or in Dissiplyne, and to burden them
with no more than they ca^ presently bear. For there are sertayne increments
and measures of the gifts of Christ in the minds of the faithful insomuch ye
all men are not capeable of al things. If so be ye should by and by at the
first chopexpounde unto a Jew newlye instructed, the misterye of the holy
Trinity, according to the fullness of our Faith, neither his understanding can
conceive it, nor his memory carye it away.

C. Now it may be demanded what things those were, which the Apostels as yet
were not apt to learn.

The Papists, to thruste in their own inventions, in stead of divine Oracles
do wickedly abuse this place. Christ say they promised new revelations unto
his apostles: Therefore we must not content our selves with the Scriptures
only, above the which Christ called his Disciples.

But seeing Christ houldeth his peace, which of us can say, either, those be
they or, those be they. Or if he dare presume to say so, how will he prove it?
Who is so vain or rash, who although he spoke these things which are true,
will afirme without any divine testymony, that they are those things, which
the Lord would not they speak. C. Moreover the Spirit is called the
perfect scolmaster of truth, which Christ promised unto his Apostles. But to
what end promised he the same, but only that they might deliuere the same
wisdom which they had received from him? That spirit is given, the which
being their guide and directour, they discharged the office committed unto them.

The same spirit had led them into all truethe, when they did put the sum of
their doctrine in writing. To this doctrine whosoever thinks that somewhat
must be added as though the same were lame and imperfect, he does not only
accuse the Apostels of fallse dealyng, but also it is blasphemuse against the
spirit.

If so be the doctrine the which they have put in writing, came as yet from
young instructed scholar and nouices yet were it not a vain and superfluose
adition but now seeing their writings be as it were prepetunall to the
Revelation of the spirit, which was promised and performed unto them, their
can nothing be added unto the same without great injury done unto the spirit.
But when we come to the matter it self, the Papists are very vain and
ridiculouse. For they define and afirme that those secrets with the Apostles
were not able to conceive and comprehend, were but childishe and trifeling
joys, then the which there can be nothing more vain and foolish.

They would have forsooth the holy Ghost to descend from heaven to teach the
Apostles how, to consecrate their chalices with their altares, how to baptize
belles, and to make holy water, and how to selebrat masses. But how do fools
and children learn, which have all these things at their fingers ends, very
perfect? M These are Jolly fellows, which place the Instruction, and
revelation of the holy ghost, in the Church after the Gospel: as though those
things alone which Christ taught in the flesh, and which the disciples could
conceive, pertayned to the Gospel: and that those things which the holy
ghost taught after the departure of Christ, which the Apostles could not
conceive and carrye before they had received the holy Ghost, are these notable
and erce lent ceremonies of days, of meals of garments and such like. B. For
they contend and affirm that these many things which Christ says his
Apostles could not bear as yet, are to be understood to be those ceremonies
which have crept into the Church, and which are very gainefull unto them.

But what can be more foolishlye spoken? R. For seeing those ceremonies do
savor more of the flesh than they do of the spirit, how could it be that
they should be revealed by the spirit, when the spirit and the flesh are
contrary one to the other?

Let us therefore, except we will be unthankful unto GOD, stay our selves
and be contented with that doctrine of the which the Apostles are authors, as
the Scripture does testify: seeing the full perfection of heavenly wisdom is
contained in them, which may make the man of God perfect.

Beyond the same we think it not meet for any man to pass. For in this
consists high, breadth, and depth, to know the love of God which is offered
to us in Christ.

Ephe, 3, 28
This knowledge is above all other knoweledg as says the Apostle Paul. And
when he says that all the treasurs of wisdom and knowledge are hidden in
Christ, Gala. 3, i.
he does not Immagin any unknown Christ, but such a one as by his preaching he
has lively depainted, yt we may behold him euenas it were before our eyes
cruc^fied. But lest any doubt or Ambiguity should remain, Christ him self
afterward expounds his own words, showing what things those were which
the Apostles could not then bear: and with all declares what the office of
the holy Ghost is, saying:

He shall not speak of him self, but whatsoever he shall hear. C. Many
restrain this unto the spirit of prophesy. A. (For there wanted not in the
Apostles time, Acts, xi, 28
some which forshewed things to come, as we may read of Agabus, Acts. xxi, x^
who prophesyed of the famine to come in the Emperor Claudius days: and what
should happen to Paul at Jerusalem he forshewed to the Brethren: also the
Apostles them selves by the revelation of the spirit prophesyed of many things
concerning Antichrist and his members? Act, xx.xxix,
all which things are most true. i. Tim. 4, i, 2, Tim. 3, 19 2. Pet, 2. i
Jude. i, 4
) C. Howebeit, Christ in this place seems rather to speak of the state of
his spiritual kingdom which the Apostles saw straight after his
resurrection, but yet could not by any means comprehend the same.

The treasures of this secret wisdom Paul expounds in his first Chapter of
his Epistle to the Ephesyans. When Christ says that the spirit shall not
speak of him self, he confyrmeth that which went before, He shall lead you
into all truth.

He means therefore that whatsoever the spirit brings proceeds from God.

Notwithstanding the Majesty of the spirit is nothing deminished by these
words, as though either he were not God, or else wear inferioure to the
father: but they are spoken to the capascity of our mind. For, because of the
veil which is before our eyes, we do not sufficiently perceive with how great
Reverence we ought to receive those things which the spirit reuealeth unto us,
therefore mention of the Divinity is made.

Even as in another place it is called the earnest by which God has
established our salvation, and the seal, Ephe. i. i3
by which he seals the sertaynty of the same unto us. To conclude, the
purpose of Christ was to teach that the doctrine of the spirit was not of this
world, John. 17.
but that it came out of the heavenly sanctuary euenas Christ often times
testifies of his doctrine.

14. He shall glorify me, for he shall receive of mine, and shall show unto
you,

C. Now Christ shows that there shall not come a spirit which shall erect
and set up a new kingdom but which shall rather establish the glory given to
him of the Father. M. Notwithstanding he speaks not this for the affection of
his own glory, but upon a desyer to pacifye and quiet the minds of his
Discipls lest they should think that they should so receive another comforter,
that they should be separated and divided from him: as though by them he
should deal in another man's cause and not in his own: the which they took
very greuouslye for the love which they bare unto him.

C. Many dream that Christ had only taught his Disciples the first
Principles and afterward delivered unto them more profounde matters.

Thus they make noe more accounte of the Gospel than they do of the law, the
which is said to have been the Schoolemayster of the Jews unto Christ.

After this error there follows an other no less intolerable, as that
Christ having now taken his leave, Gala. 3, 24
and being entered into his kingdom, had nothing to do, and had appointed the
holy Ghost to be in his place. From this ground the sacrilege of Popery and
of Mahometisme has come. For although these Antichrists are much unlike one
to the other in many things yet notwithstanding they have all one beginning.

For, they say that by the Gospel we are entered into the right faith, but
yet that we must seek for the perfection of doctrne from another. As though
Christ did not here plainly affirm, that the holy Ghost has no other office,
than to establishe the kingdom of the son of God, and to ratefye and
confirm that for ever which the Father has given unto him.

To what end then pertayneth the doctrine of the spirit? Math. 17, 5
Not to draw us from the scoole of Christ but rather to establishe and
confirm that voice by which we are commanded to hear him, Otherwise he should
diminishe the glory of Christ which says He shall glorify me. etc As if he
should say. After the holy Ghost shall be revealed, ye shall preach the Gospel
to the whoale world, and ye shall tell forth my most glorious vyctorye over
the world, sin, death, Satan, and hell, the which shall tourn to my great
glory. M. Let them noate and consider this which brag and boast of the
instruction and revelation of the holy Ghost in the Church.

The work of the holy Ghost is not to gloryfye our strength, wisdom, and
merittes, but Christ: which cannot be glorified but in our hearts mortefyed,
and void of our own righteousness. C. When Christ adds that the holy
Ghost shall take of his he gives us to understand that we receive his
spirit to this end, that we might enjoy his benefits.

For what does it profit us? Surely it brings to pass that we are washed
with the blood of Christ, that sin is abolished by his death in us, that our
old man is crucefyed, that his resurrection is of power to bring us to
newness of life, and finally that we be pertakers of all his benefits and
graces.

Therefore the spirit gives us nothing which is not in Christ, but takes
from Christ to give unto us.

The like also we must think of doctrine. i. Cor. i, 30.


For he does not illuminate us to draw us any whit from Christ, but to fulfill
that which Christ speaks, namely how that Christ is made unto us wisdom For
it opens unto us those treasures which are hidden in Christ,

To be short, the Spirit does in rich us with no other treasures than with
the riches of Christ, that in all things Christ may be gloryfyed,

15. All things that the father has are mine: Therefore said I not unto you
that he shall take of mine and show unto you.

C. Because Christ had seemed to have spoken arrogantly, lest he might seem to
deminishe the glory of the father, in saying, Because he shall receive of mine,
he straight way makes mention of the Father: and confesses that he has all
that from the father which he gives unto us by his spirit.

But when he says that al things which the Father has are his, he speaks in
the person of a mediatoure, because they should draw and receive from the
fullness of the same.

He always has respect unto us, and speaks of his Riches, to inuit us to
enjoy the same: and among the benefits which by his hand we receive from the
Father he reckons up the spirit.

M. Let us consider therefore of what dignitye the son of GOD is. If all
things are his which belong unto the Father, then is he of equal wisdom,
power, and dignitye with the Father, Mat. 11.27
and Lord of all.

Hereupon it comes that the Apostle Paul says, All things are youres, and
you are Christ's, i. Cor. 3.21.
and Christ is Gods.

M. Howebeit Christ speaks not so much here of his secreete power, as he
does of his office.

16. After a while and ye shall not see me: and again after a while, and ye
shall see me: for I go to the Father.

M. The time was even at hand, that the Disciples being deprived of the
presence of Christ, should be very heavy and sorrowful, the which sorrow
strayte after the resurrection of Christ should be turned into great joy.
By the promise of this everlasting joy to come, he comfort their minds
again with these words.

B. I therefore speak unto you of the holy Ghost the comforter (by whom
hereafter ye must be taught all things) because the time is very short, which
I have to tarrye with you in the flesh.

For even anon I shall be carried to death: but shortly after I shall be restored to
you again: but after another manner, that is to say, by the presence of my
spirit.

C. Howebeit othersome expound it thus, Ye shall see me when I am risen again
from the dead, but it shall be but for a short time, because strayte after I
shall be received into heaven.

But by this consolation he does rather mittigate the sorrow which they might
conceive by his absence, affyrming that the same should not be long: and so
he commends the grace of his spirit, by which he should be with them for
ever. And, it ought not to seem absurd, that he affyrmeth him self to be
seen, when he dwells in his Disciples by his spyrite: for although he be
not discerned with our eyes, yet notwithstanding, Faith beholds Christ's
presence.
his presence is felt and seen with the eyes of faith.

It is true which the Apostle says, We know that so long as we are at
home in the body, 2. Cor, 5.6.
we are absent from the Lord: For we walk by faith, not after outward
apperance.

Therefore the grace of the spirit is a glass for us, in the which Christ
will be seen, according to this saying of Paul, Though we have known Christ
after the flesh, 2. Cor. 5, 6
now yet henceforth know we him henceforth no more.

17. Then said some of his Disciples between them selves, what is this that
he says

18. unto us, After a while and ye shall not see me, and again, after a while
and ye shall see me: and that I go to the Father.

M. The matter it self of the which the Lord spoke, as it was rare and
seldom heard, so was it obscure unto the Disciples and not easy to be
conceived. R. For flesh and blood is deaffe at the Preaching of the Cross,
and understands nothing that is spoken of the Cross. For how oftentimes had
he toulde his Apostles that he would go unto the Father, and take
possession of a new kingdom.

How often had he made mention of his Passion? Notwithstanding, they do not
as yet understand the same: so blind is our nature in the word of God,
without the spirit of Christ.

Such is the doctrine of Christ, that it requires not carnal hearers, but
spiritual bearers: and this is the cause that so few do truly understand
the same.

Notwithstanding, we must noate that not all, but some of the Apostles, not
understanding the words of the Lord, spoke thus among them selves: for they
were not al of like capascity and wisdom.

19. Jesus perceived that they would ask him, and said unto them, Do ye
enquire among your selves of that I said, After a while and ye shall not see
me: and again, after a while ye shall see me.

R. This is an example of gentleness and carfulness. Of gentleness in that
he does not reject the dull and slow to understand, nor sharpelye hande^
them, but instructs them with much meekness. Of care, in that he
preuenteth them with his own answer, before they them selves demand: so
great a care has the Lord for those that are his. Therefore although the
Lord seem sometime to speak unto deaffe men, yet notwithstanding, he does so
help the rudeness, and dull understanding of those that are his, that his
doctrine is not unprofitable.

And it is our part to take heed, that as we are dull, so also we be not
proud and slothful, but rather to show our selves humble and wylling to
learn.

20. Verilye, verilye, I say unto you, ye shall weep and lament, the world
shall rejoice: Ye shall sorrow, but your sorrow shall be turned to joy.

R. Now he interprets that which he had said, After a while and ye shall
not see me: C. and shows for what cause he told them before hand that the
time of his departure was at hand, and withal why be added the promise of his
speedye return again: namelye, to the end they might the better know how
necessary the help of the spirit was.

A sure and sharp temptacion (says he) is at hand for you. For when I am
taken away by death, the world will triumph, but ye shall be in grievous
sorrow: the world shall judge it self blessed, but ye shall think your selves
miserable. Therefore I thought good to arm you with necessary weapons against
this battle.

He speaks here of the myddell time which was between his death, and the
sending of the holy Ghost, because then their Faith lay after a sort
oppressed.

A. And as the adversaries having overcome, and Christ being dead, all things
seemed unto the Apostles desperate and past hope, euenso to every Godly man in
afflictions, Christ seems to be gone away and to be dead: if he be afflicted
by his adversaries, and see his enemies to triumph, they having no manner of
consolation in the mean time: so that he cries with the Prophet, Thou art
of pure eyes and can not see evil: Ab^, i.i3
thou can not behold wickedness: wherefore do thou look upon the
tra^sgressors and houlnest thy tongue when the wicked deuoureth the man, Psalm,
73, 3,
that is more righteouse than he.

But it was not without the counsel of the divine Spirit that Christ
suffers him self to be slain, and his adversaries to overcome, neither js it
without cause, that he seems sometime to leave and forsake the godly man: for
he is slain not to perish but to rise again: but he suffers his adversaries
to be lifted up aloft, that they may have the greater fall and hides him self
from the godly, not to forsake them, but that by the cross he may reuele
himself by a more mighty deliverance, as he testifies by the Prophet. For a
little while have I forsaken thee, but with great compassion will I gather thee.

Esaias 54, 7
Whereupon in this place also he says.

But your sorrow shallbe turned to joy. C. He means that joy which they had
after they received the holy Ghost: not that they were afterward void of
sorrow, but because what sorrow so ever came, the same was swallowed up of
spiritual joy. We know that the whole life of the Apostles was nothing else but
a continual warfare, sustayning many reproaches, slanders, and perils.

A. We know that when the Bridegroom was taken from them they fasted and
mourned, C But being reneued by the spirit, they did put of the former feeling
of infirmity, that with heroycall fortitude they might easelye contemn all
euels.

Sorrow turned into joy
B. And look what is spoken here of the Apostles thou may apply the same
generally to all godly men. For Christ hiding him self, and helping the
adversaries side, they lament and miserablely wayle, but their weepinge and
wayling is the beginning of sempiternall joy. M Wherefore let us use this
consolation in time of sorrow and trouble, not only to comfort our selves,
but al others also which are afflicted.

The Apostell also has put us in mind of this, saying, Our exceeding
tribulation, which is momentary and light, 2. Cor, 4, i6
prepares and exceeding joy, and weight of glory unto us: while we look not
o^t the things which are seen, but on the things which are not seen. and, ce.

Thus ye see how the Apostell does not only extenuate the weight of afliction,
but does also promise ye joy shall follow. Further more by this place consider
of the joy of the wicked, If so be the sorrow of the godly be turned into
joy, the joy of the wicked cannot choose but be turned into sorrow. A. Even
as Saint John in his revelation speakinge of that strumpet of Babylon, says,
In so much as she glorified her self, and lived in pleasure, Joy turned
into sorrow.
so much give ye to her torment and sorrow: for she says in her heart I sit
being a Queen, and am no widow, and shall see no morning.

Therefore shall her plagues come at one day, death, sorrow, and famine,
Apoca, i8, 7
and she shall be burnt with fire.

Therefore, Math, 5.4
as it is said of the Godly

Blessed are they that morn, for they shall receive comfort: so also the Lord
speaks of the wicked. Luke 6, 25
VVo unto you which laugh now, for ye shall mourn.

21. A woman when she trauaileth has sorrow, because her hour is come: but
so soon as she is delivered of the child, she remembers no more the
anguishe, for joy that a man is borne in to the world.

22 And ye now therefore have sorrow. etc.

R. He shows by a similitude that the Cross is the beginning of true joy.
For as women traueiling with Child, are suddenly taken with pain of
Childbirth, in such wise that they are nere unto death, but when they have
brought forth their child, the more that their sorrows and pains were, the
more they rejoice over the child borne, even so the Godly traueilyng (that is
to say, which are to be reneued with the new regeneration of the spirit) are
at the first very sorrowful and heavy under the Cross, the Lord retracting
his hand and standing on the adversaries side: insomuch that al things seem
unto them desperate and past hop but when the day of redemption comes they are
refreshed and revived with subdayne joy, and by so much the more they have
suffered grievous afflictions.

Herevppon the Prophet says, Sorrow and mourn, O daughter Syon, like a woman
in trauele: Mich, 4, 10
for now shall thou go forth of the City, and dwell in the field, and shall go
into Babell, but there shall thou be dellyuered, there the Lord shall redeem
thee out of the hand of thine enemies.

Also it is said, Come, and let us return unto the Lord for he has spoiled
and he will heal us, he has wounded us, and he will bynd us up.

Osee, 6.1
After two days he will revive us, and in the third day he will raise us up
and we shall live in his sight.

C. Therefore because the Cross of Christ has always included in it victory,
Christ does very aptly compare the sorrow which is conceived thereby, to the
sorrow of a Woman traueilinge with child, Romans ^ 2
which sorrow is turned to joy by the reward of a Child. But because this is
the state and condition of al creatures, to travail and groan until the last
day of redemption, let us know that we must sighe and groan also, until such
times as we being delivered out of the continual miseries of this present
life, do plainly see the fruit of our faith. For the faithful are like unto a
woman which has brought forth a Child, in that they are borne again in
Christ, and are already entered into the celestial kingdom of God, and
everlasting life: but they are like unto great bellyed and traueilyng Women in
that as yet they are captives in the prison of the flesh, waiting for that
happy state which lies hid from their eyes.

When he says that he will see his Disciples again, he means when he shall
return to visit them with grace of his Spirit, that they may have the sight
of him for ever. R. For christ sees us, when he sends his holy Spirit, by
which as by a Seal: he seals and confirms our hearts, that we may have the
joy of the Spirit for ever: even as he adds saying

And your joy shall no man take from you. This perpetuity and everlasting
continuance does make the joy more precious. For herevppon it follows that
those sorrows are light, 2, Cor 4, i7
and patiently to be suffered, which are momentany. Also by these words
Christ shows what is true joy. Joys of the world are transitorye.
It must needs be that the joys of the world are transitory, and suddenly
vanishinge away, for that they consist in corcuptible and momentanie things.

Therefore we must come unto the resurrection of Christ in the which there is
eternal stabillitie and continuance. Joy everlasting is Jesus


Because therefore Christ himself is the joy of the godly, it is said to be
everlasting. For Christ dies no more, Romans 6.9
death has no more power over him.

Therefore the faithful never want true matter of joy. M, wherefore yt is not
true sorrow which is turned into everlasting joy: neither is that true joy,
which is converted into sorrow which shall never have an endde.

The wicked then are most unhappy and miserable, which joy in this world and
shall afterward, sorrow, weep, and lament for ever: and contrariwise most
blessed and happy are the children of god which mourn, weep and lament in
this life but in the life to come shall joy for ever. And that which christ
says here that there joy shall be perpetual, agreeeth with that he said before.

23. And in that day shall ye ask me no question, verily verily I say unto
you, whatsoever ye shall ask the father in my name, he will give it you.

C. After that Christ had promised joy unto his Disciples, which should come
of invincible fortitude and constancye, now he promises unto them another
grace of the Spirit, that is to say such light of understanding, as by the
same they should reach unto heavenly mysteries. At this time when Christ
talked with them, there was such great dulnes in them, that every scruple
caused them to stay, an^ to doubt.

For as children which learn but their Primer, cannot read on verse through
without stops and stays, even so in every word of Christ almost there was one
offense or other, which made the Disciples to stay: but within awhile after
being illuminated by the holy Ghost, they had no more stays and lettes, but
were famylierly acquainted with the wisdom of God, insomuche that they went
forward without stoombling through the secret mysteries of God. M, Moreover
there are some who by that day, of the which Christ makes mention here,
understand that time, which passed between the day of his resurection, and
his assention into heaven.

Othersome more truly extend the same unto the end f the world, from that
time in the which the holy Ghost was sent unto the Apostles.

For the Apostls differing nothing from children, nay, being more like unto
blocks then men, how suddenly they were changed by the instruction of the
Spirit of God, we may plainly see in the Acts of the Apostles.

Act, 2, i7
Therefore, whereas he denies that they shall ask any thing he has this
meaning. Joel, ^, 8
R. In that day in the which I will send unto you the holy Ghost, all these
things shall be revealed unto you of the which I have told you.

C. Not because the Apostles did cease even when they were most wise, to
demand at the mouth of Christ, but there is only here a comparison of a
double state: as if Christ should say, that their rudenes should be corected in
such wise that they which did stut and stammer in every small thing, should
easily attain to all perfection.

To this agrees the saying of Hieremy, And they shall teach no more every man
his neighbore, saying, Know the Lord: for they shall all know me from the least
of them, unto the greatest.

He does not take away prophecy, neither does he abolish that doctrine which
ought to flourish in the kingdom of christ but he rather denies that groase
ignorance shall take place, when all men are taught of God: the which
ignorance possesses the minds of men until such time as Christ the sone of
righteousness illuminateth them by the bright beams of his Spirit.

Whatsoever ye shall ask the father. A. For the exposition of this place read
the 13. and 14. verses of the 14. Chapter going before,

24. Hitherto have ye asked nothing in my name: ask and ye shall receive that
your joy may be full.

A. This seems at the first fight very absurd, that the Apostles asked
nothing before that time in the name of Christ: when as Luke makes mention
that they desired Christ to teach them a for^ of prayer: Teach us (say they) to
pray, a John taught his Disciples.

Again it is not like that they were so long conuersaunt with Christ, but that
they observed that rule and form of prayer which the law prescribed.

Beside this it is very probable that they used to pray, though for temporal
things only, seeing Christ taught them first to seek the kingdom of God, and
the righteousness thereof. The which they performed afterward, as may appear
by this their petition, Lord increase our faith.

But Christ by these words sought to bring his Disciples to the knowledge of
the true mediator. C. For he had allredy sufficiently declared him self unto
them to be the very same mediator: but their knowledge was so obscure, that
they could not as yet frame their prayers aright in his name. And it is no
absurdity to say that they prayed unto God upon trust of the Mediator,
according to the prescript of the law, and yet notwithstanding that they did
not plainly understand what this thing meant.

M. Therefore he says not simpley, Hitherto ye have asked nothing: (as though
they had asked nothing of GOD until that time:) but he adds, In my name:
signifiing that as yet they were not endued with true understanding.

C. As yet the external veil of the Temple remained, the majesty of God was
hid under the Cherubin, the true high Priest was not yet entered into the true
Sanctuary of Heaven to make intercession for his brethern, as yet he had not
made the way by his blood.

It is no marvel then if so be the mediator was not so well known then as he
is now, being entered into heaven to appear before the Father for us,
reconcilinge us unto him by his sacrifice, that we miserable wretches might
approach thither unto him with bouldnes.

For Christ, when he had ended the reconcilliation, was received up into
Heaven and showed him self openly to be the Mediator.

Moreover we must note here the often repetition of this, that we must pray and
call upon God in the name of Christ: to the end we may know, that it is a
wicked profanation of the name of God, when a man dare presume to come before
the Tribunal seat of God without Christ. Christ is greatly pleased with this
trust of the faithful to him wards, that they may ask in his name, and
asking may receive, and receiving may have perfect joy.

How far then are they from the mind of Christ which pray not unto the
Father, but unto creatures, neither in his name, but in the name of this or
that Saint? C. For we are said to pray in the name of Christ, when we make him
our advocate, to purchase grace for us from his Father, although we express
not his name with our lips.

Ask and ye shall receive. R. A saying most worthy to be noated: For it
teaches that it is all one to ask, and receive. For so soon as a man asks
in the name of Christ, he receives: although the receiving be not presently
revealed, that the faith of him that prays may be proved in the mean time.
And christ by these words does consecrate the faithful to be Priests, but not
popysh Priests, but christians Priests. For the Priests office is to pray,
as you may read oftentimes in, Leuiticus, where it is said. And the Priest
shall pray for him, and he shall be forgeuen. Therefore when Christ says to al
men. Ask, pray, he would have al men prists, and that by his name. For he is
the high Priest sitting at the right hand of GOD always making intercession
for us to the Father. And that which he speaks here is referred to the time
of manifestation, which should come afterward.

That your joy may be full. By which he gives to understand that we shall
have all plenty of good things, our hearts desire, and great quietness, if so
be we ask of God in his name what soever we have need of.

R. Joy begins when grace is promised: but it is perfect and full when the
promise is fulfilled. Therefore we must pray that our joy may be full, that is
to say, that we may obtain and that our desire may be satisfied. M. Of this
joy the Apostles had experince when they prayed unto ye father in ye name of
Christ

25. These things have I spoken unto you by proverbs: the time will come when
I shall no more speak unto you by proverbs, but I shall show you plainly of my
Father.

C. The purpose of Christ's is to encourage his Disciples, that they hoping of
better profit, might not think the doctrine which they hear to be
unprofitable, though as yet they have not profited much in the same. For they
might have suspected, that Christ would not be understood, and that of purpose
he kept their minds in suspense.

Therefore he tells them that the time will shortly come, when they shall
feel the fruit of his doctrine, the which by the obscurenes of the same,
might bring a lothing and contempt thereof into their minds. M, But because to
speak by proverbs is to speak by obscure and dark sentences, it may here be
demanded wherefore he spoke unto his Disciples by proverbs, when the knew that
they understood not his words, and might have diferred them until that time,
in the which he minded to speak more plainly and manyfestly of these things:
Answer may be made thus Christ though he speak somewhat darkly, yet
notwithstanding in such wise that his Disciples might have easily understood
him: but so great was their rudenes that they stood as it were amazed when
they hard him speak.

Wherefore this obscurenesse was not so much in his doctrine as it was in their
minds. And verily the like happens to us at this day. For the word of God
has not his title in vain, that it is the light of our paths: but the
darkness which is in us does so obsure and darcken the brightness thereof, yt we
think we here nothing but allegories and parables.

For as he threatens to the reprobate, that he will speak unto them in a
strange and barbarous tongue, with stammering speech: and the Apostle Paul
says that the Gospel is hidden to such, because Satan has blinded their
minds: even so to the weke and ignorant many things seem obscure and hard to
be understood: for although their minds are not altogether darkness, as the
minds of Infidels are, yet notwithstandi^g they are as it were darkened with
clouds.

And the Lord to humble us with the feeling of our own need, does suffer us
for a time to be thus dull: but he makes those, whom he illumineth with his
spirit, to profit so, that the same word is easy and famillier unto them.

But there may yet this question be demanded. How does our savior Christ say
in another place, that it is given to his Disciples to know the mysteries of
Gods kingdom, to whom he confesses here that he speaks in a dark speech,
For there he did put a differaunce between them and the commen sort of
people, because he spoke to the people in parables.

I answer. There was not such rudenes and ignorance in the Apstoles, but that
they had some understanding of that which their master spoke.

So that he does not without cause exempt them from the number of such as are
blind. And now he says that his speech was allegorical unto them in
respect of that manifest light of understanding, which he meant shortly to give
unto them by the grace of his spirit.

Boath therefore are true, namely, that they should far excel them which had
no savor or taste of the Gospel: and for all that should as yet be like unto
young Scollers, in respect of that new wisdom which the Spirit brought
unto them: which cries in the hearts of the faithful Abba, Father, and
brings with it most ample knowledge of the Father.

27 For the father him self loves you, becase ye have loved me, and have
believed that I came out from God.

A. These words seem quite and clean to overthrow all that the Lord had
spoken to his Diciples, concerning intercession to his Father.



Did he not before declare him self to be God and man in these words, I will
pray unto the father, John i4.i6
and he shall give you another comforter, that he may abide with you for ever?
Also Saint John in another place calls him our advocate. Rom, 8, 34,
And Paul testefieth that he makes interssion for us. Heb, 7, 25
The same also is confirmed in the Hebrews.

But Christ does not simplely deny in this place, Aunsvvere.
that he will be an Intercessor: but only shows that his Father is so ready
of him self to help them, that he will willingly give unto them whatsoever
they shall ask. Christ our Intercessor


B. Therefore Christ does always make Intercession for those that are his,
until such time as the number of them be full For that which he says here and
in the six and twenty verse, how that it is not nedfull that he should pray
unto the Father for them, is spoken, in this respect that he had already
obtained his fathers favor toowardes them, who at that time did both favor
and embrace them as the faithful believers in Christ,

M. This place is dilygentely to be noated, specialy against those which have
thrust in the Intercession of dead saints into the Church: because we have no
access unto God for our sins (say they) therefore we must have the saints
to be Intercessors for us: Even as we cannot be admitted unto the speech of a
King before we use some of his househoulde officers as means for us. But
Christ does not in this sort set his Father before us, whom he makes so
gentle and loving unto us, that he says he will ask nothing for us, as for
men void and destitute of his love.

A. This Fatherly affection toward us, Esa, 65, 24
the Lord him self also testifies by his Prophet saying, It shall come to
pass, that before they call I will answer and before they ask I will hear:
to the end we might not doubt but to find the Father favorable unto us, so
soon as we call upon him in the name of his Son. For he always hears
him, seeing he is his only begotten and most dear Son, in whom he is
well pleased. C. Moreover when Christ is said to pray unto the Father, and to
make intercession for us, let us not imagine any carnal thing of him, as
though be falling down at his Fathers feet, made such humble prayers for us:
but the power and force of his sacrifice, by which he has once purchased the
favor of God toward us, is always lyuelye and effectual, and the blood
which he has once shed for our righteousness, is a continual intercession
for us.

Because ye have loved me, and have believed. M. Christ in these words
expresses the cause of the love of God the Father toward us, showing how
faith in him, and the love of him, do get unto us the love of God the Father,
by which it comes to pass that we obtain all things at his hand. R. As if
he should say, because ye have loved me, and believed my Gospel, therefore I
have reconsiled you unto God, that he may be now your Father: ye are made the
Sons of God by faith in me, ye are made fellow heirs of all Gods graces,
wherefore by me ye shall have a ready way to come unto the Father. C. By
these words we are taught that there is one only bond of our conjunction with
God. And we are joined by true faith, which comes from sincere affection: the
which he notes by the name of love.

For none do believe purely in Christ but they which love him with their
whole heart. Wherefore by this word (love) he has well expressed the force and
nature of faith. But if so be God begins to love us so sone as we love
Christ it follows that the beginning of our salvation is of our selves,
because we prevent the grace of God. But contrary to this we have many
testimonies of Scripture: i John 4 i0
as these, I will make them to love me. Again Not because we loved him
first. It shall not need to repeat more places, Rom 4.i7
because there is nothing more certain then this doctrine, That the lord
caleth those things that be not as though they were, Ezech 36.26
that he restoareth the dead to life, Easy. 65.
that he makes of stoany hearts, hearts of flesh, that he appears unto them
which seek him not, and that he loves all those that are his before they: are
in this respect we are said to be loved of God, when we love Christ: because
we have a pledge of his love whom before we abhorred as a severe and cruel
Judge toward us. AVG. Therefore the Father loves us, because we love the
Son having received of the father and the son, that we might love the
Father and the son.

28 I went out from the Father and came into the world: again 1 leave the
world and go to the Father.

C. This sentence commends unto us the divine love in Christ. For we should
have no true faith in him, if we did not apprehende his divine power. For his
death and resurrection (the two pillors of faith) should profit us little or
nothing at all, except his heavenly power be annexed unto them. Therefore we
must embrace Christ by a true and sincere faith, as the counsel and power of
God.

Let us also consider to what end he came out from God namely that he might
be unto us wisdom, sanctification, righteousness and redemption.

M. For this cause he says not simpely I am sent of God into this world:
John. 1, 6
but I went out from the Father and came into the world. John also was sent of
God: the rest of the Prophets also were sent of whom notwithstanding that
cannot be said which Christ speaks here of himself, saying, I went out from
the father, and came into the world, that we might consider that to be in
Christ, Philiq, 27
which is no other. R, But some will say, how went he out from the Father,
which was never separated from him? and how goes he out of the world, when
as all things in the same are ordered and governed by his power and care? He
went out from the Father, because he abased himself, taking upon him the
form of a servant. He is gone out of the world, because he was contemned,
crucified, and slain by the world. But all these things were done that he
might go unto the Father: that is to say, that he might bring man into the
kingdom of God, that he might make him Lord over sin, the Cross, death,
and hell. C. Therefore he says that he retourneth unto the Father, that they
might certainelye believe that by his departure they should loose none of
those benifites which he has brought: because he sheddeth and powers out of
his heavenly glory the power and efect of his death and resurrection.
Therefore he left the world, when he putting of our infirmities, was received
up into heaven: but yet notwithstanding we are made pertakers of his grace,
because he sits at the right hand of his Father, and governs the whoale
world.

29. His Disciples said unto him, Lo, now taulkest thou plainly and
speak no proverb.

30. Now are we sure that thou know all things and nedest not that any
man should ask thee any question* therefore believe we that thou came from
God.

M. The disciples, because they did not as yet suffitiently know them selves,
boaste in these words that they know more, then in very deed they knew. The
lord had said, These things have I spoken to you by proverbs: the time will
come when I shall no more speak unto you by proverbs, but I shall show you
plainly of my fathere. The Discipls contrary wise say, Lo now talkest thou
plainly, and speak no proverb.

They thought that they understood all things, and that there was no
prouerbiall obscuritiy in the words of Christ. B. But, when the Lord had at
large declared his great love toward them, they also in like manner began to
burn in love toward him: they thought that they conceived much, and they
persuaded them selves of more, than they could either conceive or do.

R. Therefore it was an opinion and not knowledge, presumption, and not Faith,
in that they confess now that they plainly understand the words of Christ.
For they understand not as yet what this means, that he went to the
Father: for to understand this they needed the revealing spirit. C. In that
therefore they exclayme now that their Master speaks playnelye and without
figure, they go to far: yet notwithstanding they speak as it was in deed:
and which also we find true at this day. For he which has tasted but a
little of the doctrine of the Gospel is more zealous, and has more feeling of
Faith, than if he knew and well understood all Plato: Yea the sighs which
the Spirit of GOD stirs up in the hearts of the Godly, are manifest
testimonies that God does work by a secret means above their capassitie. For
otherwise Pauele would not have called them groaninges which cannot be
expressed. So that we must think that the Apostles felt some profit, in
such wise that they might truly say, Rom, 8, 26,
that the words of Christ were not altogether prouerbiall: but they were
deceived in this, in that they seemed unto themselves to know more than they
did.

But hereof came the error, that they knew not what the gift of the Spirit
should be. They triumph therefore before the time: even as if a man should
think him self very rytche having but one piece of goulde in his pursse.

They gather by sertaine signs that Christ proceeded from GOD: and they glory
as though there were nothing wanting. But as yet they were far from that
knowledge, so long as they kn^we not what Christ should be unto them
afterward.

A. Also they plainly enough declare their dullness in knowing Christ, by this
that they say, Now are we sure that thou know all things. as though now
and never before, they ought to know that Christ know all things, and hereby
to believe that he came out from God.

M. To what end then had they seen so many and so great miracles? Of the
which notwithstanding Nicodemus said, We know that thou art come a teacher
from God. John 3, 2
For no man can do the signs which thou do except god were with him. John,
6, 69
Furthermore if so be they did not believe until now that he came from God,
what meant they to say before we believe and know that thou art Christ the son
of the lyueing God? Thus we see that faith in the knowledge of Christ, was
often times so weak in the Apostles, that ever now and than they needed
confirmation.

They believed before that he came from God into this world: but that faith
and knowledge had as yet much obscurity and weakness: whereupon it came to
pass that so soon as they received any light and confirmation, by and by
they thouht that they did truly and certainly know and believe: although as
yet when they spoke these things their knowledge was obscure and their faith
weak enough: the which that which follows does testefye.

31. Jesus answered them do ye now believe?

32. Behold the hour draws nigh, and is already come, that ye shall be
scattered every manne to his own, and shall leave me aloane: and yet am I
not aloane* for the father is with me.

M. Christ speaks not this, to cast in their teeth their slownesse to
believe because at the last they did but begin to believe, after they had
seen so many miracles but rather to forwarne them and put them in mind of the
temtation to come.

C. For, because they stood to much in their own conceit, Christ puts them
in mind of their own infirmity, to the end they might keep them selves
within their compass. We never know well what we lack, and how far we are
from the fullness of faith, until we come to some seriouse trial: for then
proof makes plain how weak our faith is, which we thought to be perfect
and strong.

Of this, Christ puts his Disciples in mind, and pronounces that it will
shortly come to pass that they shall forsake him. And this interrogation of
Christ is Ironicall: as if he had said, Do ye thus boast, as though ye were
strong in faith: A trial is at hand which will plainlye show your imbecillitie.
For persecution is like a touchstoane to prove faith, a little whereof when it
apeareth, makes them to fear, and to stoop which before wear to lofty.

M. Therefore there are hear two things to be considered, the one is, that it
ought not to seem strange, if there be some which in time of peace, believe
and when persecution comes, go backward, seeing the very same hapened to the
Apostles. The other is that we ought to be put in mind of this Infirmity,
while as yet we believe that we may think wiihin our selves, now we believe,
but when aduersite comes what will we then do: This forwarning will bring to
pass, not only that we shall be wary and circomspect but also modest, and
perpetually depending upon the grace of Christ. Man's mind is unstable,
Man's mind is vnstaple, and chaungeable according to the time and state,
insomuch that the minds and manners of the most part are according to the
time.

Hobeit I am not aloan C. This correction was added, to the end we may know
that nothing is derogated from Christ, when he is forsaken of men. For seeing
in him self his power and glory is founded, and depends not upon the faith
of the world, if it so fall out that he be forsaken of the whoale world, yet
notwithstanding it hurts not him, because he is God which stands not in
need of any man's help.

Whereas he says that the father is with him, it is, as much as if he should
say, that God is on his side, so that he nedoth not to borrowe any thing of men.

R. And as Christ is not aloane, but has with him and on his part his father
standing, and with the Father all creatures as well celestial as terrestrial:
(whereupon he said unto Peeter, Think thou that I cannot pray unto the
Father, Mat. 26.53.
and he shall give me out of hand, more than twelve Legions of Angels?) Even
so he which has Christ by Faith is never aloan, although he be destitude of
the help of all creatures. Concerning the which matter read the stoary of
Elizeus. 4. Kin. 6.i6
The Israelites also in the wilderness had the Lord their Captain and
protectoure, Exodus i3, 2i.
though they seemed to be forsaken of all creatures. Also saynct Paul in his
first defense says that he is forsaken of all men, 2. Tim. 4.16.
to show that the Lord was with him alone. And the Prophet David says My
faher and mother forsook me, but my Lord took me up. Psa. 27.10
If therefore the Lord forsake us not what then can hurt us: Whosoever will
consider these things, though the foundation of the world should shake yet he
stands steadfast, neither can the falling away of other men, overthrow
his faith. For we do not truly honor God except we content our selves with
him aloane. A. Moreover in another place when Christ says that the father
has not left him aloane, he shows the resonne, saying And he that sent me
is with me: John. 8.29
the father has not left me aloane for I do all things that please him.

33. These words have I spoken unto you, that in me ye might have peace: for
in the world shall ye have tribulation: but be of good chere, I have ouercom
the world.

C. Again he shows how neacessarye those consolations wear, which he used
in comforting them, And he proves by this reasonne that theare were many
sorrows and tribulations abidyng them in the world. First of al therefore we
must noat this admonition, that all the godly may assure them selves of this
that their life shall be subject to many miseries, to the end they may arm
them selves with patience. Seeing therefore the world is unto us as a raigyng
Sea, we shall find the quiet calm of peace in no other than in Christ.

A. Concerning which read more in the foureteen Chapter going before, beginning
at the twenty seven verse. B. For in christ the saynctes of GOD do feel and
acknoweledge the goodness of the father, and thereby, everlasting life:
Whereupon, always when they behold him they rejoice and are glad C.
Therefore we must noate the way to enjoy this peace. Christ says that his
Disciples shall have peace, if they profit in this doctrine. Will we have then
in the midst of afflictions, quiet minds? let us then geeue heed unto this
sermon of Christ, which will bring us peace in him R. For we being iustefyed
by Christ have peace with God through our Lord and savior Jesus Christ. Romans
5, i.


For in the world shall ye have tribulation. M. Behoulde hear the conjunction
of peace and affliction, which in spirit are in Christ, and in body, in the
world. In the Spirit they have peace in Christ, in ^oby they are afflicted in
the world. They which are wholly in the world, are also subject to afflictions
but without the conjunction of peace which is in Christ aloane and felt by the
spirit of Faith. This peace which now we enjoy in Christ shall one day when
we are wholly delivered out of this world, be full and perfect: contrariwise
their affliction which are afflicted in this world without Christ shall one
day be full when they are cast to eternal dampnation. R, This world is the
court of Satan to the which the Just, the wise and mighty of this world are
chosen. So that the godly are afflicted of the Just euenas the Phariseis
persecuted the Apostles, Romans 10, 3.
because they were such as sought their own righteousenesse and wear not
subject to the righteousness of God. 1. Cor. 1, 23,
The Apostles are deryded of wise men because the gospel is foolishness unto
the Gentilles.

They are slain of mighty men: for Herod is a feared least Christ will thrust
him out of his kingdom. Math. 2, 3.
C. And as it is meet that our sluggishnesse should be corrected by sundry
afflictions, and we awaked to seek for remedy and deliverance from all
evil: even so the Lord would not have us to be discouraged, but rather
constantlye to fight: the which cannot be without we be sure of the success.

Therefore Christ calls us to the battle, and assures us of the victory,
although as yet we must labor and take pains for the same. And because there
is always much matter to us of fear, he wylleth us to be of good cheer,
because he overcame not the world for his own sake, but for our sakes. Whereby
it shall come to pass, that we being opressed and dispayring in our selves, by
the beholding of his magnificent glory, shall safelye overcome all evil.

Be of good cheer I have overcome the world. R. This is a wonderful
consequence if so be a man have respect unto humane reason. For it is as much
as if one should say to a poor man, Be of good cheer, I am ritche. But
what is the poor man the better that thou art ritche? M. And what does it
profit that Christ has overcome the world, if so be the world have liberty
still to persecute the children of God? But it is a most sweet consequence, if
so be thou draw the same to the reason of Faith. For the victory of Christ is
ours: For he has made us fellow heirs and brethren with him. This therefore
is the sum, As neither the world nor sin, nor death, nor the Cross, nor
hell, nor Satan could overcome me, no more shall he overcome you, if so be
ye abide by faith in me. For all my riches are youres.

Wherefore if so be we desire to be Christians, we must not seek to be free
from the Cross.

For those whom he knew before, he also did predestinate, Rom, 8, 29.
that they should be like fashioned unto the shape of his son, that he
might be the first begotten of many brethren. And, Acts. i4, 22
By many afflictions we must enter into the kingdom of God.

C. But let us content our selves with this one thing, that we fighting under
the banner of Christ, are in the midst of the conflict without all perryll.

A. Herevppon Saint John says, I write unto you young men, because ye have
overcome that evil. Where he says, that they have overcome, who are as yet
in the midst of the skyrmyshe.

But our condition differs far from theyrs, which fight under the standerdes
of men. For Mars to them is doubtful, and the success of the battle
uncertain: but we before we encounter with the enemy, are conquerours:
because our head Christ has once overcome the whole world for us, when he
overcame Satan ye Prince of this world. So that he may paraduenture afflicte
the children of God, but he can never have the victory, for that the cause
belongs to Gods kingdom.

By the name of the world in this place Christ reprehendeth all that is
contrary to the salvation of the Godly, in specially all corruptions, the
which Satan abuses to intrappe and beguile us.

B. Therefore the world is so overcome by Christ, that it may only profit
us, but not hurt us, if so be through Faith, (which is the victory of the
world) we cleave fast unto Christ to the end.

The.xvij. Chapter.
1. These words spoke Jesus and lift up his eyes to heaven and said: Father
the hour is come, glorifye thy son, that thy son also may glorifye thee.
R.

HITHERTO from the thirteen Chapter, Christ has taught that he was sent of
the Father into this world, and that he would go to the Father again:
Beside this he confirmed with many comfortable consolalations all those that
believe in him, against the offense of the Cross, specially with the last
comfortable precept in the Chapter going before, Be of good cheer I have
overcome the world.

For whereunto soever thou have respect whether it be unto corporal things
or spiritual things, the Cross is always objected. C. Wherefore the coming
of the holy Ghost being promised by him, he made them to have better hope, and
also debated the matter at large concerning the glory and excellencye of his
kingdom. R. And now he prays his Father, first that his Father would
glorifye him, seeing that the Ministerye of the Gospel was now fulfilled, and
the power of his glorifycation come. Then he prays for his Apostles: And last
of all for all such as should believe through the Preaching of the Apostles. M.
Therefore Christ adds a Prayer to that doctrine by the which he instructed and
confirmed his Apostles, and such a prayer as agreed with the present cause, of
the which he had spoken so largely.

This is a most excellent order, and dilligentlye to be observed and noated,
not only of all the Ministers of Christ, but also of the Faithful, that they
turn from Doctrine to prayer: For doctrine will be could except the same be
made effectual by God.

Wherefore he gives an example to teachers, not only to be painful in
Preaching the word, but also by using prayer therewith to call for help from
God, that it would please him by his benediction to make the same fruitful.
M. For whether thou teach, or be taught, we must not look to receive
increase and fruit by man, but we must make our humble prayers unto GOD, who
gives boath to him that teaches, and to him that hears, increase and
profit.

C. To be short, this prayer of Christ, 1, Cor 3, 7
was as it were a sealing of the former doctrine, boath that it might be fyrme
in it self, and also that the Disciples might give credit thereunto, and
steadfastly believe it.

C. And in this Chapter Christ manifests his Priesthood, of whom it is
written, Thou art a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedech. Also,
Psalm, ii0, 4
In the days of his flesh he offered up prayers and supplications with
strong crying and tears unto God, Heb. 5, 2
which could save him from death: and he was heard out of the fear. M. Christ
taught before: now he prays: Prayer and preaching joined together.
shortly after he purposed to offer up him self an acceptable sacrifice to
God his Father.

C. And whereas John says that Christ prayed lifting up his eyes unto heaven,
it was a token of great feruencye in prayer. For by this Iesture he declared
that his mind and affection was rather in heaven than in earth, that leaving
men he might have familliare talk with God, Also he looked up to Heaven, not
because God is included there (who replenisheth the whole earth) but because his
Majesty there specially appears. Ierem. 27.
But concerning this matter we have spoken more in the eleventh Chapter going
before beginning at the forty and one verse.

Father the hour is come M. In that Christ prayed openly and in the heareyng
of his Disciples, it was not done without cause. He loves silence and secret
prayer: Math. 6.6.
(as Christ him self not only in words but also by his own deed taught, in
going aparte when he would pray into the wilderness, Math. 14.23.
or else into some solitarye place) but that kind of prayer which the Lord
used here, was not only done for prayers sake, but also for consolation and
instruction. And this manner of open prayer did not only perfect the
Disciples, but has also brought unto us great consolation and instruction. C.
First of all Christ prays that his own kingdom might be glorified, that he
again might set forth the glory of his Father, He says the hour is come,
because although he was manifested by miracles, and by all manner of power to
be the Son of God, yet notwythstanding as yet his spiritual kingdom was
obscure, which shortly after gloriouslye shined. Also he says that the hour
was come, not which man had appointed, but the hour which was decreede by God.
R. But some will say, what means this that Christ prayed, being assured of
his glorification? I answer that, assurance is the principal cause of his
prayer. For except thou be sure and certain to obtain, thou prayest in vain.
Prayer if it be effectual proceeds from faith.
For effectual prayer must spring from faith: and faith is dyrected to the
fyrme and stable promise of God. Wherefore except faith be annexed to the
undoubted promise, it cannot be that thou should obtain. Math. 6.12
Thus we pray daily, Forgive us our dettes as we forgive our detters: when
as Christ purchased upon the Cross remission of our dettes many years before
C. Therefore this prayer was not superfluous: because Christ so depends upon
the will of God, that notwythstandyng, be knew that he must pray for that:
which was promised unto him sertainelye to come to pass. God undoubtedly will
bring that to pass which he has decrede though the whole world do gaynesaye
and resist the same: but yet nevertheless it is our part to crave that at
his hands, by prayer, which he has promised because this is the use of
promyses to stir us up to pray. M. Furthermore we must consider that he
says not. God glorifye me. but Father glorifye thy son. First of all it
expresses a trust and prerogative of the Son toward the Father: then it
puts a difference between the glorification of others of the godly, and of
the Son of God: signifiyng that he does not ask of God, a general
glorification of the godly, but a special glorifying of the Son of God.

That thy son may glorify thee. He means that there is a mutual
glorifying of the Father and of the Son. For to what end appeared Christ
but, only to bring us unto the Father. Whereupon it follows that what
soever honor is brought unto the Father, the same is brought unto Christ, and
contraryewyse A. And he which honors not the Son honors not the Father,
which sent him, Whereupon in another place he Joined the glory of the Father
and the Son together, as when he said. John. 11.4.
This infirmity is not unto death, but for the glory of God: John. 5.23.
that the Son of God may be glorified thereby.

M. So that here we see the disposition of the true son of god he says not,
that thy son may be gloriouse in the whole world, but That thy son may
glorify thee. So that whereas he desires to be glorified, it is for the
preservation of the Fatheres glory.

Therefore, not only the son but the Father also him self, is so unknown
and obscure in this world (and that not amoung the Gentiles only but also
amounge the Jews) that he can not be glorified, but by his son.

C. Finally we must always remember, what person Christ in this sustayneth: for
we must not consider his eternal diuinitye alone, because he speaks as he
was God manifested in the flesh, and according to the office of a Mediator.

B. Moreover the son glorified the Father when he manifested his power and
goodness: and the Father glorifieth the son, in that he has exalted him,
set him on his right hand, to be the Lord and Savior of all, and has made him
to be known by the preaching of the Gospel. This thing the Lord plainly
enough declares when he says as follows.

As thou have given him power over all flesh, that he should give eternal
life to as many as thou have given him.

R. This is that glory with the which the father glorified the son, namely
that he might be the Author of everlasting life to all men, which believe in
him: which are meant, by this word, flesh. For this is the will of the Father
that every one which sees the Son, John 6, 46
and believes in him should have eternal life. But to be a Medtator to the
Father, and to to be the Author of everlasting life, is not greater honor and
glory. C. The power over all flesh, signifies the Rule and dominion, which
was given unto Christ, when the Father appointed him to be the King and head.
But we must noate the end, namely that he might give eternal life to all
those that believe. Christ therefore took upon him rule and power not so much
for himself, as for our salvation. So that it is meet that we willinglye
submit our selves unto Christ not only to obey God but also because there
is nothing more amiable than that subjection, seeing it is unto us the cause of
everlasting life. M. But as touching this present place, we see that eternal
life is the gift of Christ and not the reward of our merits: Secondlye that
this gift is stayed upon the power of God, given to the son. Thirdly, Life
eternal is the free gift of god.
that everlasting life is not given to every one, but only to the elect
whom the Father has given to the Son C For christ says not, that he has
rule over the whole world, to give life unto all men* without exception, but
he restrains this grace to those only which are given unto him. But how
are they given? For the Father has also made the Reprobate subject unto him.
Answer, Only the elect are of the peculiar flock of Christ, the custody and
charge whereof he has taken upon him as a shepehearde. Therefore the kingdom
of Christ is extended to al men: but it brings saueing health to the elect
only, who gladly and willyingly follow the voice of the shepehearde. For others
he constrayneth violently to obey him, until at the last he break them in
pieces with an Iron maule. A. Therefore this place agrees very well with that
which we read before, where it is said.

Whatsoever the father gives me shall come unto me Also.

This is the will of my Father which sent me, Ioh. 6.37:
that of all which he has given me I should not loose one, but raise it up
again at the last day.

This is life eternal, that they might know thee the true God, and Jesus
Christ whom thou have sent.

C. Now he defines the way how to give life, namelye, when he illumineth
and brings the elect into the true knowledge of God. For he speaks not
here of the fruition of life, which we hope for, but only shows how men
shall come unto life. And to the end this sentence may be well understood, we
must first of all noate that we are al in death, until such time as God does
shine, who aloane is lyff: and so soon as he has shyned, because we possess
him by Faith, we enter therewithal into the possession of life. Hereupon it
comes that the knowledge of him is rightlye said to bring saving health. M.
But this knowledge is not gotten by our own industrye, but by the grace of
God. Therefore the son prays the Father to gloryfye him, to the end that
he also may glorifye him again, and that so the elect having received the
knowledge of them boath, may be made partakers of eternal life. No man
therefore can know God, but, by Christ the son of God.

R. For no man has seen God at any time: the only begotten son, which is
in the bosom of the Father which has revealed him. For he is the brightness
of the glory of the Father. John. 1.18.
And the light is known in brightness and glory. Hebr. 1.3.
C. Wherefore God is not known but in the face of Christ, who is his liuelye
and express Image.

Colos. 1, 15.
In that therefore that the Father is set in the first place, it is not referred
to the order of faith: as though our mind, knowing God should afterward
descend unto Christ: but the sense and meaning is, that God is known by a
Mediator set between him and us.

M. And to know God the Father, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent, is not
simplye to know that God is God, and that Jesus Christ is boath the son of
God, and the son of man: but is to know the mystery of the Cross, and of
the received dispensation, and to redeem mankind from sins, and death,
originallye coming from Adam: The knowledge of God is life eternal.
as, that God is the Father of his only begotten son Christ, and that he
sent him for man's salvation into the world, by whose blood salvation
belongs to all men, as well to the Jews as the Gentiles which believe in
him without whom there is no salvation. Acts. 4, 12.


C. Here he added two Epithetes, or tytles, as, the true, and only: because
first it is necessary, that faith do discern God from the vain imaginations
of men, and embracing him with fyrme assurance, should never fail or
swerve: secondlye, that men might judge nothing to be lame or imperfect in
God: and he might content them selves with him aloane.

This therefore is the meaning, That they may acknowledge thee for the true
God. But by this means he seems to deprive him self of the right and name
of the deuinitye.

If any man replye and say,

For if so be the Father only and the Son be one GOD, than the holy
Ghost is put out of his degree: the which is no less absurd.

The answer hereunto is easelye made, Aunsvvere
If a man mark and consider well the manner of speech, which Christ uses
in diverse places of the Gospel of Saint John: of the which the Readers have
been so often admonished already that they cannot forget it. Christ appearing
in the form of a man, places the power, essence, and majesty of GOD under
the person of his Father.

Therefore there is but one true God the Father of Christ. That is to say,
that GOD which promised unto the world long a go, a redeemer, is one.

But in Christ we shall find boath the unity and veritye of the dietye:
because Christ was therefore abased that he might exalt us.

When we are come thus far, than his divine Majesty shows it self, then
is he whollye known in the Father, and the Father whollye in him.

In fine, he which seperateth Christ from the diuinitye of the Father (as do
the Jews, Turks, and Arrians) he as yet knows not which is the only true
God, but does rather devise unto him self a strange God. C. Therefore we are
commanded to know God, and Christ whom he has sent, by whom, as by his
stretched out hand, he draws us unto him.

R. Also this place very well agrees with that where it is said, I am the
resurrection and the life, he that believes on me, Ioh. ii. ^5.
though he were dead, yet shall he live, and whosoever lives and believes in
me, shall not dye for ever.

For faith in Christ is the true knowledge of God: Wherefore faith is eternal
life: because it possesses Christ, which is righteousness, salvation, and
life. M. For this is the true God, and eternal life. John. 5.20


C. But whereas it seems unto some, unjust, that men should perish for
the ignorance of God only, it comes hereof, Psalm. 36.9
because they do not way and consider that the well of life is in the power
of God only, and that all they which have forsaken him are deprived of life.
Ephe. 4.18
Now, seeing men come not unto GOD but by faith, infidelitye must of
necessitye keep us in death. If any man object and say, Heb, 11, 6
that such as are just otherwise and innocents shall have iniurye, if they be
demanded, which want knowledge, we may readilye answer, that there is
nothing right and sincere in men, so long as they abide in their corrupt
nature. Gen 8, 2i
For the thought of man's heart is evil even from his childhoode, Colloss, 3,
i0
but we are renewed (as Paul testifyeth) after the Image of GOD through
knowledge.

4. I have glorified thee on the earth: I have fynished the work which thou
gave me to do.

M. Now he speaks of that by which he advanced the glory of his fathers
name, boath by doctrine and by signs, all the race of his dispensation,
ascribinge unto him continuallye all things, both him self, and his doctrine,
and also the powers of his Miracles.

C. Yea, in these words he comprehends all the parts of his Ministry,
meaning that he has finished all the whoale course of his calling: for then
was the due and full time when he should be received up into heavenly
glory. For although the special part was yet behind, namely, the sacryfice
of his death, by which he made satisfaction for the sins of all men: yet
notwithstanding, because the hour of death was now at hand, he speaks even
as if he had already suffered the same. When he says, I have finished the
work which thou gave me to. he teaches that the obedience by which God is
gloryfied, is not exercised in those works, which we in our own lyking choose
to be good, but in those works which God commits to every one to finishe.
Here let the Bishops and other Pastors, take heed how they depart out of
this life, whether they also can say, We have gloryfied thee O Lord upon
earth, we have finished the work which thou gave us to do.

C. This therefore is the sum of Christ's words, that he is set of the
Father in the possession of his kingdom: because he having ended his race
there wanted nothing more for him to do, but only to bring forth the fruit
and effect, by the power of the spirit, of all those things which he had
done in the earth by the commandment of his Father: according to this saying
of Paul, He made him self of no reputacion, taking on him the form of a
servant: he humbled him self, and became obedient to the death, even to the
death of the cross: Phil 2.8
wherefore God has exalted him, and given him a name, which is above every
name.

5. And now glorify thou me, O Father with thine own self, with the glory
which I had with thee or ever the world was.

C. He now wishes to be glorified with the Father, not that the Father should
glorify him within, without witness, but to the end he being gloriouse
received into heaven, may there declare his might and power, that every knee,
boath in heaven, in earth, and under the earth may bow. Rom, 6, i0
Therefore these words (with thine own self) are compared with terrestrial
and transitorye glory: even as the Apostle Paul when he says that he is once
dead unto sin, but now alive unto God, expresses the blessed immortalytye,
afterward he declares that he desires no borrowed or transitorye glory,
but only that he may appear to be such a one in the flesh, as he was
before the world was made, or (to speak more plainelye) that the divine
majesty which he always had might now shine in the person of the Mediator,
and in the flesh of man which he had taken upon him. A. This place serves
greatly to the confutation of the Arrians. For although he speak of the
glorification of a man, in the form of a servant, yet notwithstanding the
same Christ, as he is the word of God, (which was in the beginning with God,
and God coescentiall with the Father, and coequall in glory) had his being
before the world began: who afterward, when the fullness of time came,
abasing himself and taking upon him the form of a servant, Gal, 4, 4
was made man. Whom at the last God set on his right hand in heavenly
places: far above all rule, power, and might, and dominion, and every name
that is named, Ephe, i, 20
not in this world only, but also in the world to come.

Therefore it is evident that he is not a new or temporal God. For if so be
his glory be eternal, himself also must needs be sempiternall.

Moreover we have here a manifest didistintion between him and the person of
the Father. Where by we gather not only that God is eternal, but also that
the word of God is eternal, begotten of the Father before all worlds. The
Lord (says he) has possessed me in the beginning of his ways: Prove 8, 22
I was before his works of oulde: I was set up from everlasting, from the
beginning, and before the earth. Therefore he prays not to receive any new
thing but that again the form and glory of God, which for a time lay hid,
might be manifested in him by the resurrection. R. By this example we also are
taught, that when we are delivered unto the Cross, and do sustain ignominye
and reproach, we bend our eyes to that glory of the Children of GOD, Mat,
25, 34
which we shall have with the Father, prepared before the beginning of the
world. Romans 8, i8
For so Christ makes mention of his kingdom that it was prepared before the
beginning of the world for all the faithful. Also, the Apostle Paul says
that the afflictions of this time, are not worthy of the glory which shall be
showed upon us, and he says that God has predestinate us, that we might be
made like unto the Image of his son.

6. I have declared thy name unto the men which thou gave me out of the
world: thine they were and thou gave them me and they have kept thy word.

M. Thus far Christ has prayed, for the glorifying of him self and of his
father: and now he begins to pray unto the father for his Disciples.
First this place shows that Christ is a setter forth and glorifyer of the
fathers name. A. And the name of God in this place, is not a sertaine bare
word, but the very same, which we ought to think, know believe, and preach
concerning God, as of the most loving Father and only preserver of mankind
that to manifest his name, and to manifest him, or to make him known may be
all one. The name of God, is mercy, remission of sins, goodness,
righteousenesse, redemption, and salvation. All these are made manifest and are
reveled concerning God, through the Gospel. The Jews, had heard much of God
before the coming of Christ, but yet notwithstanding they know not this his
name, which was manifested by Christ, but as they received the same at the
mouth of Christ:

By these words of Christ also we artaught, that the name of the father is not
revealed but only to the elect. He had taught and wrought miracles openly, but
yet for all that, none knew the name of the father but only the elect. C.
There wanted no diligence in Christ to call all men unto God: but his labor
was only profitable and effectual to the elect.

His preaching was heard of all men, which preaching manyfested the name of
God? neither did he let to defend his glory before the obstinate. Why then
does he say that he manyfested him self only to a few, but only because
the elect alone do profit by the inward instruction and revelation of the
spirit? Understand therefore, that not al to whom the Gospel is preached,
are truly and effectually taught, but they only whose minds are illumined.
The cause hereof Christ assigns to Gods election because he puts no other
difference why he omitting some, manyfested his fathers name to othersome, but
only because they wear given. Faith proceeds from predestination.
Whereupon it follows that faith springs from Gods eternal
predestination, and that it is not generally given to al men because all
appertain not unto Christ. When he adds saying, out of the world, he plainly
teaches that his Apostles were sometime of the world, (as were also the rest
of the elect) and given unto Christ.

The father might have given Angels from heaven to his Son Christ by whose
means he might have manifested his name to the world: but he thought it
better to choose sertayne out of the world that is to say out of the number
of them, which were conceived in sin, and subject to death, and so give them
unto Christ to be his Disciples, in whom there might appear a sertayne vewe
of the Heavenly grace.

For they were, as were others also, by nature the children of wrath. But
concerning this we have spoken more in the fifteen chapter before, Thine they
were and thou gave them me. M, All things belong unto God the father: but
two manner of ways. All things are his, in that he is Creatoure and Lord of
all things, whether in heaven or in the earth: thus the wicked and reprobate
are his.

Again all they are his specially, whom he has elected and received into his
favor.

These are chosen to life, he gave them unto his son the only savior and
Mediatoure to be saved, when by the preaching of the Gospel he called them to
faith in him. Therefore in these words is noated the eternity of election: and
also bow we ought to consider of the same. Christ declares that they were
always the elect of God. Wherefore GOD discerns them from the reprobate,
not by faith, or by any merit, but by his mere and free grace: because when
they wear farthest from him, yet in his secret counsayl and purpose he
accounted them for his. The assurance and safety consysteth in this that he
has given al those to his son to keep, whom he has chosen, least they
should perish: and hereunto we must bend our eyes, that we may know for
sertayne, that we are in the number of Gods children. For in him is Gods
predestination hid: and in Christ only the same is revealed. R. For he will
save none but such as believe in Christ. For he has appointed Christ to be
a Mediator, an intercessor, and a iustefier. Whereupon he says, They were
thine, that is to say, they were elected of thee: and thou haste given them
unto me: that is, thou have so ordained, that they should be saved by me.
Wherefore I would not have thee first to seek thy self in God, but in Christ
in whom if thou find thy self by faith, be thou sure that God has
predestinate thee to life.

And they have kept thy word. M. He says not sympely, And they have heard
thy word, but, And they have kept thy word. It is one thing to hear with
our ears the word of truth, and another thing to feel and retain the same
with our heart.

This only belongs to the Elect, whom the Father has given to the Son:
The other is common to all that have ears to hear. A. My sheep (says he)
hear my voice. R. For the elect hear and believe the Gospel, the other are
obstinate. Therefore so many as are ordained to everlasting life believe.

C. This therefore is the third degree. The first is, free election: The
second is that donation, by which we are committed to the custody of Christ,
and being received of Christ, are gathered through faith into the sheepefoulde.

The word of God vanishes away from the reprobate: but it takes deep root
in the elect: whereby they are said to observe and keep. A. Wherefore Christ
said not in vain unto the Jews Ye seek to kill me, because my words
abides in you: And in the parrable of the seed, that they had no root, which
believe but for a time, Luke. 8.13.
and in time of temptation go away.

7 Now theye have knowene that all things whatsoever thou haste given me,
are of thee:

C. here is expressed that which is principal in faith, when men so believe in
Christ* that faith, stays not it self upon the sight of flesh, but conceive
his divine power. For when he says, Now they have known that all things
whatsoever thou have given me, he means the faithful, that whatsoever they
have, they feel and know the son to be celestial and divine. And verily
except we know him in Christ, we must needs continuallye waver and be
unstayed. R. Therefore because the elect do believe the Gospel, therefore
they know that it is no humayne invention, but the word of the Father come
from the Father, and the power of God to salvation to every one that believes.
But the word of the Cross to them which perish, is foolishness. Romans 1.16.
1. Cor. 1.18
Thou see est also this place, that knowledge follows Faith, and goes not
before the same, as we saw also before in the three score and nine verse of
the sixth Chapter.

8 For I have given unto them the words which thou gave me, and they have
received them, and have known surely, that I came out from thee, and they have
believed that thou dyddest send me.

R. Now he declares what that is which the Father has given unto him,
namelye, the Gospel, the which was committed by the Father, to the Son that
he might preach the same unto the world. Whosoever therefore receives the
gospel of CHRIST by faith he shall truly know Christ, who being known, GOD
is also known. And the knoweledge of the Father and the Son, by the Holy
Gospel is life everlasting.

C. Therefore least any Man should think, that his doctrine is of Man, or
sprung from the Earth, he pronounces in these words that GOD is the Author
of the same. And he speaks after his manner in the Person of the
Mediatoure, when he says that he has taught that only, which he had
received of the Father.

For because this condition in the flesh was as yet base, and because under the
form of a Servant his deuyne majesty lay hid, he assygneth GOD under
the person of the Father. Nevertheless we must remember that which Saint John
in the beginning, how that Christ, in that he is the eternal word of GOD,
was always one GOD with the Father, Therefore the meaning is, that Christ
was a faithful witness of GOD unto the Disciples, that their faith might be
founded upon none other than upon the word of GOD, seeing the Father himself
has spoken in the Son.

M. Here therefore we see that Christ delyuereth nothing to his Dysciples* but
that which he had received from the Father, so much do althynges depend
upon the word of GOD, that the Savior himself the Son of GOD, would
preach nothing else unto mortal men, then the word of his Father, given unto
him to this end, that he might preach the same unto the world. Let then the
teachers of human tradicions be ashamed of their great presumption, in tying
the consciences of men to human tradicions and imaginations: when there can
come no peace of conscience but from the word of God, delivered to the
Apostles by the Son of God.

And they have known surely, that I came out. That which he had touched
before he now repeateth in other words. For Christ to come out from the
Father, and to be sent of the Father, is even as much as that which went
before, where Christ says, that whatsoever he has is of the Father. M He
might have made mention of signs, which testify also, that he came out from
God: but this is the noate of the Children of God, to believe his word. C. The
sum is this, that faith ought rightlye to behoulde Christ, but so that it
deem and judge no earthlye or contemptible thing to be in him: and that it
ought to be lifted up to his divine power, that it may certainelye be persuaded
that God, and whatsoever belongs unto God is perfytelye in him. B. Behoulde
here therefore the order of salvation. First of all the Gospel is preached to
the elected: then it is given unto them to believe: thirdelye in the Gospel,
and by it, God is known: hereof by and by spring a trust in him, and the love
of him: from whence consequentlye grows the love and desire of piety and
holiness, and also the duetye which we owe unto our brethren.

C. Also we may noat that in the first part of this sentence Christ uses
this word (known) and in the latter part this word (believe) For there by he
teaches us that we cannot know God truly without faith: in the which there
is such assurance and sertayntie, that it is rightly called knoweledge, A. How
Christ went out from the Father we have showed before.

9 I pray for them, I pray not for the world: but for them which thou haste
given me, for they are thine

R. Before Christ prayed for him self to be gloryfyed now he prays for his
Apostles.

And this prayer is a brazen wall for the Disciples, whereby they may stand
steadfast in all aduersityes, and whereby they may overcome sin, death, and
Satan. C. Therefore after Christ had showed that he could bring his Disciples
into his fathers favor, now he makes a prayer for the same, in the which he
shows that he desyereth nothing but that which is agreeable unto his fathers
will: because be commends those only to his father whom he of his own accord
loves. M. Christ in praying puts a difference between the elect and the
reprobate: and prays (...) only for the elect, and not for the world but
also expreslye prenounceth that he prays for them and not for the world He
calls his those which the Father has given him: and he calls the
unbelievers the reprobate, and those whom the father has not given unto him,
the world.

C. So that he plainly affirms that he prays not for the world: because he
cared for his own flock only, which he had received of his Fathers hand.
Notwithstanding this might seem very absurd.

For there cannot be a better Rule of prayer devised, then if we follow Christ
our Captain and master. Math. 5, 4
But we are commanded to pray for all men, yea even for our enemies. i, Tim,
2, 1,
Also the Apostle exhorts that before al things, prayers supplications,
intercessions, and thanks giving be made for all men. Luke 23, 34
C. Furthermore Christ him self prayed after this Indifferently for all men
saying, Father forgive them: for they wotte not what they do.

M. Moreover it is the office of a Mediatoure not only to pray but also to
offer.

And he offered him self upon the Cross for all men. 2, Cor. 5, 15,
For (as says Paul) Christ dyed for all men. Finally Saint John says that he
is the propitiation for the sins of the whoal world. i, John, 2, 2
How then says he that he prays not for the world seeing he dyed for all
men, C. This may be breefly answered, that these prayers which seem to be
made for all men are notwithstanding restrained to the elect of God. Aunsvvere,


We ought to wish this and that man to be saved and so to comprehend all
mankind because as yet we cannot distinguish the elect from the Reprobate yet
notwithstanding we pray therewithal for the coming of Gods kingdom, wishing
that he would destroy his enemies.

This is even as much as to pray for the salvation of all men whom we know
to be created after the Image of GOD, and which are of the same nature that we
are of and do leave their destruction to the Judgment of GOD whom he knows
to be reprobates. There was another sertayne spetiall cause of this prayer,
which ought not to be drawn into example. For Christ's prayer proceeded not
only from the bare scence of faith and love, but also from the feeling of his
fathers secret Judgments which are hidden from us, so long as we walk
through faith.

M. Therefore because we know not who they are which so appertain unto the
world that they can never be drawn away from the same, it is meet that we
wish well unto all men, and to declare our good will by prayer. C. Furthermore
by these words we gather, that they whom it pleases God to love out of this
world shall be heirs of eternal life: and that this difference depended not upon
man's merits but upon the mere good will and grace of God.

For the which place the cause of election in men must first begin with
faith.

Christ plainly pronounces that they were the fathers which were given unto
him.

And it is sertayne that they are therefore given, that they might believe, and
that faith comes of this donation. If so be this donation be the original
of faith, and that election go before the same, what else can follow but that
we confess that they are freely chosen, whom God will have to be saved from
among the rest of the world? Now, seeing Christ prays only for the elect,
the faith of election is necessary for us, if so be we will have our salvation
commended to him of the father. Therefore they do great injury to the
faithful, which seek to race out of their minds the knoweledg of their
election, to the end they might deprive them of the help of Christ.

They also are here reproved which under the pretense of their election: give
them selves to all licentiousenesse of life and to negligence and sleweth in
the work of the Lord: whenas the same ought rather to move them to all
godliness, euenas Christ teaches by his example.

Furthermore, whereas Christ prays not for the world but only for the elect
it brings great horror and fear. For, for this cause, the world ronneth
headlong to all kind of wickedness, to death, to hell, and into everlasting
condempnation, for only the vnbeleeuinge for whom Christ prays, overcome in
Christ through prayer all the euelles of the world, and of the Deuell. But the
world by the Just Judgment of God is given over into a reprobate mind, and is
left unto his own will and pleasure Wherefore as it lives wickedly, so by
the horrible Judgment of God it is condemned. M. Here also we are taught to
love these heartily, whom we know to belong unto Christ and to the father and
for that cause to make our earnest prayers unto God for them.

10. And all mine ar thine and thine are mine, and I am glorified in them.

R. This is a confyrmation of Christ's prayer. For Christ obtains that at the
hands of the father which he prays for, because al things belonging to the
father are his: the which he would not have said, if he had not been the son
equal with the father. M. To the father beelongeth the sempiternal divinity
wisdom, power, goodness, all honor and glory, heaven, earth, and all things
in them, Angels, men, and whatsoever else: therefore all these things also
belong unto Christ, whom the father has made heir of all things. C. Christ
therefore speaks this to show that he shall sertainly be heard of the
father. Hebr. i. 2.
As if he should say. I commend no other unto thee than those whom thou
know to be thine own, because I have nothing which thou haste not. Therefore
I will not be denied. R. Notwithstanding he seems hear to speak spetially
of the elect. These things are so common unto the father and to Christ, that
Christ takes none to be saved but those whom the father has elected for the
same purpose: and all those whom God has elected, those Christ takes into his
charge and saves. When he adds, And J am glorified in the^ he shows that
he has just cause to have care for the elect and to seek their salvation,
seeing they seek whollye to set forth his glory. As if he should say I am
now going out of the world, these shall abide in the world and shall glorify
me, that is to say they shall preach to ye whole world my victory and triumph
over sin, death, and hell, C. And this is a notable confirmation of our faith
that Christ will neauer cease to have care for our salvation if so be he be
gloryfyed, And to gloryfy Christ is first of all to believe in him as in the
son of God: secondly for his sake to do and suffer al things, thirdly to
seek dilligently to bring al men to believe in him to profess his name, and to
embrace his truth: and fourthly to express his spirit in all things by the
exercise of true godliness. Al which things are looked for at their hands
which are given to Christ of the father.

11. And now am I not in the world, and they are in the woorlde, and I come
too thee, Holy father keep thorough thy own name them which thou have given
me, that they may also be one, as we are.

C. Now he adds another cause why he prayed so earnestly for his Disciples,
because shortly they should be destitute of his corporal presence, by enjoying
the which they were as yet cherefull. So long as he was conuersaunt with them,
he gathered them, and nourished them, even as a Hen does her Chickens, under
his wings: and now gooing away, he desires of the Father to protect and
defend them: the which he does in respect of them. For he seeks to remedy
their fear, that they might stay themselves upon God him self, to whom he
now delivered them as it were from hand to hand.

M. Therefore now we see how the most faithful and loving Lord was not so
desirous to go unto the Father, that he regarded not the condition of his
Disciples, but carefully considers in what state to leave them after his
departure. Hereof comes no small consolation, when we hear that the Lord
is the more careful for the salvation of his, when he leaves them according
to his Corporal presence. For hereof we may gather, that we also at this
day laboring in the world, are regarded of him, in so much that he sends
help unto us when we are in trouble, even from his heavenly glory.

Holy Eather keep thorough thy own name. M. He knew that they should be
subject to many dangers in this world, and therefore he prays that they
may be preserved by his Fathers providence. C. For all his prayer tends too
that end, least his Disciples should be discouraged, as though their
Corporal state should be the worse, by the miss of the Corporal presence
of their Master. As if he should say, My Apostles shall abide persecution of
the world for the Gospel. Wherefore I pray that they faynte not under the
heavy burden of the cross.

M. He adds: In thy name. For because they were consecrated to the name of
God, and should suffer many adversities in the world for his sake, he prays
that they may be preserved in or by his name. R. For the name of GOD is a
most strong tower. Prou. 18.10.
Therefore the name of GOD can defend the Faithful man from all evils, and
from the darts of Satan.

C. The sum then is this, When the Corporal sight of Christ is taken from
the Disciples, they sustain no loss, because God receives them into his
protection, whose power is everlasting. He ascribes the manner of saving,
saying: That they may be one.

For those whom the heavenly Father has decreed to save, he gathers into
the holy unity of faith and of the spirit. But because it is not sufficient
for me^ to agree together in one, he adds this: Even as we are one.

For then our unity shall be happy, if so be it set forth the Image of God
the father, and of Christ: even as the wax in the which the King or Signet is
printed, carries the mark or print of the same. A. But concerning ye unity of
the father and the son, read the tenth Chapter going before, beginning at
the.30. verse, and in the verse following.

12. While I was with them in the world, I kept them in thy name: those that
thou gave me have I kept, and none of them is lost, but that lost child:
that the Scripture might be fulfilled.

C. Christ says that he has kept them in his Fathers name, because he made
him self only a Mynister, which did nothing but by the power of GOD. He
therefore thinks it not meet that they should now peryshe, as though the
power of GOD by his departure were extinguished or beade. R. As if he should
say, Hitherto I have confyrmed the Apostles with the word of the Gospel, yea,
I have left nothing undone that might keep them within the bands and
duty of Faith: and I have kept them that none should perish, but only
that Judas Iscarioth, of whose fall the Scripture before testified. And now
because I am gooing away, I commit them to thy charge. For I shall be
delivered too the Adversaries, and shall be left in the hands of the wicked,
that in deryding me they shall say, He saved others, him self he can not
save. Wherefore I resign them over into thy hand, that they may be
preserved from all evil.

C. But this seems very absurd, that Christ should set over unto GOD the
office of saving and preserving, as though he having ended the course of his
life, leassed to be their keeper.

But this is thus answered, That Christ speaks only here of the visible
custody, which had an end in the death of Christ. For so long as he was
conuersaunte on earth, he needed not to borrowe any other power to preserve his
Disciples. But all this is referred too the person of the Mediator, which
appeared in the form of a servant for a time. But now he commands his
Disciples, so soon as they begin to want but the least help, to lift up
their eyes to heaven. Whereby we gather, that Christ does no less preserve
the faithful at this day, than he has done in time paste: but after an
other manner: because the deuyne Majesty openly shines in him.

R. For if so be Christ kept and preserved his, before he entered into the
Kingdom of his Father, and satisfied the desire of the Faithful concerning
joy, how much more shall he keep them now, seeing he has justified them
by his Death and Resurrection? For now our salvation is more near, than
when we believed. And seeing when as yet we were Sinners Christ dyed for us:
much more now we being justified by his blood, Romans 5.6
shall be saved through him from wrath.

M. Furthermore let us note here how Christ says that he has kept his
Disciples in the world. For such is this world, that the Elect have need of
Gods preservation, so long as they are in the same. C. Whereas he makes
exception here of Judas, it is not without cause: For although he were none
of the Elect, and of Gods flock, yet notwithstanding the dignity of his
office, made him seem so to be. Neither would any man have thought otherwise
of him, so long as he was in that office. Therefore (in respect of Grammar) the
exception is improper: but if we consider the matter, all men will say that it
behooved Christ so to speak. Moreover lest any man should think that the
eternal election of God was void in the destruction of Judas, he adds
heerewithal that he was the son of perdition: by which words he gives to
understand, that his ruin and destruction, which suddenly appeared in the sight
of men, was from the beginning known unto God.

It appears therefore very well, that Christ knew for whom he prayed, and
for whom he prayed not. M. By this perdition of Judas we may gather that
there is no hope of salvation for those, which following the steps of Judas,
persecute the truth of Christ for filthye gain, whereby they manyfestly
declare that they are borne the children of perdition: seeing the same happened
too a familiar Apostle of Christ.

That the Scripture might be fulfilled. By this place a man should gather
amiss, that the fall of Judas should rather be imputed to GOD, than to him
self, because of the necessity which was laid upon him by the Prophecy.
For the success and sequel of matters ought not therefore to be ascribed
unto Prophesies, because the same is there foreshewed. Neither do the
Prophets prophecy any other thing than the very same which should come to
pass, though they held their peace. Therefore we must not think the cause
of any thing to be in them. Most certain it is that nothing happens but by
the ordinance of GOD: but the question is now only concerning the Scripture,
whether their predictions and Prophesies bring any necessity with them to men,
or no: the which we have showed already to be false. Neither was it the
purpose of Christ, to impute the cause of the destruction of Judas, unto the
Scripture: but only to take away the occasion of offense, which might trouble
weak minds. And the reason why offense might be taken away, was, because
the spirit of God had before testified that the same should so come to pass.
For commonly at new and unwonted things we are much afraid.

This is a very necessary admonition. For how comes it to pass at this day,
that the greater part of men so easily fall at every stumbling block, but
because they remember not the testimonies of Scripture?

A. But of what Scripture is this that Christ speaks: for he expresses not
the place, no more than he did in the eyghteenth verse of the thirteenth
Chapter before? B. We must note that as what soever is written of the
afflictions of the Saints, the same does belong to the Lord, the head of
the Saints, yea, and is fulfilled in him: Even so it follows that what
soever is written of the enemies of Christ, should not only agree, but also
be fulfilled in the enemies of Christ. Heerevppon the Apostle Peter says, Let
his habitation be deserte, and no man be dwelling therein. Act. 1.20.
And his Byshopricke let another take. Psalm. 69.26
The which place he alleges as spoken of Judas. The which Psalm, and the
hundred and nine also, do specially entreat of the Lords punishment, and of
his enemies: notwithstanding the contents of them were first fulfilled in
David as in the figure of Christ, and in his enemies, which were types of the
enemies of Christ, but yet figuratively and truly fulfilled at the last in
the Lord, and in his enemies.

Heerevppon it seems that the Lord spoke in this present place of those
things which are written in the sixty nine Psalm. concerning his enemies.

By this place also we are taught, that the holy Scripture can not be frustrate
(even as Christ taught in the tenth chapter gooing before.) And therefore those
things contained in the same, whether they appertain to the salvation of the
Godly, or to the destruction of the Reprobate, are so certaynely to be
believed, that we need nothing to doubt, but that they shall be saved to
whom the same promises salvation, and those destroyed, to whom soever the
same threatens destruction.

13. Now come I to thee, and these words speak I in the world, that they
might have my Joy fullfilled in them selves.

C. Here Christ shows that he did not therefore so earnestly pray unto the
Father, for his disciples, as though he were careful for their state to
come, but rather to ease them of their care and sorrow. M. He spoke these
things in the hearing of his disciples, not because of him self, or his
Father, but for their sakes. As if he should say, hitherto have I kept them in
the world: but now I come unto thee: wherefore I now commend them unto thy
providence. And I speak these things, that they might rejoice in my name,
knowing in what favor I am with thee. C. He calls it his joy, because he him
self was the aucthor, cause and pledge of the same. For in us, there is
nothing but terror, fear, unquietness, and sorrow, and in Christ alone, peace
and Joy. A. And this verse agrees with that where Christ speaks unto his
disciples after this manner, These things have I spoken unto you that my Joy.
might remain in you, John. 15.11.
and that your joy might befull. Compare the exposition of both places
together, and thou shalt have the true meaning of Christ.

14. I have given them thy word, and the world has hated them because they
are not of the world, even as I also am not of the world.

C. For another cause he commends the disciples unto the Father, because for
the hatred of the worlds sake they had need of his help. And with all he
shows the cause of the hatred, namely for that they embrace the word of God,
which the world can not abide. R. As if he should say, I have preached unto
them the Gospel, which they in like manner shall set forth hereafter too the
whole world: and for the same shall suffer persecution of the world. For they
are not of the world: that is to say, they teach those things which are
contrary to the world: for they preach impiety to be there, where the world
places righteousness, and that they make sin which the world cou^teth
Innocensy: beside all this they fashion not them selves after the manner of this
world for they allow of the will of God, and dislike of those things which
please the world. C. Now we must note that, and call it to mind, which we
heard eue^ now, that the end of this prayer was, that the Joy of Christ
might be fullfilled in us. Therefore, so often as the fury and rage of this
world is so kendled in against us, that we seem to be nere unto destruction,
let us hold before us this targuet, that God never forsakes them which labor
for the Gospel. He says that they are not of the world, because all they are
separated from the^ which are regenerate by the spirit of God. God therefore
will not suffer his sheep to wander among wolves, but he will show him self
a sheepehard unto them. A. But concerning these things we have spoken more in
the.15. Chapter going before, and in the.9. verse of the same. In like manner
in what sense Christ is said not to be of this world read the.23. verse of
the.8. chapter going before.

15. I pray not that thou should take them out of this world but that thou
keep them from evil.

Christ does not teach his father what he should do unto the Apostles* and
what not: he speaks these things, because of the disciples which stood by,
for whom he prayed, to the end they might know that this was the divine
custody, that they might be preserved and kept in this evil and wicked world,
that they might not be circumuented with the wickedness of the same. C.
Therefore Christ provides for their infirmity, to the end he might temper
their desiers (which exceeded very much) by this means which he prescribes.
He promises not unto his disciples the grace of his Father, which might
deliver them from all care and labor, but which might arm them with
invincible fortitude against their enemies, and defend them against the huge
heap of dissentions, which they should sustain. Therefore if we desire to be
saved according too the Rule of Christ, we must not desire to be free from
evils, neither must we pray unto God to deliver us by and by into blessed
rest and peace: but we must co^tente our selves, with a sure trust and hope
of victory: and must stronglye and constantly resist all evils, from the
which Christ prays his father that we may have a happy deliverance. 1. Cor.
10.13
R. For God is faithful which will not suffer us to be tempted above our
strengh: Mat. 6.13
but in the midest of temptation will make away that we may be able to bear
it. M. To this effect perteyneth this petition of the Lords prayer, Lead us
not into temptation but deliver us from evil. C. To be short, God takes not
those that are his out of the world: because he would not have them Idle and
sloughfull: yet notwithstanding he deliuerethe them from evil lest they
should be destroyed. For he would have them fight, but he would not have
them wounded to death.

R. Therefore by this word Evil, understand not affliction Cross, and
death, but sin, impiety, infidelity, and falling a way from the Gospel,
the which evil being taken away, other evils will turn to good. For in that
Christ has taken a way sin, the evils, and wages, of sin remaining, he
declares his glory and power, by which of evil, he makes good. For death
because it is the reward of sin, and the Cross, because it is the hyer of
sin, are evils: but sin being taken a way, by faith they are made good:
and they must abide with the Godly in this world, that they may be proved and
purged, as it were through fire.

17. Sanctify the^ through thy truth, thy word is the truth.

M. Before he said, I have given unto them thy word: now he prays that
they might be sanctified with the spirit of God at their entering into the
Apostleship, whereby the truth of God might be spread throughout the whole
world: that is to say, that they might supply his room and be confyrmed.
Therefore this sanctification comprehends the kingdom of God and the
righteousness thereof, that it might also be extended to all the beeleeuing,
though not Apostles: the which is brought to pass when God renueth us by his
holy Spyrite, and confyrmeth the grace of renouation in us, and continues the
same to the end.

First of all therefore he prayethe that the Father would sanctify his
disciples: that is too say, that he would whollye addiecte them unto him,
and take them too him self as a holy and principal charge.

Secondlye he shewethe the manner how he would have them sanctified: and
that not without cause. For there are sertayne braynesicke Men, which
babble and prate much of sanctification, but do omit the truth of God, by
which he consecrateth us too him self.

Moreover, because others no less mad than they, do tryffle and toie with that
truth, (of the which there is mention made here) and do in the mean time
neglecte the word, Christ plainly affirms that the truth is no where else to
be found than (...) which does (...) is it (...) For (...) be s^^^led with
^^^pe and work, according to the custom of the law, sa^^g the blood of
Christ is mutable, and h^dde^ from our eyes Therefore it is (...) the
consciences by the word of the Gospel, which is the truth And the word is
this: Christ dyed for us (...) for my ^^eepe ^ake ye (...) this is my body
which i^ given for your drink ye^ this is my blood ^hiche is shed for you.
And such like.

1 Pet. ^.18. Ioh ^.1^.15 Mat. 26 26 Ephe. ^.26.
In this sense Paul affirms that the church is cleansed by the fountain of
water in the word of life. R. Also Christ says, Now are ye all clean through
the word which I have spoken unto you. And Peter says, Ioh. 15.3.
Purifying your souls in obeying the truth by the spirit. C. It is God only
which sanctifies. 1. Pet. 1.22.
A. I am the Lord (says he) which sanctify you: but because his Gospel is
the power of salvation to every one that believes, whosoever forsakes that
mean, Romans 1.19.
he must needs be more filthe every day than other. Truth here, by
excellency is taken for the light of Heavenly wisdom, in the which God has
revealed him self unto us, that he might make us like (...).

18. As thou dyddest send me into the world, even so also have I sent them
into the world.

C By another Argument he confirms his prayer, namely,, because his and the
Apostels calling was all one. Now (says he) I commit unto them that office,
which hitherto I my self have sustained and borne at thy commandment.
Therefore it is necessary that they be instructed and armed with the power of
thy spirit that they may be able too bear so great a burden. M. And he
uses here according to the Hebrew phras, one tence for another, as I have
sent, for I will send. For he sent them not until after his resurrection.
Mar. 16.15.
Also here we have to noate who they are which may hope that this heavenly
santification shall be given them, to discharge the office of preaching. There
are some which run of them selves uncalled and there are other some, which
being only taught and called of men, run without the divine disposition and
calling of God. Neither of them have to hope for the sanctification of the
spirit. But they whom Christ sends into the world, which are sanctified by
the spirit of God to be ministers of the truth. Such were the Apostles: whom
Christ intended to send forth into the world, even as he him self was sent
forth of the Father. Also we must weye how greatly we ought to esteem the
doctrine of the Apostles. Although they were men, yet notwithstanding by the
testimony of Christ him self they were so sent into the world, even as he
was sent of the Father. Therefore he which hears them, hears God him
self: and he which despises them, despises God. Luke 10.16.
Finally, let us consider to what end the Apostles were sent into the world.
R. They were sent of Christ, even as Christ was sent of the Father. Now,
Christ was sent to show the will of his Father, that is to say, the
Gospel: he was also sent to be a lively example, and to bear the cross: M.
not to rule in the world after the manner of men, but to be as it were the
seuaunte o^ others, when as notwithstanding he was Lord of all. R. Even so
also the Apostles were sent, not to teach man's inventions, but the Gospel:
not to live at their own pleasure, but that their light might shine before
men: not to be Princes of this world, but to bear the cross with Christ: Who
came, not to be ministered unto, Mat. 20.28
but to minister him self, and to give his life a redemption for many. M.
Wherefore let the Bishops of Rome mark well, and see how they defend their
Lordship, which they have in the Church under the pretense of Christ.

19. And for their sakes sanctify I my self, that they also might be
sanctified through the truth.

R. To sanctify is to ceparate to divine uses. C. Therefore in these words he
does more plainly explicate from whence that sanctification does come which is
wrought in us by the doctrine of the Gospel, namely because he has
consecrated him self to the Father, that his holiness might appertain unto
us. For as the blessinge is extended from the first fruits to the whole
increace, even so the spirit ^f God does sprinkle us with the holiness of
Christ, and maket^ us partakers of the same: and that not only by imputation
(for by this means he is said to be made unto us righteousness) but he is
also said to be made unto us sanctificaon,.1 Cor. 1.30
because after a sort he offers us to the Father, that by his spirit we may
be renewed into true holiness. And although this sanctification pertains to
the whole life of Christ, yet notwithstanding it is specially to be seen in
the sacrifice of his death: because then he appeared to be a true Priest,
which consecrated the Temple, the Altar, all the Vessels, Exodus 29.1
and the people by the power of his spirit. A. Even as before time in the Law
it was shadowed. R. Christ therefore sanctifies him self: That is, he is
made the instrument of God the Father, by which he is glorified: he offers
and sacrifices him self, that we also may be made the instruments and true
sacrifices of his divine glory. Sanctification.
M. For Christ has not so sanctified him self for us, that we may abide
profane and far separate from the communion of his spirit and
sanctification: but although we be saved by his only holiness, yet
notwithstanding we are sanctified also by the participation of his spirit.
They which are void of the same, promise unto them selves in vain the
fellowship of Christ. Whereupon the Apostle says, Romans 6.4.
We are buried with him by Baptism into his death, that lykevvyse as
Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father: even so we
also should walk in nevvnesse of life. And in another place he says: Roma.
12.1.
Offer up your bodies a quick sacrifice, holy, and acceptable unto God,
which is your reasonable service. This therefore is the sense and meaning, I
sanctify my self: that is, I dye for them, that they by my death may be filled
with the spirit of sanctification, and may be made the holy vessels of God, by
the revealed spirit of the Gospel. M. This the Apostle comprehends in these
words, Hebr. 10.10.
In the which will we are made holy, even by the offering of the body of
Jesus Christ once for all.

In the truth. The word of God is the truth, even as Christ said before.
Therefore the sanctification of the ministers of Christ, and of the faithful,
Acts. 15.9 Faith makes al things clean.
consists in the truth of Gods word, upon the which faith is grounded, by
which God purifieth the hearts. Without this all things are profane and
unclean.

20. Nevertheless I pray not for them alone, but for the^ also which shall
believe on me through their preaching.

R. Thirdly Christ prays for all the faithful, which should be to the end
of the world. This verily brings great consolation. For if so be through the
doctrine of the Gospel we believe in Christ, there is no cause why we should
doubt but that with the Apostles we are under Gods protection, so that none of
us can perish. This prayer of Christ is a quiet haven, into the which
whosoever enters, he is safe from all peril of shipwreck: for his words
are of as great force as if he had solemly sworn that he is careful for our
salvation. R. And first of all this place confirms the authority of the
Apostles against those which very contemptuously extinuate and disprayse the
preaching of the Gospel by the Apostles, Prou. 20.9.
for that they were men also subject unto errors. And it is true that they
were men in life and in works: (for who can say my heart is clean?) but they
preached the doctrine of the Gospel, not by human, but by the divine
ministry. Whereupon Christ also prays for those which should believe
through their preaching. Furthermore let our consciences be confyrmed against
the world, and against all the afflictions of the world. For so soon as
Christ prayed, the Father heard, and the father hearing, what remains but
his grace and ready affection toward us? C. Let this also suffice us, which
know that our faith is founded upon the Gospel preached by the Apoples,
though the world condemn us a thousand times, namely, that Christ
acknowledges us for his special charge, and commends us to his father, Ioh.
11.41.
of whom he can not choose but be heard. C. When he adds.

Through their preching He very well expresses the forre and nature of faith.
M. Even as the Apostle Paul also, Romans 10 17
when he says that faith comes by hearing. And the word of the Apostles is
nothing else but the Gospel which they were commanded to preach in the
world. Mar. 16.15.
C. Woe then unto the Papists, whose faith is so far from this rule, that
they are not ashamed most blasphemously to say, that the scriptures are like
unto a Shipmans hose, and to a nose of wax: and that therefore the tradition
of the Church shall be their direction and rule of faith. But let us be
assured that the same faith only is approved of the son of God our Judge
alone, which is conceived by the doctrine of the Apostles. For there shall no
certain testimony any where else be found, than in their writings. We
must also note what faith the word of the Apostles does bring forth. This
Christ declares, when he says.

Which believe in me. Let now the Jews, Turks, and Romish rabble, glory of
their faith: but it makes no matter what every one believes, and in whom he
believes. Every doctrine has his faith: but the Apostolical doctrine
begets only the faith in Christ. And this faith alone is partaker of this
prayer of Christ, and of the promises concerning everlasting life.

21. That they all may be one, as thou father art in me, and I in thee, and
that they also may be one in us: That the world may believe that thou have sent
me.

R. That which Christ prayed for his Apostles, he now also prays for all the
faithful, that they might be of one faith, of one spirit, Ephe. 4.5.
and of one Baptism, and might acknowledge one Lord. C. Therefore he prefixeth
again the scope of our felicity in unity: and not without cause. For this is
the destruction of mankind, that the same being drawn and fallen from God,
is lame, dispersed, and confounded in it self. Therefore the repayring thereof
is contrary, namely, that the same must grow together into one body: even as
the Apostle Paul says, He gave some Apostles, Ephe. 4.13.
and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Shepheardes and Teachers, to
the gathering together of the Saints, into the work of ministration, into
the edifying of the body of Christ, till we all meet together into the unity
of faith. Wherefore so often as Christ makes mention of unity, Unity in
Christ.
let us remember how horrible the dissipation and confusion of the world is
without him. Furthermore let us know that this is the beginning of a happy
life, if so be we all are governed and do live by the only spirit of God.
Unity is the gift of God.
M. But withal let us remember that this unity comes not but by the gift
of God. Therefore Christ prays the Father, that he would give unto them to be
one. This gift is not gotten but by the spirit of God. The spirit of the
flesh and of the world, is not the spirit of unity, but of discordes. R.
Among the wicked there is not one faith: for one believes in his fasting,
another in his sacrifices, this fellow believes in Saint Nicholas, and that
fellow in Saint Michaell: some in the blessed Virgin, and other some in
Saint Anne: and look how many men, so many Gods there are among the
wicked. Therefore the true unity is among Christians only, which are of one
spirit, which have one Lord, and one Savior. C. Moreover we must note, that
so often as Christ in this chapter pronounces him self to be one with the
Father, he speaks not simply of his divine essence, but is called one in the
person of a Mediator, in that he is our head. A. Saint John comprehends this
conjunction, of the which Christ speaks here in few words, saying: 1. John.
1.3.
That which we have seen and heard we show unto you, that you also might
have fellowsippe with us, and that our fellowship may be with the Father, and
with his son Jesus Christ. 1. Ioh. 2.24. Romans 12.4. 1. Cor. 12.12.
And in another place: If that abide in you which ye have heard from the
beginning, ye shall continue in the Son, and in the Father.

That the world may believe. C. Some by this word world) understand the
Elect, which at that time were dispersed. But because throughout this whole
Chapter, by the world he means the Reprobate, the contrary sentence and
opition is better allowed. In the.25. verse following, he separateth the world,
of the which he speaks here, from the faithful. And this word (Believe) is
improperly put by the Evangelist, for the word (know) seeing the wicked being
convinced by experience it self, do understand and perceive the heavenly and
divine glory of Christ. Thus it comes to pass that in believing they believe
not: because this sense and understanding does not perch into the internal
affection of the mind. And this is the just judgment and vengeance of God,
that the eyes of the reprobate should be blinded with the brightness of his
divine glory, which are unworthy of his sincere sight. R. Christ therefore
prays his Father, that he would confyrme the faithful in one spirit, that
all the world may know that he came by divine authority into this world. And
this began first to be fulfilled, Act. 4.32.
when by the sending of the holy Ghost, the faithful had one heart and one
mind. The which thing was wonderful in the eyes of the world, in so much
that the wicked were constrained to cry: This is the finger of God, and the
right hand of the most high.

22. And the glory which thou gave me, I have given them: that they also may
be one, as we also are one.

C. Mark and consider that there was such an example expressed in Christ of
perfect blessedness, that he had nothing proper to him self, but was rather
made rich, to enriche all those that are his faithful servant. This is our
blessedness, that the image of God should be repaired and framed anew, which
before was decayed and destroyed by sin. For Christ, not only as he is the
eternal word of God, is his lively Image, but also has the express picture
of his Fathers glory engraven in his humayne nature, of the which he is made
partaker with us, that he might transfigure his members into the same. The
same also Paul teaches, 2. Cor. 3.18.
We all behold as in a myrrour the glory of the Lord with his face open, and
are changed into the same similitude from glory to glory. Whereupon it
follows that none shall be counted for a Disciple of Christ, but he in whom
the glory of God, imprinted by the Image of Christ as by a signet, is
expressed. Notwithstanding there are some which by this glory which Christ
confesses that he has received from his Father, understand the love, with
the which he was loved of the Father before the foundation of the world, of
the which glory he will speak anon. Other some refere it to the glory of
Miracles, and to that ample power of the spirit. By which the first believers
(that is to say, the Disciples) wrought greater Miracles than the Lord him
self: that this place might agree with that of Mark, The signs shall
follow them that believe: Man. 16.17
In my name they shall cast out Devils, They shall speak with new tongues.
etc. The rest by this word (Glory) understand the Gospel, the which
Christ gave unto the believers. For if the ministration of condemnation be
glory, much more shall the ministration of righteousness excel in glory. But
the first exposition is best to be allowed.

23. I in them, and thou in me, that they be made perfect in one, and that the
world may know that thou have sent me, and have loved the^, as thou have loved
me.

M. Christ speaks not here of that perfection of unity, by which he is one
with the Father, but of that manner of unity by which he is united in the
Father, and the Father in him. And he speaks as a Mediator, by whom we are
made one with God. C. For his purpose is to show, that all the fullness of
goodness, and that also which was hidden in God, was now openly to be seen in
him, that he might make his members partakers of the same: even as the water
flowing from the Condite head to diverse places, by pipes, serves diverse
Cities, and waters sundry fields. When he adds:

And have loved them as thou have loved me. He notes the cause and original
of love. As if he should say, Because thou haste loved them, thou haste loved
me. For there is but one only Christ which can be said to be well-beloved.
Furthermore the heavenly father loves all the members with the same love with
ye which he has loved the Church, that he may love no man, but in Christ.
But for this, read more in the.3.14. and.16. chapters before.

24. Father I will that they which thou have given me, be with me where I am:
that they may se my glory which for thou haste given me, thou louedst me
before the foundation of the world.

M. Whereas Christ says here to his Father (I will) it is not spoken
commaundingly, but in the way of petition. C. For, I will, in this place, is as
much to say, as I desire. Notwithstanding there may be double understanding
in the same: either that he would have his disciples to enjoy his external
presence: or else, that God would bring them at the last into his heavenly
kingdom, whyther he went before. Thus, to see the glory, some expound to
have the participatio^ of that glory which Christ has: other: some, to feel
with the sense of faith, what Christ is, and how great his majesty is also.
But all things well wayed and considered, we must believe that Christ speaks
of the perfect blessedness of the Godly. As if he should say that his prayer and
peticion was not granted, until such time as they were received up into
heaven unto him. Thus we must understand the sight of his glory. They then
saw the glory of Christ when he was present with them, even as if men should
see a small light shining through the narrow chinks or crakes of a ^oore or
wall, when they are shut into a dark place. Now Christ wishet that they
might profit so long until they enjoyed the perfect light in the kingdom
of heaven. In effect he prays that the Father would bring them forward more
and more, until such time as he brought them unto the full sight of his
glory. M. By this place we see what manner of prayer it was which Christ
made, namely no uncertain or doubtful prayer, but an assured and faithful
prayer too obtain that which he asks. C. When he adds.

For thou louedst me before the beeginning. It does far better agree with the
person of the mediator than with the bare deuinitie of Christ. A. By this place
we gather that the faithful are out of peril, seeing they are partakers of
the same glory, with the which Christ is endued of the Father for the head is
not separated from the members. R. Therefore, whether the faithful are in
death, or in life, they are with Christ. Whereupon the Prophet says, if I walk
in the midst of the shadow of death, I will fear none ill, because thou
art with me.

25. O righteous Father, the world also has not known thee: but I have
known thee, and these have known that thou haste sent me.

M. Again he comme^deth in his disciples the knowledge of god the father, the
which he manifested unto them. Of this he spoke before. And here he repeateth
the same again, discerning his disciples from this world, and accusing the
world in this, that the same knows not God the Father. C. Therefore of
right, Christ of a singular affection commends his disciples whom the
unbelief of the world, did not hinder from the knowledge of god. M. The like
sentence almost thou haste before in these words, And ye have not known him
but I have known him. Also it agrees with the.8. verse of this chapter. C. In
calling the Father righteous he condemns the world and the wickedness of the
same. As if he should say, Although the world do proudly despise and reiecte
God, yet not withstanding he loses nothing therebye, but remains still as
glorious a God and a righteous as he was before. By which words he teaches
that the faith of the Godly ought to be so founded in God that though the
whole world should fall, yet the same should never shake Also we must note
the order of faith which is here described. The son only which came forth
of the bosom of the Father, does properly know the Father. Therefore al they
which desire to come unto God, must of necessity receive Christ which comes
to meet them, and must wholly addicte them selves unto him. And he, when he is
known, will at the last bring his disciples to God the Father.

26. And I have declared unto them thy name, and will declare it: that the love
wherewith thou haste loved me, may be in them, and I in them.

M. By this place it does appear that the knowledge of gods name, is not
separated from the knowledge of the dispensation and mediation of Christ by
which he is known to be the Mediator sent into this world. C. When he says
that he has manifested unto them his fathers name, he means that he has
done the office of a teacher: but yet that he used not only the sound of a
voice, but also the secret revelation of the spirit, to manifest ye father.
And because ye faith of the disciples was as yet but weak, he promises with all, increace of this knowledge. B. For we must here continually increase in the
knowledge of god. C. And thus he prepares the^ to hope for more large
knowledge and grace of the spirit. Also, although he speaks of the
Apostles, yet we may gather thereby a general exhortation, that we may study
daily to profit, and not to think that we have run so well, but that there
remains yet a great deal of our race, so long as we are in this flesh. M.
Wherefore let us seek for the increase of this knowledge of God, at the hands
of Christ, the perfection whereof we shall have at the last in the life to come.

That the love wherewith thou have loved me C. That is to say, that thou may
love the^ in me. Or else: That the love wherewith thou have loved me, may also
extend it self unto them: For the love wherewith God loved us, too speak
properly, is even the very same with the which he loved his Son from the
beeginning, that in him he might make us acceptable to him self. And verily,
in respect of our selves we are odious unto God without Christ, but the^ he
begins to love us, when we begin to grow into the body of his welbeeloued
son. This is an unspeakable privilege, when we know that Christ was
beloved of his Father for our sakes, that we might be for ever pertakers of
the same love M. We must note also that the knowledge of God does bring us
into this wonderful fellowship of Gods love C. But we must note these words.

And I in them. By which we are taught that we are no otherwise comprehended
in that love of the which he speaks, than if Christ do dwell in us. For
as the Father can not behold the Son, but he must have before his eyes his
whole body, even so, if we will have him to behold us, we must be the true
members of his body. B. Therefore when we are absolutelye Godly, it shall
appear that we are dear and acceptable unto God. R. And we must well
remember the prayer contained in this Chapter. For if so be Christ prayed for
him self, for his Apostles, and for all those that should believe by the
preaching of the Apostles, it must needs be in an effectual prayer. For how
could it be that the son which was obediente to the death of the Cross, should
be repulsed? Wherefore let us be fullye persuaded, that neither death, neither
life, neither Angels, neither rule, nether power, nether things present, nor
things to come, neither height, nor depth, neither any other creature shall be
able to seperat us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

The.18. Chapter.
1. When Jesus had spoken these words, he went forth with his Disciples over
the brook Cedron, where was a Garden, into the which he entered with his
Disciples. M.

IN this Chapter the Evangelist begins to declare the history of the Lords
passion: in the declaration whereof he omitteth many things which are to be
read in the other three Evangelists: the which he does of purpose, even as he
has set down many things worthy of remembrance, which the other three have
let pass with silence. R. Therefore hitherto was noted the Sermon which Christ
made at his last Supper: by which Christ most fully declared and manifested him
self to his Disciples: to the end we might know what grace and goodness he
conteyneth in him self, specially under the cross. Also he prayed that all
those that believe in him might be sanctified, that they might be one with him,
and that the love with the which the Father loved him might be in them.

Therefore his Sermon and Prayer being ended, he went forth with his Disciples
over the brook Cedron. M. Some think that this brook was called the brook
of Ceders, because many Ceder trees grew about the same. C. But it is very like
notwithstanding, that this name came up through error. For of the valley or
brook of Cedron there is mention oftentimes made in the Scriptures. M. Where
the Hebrewe word does not signify Ceder trees, but dimnes or darkness. R.
Concerning the which brook we read in the book of Kings. 2. Kin. 15.23 4.
kin. 23.4.
C. This place therefore was so called because of the darkness, because it was
a deep valley, and much shadowed. Howbeit we will not contend much about
this. Specially we have to consider the purpose of the Evangelist in naming
this place. For his purpose was to show that Christ went willingly to death.
He came into that place which he knew was well known unto Judas. And to what
end, but only to offer him self to Judas, and into the hands of his enemies?
For he came not unto this place without foresight of that which followed, seeing
he was ignorant of nothing which was to come to pass. M. Wherefore Christ
passing over the brook Cedron, entered into the Garden, not to flee from his
Persecuters, but that he might go to that agony which was to come, according
to Gods appointment. If he went over the brook Cedro^ because he would flee
away, his best way had bin through the wilderness, and not to have entered into
this Garden. C. He went not therefore to seek a place to hide him self in, but
he entered into the Garden, that he might have more liberty to pray. The other
Evangelists say, that he went out unto the mount of Olives, Mat, 26.36
and they make mention of a certain place which is called G^thsemane: the
which has no discrepance, seeing that the history of David also says, 2.
kin. 15.23.
that the people when they had passed over the brook Cedron, went toward the
way of Oliuet.

2. Judas also which betrayed him knew the place, for Jesus ofttimes resorted
thither with his Disciples.

R. As Christ is not betrayed but of an Apostle, and his chief Disciple, and
that to those to whom he him self was the truth, and whose office and
function was a shadow and tipe of him: Persecution of the Gospel by
Disciples. Mat. 23.37 Act. 7.52.
(that is to say, to the high Priests and Scribes) even so the word of the
Gospel is almost never betrayed but of such as know the same, and are friends
in show, and very seldom it suffers persecution of strangers. The Gentiles
killed not the Prophets, but the Jews, which boasted of the word of the Lord.
The Phariseis cast out ye Apostles: Antechrist is not such a one as denies
Christ, but a boster of the name of Christ, and yet he persecuteth the Gospel.
So the hypocritical Monks, Priests, Bishops, Popes, and such like, have only
the outward name of Christians, and seek to betray and to destroy Christ.

3. Judas then after he had received a band of men and officers of the high
Priests and Phariseys, came thither with lanternes, and torches, and weapons.

R. With what force and strength does Judas set upon Christ? Or by what power
do the soldiers of Judas persecute the Gospel? Not with reasons and sentences
of scripture, except peradventure the same be wrested to serve their turn: not
with probable arguments: but with the corporal sword, with weapons, with
afflictions and all kind of torments. If this be to overcome, who have greater
conquest and victory, than tyrants fighting with cruelty? And if this be to
play ye champion, who is more bold and stout than thieves? Read the.26. of
Mat. beginning at the.47. verse. concerning the other two verses following also,
read the same chapter.

6. As Soon then as he had said unto the^, I am he: they went backwarde, and
fell to the ground.

C. The Evangelist shows what great virtue and power the Lord breathed with
one voice, to the end we might know that the wicked had power over him no
further than he gave them leave. He gently answers, that he is the very same
whom they sought for: and yet notwithstanding he casts them prostrate upon
the earth, even as if it had been with the violent puff or blast of a whirle
wind, or with the flashing stroke of lightning. Therefore he wanted no power
to restrain their hands, if it had so pleased him: but he would obey his
Father, by whose decree he knew he was called and appointed to death. Aug.
For where is now this ambushmente of Soldiers? Where is, now their terror
and fortification of weapons? One voice struck, repulsed, and prostrated
without force of weapon, the outrageous hateful multitude, and terrible with
weapons. For God lay hydden in the flesh, and the sempiternall day was so
shadowed and covered with humayne members, that darkness sought with Lanternes
and Fyrebrandes to kill the same. What will he do which shall come to judge,
which did this that he might be judged? But this purpose was to put in proof
that efficacy which the Prophet Esaias attributes to his word. Amongst other
the mighty powers of Christ, the Prophet repeateth this, Esa. 11.4.
that he shall strike the earth with the rod of his mouth, and shall slay the
wicked with the breath of his lips. 2. These. 2.8.
The Apostle Paul suspendeth the fulfilling of this Prophecy unto the end of
the world, yet notwithstanding we see daily that the wicked do fall with
their fury and pride, at the voice of christ. But then when they fell which came
to bind Christ, was showed a visible token of that fear, which all the wicked,
manger their heads, feel within them, when Christ speaks to them by his
ministers. Moreover seeing this was as it were accidental to ye voice of
Christ (whose property it is to raise up miserable men, which lie in the
shadow of death) he will use, no doubt, this power toward us, to exalt us up
into heaven. R. And this is manifest that the same word of God, which is to
the wicked, judgment, is to the Godly consolation. For at other times Christ
comforted his Disciples when they were afraid, Mat. 14.27 Luke 24.39.
with these words, I am he. Also, Why are ye troubled? it is I? Therefore
that which the Lord threatens to the wicked in the Law, is in these words
manifefestly to be seen. For Moses says, The Lord shall give thee a
trembling heart, Deuteronomy. 28.65 Esa. 57.21.
and looking too return, till thine eyes fall out, and a sorrovvfull mind.
Psalm. 110.1.
And the Prophet says, The wicked have no peace. M. Let the wicked
therefore consider what shall befall on the enemies of Christ. For this
contains a figure of that which happens and shall happen to all the
enemies of Christ, namely, confusion and utter destruction. It is prophesied
that the enemies of Christ shall be made his footestoole. The enemies of
Christ, of the which we have so great a multitude here, consisted of Judas
the hypocrite, and false Apostle, of the servants of the high Priests, and of
the Roman soldiers. In these we see what the enemies of Christ are
oftentimes: some are hypocrites, some are superstitious, and other some
worldlinges: but in due time when Christ shall show him self, they shall
utterly be destroyed, and though they be lyfted up alofte, yet shall they be
cast down to the ground flat, and shall be brought to duste. A. For the
wicked shall not be able to stand, but shall be like the duste, Psalm. 1.5.
which the wind scatters away from the face of the earth.

7. Then asked he them again, whom seek ye? They said Jesus of Nazareth.

C. Hereby it does appear how great the blindness is, with the which the
Lord strikes the minds of the wicked, and how horrible their obstinacy is,
after that Satan has bewitched them by the just judgment of God. The Ox
and the Ass when they fall have some feelyng: but these men having had
manifest experience of the divine power of Christ, do no less securely go
forward, than if they had not seen so much as the shadow of a man in him:
Nay, Judas him self is not moved. Let us learn therefore to fear the
judgment of God, by which the Reprobate being suffered to fall into the
hands of Satan, are more senseless than brute beasts. For Satan no doubt was
the author of this so great wickedness.

8. Jesus answered, I have told you that I am he: If ye seek me therefore let
these go their way.

9. That the saying might be fulfilled which he spoke: Of them which thou
gave me have I not lost one.

R. Although he were taken, yet he retained his authority and power still. For
the power of the word can not be bound. For the Apostles had not gone away
without hurt, except the Adversaries had been restrained of their fury, by
the efficacy of this commandment. By the same efficacy of the word he
restored to Malchus his ear, Luke 22.51.
that we might learn the power of the word, in the midst of impotencie and
weakness. A. But, was it not lawful for him, which delivered others, to
deliver him self also out of the hands of his enemies? C. But he minded to
play the part of a good shephearde, to defend his flock. He saw the
ravening of the Wolves: he taryeth not until they come to the Sheep, of
which he was appointed the keeper: but wythstandeth them betyme. Wherefore let
us not doubt so often as wicked men or the Devil rise up against us, but that
we shall have by and by the same help. Moreover Christ has by his example
prescribed a rule to the Shepheardes, which they must follow, if so be they
will duly fulfill their office.

That the saying might be fulfilled. R. The Evangelist alleges the saying of
Christ, to teach that the same is effectual. For if so be the saying of
Christ had not been effectual, how could the Disciples have escaped this
peril, and shunned such wylfull madness of the people their adversaries,
specially Peter, who struck with the sword? Notwithstanding this sentence
seems to be brought out of order, which seems rather to appertain to
men's souls, than to their bodies. For Christ did save and preserve the
Apostles in safety (as touching their bodies) to the end: but he rather spoke
this, that in the midst of continual dangers, and in death it self, their
eternal salvation should be in safety. I answer: The Evangelist speaks
not simply of their corporal life, but means rather that Christ sparing them
for a time, provided for their everlasting salvation. Let us consider how
great their imbecilitie was as yet: What would they have done, think you, if
they had been brought to the pinche? Seeing therefore Christ would not
tempte them above their strength, he delivered them from eternal destruction.

And hereby we may gather a general doctrine, namely, that although our
faith be proved by many temptations, yet notwithstanding we shall never come
into extreme perilles, but he will give unto us strength and ability to bear
the same. AVG. Therefore because the Apostles were not as yet sufficiently
confyrmed in the Faith to retain the confession of the truth, and had both
denied Christ, and also peryshed, the Lord would save them.

M. Furthermore, they were specially chosen to the preaching of the Kingdom of
God, and were not only so given unto Christ that they might be saved, but
also to Preach the word of life unto others, and to serve Christ. For this
office they were to be preserved. Wherefore if they had been taken and slain
of their enemies, they had perished to Christ: unto whom they brought forth
much fruit by the preaching of the word.

Concerning that which follows until ye come to the.19. verse, read our
Commentary upon the.26. of Matthew, beginning at the.51. verse.

19. The hye Priest then asked Jesus of his disciples and of his doctrine.

R. This hye Priest was Caiphas, for Annas had straightway posted over Christ
unto Caiphas. M. These things and many mo (of the which the other Evangelists
speak) were done in the Council of the Phariseis and of the seniors of the
people. These things our Evangelist thought good to repeat, as passed over in
silence by the others, and to omit that which the other three have noted.

R. Christ, or the word of God, Gods word accused of heresy, and Christ of
sedition.
is aways accused of two things: First, it is accused by the high Priests and
Bishops, of heresy: Secondly, by the civil Magistrate, of sedition. The first
part of this accusation is handled before the high Priest, concerning heresy:
the second before Pilate, concerning sedition. To these also was joined Herod,
who in the action of this Tragedy represents the wise men of this world:
for he contemns and derideth Christ. For the Gospel is to the Gentiles
foolishness, because it teaches that the cross is holy and glorious, that
death is life, and such like. C. Therefore the high Priest asks Christ a
question as if he were some factious person, who in gathering Disciples unto
him, had brought schism into the Church: he questioneth with him as with a
false prophet, which should go about with new and peruers opinions to corrupt the
purity of faith. But let us note the hypocrisy of the false hye Priest. He
enquireth of the doctrine and Disciples of Jesus. He might ask this question
in respect of his authority which he had among the people of God: (For it
apperteyned to the high Priest, specially to defend true and wholesome
doctrine, and to repress that which was false and hurtefull) notwithstanding
this appertayned not to the office of a high Priest, to cause a Teacher,
which had taught daily in the Temple openly before all men, whom he
might have heard, and whose doctrine he might have learned of his own
mouth, to be taken violently with a band of Soldiers, and to be brought
bound before him as a malefactor, and a seducer of the people, to be
condemned and put to death, not yet convicted. This thing beseemed not his
person, but declared rather the malice of the High Priest. He moved this
question in the myddest of armed men, and bonds, not that he might know
the truth of Christ's doctrine: but that he might seek and find out some
color of Justice, and just condemnation, wherwythall to blind the eyes of
the simple.

This form of questioning the Popish Prelates use at this day in such
places where the Gospel is persecuted, to the which they have always annexed
Inquisitions, bonds, and torments: because they seek no more to know the
truth, than did the high Priest among the Jews.

20. Jesus answered him, I spoke openly to the world, I ever taught in the
Sinagogue, and in the Temple whyther all the Jews resort: and in secret have
I said nothing.

C. Christ having done the office of a Teather, seeks not any new
defense: yet notwithstanding lest he should forsake the patrocinie of the
truth, he shows that he is ready to defend all those things which he had
taught. And wythall he reproves the impudency of the High Priest, who
enquireth of a most manifest matter, as if the same were doubtful.
Notwithstanding this place seems contrary to that other saying of Christ,
Mat, 10.27 Math. 13.11.
where he commands the Apostles to preach that upon the house tops,
which they had hard in secret. Answer hereunto is made, When he says in
this place, that he has spoken nothing in secret, it is to be referred to
the substance it self: which was always one, though the form of teaching
were different. Mar. 4.14.
M. He had taught the Disciples severally in secret certain things: but
yet the very same which he had taught in Parables openly before the
people, neither yet because they should retain them in secret, but because
when the time came they should preach the same upon the house tops. He had
taught also in private houses, but not therefore because he sought lurking
corners, and to shun public assemblies: neither did he teach any other
things than the very same which he had taught in the Temple, in the Synagogues,
and in other public places.

C. Wherefore he might protest with a good conscience, that he had freely
professed, and sincerely publyshed the sum of his doctrine.

M. Also we see here how the Lord used the Sinagogues and Temples, and also
what we must do according to his example in Ecclesiastical assemblies. He
taught, he offered not Sacryfyce. Doctrine belongs too the people of GOD.
Therefore they which do nothing in their Churches, but boa and bleate, and
sacryfyce, are not the followers of Christ, but of the Iewishe Priests. C.
Moreover very childishe is the error of some, which think that they are here
condemned by the answer of Christ, which handle the word of God secretly and
in closets, when they may not publicly preach the same, by reason of the
tyranny of ye wicked. For Christ does not dispute what is lawful to be done,
and what not, but his purpose is to refute the impudent malice of Caiphas. A.
The Apostles also were then to be condemned, who preached not only publicly,
but also privately in houses. Act. 20.20.


21. Why ask thou me? ask them which hard me what I have said unto the^?
behold they can tell what I said.

M. Christ would not have refused the examination of his doctrine, if so be
these hye Priests and Prelates had sought with their whole heart the knowledge
of the truth. For how could he which was ready to dye for the salvation of
mortal men, have denied so little labor to teach them which enquired
concerning his doctrine. But he knew that they sought nothing less then to be
taught, when they enquired of his Disciples, and of his Doctrine. Wherefore he
appealeth to his hearers, which were his enemies. R. Whereby we learn what
boldness ought to be in a teacher of the Gospel. He does not deny the
examination of his Doctrine, which he knew to be so sound and true, that he
referred the high Priest to the testimony of those which had openly heard the
same, what manner of persons soever they were, so that they would set malice and
envy aside. He does not appeal unto his Disciples, but to all generally
which had heard him in the Temple and in the Sinagogue. This testimony of
conscience for teaching the truth, ought to be in every Minister of the word,
in so much that he may also say, Ask those which have heard me: behold they
can tell what I have said. A. The which they may easily do, if so be they
speak nothing of them selves, but speak in the Church as the words of God,
1. Pet. 4 11. 1. Cor. 11.23.
and if so be they have received from the Lord that which they deliver unto
others.

22. When he had thus spoken, one of the officers which stood by, smote Jesus
with a rod, saying: Aunswerest thou the high Priest so?

M. This seemed to the servants of the high Priest great contempt of their
master, and of his Pontifical majesty, in that Christ answered not seruilely,
fearfully, and abiectly, saying, May it please your Holiness most Reverend
father, to ask those which have heard me? but with a certain reprehension and
hold speech he says, Why ask thou me? ask them which heard me, what I
said unto them. Therefore one of them thinking to do the high Priest a
pleasure, as a maynteyner of his Pontifical honor, gave the Innocent a blow
on the face, being captive and bound, and withal taunted him, saying,
Ansvverest thou the high Priest so? As if he should say, Is this thy reverence
which thou geuest unto the dignity of the Priesthood? Art thou so rash, that
thou answerest the high Priest no better than thou would speak to a
private person, and one of the common sort? C. Therefore this was added first
of all, that we might know how great the madness of the enemies of Christ was,
what tyrannical government, and also what discipline was amongst those hye
Priests. M. There is a Proverb, Such a master, such a man. A man might know
what this high Priest was by his servant. It is too much inhumanitie, to
check, taunt, and beat a prisoner before a Judge. C. They sit as Judges,
and yet they are more fierce and cruel than brute beasts. This was a Session,
in the which there should have been great gravity: and yet notwithstanding a
servant is so boulde and presumptuous, that in the midst of the Plea, even
before the Judges, he strikes the Prisoner which was found gilty in nothing.
Wherefore it is no marvel if so be the doctrine of Christ be condemned in so
barbarous an assembly. M. It became the hye Priest to have reprehended and
corrected this rashness of the servant: but because he seemed to be a
maynteyner of his Majesty against the Lord, he allowed this wicked act by his
silence. This flattering Parasite represents all those which allow and
confyrme the disdain, arrogancy, and iniquity of false Bishops, and do
judge it great contumely and dishonor to the Bishoply dignity, if all things
concerning the same be not seruilely with submission allowed, and extolled even
to heaven. They can not see their iniquity, but can with great feruencie
maynteyne their Episcopal dignity and authority.

23. Jesus answered him, If I have evil spoken, bear witness of the evil:
but if I have well spoken, why smytest thou me?

M. First we must note the patience of Christ. He might have revenged himself
of that lewd servant of the wicked hye Priest: but he thought it better to
suffer contumely, then to revenge himself. 1. Pet. 2.23.
The which is set down here for our example. Luke 9.56.
A. For beside this, that the son of man came not to destroy men's souls, but
to save them, he was also ready to suffer death, Luke 23.34.
that we being enemies he might reconcile us unto his Father: Whereupon
afterward he prayed for those which crucified him, so far was he from
wishing vengeance to be taken of them. M. Therefore he suffers contumely,
and takes not vengeance of his enemy: and yet notwithstanding he holds not
his peace at his iniquity, neither does he forsake his Innocence, but
maynteyneth the same. C. As if he should say, If I have offended, accuse me,
that when the matter is heard, I may be punished according to the offense. For
the foresaid violence was no lawful dealing, but another manner of order and
modesty belonged to judgments. Christ therefore complayneth of great
injury done unto him, if he has not offended: and that if he had offended,
yet they should have dealt according to law and equity, and not by violence.
But Christ here seems not to observe that, Mat. 5.39.
which he commanded his to do in another place. For he does not turn his
right ear when his left check was buffeted. Answer. R. If thou well
understand the word of Christ, by which he expounds the Law, it shall
manifestly appear that Christ has fulfilled his own doctrine. For this is
the meaning of that place: If so be any man do unto thee any injury,
contumely, or harm, thou must be so far from requiting one injury for
another, that thou must rather be prepared to suffer great injuries. Compare
now the deed of Christ with this saying: Did he revenge him self? Peter
says he did not. Did he give evil words again? Thou hear a defense, but
no accusation: Thou hear an admonition, but no railing: For he says, If I
have well done, why smitest thou me? As if he should say, I strike not
again, I do not revenge my self: but I warn thee repent, least worse happen
unto thee from the Lord our God. C. Wherefore it is not always required in
Christian patience, that he which is hurt, should both hold his peace and
suffer injury: but this is required, that he suffer the same patiently,
without desire of revenge, and that he rather seek to overcome evil by doing
good. The spirit of Satan does too much carry the wicked to do harm, yea
though no man provoke them.

M. Moreover that which was done unto Paul by Annas the high Priest, Romans
12.21.
differs little from this which was done unto Christ by the presumpteous
servant of the wicked hye Priest.

24. Now Annas had sent him bound unto Caiphas the high priest.

R. This sentence must be included by a Parenthesis. C. For, because the
Evangelist had said, that Christ was led to the house of Annas, and had so
prosecuted his Narration, as though the counsel and assembly of the high
Priest had been there, he now gives us to understand that he was brought
back again to the house of the high priest. A This also seems to be added
to exaggerate the injury done unto Christ by the hye Priests servants, for it
was very unmeet that a prisoner, bound, and uncondemned, should be foully
beaten before a Judge, standing at the bar pleading and defending his own
cause. Concerning the rest of the text between this and the.28. verse read
our commentary upon the.26. chapter of Matthew.

28. Then led they Jesus from Caiphas into the haule of Judgment: It was in
the morning, and they themselves went not into the Judgment haule, lest they
should be defiled: but that they might eat the passover.

R. This is a preparation to the second part of the oration or communication,
by which Christ was reproved of sedition. M. For the Evangelist passes to
the declaration of those things, which were done before Pilate, of the Roman
Lieftenant. C. That examination of the which Saint John speaks, was very
early, before the break of the day. Yet notwithstanding there is no doubt but
that they had in every place of the City their bellows, to set ye people on
fire, the burning madness of the people, which with one consent required to have
Christ delivered up to death, flamed so suddenly. The hye priests had the
examining of Christ, not that it was in their power to give sentence, but
because by their prudence they might deliver the oppressed to the judge, as the
matter concerning him were sufficiently examined and known. M. They made haste
to finishe their purpose, lest the wicked act might be prevented or let by
any tumult or trouble. C. The Romans called as well the house of the
Lieftenante, as the Tribunal seat, where judgment was commonly given, the
judgment haule.

It was in the morning. A. Read the exposition of this in the 27. of Matthew.
in the.11. verse. Also concerning the rest of this chapter read our
commentary upon the said, 27. chap. beginning at the said verse.

The.19. Chapter.
Then Pilate took Jesus therefore and scurged him. M.

IT appears by that which follows wherefore Pilate caused the Lord to be
scourged. R. He saw that the Jews were so envious against Christ that no
persuation, nor fair speech could stay them from murdering him. Wherefore to
avoid a greater mischief (which was the kylling of an Innocente) he chose a
less punishmente. C. Hopyng that the Jews by this mean punishment would be
contented when Christ was scourged. M. But this purpose of Pilate, though it
were directed to avoid the necessity of killing Christ, yet notwithstanding
it can not be defended as well done. For he should freely have delivered the
Innocente, and have delivered him out of the hands of the wicked, and not to
have scourged him. C. And whereas he laboreth so earnestly, and profyteth
nothing, we must therein consider Gods decree, by which Christ was appointed
to death. Yet notwithstanding his innocence was often times mayntayned by the
testimony of the Judge, to the end we might know that he being free in all
things from sin, was made gylty for others, and sustained the punishemente
due for the sins of other. R. Moreover the Lord declared in his only
begotten Son, how he will have his Elect and adopted sons, to be handled
in this world. For if he suffered his only begotten Son to be scourged, how
much more will he suffer his adopted Sons, too be whipped and scourged. Pro.
3.12. Apoc. 3.19.
Whom the Lord loves (says Solomon) he corrects: and he scourges every
son whom he receives.

2. And the soldiers wound a Crown of Thorns, and put it on his head, and
they did on him a purple garment.

This no doubt was done at the commandment of Pilate, to set some note of
offense upon the Son of God, because he made him self a king: and this he
did to fulfill the madness of the Jews, as if he had been persuaded that
Christ was rightly accused of them. Notwithstanding the soldiers went beyond
their commission, and delte more cruelly with Christ then they were
commanded: even as all the wicked are went to do, who when any occasion of
evil doing is offered unto them, greedely take the same. R. For the soldiers
with contempt Crown Christ, put on him Purple, and give him a reed in his
right hand: (for they heard that he desired a kingdom) but while the wicked
deryde and contemn him, the purpose of God has his effect. For by these
ceremonies Christ is set in his kingdom, and it is declared that the kingdom
of Christ is not of this world, that is to say, glorious in the flesh, adorned
with pomp, and mighty in external power: but a thorney, and purple kingdom,
that is subject to afflictions and passions.

4. Pilate went forth again and said unto them: Behoulde I bring him forth
unto you, that ye may know that I find no fault in him.

M. Pilate testifies again of the innocence of Jesus. A And therefore he
pronounces sentence against him self. For if so be Christ be subject to no
fault, why was he wipped by the commandment of the Judge?

After the same manner the tyrants at this day, which cruelly vex and torment
the professors of ye Gospel pronounce many things against them selves, whereby
they shall one day be judged. For they say, Wonderful is the condition of
these heretics, they have nothing in their mouth but the word of God, they
talk always of God and of Christ, and contenting them selves with the word of
the Gospel, they contemn human traditions, as superfluous: many such like
things they speak, by which they pronounce the cause of the Godly to be most
Just, and them selves most wicked wretches.

R. As touching the civil law, Christ of right, should have been set at
liberty, seeing the sentence of the Judge was satisfied, and the Civil laws
can give to one cause but one punishemente: But this is the lotte of Christ and
of the Gospel in this world, to have wrong and injustice in this world
offered him. For as at another time Christ was condemned by the Phariseis, his
cause not heard, and the Gospel contemned before it was known: even so at
this time Christ, though he were clear and quit by the sentence of the Judge,
yet notwithstanding impiety would have her pleasure.

5. Then came Jesus forth wearing a crown of thorn, and a robe of purple:
and Pilate says unto them, behoulde the man.

M. To the end Pilate might somewhat pacify the Jews, and might bring them
to human compassion and pity, he first pronounces Christ to be an
innocente: secondly he wills them to behold with more pitiful eyes, the man
myserably handeled and entreated, and to lay aside their fury. As if he
should say, if ye be men, have pity upon this poor man miserably
entreated: if he be just discharge the Innocent.

R. But they were so far from being satisfied and appeased, that they waxed
more outerageous than they were before, crying with a loud voice, Crucyfie
him, Crucify him. With the like voice the mad Ethnix cried out against the
Christians, saying, To the Beasts, To the Beasts, Away with the Church
robbers, away with them. A. So the Papists at this day cry out against the
professors of the Gospel, To the fire, To the fire: To whom we may more
modestly answer, To the Scriptures, To the Scriptures, and as the Prophet
speaks, To the law and to the testimony, But these miserable men hear not
this voice. C. Wonderful verily was the madness of the people of the Jews, and
their cruelty no less, whose minds could not be moved to pity and
mercy, by so sorrowful a sight. But God was the moderator of all these
things, that he might reconcile the world to him self by the death of his
Son. A. Concerning the verses following read our commentary upon the.27.
of Matthew, beginning at the.23. verse.

31. The Jews therefore, because it was the prepartion of the Sabbath, that the
bodies should not remain on the cross on the Sabbath day (for that Sabbath
day was a hie day) besought Pilate, that their legs might be broken and that
they might be taken down.

M. Thus far comes the history of the passion and crucifying of the Lord,
and the Evangelist goes forward, with that which happened after the death of
Christ. C. Therefore that which he tells concerning the Jews how they
besought Pilate, that the bodies might be taken down, it serves to the
confirmation of our faith: first, because it shows that the same was
fullfilled in the person of Christ, which was foreshewed in the Scrptures:
secondly because it contains a mystery of no small weight.

A. In the mean time notwithstanding the Jews bewraie their hypocrisy when
they require that the bodies may be taken down from the Crosses. Deu. 21.23.
M. The law of Moses commanded that the body hanged upon the tree, should the
same day yt it was hanged be taken down and buried. R. The Jews very
diligently observe this law, being made only for ciuility and humanities sake:
whereas otherwise they transgressed ye whole law. Who would not have judged
these to be holy men? Who would have suspected that they would have killed
Christ against the law, seeing them such diligent obseruers of the law?
Therefore to ye end they might religiously observe their Sabbath, they are very
careful for ye outward pollution: in the mean time not considering how wicked
a deed it is to kill an innosent man. So a little before we saw yt they entered
not into ye judgment haule, least they should defile them selves, when as
their impiety defiled and polluted the whole Country.

22. Then came the soldiers and brake the legs of the first, and of the
other which was crucified with him. 23. But when they came to Jesus, and saw
that he was dead already, they brake not his legs.

G. Whereas, when they had broken ye legs of the two thieves, they found Christ
dead, and therefore touch not his body, we may therein behold an extraordinary
work of Gods providence. Heathen and profane men will say, that it comes
naturally to pass that one man dies sooner than another: but he that shall
wey and consider the whole order of the history, shall be constrained to ascribe
it to ye secret purpose of God, in the judgment of god, yt the spedy death of
Christ stayed them from breaking his legs.

34. But one of the soldiers with a spear thrust him into the side, and
forthwith came there out blood and water.

In yt his side was pearsed with a spear by the Soldier, it was done to
approve his death: but god had a further respect, as we shall see anon. But
very childish is the imagination of the Papists, which have made of this
spear man a Longius, fayning the proper name of a man: and to make the matter
more fabulous, they say that this Soldier was before blind, and receiving his
sight was converted to the faith. And therefore they have canonized him a
Saint. If such Saints be their patrones when they pray unto God, what, I pray
you, shall they attain at any time? but they are worthy, which leaving christ
seek after dead men, to be deceived and blinded by the Devil.

And forthwith came therout blood and water C. Some were deceived, fayning
hear a miracle. For it is a natural thing for blud when it is congealed, and
has lost his redines, to be like water. Therefore this was no miraculous thing
that water gushed out of his side with blood, he being dead. And the purpose
of the Evangelist was to declare, that his narration was confyrmed by
testimonies of Scripture, which he afterward adds: and specially that he
might put the faithful in mind of that which he says in another place, 1.
Ihon. 5.6.
namelye, that Christ came by water and blood. By which words he declares that
Christ brought with him the true satisfaction, and the lively fountain. For
remission of sins, righteousness, and the purity of the soul, were fygured in
the law by these two signs, namely, by sacrifyces and washinges. In sacrifyces
blood satisfied for sins, and was the price to satisfye the wrath of God.
Washings were testimonies of true purity, and remedies to pourge away
uncleanness, and to wash away the spots of the flesh.

But least faith should stay any more upon these elements, S. Ihon testifyeth
in his Epistle, that the fulfilling and fullness of both graces is in Christ:
and here he gives us a visible sign of the same thing. To the same end
pertayne those Sacraments which Christ has left unto his Church. For in
Baptism, the purgation and purity of the soul, which appears by newness
of life, is declared. And the Supper is a pledge of the satisfaction made. But
they differ far from the figures of the old Law, because they offer Christ
as if he were present, whom the figures of the Law showed a far off.
Wherefore we may affirm that our Sacraments flowed out of the side of Christ:
Sacraments flowed out of Christ's side.
For the^ we are truly washed away from our spots, and are renewed into a holy
life: then we are redeemed from death, and do live in the presence of God, when
Baptism, and the Supper of the Lord, do lead us unto Christ's side, that
from thence we may draw that, as from a lively spring, by faith, which they do
figure and signify.

35. And he that saw it bare record, and his record is true: and he knows
that he says true, that ye might believe also.

M. This S. John adds for the more certentie of the matter, showing that in a
cause of Christian faith, we must lean to those things which are certain and
true. To the same effect pertayne these words, And we savv his glory, John.
1.14.
as the glory of the only begotten Son of the Father. And again. John. 3.11.
1. John. 1.1. 2. Pet. 1.16. Ephe. 4.14. 1. Ioh. 2.24.
That which we know we speak, and we testify that which we have
seen. M. Furthermore in that he brings god for a witness of those things to
be true which he writes, (saying, And he knovveth that he says true) we have
an example of a Christian teacher. He which speaks or teaches in the
Church, ought not only to speak, but also to testify, and that of such true
and manifest things, as he him self nothing doubts of, so that he him self
may say, I know that I speak those things which are true. A man shall find
diverse which teach the truth, notwithstanding they are uncertain whether
they speak truth, or no, because they have not the true and undoubted meaning
of those things which they speak, but the letter only. Furthermore, we see to
what end the Evangelist has written, namely to this end, that we might
believe, because in him the Scriptures are fulfilled. He was not content with
his own faith, but sought also to bring others unto the same.

36. For these things were done that the Scripture should be fulfilled, Ye shall
not break a bone of him.

M. The soldiers brake the bones of the thieves which were crucified with
Christ: but they left the bones of Christ untouched, because both God had so
appointed, and it was also prefigured in the Passover. C. For this testimony
was taken out of the twelfth chapter of Exodus, where Moses entreats of the
Pascall Lamb. And S. John takes this as granted unto him, that the same Lamb
was a sign of the true and only sacrifice, by which the Church should be
redeemed. Neither makes it any matter that the same was offered, for a
remembrance of the redemption already made. For so god would have that
benefit celebrated, that it might promise spiritual deliverance unto the
Church in time to come. Wherefore without all controversy, the Apostle Paul
applies that form of eating the Pascal Lamb, which Moses prescribes, unto
Christ. By this analogy and similitude, faith gathers no small fruit:
because the same shall behold salvation offered in Christ in all the
Ceremonies of the Law.

37. And again another Scripture says, They shall look on him who^ they
pierced.

This place is taken out of the twelfth chapter of the prophecy of Zachary.
B. Deuteronomy. 32.35.
And it agrees with that which is written in Deutronomie, where it is said,
Vengeance is mine, and I will repay. By which places, seeing the punishemente
of the wicked is deferred for a long time to come, the spirit signifies that
the wicked shall prevail and have the upper hand in this world: but yet so,
that they shall sley them selves with their own sword. For the more they
prosper in their evil dooinges, the more just their cause is thought of them
to be. Therefore being blinded they run headlong into the grievous
judgment of God. Therefore they which go about too expound this place
concerning Christ, according to the letter, do too violently rack the same.
For the Evangelist does not allege the same to that end, but rather to show
that Christ is that God, which long ago complained by Zachary that the Jews
had perced him to the heart. For there God speaks after the manner of men,
signifying that he is wounded with the wickedness of the people (but specially
with the wicked co^tempte of his word) even as that man is wounded to death,
whose heart is perced. Now, because Christ Jesus is God manifested in the
flesh, Esaias. 6.10.
Saint John says that the same was openly fulfilled in his visible flesh,
which his divine majesty (according to that manner which it might suffer)
suffered of the Jews. Not that God is subject to the injuries of men, or that
the reproaches and slanders of mortal men can reach from the earth unto him:
but because he would express by this manner of speech of how great sacrilege
the impiety of man was guilty, when proudly and presumptuously it extends it
self to heaven. And rightly S. Ihon ascribes that to the Jews, which was
done by ye hand of a Roman soldier. Even as in another place they are said
to have crucified the Son of God, although they touched not his body with
their finger.

They shall see him. M. As touching this seeing, some thereby understand the
conversion of the Jews: Act. 2.3.9. Act. 3.15.
of the which we have an example in the second of the Acts of the Apostles. R.
For then they began to have respect unto him whom they pierced, in mourning and
repentance. Othersome interpret the same of the punishemente of the wicked to
come, as we said before: Both which are comprehended in this place, if we well
consider of the same: namely that a remnante shall be gathered by God from
among this lost nation: and shall also show his horrible punishment and
vengeance, upon all the contemners of his grace. For we know that they were
wont to scorn the Prophets no less, than if they had told a tale, without
the commandment of God. This says the Lord shall not escape unpunished,
because he will him self defend his own cause. Concerning the rest of this
chap. read the.27. of Mat. 56. verse

The twentieth Chapter.
1. The first day of the Sabbaths, came Mary Magdalene, early when it was yet
dark, unto the sepulcher, and saw the stone taken away from the grave.

HItherto we behold nothing in ye passion of Christ, and outwardly in Christ,
Romans 1.4.
tha^ a very abject man, and forsaken of God. But now by the resurrection it
is manifestly declared that he is the son of God. And first of al we must
have a consideration of the works of God by the resurrection. For as God began
the resurrection in Christ by a clean contrary work, (that is say, Death the
beginning of life.
by deiecting and casting down into the extreme pit of hell) even so he
begins joy with sorrow, glory with ignominy and shame, and life with death.
C. But because ye resurrection of Christ is ye principal Article of our faith,
without which ye hope of everlasting life lies dead, therefore the Evangelists
do stand the more upon ^he probatio^ of the same. Romans 4.25. Roma. 6.4. 1. Cor.
15.3.
Even as this our Evangelist gathers many testimonies, by which we may be
certified that Christ rose again from the dead. A. The virtue of whose
resurrection, the Apostle Paul in diverse places shows at large, but
specially in his Epistle to the Romans. C. But it may seem very absurd, that
S. John does not bring more approved and credible witnesses: for he begins
with a woman. But thus this saying was fulfilled, 1. Cor. 1.7.
that God has chosen the weak, foolish, and conte^ptible things of this
world, to confound the wisdom, power, and glory of the flesh. A. And in that
there seems to be some variety between this our Evangelist, and the other
three, read our Commentary upon the.28. of Matthew. the first verse, and there
you shall see a plain reconciliation of those places which seem to vary.

2. Then she ran and came to Simon Peter, and to the other disciple who^ Jesus
loved, and says unto them, They have taken away the Lord out of the grave,
and we can not tell where they have laid him.

R. Although this woman was not as yet endued with a perfect faith, yet
notwithstanding she rightly endeavored her self to manifest the glory of the
son of God. M. Mary therefore runs with speed to Peter and John, either
for that they were best known unto her, or else because they were gathered into
one company. She makes have by running, being fervently affected by the
spirit. And because she found ye grave empty, contrary to her expectation,
forgetting, the words of Christ, she conceyueth a wrong suspicion in her
mind, that the body of ye Lord was translated into some other more seemly and
decent sepulcher, the other being but rude and inconvenient, though
peradventure fit for the purpose of the Jews being near unto mount
Caluerie where he was crucified: or else she judged that the body of Christ was
removed for some other cause which she knew not of. R. Therefore weeping and
crying she comes to Peter and John, saying, They have taken away the Lord
out of the grave. She speaks of the body of the Lord, and she calls him
her Lord, though he were buried: so she was affected toward the Lord Jesus.
But this woman rather suspected that which was false, than that which was
true, and foreshewed by the Lord him self in plain words. She suspected that
he was removed to some other Sepulcher: when as he was neither in that nor in
any other: but was risen again. So in doubtful matters we rather fall into
suspicion of that which is false, than of that which is true. Bv.
Notwithstanding by this complaynt it came to pass that occasion was given to
the Disciples more diligently to search out the truth. For therefore Mary
Magdalene told that unto Peter and John which she understood, that they
might more narrowly discuss the whole matter. The which they also did, as
appears by that which follows.

3. Peter therefore went forth, and that other Disciple, and came to the
sepulcher.

M. When Peter and John understood that Mary had found the sepulcher without
the Lord, and carried from thence to another place, they went also together out
of the City, because they would know the truth, and came at last to ye
sepulcher. C. But it is marvel, seeing there was so little faith, and almost none
at al, as well in ye disciples, as in ye women, yt there was notwithstanding so
great a zeal and fervent a desire. And in deed it can not be but that piety
drove the^ to seek Christ. Therefore there remained some seed of faith in
their hearts, but choked as it were for a time, insomuch that they knew not
that they had that which they had. So the holy Ghost works oftentimes in ye
Elect after a secret manner. Wherefore we must be persuaded that there was some
secret root, from the which we see fruit to spring. M. For as touching Peter
we see, that although he were greatly fallen in denying the Lord, yet
notwithstanding he retained his accustomed mind and affection toward him.
Whereupon here also, though the disciples were in fear, yet nevertheless he
doubted not to go forth to the Lords Sepulcher. He said not, What have I to
do to go to the sepulcher of our dead Lord, whom most filthily I denied when
he was alive and in peril? He thinks of none of this, but joins himself
to the rest of the Disciples again, and retayneth a sincere mind toward Christ:
such is their disposition which fall not so much of malicious wickedness, as
of infirmity of the flesh.

4. They ran both together, and the other Disciple did outrun Peter, and came
first to the Sepulcher.

Bv. We have a notable example left unto us in these two Disciples. For they
run with a fervent desire, and very carefully and diligently they search out al
things. M. They run, I say, both together, but the one is more swift on foot
than the other, and comes first to the Goal.

Hereby we are taught, not to look that they which are chief and excel
others in singular gifts, should run all alike in the race of Christ, least
one should contemn another.

5. And when he had stouped down, he saw the linne^ clothes lying, yet went he
not in.

M. The Lords sepulcher was so made, that none standing vprighte, but stouping
down, could see into the same. Eue^ so such are the mysteries of the death, of
the burial, and of the resurrection of the Lord, that they can neither be
seen, known, nor considered, but of those which have an humble and lowly
mind. They will not be seen of such as are proud and hye minded, yea though
they be called Apostles, Bishops, Priests, and Doctors.

6. Then came Simon Peter following him, and went into the sepulcher, and saw
the linen clothes lie.

7. And the Napkin that was about his head, not lying with the lynnen clothes,
but wrapped together in a place by it self.

R. Although John came first to the sepulcher, when he saw the linen clothes
lie aside, he went not in, peradventure stayed with fear, or else to tell Peter
news, who came more slowly after him. And in civil matters too much have is
reproved by this proverb, A soft fire makes sweet malte: that is to say,
thou must not be too rash, nor too slow: but make have, not with rashness,
but with consultation: not with heat, but with prudence: not with lust, but
with deliberatio^. C. Therefore, in ye Peter, who made less have, entered
notwithstanding first into ye sepulcher, we thereby learn, yt there is more
given to many in retiring, tha^ apereth at the first sight. And sometimes we
see it comes to pass that many which in ye beginning were very hot, do wax
cay cold, and that many which brag most at the first, when they come to the
conflict, turn their backs and run away: and contrariwise yt they which were
thought to be cold and slow, when peril comes ar most forward and coragious
And he saw the linen clothes.

C. These lynnen clothes were as it were Relikes to confyrme the faith of the
Resurrection. For it is not like that the body was stripte to be carried to
another place: For neither enemy nor friend would have done such a deed.

And the napkin that was about his head. M. The Evangelist is wonderful
diligent in noting and describing all things so exactly. For it was not
without cause that ye napkin which was about his head, was laid from the
linen clothes in a several place by it self. For hereby the beholders of the
same might quickly see, that none of those things were wanting, in the which
the body of Christ was wrapped, that there might be a perfect testimony of his
resurrection, and that all suspicion of removing his hody might be taken away.
The Lord left his apparel which he used in this life, with the soldiers,
before he was executed upon the Cross: but he left the linen clothes and the
napkin which was about his head, with the which he being dead was infolded and
buried in the Sepulcher, when he rose again from death. For he being raised to
the glory of immortality, minded to come no more into this miserable life:
therefore he had no more any need of those garments and linen clothes. So in
like manner we must dye with Christ, that we may wholly forsake this new life,
and we must so rise from death, that we must leave the Relics of sin in
Baptism, as in the grave.

A. Concerning the exposition of the eight and ninth verses following, read
our Commentary upon the.28. of Math.

10. Then the disciples went away again to their own house.

R. It is like that the Disciples returned home again with suspended and
doubtful minds. For although S. John says that he believed, yet
notwithstanding that faith was not fyrme, but had only a certain small taste
of the miracle, until such time as he was afterward better confyrmed. And in
deed a sound faith could not be conceived by a bare sight only.

Moreover, Christ did not show himself unto them until such time as they
were better awaked from their carnal blindness. They had showed a notable
token of their zeal, in running to the sepulcher: notwithstanding Christ was
hidden from them, because they sought him too superstitiously. Let us learn
also by this example to keep us within our bounds in sorrowful and obscure
matters, until by the grace of God better things come to light.

11. Mary stood without at the Sepulcher weeping: So as she wept, she bowed
her self into the Sepulcher:

12. And sees two angels clothed in whit, sitting the one at the head, and the
other at the feet, where the body of Jesus was laid.

C. Now the Evangelist begins to show how Christ appeared to testify his
resurrection, Resurrection of Christ confirmed.
as well to the women as to his Disciples. And although there be mention but of
one Mary, yet notwithstanding it is likely that there were mo women with her.
For whereas other think that they were gone for fear, it is against reason.
They seek to avoid repugnancie where there is none. Now whereas the women
abide by the sepulcher, the Disciples being gone into the City, there is no
cause why they should be greatly commended for ye same more than ye other. For
the other go away with joy and consolation: and these tarry and occupy them
selves with vain and superfluous weeping. To be short, they stayed at the
sepulcher superstitiously, and with carnal affection.

And sees two angels. Bv. It seems that Mary, the Disciples being returned
home, came again to the Sepulcher. For as she stood without at the door of
the Sepulcher, and did nothing else but weep, after the manner of women, ye
presence of Angels which were in the sepulcher, brought to pass, that
stouping down she might see into the Sepulcher: where she saw two Angels with
a joyful and glorious countenance, keeping that place where the body of ye
Lord was laid. C. Wonderful was the sufferance and goodness of the Lord,
which forgave Mary and her fellows so many vices. For he does them no small
honor in sending his Angels, and in manifesting him self unto them: the
which was not granted unto the Apostles. For although the Apostles and the
women were all in one fault, yet notwithstanding their blindness was less
excusable, who being so plainly taught, had profited so little. Christ chose
the women, that he might first reveal him self unto them, not with shame to
the Apostles. M. Notwithstanding it is uncertain whether Mary knew them to be
Angels, yea or no, or whether she thought them to be men. Most think that she
took them for me^. But so often as we read that Angels appeared in the vsible
show of men, and clothed in men's apparel, it was because of the gross
rudeness of men. Also there is no doubt but that they had sometime true bodies
given unto them. But whether these two Angels had only the form of bodies, or
no, it is superfluous to enquire. It suffiseth us that the Lord gave unto them
a human form, in so much that the women could both see and hear them: but
they were beautified so straungely, that they seemed rather to be come from
heaven, than from among men. Bv. And certaynely, God at this time had ordained
these Angels to testify of the resurrection of the son.

The one at the head, and the other at the feet. Whereas in Matthew we have
mention made only of one Angel, it differs nothing from the Narration of
John. For both spoke not at once to Mary, but one of them to whom the message
was committed. C. And in that the Angels keep and watch this place, we have
to note that Christ thus began the glory of his kingdom. For in that the
Angels honor his Sepulcher, the ignominy of the cross is not only thereby taken
away, but the Majesty of Christ also shines.

13. They say unto her, woman why wepest thou? She says unto the^, for they
have taken away my Lord, and I wot not where they have laid him.

M. The Angels knew wherefore Mary wept: but they kept the same secret awhile,
until Christ made them joyful by appearing unto them. C. But by ye other
Evangelists we may gather that the Angels spak more: but S. John only notes
the same briefly, because this was sufficient to testify the resurrection of
Christ. This speech conteyneth both reprehensio^ and consolation. The Angels
reprehende the untimely weeping of Mary, notwithstanding withal they mix joy,
in denying that there is any cause to weep, for that Christ was risen.

She says unto them, because they have taken. Mary being exceeding sorrowful,
wayed not what these two men appearing in white apparel, and sitting in the
empty sepulcher, might mean. A. And therefore simply she co^playneth that the
body of the Lord Jesus was taken away: even as a little before she complained
to the Disciples, with the rest of the women.

14. When she had thus said, she turned her self back, and saw Jesus
standing, and knew not that it was Jesus.

C. But how was Mary thus blinded and deceived, that she knew not Jesus, who
ought to have been familiarly acquaynted with him? Some think that he appeared
in another form. But it is more likely that the fault was in the woman's
sight: even as it is said of the two Disciples in the.24. of Luke. Therefore
let us not say that Christ did alter and change his face, as the Poets feign
of Proteus, who transformed him self into diverse shapes: but rather let us
say, that it is in the pleasure and power of God, which has given eyes unto
men, to dasel them, when it shall seem good unto him, that in seeing they
might not see. And in Mary we have a common example of the errors of man's
mind. For although Christ offers him self to be seen, yet nethelesse we
imagine that he has diverse fourmes, in so much that our sense and reason
conceyueth any thing sooner than true Christ. For seeing the sight of our
mind is of it self deceytfull, it is also blinded and bewitched by Satan and
the world, that it might discern no truth.

15. Jesus says unto her, Woman why wepest thou? whom seek thou? She
supposing that he had been a Gardener, says unto him: Sir, if thou have borne
him hence, tell me where thou have laid him, and I will fetch him.

M. The Lord him self speaks unto her as a stranger, and demands the
cause of her weeping, as moved with compassion.

Sir. C. She calls him Sir, according to the manner of her country. For the
Jews saluted husbandmen and other base personages by the name of Sir.

If thou have borne him hence. M. Because she thought that he had hard her
speak those things which she had answered to the two men sitting upon the
sepulcher, she says not, I seek my Lord, but simply, If thou have borne him
hence tell me where thou have laid him, that I may go and fetch him, and
bury him in a condign place, C. Here we see that Mary sauoreth nothing but
that which is from the earth. She only desires to have the dead carcass of
Christ, that she might keep the same in a sepulcher, but she thinks not upon
the divine power of his resurrection, which was most principal. Wherefore it
is no marvel if such gross affections put a veil before her eyas.

16. Jesus says unto her, Mary. She turns her self, and said unto him,
Rabbony, which is to say, Master.

C. In that Christ suffered Mary to err for a short time, it is profitable
for us to confirm our faith: but now with one word he reuoketh her from
error. M. He says not, I am he whom thou seek, for whose sake thou wepest
so much: but he calls her by her proper name, as one familiar friend
speaks to another, and that with such a voice as was best known unto the
woman. C. At the first he spoke unto her as a stranger: but now taking upon him
the person of a Master, he speaks unto her as to a Disciple: eue^ as we heard
before that a good shepherd calls all the sheep of his flock by name. John.
10.3.
The voice therefore of this shepeherd perceth into the mind of Mary, opens
her eyes, moves al her senses; and affects her forthwith to give her self
unto christ. For

She turned her self, and said unto him Rabboni. M. The Evangelist in saying
that Marie turned her self about again, means that she turned her face
again to the Sepulcher, whither peradventure her heart was bent. A. For she had
a fervent and unspeakable desire to find the Lord: but so soon as she heard
and understood the voice of her Shepeheard, she biandby cried with great joy
and admiration, Rabboni. C. Thus in Mary we have depainted to us the Image of
our calling. For this is our only enteraunce into the true knowledge of Christ,
if so be he know us first, and do familiarlye call us unto him, not with that
common voice, which generally sounds in the ears of all men, but by which he
does specially call those sheep which are given unto him of the father.
Hereuppon the Apostle Paul says. Gal. 4.9.
After that ye knew God, yea rather were known of God. And the efficacy of the
word appears hereby, that Mary gave biandby unto Christ, that honor which
was due unto him. For ye name of Rabboni is not only honorable, but contains
also the profession of obedience. Therefore Marye declares her self to be a
disciple of christ, and submits her self unto him as to a master. This is
a wonderful and secret conversion of man's mind, when God illuminating the
same by his holy spirit, makes the same of blind, suddenly to see perfectly.
The like example we have almost in the two disciples which were going to Emaus.
A. For when as at the first their eyes were held that they knew not Christ,
Luke 24.30.
at the length when he took bread, and blessed, and brake the same, their eyes
were opened, and they knew him whom before they judged to be a stranger.

C. Furthermore the example of Marye ought to be an exhortation unto us, that
so many as Christ calls unto him do answer him presently again without delay.

17. Jesus says unto her, touch me not, for I am not yet ascended to my
father: but go to my brethren, and say unto them, I ascend unto my father,
and your father, and to my god, and your God.

B. Mary would have imbrased Christ for ye exceeding love and joy which she had,
because she saw Christ present again in the flesh. But when the Lord saw that
she wondered at his carnal presence more than was mete, seking to lift up her
mind to heavenly things, and to the imbracinges of faith, forbad her to touch
him, saying:

Touch me not. C. Notwithstanding this seems not to agree with the narration
of Matthew. Mat. 28.9.
For he plainlye writes that the women imbrased the feet of Christ. And
seeing afterward he would have his disciples to handle and to feel him, what
cause was there why he should forbid Mary to touch him? M. For he said unto
Thomas, bring hither thy finger, and see my hands, and put thy finger into my
side, and be not faithles, but believing. C. The solution hereof is very easy,
if so be we consider that the women were not prohibited the touching of Christ,
before such time as they were too busy and desirous to touch him.

M. Moreover because his disciples doubted whether he were truly risen again or
no, and because the same which appeared unto them was judged of them to be but
a vision, Luke 24.37
to the end they might believe the resurrection, he said, Feel and see, for a
spirit has not flesh and bones as ye see me have. Also, Thomas had said,
Except I see the print of his nails in his hands, and put my finger into the
print of the nails, and my hand into his side I will not believe. Therefore
Christ did very well in offering him self to be felt of him. A. But in Marye
there was no such doubting, that there should need any further feeling: but
it was requisite that she should come to a further faith, and to more plain
understanding of the kingdom of Christ, least she should abase him in
cogitation more than there was cause. C. We must also note the reason which
Christ adds.

For I am not yet ascended to my Father. For by these words he commands the
woman to suspend their affection, until such time as he was ascended into
the glory of his kingdom. Furthermore he shows the faith of his
resurrection, not such a faith as they imagined to them selves, as that when he
was risen again he should reign and triumph in the world: but rather that by
his ascension into heaven, he should take possession of that kingdom which was
promised unto him, and sitting at the right hand of his Father, might govern
the Church by the power of his spirit. Therefore the sense and meaning of his
words is, that the state of his resurrection is not full and perfect, until
such time as he sit at the right hand of his Father in the kingdom of heaven.
As if he should say. B. Think not because ye see me present in the flesh, that
ye have obtained the fruition of all good things. I said before unto my
disciples, that it was good for them that I should go unto my Father, to whom
when I had ascended, I would send my spirit the comforter, and bring all
things to pass for them. These things ye ought to look for, and not to make
such account of my corporal presence. Abstain therefore from this earnest
touching, lest ye be to much addicted to my carnal presence: ye ought hereafter
to embrace me by faith, reigning in heaven C. But this doctrine brings a
double profit. The first is, yt al they which will not err in seeking Christ,
must lift up their minds to heaven. The second is, Col. 3.1.
yt al they which come to him, must cast off from the^ carnal affections, eue^
as the Apostle Paul teaches.

But go unto my brethren M. Christ se^deth Mary unto his Apostles, whom he
calls his brethren. For they were sons of the same God ye father whose only
begotten son he was. C. But the inestimable goodness of Christ does shine in
this, that he ordains and appoints women to be witnesses unto the Apostles
of his resurrection. For ye Embassage which is committed unto them, is the only
foundation of our salvation, and contains the principal point of heavenly
wisdom. Howbeit we must also note that this was extraordinary, and as it were
accidental.

I ascend unto my father, and your father. By the name of ascending he
confirms ye doctrine of yt which we spoke even now: namely yt he therefore
rose again, not to abide upon the earth, but to enter into ye heavenly life,
and to draw all the faithful thither with him. Therefore there is a great
emphasis and force in this word, I ascend, because Christ reaches his hand
unto his disciples, lest they should seek felicity in any other place then in
heaven. For where our treasure is, there also it is meet that our heart should
be. But Christ says that he does ascend: therefore we also must ascend, except
we will be separated from him. Mat. 6.21.
Moreover when he says that he does assend to God, he does put away all sorrow
and grief which the Apostles might conceive by his deperture. For he gives
the^ to understand, that he will always be present by his divine presence, with
those that are his. By his assending the distance of ye places is noted. But
although Christ be absent in body, yet notwithstanding because he is God, his
power every where shed forth, does plainly declare his spiritual presence.
For to what end does he ascend unto god, but only that he sitting at his right
hand, might reign in heaven, and in earth. M. Also this is to be noted, that
he does not only say, I ascend unto my Father and my God, but added also, And
to your Father, and your God. Therefore they which are Christ's, have the same
God, and the same Father that he has. C. For this is an inestimable benefit,
that the faithful may surely trust and believe, that the God of Christ is
their God and Father also. This trust, being founded upon Christ, is no
rashness. Moreover Christ calls the Father his God in respect of his
humanity, he having taken upon him the form of a servant. This therefore is
proper to his humane nature: but yet it is referred to the whole person in
respect of the unity: because he is both God and man. We have also here to
note that Christ is the Son of God by nature, but we by adoption only: but
such is the stabilitie of grace which we have by him, that the devil with
all his force shall never be able to shake the same, but that we shall always
call him our Father, who has adopted us in his only begotten son. A. Christ
therefore is so called our brother, that therewithal also we must account
him our Lord and Prince.

18. Marye Magdalene came and told the Disciples that she had seen the Lord,
and that he had spoken such things unto her.

A. So soon as the Lord commanded, Mary Magdalene obeyed, who
notwithstanding, as it is like, was much grieved that she should depart from
him. And she told unto the Disciples two things, according to the Lords
commandment: The one is that she shad seen the Lord. She says not that the
Lord was risen, but that she had seen him, that she might bring tidings of
that which was plain and evident. This was very necessary to be told unto
the Apostles, by her, who before had made them suspecte the removing away of
the Lords body. The other is, that he said unto her, Go unto my brethren, and
tell them, I ascend unto my father. etc. Let us consider that it is not without
cause that he commanded Mary to tell the Disciples, not only that he was risen
again, but also that he was about to ascend into heaven to his Father. They
were to be called from an earthly opinion as well as Mary, the which they
could hardly put away, having conceived the same in their minds before his
Passion. Wherefore Luke reports that they said, Lord vvilte thou at this
time restore the kingdom of Israel?

19. The same day at night which was the first of the Sabbaths, when the doors
were shut where the Disciples were assembled together for fear of the Jews,
came Jesus and stood in the midst, and says unto them, Peace be unto you.

M. Saint John omitteth many things which are to be read in the other
Evangelists. C. He now begins to show here, how that by the sight of
Christ the Disciples were confirmed in his Resurrection. Bv. For he sets
his lively body before his ten Disciples to be seen and touched. C. And it
came not to pass without the providence of God, that they came altogether in
one place, that the credit of the matter might be the more sure and manifest.
Bv. The Apostles were miserably dispearsed by the cross of Christ: even as
the Lord himself by the mouth of the Prophet Zachary, had told them it
should come to pass: but now taking unto them a good courage again, they come
together, loking now for more happy success. Wherefore if so be at any time
the tempest of afflictions do disperse us, let us return again unto our
fellowship, for we shall not want the grace of God. C. Christ verily delte most
gentelly with them, because he held them in suspense but till the evening.

When the doors were shut. M. The manner of this people was not to shut their
doors in the day time. For this cause the Evangelist says, that the Apostles
came together in a secret assembly being afearde of the fury and outrage of
the Jews. C And in that they came together, it was a sign of faith, or of
Godly affection: but in that they shut up them selves in secret, we do
acknowledge that there was some infirmity in them. For the stoutest and most
valiant me^ sometime are afraid: but notwithstanding we may perceive that the
Apostles were so afearde, that they bewrayed the infyrmitie of their faith. R.
The Apostles feared the Jews as yet (because their heart was not yet sealed
with the spirit of God: but afterward, the spirit being revealed, the
doors were not only opened, but also the Apostles preached Christ publicly
abroad, fearing neither thretninges, nor death, nor hell, nor Satan, but
deryded them even as tryfles and sport. Of so great power is the consolation
of the holy Ghost. C. And we have here an example worthy to be noted. For
although the Apostles behaved not themselves so valiantly as it became the^,
yet notwithstanding they did favor their infirmity. They seek to hide them
selves to avoid peril, yet notwithstanding they pluck up their minds yt they
may abyd together. For otherwise they had been disperced here and there, and
one of them would have been afraid to look another in the face. After the
same manner must we fight with the infirmity of our flesh, and resist fear,
which makes us to fall away. And Christ does bless their zeal in appearing
to them being gathered together, and Thomas is justly deprived of that grace
which all his brethren had, because as a vagrant or wa^dring soldier he was
departed from the ensign of unity. Therefore let al those hereby learn,
which are to fearful, to imbolden them selves, and to correct in them, the
fear of the flesh.

Came Jesus and stood in the midst. M. In that Christ, when the doors were
shut, came unto his disciples, which were gathered together for fear of the
Jews, to the end, by his apparition he might comfort them being in grief
and fear, we have a notable proof of his divine power. For whereas some think
that the doors were opened for him, that he might enter in according to the
manner of men, it disagreeth much with the mind of the Evangelist. Therefore we
must not think that Christ entered in without miracle, to the end he might
declare his divine power, to make his Disciples the more attentive.
Nevertheless that is most false which the Papists affirm, as, that
Christ's body perced the doors which were shut. This they therefore affirm
that they might make his gloryfied body not only like unto a spirit, but
also so incomprehensible that no place can contain the same. But the words of
the Evangelist sound no such thing: because he says not that he entered
through the doors that were shut: but that he stood sodaynely in the midst
of his disciplees when the doors were shut. We know that Peter came forth
of the fast barred prison: shall we therefore say that he perced through the
midst of the Iron gate? This were to absurd and childish: let us content our
selves with this that Christ purposed by a notable miracle to confyrme the
Apostles in the faith of his resurrection.

Peace be unto you. Bv. Christ according to his manner saluteth his beloved
disciples. For the Jews used this manner of salutation, and it continues with
them until this ^aye. By peace, he means integrity and health, prosperity
and a blessed life. M. Even as when we say, God save you. The Lord used this
manner of salutacion, not only at this present, but also before his passion. A.
Concerning this salutacion read the tenth Chapter of Matthew, beginning at the
12. verse.

20. And when he had so said, he showed unto them his hands, and his side: Then
were the disciples glad.

C. It was meet that this confyrmation should be added, that it might appear
unto them by all manner of means that Christ was risen again. Bv. Least they
should imagine him to be a spirit, or some other body than that which had
hoong upon the cross. Therefore he shows unto the^ his hands and his side,
namely the prints of the nails in his hands, and the wound pierced by the
spear in his side. M. The Evangelist Luke in his four and twenty chapter
adds more concerning ye communication of Christ with his disciples about
meat, in the 41. verse.

21. Then said Jesus unto them again: Peace be unto you: as my father sent me,
even so send I you also.

C. Christ saluted them again to make the^ ye more attentive unto those things
which he spoke, being matters of great weight and importance.

As my father sent me M. Christ first declared unto his disciples, the reason
of his death and resurrection, out of the scriptures, and then he told them
that they should preach remission of sins, and repentance, and give testimonye
unto the gospel. C. By which words Christ does after a sort enter his Apostles
into their office, to the which before he had chose^ the^. They were sent before
throughout Iewry, but only as forerunners, which should exhort and command men
to hear the chief teacher, but not as Apostls which should take upon the^ the
continual office of teaching. And now the lord appoints the^ as Ambassodors
to declare and set forth his kingdom in ye world. Therefore let this stand as
an undoubted truth, yt this is ye first time in the which ye Apostls were
ordained to be ordinary ministers of ye gospel. And his words are in effect as
much as if he should sai, yt he had hitherto don ye office of a teacher, and yt
he having ended his course and race, appointed unto them their turn. For the
father had appointed him to be a teacher of the church to this end, yt he might
go before ye rest for a time, and might afterward appoint substitutes in his
place to supply his room. For the which cause Paul says that he has
appointed some in the church to be Apostles, other Evangelists, Ephesians. 4.11.
other Shepeheardes, to govern the church unto the end of the world. Bv.
Therefore he commits unto them their Embassage, and appoynteth the^ to be
teachers of the whole world and ministers of his church. C. First of all then
Christ testifyeth, that although he him self has a temporal office of
teaching, yet notwithstanding that the preaching of the gospel shall abide for
ever: and lest the doctrine of the Apostles should have less authority, he
commands the^ to succeed him in the same function which he had received of
his father. And thus it was meet that their ministry should be authorized:
for they were base and unlearned men. Bv. But we must take heed lest we abuse
these words of the Lord or misconster them. For the lord did not send forth his
Apostles, to offer them selves a sacrifice for the sins of the whole world,
nether to the end the father might be called upon through their name, or that
by their merittes the whole world might be saved, Mat. 9.12. Ihon. 6.38.
Ihon. 3.17.
but that by the preaching of the word they might call men to repentance,
and to remission of sins in Christ. Therefore the manner how Christ him self
was sent is noted in the places quoated in the margent.

This then is referred to the preaching of the gospel: even as he says in
another place: Mar. 28.19. Mar. 16.15.
Go ye forth into the whole world and preach the Gospel to every creature

22. And when he had said those words, he breathed on them, and says unto
them, receive ye the holy Ghost.

Bv. The Apostles might have said unto Christ, thou laiest a heavy burden
upon our shoulders. We fear Lord that we are not sufficient for these
labors, and that we want strength, insomuch that we shall fainte at the last
under our burden. This world has his power, his customs received from the
fathers, which it accounts for divine laws, it has Priests, and
Philosophers which are learned, elloque^t, and of great authority: against
whom thou set us which are naked, unprepared, unlearned, and barbarous men.

C. Therefore because almost no mortal man was fit for so heard an office,
therefore Christ endueth his Apostles with the spirit of grace. And in deed it
is a thing far surpassing the strength and power of man to govern the Church
of God, to prefer the Embassage of eternal salvation, to erect the kingdom of
God in earth, and to lift up men unto heaven. Wherefore it is no maruayle if so
be none be found fit, but he which is endued with the holy ghost. 1. Cor.
12.
For no man can speak one word of Christ, except the holy Ghost govern his
tongue, so far is every one from the faithful discharging of so notable an
office.

But this glory belongs only unto christ, to frame and appoint those teachers
which he sets over his Church. For therefore he received the fulness of the
spirit, that he might give unto every one of the measure of the same. And
seeing he is the only Shepeheard of the Church, it is necessary that those
Ministers, whose labor he uses in the Church have the power of the spirit
from him: the which he declared by an external sign, when he breathed upon
his Apostles. What horrible sacrilege the^ is that of the papists, which take
that honor unto them selves which belongs unto the son of God? C. For
their consecrating Bishops deprave these words, when in making their Mass
Priests, they boast that they breath out the holy Ghost by belching. But the
matter it self does plainly declare, how much their filthy breathing, does
differ from the divine breathing of Christ: because of brutish horses, they do
nothing else but make ignorant asses. Wherefore they usurp unto themselves the
glory of the divinity, which profess that they give the holy ghost by
breathing. We must also note that Christ indueth them with necessary gifts,
whom he calls to the pastoral offices, yt they may be able to execute their
office, or at least not unprepared for the same. Therefore let us believe that
they are lawful pastors of the Church, who (as it may appear) are endued with
the grace of the spirit. But some will say, Luke 24.42
and to abide in the City, until such time as they were endued with power from
above. And when Christ might have given grace to his Apostles by secret
inspiration, he added thereunto visible breathing, to the end he might not only
instruct them with words, but confyrme them also with a certain sign, Ier.
19.10.
to the end the minds of the disciples might doubt the less of the truth of
the promise. The like sign Jeremy used in threatening destruction of Jerusalem.

But we must also note that the word is joined to the external and visible
sign. For hereof sacraments take their force. Not that the efficacy of the
spirit is included in the voice which sounds in the ears: but because the
effect of all those things which the faithful understand and feel by
sacraments, depends upon the testimony of the word. Christ breaths upon
his Apostles, but they receive not only brething, but also the holy ghost. And
wherefore, but only because Christ promises unto them? Thus it comes to
pass in Sacraments. Whereupon we may gather, that whatsoever sacraments men
have devised, are nothing else but mere toys: because there ca^ be no truth in
signs, but where the word of God is present.

23. Whosoeuers sins ye remit, they are remitted unto the^: and whosoeuers
sins ye retain, they are retained.

C. After that Christ had ordained and appointed Ambassadors to be sent forth
into the world, now more expressly be describes the office or ministry of his
Apostles, and comprehends in few words the sum of the Gospel. For this
power of remitting of sins must not be separated from the office of teaching,
Sins remitted by Christ.
to yt which here it is annexed. M. The son of God him self came into this
world, and suffered the death of the cross, to bring remission of sins unto
mankind. So said the Angel, Mat. 1.21. Lu. 24.47. Romans 4.6.
He shall deliver his people from their sins. For in this consists our
salvation, that our sins are freely forgiven us, even as damnation stands
in the retayning of them. Remission of sins pronounced by the Apostles.
C. Therefore the special end of preaching the Gospel is, that men may he
reconciled unto God: because remission of sins is free, even as the Apostle
Paul teaches in the fyfth Chapter of his second Epistle to the Corinthians,
where, upon this consideration, he calls the Gospel the ministry of
reco^ciliation. Many other things the Gospel conteyneth: but this is the
special thing which God entreats of in the same, that he might receive men
into his favor, not imputing unto them their sins. They therefore which
will show them selves faithful ministers of the Gospel, must be very
paynefull in this point. For the Gospel does differ specially from profane
Philosophy in this, Salvation consists in free remission of sins
that it places the salvation of mankind in the free remission of sins. For
hereof come other benefytes of God, as, that God illuminateth and regenerateth
us by his holy spirit, that he makes us like unto himself, and armeth us
with invincible fortitude against the world and the devil. So that the whole
doctrine of piety, and the spiritual buylding of God stands upon this
foundation, that God delivering us from all our sins, adopteth us to be his
sons.

M. But it may be demanded,

Answer. 2. Cor. 5.20.
We are messangers in the room of Christ, even as though God did beseech you
through us: so pray we you in Christ's steed that ye be reconciled to God.
And we ought not to esteem of this unspeakable treasure any whit the less,
because it is offered to us in earthen vessels: but we have rather cause to
give thanks unto God, which has given such honor unto me^, that they may
represent his own person and the person of his son, in pronouncing remission
of sins. Moreover hereby appears the madness and blindness of the
Papists, Absolution of the Papists.
which wrest and abuse this place to their magical absolutions. But Christ
did not here appoint his Apostles to be auriculer confessors, but public
preachers of his Gospel. Wherefore we must consider the manner of remitting of
sins, that we may know what power this is, which is given to the Apostles.

And whosoeuers sins ye retain. Christ adds this second part, to
terrify the contemners of his Gospel, to the end they may know that their
pride shall not escape unpunished. Therefore as the Embassage of salvation and
eternal life was enjoined the Apostles, so also they had vengeance committed
unto them to use against all those wicked ones, which should reiecte the
salvation offered unto them: as the Apostle Paul teaches. Bv. So that the
Apostles forgave men their sins, when by the preaching of the Gospel they
taught that the faithful had their sins forgiven them, Retayning sins.
and that they were endued with life by the death and resurrection of Christ
Jesus: And they retained sins, when they pronounced the wrath of God to rest
upon al unbelievers. It is proper unto the Gospel that we are reconciled unto
God: 2. Cor. 10.6.
but it is accidental that the unbelieving are addicted unto death.
Notwithstanding we must note, that whosoever hears the preaching of the
Gospel, and does not embrace remission of sins there offered, is in the
state of eternal damnation. 2. Cor. 2.16.
For as the son of God is the savor of life unto life to them that believe,
so also he is the savor of death unto death to the Infidels.

A. Concerning the larger exposition of this place, read our Commentary upon
the.16. Chapter of Matthew, and begin at the nynth verse: also at the.18. verse
of the.18. chapter.

24. But Thomas one of the twelve, which is called Didimus, was not with them
when Jesus came.

R. As the fall of Peter is before described at large, not to the reproach of
Peter's fall, but that the Scripture might set before us the vain presumption
of flesh: even so in this place S. John describes ye unbelief of Thomas, not
to discredit him by ripping up his sin, but to set forth in Thomas the
nature of flesh. Bv. For Thomas represents all those who judge the
resurrection of the flesh to be impossible, and therefore do make a scorn at
the same. And the unbelief of this Apostle is therefore set down, that the
faithful might thereby be the better confyrmed and strengthened. He was not
only slow and hard to believe: but also his obstinacy made him desire to
feel and handle the body of Christ, being not contented with the sight of
the same.

R. Furthermore in this History we acknowledge the wonderful Judgments of
God. For as God wyncked at the brethren of Joseph, and suffered them to be
led by envy against Joseph at the first, secondly to sell him, and lastly to
lie unto their Father: but to this end, that being fallen the deeper, when
they were delivered, they might the more manyfestly see and acknowledge the
hand and power of the Lord: Even so Christ wynketh at the unbelief of
Thomas, but with this judgment, The judgments of god in Thomas his unbelief.
that not so much his faith as ours might be the more confyrmed. For by the
unbelief of Thomas our belief was furthered. M. In that Thomas was not with
the rest, some think the cause to be this, because he was not as yet returned
from the flighte which he took for fear.

25. The other Disciples said unto him, we have seen the Lord. But he said
unto the^, except I see in his hands the print of the nails, and thrust my
hand into his side, I will not believe.

C. Here is noted the original and welsyring of the fault, because every man
will be wise in his own conceyte, and flattereth him self too much. Bv. Thomas
does not desire simply to see the Lord, but rather seeks for the printes of
the nails, and marks in the flesh, for so he says he will believe, that
Christ is truly risen again. As if he should say, Ye are disceyued no doubt
by some fantasy or spirit. I therefore will not believe, except I see his
body, yea (and least my sight be deceived) except I put these my hands into the
printe of the nails in his hands, and my finger into the wound of his side.
These words contain nothing sounding to faith, but only a sensual
judgment. The like happens to all those which are so addicted unto them
selves, that they give no heed or credit unto the word of God.

26. And after eight days again his Disciples were with him, and Thomas with
them: Then came Jesus. etc.

M. This was the eight day after his resurrection, which we may name the
Sunday. The same day the Disciples were gathered together again. In whom we
may note the nature of sincere love. There is a common proverb: Like will to
like. They were all like affected toward Christ, therefore they desired to be
in one assembly. And they did patiently bear the unbelief of Thomas, until
such time as he should be cured by Christ him self. They did not
excommunicate him, but admitted him into their fellowship without grudging.
And Thomas also him self, although he believed not those who told him of the
Lords resurrection, yet notwithstanding he could not keep him self out of
the company of the Apostles and Disciples. Hereby we are put in mind to
foster and maynteine mutual love, and not to forsake ye bond of Christian
charity for some light contention. C. Concerning the coming in of Christ,
and the salutation which he used, read the.19. verse going before.

27. After that said he to Thomas, Bring thy finger hither, and see my hands,
and reach hither thy hand, and thrust it into my side, and be not faythlesse,
but believing.

M. The Lord does not tarrye until Thomas preuenteth him, but e^^^eth him
that thing first, without the which he had said he would not believe: that
thereby he might not only believe the resurrection, but might also be pierced
in conscience: and that he might know that he was not ignorant of those
things which he had spoken unto the rest of the Apostles, telling him of the
Resurrection.

C. Hereby also we gather, what care he had to provide both for the
confirmation of our faith, and also for Thomas his faith. For this was not
done for Thomas his sake only, but for our sakes also, that nothing might be
wanting which might confyrme our faith. M. Moreover in that Christ spoke
these things to Thomas, not in secret, but openly before all the Apostles, it
was not done without cause. For this unbelief of Thomas was not secret, but
manifest unto the rest of the Apostles: Wherefore there was no cause why either
his estimation; or his shame should be spared. For why should he be ashamed
openly to be cured, who was not ashamed openly to offend? A manifest wo^^de
must have a manifest plaster. Therefore let us hereby learn what is the form
of Christian discipline. Christian discipline.
Let these things which are secret, be secretly corrected, and these things
which are manifest, he manifestly reprehended. Also this open reprehension of
Thomas, served greatly to the confirmation of the other Disciples which were
present. Even so Paul wills that they which sin openly, be openly
reproved, that others may fear. For he which by his unbelief stays others
from the faith of Christ, must suffer him self to be cured by open
correction. C. But wonderful and monstrous was the unbelief of Thomas: who
being not content with the simple sight of Christ, would have his hands
also witnesses of the resurrection. And thus he was not only obstinate, but
also proud and contumelious against Christ. But now at the last when he had
seen Christ, he ought to have been ashamed and afraid. And yet as though
he had known no fault by him self, he bouldly and without fear puts in
his hand. For we may easily gather by the words of the Evangelist, that he
did not repent him before he was convinced by touching. Thus when we give less
honor to the word of the Lord than is meet, there creeps into our hearts
by little and little, obstinacy, which brings with it contempt, whereby all
reverence of him and his word it quite taken from us. Wherefore we must take
the more pain in brideling the lasciviousness of our nature, least by
obstinacy we quench the feelyng of piety, and shut up the gate of faith
against our selves.

28. Thomas answered and said unto him, My Lord, and my God.

Bv. Thomas so soon as he had seen and touched, knowing both the face and
also the wonted voice of the Lord, is awaked, and (even as a man when he has
been out of his wits and comes again to him self) he cries out, saying.

My Lord and my God. For an abrupte speeahe has always great vehemency. And
there is no doubt but that shame constrained him thus to cry, whereby he
might condemn his former slouthe. Bv. But this, as it is a most brief
confession of a true faith, so also it is most absolute. For Thomas gathers
by the true resurrection of the body that he was Jesus and the Lord, that is
to say, the Redeemer, and the king of all: Also God, that is to say, the life
and conceruation of all creatures: and not only the God and Lord of all
things, but also his God, and his Lord. For he does not cry, Thou art Lord
and God, but, My Lord, and my God. Therefore such sudden exclamation shows
that faith was not clean extinguished in him, though it were buried for a
time. For he touches not ye divinity of Christ in his side, nor in his
hands, but he gathers much more by those signs, than they did show. And
whereof came this, but only because he returned to him self from oblivion?
Also who would have thought that so great faith would have followed such
obstinate unbelief? Act. 9.2.
So Paul in the beginning was a most cruel persecuter of the Church,
notwithstanding afterward he became a most faithful Apostle. For these
wonderful judgments of God are described to this end and purpose, that we
might learn to know the wonderful goodness of God, who turns evil into
good. C. For the same which happened to Thomas, happens sometime to many:
Who castyng the fear of God aside, for a time run at randam, in so much
that there appears no faith at all to be in them: but so soon as they are
chastised with Gods correction, subduing flesh and blood, they return to a
better mind. 2. Kin. 12.13.
The which we may behold in David after the short admonition of the Prophet.
For it comes to pass by the wonderful goodness of God, that the Elect
forsaking not the faith, do never so far fall, but they soon rise again.
Wherefore we must take careful heed that we fall not away from the faith.
Notwithstanding let us be sure of this, that GOD does hold back the
faithful with a secret bridle: least they should fall to their destruction, and
does always keep in their hearts some sparks of faith, Christian faith.
which afterward in due time he kindles by the blast of his spirit. M. We
see also here what is the confession of a christian faith. He is a true
Christian which confesses with his heart that Christ is his Lord and God: for
we see that this confession is approved of Christ. He would never have
suffered the honor taken from his father to be given unto him falsely. But he
confirms that which Thomas spoke. Therefore if he had not been God, he
would never have aproued this confession of Thomas. Wherefore this one place
is sufficient to overthrow the heresy of the Arrians.

C. Hereby let us learn to be brought from the man Christ, unto the true God
Christ. For that our faith may come unto the divinity of Christ, we must
first begin with that knowledge which is most easy, because our faith does
profit and go forward by degrees so, that we apprehending Christ in earth,
borne in a stable, and hanged upon the cross, may come at the length unto the
glory of his resurrection, and from thence to his eternal life and power, in
the which his divine Majesty shines.

29. Jesus says unto him, Thomas, because thou haste seen me, thou haste
believed: blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have believed.

Bv. Least any man should say, these things were spoken and written
concerning the Apostle Thomas, they appertain not unto me, the Lord
extends the same unto all the faithful, pronouncing them blessed which have
not seen, and yet believed. C. Christ reprehendeth nothing in Thomas, but
only because he was so slow to believe, that he was violently to be drawn
unto the faith, by the experiment of his senses: the which is quite contrary
to the nature of faith.

Blessed are they that have not seen. M. According to the Hebrew phrase he
uses the Preterperfect tence for the Present tence. He does not condemn the
faith of Thomas (to the which he had exhorted him, saying: Be not
faithless, but believing. But condemns their faith, which seeing not, are
contented with the hearing of the word of God only. So when he says,
Blessed are they which hear the word of God, and keep it: he does not
deny that to be true, which the woman had said, Blessed is the womb that
bare thee, and the pappes that gave thee suck: but extolleth those which
hear the word of God, and keep it.

C. Therefore Christ here for this consideration commends faith, because
the same being content with the simple word of God, depends not upon the
sense and reason of flesh and blood. So that he comprehends the force and
nature of faith in a brief definition: namely that it stands not in the
present aspecte, but pearceth unto the heavens, and believes those things
which are hidden from humayne understanding. To this effect pertayne these
sentences: Faith is an assurance of things which are hoped for, Heb. 11.11. 1.
Cor. 5.7.
and a certenty of things which are not seen. Aso, We walk by faith, not
after outvvarde appearaunce. The which places signify that faith has his
aspecte, but yet such aspecte as stays not on the world, and upon earthly
obiectes.

If any man object and say, that this place is contrary to that where he
pronou^ceth those eyes to be blessed which behold him present. We answer,
Mat. 13.16.
That Christ does not speak there of a corporal aspect only, as he does in
this place, but of the revelation which is common to all the godly, from the
time that he came to be the redeemer of the world. He compares the Apostles
with the holy Kings and Prophets, which were held under the obscure shadows of
Moses law. But now he says that the state of the faithful is blessed, because
more perfect light shines unto them: yea, because the substance and truth
of figures is offered unto them. Many of the wicked beheld Christ with the
eyes of the flesh at that time, who notwithstanding were never a whit the more
blessed: but we which never saw Christ with our eyes, are made partakers of
this blessedness, which Christ here commends. Blessedness of those that see
not Christ. Gal. 3.1.
Whereupon it follows that those eyes are called blessed, which spiritually
consider that in him which is heavenly and divine. For at this day we behold
Christ in the Gospel no less, than if he were present before us. M. Therefore
let no man say, O that I had lived in the days of Christ, and had seen with
mine eyes those his miracles. We believe that they are much more blessed
which see not, than those which have seen. 1. Pet. 1.8.
C. If therefore we desire to see that in Christ which makes us happy and
blessed, let us learn to believe when we see not. Whereas therefore the Papists
wrest these words to prove their Transubstantiation, it is too frivolous and
vain. That we may be blessed they command us to believe that Christ is in
the form of bread: but the purpose of Christ was nothing less, than to make
our faith subject to the inventions of man, the which faith, if it pass never
so little the bounds of the word, it ceasseth now to be faith. If so be we
must believe generally all things which are not seen, then our faith shall be
subject to all monstrous miracles to all fables, and forged lies. Therefore to
the end this sentence of Christ may take place, we must first of all prove
that by the word of God, of the which we do doubt. The Papists bring the
word of God for their Transubstantiation, but false, expounded and unaptly
alleged. Bv. Let us therefore keep our selves within our prescript bounds,
and let us believe that Christ is our Lord, our life, and our resurrection, in
that he him self is risen again from death.

30. And many other signs truly did Jesus in the presence of his disciples
which are not written in this book.

M. When the Evangelist did write these thing, many other signs also
concerning the Lords resurrection, came unto his mind: the which he might
have put in writing as well as these: but because he had already determined
with him self concerning the quantity of his book, and was already come to
the measure of the same, least any man should think that he had written all
the signs which Christ did after his resurrection, and that the Lord appeared
not passing once or twice to his Disciples to confirm his resurrection, he
thought good to add these things unto his Narration. C. As if he should say,
Let no man think that he has here a full and perfect history, Bv. For the
Lord Jesus did declare by many other Arguments, signs, tokens, and
demonstrations, the truth of his resurrection, and of his divine power, and
that so evidently, that the disciples might not only understand the same, but
also might see with their eyes, and touch with their hands the Lord Jesus
restored to life, and might believe that he was risen again from death. But al
these things have I not perticulerly repeated in this my Euangelical work, Act.
10.41.
not that they were unworthy to be remembered, but because these things were
sufficient to the edification of Faith.

31. These things are written that ye might believe that Jesus is Christ the
son of God, and that in believing, ye might have life through his name.

Bv. Here the Evangelist adds the cause and end of those things which he
has hitherto declared, to the end the Reader might know how to profit in
reading these things, saying: That ye might believe, that this Jesus, of whom
I testify that he is risen again, who by so many signs declare to his
disciples after his death, that he is risen to life, is Christ the son of
God, that is to say, that Messiah, and only begotten son of God, whom the
father acording to the Scriptures, sent into this world to be a savior and
Mediator. C. Therefore by these words he gives us to understand that he has
put in writing so much as is sufficient to satisfye us: because the same is
sufficient inoughe for the confyrmation of our faith. For he minded to
preuente the vain curiosity of men, which is seldom or never satisfied.
Also, Saint John was not ignorant what the other Evangelists had written.
But seeing he intends nothing less than to abolishe their writings, he
does not sepadate their Narration from his, saying that this is the end of
the Scriptures, that we might believe that Jesus is the son of God. C.
Notwithstanding it seems absurd that faith should be grounded upon miracles,
which ought to be wholly tied to the promises of God, and of his word.
Answer. Miracles are appointed here to serve for no other use, than to be
helps and stays of faith. For they serve to prepare men's minds, that they
may give more reverence unto the word of God. Miracles confirm our faith.
R. Therefore miracles do confyrme a man's faith, but they give not faith. For
they which believe not by the word, bot miracles, do fall away in time of
temptation.

That Jesus is Christ. Bv. That is to say, the Messiah promised in the Law,
and in the Prophets, perfect God, and perfect man, the mediator of God and
men, the high Legate of the father, the only author of perfect felicity. Bv.
Who by his death has put away death, and by his resurrection has restored to
life.

The Son of God. Because among men there was none found meet to bring such
notable matters to pass, as, to reconcile us to the father, to make
satisfaction for sins, to destroy death, to overthrow the kingdom of
Satan, and to bring unto us true righteousness and salvation, therefore God
sent and gave unto us his only begotten son. A. For all are gone out of the
way, all are beoome unprofitable, Psalm. 14.3. Romans 3.12.
there is none that does good, no not one. C. Moreover, seeing the name of
son does belong unto Christ only, it follows that he is not a son by
adoption, but by nature. Wherefore in this name the eternal Divinity of
Christ is contained. M. Read more hereof in our Annotations upon the.16.
verse of the.16. chapter of Matthew.

And that in believing ye might have life. Bv. Now Saint John adds the
fruit of faith, to restrain the desire of men, least they should desire to
know more than were sufficient to obtain life. For what wickedness were
this, not to be contented with eternal salvation, and to seek to pass the
bounds of the heavenly kingdom? M. The end of the Scriptures concerning
Jesus, is Faith in Christ the son of God: and the end of faith in Christ
is everlasting life. Bv. For both the Prophets and the rest of the Apostles
also said, Haba. 2.4. Romans 1.17. Gal. 3.11. 1. Pet. 1.9.
that the just man shall live by faith. Concerning our restoring to life by
Christ, read our Annotations upon the third chapter before, the 16. verse.

Through his name. Bv. He adds this to declare that we have life, by the
merits and virtue of Christ. For in showing that our righteousness comes
hy the grace of Christ, he excludes all man's merits. M. Therefore we have
life by the name of Christ that is to say, through Christ, for Christ, in
Christ and to the glory of Christ, because we are Christ's, and do apperteine
to his name if so be we believe in him. For we are given unto him of the
Father. A. Also there are many places of Scripture which testify that we have
life given unto us by the name of Christ Jesus only. Act. 4.12. Act. 10.43. 1.
Ihon. 2.12
Such are these which I have coted in the margent.

The xxj. Chapter.
1 Afterward did Jesus show him self again to his disciples at the sea of
Tyberias: and on this wise showed he him self. Bv.

SOme think that this chapter was not added by John, but by some other,
because Saint John concludes his history in the end of the twenty chapter.
But they see not, that in the twentieth chapter those arguments only are
spoken of, by which the resurrection of the Lord was manifested at
Jerusalem: and that in this one and twentieth chapter those things are named,
Mat. 26.32
by which he approved the truth of his resurrection in Galile Therefore of the
twentieth chapter, he concludes the narratio^ of those signs which were showed
at Jerusalem. But, because the Lord had specially promised that straight
after his Resurrcection he would go into Galile, and there showed him self
alive again unto his disciples, S. Ihon lest: he might seem to omit any
thing which appertayned to a full and perfect history, has in this chapter
added the revelation of the Resurrection made in Galile. M. But when this
apparition was made we cannot sertaynely tell, for that the Euangeliste
speaks not of any time. It is most sertayne that the Apostles, according to
the commandment of the Lord, left Jerusalem and came to Galile after the
eight day of his resurrection. Wherein we have to note the diligence of
Christ, who sought to co^fyrme his disciples in the faith of the Resurrection.
If so be he had sought only to have made them believe his resurrection, he had
done that out of hand the first day of the same, neither was it need full to
use many signs and apparitions for that cause: but because it was not
sufficient once only too know the truth of the resurrection, except they
did percist in the knowledge and faith of the same by invincible constancy, it
was necessary too instruct and confyrme them by many signs, by the space of
forty days. So also we have need to be strengthened in the knowledge of that
truth which we have once received. Therefore Christ has so ordered his
Church, that we might not only be illumined, but also confirmed even to the
end of the world, by the word, by Sacraments and by the often operations of
the holy Ghost.

2. There were together Simon Peter, and Thomas which is called Didimus. etc.

C. Saynct John declares that Christ apeared to seven of his disciples:
amongst whom he reckeneth Thomas, not for estimations sake so much, as that
we might the sooner believe by his testimony.

M. Simon Peter was of Bethsaida, a city of Galile bordering upon the Sea,
which in other places is called the lake of Genazareth, but here ye Sea of
Tiberias. This Peter and the rest, S. John names as witneses, to prove the
truth and sertainety of the resurrection of Christ.

3. Simon Peter says unto them, I go a fishing. They say unto him, we also
will go with thee. They went their way, and entered into a ship immediately, and
that night caught they nothing.

Bv. Here first is set down the occasion by which ye manifestation was made.
For when Simon Peter was come into his own country with his disciples, least
he should be idle, and live upon other men's cost and charge, went a fyshing
and took with him the rest of his disciples. C. And this travail of Peter in
fyshing ought not to be judged unseemly and unmeet for his office. He was
only ordained an Apostle by breathing as yet, as we have said before in the
twenty chapter: but he ceased for a little while until he were endued with new
power. For he was not as yet commanded to go forth to execute the office of
teaching, but was only admonished of his calling to come, that he and the rest
might know, that they were not chosen from the beginning in vain. In the mean
time they do that which they were accustomed to do, and which became private
men, until such time as they were called of the lord to do other business. The
Apostle Paul even in the midst of his race of preaching got his living with
his hands: but he had another consideration. For so the time gave him leave,
least handy labors might draw him away from teaching. But Peter and his
fellows because they were free from al public function, gave them selves
wholly unto fishing.

Bv. Therefore herein labor is commended to us all, and idleness condemned.

And that night caught they nothing. M. In that they took nothing it seems
to be so ordered by gods disposition and appointment. C. For god had suffered
the^ to labor and weary them selves in vain all the night, to make ye miracle
more manifest. For if they had taken any thing, ye power of Christ would not so
quickly and so euidentlye have appeared: but laboring all the night in vain,
and then suddenly enclosing a great multitude of fishes, they have just occasion
given them to acknowledge the grace of ye lord. Bv. By this place we are taught
yt all man's labor is in vain, except ye lord prosper and bless his endeavor.
R. For so long as we labor without Christ, we labor in vain. And this is the
cause why they which oftentimes take most pains are most poor. For they see
not God in their labor. God is not seen but by the word. The father is not
seen, but by the son. What then says the son? The father clotheth thee,
the father nourishes thee. Therefore if by faith thou begin to labor in this
word of the son, thou shall truly see god in thy labor, who will thoroughly
bless thee, and whatsoever thou take in hand it shall prosper. C. Also God
does oftentimes exercise the faithful, even as he has don the Apostles, to
commend unto them his blessing. If so be always all things which they take in
hand should have good success, no man almost would impute ye fruit and gain of
his labor to ye blessing of god: every one would boast of his own labor, and
kiss his own hands: but when sometime they wearye themselves without profit,
if so be afterward any better fruit chance to come, they are constrained to
acknowledge somewhat that is extraordinary. Thus it comes to pass that they
begin to attribute the praise of prosperous success unto ye grace of God.

4 But when the morning was come, Jesus stood on the shore: nevertheless the
disciples knew not that it was Jesus. Jesus says unto them, children have ye
any meat. etc.

Bv. The disciples knew not christ, either yt they were far from ye shore, or
else because their eyes were held, as were ye eyes of those disciples which were
going to Emaus. M. But Christ most friendly calls unto the^, saying, Children
have ye any meat? By this voice is set forth that fatherly affection which
Christ bears toward al those which will be his disciples. M. Christ
demands this question as a marchaunte come thither to buy fyshe. And when
he asks them if they have any meat he means fish. But the disciples
supposing that he had been some other man which came to the lake to buy fyshe,
answered him, that they had nothing.

6. And he says unto the^, cast out the net on the right side of the ship and
ye shall find etc.

C. Christ commands not as by ye right and authority of a Master, but
gives friendly advice as one of ye people: M. And by this admonition he
prepares away for the miracle. For it was necessary that they should have this
watch word before, that they might afterward know, whereunto they might refer
this sudden and unlooked for multitude of fishes. And whereas Christ did not
make the fyshes of their own accord to leap into ye disciples Ship, but be
rather would have them to be taken by the inclosier of their net. By this image
we are taught that the gospel is needful to be preached even among the elect,
by the ministry of the Apostles, that they may be saved. C. The disciples not
knowing what to do, and being without hope of fruit, easilye yielded to the
counsel of him, whom they took to be a stranger. If so be any man had
given them such counsel at the first pitch, they would not have been so
ready to obaye, The which is therefore spoken, least any man should maruayle
that they were so obedient, seeing they were so far spente with labor.
Therefore, because they had taken nothing, they obeyed the word of the Lord,
though unknown unto them, if peradventure they might at ye last take some fish
to carry home with them.

C. Howbeit this is no commen example of sufferaunce and patience, that they
continue their labor after the day light, which they had spent without
profit all yt might. And verily if so be we submit our selves to the blessing
of him, we must patiently wait for the same. For there is nothing more unmeet
than by andby to pull back our hand from our labor, if it appear not
profitable. The nakedness of Peter testifies that the Apostles had labored
very sore, and yet notwithstanding they let not to cast in their net a fresh,
that they might omit no occasion. Notwithstanding in that they obeyed the
commandment of Christ it cannot be ascribed unto faith. For they heard him as
a stranger. Now if so be at any time our vocation seems yrkesome, because
our labor and travail is without fruit, yet notwithstanding when the Lord
exhorts us to go forewarde, let us be of good cheer, we shall have at the
last good success in due time.

7. Then said the disciple whom Jesus loved, it is the lord. When Simon Peter
heard that it was the lord, he gyrt his coat unto him, (for he was naked, and
sprang into the sea.

M. This disciple beloved of Jesus was John, who wrote these things. He was
the first which knew the Lord, by the enclosing of the wonderful company of
fyshes, of whom he informed Peter also. R. Therefore it appears for what cause
they had taken nothing all the night long, and afterward drew a great
multitude of fishes into the Ship, namely, for no other cause than that they
might thereby the more plainly know the Lord: even as oftentimes our prayers
seem to be vain, if so be any thing contrary unto our desire happen. And
with this purpose the Lord does work contrary to our prayers, that he may
afterward more fully grant us the petitions of our hearts, and may be more
largely glorified in us. Moreover the Evangelist by his example teaches, that
when we have good success contrary to our expectation, we must lift up our
minds unto the Lord: because we ought biandby to remember, that this benefyte
proceeded from his grace, which is the author of all goodness. This godly
knowledge of the divine grace which John had in his mind, brought him to the
knowledge of Christ also. For he knew not Christ with his bodily eyes, but
because he was persuaded that this abundance of fysh was given unto them of
God, he gathers that it was Christ which directed their hands.

And spra^g into the sea. As faith was first in John, so Peter biandby
excels him in feruencie of the spirit, when setting all fear of peril
aside, he casts him self into ye lake. R. For Christ being known, no
danger is feared.

C. Notwithstanding it is uncertain whether he did walk upon the sea, or swim
to the shore. Let it suffyce us to know this, that he leaving the ship took
his way, not rashlye, but according to the measure of his zeal, that he might
come before the rest unto Jesus. M. Moreover in that he being naked gyrded his
coat unto him when he came out of the Ship to Christwarde, it is an example of
shamefastnes and reverence. Some Anabaptistical spirit would have come naked
unto Christ without blushing.

8. The other Disciples came by Ship. etc.

9. As Soon then as they were come to land, they saw whot coals, and fishes
laid thereon, and bread.

C. All come at the last unto Christ, but Peter excels the rest in zeal.
They were occupied in taking the fishes out of the net: the which leisure Peter
could not tarry, not regarding the fyshe, when he knew that the Lord was upon
the shore. R. Men come unto Christ by diverse means, some with excellent
gifts, other some with base science and labor, which appears in the sight of
the world so contemptible, that the same is counted no gift. Peter comes unto
Christ, but by miracle, and with a gift wonderful in the eyes of the world:
the other disciples row in the common skyffe or cockboate unto Christ. A. But
it makes no matter how thou come, so that thou bring faith with thee which
works through love.

They saw whot coals. M. Now consequentlye the Evangelist comes to the
declaration of those things, which the Lord did after this apparition, and
miraculous inclosier of fyshes. The Evangelist says not, they laid whot
coals, fyshe, and bread, but they saw whot coals, and fishes laid thereon.
Therefore not they, but the Lord did these things, while they were fishing on
the sea, that he might entertayn the^ with a silly feast according to his wonted
manner: with this purpose to teach them, that no necessary thing appertaining
to the body, shall be wanting to his Ministers, so that they labor not
slouthfullye, but couragiouslye. R. For the disciples coming forth of the Ship
from their godly labor, found not only broyled fish, but also bread. Thus
also the Lord fed the Israelites in the wilderness, who following their vocation
had bread from heaven, quails brought with the wynd, and water out of the
rock. Moses following the calling of the Lord in the mountain, was nourished
forty days without bread or water. Elias following his calling was fed by a
Raven, by nature a ravenous bird. And although these were special miracles,
yet notwithstanding we may herewithall confyrme and strengthen our faith. For
miracles are seals unto us of Gods promises.

10. Jesus says unto them, bring of the fish which ye have nowcaught.

11. Simon Peter went up, and drew the net to the land, full of great fishes.
etc.

Bv. Christ commanded this to be don to take away al suspicion, least they
should think either the broiled fish, or that which they had taken to be but a
fantasy.

R. But why does he not say, bring hither of the fyshes which I have caused you
to take? Answer: The holy Ghost is wont in other places of the Scripture, to
ascribe those works unto us, which notwithstanding God works in us: not to
the end we should be proud in our own conceit, but that we might go foreward
in doing our duty. C. So we call that our bread, which in desiring to be given
unto us, we confess to come from the blessing of God.

Simon Peter drew the net. Bv. Peter alone drew not the net to land, but was
helped by the rest of his fellows. R. In this manifestation of Christ, we have
many wonderful things to be considered. The first is the taking of so great a
multitude of fyshe, and being so many the net not broken: secondlye that Peter
came unto Christ not as did the others in a boat, but by swimming: last of al,
yt with out the preparation of any man, meat was dressed to satisfy their
hunger. This therefore is the most notable apparision of Christ, replenished
with deuyne power. For the lord which blesses man, makes them fyrme
instruments, to finishe his work and will.

12. Jesus says unto them, cum and dyne. And non of his disciples durst ask
him who art thou? For they knew that it was the Lord.

M. Christ calls his disciples to meat, the which he had prepared not so
much to fill their bellies, as to confyrme them in the faith and knowledge of
the resurrection, by eating with him. Bv. For although this be not plainly
expressed, yet notwithstanding it may appear by the circumstances.

And none of his disciples durst ask him. C. The Evangelist means that the
disciples durst not ask Christ who he was, because they feared that they
should thereby do him injury, he had so plainly revealed him self by manifest
signs. As if he should say. Bv. The Lord was so familiarly conuersaunt with
them, that none of them needed to ask and say, who art thou?

13. Jesus then came, and took bread, and gave them, and fish likewise.

14. This is now the third time that Jesus appeared to his disciples. etc.

M. His custom was to break the bread: whereupon the two disciples which went
to Emaus knew him, by breaking of bread Bv. But he did not this without his
accustomed manner of giving thanks. Luke 24.


C. Christ had appeared more than seven times, but whatsoever was don in one
day, is comprehended under one apparition. AVG. So that the first day is the
day of his resurrection: the second, the eight day after his resurrection, in
the which he offered him self to Thomas to be seen and felt: The third day is
this, in the which he appeared by the sea shore of Tiberias. C. He means
therefore that Christ was seen of his disciples at several times, that his
resurrection might have the more credit. M. There are other some also, which
think that the Evangelist speaks of those manifestations, by which he apeared
not to one or two alone* but to all of them when they were gathered together.
Otherwise it should follow, that the Lord was not seen of his Disciples in
Judea, but only upon the day of his resurrection, and the eight day of the
same, the which can not be affirmed.

15. So when they had dined, Jesus says to Simon Peter, Simon Ioanna, love
thou me more than these? He said unto him, Yea Lord, thou know that I
love thee. He said unto him, Feed my Lambs.

Bv. As the Lord when he had fed many in the Desert with five loves and two
fishes, passed from the meat of the body unto the food of the soul, teaching
that we must also hunger after the eternal food, which makes us immortal:
even so he taking here occasion of the fishing, exhorts, his Disciples to
the spiritual fishing, whereby they may draw many unto God by the net of the
Gospel. Notwithstanding he changes the allusion. For he passes from fishes,
to cattle, commanding them to feed the Lords flock. But specially he
conuerteth his whole speech unto Simon Peter, whom the Lord Jesus restored to
that degree of honor, from the which he was fallen. That foul denial of
Christ, of the which we have hard, had made him unworthy of the Apostleshippe.
For how should he be a faithful teacher of the faith, which had so fowlly
fallen from the same? He was made an Apostle, namely with Judas. But so soon
as he had forsaken his place, office, and dignity, he was also deprived of the
honor of the Apostleship. Bv. Therefore least he might seem to be removed for
ever from the fellowship and office Apostolical by the threefolde denial, he
is received again by the trebble confession of his love, and now as well
liberty, as authority to teach is restored unto him: both which he had lost
through his own fault. And least the infamy of his fall might any thing
hinder him, Christ quite wipeth and blotteth away the same. Such a perfect
restitution both for Peter, and also for his hearers was most necessary: for
him it was necessary, that he might the more boldly execute his office,
being assured of his vocation, to the which he was restored again: for the
hearers also, least the fault remaining still in the man, might have given
some me^ occasion to despise ye gospel.

Simon Ioanna. A. Concerning this name we have spoken before. John. 1.42.
Simon Ioanna (says our Savior) love thou me? Bv. The which some refer
unto the Disciples, that this might be the sense and meaning, Love thou me
more than thou do these thy brethren and fellows? But it seems to be the
more simple sense and meaning, if so be thou understand that Peter was asked,
whether he loved the Lord more ferue^tly than did the rest. Peradventure the
question rose herehence, for that he leaving his fellows in the Skiffe, cast
him self into the lake, not tarying the time of rowing, and seeking to come
first unto the Lord standing upon the shore. Also because he fund the Savior
very merciful unto him in forgeuing his sin, Luke. 7.47
by right the greater love is required of him. For he, to whom more is given,
ought to love more C. But howsoever the matter stands that way, it is most
certain that the meaning of Christ in these words is, that no man can
faithfully serve the Church, and take pains in feeding the flock, except he
have further respect than unto men. First, the office of teaching, of it self
is laborious and troublesome, seeing there is nothing more hard, and to keep
men under the yoke and obedience of God: of whom, some are weak, some light,
some perverse, some dull, some slouthful, and some hard and unapt to be
taught. Preaching a hard office.
Also Satan for his part thrusts in all the lettes and stumbling blocks he
can devise, to discourage the good shepherd, or at lest to weaken him.
Therefore none shall c^nstantly go or ward in this office, but he in whose heart
remains the love of Christ, that he forgetting him self, and wholly
adicting him self unto Christ: may overcome all impediments and stays. Thus
Paul declared him self to be affected, when he said, The love of Christ
binds us. Bv. To be short, Christ requires of the shepherd, burning and
earnest love. For the Lord did not ask Peter as one ignorante what was in the
heart of Peter, or of any other man: but he sought to imprint this in the
minds of al his Disciples, that he must of necessity be endued with perfect
love toward Jesus Christ, which takes upon him the care of his flock. C.
Therefore let them which are called to govern the Church, remember that if they
will eighthly and truly execute their office, they must first begin at the love
of Christ.

Yea Lord thou know that I love thee. M. So great is the constancy and
trust of a good conscience, that it is not afraid to appeal unto the
knowledge of the Lord, and to take the Lord him self for a witness. Peter
says not, Thou know Lord that I love thee more than these do, but, Thou
know Lord that I love thee. He exalts not himself above the rest,
neither does he ascribe less love unto them than unto him self, but modestly
and simply affirms that he loves the Lord. He could judge no more of other
men's hearts than they could do of his. For no man knows what is in man, 1.
Cor. 2.11.
but the spirit of man that is in him. Even so we must testify of the truth
of our heart, that in the mean time we reiecte not others, nor presume to judge
of the spirit of other men.

Feed my Lambs. C. The Scripture applies this word (Feed) metaphorically
to all kind of government. But because here he speaks of the spiritual
government of the Church, it is good for us to note in what parts the office
of a shepeheard consists. For we have here no vain or idle dignity
depaynted unto us, neither does Christ commit any government to a mortal man,
that he may use the same at his own pleasure. Christ, seeing he is properly the
only shepherd of the Church, who governs and feeds his sheep by the word
of salvation, Pastors of Christ to feed his sheep.
because he uses the help of men to preach doctrine, does give also unto
them his name, or at lest communicates the same with them. Therefore they are
accounted for lawful and true Pastors before God, which govern the Church by
the ministry of the word under the head Christ Whereby we may gather what
burden Christ lays upon Peter, and upon what condition he appoynteth him a
governor of his flock. Whereby also the wickedness of the Bishops of Rome
is plainly enough refelled and dysproued, which wrest this place to establishe
the tyranny of their Popedom. To Peter (say they) it was said above the
rest, Feed my Sheep. Why it was spoken rather to him than to the rest, we
have showed before. Supremacy of the Pope.
But there is nothing given to Peter in these words, which is not as well common
to all the Ministers of the Gospel. R. For the Apostles have all one power,
because they have all one and the self same spirit, all one word of the
Gospel given unto them to preach. C. Therefore the Papists do seek to prove
in vain that Peter was chief, because he was specially spoken unto above the
rest. But admit and grant that he had some special honor above the rest, how
will they prove that he was placed in the highest degree of all other? He was
in deed the chiefest among the Apostles, but shall it thereof follow that he is
the universal Bishop of the whole world? Verily whatsoever Peter has
received, does no more appertain to the Pope, than it does to Mahumet. For by
what right does he challenge to him self to be Peter's successor? And what man
in his right wits will grant unto him, that Christ speaks here of any
right of succession? Yet notwithstanding he will be counted Peter's successor. I
would to God he were. None of us does let him but that he may love Christ, and
take care and charge to feed his flock. But neglecting the love of Christ
the most high Shepherd, and rejecting the office of feeding, to boast of
succession is extreme impudency and folly. Bv. This also has a singular
emphasis, that Christ said not, Feed thy sheep, Act. 20.28. 1. Pet.. 1.18
but feed my sheep, feed my lambs, For he has made us a peculier people to
him self by the redemption of his blood. Ministers therefore are shepherds of
the Lords flock, and not Lords. G. Moreover hereby it does plainly
appear what great care Christ has for our salvation, when he does so
specially commit the same unto Shepherds. M. Also we must not lightly pass
this, that Christ calls all the faithful his Lambs. For he gives us to
understand that as yet they are tender, and are therefore to be fed with
greater care and diligence: even as there is commonly greater care had for the
feeding of young Lambs, than for old sheep: because the hope of the flock
consists in them.

16. He says unto him the second time, Simon Ioanna love thou me. etc.

A. Again the Lord asks Peter whether he love him, laying upon him the same
burden which he did before, saying, Feed my sheep. Bv. That is to say,
refreshe, comfort, reprove, admonish, and teach, with the word of truth. M.
Here is the office of a Shepherd expressed. For the verb which we have here,
does not only signify to feed, but also to govern and rule. Thus the
minister of Christ ought to feed the Lords sheep, with the prouander of
doctrine, and to direct and govern them with the word of admonition and
correction. C. Moreover Christ did not commit all generally unto Peter and to
others to be fed, but only his lambs and sheep. Every good shepherd must
seek to b^^ng all unto Christ. And because they can not discern between
sheep and wild beasts, we must seek by all means possible to tame those
that are more like Wolves than sheep. But when they have done all they can, it
is but lost labor which is not bestowed upon the chosen sheep.

17. He says unto him the third time, Simo^ Ioanna love thou me. etc.

M. Peter was very sorry, by the remembrance of those things which were past,
least the same might happen unto him again, which happened before, when he
presuming and bragging overmuch, had a miserable fall. C. Or else he thinks
that he is secretly nipte and blamed, as not answering to the mind and purpose
of Christ. But we showed before that this repetition is not superfluous. Also,
Peter as yet had not experience, how deep this love of Christ ought to be
imprinted in their minds, who were to withstand an innumerable sort of
perils. Afterward he learned by experience that this strayte examination was
not vain. Also in his person all they which will take upon them the charge of
governing the Church, are taught, not lightly, but deeply to examine them
selves what zeal they are endued withal, least they run back or faint in
the midst of their course. We also are taught to be quiet and patient, when
soever the Lord shall straytly or roughly examine us: because he has just
causes of that thing, of the which oftentimes we are ignorant.

18. Verily, verily, I say unto thee, when thou wast young thou gyrdedst thy
self, and walkedst whyther thou would: but when thou shall be old thou
shall stretch forth thy hands, and another shall gyrde thee. etc.

Bv. After that Christ had received Peter into the company of the Apostles, and
had restored him to his name and office, prescribing what he should do
(namely, love and feed) C. He armeth him also against the battle which was
at hand. And so, he does not only require of him faith and diligence, but
also an invincible courage in perils, and constancy in bearing the cross:
willing him to be ready to suffer death, so often as need shall require. Bv.
Whereby he declares what all teachers of the Gospel, and faithful pastors
must look for to receive at this world, namely grievous afflictions, and in
the end shameful death. C. For although the condition of all Pastors be not
alike, yet notwithstanding this admonition perteyneth to all in some part. The
Lord spares many, and requires not their blud, being only contented with
this, that so long as they live they wholly consecrate the^ selves unto him in
faith. But yet because Satan bids battle daily, they must be always
prepared to dye, which take upon them the office of feeding, because they
have to do not only with sheep but with wolves.

When thou wast young. M. Christ does not here so much put a difference
between youth and old age, as between the time of worldly peace, and
tyrannical persecution. C. And by this word of gyrding, he comprehends all
outward actions, by which a man frames him self and his life. Howbeit many
think that the kind of death which Peter suffered, is here noted, because
he was hanged with his arms stretched out. But what kind of death soever it
was that Peter suffered, it is better to be ignorant of the same, than to
believe doubtful tales. Bv. Therefore the simple sense is this, Before that
Peter was a preacher of the truth, that is to say, an Apostle of Christ, he
had liberty to live as he lysted: the world did not hate him: But so soon as
he was made the servant of Jesus Christ, and a preacher of the Evangelical
truth, John. 5.19.
the whole world was against him. For the whole world lies in wickedness.
But the Gospel preaches to the whole world righteousness: Therefore it accuses
kings, Princes, high and low, rich and poor. And hereupon it comes that
the preachers of the truth are hated of all estates and degrees of men, even to
the death. C. Now in Peter we have a notable spectacle of the estate and
condition of us all. Many live in ease and pleasure before they be called of
Christ: but so soon as they have given their name unto him, and are received
for disciples, they suffer grievous conflicts, they are in peril, and at
deaths door. This condition, though it be hard and paynfull, yet
notwithstanding we must bear the same patiently. For he knows our
infirmity, and he will lay no more upon us than we shall be able to bear. A.
1. Cor. 10.13
So he bare with Peter so long as he was tender and weak, even as he said unto
him, John. 13.36
VVhither I go thou can not follow me, but thou shall follow me
hereafter.

And lead thee whither thou would not. C. It seems absurd, that Christ
says his death shall not be voluntary. For as he has no constancy, so has
he no praise of Martyrdom, which is carried violently to death against his will.
M. But we must distinguish here between the will of the spirit, and the will
of the flesh. C. For this ought to be referred to the battle of the spirit
and the flesh, which the godly feel in them. For we do never obey God with
such a willing and free mind, but the world seeks to draw us a contrary
way. R. Death is always unsavory to the flesh, the flesh is most unwilling to
dye. C. Whereupon the Apostle complayneth, The good which I would do I not, but
the evil which I would not, that do I. Romans 7.19.
Therefore Peter in the flesh was unwilling, but in the spirit willing to dye.
G. Furthermore we have to note that all men naturally fear death: Death feared
by nature.
because it is contrary to nature to desire to be dissolved. Therefore Christ,
though with his whole heart he was framed to ye obedience of God, he wishes
death away. This doctrine therefore is necessary to be known. For it stirs
us up to pray: because we can never overcome the fear of death without the
singular help of God: therefore our only way is to submit our selves under his
holy hand, to be ordered at his pleasure.

19. That spoke he, signifying by what death he should glorify God. And when he
had spoken this, he says unto him Follow me.

M. The Evangelist expounds the words of Christ, by which he gave Peter to
understand, that he should be slain for the doctrine of the Gospel. C. This
addition of S. John is of great weight. For although all the godly ought to
seek to glorify God whether it be by life or by death, yet S. John thought
good to adorn their death with a special title, which with their blood seal
the Gospel of Christ and set forth his name. Phil. 1.19.
Bv. That punishment which the confessors of Christ suffer is extreme,
reprochefull, and full of ignominy: but the truth calls such deaths, and
such punishments, glorious, because the holy Martyrs of God by death do
glorify God, and are glorified also them selves by that eternal glory. M. The
Evangelist does not say, by what death Peter should dye, nor yet by what death
he should deserve everlasting life, but he says, Signifying by what death he
should glorify God. Therefore the death of the godly which they suffer for
Christ's sake, brings not destruction unto them (as the blind world judges)
neither does it deserve eternal life, but has only this commendation, that
it glorifieth God. The which whosoever does, he has to comfort him self
with this voice of the Lord, 1. Kin. 2.30. Apoc. 14.13.
I will glorify them which glorify me. Blessed therefore are the dead which
dye in the Lord.

Follow me. C. H^^re Christ declares wherefore he foreshewed the violent death
of Peter: namely that he might prepare Peter to patience and sufferance. Seeing
(says he) thou must suffer death by my example, follow thy captain. M.
Therefore ye Lord propounds his example to Peter, as if he should say, Thou
know how I have lived in this world, how diligently. I have fed the sheep
which the father has given me, what I have suffered of the wicked for this
cause, and from whence I am now raised to eternal life and glory. Hereby
frame thy self after my example, hereby take heed what thou do, hereby
know what to look for, and thou shall find consolation. R. For thou shalt
dye a cruel death: Therefore prepare thy self for the afflictions to come, and
take heed to thy calling. This ought to be no small consolation unto us, how
sharp soever death seems to be, seeing the son of God offers him self
before our eyes, with his blessed resurrection which is our triumph against
death. Bv. So that this place plainly shows that all the Ministers of the
church ought to be folowers of Christ: in whom they shall find, see, and
learn all that apperteyneth to the discharging of their ministry. In him is
the most excellent love, both of God the father, and also of the flock
committed unto him, in him is a burning and discrete zeal, he teaches
sincere, sweet, and sharp doctrine, he is most pure in manners, and in example
of life, he gives strength and patience to every one in perils, and he is most
long suffering. To this Shepherd let every Pastor in the Church have respect:
John. 8.12.
For he is the light of the world: who so follows him, walks not in
darkness, but shall have the light of life.

20. Peter turned about, and saw the disciple whom Jesus loved, following him.
etc.

Bv. Although Peter was restored and placed in his Apostolical office, yet
nevertheless he retayneth still in himself the relikes of human nature, and
imbecilitie, which proceeds from ye corruption of sin. M. For when he was
comanded to follow ye lord, he does not so much consider that vocation, as he
has respect unto others. Bv. For looking behind him he saw John following:
and seeing he knew thot he was more dear unto him than the rest, he greatly
marvelled what death he should dye. M. Whereupon he moves the question
concerning his lot, saying, Lord what shall he do? For he thought it very
absurd that he should be called alone, and John omitted, whom Christ had
always so greatly loved. A. Concerning the leaving of John on Christ's breast,
read the.23. verse of the.13. chap. before.

Lord what shall he do. C. We have here in Peter an example, not only of our
superfluous, but also of hurtful curiosity, when as by the the beholding of
others we are drawn away from our office. For we being by nature severe and
narrow examiners rather of other men's lives than our own, do thereby seek to
shift off our selves. For by this color of excuse we willingly deceive our
selves, namely, that other are no better than we: as though their sloth and
folly were our discharge. Scarce the hundredth person does consider this saying
of S. Paul. Gal. 6.5.
Every man shall bear his own burden. Wherefore in the person of one man
this is a general reprehensio^ of al those, which look round about them how
other men behave them selves, but neglecte their own duty and charge which
God enioyneth them faithfully to execute; Of ten God will choose one, whom
he will exercise either with exceeding sorrows, or with grievous labor, the
other nine he will suffer to live in peace, or at least will lightly exercise
them. He uses not all men alike, but tries every one as it seems good unto
him. Seeing therefore there are diverse kinds of Christian warfare, let every man
learn to keep his own raye and order, least as idle persons we enquiring
after this or that, provoke our heavenly Captain to displeasure against us: to
whom we ought to be in such subjection, that we should forget al such things as
appertain not to ye doing of our duties.

22. Jesus says unto him, If I will have him to tarry till I come, what is
that to thee? Follow thou me.

Bv. The Lord Jesus reprehendeth the curious and unprofitable demand of
Peter: Bv. and calls him into the way in the which he must go, willing him to
consider, not the burden of other men, but what he him self is enjoined to
bear. As if he should say, It makes no matter unto thee, neither have thou
any thing to do to demand what shall become of thy fellow: leave this to my
will, only consider of thy self, and prepare thy self to follow whither soever
thou art called. R. Have regard to thine own calling, and not to an other man's,
I will have a regard to others my self. If he abide, and suffer no cruel
death, he abides to me. Bv. Yea if it be my will that he shall not dye, but to
abide in the state he is in now until I come to judgment, and that the same
should be good for him, what have thou to do with it? I will have thee, nor no
man else, curiously to search out Gods counsayles, or to discuss other men's
callings. John is mine, and I will use him at my pleasure. Therefore that which
I said even now, I say again, Luke. 9.62.
No man putting his hand to the^ Plough, and looking back, is meet for the
kingdom of God. R. I would to God that this sentence were imprinted in all
men's minds, that every one might learn to have his duty in remembrance. For
what art thou (says the Apostle) which iudgest another man's servant? Romans 14.4.
To his own master he stands or falls. M. Notwithstanding we must here
distinguish between that care which proceeds of curiosity, Care proceeds of
love, and of curiosity.
and that which proceeds of love C. For all care for our brethren is not
superfluous: if it observe a mean, then is it not curiosity, but a good care.
M. This is curiosity, to search and seek how long this or that man shall
live, and whether he shall be rich or poor: the which many do, by curious
arts, rather then attending and regarding Christian charity: Let us say, If
so be GOD will have this Prince, or that Tyrant, to rain until the end of
the world, what is it to us? Let us follow Christ our Captayn. C. To be short,
let every one of us have respect unto our neighbors, to see if we can draw
them unto Christ, rather than by their offenses, to do euel our selves.

Until I come. Math. 25.31 Act. 1.11.
M. Therefore he gives us to understand, that he will come again into this
world: the which also in other places is more plainly affirmed.

23. Then went this saying abroad, among the brethren, that the same disciple
should not dye etc.

C. The Evangelist declares, that an error sprung up among the disciples, by
mistaking the words of Christ, that John should never dye. M. The Evangelist
therefore thought good to interpret truly the words of Christ not understood,
but rashly taken, least when he him self were dead, any note of untruth might
with offense be ascribed unto the words of the Lord. Among the brethren. C. He
means these Apostles which were present at that saying: not that the name of
brethren appertayneeh to them alone: ( Bv. For all Christians were called
brethren.) But because they were the sanctified first fruits of unity. It may
also be that others, beside the eleven, which were present are noted. Bv. Hereby
we gather, how apt and ready men are to err. For if so be those men which
were, as it were, the first pillars of the Church, stombled at such a straw,
what will we do which have such great stombling blocks laid in our way. C.
Howbeit it is like that this error continued no longer among them than until
they were replenished by the holy ghost. Bv. Error springs of diverse causes,
Error springs of diverse causes.
but specially of these two: yt is to say, either of our affection, which
judges not rightly of the eternal majesty of god: or else by some small
wresting of ye word of god. Of wrong affection toward Jesus, thus the disciples
gathered, Jesus loves John, therefore John shall not dye. For those whom
human affection loves, it wishes to live for ever. To the wresting of the
word of Christ this appertayned, because they absolutely pronounced, that John
should abide in his present state, until Christ came again: whereas he spoke
conditionally, If I will have him tarry till I come, what is that to thee. C.
Thus very profytably Christ teaches us to our edification, and that also very
plainly: but we by our corrupt and wicked imaginations, do obscure and darken
the light. Christ would not pronounce any thing certain concerning John, but
only approve that he had full power of life and death. So that of it self it
was a simple and profitable doctrine: but the disciples devise and imagine more
than was spoken. Wherefore that we may be safe from the same peril, let us
learn soberlye to conceive that which is spoken out of the word of God. M.
Also by the present care of the Evangelist we are taught, how circumspect we
ought to be in reading the words of Christ, the which, one letter being added
or taken away or changed, may be so perverted, that they will not testefye a
truth but a lie, and will serve to maintain contentions: specially seeing it
is a very hard matter to take away quite out of men's minds an error once
conceived, if so be it have any show of authority from Christ. The which
happened in this cause concerning the death of John. For such is the wickedness
of man's nature, that it rusheth headlong into all vanity. Whereupon it comes
to pass that this error also, of the which the Evangelist has warned us to
take heed, is yet in ye world. For there want not some which deny that he is
dead, M. but have feigned, that when he had commanded his sepulcher to be
dug, and was put into the same, the next day after it was found empty, John
being carried alive corporallye into paradise, to Enoch and Elias, who shall
come at the latter day to war against Antechrist. C. Wherefore we see that
there is no end of erring, except we simply embrace that which the Lord has
delivered, and reject all other Imaginations, comments and surmises. Bv. These
things teach us not to trust to much to our own wisdom, lest we lightly
and necligently handel the Scriptures: but rather let us reed them in the
fear of God, and with often prayers, knowing that we are full of error and
darkness, but do receive the true and perfect illumination from above.

24. The same discyple is he which testefieth of these things and wrote these
things: and we know that his testymonye is true.

Bv. This is the conclusion and appendix of this divine history, by which
Saint John happily knitteth up the work. C. And because hitherto he has
made mention of him self under the third person, he now expresses that he is
even the very same: to the end he being an eye witness, and one that speaks
by experience, might bring more weighte and authority to his word. Bv.
There is great modesty, to be followed in his words. For he neither speaks
nor writes any thing of him self arrogantly or boldly. He calls him self a
disciple, not a doctor: who notwitstanding far excelled all the Doctors and
teachers in the world. Let then those greedy hunters after vain glory blushe
and be ashamed, who are contented with no tytels be they never so honourabie
and large. John the Baptiste, called him self a voice crying in the wilderness.
Peter and Paul which are the lights of the whole world, name them selves the
Servants and Ministers of Jesus Christ. But John also calls him self a
witness: because the Lord had said, ye shall be witnesses of these things. A
witness speaks nothing of his own, but faithfully does declare those things
only which he has either seen or heard. Wherefore that which he had heard
of the Lord: and had seen him do and suffer, simplely and truly euenas they
were spoken and done, he has vttred and declared. M. This therefore is the
very same disciple, whom he has so often said was specially beloved of the
Lord: and yet has he not once in all his book, set to his name, lest he
might incur the suspicion of arrowgancy. Yet notwithstanding it is not too be
forbidden that the names of aucthors should be set unto their books, the
which may stand too very good use and purpose, so that vain glory be not
sought.

And we know that his testimony is true. Bv. Now Saint John very-seriously
affirms that he has faithfully and truly delivered the pure and simple
truth. Even as in another place also, That which we have heard which we have
seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon* and our hands have handled
of the word of life, we show unto you. For his meaning is that the
Apostolical doctrine is most true, and approved: even as said Peter, we have
not followed deceitfall fables, when we opened unto you the power and coming
of the Lord Jesus, but with our eyes we saw his Majesty. A. Concerning the
rest which may be brought to the exposition of this place read the.35. verse
of the.19. chapter before. For there he geeueth the like testimony to that
which he has written.

55. There are also many other things which Jesus did, the which if they
should be written every one I suppose the world could not contain the
books that should be written.

John. 20.30
Bv. This place agrees with that which ye Apostle said before, how that not all the signs of ye Lords resurrection were written, but those only which were
sufficient to persuade men to believe in the Lord Jesus, that by him they
attain to life everlasting and true blessedness. M. The very same he seems
now to repeat again, but yet not without some difference. Before he spoke of
the signs after the Resurrection: but here he speaks of those signs
generally which Christ wrought and showed from the first to the last, all
the which he says are not written, neither in this book nor in any other C.
Therefore lest any man should suspecte his word as one speaking pertially
because he was loved of Christ, he cutteth off this objection, saying, that he
has omitted and ouerpassed more than he has written. Neither does he speak
of every action of Christ, but of those which appertayned to his public
office. M. And the reason hereof he says, is the innumerable multitude of
Christ's deeds, saying, that the whole world would not contain those books
which should be written if all perticulers were written. By which hyperbolical
speacke his mind was to express that multitude of books, which must be
written, if all the actions of Christ were to be written. Hiderbole is an
excessive speech either in aduauncing or de^^praesting any thing.
C. Neither ought we to Judge this an absurd Hiperbole, seeing we bear with
many things in profane writers. We must not only consider the number of
Christ's works, but also, we must way the weighte and greatness of them. The
divine majesty of Christ, which to man's sense and understanding ^s infinite,
did in those his works wonderfully shine. If the Evangelist having respect
unto this, as one astonished exclameth, that the whole world is not able to
conceive and comprehend a just and full narration, who will marvel? B. And
verily seeing the acts of Christ were almost infinite, who could have
remembered or wayed al things with fruit. To what end then should they have
been written? For it had not been meet yt we should have neglected them. C.
Furthermore he is not to be reprehe^ded, for using an old, and accustomed
figure, to commend the excellency of the works of Christ. Bv. Furthermore who
sees not that the same is a full and perfect kind of doctrine, which leads
and brings unto that end, to the which it is ordained and appointed? But
the Eua^gelical history was ordained to show unto us a way how we might obtain
eternal life, the which we obtain by faith in Christ: the which way it does
most plainly and plentifully teach us. Therefore it follows that the Gospel
is a most perfect kind of doctrine, and that the Evangelists have put a su^me
in writing, which may suffice to instruct us in the faith, and also to lead
us in the way to everlasting life: although they have not delivered unto us
word for word all things that Christ both spoke and did. B. Those things
therefore are written which being well wayed, are plentiful inoughe to
instruct us in all godlynes. I would to God they were so exactly discussed to
embrace Godlynes, as they are narrowly sifted and stretched to maintain
contencions and braules. C. Wherefore he is sufficiently learned and instructed,
which has profited in the reading of this Scripture. And verily seeing the
Apostles ar ordained of God to be witnesses unto us, as they have faithfully
done their duty, so also is it our part wholly to depend upon their
testimony: and too desire no more than they have vttred, specially seeing their
pens have been dyrected and governed by the assured providence of God, lest
withouermuch matter they should oppress our weak capacity, and yet
notwithstanding having choice, might deliver so much unto us, as he which is
only wise and the welspring it self of Gods wisdom, knew to be expedient
for us. A. But to make an end of this exposition of S. John, let us note that
we have here described and truly offered unto us our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, that true and natural son of God, consubstantiall; and coequall with
the Father in all things: but in the fullness of time, according to the
Prophets, he was incarnate for us, he suffered, he truly dyed, and was
undoubtedly raised again from death, and was made King and Lord of all
things. This Christ, seeing he is appointed of God the father, and given unto
us to be the fullness of all grace and truth, that Lamb of God which takes
away the sin of the world, that Ladder and gate of heaven, that exalted
Serpent which makes the deadly poison hurtlesse, that water refreshing the
thirsty, that Son reconciling us to the Father, that bread of life, that
light of the world, that Shepherd of the sheep, the door, the
resurrection, the life, the growing wheat corn, the Conqueror of the prince of
this world, the example of life, the way, the truth, the true and fruitful
vine: to be short, the redemption, salvation, satisfaction, and righteousness
of all the faithful in the whole world: Seeing (I say) Christ is the
plentiful treasury of all these riches and graces unto us, let us give thanks
unto God the Father of the same Jesus Christ, who has not spared his only
son, but has given him for us, to redeem us from all iniquity, and to make
us a holy and acceptable people unto him self devoutly given to all good
works: that being now delivered by the blood of Christ, from the hand of all
our enemies, we might serve him in holiness and righteousness before him all
the days of our life.

To him be Glory, Empire, and Dominion, now and for ever. Amen.
FINIS,
Laus Deo.
IMPRINTED AT LONDON by Thomas Marshe, dwelling in Fleetstreete, near unto
Saint Dunsions Church.


