THE Triumphs of King James THE FIRST, Of Great BRITAIN, FRANCE, and IRELAND,
King; DEFENDER OF THE FAITH.

Published upon his Majesty's advertisement to all the Kings, Princes, and
Potentates of Christendom, and confirmed by the wonderful Works of GOD,
declared in his life.

Devoted, Dedicated, and Consecrated to the most excellent Prince Henry Prince
of Wales.

Printed at Britains Bursse, for John Budge, and are there to be sold, 1610.

To the High, Mighty, and Magnanimous Prince Henry, Eldest Son to the King,
Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, and Rothsay: Earl of Chester, and Knight of
the most Noble Order of the Garter, etc.
Most generous and redoubted Prince, The Honor and Ornament of your age; The
Hope of your people; The Subject and Object whereon their most happy wishes
depends; The STAR of their fairest Fortune; The COMMET of dreadful terror
to their enemies; The Index, Abstract, or Compendium of the very greatest
Princes whatsoever.
Here, upon the rich Pillar of your glorious name, do I hang up The Trophies
and the Honor of MY KING your Father, sown through France, and dispersed over
the whole world. Such holy spoils are worthy your auouching, because they
are due unto none other, but only unto your HIGHNESS, in regard that a
person who is so near unto you, has conquered and won them: And his
Triumphant Triumphs, are the auguries, harbingers, and vantcurrers of your
infallible fortunes to come, even as your own Virtues do serve for a pattern
and example, to them of MY LORD the Duke your Brother.

Accept them then My Lord, and by your favorable looks, give them all a
speaking-power, as the Suns reflectio^ did on the Image of Memnon. And
believe, that as one of yours, you shall find me readier to lay hand on my
sword for you, then on my pen, and would rather spend my blood then mine Ink,
for your honor and service, in all, and by all,

My young CAESAR, and great ALEXANDER.
THou Eye of Europe, the Soul, the Heart, the delight of all thy neighbors;
France, Mother of courtesy, and our ancient friend: Suffer, that (with a voice
of Brass) I may make heard through all the Corners of the earth, and even to
those worlds which yet are furthest off, cry out to that Iacobine Monk, and
that Proselite PELLITIER, Do no evil at al unto my King. For so cried out the
Son of Croesus, dumb all his life time before, until he saw the sword
drawn to wound his father. If the child for the Father, why not then the
Subject for his Prince? Their love ought to be alike or equal, and (in
semblable actions) alike also ought to be their duties, because the people are
held to be the Princes Children. For I see, that these two audacious and
presumptuous Phaetons, do labor by their flattering answers (as with a
Delphian sword) to open the bosom or breast of MY KING, to strike at his heart
with a deadly stab, and to give him the lie more covertly, then Tortus (to his
shame) has done, coveting to impresse lies and falsities in the souls of
every one.

Their painted speeches and goodly protestations, makes my hair stand up as
affrighted, pales my countenance, smites my heart, and tears open my lips, to
entreat you (good Frenchmen) to credit them no further, then Our King has
done. He always deriueth sound judgment from words, and by the very moving
of the tongue he knows the hearts of them that make such Orations to him.
Wherefore, in beholding their books, he has said with God, Hilabijs me
honorant, cor aute^ eorum long est a me. These men honor me with their lips,
but their hearts are far off from me. In like manner there is nothing more
dangerous then the teeth of a Serpent hid under green herbs, and the throat
of a wolf, having on a sheeps habit. Woe be to them that call evil good, and
good evil; that make darkness light, and light darkness, and that call
bitterness sweetness, and sweetness bitterness. Woe be to you Scribes and
Pharisees, Hypocrites, for you compass both sea and land, to the end, to make
one Proselite: and when he is made, you yield him up as the Son of Hell,
doouble worse then your selves.

What impudence was it in a cloistred Priest, and in a private person, to show
himself in open field, to cope with a great and powerful king, when Kings
have been at all times without Peer, and free from fight, except it were with
others kings? Honor is not to be had, but by an equal: and Alexander, being
desirous to win the prize, in the course of the Olimpian games, demanded
continually: Is there any kings that run? The like may our King very well
question: Is there any Kings that answer? It is to them to whom his Majesty
has directed his advertisement, and it is to them only to make answer.

Monarkes, Kings, Princes, and Potentates of Christendom, where are your
Provost Marshals then? Where are your Lictours and Sergeants, to seize on these
saucy gamesters? Where are your Laws and Edicts, to punish these proud
presumers, that durst set footing within your Lists, to step before you in so
fair a Race or Carriere? Stir Magistrates, lay hold on these base
Hackny-runners, in so brave a fight, and do you beat down the insolence of
these rash headed Athletes, or malepart Champions. There lackes Tortures for
Tortus, to break the bridles of such silly naked souls, and bolster their
crazed brains a little better; to the end, to make Coeffeteau confess, and
Pelletier profess the truth, perforce, according to the rule of truth it self.

These proves, are to be vanquished with other Reasons, then those whereby
they labor to refute them, else it will never be done. Heresy finds daily
something to re-say, and to confound Paper withal: some means to save
himself either by flight, or obstinacy of opinion, because he will never
confess his error, much less deliver up his Arms. Even so the Pharisees and
the Saduces, being beaten down by the mouth Divine, would yet suddenly exalt
themselves again, without confessing either their fall, or the offense. So
Pericles, thrown headlong down, and even almost buried in the dust, would yet
persuade the whole Theater, that he deserved to be crowned. So that Hippomachus
(of whom Pliny speaks) and the other of the Acolians, would needs be
proclaimed victorious conquerors, after they had breathed forth theirs souls
under their enemies feet. And so this Antaeus, and his companions, already
stifled in the gripes of our Christian Hercules, would feign persuade the
world, that being themselves vanquished, yet they stand up still as
vanquishers. All such brablings and contentious disputes, do but whet on
Choler, and harden bad spirits, as being more apt to move sedition and
disobedience, then to affoorde any fruitful edifying.

Let then their shameless foreheads be circkled with Crowns, such as the
Romans used in their Consul festiuals, for their Arcadian Monsters, rather
then any answer be made unto them, except it be by the hand of Thomas Dury,
our Master Guillaume. Let the Laurel wreaths be wrung out of their hands, to
impale the victorious head of our JAMES, truly Triumphant, over Pagan
Idolatry, and Popish Heresy, which is the subject of this my present labor,
and the whole desseign of this discourse, as appears in the Frontispice of
the main building. Thus are His Trophies gathered, and limmed (through by an
unexperienced Pensill) in his victories, derived from the writing of his Royal
Advertisement.

This is the full aim of mine intention (Religious Frenchmen) and that which
I desire to show unto you (Dear Children of Heaven) to the end, that you may
not suffer your selves to be persuaded in the contrary, by the deceiving
Language, subtle Arguings, Sophistries, and captious arguments of this Doctor
Diuinity-destroyer, and the discoursing Enthusiaste, least of wise Frenchmen,
you become with them, mad and insensed Galathians. The very written book it
self does furnish us with strength sufficient, to vanquish and convince all
the answerers of the world, and their answers; not turning any one leaf of
his book, but it delivers many most express Texts of the holy Scriptures, as
many goodly places out of the holy fathers, as many Canons of the chiefest
Counselors, with many rich and strong arguments, and al set down by his
Majesty.

It is to you (Generous Frenchmen) that I speak this, and to whom I desire to
make it manifest: for though the speaking, or willingness to make it known to
you of my Country, should be but in me as lost labor, yet must J needs speak
it again, being no more but what you know, what you have seen, and what has
bin published. So many mouths are as so many Trumpets of his greatness in
great Britain; so many hearts, they are as so many Temples of his virtues;
and so many souls, are as many Vows and Sacrifices to his fair name. Among
them, J am but as one voice, yet now driven to the universal consort of the
whole worlds voices. For if my voice could be understood from the East to the
West, from the North to the South: nay, if it could pierce from this low center
of the earth to the highest circumference of the Jmperiall heaven: I would call
al Noble Spirits to com, to see Idolatry subdued, and Heresy vanquished, and I
would entreat them, to beeleue that which I say unto you, for an assured
verity, whereof Heaven, Earth, Men, and Angels, are faithful and
unreprovable witnesses. My words do savor rather of the salt of a pure
affection, then the Oil of supple flattery; My pen shall never be Ioabs
Dagger, to stab Abner backward: My life is innocent, my heart Christian, My
tongue to Scottish, and he is too good and wise a King, to be flattered by any.

But to accommodate my self to the ignorance of these insolents, who have
made French answers to a Latin. Book, I shall labor to express my conceit
of their Idiome, and imitate (as well as I can) the steps of our French
Orators. Wherein I will loose no time for excusing my self, either for my
harsh and vnelegant language, fearing the reply (in elder time) made by Cato
unto the Historian Albinus.

The courteous and Charitable Frenchman, in considering the good and free will,
wherewith I march on in this matter, and for his instruction; will amiably
correct the Errors of my Pen and the Press, which many (in like favor)
have amended in our Language. In this affair, their blows do touch us, their
Jests and Sportes do inuit us, their Reasons do drive us, and their daily
desires ought to move us.

But if any base and creeping soul, if any dejected spirit, or if some Monk
or Priest shall recreate his leisure by this writing, and purge his salt soul
of those foul slanders, breathed forth with so many wry mouths, and apish
faces, with such bending the brows, and snuffes in the nose, and which (no
doubt) he will use in reading this work: One Laurel branch of MY KING
(only) shall be my Warrant, from the sparkeling flashes of such false fires,
and his glorious Name shall serve me as the Shield of Minerua, against all
their impoysoned Arrows of Nessus and Philocteres. Let every Momus, Zoylus,
and all insenced Censurers examine this little Book Letter by letter; let them
measure the Syllables, weigh the Words, control the points and Virgulers; let
them peruse the Periods, count the Pages, and turn over the leaves: I will
protest only for my Apology, that I have taken the Rule, Squire, Plummet, and
compass in forming it, only to enform them in a solid truth.

Wherefore, cruel apprehensions, bristle not up your hairs against me;
affrighted horrors, seek not to shake my soul any more; panicke terrors,
leave my heart at large, and my tongue at liberty; to the end, that I may
bid them; Go out, go out of Babylon fly from behind her, Be not overthrown
in her iniquities. But publish this with a loud voice, as a Song of Triumph,
and speak it unto the utmost part of the Earth: THE ETERNAL HAS RRDEEMED HIS
SERVANT JAMES.

Farewell then France. My well beloved, and take this for thy present, and the
gift of my remembrance. From Alethia, toward the VVinter Solstice, or the
decreasing of the Romish Religion, and ascending of the truly Catholic and
Reformed.


King JAMES Triumphant. OR, The Trophies of the KING of great BRITAIN, etc.
UP, on your Palm Trees (o ye mortals) run all to Laurels or flourishing Bays:
on to the wild Olive, let us fill our hands with flouring branches of the
Pine; all which, never wither: to plaite Wreathes, Ch^plets, and Coronets of
honor for this worthy Pancratiaste. Gather green Maple, to beset round about
the body of this Triumphant VVrastler. Call for Trumpets and Clarions, to
celebrate the victory and blessing of our KING JAMES. Let us found forth the
praises of that invincible Monarch, who inuiteth all Kings unto his Royal
Triumph. Let us pass thorough a lustrall fire of venomous tongues (be it
either the poison of Heresy, or of envy, or of slanderous detraction) or of
immolated Beasts. Let us prepare the hauty Trophies of his heroic actions,
far more surpassing in noise, sound, and glory, then all the pompous
Triumphs of Pompey, Aemilius, Scipio, or Vespasian. Let us insculpe and carue
them, not in the Marble of Quarrera, the Alablaster of Venice, the Porphiry of
Guinea, nor yet in Iuory; not in Brass or Copper, nor yet in Silver, or in the
richest enammeled Gold: but in the Temple of Memory, and in the hearts of all
men. To the end, that altogether in one unanimity may sing with me, not in an
half or low, but in a full and loud voice, cheerfully sounding out these two
Words, these joyful Words, this IO PAEON.

Let all mortals now rejoice,
And applaud with hands and voice:
When they hear the noise and sound,
(Which like thunder does rebound)
Of King JAMES the honor great,
To whom God from his mercies seat,
(Beyond all other else) has shown,
Such love, as like was never known.
Chaste Spouse of Jesus Christ, thou being the glory of his Victories, thou
being the Victory of his Triumphs, and thou being the triumph of his just
fights: Come, o come, descend from Libanon, look down from the Mountain top
of Amana, from the height of Shamit and Hermon: Come sweet Empress of the
world, and work so graciously, that the homagers of thy Faith may (at the
least) bring victorious Palms, and lay them before his feet, whom God has
here established upon earth, and has made choice of at this instant, for thy
deliverance out of the hands of cruel Antichrist.

And see how Heaven has confirmed his throne,
Induitur chlamidem, regnique insigne vetusti
Gestat laeua decus, cinguntur tempora vitta
Albente, ac lateride more accingitur ensis.
In this manner is it, that the true Church prepares the triumphal Arche of MY
KING, even of all the Sacred Orders which he has in his Royal Parliament of
England, and on that very day, when he delivered us from the dreadful fire, the
Flames whereof would have reached up to the Stars, and the Ashes unto the
center of the earth, in the year of Grace, MDCV. and in this year also, the
day of his birth in Scotland. Which Nation also, being desirous to eleuate
their piety unto the Heaven of his glory, has imitated the Emperor Macrinus,
who to deify Antoninus, erected him a Statue^, sitting in his Throne, adorned
in all his Royal Ornaments.

This is the magnificent furnishment, which the reformed religion has provided
for him, as being due to the Preserver of her Sacred privileges, and to the
Guardian of her entire purity. To the end, that he should be acknowledged
through the whole world, for Defender of the Faith, and appear dreadful to
his enemies, as the ouer-commer of Monsters.

Let us go on then to his fights, march on to his allarums, and search into his
victory, to attain unto his Triumphs; where we shall first of all behold,
that it is not a single fight, or Combat of man to man, but the encountering
of one man (half an Angel) with the dark and infernal powers of Hell.

For the Enemy, both of God and of Kings presumes into his presence, to search
into, and to dispute the sense of the Gospel, in the brightness of Flames, and
in horrible exploites of severity and cruelty. His Squadrons are prepared, and
consiste of Furyes, Scolopenders, Stellions, Phalanges, and Philemons, more mad
and enraged then those of Orestes, more furious then those of Hercules, and
much more frantic then that Ajax, whom Sophocles produces in his Tragedy. The
Keys served the^ as Courtle-Axes, not to open and shut the heavens, but to
gripe and graspe up all the Gold and Silver, yea, all the wealthy abundance of
Great Britain. The Sheepe-hooke, Crosier, or Pastoral Staff, served to
catch up the fattest Sheep in all the Lords flock. And the Watchword was
nothing else, but Kill, Burn, and Massacre. As for the followers, they were
fully armed from head to the foot, with fury, rage, and malice, having their
hearts filled with Sulpher and Brimstone, to burn, spoil, and desolate all.
Their pieces of Ordinance carried six and thirty barrels of Gunpowder, beside
Billets and Faggots, and great sharpe-pointed bars of Iron. And the sound of
their Trumpets, was, Pereant amici, modo inimici.

O good God, what kind of arms are these? The Church, the only daughter of
Heaven, the Virgin feated on the hill of Sion, was she ever a Murdresse? Was
she ever taxed with any cruelty? Or did she ever drown the world in blood?
Alas, has not (much rather) persecution bin her legitimate legacy in the
world? Has not infinite store of afflictions bin her patrimony and inheritance?
And the crown of martirdom, has not it bin her only triumph?

Contrariwise, for MY KING, has not he contented himself, to encounter his
enemies alone, the edge of his sword being rebated, the point broken off, his
match not fyred, his powder wet, his Ordinance out of carriage, their mouths
empty of fire or Saltpeter, only to fight against them with the Arms of
Justice? And where was the field for battle, but in Court of Parliament? And in
the most eminent place of the plain, were all the Monarks, Kings and Princes of
Christendom (even as Homer feigned his Jupiter on the Dardanian mount, where
he beheld Troyan bands and squadrons of the Greeks?) And what was the shocke
of battle, but the fire discovered, the blood and death of some few known
Traitors, where Rebellion was taken captive, to be tied both by hands and feet
to the Chair of King JAMES? Loyalty evermore singing with a cheerful voice,
and resounding in praise of his victory, this Triumphant IO, or Live King
James. That he may live as triumphant, even in Rome, as victorious in Great
Britain; as much admired of all the world for his Mercy, as feared for his
Valor, and cherrished and honored of his people, both for his Piety and
Justice. For, as Learning and Knowledge are written in great Letters on his
Royal for-head, as knowing how to instruct stout Rebels, giving them lessons
of duty, and apprehensions, how to live acording to his Laws: so (in like
manner) may be seen shining in his Eyes, Clemency and Mildness, Virtues apt
and proper to MY KING.

And therefore we see him, not running, like Aratus, with a drawn sword in
his hand, upon the Walls of Rome, and to the Tyrants gate, to take revenge in
his just displeasure, but seated. Seated in sign of Royal power and
Sovereignty of his own right and Justice. Sitting on his Throne, in sign that
Iehu shall reign, and that is, according as the Wise man approves it, when he
says, The King that is seated upon his Throne, chaseth all evil out of his
sight.

In like manner, here do I see my self ravished in spirit, and rapt up to
Heaven, the heaven of the most high majesty of Great Britain, the Epicicle
most eleuate of his Royalty. That is to the Daix or State of his Throne-royall,
where I see the God of our World ruling all all the Motions, the Aspects, the
influences, and the Conjunctions of all the stars in his heaven: discerning
the fixed from erring, and Commets from Plannets; to the end, that all may
shine the better, and enjoy (at length) the Heaven of God, which is the maine
end of all his travails, and shall be the Crown of his fair Trophies. He is
seated, to be (as yet) peaceable, the Sword hanging but by his side, to
declare thereby, that he would not force the faith, that slaughtery, butchery,
and all their massacres (with the Phalarian and Neronian torments) are to him
most horrid and hateful, and that their foul treason has but only drawn out
of his breast, a very small spark of Divine fire. Finally, that he has not
caused Scaffolds, Jibbets, and Helles to be erected, to handle and punish
Traitors, according unto their merits.

To how many has he given pardon, as that grave and sweet Author of Tortura
Torti (as truly as learnedly) testifies unto us? Was there ever any Prince
more forgetful of wrongs, and more apt to remit injuries done against him,
then his Majesty, even then when he might be very easily revenged? How many
Acts of Parliament, full of benignity, clemency and kindness, has he set
toorth since his happy coming to the Crown of England, even toward his very
enemies themselves? which is the only reason, that his subjects both love and
obey him the more willingly, and that strangers ought to be the more
respective of him.

For my self, J may say, that (by good right) of him, which the Roman Orator
did of Julius Caesar. He is a great Iusticer, Upright, Equal and true: But in
all his virtues, there is none more Great, more Excellent, or more commendable,
then is his Clemency and Benignity. I speak not this as a Learner, or being
Tutored thereto; but out of knowledge and good experience, and as one willing
with poor Vzza, to set a hand to help the Arc, whereof J feared the falling.
And if I have done it with out any great pain, yet am I glad that it has
returned me no danger, and so long as I shall have any jot of life in me, I
will publish every where, and sing in heart, though it be to my self;

En tibi praepetibus foelix victoria pennis
Quae volat, and laet am adducit Clementiapacem,
Vnde salus populis te Rege Iacobe beatis.
But fearing the like inconvenience, as that which happened unto the
High Priest Cecilius Metellus, for having dared to be so bold, as to put his
hand near to the Statue of the Goddess Pallas: I am constrained to turn my
sight from the fair Eye of the World. His Beams do force me to kiss the very
liddes of those eyes, even as the perfection and proportion of his other
Visible parts, do restrain my tongue, from delivering the mystical and
Physiognomicall sense of every one of them. In like manner it was never mine
intention, to note all the Anatomical considerations of his Imperial Body, or to
pierce any further, then unto the subtlety of our own reach and apprehension:
which does sufficiently content it self, to refer all the functions of his
parts, to the apparent appearance, thereby to erect a Triumph, not only fully
rich, but also morral, to following posterity.

We will begin with his Crown, which is the Ornament for the Head, the
chiefest member, and that which is most honorable of all the body; even that
part, wherein are composed all the principal instruments of life, by the
perfection of numbers. This rich chief part is crowned, to the end, that his
enemies beholding the same, should enter into the apprehensions of Cassander
King of Macedon, who having found the Statue of Alexander, entered into such a
fear, that he trembled at the very sight thereof. And to let be seen, that
mere glory has defended him from his greatest adversaries: they should bring
him no such frail Crowns, wherewith (in elder times) they were wont to honor
the Conquetors in the Olympian, Pythian, Ismyan, and Nemean, games; but that
duty which shines in heaven, and can never be withered, because it was first
wrought and wouen with the very fingers of the son of God himself.

It is a Crown of Gold, enriched with Pearls and precious Stones. Of Gold,
which rejoices the heart, heals all putride Ulcers, Woolfes, or rotted
corruption. To declare thereby, that this King shall bear the precious Balm,
the Cataplasme and Seare-cloath to heal vlcered hearts and consciences, even
those which are most fired and cauthorized, thereby to bring the new birth
again of the former Golden days of Saturn.

The Pearls are the Hieroglyphickes of his souls immaculate whiteness or
integrity, and do testify unto the whole world, that he is Protector of
Innocence and Truth.

The Diamonds do shine, and deliver a clear white luster, which cheareth the
eye. The Rubies do dart forth to sight very strange flaming beams, which may
offend some (perhaps) more then they please. These are the two most precious
Stones above all other, the Symboles or Creeds of our Churches. Nothing can
bite or cut the Diamond, but the Diamond it self; neither can we shape or
figure any thing else thereby, of any indamagement or hurt toward us, but it
must come by our own selves. The Diamond is inuulnerable, and not to be
bruised by hammers on the Anuile: but will enter far into the Ruby, who is
subject to be wrought therewith, penetrated, cut, carved, or imprinted thereon,
in whatsoever a man pleases, even as our beleese works the like effects in
unbelieving hearts, which they may very aptly signify.

The Sphear-like form of his Crown does denote the even roundnesse wherein
he proceeds to every one, as well toward the small as the great, the poor,
as the rich. That he is the Common Father of all his people, ordering all his
affections in an equal partage, like unto the Geometrical point, which
beholds all his circumference in one and the same proportion. Answerable to
the Sun, which shines equally upon all: Or as the heart, which furnishes all
the other members with life and heat: Or like unto the Palm Tree, which
distributeth his nourishment to his leaves and branches, even as if it were by
just weight and measure. Before that Parliament, he contented himself to
express unto the Papists themselves, rather the power of his Authority, then
the rigor of his Justice. He permitted to all, the free communication of his
favor, as of his Conntreyes air, and the enjoying of his presence, as the
sweet breath of his fertile kingdom.

The Book and the Scepter, which his Majesty holds in his hands, do
represent Reason and Rigor, which are the two Engines, whereby all men are
drawn to their duty. For, if Reason profit not, recourse must then be had to
Power: According unto the example of our Lord Jesus Christ, and of his
Apostles. For they, presenting peace in all mildness, thorough all places
where they came; shook off (in the spirit of Justice) the dust from their
feet, on them which resisted the^. Saying for reason of the first; That be was
soft and gentle, and for the second; That he was upright or just. In the first;
that he is good and gracious; in the second, That he is terrible. In the first,
That he helps the desolate in heart, and binds up their wounds, In the
second, That he is Dominus percutiens, a Lord that smites. In like manner Our
King, Gestans leua decus, will never press with his Scepter of authority, which
he bears in his right till he may use his pen no longer, and that the left
hand be wholly despised. He applies not the Rasor to the Canker and Gangrena
of Heresy, so long as Reason, and soft and lenitiue remedies may serve the
turn. Throughout antiquity, The Scepter has bin common to al Kings on the
earth. The Book perticularly, and for the exclusion of others, appertains to
our Mercuriall Heroes, to enstruct us, that of him (properly) ought the double
Prophesies be understood. The one of Cataldus Finius, which is more then a
thousand years since: Iste solus Clare aperiet librum scriptu^ digito Dei
viui, He only shall evidently open the book, written with the finger of the
living God: As plainly appears by his Learned Preface. The other of Sybilla,
on the destruction of Antechrist: Miserum inde tempus quia linum, ipsum perdet,
Miserable in time shall he be, because linen or a Line shall destroy him. By
Linen his Majesty's Book is understood, the Paper whereof is made of old
decayed linen: Or else the Line or Cord is threatened thereby, to hang him up,
according to the example of Achitophel.

His Scepter, which is in his right hand, is not of wood, made fast with Iron
nails, as were the ancient Scepters in Homer and Virgil; nor yet of Juory,
such as the Kings of Rome carried, and sent to their Kindred and friends; nor
of Ebony, like that of the Jndians: nor of Iron, Copper, or Silver, but of fine
Gold, like that of Mark Anthony in Florus, and such as Ahasuerus stretched
forth to Hester in the Bible, to show us, that his is one of the very Noblest
Scepters in the world. As His length plainly tells us, that even so shall his
power extend it self, and make it self to be felt very far off. It bears
on the top, not any Eagle, like that of the Tarquins, nor a Cross, as that did
of Constantines: nor yet a Storke, or the strange beast living in the River
Nylns, called Hippopotames, as others have carried, nor yet a hand like to that
of France: But a Lilly or Flowerdeluce, thereby to assure us, that his power
and manner of government is full of sweetness, mildness, and good order.

The most precious garment of his Trophies is a Royal Mantle or Cloak, the
only sacred ornament of Kings, for the more sumptuous decking of potent
Majesty, made of Velvet Azure and Gold, which are the only sightly things that
can be used in the habit of princes. It traineth along upon the ground after
him, to express the amplitude of his royal benignity, being called of God, to
cover, not only the members of his own estate from the Tyranny of Antichrist,
but likewise those people that are strangers, and of other Countries. His
colors under, are of Scarlet and white, as the Spouse in the Canticles says:
That her Best-beloued is all white and Vermillion: white in Innocence, Red and
Vermillion in Charity. For every color else looks pale and dead, or loses
his beauty, being near to these, yea, though it be Purple twice dipped in his
tincture: As in like manner, the religion of Popery does (being compared with
that which Our King embraces) as being without both sound and luster,
vanishing of it self away, even as dusky clouds do before the beams of the
worlds greatest light. The White of this Mantle royal, is Ermins, which are
more perfect in fair luster, then any other, and those furies do testify, not
the coldness of his Original country, (as some have scornfully said) but his
generous and resolved gravity, as full of bounty, As the skin of little black
spots. Admonishing us thereby, that there is nothing so prosperous, but
sometime it meets with sinister accident: as the Ermine, which is white over
all the body, and yet directly on the top of his tail, has that small touch or
mark of blacknes.

Under this Mantle or Cloak, he wears the Palmata Toga, or Dalmatian
Vesture, proper to some Ministerial Office, because the sleeue reaches so far
as the elbow only. The which may teach and persuade us, that in despite of the
Pope, of Anabaptists, of al haire-brain'd, mutinous, opiniotiue, and frantique
Preachers (whom his Majesty calls and understands to be Puritanes only)
he is an absolute Monarch, as well of the Spiritual, as of the Temporal,
even as in elder times the Caliphes were, and that in him is verified the
saying of the Poet:

Rex Anyus, Rex idem hominem, Phoebique Sacerdos.
King Anyus, is the same man, King, and yet Apollos Priest.
For Kings are the Coombes of the Estate belonging to God, even as well as of
that appertaining to their kingdoms, and their Authority is the bases and
foundation, which vpholdeth the Church, in favor and regard whereof, they were
at first established by God, who had never created or preserved the world, but
for this respect only. They have like power therein, as Josias had, and like
pre-eminence as Constantine, who published himself Bishop of exterior
occasions. They have (I say) Soueraign jurisdiction over Prelates, to keep an
eye upon their Discipline, and on the manners or behavior of the Clergy, to
take acknowledgement of their differences. Which is very easy to be proved, as
well by Testimonies and solid Reasons, as by the examples and effects of all
most venerable Antiquity.

Finally, Our King, in sign of diligence, and that he shall very shortly
triumph in all truth, Justice, and power, even as far as that proud Tarpeiane
Tower, To kill the Dragon, and deliver the male child from his throat, as
manifestly appears by the Angel mounted upon the white horse, to whom was
given the Crown of victory: He is circkled with a Girdle of Gold hanging
before his breast, which is The Collar of Saint George: which was not forgotten
by the Romans themselves of the round Table, speaking of the two Dragons,
white and red, delivered out of prison by Merlin, in the time of k. Vter
Pendragon, father to King Arthur, who after a long and deadly fight, the white
at length overcame the red. And now we may see a second surprise them.

That rejected Esau (otherwise called Edom) which signified the Red Dragon,
that old usurper, that Tyrant over so many Nations, the Pope himself, comes
to the succor of his vanquished Legions, with two Breeues, and a Letter from
the Cardinal Bellarmine, which are Gerions with three bodies, or Cerberus with
three heads and throats, casting fire out at the eyes, the nose, and the mouth.
They would feign fasten on Our white King James, the Child of Blessedness,
even in his Cabinet, and pursue him thence to his Bedchamber, in seeking to
set free all his Subjects from their obedience to him: yea, and to turn his
very household Servants from their duty: Monarchy being not so pleasing to his
taste, as Aristocratie; Order, as Anarchie.

Behold how Our King dealt in this manner with them, as others have done in the
like: To day for him, to morrow for them. And their to morrow should have bin
much nearer, if they could have attained to what they pretended. But his
Majesty stopped their way with a Mattock and a Wedge, as the Roman Captain
said: or in applying Triplici nodo Triplicem Cuneum, in cleaving a Triple knot
of Iron, with a Triple wedge of Brass; or in cutting The Gordian knot with the
sword of Alexander. His Apology (verily and of good right) ought to be held
for the support, defense, Rampant, and Fortress of all the Kings, Monarkes,
and Sovereign Princes of Christendom, whom at the third voice of his Triumph,
he awaketh and exhorts, to maintain and defend themselves altogether with
him, against the attentates and usurpations of the Pope, in aduising each one
of them, according to the rule of reason and common fence, grounded upon
custom, and derived from the Pagan Poet, to learn of the wise, saying;

-- Ecquid
Ad te post Paulo ventura periculis sentis?
Nam tuares agitur, paries cum proximus ordet,
What perilles in short time may come,
are they unto thee known?
No, when thy Neighbors house does burn,
be careful of thine own.
Monarkes, Sovereigns, Chief Judges of the World, to whom the Justice of
heaven has given absolute power, and Scepters to govern the wide Universe;
Earthly Deities, Living Jmages of the Eternal, true Lieutenants and Vicars of
God, Fathers of the people, and Tutors of his Church (kneeling on the earth, so
imitate him in a resounding Echo, with her permission and your own) waken
your selves at the voice of My King. HOW much more pleasing should this be unto
you, then that of the trumpet, which called them to enter the Listes, who
presented themselves at the Games of Olympus? O Princes, are your heads so
laden with vapors, and the Conduites of your vital spirits so stopped, that by
no agitation or motion, you can be awaked from this Leaden slumber? Do not
you know, that the last Judge of the Hebrew people, because he did sleep in
the lap of his Mistress, lost first his strength, next his sight, and soon
after his life? While you sleep so profoundly, do not you Dream what may
happen, and much more what has been already past? Will you still slumber, or
do you dissemble it, when they that should watch for you, and feeke to
preserve your Crowns in safety, are readyer to bereave you of them? It is you
Great-Soueraignes, whom this case concerns. You can be no longer assured
safely, neither in your Palaces and Cittadels, nor of the faith of your
household servants, or those you put most trust in, if this Article may be
granted to public murders, and assasinates, (to wit) That they have power to
dispense, and free your Subjects from the Oath, whereby they have vowed faith
unto you, and may cause you to be murdered, were it by a Monk, and then to
Cannonize or glorify him, when the deed is done.

Arise then Kings, and provide for those affairs which the Great God has put
into your hands. The Church is in tutelage and protection of kings, and you are
anointed and Sacred by God, to show by this exterior note, that the care of
spiritual things appertains unto you. Make of us one heritage, that this
seame-lesse Garment of our Lord may no more be torn in pieces. Cast off the
yoke of Antechrist, who cowardly abuses the Authority to you committed. It is
you that have given your power to the beast, to fight against the Lamb. It is
you also that should rather hate him, and eat his flesh. And what hinders you
from doing it? Has not the light of the Gospel (already) sufficiently enough
discovered the frauds of this man of sin? The Spirit out of the mouth of
Jesus Christ, breathed abundantly in so many places, and yet continuing, has
it not already foiled him, even in the most signal parts of his Dominion?
There is not any Prince or Commonwealth, but is weary to see this Tyrant
(fair from all obligation of Laws, Equity, and Justice) to gurmundize and
devour up all the Estates of Christendom. The Pope seems to solicit Heaven
and earth, even to his own ruin, and Coniures all Europe to make but one
Aesopes Crow. All the world is in a shiuering, so highly is it offended at his
Tyranies, and desires nothing else with us, but one just Conference, and which
also is the advice of Our wise and Learned King.

It is necessary, that a good, free, and lawful Counsel should be called and
assembled, by you Princes and Sovereign Estates, to compound all these
dissentions and differences in Religion: as being (at all times) the only
ordinary means, to abolish Schisms, disanull Heresies, and to reform
whatsoever is amiss in Ecclesiastical Discipline. This is the only way, to
restore the wanderers, to win their hearts more sensibly, and to consolidate
the languishing members, to the great body of the Church, and to reunite the
wills of your subjects, scattered into factions. Such sickly and diseased
Spirits, do require a mild and gentle cure, the keen edged sword of the
word is that which pierces into the Soul, and the Church instructs not to
persecute, but to admonish and inform such as are in error. And it seems
that this way is desired, wished and requested by many, who do offer to
submit themselves, to that which thereby shall be defined, concluded, and
ordained.

Such a notable occasion is not any way to be contemned, Non oportetsi quod
omnibus, votis petendum erat, vltro offertur, fastidire. An adboue all at this
time, having a Constable antine amongst your selves, capable to preside as the
other did in the Nicene Assemblies, the presence of whom is able to dispose of
differences, to soften the sharpest, to restore and place peace and concord
among all good Fathers, not passionate or interessed in strange opinions, and
to make them happily finish such a desseign, worthy of your best furtherance.
If this happen not in our days, let us never flatter our selves with any
human hope, of compassing it hereafter. Our last ankor is cast, having such
a Prince, Virtuous, Wise, Learned, Eloquent, Experimented, Conquering,
Victorious, well obeyed, Absolute in his kingdom, and beyond all this,
nourished and educated in piety, and in the true service of God.

And now see him among all other Kings, in his second Triumphall Chariot, like
to the Lion among the other beasts.

Where we may see this Lion in the Arms of MY KING (which is the note of his
second victory) as all they do which behold this Great Solomon upon his Throne,
round engirt with Lions. These Images do give them a sudden apprehension, as
appearing terrible and dreadful to them. But when they approach nearer, they
see that the Lions are of Gold, and as they mount to the feet of the Prince,
the same Lions do serve as a guarde and defense. In like manner seems it to
them, which a far off do behold the Lion Rampant of Scotland, that he
breaths forth nothing else but punishments, death and desolation: but when
they com nearer, and consider him advisedly, they find nothing but purity and
perfection, which is very solid and most pure and perfect Gold. And if they
should yet stand in need of the clemency of My Prince, this generous Lion will
serve them as a prop, supply and support thereto.

It is a Lion Rampant, to represent unto us the Majesty of his Majesty, who in
strength and fury is a true Lion, when the presumptuous boldness of men shall
be such, as willingly to reject his clemency; Leo vngiet, and formidabunt
filij maris. Then the turbulent, traitors, underminers, powder men, and such
like; who are all as Marine-Monsters, and Children of Neptune, shall quake with
fear. Huic Galli terrori non sunt. And in truth, Hic est Leo qui vinciri
pernegat, according to the Mystery which is on the Med aile of the Duke of
Albania. For if the Childretn of Saleucus, had each of them on his thigh an
Anchor imprinted or carractred, as a certain mark of the line of their
extraction; And the race of Python of Nisibis, had the impression of an Axe on
their bodies, which testified the honor of their lineage: Even so, Our King,
does not carry this Lion only in his Shield, as for a show, but likewise in
sign of his hearts generosity, has one lively figured on his body, under his
left pappe, Ab vtero Matris suae, which is not without a very great mystery.

As concerning the Flowers de Lys or Lyllies, which Charle-Maigne caused to be
done in a double draught about the Scottish Escutchion, in the time of
Achaius, the year 777. in perpetual memory of their alliance: it cannot be
denied, but that they first came from heaven. So that all other flowers (being
compared with them) do appear no otherwise, but even as Thistles, Brambles,
and Briars: Sicut Lilium inter spinas, ita Amica mea inter Filias; Like as a
Lilly among the Thorns, so is my Love among the Daughters (said Jesus Christ)
in speaking of his Church. Whereupon, some Doctors, very curious and
contemplative, have noted three especial things in this fair and Celestial
Flower (to wit;) his purity and whiteness, his admirable sweet savor, and his
phisical virtue against al burnings. And by his growing among thorns, they
signified idolatries, impieties, and heresies, among which pure and unspotted
doctrine shall always shine most brightly. The Rabines also, they found out
infinite goodly and rare Mysteries, upon the inscription of the Psalm, where it
is said; Ad victoriam Lilijs. And the Naturalists do affirm, that there is an
oil extracted from the Lilly, able to cure the Palsy, the head ache, and
deafness in the ears; in sign, that the Writings of Our King should also
serve, to heal the sickness of spirit, and restore the Church of God to her
first strength and conualescence.

Nor was it enough, that this Lilly of Alliance should be a Lilly only, and
no more then a Lilly, but that it should also have the virtue and property,
which Nature had bestowed upon the Lilly. And therefore he willed withal,
that this Lilly should be of Gold, in a double draught: to declare thereby,
that the virtues of our Kings, should exceed them of other Kings in quality;
yea, even in quantity, according as Gold is the most precious thing among all
inanimate creatures. He placed them also round about his Arms, in sign of the
loud terror which they had given, and shall yet give (if it please God) as
well over the whole great continent, as in their own little world, made, and
made perfect, by the conjunction of those three Leopards with that Lion.

This new Alliance, in passing the Sponge vpwardes or above the Table of our
fatal divisions, has united our Lion Rampant, with the 3. Leopardes, three
Floured de Luce or Lillies of England, and the Harp of Ireland, to the end,
they might be eight in all, as they of elder times were wont to say, namely,
perfect. Because none can go any further then this, when a number or figure is
come unto his Triple dimension of length, breadth, and depth. According to the
Pythagorians, it is the number of Justice, because that first of all it
resulteth it self into numbers of paire-like-parity, dividing equally al
things. By means whereof, it is justly attributed unto Jesus Christ, who is
only just.

Cui tria sunt octo, tu me seruabis vt opto
Ne voret innumerus, cui tria sex numerus.
Which was likewise foretold by Sybilla, speaking of our Savior.

Although the number be one eight,
and eight tens in account!
Yet to eight hundred shall his name,
in valuation mount.
Eight is like the Cube, which signifies firmness or stability, in that it
turns his face to all, and turning down from above, comes underneath, yet
is it evermore firmly seated, and in one and the same form. It is also a
solid body, which has his dimensions and properties, by reason of his four
direct or right Angles, for better seating and making himself firm: which
rendering it so maruailously proper and mystical, does thereby the better
represent him unto us, who by his power has reestablished and reconfirmed the
estate of mankind. Eight, composed of this Royal unity of Our Lion, and of
the English Septeuery, does make up the Armories perfect in all their measures:
also by this fair mixture of numbers, that sweet harmony is made, which
entertaineth and preserves the whole kingdom in good peace and quietness.

And not to dispute here, concerning the Three Leopards, the three Flowers de
luces, and the Harp, which being severally joined with the Lion, do make
five, the Symbol or sign of health or safety: which number, among al them
that are not paires, do appear to be the most nuptial, and best beseeming
marriage. Because three is the first, no-paire, and two the first pair, and
five is composed of these two, as both of male and female, which shows unto
us, that Scotland and England are in such sort married together at this
instant, by mutual love in a true, pure, and sincere Religion, living also
together in one faith, under one King and Law, as they are never hereafter to
be sundred or divided.

The Teruary number, or of three, is of the Leopardes, Guardians of our
Microcosmns or little world (not of great Masties or Dogs, not of Tigers and
Draggons, preseruers of the Hesperides Apples) which do express unto us, that
the virtues and power of Our King, is not only to cleanse the world of all
Idolatry, Heresy, Error, and ignorance: but also of worldly knowledge, of the
wisdom of Hagars children, of the sapience of Babylon, of political prudence,
which imployes it self to the acquisition and maintenance of dignities,
riches, and his own case, without regard of piety or Religion. The King, by
the very sweetuesse of his breath, shall draw the Leopardes themselves to him,
they having the paws of the Lion, or the appearance of a Christian, and lay
hold on the Panther, which is Heresy by his spots or blemishes, because
she is the Mother and Nurse to many meruailes.

These are true Candiots, Chameleons, and Protheus, who believe not in God, but
by an inuentory or Register, who acknowledge no other Divinity, then that which
is called State, who worship not (as the Emperor Iouinian, and Themistius
the Philosopher said) but the soulelesse Purple of Kings only, without
Conscience, without any taste or feeling of a second life, or fear of a second
death: little caring for any thing, but greatness in the world, which serves
them for Religion, as fitly, as the Buskins of Theramines, would do for walking.

Behold, how like another Orpheus, Amphion, and Arion, he draws to the true
knowledge of God, very saluage Beasts, Forests, Trees, and Stones, by the
sweet Harmony of his Harp: the most fierce and wild, the most stupid and
insenced, the most brutish and voluptuous, are changed and ciuilized by the
delectable sound of his Music. The which may transport and ravish our cares,
at his mellodious touchinges and concordes, and not tickle them with any
delicate noise, tending unto voluptuous and sensual pleasure: but rather such,
as (by well tempered proportions) are able to reduce all extrauagant rudeness,
and circuites of our souls, though they had wandered from the right way, to
the true path of duty, and settle all thoughts in such a harmony, as is most
pleasing unto them. For this is that Lady indeed (says Zoroastres) which
does make a man leap with joy, when he feels in himself an agreement, like a
sweet consort of Music, whereunto he is admitted with God and his Angels.
But, according to Proclus, so soon as he sins, she absenteth her self,
and he remain eth deprived of her company. Hereupon, the evil Spirit, or
proud Demon (in the judgment and saying of the Cabalists) in his fall, lost
wholly the Musical harmony which was in him.

In like manner, there are no souls well born, but in them this harmony may
have place (so says Pyndarus) and that the bad spirits cannot endure a sweet
concording Music, because it is quite contrary to their disproportioned
nature. This may be witnessed by Saul King of the Israelites, when he was
possessed with the evil Spirit, David by the sound of his Harp, compelled him
to depart from the King, or at the least to let him be quiet. Pythagoras,
according as Cicero and Boethius records, I know not by what Mellody, but by
a Musical Air thereto apt and proper, brought a young man into his perfect
senses, that had bin before mad and distracted. The like we read of Terpander,
Arion, Ismenius and Linus, Musicians of Thebes, who thus reduced very many bad
distempered and most perverse people into the right way of virtue. It is
likewise said, that Thales the Mylesian, appeased the civil dissentions among
the Lacedaemonians, by the sweet mellody of his Harp only.

From whence, we may collect the maruailous effects of Music by Instruments,
and thereby acknowledge, that it is able (very extremely) to excite humain
affections, as being full of high and hidden mysteries, if we may give credit to
the Hebrews Cabala, and the very learned Rabines. For this Harp of MY KING
is made in a triangle, having ten strings, which being touched above, do
resound beneath, and deliver such an acceptable mellody, as it pierces all the
Celestial Spheres, even by sanctified desires, conceived to the honor of
God, and it trauerseth all Countries of the whole world, for the defense and
support of all Kings, Princes, and Commonweales of Christendom. Such are the
accents of this mystical simphony, and the lofty tunes of the Diapenthes,
Diatessarons, and Diapasons of our Royal Harp. Therefore,

Bestirre ye every faithful heart,
To the Harpes Music bear apart,
Hanging in his Silken twine,
Sing his praise that is Divine.
With Lutes and Organes mellodie,
And holy Songs sweet Harmony:
All laud his name continually.
And so Ad Triarios ventumest, and unto the third voice of his Triumph, which
prepares the Trophies of out Jacob, for his victory over Gog, or the hidden
and covert Esau, for all Demons and Monsters mentioned, neither could, nor can
do any thing (God be thanked) with their overt power, against his sacred
person. Here we must look for Hags, Goblins, Devils, Night-walkers (as
Plancus said against Pollio) armed, with not visible weapons, but with
venomous thoughts, lying tongues, and pens more dangerous, then the fire,
then the Iron bars, or then the barrels of Gunpowder, to tax him in his Name
and Honor.

One is a Critic Anonymus, and insensed Censurer, having the eyes of his
understanding so masked or hudwincked, that he could no more see the Author of
the Royal Apollogie, then he saw his Right to the Crown of England. Another
is a wry-treading Tortus, so Crooked in heart, and Lame in spirit, that he
cannot walk upright or directly in his Doctrine. And both of them Andabates,
or purblinde Fencers, who, for the ugliness and deformity of their souls, are
glad to hide themselves under the cloak of those borrowed false names: to the
end, that they may bestow their blows where best they please, lying
impudently, and belying as well the Gods, as men. And because his majesty does
fight but with Chimaeraes and shadows, he breaks through all the danger of
their malice, because he can no nearer grapple with them: for the first has
as yet escaped (for some time) the hands of Justice, and the Hangmans halter.

These wicked and detestable men, to whom nothing is dear, provided, that it
may do hurt to such as they malign and malice, do invent crimes, forge
offenses, hurl Pelion upon Olympus, to overthrow the Gods: but it is an
infallible maxim, that a lie living but an hour only, may yet beget some
frivolous effect, and so they fear not, but would feign persuade the people,
that the King is not the Author of the Book, and therefore they repay him with
injuries, instead of honest Reasons.

But the modesty of his Majesty, scorning horse-play, to strike with his heels,
like the foolish Fencer Ctesiphon, was content to avouch the Book by his
learned Monitory Preface, which is not only an answer to such base fellows,
but also written in just contempt of the^: wherein he imitateth Caesar in
Lucan, who to commit nothing unbeseeming the greatness of his courage, and
renown of his Armies, did the like to Cowardly Metellus, being desperate of
his glory, lying then at the stake to be foiled.

-- Vanam spem mortis honestae
Concipis, haud (inquit) iugulo se polluet iste
Nostra Metelle manus.
Never did he triumph with greater pomp, then in refusing this fight, even as
did Fabius Maximns, in refusing to triumph. For the impudent and false
calumnies of both these Libellers, are so notorious through the world, as there
is no man, who hearing the children of Beliall disgorge their blasphemies, but
does know, and will confess it openly, yea, and loud enough to be heard: that
it is the natural property of them, who (after they have been so long time
nourished in blaspheming against GOD) do do think they may be justly
dispensed withal, in railing, lying, and speaking falsely of their Princes.

Who could believe, that in Great Britain they had an Harpocrates, one of the
Indian Astomi, or a King with a Shut-mouth, that could not make answer to two
Breeue of the Pope, and to a Letter sent from a Cardinal? Had not his silence
in this case seemed as little important, as if he had given consent thereto?
And could any think him so weak in wisdom, as to say with the Romain
Emperor, would God I had never learned the first Elements of Letters, when no
Question is to be made, but that he is able to warrant himself (with his pen
only) against the Tyranies of Antichrist? Not any (I am persuaded) could be so
idely conceited.

Let us then chearefully avouch it, and in the favor of his Triumph, engraue
in great letters on the bases of this statue, the secret sense which is hidden
in his Arms, even in the Frontispice of his Apology, which is, James
Triumphant.

That as in all parts by Gods grace,
is spread his Royal Name:
So may the worlds remotest Lands,
both know, and speak his fame.
To the end, that these Ground Moles, who never saw their own eimpudence, may
scent or smell it out by those goodly Carracters. And if to them it may seem
inopinate (as I believe it) let them then take-occasion to consider well, yea
and weigh what they promise or portend, as in an interlaced mystical Cipher.

The Author is James the Great Monark the Protector and Propagator of the
Faith, the Rampart of Christendom, the Fort and Bulwark of the Church, the
Succor of true Catholics, the Enemy of Heretics, the Terror of Infidels,
the Support of the Afflicted, the Tamer of Monsters, the Example of Charity,
and the Blessing of his time.

Which the very blindest will be enforced to confess, considering the
assistaunce of God in all his actions, and how he has preserved him from so
many dangers, even by extraordinary maruels: wherefore (by good right) he
deserves to be accounted, The King of wonders, or The wonder of kings, The
Miracle of the ages present and to come. For my self, when I come to consider
by what means he has bin hitherto preserved, I am even swallowed up in
admiration, and the more contradictions and assaults J find by so many Esaus,
the more I reverence those high conditions whereunto God has brought him: for
he could not come into the world, but through the danger of blows, even
amongst the horrors of blood and death. As we plainly see, that the Rose
cannot be gathred without pricking, and to give the greater sound to his
virtues, he was borne to wade through diverse dangers.

For, to let sleep in silence that wicked attempt, and the very Non-pareile
offer that ever was adventured, even to smite him quite thorough the heart, in
the womb of the late Queen his Mother of happy memory, four months before he
saw the light of this world: it may suffice, that it could not so have
happened, but by the very special providence of God, and to make the whole
universe stand amazed thereat, as the spectator of our bloudiest Tragedies. So
in his very birth likewise, he held Esau by the heel, and in his Cradle (in
imitation of great Hercules) he smothered and strangled great store of Serpents.

In the tenderest of his youth, his enemies, who had no assured subject wherein
to lodge their ambition, but in the Mazer or cup of his destruction; they
feared not to attempt by open force. But heaven being much stronger then the
poison, dissipated and quailed all their disseignes. Desseignes in very deed,
ouer-bold to some, to see them so highly pearched or placed in an instant,
whose execution drew on so many miseries and calamities in our Country, as I
am ashamed to speak it, except it be to express the great blessings of God
toward our Jacob.

Who as he went to Padan-baran, or toward Denmark, to take a wife in the
Royal house of the King, how cruelly was he assailed by furious Medeaes, and
his own chief Ship foulded up in stearne Tempests? Contrary Winds did
afflict it, beat and drive it every where, they excited and blew the Waves,
which swelled, foamed, roared, and gaped with open mouths to swallow him. And
as the winds wrastled on either side, against the Mast, the sails, and the
maine yard, behold, even in laboring (with all their might) to devour him,
they proved the cause of his happy escape, and with full sails (through all
the storms) brought him to Port Laetus, in which place, al Scotland at his
return, welcomed him with singular ioyfulnesse. Even as the whole Isle
received Constantine the Great, at his home return from strange wars, by
delivering him these words in the mouth of Optatianus Porphyrius.

Omnis ab Arctois plaga finibus horrida Cauro
Pacis amat cana and comperta perennia iura
Et tibi fida tuis semper been militat armis
Resque gerit virtute tuas, populosque feroces
Propellit, ceditque lubens tibi debita rata
Et tua victores sors accipit hinc tibi fortes
Teque Duce inuictae attollant sign cohortes.
Congratulating also the fortunate coming of the Queen, by this discourse in
effect and affection, but in words much better shaped and couched.

MAgnificent and Great Princess, Sacred blood of the Danes, Race Royal, Wife,
Daughter, and Sister to a King? If I should receive into my Ports, and on my
shores, the Great Juno of Candy, the Daughter of old Saturn, the Wife and
Sister of Jupiter of Creet; Jf I should receive Palas herself, Minerua her
self, the Great Semiramis, the Stately Cleopatra* the Empress Zenobia: If I
should receive even her, that wears at this day the Crown of the Romain
Empire, the Empire of the East, the Kingdoms of Spain, of Hungaria, of
Poland, of Egypt, of Prester John, and all that which the Great Signeur or
Turk has, and may have for his Queen, yet could I not receive a more great
Princess then you MADAME, for Royalty of blood, Luster of Nobility, and
Nobleness of so ancient a Family, neither could I receive a Princess more
splendant in Beauty, and all good Graces. Come then Great Queen, and by your
coming make me most happy. Happy shall you long time be in Scotland, and to
Scotland, and for the greater height of your Glory, be you also a happy
Mother of Kings.

Which she shall be (God assisting) as already (by his especial blessing, and
more then particular favor) her Majesty has had My Lord the Prince of Wales,
My Lord the Duke of York, and the Lady Elizabeth their Sister, and thereby not
only makes Scotland happy, but al Great Britain, whereon depends their
peace and freedom from strife (even as the presence of the Halcions do make the
Sea calm, and commodious for Navigations) which wanting before in that Empires
felicity, makes it now an Empire abounding in felicity. She has established
our Delos, and has set us above the winds, as safe sheltred from all storms,
by the firm assurances of so fair a succession: and this suffices not only
for the conjunction and conservation of this Estate, but also for the
increasing thereof. Wherefore, no kingdom in the world is there, which has
more occasion to glad it self in her Queen, then Great Britain in her
Gracious Queen, or in the fair and virtuous Lady Anne.

But alas, Our King, after this voyage of his, was yet again pursued by
tumultuous Travelers: but behold, how (our Ulysses) escaped the cruelty of
Polyphemus. I do not mean that which was done (in the silence of a mournful
night) at the Abbey of Saint Cross, albeit the noise thereof redounded even
into the chamber of his Majesty (the Amnestia and law of Oblivion, having sent
some part to death and the grave, another part to the gallows and bellies of
Crows, and the last to the curse of al coragious spirits) but J would speak
of the inhumanity of those two Brethren, who violated the laws of Hospitality,
upon the person of their Prince and Father. Alas, I mean the Treason of those
two Esaues, that made tender of presents to Our Jacob, those two Athletes and
dangerous Antees, that wrastled with him in the midday time, in close field,
with feet lifted up, and arms outstretched, to bind and bear him to ground
without any mercy: where he being alone, without any help but God only (who
never forsook him) labored them out of breath. Whereby his very enemies are
constrained to confess, that he is verily elected of God, and for the glory
of his name.

In like manner, As he went toward his Canaan, to enjoy the right of his first
begetting, it seems the like should have been done in England: All Europe
prepared their eyes, to see the fall of that stately Monarchy, the greatness
whereof had compassed the whole Globe of the earth. All the world ran to the
bruising of that mighty Ship, when it pleased God to look upon us with the eye
of his mercy, and defend us from that fall, by his most powerful Arm. Whereby
he plainly declared to all the earth, that he is the preserver of Kings, the
God Tutelarie of kingdoms, and the Patron of al Royal Estates. He has thereby
also given a lesson to all Kings and Princes of the world, that their reigning
is by him only, and that it is an overmuch boldness in any, as shall seek to
exalt himself, or grow great, against his ordinance and express commandment.

But it is nothing to see him Monarke of the English, as also endued with such
authority and power, except we understand withal, by what means it was thus
provided, for that is it, wherein the blessing and wonderful work of God
toward him is to be discerned.

For (in the Papists opinion) the Laws, the Estates, the Counsel, the
Cities, the Country, the great, the small, the rich, the poor, the young, the
old, and all sexes should have universally refused him, and denied him his
right: But herein they were deceived, and the people better advised, as being
more wisely experienced in affairs of the world. They, acknowledging his just
merit, and being effectually instructed, in the will and affection of good aged
Rebecca, his Mother Hereditatis, they caused his sweet smelling savor to be
felt of all, and (by their good example) reformed the error of diverse other.
So that all vnanimately or with one consent, were in duty compelled to respect
him, and prostrate themselves before his Royal Majesty. The Clergy (whom Pope
and Papists would have had to doubt) most earnestly desired him; the Nobility,
that should have left him, chearefully elected him; Justice, who should have
left him, entirely imbraceth him; the people, who should have fled from him, do
all seek after him: and we may well say, that he has bin the vows, the
desire and universal wish of the whole kingdom, yea, in such manner, that (in
despite of Popish malice) Our King, is as a fable reduced into an history,
Qui tanquam lapis quem rebrobanerunt, factus est caput anguli. They that thought
to see him at their feet, do acknowledge him to be their head, and they to whom
he was as nothing, at this day do love and honor him for their king. A
wonderful work wrought by the providence of God, who in his strict and secret
counsel, kept it hid for a day, to publish and propose it then to mankind for
ever, and against the opinion of some envious English, to make him King of the
English.

O happy English, that have no more women and children for your King, but a
King full of strength, a king participating the verdure of his youth, and full
ripeness of his age. O most happy, to have a King that loves you more then
himself, and desires not to live, but for your preservation. O more the^
thrice happy, to have a King among your selves, who is natural unto you who
comes not to reign, by the furies of a mutinous multitude, nor by the favors
of a blind fold Fortune, but by the blessing of God, and right of birth, as well
by the Fathers side, as the Mothers. To abreuiate these maruayles, there is no
man ignorant, but he well knows; that this kingdom had bin swallowed up in an
hideous Chaos, the fifth day of November, 1605. if the Divine goodness had not
appeared (in such a need) to this Great King, even like a new Star at the
break of day, to scatter the latest night that came to ouer-whelme us. In
which wonderful deliverance, he has evidently declared unto us, that he will
have his Majesty to live and flourish more then ever heretofore: because he
drew him out of this bottomless pit, by raising us such succor, withour
which he had undoubtedly bin expired, by such cruelties as the like were never
heard of.

Quoru^ animus meminisse borret Luctuque refugit. The heart abhorres
remembrance, tears fly from it. Thus we see, that the Author of the Book,
was fore-appointed of God by his name and person, as long since, was Cyrus,
whom he foresaw, provided and called by his name, two hundred years before he
was borne, to oppose him against Kings and Nations, enemies to his word and
people. That verily, and in effect, by all the periods and paralelles of his
life, this is Jacob, according to the Hebrews, and James in Scottish, the
Pentaphyllon, or the name of five Letters, bearing the word (...). The
Pentagon, in former time Mysteriously revealed to King Antiochus, sur-named the
Savior, for the saving and conservation of his people. That it is he, Among
the ten Kings, as the great finger among the rest, as the Sun amongst the five
male Planets; as hearing, among the five Senses, and among the fine wounds,
that of the heart, to save and preserve us That it is he, who shows us
Antichrist, by the five marks of the Apocalypse: First, That be is an
Idolater, secondly, a Murderer, thirdly, an Empoysoner, fourthly, a whore,
fifthly, a Thief: And that it is he, who shall at length Triumph over Pope
Paul the fifth, because that the sundry accidents of men, of States, and of
affairs, do roll or give by the number quaternary, or of four, and then rest
themselves upon the fifth, which is denoted by the first Letter of the Hebrew
Alphabet (HE) redoubled to the great Tetragrammaton IEHOVA, which afterward in
the Law of Grace, was amplified to a quinary or number of five, JESUS. And the
same is judged also, by the seven Letters, or Judicial number of his name, in
Greek, Latin, and French, whereby likewise is made and commonly comes their
mutations and renewings. It is the holy number, and it signifies all plenitude
and perfection: as contrariwise, the number of two (whereof is Papa, the name
of his adversary, the most common and generally known) is an Hierogliphicke of
filthiness, of wickedness, and of the divine vengeance, as all our Doctors have
observed. In Papa, there is nothing else but P. A. doubled into two Syllables,
after the same manner as the Pythagorians signified the Devil. Also it is
said, that The Beast shall speak like the Dragon, and that Antichrist, shall
come in the efficacy of Satan. According unto the Nature of Numbers, the
Septenary or that of seven, whereof is Iacobus, is the number first sacred and
hallowed by the Creator, and it is taken for a sign of his Divine rest: the
Binary or that of two, is the first number that deuides or withdrawes it self
from the unity, and from his beginning. Moreover, in all the days of the
creation, the Scripture says, And God saw that it was good, except the second
only: not as signifieng, that what he had created on that day was not good;
but to set a secret mark thereon, concerning the numbers signification. In like
manner, Noah sent into the Ark, The cleave creatures by seven and seven, and
the unclean by two and two. Naaman the Assyrian received command from
Elyseus, to go wash himself seven times in Iordain, to be healed of his
leprosy. But two Angels were sent to consume Sodom and Gomorrba; and two
molten Calves were provided, to be the first Idols, and first wickedness of
Jeroboam the first king of Israel, and long time after two other, by the
misbeleeuers of the same people. Oh, that the leprous among the papists, who in
outward appearance have fair flesh, but are all rotten and putrified within,
who in exterieur devotion, and feigned simplicity, in habits, in Ceremonies,
and public actions, seem especial men, and to exceed all other, and yet
underneath, are nothing but vlcered with envy, pride, and gluttony, with all
other kinds of voluptuousness: who are a people that repel and thrust out
vice, to the eyes of the world, and yet retain and call it in again at a
back door: Oh, that they would seek their own cure, in the learned writings
of Our King James or Iacobus, By the Lamb with seven horns, and seven eyes,
by the seven Spirits of God, and the seventh aspersion or sprinckling of the
Leuiticall blood.

And coming to Divination, by the numbers appropriated to their Carracters,
excogitated first of all by Pythagoras, the Traditions whereof are no other
thing, but a very Hebrew Cabala, grounded upon this place in the Book of
wisdom: God has made al things in number, weight, and measure: we shall
there find, that this only name IAKOOS in Greek, surmounteth double almost
the name and the Number of the Beast, in all Languages and tongues, which is
not without some special mystery, neither without the providence of God:
whereunto neither Aristotle nor Ptolome do any way contradict, but rather they
avouch, that Letters do contain in them (mistically) certain numbers, and that
in the proper names of persons, some secret matter is contained of their
Fortunes and Destinies. As we may see by these verses, traduced and drawn out
of that old Grammarian Terentianus, which shows unto us both the use and the
practice thereof.

One tells us, that the verse names,
in Letters do contain
The Fortunes of the greatest men,
and those of lower strain.
If both do venture to oppose
and tempt the God of War:
To use his Arms; the Lot to each;
will differ very far.
The Victory will fall unto
the greater numbers name,
The lesser thereby gains harm,
perhaps, mischance and shame.
For so it was great Hectors hap,
Patrocles to confound:
And then Achilles (by wanes chance)
laid Hector on the ground.
In like manner, our Royal Name, which notes and marks the thousand years and
more, that the reign of Antichrist has continued powerfully and with
authority; that his blasphemies against God, his cruelty against his Saints,
his fowling with his feet the spiritual Jerusalem, the prophecy of the
witnesses of God, to annihilate the true and invisible Church, because they
were laid as dead and dumb, in the visible, exterior and pretended Church,
the flight of the Spouse of Christ into the wilderness, and that she became
invisible: In all these do surmount (at this instant) the name of the Beast.

For, be it that he call himself Apphipior in Hebrew, or LATEINOS in Greek (to
omit (...) and Die Lux, which are neither names of men, nor of the Latin
Empire: no more then (...) and (...) are not of the first best) or Papa in
Latin. Jacob shall triumph daily, and more perticulerly, on the number which
is found in Paulus Quintus, Vice-Deo (a Vize-God.) Here is wisdom He that has
understanding, let him count the number of the Beast: for it is the number of a
man, and his number is six hundred sixty six, and that of IAKOOS of a King,
which contains eleven hundred and three.

That which wants of forty two months, of a thousand two hundred and sixty
days Prophetical, of three great days and an half; of a time, of times, and
of half a time, mentioned in Daniel, and in the Apocalipse: al do signify the
same term or space of time, and each, one thousand, two hundred and sixty
Julian years, which is since the diminishing and fall of the kingdom of
Antechrist, and which shall be wholly overthrown by Our Prince, accomplished
in his Numbers.

As the hundred seventh King of Scotland, he has contributed more alone by
himself, to build the Temple of God, and to reform the service therein, then
all the Kings together have done, or all the people of Asia, to raise that
proud Temble of Dyna (named by the Greeks Agrotarius, or Elaphobolos) which was
a wonder of the world, and the Ornament of Asia. Likewise his number has this
respect, that it is composed of two perfect numbers. Of an hundred, which is
ten times ten, wherein God is maruailously pleased. For Jacob bought an
hundred Lambs for an heritage which he had in Syria.

The Children of Israel gave an hundred Tallents, wherewith was made three
Cupbordes, for the Vessels which were placed near unto the Tabernacle The
Romans themselves were not ignorant of the power and virtue of this number,
having builded the Temple of Mars at Rome, with an hundred Collomnes, and their
Senate consisted of an hundred Counselors. And Julian in his Epistle unto
Serapion, says, that Creet had an hundred Towns or Cities, Thebes an hundred
gates, some Altars an hundred feet, some Sacrifices an hundred beasts, and
continually an hundred Soldiers to several Centurions.

But in what part of the world is to be found, so long a succession of Kings
in the right line, without interruption or breach? Turn over all the World,
search into all families, number the Monarchies, the Empires and Kingdoms,
count all their Kings one by one, their Emperors, their Monarkes, and you shall
never find so great a number, neither any Reign: which has endured for the
space of 1908. without ever being subiugated, like unto ours, or that goes
before us in the susception of Christianity, and profession of the Catholic
Faith.

Christi transactis tribus annis atque ducentis
Scotia Catholicam coepit inire fidem.
Since Donaldus, the first Christian King, he is the 79. who being multiplied
one by another in their times, it produces prognostically the most dangerous
Climacteriall age of Popery, or the Papacy: as their simple transposition
marketh the year of the Revelation Written by Saint John: and the last apart
by it self, did facilitate the way for him to his second Crown, and to us the
sense of this Arithmeticall prediction, by the effect.

Galla feret natum, cui tota Britannia laeta
Subijciet collum refluo circumsona Ponto
Nec proprior quam nonus erit de sanguine Bruti.
His perfection likewise is seen in this, that he has the name of James the
sixth of Scotland. Six being the sign of accomplishment, as Saint Augustine
observes it to be that only amongst numbers simple, which resolves all the
parts, and makes them equal, to wit; of one, of two, and of three. This is a
number very pleasing and acceptable to God, and which himself has observed in
the most part of his marvelous actions. Six days he labored and wrought in
the perfection of the world: Six days he rained Manna in the wilderness,
and distributed unto men the bread of Angels. Six days Moses conferred with
him, about the eternal decrees of his will, and on the Articles of Religion:
he willed that the Walls of Jericho should be six times circuted about, before
they were to be tumbled to the ground. Six days he kept shut the gates of his
Temple, which looked toward the East, and commanded that six Lambs should
be offered to him, on each day of the Sabbath in sacrifice: we may also say,
that he has recommended this number in Nature, as it being his will, that
(among flowers) the Lilly should have six leaves: Among stones, the Iris should
have six Corners: and that the Lyonnesse in her first whelping, should have six
young ones, and that so decaying continually unto one, she should terminate her
brood in an unity, which is the bottom, the beginning, and the only sourse of
all other numbers.

Jn the same sort is he called and chosen of God (without any doubt) the sixth
of Scotland, to be the first, not only of Great Britain, but also every
where. Because in this Unity, the Verity is found, who is but Only One, and
as Mercurius Trismegistus says, The beginning and the root of All. He is the
first also of Ten Kings Christians, that should hate the whore, making her
become naked and desolate, should eat her flesh, and burn her with fire.

So may we also say, that he has changed his Name (like unto Jacob) to
resemble him in all things. Of the sixth, he is come to be the first, and of
King of Scotland, and of England, he is now the King of Great Britain, etc.

Iam cuncti Gens vna sumus
Et Simus in aeuum.
And for the fulfilling or accomplishment of this old vaticination.

Imperium, Fasces, C. Fastus Sceptra, Triumphus Quae fuerant: penitus C.
veniente cadent. He ought of right, as well as by his Baptism, to be called
Charles.

Charles, and Charles the Great, a more just Title then that of Antiochus,
Quintus Fabius, Pompey, Methridates, and the rest: or they that are yet called
the Great Chams of Tartaria, or the dreaded Othomans. For if Constantine did
deserve this Name only, for having succored the Church; and Theodosius, only
for warranting the Empire from so many imminent dangers: what Name can be
found conuenable unto his Devotion and desseign, to deliver all Christendom
from the Tyranny of Antechrist? Whom may a man term to be more Great, then
he which is the Non pareil, of all that are, or may be in this present Age?

He is Great, according to the World, and in all that which the world
esteems to be great, as the Scripture says, According to the Name
Greatness on the earth. Great in Kingdoms and Provinces; Great in Lands and
Seigneuries, Great in Authority and power, Great in Arms and Treasures, Great
in Nobility and Lineage, Great in Age and youth. And every way so Great in all
these, as being not to be equalled by any, he is The Great of Greats, the
Chiefest and the most Great of all.

But that which is much morethen all these, and whereunto the world cannot
attain; he is Great according to God; great in Faith and Religion, Great in
Virtue and Faithfulness, Great in Justice and Piety, Great in kindness and
^ansutude, Great in Goodness and Innocence, Great in wisdom and experience,
Great in name, and more Great in effects. Briefly, he is the lively Image of
Great Hercules, who never did or thought on any thing, but it was Great, and
greatly profitable. All his actions, al his words and cogitations, are nothing
but Great.

It is a thing most certain, that God does evermore raise Great personages,
whom he indueth with excellent and Heroical virtues, to finish fortunately
whatsoever he commits into their hands. The which is also testified by a
most especial providence of God, even in his Sur-name of (Steuart,) thereby
being opposed against Antechrist, as the South-winde against the North Wind,
that is to say; as Grace against sin, and as the blessed Spirit against the
Devil, who is the true North Wind, from whence all evil comes upon all the
inhabitants of the earth. And this is conformable to the scripture, where
speaking of them that are Faithful Ministers, that is to say, Good Stewards in
our Language, and whose works God has established in verity, and made a
perpetual league or covenant with them: It is said, that Their seed shall be
known among the Gentiles, and their increase shall be in the midst of the
people. As it was seen in the Macchabees, who by being of the seed of them,
by whom salvation came to Israel, this blessing was bestowed upon them.

Now, this house of Steuart in Scotland, is as a Phoenix among the Nobility,
the Lords thereof are as Nectors among men, for the length of time that their
race has lived. For since the year of Grace, 1057. from the reign of
Malcolme, even to this present, it has flourished full of prosperity and
honor. All the Kings issued of that line, have taken hands with him, and (as
by infusion) transmitted their rare and excellent qualities, still from one to
another, never degenerating: for evermore Royal Eagles do produce Imperial
Eagles, Eagles that have continually made War with Dragons, with Foxes, and
(above all) with Serpents.

As is now to be seen in our Great King, who has producted the most Noble
Prince Henry, (the ninth in Sur-name among Kings in Scotland, as of Name in
England) for the greater height of his good fortune.

This young Prince is a warrior already, both in gesture and countenance, so
that in looking on him, he seems unto us, that in him we do yet see Ajax
before Troy, crowding among the armed Troops, calling unto them, that he may
join body to body with Hector, who stands trembling with chill-cold fear, to
see him seek to determine the difference in the enclosed Field or Lists. He
can never permit, that any other should step before him in an occasion so
remarkable. Honor was all his nouriture, and Greatness his pastime (as it was
said of Alexander) and Triumph the ordinary end of al his Actions. What though
his desires be impeached by a much stronger desire, and his deuoire retarded
by a Natural duty, and by an obedience, which in this occasion only is
contrary, and contrary to his own affection? Yet let it not be immagined, that
the execution of great desseignes, are utterly lost by deferrence and delay.
Deferred, not in regard of weakness or impuissance, but referred to fit
season, to do nothing against the order of Nature, or contrary to the will of
his father: who would always have his Son for Object, and subject of
contentment by his presence. Contrary to the Ottomans, who could not, nor can
endure the youngnesse of their Children, their very shadow gains them so many
other suspicious shadows, and their presence excludes them from all kinds of
pleasures.

His Majesty has also another Son, Duke Charles, who shines in the two
Kingdoms of Scotland and England, like the other twinne-Starre, and who
promises us, that as the Sun is at the very highest in Gemini: even so, God in
the same manner, will very quickly raise and exalt Great Britain, in the
Apogaeum of his Greatness. And that he will make the succession of the house
of Steuart, not only equally unto the worlds continuance, but the world it
self equal to his succession, and to the sacred stirpe of his Majesty. This is
it, whereunto the full end of his greatness is assigned, and where he has
laid the bases of his very greatest Trophies: This is the point where his
Angle ends, this is the extremity of his line, and this is the center of his
circumference.

Wherein we discern (at last sight) the difference of the house of Cyrus (which
was of small continuance, because they did not acknowledge God who elected
them) to that of Our King, whom he multiplieth and increases every day,
awaiting until God shall come from the south, to chase away that rude Ox, and
dissolve the captivity of the Waters which are frozen, to make them run in
Torrents, and like Rivers in the South. That is to say, the extermination of
Antichrists race, by that of Steuart, to deliver those poor souls, which
under the coldness of this barbarous impiety are so miserably captiued, by the
heat of the South, which is the Grace of the Holy ghost, and Faith and
Christian piety. That the garden of the Spouse may be so breathed by this wind,
as the odorifferous juices thereof may distill on all sides, by a renewing of
holiness and devotion in all the ways upon earth, and causing that they which
are at the South (as it is written in Abdias) that is to say, the true
Christians which are in the South, shall possess the Mount of Esau, and make
themselves Masters of that Estate: Even so may we hope one day to see, that
under the name and family of Steuart, all Christendom shall flourish in an
absolute Monarchy.

For the Master, who has placed him over his household, to give them all
things in due time, has found him a faithful and wise Spender and Steward,
or a good Oeconomicus in his dealing. Wherefore he has said unto us, that (in
very deed) he will commit all his goods to him. And the Lord who has given
him those five tallents in keeping, when he takes his account of him, will
find that he has made profit of them, that he has gained five more by and
above them. Wherefore he will say unto him; It is well done good servant, thou
have bin faithful in a few small things, I will set and constitute thee over
much more, enter into the joy of thy Lord.

For the rest, Roman antiquity has observed, that in the family of the Fabij
there were three Princes of the Senate; In that of the Curij, three Orators: In
some so many Censors, In others, as many Dictators. But in the family of the
Steuarts, there are not three or four to be noted, but many great Lords and
Princes, who have all made appearance of the greatness of their valor throughout
the world, and perticularly they that are of the branch of Noble Lennox.

Their piety appeared with Saint Jews: their courage against your enemies (O
Frenchmen) and their fidelity at al times toward the Realm of France, our
Chronicles do report them. Also the memory of those voyages in the East, do
witness them, and your Histories themselves are full of their praises: which
whosoever shall read, will find them as so many sharp spurs inciting to virtue.
Such as have read the manuscripts of that race, or seen The Galleries of
Verrerye in Soulongne, will confess, that they never read either among the
Greeks or Latins, any thing coming near to their natural generosity. From
this virtue came it, to advance Messire Berault Steuart, Lord of Aubigny, and
of Croitet, Knight of the Order, Captain of the Guard to his Ma-body, Great
Constable of Scicily and of Jerusalem, and his Highness Lieutenant General in
the kingdom of Naples. And hence, an infinite number of other, al Captains of
Guard to the Body, of the Chamber, Counselors, Marshals, or Constables of
France. And hence also Messire Bernard Steuart, Marshall of France, that gave
so much exercise unto the Emperor Charles the fifth: who vanquished, and took
Prisoner in Piedmont, that great Roman Captain Prosper Colonnus, in the
year 1515. according to the Relation of our French Authors. And whence at this
instant is sprung,

Dux inter primos praestanti corpore LENOX. who for his excellent and singular
parts, has not forsaken us, although he be called into Great Britain, to be
the Honor of Honors to the French. Let the Parthians vaunt them of their
Arsaces, the Greeks of their Egides, and the Romuines of their Emilij, Fabij,
Curij, and Marcelli: Great Britain, makes vaunt of her Steuarts, and of
nothing more then of her Steuarts.

-- Nec Phoebo gratior vlla est
Principis haec quam quae praefixit pagina nomen.
Prince most generous and Magnanimious, happy Henry, the delight of Heaven, the
love of the Earth, and the Titus of human kind, never fear that the
victories of MY KING will leave you nothing to conquer. Enter not into that
ambitious ielousy with Alexander, who seeing the fortunat progress of his
Fathers affairs, and how victoriously he went on, joining City to City, and
Province to Province: Surely (quoth he to his soldiers) my Father will win
all, and leave nothing famous or Magnificent for me to conquer with you. You
must triumph with him, as did the Sons of Emilius, and of Commodus, with
their Fathers, and the children of Marcus Caesar, with Mark Anthony. In fights,
the disposition and order must be committed to his judgment, and his judgment
must be referred to the execution of your sword, against all Refractaties.
Yours shall be the arm and strength, but his the head and Counsel; Yours the
pain and endeavor, his the effect; Yours the Action, but he the Agent: You for
him, and he for you, and you and he jointly together, shall win an immortal
glory; to the end, that all the world may see you in effect after the same
manner, as one figured Caesar, aloft, deposing or treading a Globe under him,
holding a book in one hand, and a sword in the other: so that it may be said
of you, That for the one and other you are a Caesar.

And you Prince and Duke, Duke and Prince, Charles, Beloved of all, who may
hold it as much honor to be called Son to the King of Great Britain, etc.
as Charles King of Jerusalem, Naples, and Scicily, Brother of Saint Jews, to
name himself Son to the K. of France: or Charles King of Arragon, and of
Valencia, in the same manner. Remember that you are the Son of a King, as
Menedemus said in the ear of young Antigonus; You, the excellency of my
Hope, and the Sacred Anchor of him who seeks no other happiness in this
world, then in your service, neither any honor, then what may be pleasing unto
you. Methinkes I see a Sword in your hand, and you upon the walls of
Nicomedia, Nicea, Antioche, and Tripoli, aiming at the fairest through all
perilles, even in the lesser Asia, and take perforce Jerusalem again by
assault, after the siedge of five and thirty days. Go generous Race, go
gather Laurels in the fields of Armenia, enfrachise the Palus Maeotides, enter
into Lycaonia, Bricea, Trabasonde, chase the Turbants from those Provinces, and
making a new world, sur-name those Provinces after your Name.

Who steps up, to drive the Lydian out of his house, and leave nothing but
the Tartesian Cat? Oh, that I might see MY KING glorified universally, and
Great Britain made Famous in the love of Christendom, and to the
astonishment of the Infidels! Oh, that with one common hand we might War on
the Mahometane, and that his Trophies might no more be shameful Marks of our
general calamity! Let us be the first upon their squadrons, and (all armed)
march for the conquest of the Holy Land, so much honored by God, by the
beginning of his Church. Let us cross the seas, and as they, who (to animate
others) cried in the Ship, Itorus, Itorus, the Master, say; Behold here is
the Master. Let us be the first to advance our Standards, upon the Ramparts of
Constantinople, daunting all them that shall seek to tardie our desseignes, and
let us free the way to the whole Army, to the end, that

In reign so great of such a great reign reigning,
By force of Arms, the greatest gates of Brass
Were made to open: the King and Duke so joining
Beat down, sunk Ships, a fairer day near was.
And that insteade of a Tyrant Fratricide, My Lord and Master might be
honored, respected and obeyed, as the lawful Prince, and true nourisher of
his subjects.

You also Duke and Prince, a Peer sans Peer, in all Great Britain; You the
Iolaus of our Hercules, the Claterus and the Hephestion of Our ALEXANDER; You
my Omphis, my Benefactor, according as Xenocrates called his Jupiter: Remember
that you are a Branch of this great Tree. Look in the old Tables of your
Predecessors, and their Laurels all dustie, but with the dust of Honor. You
wise and prudent Lodowicke, honored so many times with royal honors of Lenox,
Grace of Graces, that have left France (your Native country) to be always by
and at the right hand of Our King, as not able to loose the sight of him;
neither be further off from his Majesty, then the Sun from the Eccliptick line.
You that give so many wholesome counsels for the preservation of his estate and
person: give likewise your Vows and Prayers to that Jupiter Hypsistius, which
is the most high God, that Heresy may for ever be stifled, and by the same
Divinity of Our King, which is his cheifest practice, his own advise, in
assaying to restore the little wandering flock to the fold of the Church, by
a National counsel, or one Ecumenical or Universal, it cannot but be hoped.
This is the only remedy for these euilles (as his Majesty very well
acknowledges) and the best means to convert the most Learned, and lesser
oppinitiue. This is the voice, wish and desire, yea, even the very final
cutting off, of all our pretended Roman Catholics.

To take excuse from the one side, and give pretext to the other, as it
behooves to convince them Viua voce (as they have been often enough by learned
writings, as well of his Majesty, as by others) before they be constrained.
That we might see (with patience) their Reasons laid on the board, and our
Combat with them, to be in mildnes and modesty: This is the desseigne of my
discourse, and the perfection of my Paraenesis, or accomplishment of my wish.
Oh, that you might see these temerarious spirits, which hurl dust in the eyes
of truth, in thinking to dazell ours, should yield up their Weapons into the
hands of his Majesty, to offer them at his service, and take the Oath of his
faithful obedience. You should see them suddenly surprised, like the
accomplices in Cilones conspiracy, at the Temple of Minerua, and all run in zeal
of affection, to the Palms, Laurels and Crowns, which his Majesty has
proposed as their recompense, in such an happy and profitable conversion.

All such as are capable of the advancement of such a fruitful desseigne,
ought to bestow their watchful pains and Travail, to the honor of God, and
the safety of the King, for the conversion or confusion of all our papists, and
for the quiet of our Country, if not of all the whole world.

Nor do I think herein, that any one ought to be so arrogant or ouer-weening
as he should seek to give a Lesson of wisdom to My Learned King, or should
teach his experience, or clear his knowledge, or be a guide to his discretion
for following time: Neither think I, that there is any one so bold-faced or
presumptuous, as to censure his proceedings past, or to come. In either of
these arrogancies, we should behold but a Souldiour-like Phormio; an Asseearde
Mydas, a Croote-nosed Corebus, a tedious Hisser, a prating Xenophanes, and one
altogether like to Mineruaes Hog, or Apollos Marsyas: and I should repute such
a Hermes without shame, worthy the pains and punishment of Hermea, his Majesty
being more able then any other, to give form to every action, and has never
forced (by wheel or fire) violently their consciences. But it is to this end,
that you, who do face to face contemplate the divinity of My King, might be the
Mediator of such a holy resolution, and that boldly, and with open mouth you
would tell him, that the whole world expects the accomplishment of his
advise, either by himself, or never.

Because that God by his Grace, has adorned him with a singular and
supereminent quality of a King, not so much in favor of his Ancestors (as he
did to the house of Laban, for Jacob; of Putipher the Egiptian, for Joseph; and
to Solomon, for love to his Father David) as in regard of his own propper
merrites, in like manner as he said to Abraham: He foresaw his merit and his
diligence, in well instructing his children and his posterity after him, and
that he should acknowledge to hold his Crown of him, and not of any other.

Wherein we may see, that he is King, not by the neighing of a horse, like to
Darius, nor by the flight of an Eagle, like to Aegon in the City of Argos, nor
by uncertain report, as to Alynomus in the Isle of Paphos, nor by the Lance,
as Caesar was made Emperonr, nor by the sword, as Seruius, nor by tyrany, as
Nero, nor by adoption, as Caius Luciius Caesar's: But by extraction, not by
election, which he would never have been, how ever Tortus (to his Graund
tort) speaks it. But by the Grace of God, as his majesty does confess it, by
inheritance and succession, like Octauian, bearing the Crown one way by his
birth, as his Thistle declares, and the other by patience, as did Marcus
Aurelius, being both by right of blood and merit, the chiefest Prince.

It is an high gift of God, to com into the world in such a rank and degree,
as to bear away a Crown by being borne to it: but to deserve it he touch it,
and thereby to fill the whole world with his name, that makes him double
worthy thereof, and he rather honors the Monarchy, then he receives any
honor thereby.

But it seems, that they would make him enter into the Land (all shining in
felicity) by a false door: by fear, by hope, etc. which is not only to make
a commerce of Kingdoms, and to Traffic with Scepters: but likewise to expose
to open sale, even the heavens and souls of men.

-- Vaenalia Romae
Templa, Sacerdotes, Altaria, Sacra, Coronae,
Ignes, Thura, Preces, Coelum est vaenale, Deusque.
And what is it? That the King of Scotts had given some hope of his Apostasy
from the Religion, to be King of England. Can any man believe it? This came
from so many Monsters, as disloyalty and perfidie of those Ministers would
build in the fantastical brains of the Pope and his Cardinals. Rather the sun
retrograde in the South, shall return and wash his fair locks in the
Oriental billows, and the earth once more drowned with another deluge, shall
accuse Iris of lying; then My King should, or ever did think to promise such a
wickedness: That the faith, of the Defender of the Faith, would so submit it
self, and cause him to yeilde homage to one without faith, and makes public
profession of violating all Faith: That the promise of a Prince (the very
abstract of all virtuous Princes) should be subjected to the wicked passions or
pretenses of any whatsoever? That a puissant Monarchy, which could even then
extend her right hand, for the terror of his enemies, and ruin of them as
dust resist against his just right, would render up her Lord, King, and
Master, by perfidie or subtilty, to establish himself in the Fox, and forsake
the sign of Leo.

No, no, this might easily have been done with an Athenian or Melian Diagoras,
or a Cyrenian Theodorus, and many other Empirickes of State, who had much
rather take part with earth then heaven, and who for a mess of Lentill
Pottage, would turn their backs on God. But not with such a Prince as he, who
from his Cradle, has been nursed with the blood and suck of Lions; I mean
in his Religion, truly a Christian, and which has taught him, that it is the
Faith which makes him acceptable in the sight of that great King of Kings, and
which also must one day make him Triumph, with a Crown of infinite glory, far
beyond the joys of feigned Elisium.

It was for the first King of Athens Cecrops, to be double, as also the
Courtier of Phillip King of Macedon, who was named Hecateros, to be both the
one and other, and it fitteth well the Jesuits, to equivocate: but not a man
of Honor, such as My King is, who carries his heart upon his tongue, and
speaks from the bottom of his stomach, as Homer makes his Ulysses to speak,
immooueable, and evermore in full weight, upon his duty both toward God and
men, keeping his faith and promises to enemies themselves, Verus Israelita in
quo dolus non est: knowing very well, that God loves no craft, cunning and
dissembling, and affected the Patriarch Jacob so much, because he was without
all fictions

Vir bonus and sapiens, linguaque and pectore verus,
Iustitiae cultor rigidi seruator honesti.
A man both good and wise,
in tongue and mind full true:
Adoring Justice, cool and calm,
and naught but honest knew.
Nevertheless, to deal and cope with the envious and perfidious, malignity of
these calumniators, even at their own weapons, let us admit, that the king had
treated of his Religion, before an examining bench at Rome, that he promised
to make himself a Papist in intention, or wholly at a free leap, without
shame, without piety, and Christian fear of that great dreadful day, that he
would have forsaken the love of God, the care of his own salvation, and of all
eternity. Shall we not here consider, that the world, that te^porall interses
may be made with them (for the matter of Religion) as a counterband of
Merchandise? And when all this had bin done, where are then his so much
vantageable profits? It should have bin very small, to make the greatness of his
Throne, the foot pace of the Pope, and miserable were his condition, if in sted
of having heaven for his Aspect, the earth for foundation, and the sea for
limit, he should consent that his scepter and Crown must be subjected, to the
perturbations and appetites of a Priest. This were, to establish another
Kingdom in his Kingdom, to admit another King above him, which would be as
prodigious, and occasion as much hurt, as two Suns shining at once in heaven,
which would overthrow all. The plurallity of Caesar's (says an ancient Writer)
is dangerous, and the Poet,

-- All greatness Royal,
By no means can endure to have an equal.
Now I am of the mind, that his Royal Majesty, in attributing to himself
this quality, or this Title of King, does understand it also in the same
manner as Seneca spoke of the Imperial Greatness and Authority. It is I
(says he, under the person of a potent Emperor) who have been so acceptable
to the Gods, as they have chosen me for their Lieutenant on earth. It is I that
second them, It is by my mouth, that they pronounce their determinations
immovable, and the good or evil fortunes of men.

For, beside the authorities and prerogatives in common, which his majesty has
with other Kings, that they are rich in quantity, having this quality, as
being happy in having this quality, as being happy in having this contentment,
to say; I will, and it is done; I desire, and the desire is accomplished. That
the very wink of the eye makes them to be understood, the least changing of
their looks, procures execution of their will, and that they can wish nothing
more in earth, because he that is a King, is All, according to the answer of
King Porus: yet over and above these particular advantages which GOD has given
him, as making the Kings of Persia, by the right of their eldest children; this
word KING, does show us his faith pure and clean toward God, by his Charity
and fatherly love unto his Subjects, and his providence in the affairs of his
Crown. For, in our French Language, it consists of 3. Letters, ROI, and also
in Latin REX, as the primordials and Radical Letters of the Haebrewes, and of
one Syllable, which simbolizeth (in some sort) with the most holy and Sacred
Ternarie or Trinity.

First, for the Letter R. (according to the considerations which concern
Socrates in the Cratylis of Plato) it signifies unto us, his continual action
and exercise of duty, for the acquitting of his charge, as the tongue remoueth
strongly and without any stay, in the pronouncing it. O, denotes the roundnes
which he equally uses toward every one, which, as it is round, equal and
even, without any points, or corners to carry it out abroad: so it shows,
that Our King is perfectly round, seeing that his words and actions do concord,
and that both to one and other he goes in full rotundity, plainness and
sincerity, speaking evermore with a round mouth. As J, does also represent his
lenity and mildness, by a facile and very gracious prolation.

And according to the Traditions of the Cabalists, the Letter RESH does infer,
that he is King by succession, and instructs us, that Hereditary kingdoms
are much better instituted, then those which be elected: where the combustions
of suites and partialities, do often times cause them to turn their backs on
their enemies, with extreme affliction, and ruin of the people. (O) is as the
eye, which he lends to al, and over all, in imitation whereof, the Egiptians
in their Hierogliphicks, did represent royalty by an Eye, placed upon the top
of a Scepter. (I) whereof all the Hebrew Letters are composed, and which by the
same means constituteth the number of ten, the perfection, resting place, and
accomplishment of all other numbers; does signify thereby, that all the parts
and members of his kingdom, do depend entirely upon him, wherefore, al ought
to be referred to his safety and preservation.

Thus passing these mystical Interpretations, and significations of these three
Letters, to that which might result from their diverse Anagrams, Metathesis, and
Renuersements, according to the Tmurah and Siruphs of the Haebrewes, Our King
(as Philo says in the life of Moyfes) is a Soule-like Law, and his Law is
Our Iust-King, they are so bound by the girdle of the Graces, and joined
together by Justice.

Iustitiae cupidus recto non deuius vnquam. Desire of Justice never swerues
from right. For although Cato was wont to say, that a King was a ravenous
Beast; that he lived not but by his prey, and on Venison or wild food: yet
can not it so be said of Our King, seeing he contents himself with a small
circumference, not insulting upon his Neighbors or Strangers. Never did any man
hear in him, that ouerbold wish of the Emperor Maximilian (by the report of
Phillip de Commines) to be a God, And that his Son might be King of France.

His desire, and the chiefest degree of his Title, is to be called King of
Great Britain, which is the kingdom of the Church of God, his part and portion
which he has chosen in earth, and the kingdom which succeeds to the
Kingdom of Judah. This is the Christian kingdom, wherein even to the very least
or vulgar, cannot (elsewhere) be found a people more devout and Religious:
Piety and Religion are there so zealously, and so often exercised. In brief,
It is the Land of Promise, which God reserved to himself in Christendom,
where he has so long time kept the Book open, and the Revelation of his
Prophetic and Evangelical Mysteries. God himself Husbanded the Garden of
that Country, and took thee even measures thereof, having enguirt it with the
great Ocean. As concerning the form of the Island (according to the opinion
and description of Caesar) it is triangulare, whereof one way is opposite and
faceth France, and contains on that side, about six score and five leagues
or miles in length. Another looks toward Spain, and that longitude is an
hundred and sixty miles. The third, is opposed to the North, drawing most part
toward Germany, and it is thought, that this way it contains well two
hundred good miles. So that the whole Isle may have some five hundred miles in
circuit.

It has a very serene and fair Haven, and the habitation there is much more
temperate then in France, and the colds are less sharp and violent. Gallia
trieme frigidior, by the judgment of Petronius, and in mine understanding, so
it is at this instant. In that Country are not to be seen, the intolerable
heats of Egypt, no more then the Ices of Sarmatia, all is temperate, all is
cultiue, and all things are fruitful there in abundance.

Non illic Aries verno ferit era cornu
nec Gemini praecedunt cornua Tauri
Sicca Lycaonius resupinant plaustra Boots.
It has a copious Sun, Corn, Cloth, Wools, Waters, Beasts, Fish, Foul,
and all kinds of wild flesh, in most great facility and felicity. She has
even in her self, her India, and her Peru, not only of Time, and of Iron, (as
in the time of Caesar) but likewise of Gold and Silver: and therefore she
uses not any money of Copper, Brass, or Annelets of Iron, added to even
poize, but all fine Gold and Silver. And such is her abounding in all kinds of
riches, and in all things necessary for man: as (in due right) she is
confirmed by the Master of Treasures, to be the first and principal of the
fortunate Islands.

She has made plain and smooth the back of Thetis, by the number of her
goodly and great Ships and Vessels: which do serve her as bornes, as
limits, as ramparts, and as walls.

And she is called Great, not for the extendure of her Lands, Countries, and
Provinces; not so much for infinite multitude of people, for the great number of
her Cities, Towns, Borroughs, and villages: as for the greatness of courage in
her Inhabitants, who never leave winning, and never suffered themselves to be
foiled, or fully conquered.

Imperij fuerat Romani Scotia limes
Romanae fuerit Scot-Anglus origo ruin.
But to conclude, the Kings most glorious and pompous Title of Triumph, is to
be called DEFENDER OF THE FAITH, because it is apparent, and he shows
himself more affectionate, ardent, and zealous to preserve, exalt, proclaim,
and communicate it to them, which have not as yet received it, then any other
King on the earth. It is a Title, which gives him more glory and splendor,
then all his Scepters and Diadems. It honors him so much, as he should not
think himself worthy to bear the name of King, if he had not that withal
of Defender of the Faith. It is a Title, which makes him as much beloved of
all, as that of King causes him to be feared. It is a Title, not as to day
deserved, and given to our Kings, but it is more then an hundred years, since
it was given to his Majesty's great Grandfather, James the fourth K. of Scots,
as the Chronicles of M. Chambres do testify. So that they deceive themselves,
who think it is no longer, then since the time of King Henry the eight of
England.

A glorious and Hereditary title, which you and we ought to esteem, since it
has bin graven in the foreheads of the late Kings of either kingdom. Yet a
title not so much by succession, as by merit and acquisition of a King, who
fightes and beats down idolatry and Heresy, more valiantly then all his
Ancestors. By a King, who shall reform the error, not only of Scotland and
England, an Angle of the earth, but of the whole earth. For behold, the days
are coming, when God will punnish the graven Images of Babylon, that he will
make all her Country ashamed, and will cause all the wounds of death to fall in
the midst thereof. These tidings shall come this year, and after this in the
other, there shall be violence on the earth, and Ruler upon Ruler.

Roma diu titubans varijs erroribus acta
Coruet and mundi desinet esse caput.
Wherefore, Go forth of her all people, to the end, that you be not partakers of
her sins, and receive not her plagus. Deliver every one his life, out of the
heat of the wrath of the eternal. Humble your selves under the mighty hand of
God, and resist no longer his reasonable will, through a rash kind of zeal.
There is no one of you so ignorant, but he knows most part of the abuses of
the Roman Church to be so evident, as the fautors and favorers of them, can
no longer deny them. Seek the truth, turn over the leaves of the Scriptures,
which have been (for so long time) maliciously interdicted to you. None has
more or greater intrest in your salvation, then your very selves.

Yea, even thou, who (with shame and false Ensigns) do vsurp the Title of
Holy Father, Lieutenant of God, Vicar of Christ, Vice Deo, Universal Bishop,
Great Priest, Soueraign high Priest, Prince of Bishops, Heir to the
Apostles. And you, who say of him, that for Primate he is Abell; For
Government, Noah; for his Patriarchate, Abraham; For Ordere, Melchizedeck; For
Dignity, Aaron; For Authority, Moses; For Judgment, Samuel; For Power, Peter;
and for Unction, Christ. Thou that seatest thy self in the Temple of God,
above God, and above all that is called God, to make thy self honored as God.
Thou that say thou have power to bind Kings, to tie them in Chains of Iron,
to bereave (and at thy pleasure) take away their Crowns, to break their
Scepters, trample on their Crowns to give their kingdoms as preyes, or
otherwise to dispose of them, to disoblige their subjects from their oath of
fidelity and obedience: Repent thy self of this doctrine, when both reason and
Authority fails. Content thy self at least, with the power limited by our
learned Barcklay, cut off the disorders which (like a crafty Serpent) have
crept into the Church, scratch and break the head of those Vipers of thy
Pastoral staff, cast off also the sin and corruption, so much as may be, not
only of thy Court, but of Rome, yet not of Rome alone, but of all those places
where thou art feared and reverenced. Let the Church recover her first
splendor again, that all abused may be beaten far from her. Thou have a
long time converted Lead into Gold, by means of thy Bulls, which are but sorry
meat to satisfy feeble spirits. Thy Pardons are too pardonous, and thy
Indulgences have too much indulgence; keep them to thy sourse and thy self.
Acknowledge the power of them that have given thee this power: Reddendo Caesari
quae sunt Caesaris, et quae sunt Dei, Deo.

And you also, who will be Princes and Cardinals altogether: You Prelates,
Bishops, Cannons, Priests, Prebends, and all Romain Churchmen, of what order or
name soever ye be, learn that it is now no longer time to resist, you must bend
or break under the yoke of the Son of God, and of his holy word.

There has bin sleep enough, Luxury enough, Traffic enough, and enough of
disorderly walking in the house of God, enough have ye served your bellies and
idleness, enough have ye pild and pold the very fattest sheep in the flock,
enough have ye chopped, changed, bought, and sold in the temple of the Lord.
Awake now, prevent judgment, there is yet place for clemency and for mercy.
The Synagogne of the Jews, it is gone, the Law has given place to the Gospel:
by much more powerful reason then should abuse make way for purity; lying for
truth; inventions and Traditions of men, for the ordinances of God, against
which, let time be never so long, it prescribes nothing.

Nec poterit ferrum, necedax abolere vetustas. I beseech the Father of Lights,
to open the eyes and hearts of Kings, of Magistrates, and their people, to the
end, that in giving place to his Heavenly word, they may take knowledge of
Antechrist, and detesting his yoke, they may submit to that of Christ. To whom
with the Father and the blessed Spirit, be Glory and Dominion eternally, Amen.

FINIS.

