The 26. of July. 1622.

A TRVE, PLAIN, AND COMPENDIOUS DISCOVRSE OF THE BESIEGING OF BERGEN UP ZOME,
Sh^^^ng the late Actions of SPINOLAS Forces before the same.

With the Proceedings of the Prince of Orange before Sattingambus.

As also what has happened of late to the rest of the Armies in the low
Countries.

LONDON: Printed by E. A. for Nicholas Bourne and Thomas Archer, and are to be
sold at their Shops at the Exchange, and the Popes-head-Pallace. 1622.

A true, plain, and Compendious Discourse of the Besieging of Bergen up Zome,
showing the late Actions of Spinola's Forces before the same.
With the proceedings of the Prince of Orange before Sattingambus.
As also what has happened of late to the rest of the Armies in the Low-
Countries.
THIS attempt of Spinola's upon Bergen, makes me remember that famous Siege in
1590. or thereabouts, when the Prince of Parma came before it with 30000. and
continued the battery almost half a year.

But because I would revive the memory of famous men to the good example of
others, and relate some passages worthy the observation to the renown of
virtuous and worthy exploites, give me leave by way of introduction to speak
something of those times, and so by coherence of Story you shall see me fall
into the matter now proposed.

It pleased the Prince of Parma in the behalf of the King of Spain, being
then his absolute Governor in the Low Countries, after that ever memorable
Victory in 88. to lay siege unto Bergen with above 30000. men, as if he
resolved to do some thing worthy of his Honor, and memorable to posterity, as
it were in recovery of those losses and fortunes, which both happened to him and
his Master at that time: but so many Skirmishes, Stratagems, and encounters
were then put in practice, that he was compelled to rise and leave the Siege,
till better opportunity and fairer days.

I will not speak a word of neither Armies, nor their skirmishes, nor their
Assaults, nor their Batteries, nor their Sallies, nor their stratagems, nor of
Grimston and Redhead, by whose policy and service, 400. of Parma's best
Gentlemen lost their lives: but of the bravery of the besieged and the glory of
the English, whose fame flourished over the world.

For in this siege, that Son of Mars the Lord Willoughby was General of the
English, and such a General, that his authority extended in bestowing of
honor upon well deseruers, which appeared in Knighting those famous Dutchmen
Sir Paul Buxe, and Sir Marcellus Buxe, who afterward proved Governor of
Bergen, and so continued many years.

But at this instant Sir Thomas Morgan a Colonel was Governor of the place,
and had 6000. brave defendants in the Town: there were also famous Commanders
all English, the Lord Borough Governor of Brill, a spirit of unmatchable
Valor: Sir Nicholas Parker called Captain of the black Lances: Sir William
Drury, Sir William Pellam, and so many other, all Commanders, that their well
deserving commands me to silence, least I should by this my slender discourse
extenuate their Noble fame, and merit.

There came likewise as Volunteers, and spectators of this Theater of War,
the Right Honorable Earl of Northumberland, Sir John Boroughs and diverse
others: yea here were fair Ladies too, who were so far from artificial
effeminatenes, that they scorned the smoke of powder, and knew (besides the
justification of their courages) that true beauty would not, nor could not be
impaired with a little dust, and vapors of a thickened air.

All these endured this Siege, and in steed of Courtly music had the roaring
Cannon sounding in their ears: in steed of sumptuous imbroderings, and
bespangled Cloakes with gold and Pearl, or other dainty fights, many times
beheld bloody Cassocks, and wounded Soldiers: and all the senses both of men
and women were here to suffer unsavory objects, and subjects, and to make
trial of their patience and constancy, which they did with perseverance to the
end: yea this is most remarkable, that when the Prince of Parma made his
approaches, as if he pretended a battery, and so a breach, the heroijck Lord
Willoughby sent him word to spare that labor, if he pleased: For he should
have a Port open, enter if he could: whereupon the Prince was much amazed, and
so having a full half, years trial of the business, and still encombred with
the daily sallies, and excursions of the Soldiers, he thought it far better
to raise his siege with honor, and upon equal terms, then adventure so many
lives, and yet (as he had been in some cases put to it) hazard his renown
with fearful loss and detriment.

Let us therefore ouerlooke their actions to understand, which way this siege
comes about, and how time has brought them into this threatening and danger.

After the taking in of Wesell and Gulick by Spinola, wherein the first they
left Don Lewis de Valasco for Governor: and in the last Henry Vande Bergen,
the Army retired to their several Garrisons, and surely meant to repose
themselves in some rest and quietness, had not contrary to custom, and the time
of the year to draw men into the fields. Don Ynigo, Governor of the Cittadell
of Antwarp, proiected to do something worthy of his renown, and the service
of his Mistress the Arch-Dutches, and this was the besieging of Sluice:
whereupon he undertook the business in the beginning of April last, with
seven or 8000. Wallons and Spaniards, dispiersing them some to Dysendike: some
to St. Kathevine, a Fort builded and possessed by the States, and some to such
places, where he thought it most convenient to bestow them, resolving to enter
upon Cassant, and other passages, whereby he might with ease come upon the
banks, and so bring his approches nearer the Town, which to effect, he built
a Fort, and put therein a Garrison to come nearer and nearer, to set his design
on her best feet.

This he first attempted, when Spinolas Army watched the Rhine, and the Prince
of Orange ouerlooked his Army by Wesell: and this he did of purpose, as I take
it, to divert his Excellency from following him any further, supposing he
would return to defend a Town of such importance, as Sluice was: but the
States had leisure and means (without troubling the Prince of Orange at all)
to supply their wants, and send more Companies into the Town: so that Spinola
got nothing, but the loss of men, with cold, hunger, and sickness all the
Winter, and so consumed his Army, that he tried many friends and Countries to
fill up his troops and Companies. At last, the Winter falling out so strange,
and Don Ynigo perceiving all accidents to counter-checke his pretenses; he
took another course for the time, and returned to Antwarp, doing no great
matter about Sluice, but raising a Fort a little nearer, which they say he
could not effect without the loss of 800. men.

When my Lords the States understood of this retreat, and that Cassant and
other Polders of land round about, were free from this threatening peril and
displeasure, they advised themselves for the best, and by a premeditated settled
Council, resolved not to loose Sluice, nor have her hedges trodden down round
about her, that is, her Bulwarks and Trenches demolished, or possessed by
Strangers: whereupon they concluded to cut all the ditches, and let in the Sea,
which they did in the end of February, and in which work the Contributory
Boores were employed: and although it turned much to their prejudice, as
loosing both land, and dwelling by this course: yet when they saw, it was for
the service of the States, and the preservation of the Town, they quickly
accorded, and played the Pyoners in the business.

They began behind the Fort of St. Cateline, and so dispierced themselves to
Crines, Saint Margarite, Saint Hieronimo, Saint James, the Hermitage, and many
Polaers of land, with the other Forts and Holds round about, but when the tide
came in a pace: they made sure Rowfellares, Hollands dike, and many
Fortifications on the other side, which might be prejudicial to the maine
business, so that at last the Sea swelled almost as far as Gaunt, and the
Enemy was glad to secure themselves by returning, and so the coast was in a
manner cleared at this time: For Monsieur de Hautin the Governor of Sluice,
made a salley with fifteen hundred, amongst whom were sufficient Commanders,
and well experienced Trenchers and Engineeres, who performed this work in such
a manner, that the principal Fortresses, which served for the defense of
Sluice, were all secured and kept upright; and although the Sea swelled as
far as Vedo and Buscams Vell, yet was the land not comparable to the lives of
so many brave Soldiers, who must needs perish, if this had not been done,
and the siege of Sluice once attempted thoroughly.

When Spinola understood, what was done, he retired in his person to Brussels,
from the clamours of the Army, who began to want their pay, and murmur for
lack of employment, and satisfaction: whereupon he gave the Commanders leave
to promise them fair, and threaten once again the surprising of Sluice,
Breda, and Bergen, as though they would have three Armies on foot at once, and
meant to make an end of the War in one Summer, to which they were the rather
animated, because they heard of new supplies out of England, to fill up the
Regiments of the Earls of Tyrone and Argile, who were both here entertained
as Colonels under the Archdutches service.

But when this threatening passed over without attempting any thing worthy of
moment, the Prince of Orenges brother, Grave Henry, with five thousand foot,
and six hundred horse, enters into Brabant, burning Villages, spoiling Towns,
and forraging all the Country, in so much that the fires were seen at
Brussels, and the Inhabitants ran into their walled Towns for their
preservation: yea, when Spinola feasted the Ambassadors, and attended the
determination of the truce, was this brave Soldier reading his Subjects a
lesson of War and Slaughter, and tied them to harder conditions then ever
they learned in their lives; by which occasion he mightily enriched himself,
and returned to the Hage with great booty, spoil, treasure, and prisoners.

Whereby the Enemy grew enraged, and thought upon nothing but revenge, which
at last they effected upon the surprising of Bergen up Zome, wherein failing,
they fell into the course of besieging it, whereat they remain at this hour;
but because many remarkable things chanced in this preparation, I think it
not amiss to order the Discourse in this manner.

The Town of Bergen is of as great importance to the States in Brabant, as
Sluice in Flaunders: For as this watches Ostend, Newport, Dumkirke, and other
maritine Towns, yea opens a door to Ipers, Gaunt and all the land Country,
that keeps the Rivers, and is the Key of the continent letting you in to the
fields of Antwerpe, Thurmount, Auschiroten, and all the great Towns of
Brabant: It stands on the East side of the River of Some, coming from
Antwerpe, and Antwerpe is situated within 15. English mile, and was one of the
famous Mart Towns of the world: and as this Bergen is the very Gate or
entrance into the Country, so is it in a manner the bar and hinderance of
the Enemy into Zealand and Holland: The States have likewise diverse Sconces in
the Island of Tole or Tertoll of great respect and necessity, and within Five
mile of Bergen, they possess a Town called Steen Bergen, on the West bank of
another River coming out of the Country, at the mouth whereof, they have
another Sconce and other Fortes.

I will not speak of Breda, and some places in the States jurisdiction, nor
how the Towns are divided, though the whole Country in a manner is in the
Arch-Dutchesse possession: but the truth is, that the Governor of Antwerpe
taking advantage of certain Companies, which marched out of Bergen toward
Breda, and understanding that the Governor of Bergen was also absent, sent
Spinola word of the same, who presently proiected to make use thereof, and take
advantage of their absence: and the truth is, that the Governor being called
as they say Rehonen, perceiving his Commission growing to an end, and
understanding that the Prince of Orange was coming with his Army toward Breda,
took a Conuoy of 2000. and went thither with intent and purpose to renew his
Patents, but ere he came there, a Messenger was sent unto him to return in
all have to his Government, for the Enemy was on foot and had some project in
hand, which somewhat amazed him, considering as he thought he had not full
Authority to command the Garrisons: notwithstanding this meditation, the
necessity of the time ouerswayed all nicety and exceptions, and he returns
very opportunely with all his Company to the Town.

Spinola follows his first purpose, and appoints 3000. from Antwerpe to give
the attempt: among whom they will have the Earl of Argiles Regiment to be
thrust: the charge and rule of this Company is committed into the hands of two
Spaniards, the one called Borgia, the other Velasco, some say Lewis de Velasco
Governor of Wesell, who understanding the resolution of the Armies to quarter
about Brabant, found occasion to be dispensed withal, and attend the service
nearer home.

Well, let the Names pass, the Company march down apace, and with all
expedition take the same side of the River where Bergen stands, but it should
seem they came short half a day at least: For before they had marched 7.
English mile, they understand how Bergen was supplied (as you have heard) yet
they go forward, and come at last to their Rendeyuous, where they grew so
angry and exasperated, that they would needs give an attempt in a rage both on
the Wall, and at the Ports, where the Cannon from the Town played so
violently, and the Musket at rest shot so effectually, that they lost 600. men
at the first assault, the most of them Irish and English newly come out of
their Countries.

This began on Wednesday as I take it the Tenth of July: the next day they
attempted again, and proffered another Assault, but here they were repulsed
with a Salley, in which a valiant Colonel Scotchman lost his life in the
behalf of the Town, but it was a dear loss to the Enemy: For before the
skirmish ended, there lay 200. on the ground, and they were enforced to retire,
some will have them fight the third day likewise, but I think that was
employed in another business, for the Enemy finding the resistance of this
strong Town, took another course and marched to a weaker, I mean
Steen-Bergen, which not able to endure either battery or assault, they easily
took by composition, as also a Sconce by it, which they obtained with final
repulse.

I have yet said little of the Prince of Orange, who thought as little of this
attempt or enterprise, but only supposed that Breda or Sluice might be the
object of his Summers employment, and so the War to continue either in
Brabant or Flaunders, whereupon he brought down most of his Forces, and
settled himself a while about Schetogen Bosch, and was (as they said) himself
gone toward Rees, where he surueyed the Towns in the States possession, and
took order, that all the Garrisons should be ready to come into the Field at
his appointment, for which purpose he also sent to the Commanders and
Captains that were in England, to come over with expedition.

In the mean while this was done, as you have heard, the Governor Reehouen
returned to his charge, and ordered Bergen against the Obsession and
expugnation, if Spinola so determined the matter.

Now they will have 2000. foot, and 300. horse all ready in the town, amongst
whom they have named the companies of Sir Th. Winn, Sir Michaell Eueret,
Captain Appleton, who had married a Dutch woman and dwelt in the same place,
with diverse others attending the service, and the issue of these troubles: the
greatest part of the army lying, as I said, about Breda, a town of their own,
and Schetogen Bosch belonging to the Archdukes, which peradventure they
determined to besiege, howeuer they may now be disappointed, either in raising
the enemy from Bergen, or employing themselves to ouer-looke their actions, if
they continue there this Summer.

By this time Spinola understands what is done on both sides, and how his
forces have been disappointed, which made him alter his purpose for a
Rendez-vous at Maestrich, and draw all his Garrisons toward Antwarp out of
Mechlin, Arschot, Husset, Bissell, and other towns and villages, where they
had wintred: so that though he lay himself still in person at Brussels upon
greater matters of importance: yet he disposed of his business, that the country
was resolved, he determined an absolute siege: for 15. pieces of Ordnance were
sent out of Antwarp down the River, and 10000. more men marched by land to the
new begun Camp. He also sent supplies to the Governor of Gaunt, with a
special command to have an eye upon Sluise, and make some attempt that way, as
occasion shall serve. It is also said that the Governors of Ipren and Lisse in
Flanders, who had lost a son in a skirmish in the Palatinate, desired to be
at this service.

All this while the siege is but preparing, for the army was not quite come
down, nor the provision for the expugnation brought together, as Hurdles,
Gabions, Cariages, Munition, Traces for horses, Carts, Wagons, and such like:
yet was some extraordinary matter accomplished: for the Post of Antwarp
reports, and the letters certify as much that they heard the Cannon play
thither: so that by all likelihood it is fully resolved, and the Spaniards
settle themselves to the enterprise, although they want men to fill up their
companies, as having lost this winter by casualty at least 6000.

They say, that in the first attempt there were so many dead bodies, that
thirty Wagons at once have come with them into Antwarp, and in the latter
enterprises the town was so strong and well provided, that they made diverse
sallies ere their enemies could be settled to their much prejudice, and retired
themselves to their fastness at pleasure

Other letters assure us, that the country sending in three hundred Wagons with
provision to supply the wants of the army, which began already to feel some
inconveniences: they were set upon by some of his Excellencies troops and
companyes lying about Breda, as they were going over the Heathes, wide of
Antwerp, and so after a skirmish surprised: for the Conuoy lagging behind, and
not keeping together with the rest, smarted for the disorder, and were
compelled to shift for themselves.

When the States of Holland understood of all these proceedings, they bestirred
themselves and sent diverse men of war to attend about Zealand, of which some
of them stepped into the river, to intercept such boats, as should come from
Antwerp to the army: the rest that kept the Sea behaved themselves so well,
that the Letters say, they took a ship full of Soldiers going to Dunckirke,
whom they examined and finding that the Soldiers knew no other, but that they
went into the Low Countries, they hanged up the Lieutenant and carried all the
rest prisoners to Middleburgh, resolving to watch for those companies which are
coming out of England to serve the Archduches. For rumor cannot be so sparing
but that they know by name the Captains of every Country and the manner of
raising their men.

Amongst other things the Merchants assure us, that at this instant there lie
fifty or sixty sail of Hollanders and Pirates of Argier before Lisbone, who
not only watch the harbors and towns but the Sea it self, as having made a
contract with the^ of Tunis also to associate and defend one another, both
against Spaniards and Portugals, whom they resolve to empouerish and damnifie
all they can, as men resolved to have neither peace nor truce any longer with
them.

But to return to the siege at Bergen, for all these attempts it is supposed
that the siege will not lie long before it, nor the enemy continue with such
resolution, as to make it a work of such consequence, but even do as the Duke
of Parma did in the beginning of this relation leave it, and take some other
enterprise in hand, and that for diverse reasons at this instant.

First, because they cannot command the River, but the town will be relieved
at all times by Sea, which they cannot avoid.

Secondly, because the seat of the war is now as it were in their own
country, and the Prince of Orenges army must both be relieved and set on work
in Brabant, even to the terrifying of the inhabitants.

Thirdly, because rumor has played a woman's part, and told them that some of
Count Mansfields forces are come out of Alsatia, as far as Loraine and
Luizenberg: and either mean to be their own caruers of the blessings of
these Provinces, or unite themselves to the Prince of Orange, if occasion serve
to increase his army, and remove the siege.

Fourthly, because they are afraid to want momoney, considering their treasure
is so many ways exhausted, and the Emperor must not be neglected in his
designs.

And last of all, because there are many hollow hearts in Antwarp, and what
know they whether (besides the treason that may be wrought) the Prince of
Orange if the peace of the Palatinate thrive, will send for the Duke of
Brunswicke, and set him on work on these good towns: so that whether Tilley
follow or no, or that Gonzales come to Spinola again, yet must a bloody war
ensue, and the 17. Provinces in the end smart for all.

FINIS.

