A REMEDY FOR SEDITION, VVHERIN ARE CONTAINED many things, concerning the true
and loyal obeisance, that comme^s owe unto their prince and soueraygne lord
the king.

ANNO. M. D.XXXVI.

A REMEDY FOR SEDITION.
WHO SO EVER well considers with him self the high commodyties, yt come of
good laws, he will, I am right assured, think as divine Plato thought, all
those laws that are made for the welthe and safegarde of mankind, to be of
god, all be it they be constituted by manne: on the othersyde, he that well
pondereth the damages, that of necessity must follow, where either none be,
that can rule, or few that will obey, shall think as I do, all realms,
regions, cities, and towns, that are not governed by laws, to be forestes of
wyld beastis, and not places habytable for men. We lack no good laws, god be
thanked: but what avail they, when as Diogenes says, men that are good, need
them little, and they that be euylle, are never the better for them? Surely in
time of sedition, laws lose their voices, or to say better, in such ragious
outcries of soldiers, noise and brayeng of horses, clutterynge and ienglynge
of harneys, men wax thick of herynge. Justice hydeth her face, when she
sees this to be allowed for a law, He that is the stronger, shall oppress and
spoylle the weaker, and no man say he does evil. Honesty can not abide,
there where might sytteth above right, where will is skyll, where treason
stands for reason. When every man will rule, who shall obey? How can there
be any common welthe, where he that is welthyest, is most like to come to
woo? Who can there be rich, where he that is rychest, is in most danger of
poverty? No no, take wealth by the hand, and say farewell welthe, where lust
is lyked, and law refused, where up is set down, and down set up: An
order, an order must be had, and a way found, that they rule that best
can, they be ruled, that most it becomes so to be. This agreement is not
only expedient, but also most necessary in a common welthe, those that are of
the worser sort, to be content, that the wyser reule and govern them, those
that nature has endewed with synguler virtues, and fortune without breach of
law, set in high dignity, to suppose this done by the great prouydence of
god, as a mean to engender love and amity, between the high and the low,
the small and the great, the one being so necessary for thothers safegarde
welthe and quietness. For as there must be some men of polycie and prudence, to
discern what is metest to be done in the government of states, even so there
must be other of strength and redynes, to do that the wyser shall think
expedient, both for the mayntenaunce of them that govern, and for theschewyng
of the infinite ioperdies, that a multitude not gouernid falls into: These
must not go, arm in arm, but the one before, the other behind, wit and
prudence must be as masters of a work, and appoint strength and redynesse
their task. For undoubtedly, boldness does never well, except it come, and do
as reason commands it to do. Sertorius that prudent Captain, showed this
by a pretty exaumple, he had two soldiers in his camp, the one little, weak,
and in manner of no strength, but very wise: the other high, bygge and full of
bones, but void of brain. He had also two horses, the one galyarde, lusty, and
of a thycke tail, the other lean, little, and almost without a tail. He
appointed the little man, to pull of the great horse tail, the bygge and
sturdy soudiour to pull of those few hears, that the lean horse tail had.
The weak and feeble man, unto whom god and good education, had given wit in
strengthes place, pulled by.iiii. and by.v. hears at ones, and so within a
short space, he had made of a long tail no tail. The Other a good yoma^s
body, tugged at the hole taylle, and sweatte fast, but he pulled of not a
hear. Now, if the ignorant soldiers, were here thus taught, a handful of
wit to be much more worth than a horselode of strength, and were content in
battle, that they should rule: which were the wyser, they obey, that were
the stronger, how much more ought we to be moved with this example, specially
in the gouernynge of a common wealth, in making laws, in setlynge mattiers
concerning faith and relygion, finally in discussynge, what things maynteyne
most the favor of god toward us, and by what means a realm may best be
kept in welthynes? We love to be disceyued, we ymagyne a certain common
welthe in word and in outward appearance, which if we baptyse right, and not
nycke name it, we must needs call a common woe. We think it is very evil, that
so many of us be poor, we think it were a good world, if we were all rich.
I pray you for a season let it be as we desire, let us imagine, we be al rich,
does it not straight follow, I as good as he, why goes he before, I behind? I
as rich as he, what needs me to labor? The maid as proud as her dame, who
mylketh the cow? The fermour having no more cause to toil then he that looks
for the rentes, who shall till the ground? His meny ye say. How so? why they
more then he, if they be rich to? What were more to be wayled, then such
wealth, that should bring either every man, or the most part of men, to
extreme confusion.

The Romans after that they had won the city of the Veiens, were at great
contention, the commons of Rome, and many also of the gentylle men, thought
it very expediente, and hyghely profitable, that half Rome should goo dwell
there, alledgyng, that many in Rome lacked, and that this city was rich, and
of great welthynesse, gorgiously builded, and also nigh unto Rome, so that here
many of them might be enryched without any disturbance of them, that had
possessions in Rome, ye and might also, because they were so nyghe, be at al
assemblees, all parlyamentes, that should be kept in Rome. Mark what followed:
The senators in especial those that were wysest, in no case would assent to
this, no they thought it much better to abide all peril, then any such
matier should pass their hands. In so much, that when this was had in
deliberation, and hotely disputed, the commons were so kendled against the
Senators, that it was hard to keep them from going together by the ears.
But what is it that sage and grave persons can not persuade, if they be hard
of them that utterly lack not discretion? A few of these ancient fathers and
esteemed senators, here strayte brydled the rage of the people, and made them
condescende unto this, that all be it outwardely there seemed gaynes in
departing, and loss in the abiding at Rome, yet they should do better to
tarry poor, than in going away to make them self rich.

A common welthe is then welthy and worthy his name, when every one is content
with his degree, glad to do that, that he may laufully do, gladder to do
that, which he sees, shall be for the quietness of the realm, all be it his
private profit byddeth him do the contrary. The shypman sayleth for other
men's profyt, as much as for his own, but yet he sturreth the stern, and
turns the sail as him lusts, he casts the shot anchor, when he will,
and not when they bydde him, that are in his ship. The physician is called to
do more good to other, then to him self, and in deed oftymes he saves the
sick, and takes the disease him self, but yet he dieteth his pacient, not as
the paciente desires, but some time kepethe him from meat, when he is hungry,
some time from drink, when he is full thursty, seldom geuynge him that he
calls for. Governors in a common welthe, must look to the commons profit,
but they must rule or else how can they govern? They must make laws, and
not such as every man wolle, neither esteem that to be profitable to a few,
which brings damage to the hole. They only ought to be officers, that are
known to be discrete, polytique, wise, and of such stomach, that if need be,
they can set little the hatrede and malice of them, that seldonie love
such as are in greattest authority, and not only set lyttel by them, but
also contemn their own profit, welthe, ye and life to, sooner than to seek
praise at their tongues, that for the most part, love they wot not what, and
hate they wot not why.

Anthistenes seeing the lyghtnes of the people of Athens came one day among
them, and gave them counsel, that they should plowe their land as well with
asses, as with horses. They lawghed at him and said, Asses were nothing fytte
for the tillage of the earth. Than let me laugh to, says he, at you, which woll
have them rulers in the common wealth, that so little can skyll of thaffaires
thereof. Demosthenes, when he was banysshed, by the consent of the people of
Athens, in his departure he turned toward the city, and made this
exclamation, O Pallas, how is it possible, that thou should bear such
love unto these.iii. beasts, the night owl, the dragon, and the people? He
was also wont to say, If I had known the envy, the fear, the false
reports, the iniust accusatio^s, that they must sustain, which govern,
where credit is given to the false iugementes of people, if of.ii. I must
needs have done the one, I would sooner have broken my neck, than have had to
do in the common welthe of Athens.

One told Antisthenes, The people speak much good of you, why says he, what
hurt have I done? as who should say, they seldom praise, but such as do evil.
I dare boldly affirm, yt there was never ethnicke more worthy life, than
Socrates was, the people would needs have him deed. Who knows not, that
knows any thing, how much Rome was bound to Scipio? This worthy
Captain, dyed out of his country, banyshed by them, whom he often had saved.
I let pass Phocion, Aristides, and many mo, whom all hystories bring in, to
show the lyghtnes and lewd judgment of communes. Dante, that good Italyane
poet says full truly of them, It is seldom seen, that the people cry not,
Viua la mia morte, muoia la mia vita, That is, Let live my death, let dye my
life, let that go forth, that brings my destruction, let that be
banyshed, that is my welthe and safegarde. Geffrey Chauser says also somewhat
in their praise, bear it* well away and lawde them as ye find cause,

O stern people unjust and untrue
Ay indiscreet, and chaungynge as a fane
Delytynge ever in rumors that be new:
For like the moon ever wax ye and wane
Your reason halteth, your judgment is lame
Your dome is false, your constance evil preuith
A full great fool is he that on you leueth.
What can be more against their profit, than to obtain that they most
desire? They be angry, that virtue should be rewarded, when she comes to men,
that had no lords to their fathers. They will that none rule, but noble men
borne. Let them have that they require, whom towcheth this so soore, as them
self, and al their posterity? What do they leave unto theirs, when they also
take away the possibility of better fortune? I may say troth, and without
blame, thanked be the knowledge of our most gratiouse soueraygne lord the
king, which has evermore well declared, that true nobility is never, but
where virtue is: and has evermore, from the first of his reygne hitherto,
both by his own great study, to atteyne learning, wisdom, and other
pryncely qualities, and also in gyuyng offices, dignities, and honor, well
testified, that he woll all his subjects to contend, who may obtain most
qualities, most wit, most virtue: and this only to be the way to
promotion, and here nobility to consyste. In all other things it little
avails, whose son a man be. At runnynge he has not the best game, that
leyeth for him, My father ran faster than any other did: nor he that takes a
fall at wrastlynge, has that his father was wont to have, when he gave the
fall. They must needs here, and almost in all other things, content them
self, with that they be able to do, of what parentage so ever they be. There
was one, which said, Princis and noble men, were much more bound to their
horses, than to many of their friends. A horse if the lord ride not well,
lays him in the duste, and tellethe him plainly, he must learn to ride
better, if he will take no fall. All things tell truth but man. The bow
shoots wide, if ye hold it not streyghte. The arrowe says, I must needs
be short, except ye shote me hoome. I must needs be goone, if ye shote me to
far. They can not flatter, they can not say, My lord ye shote nygh,
except ye shote nygh in deed. It is no great hurt to fail here, it is small
loss if a lord* shoot not well, or at the least the loss hurts but him
self. But give the government of commune wealths, into their hands, that can
not skyll thereof, how many must needs go to wrack? The hurt towcheth to
many, to be but smally regarded. Again, what desire shall good wits have, to
employe them self to the knowledge of things, and to pass the other, whom
slouthe woll not let grow any higher, when good and evil be equally esteemed?
what shall we need to endeavor our selfs unto, whenne what so ever we do, we
must be tried by our birth, and not by our qualities? That common welthe can not
long stand, says Plato, that virtue is not most honored in. Any City,
says he, that will be long saufe and in prosperity, must distribute these
two things well, Honor and Shame. They be well distributed, when the chief
and prime honor is given unto qualities of the mind, the second to the
body, the third to external things, as nobility, possessions, and riches.
If ye break this order, and put the one in thothers place, that is, if riches be
chiefly esteemed, the body next, and virtue last of all, here can be no
welthe. This city can not long continue, says Plato. Now, as there is a
difference, in these things, so must we put also, a difference in men that are
endewed with them. They must best be esteemed, that have most gifts of the
mind, that is, they that do excel in wisdom, Justice, temperauncy, and
such other virtues: they next, that have most gifts of the body, as health,
strength, quycknes, beauty: They thyrdly, that have riches and possessions,
the laws not withstanding, having evermore their full strength, that is no
man presumynge, of what qualities so ever he be, to prefer him self to any
office or lands, but as the governors or laws, shall call him to. Justice
must be in every act. And therefore me think, Plato did wonderful well, to
entitle his book, that he writes of a common wealth, de iusto, that is, of
Justice: Every man must be sure of his own, and be content that his neighbor
have more than he, if that by honest ways, he can atteyne unto more. For
welthe can not be, where rape is permytted, ne rape lack, where order is
broken. A comune wealth is, as I think, no thing else but a certain nombre
of cities, towns, shires, that all agree, upon one law, and one head, united
and knytte together, by thobseruation of the laws: these kept, they must needs
florishe, these broken, they must needs perisshe. The heed must rule, if the
body woll do well, and not every man make him self ruler, where only one ought
to be. Things be not done in this world by chance, neither ought to be
governed by rasshenesse. God makes kings, specially where they reign by
succession. God took away prince Arthure, and would king Henry the eight, to be
our heed, and governor. Woll we be wyser than god? wol we take upon us, to
know who ought to govern us, better than god? God made him king, and made
also this law, Obey your king. How can ye obey him, that refuse his laws?
that seek his dishonor? that hate them, whom his grace can not chose but
love? whom also ye would love, if ye did not sooner upon false reports, than
just cawse, hate. Who shall do the king true service, who shall desire, to
stand most in his favor, if at the malycious requests of fond and light
people, his highness should without any other cause put down them, whom his
grace with the rest of his counsel, think most worthy favor. we be but
men, many of us ignorant, many without knowledge, let us think, that we know
much worse then god, who ought to be our governor. Let us content our selfs,
that he rule, whom god made our king, whom god preferred in taking away
Prince Arthure, his gracis elder brother. If we woll this to be our prince,
heed, and governor, than we must also let his grace govern us, by such
officers, as he shall know to be best for us, and not we to appoynte him,
such as we shall think metest, that seldom either see, what is good for us,
or who most entendeth our profit. A comune welthe is like a body, and so
like, that it can be resembled to nothing so convenient, as unto that. Now,
were it not by your faith a mad herynge, if the foot should say, I will wear
a cappe, with an ouche, as the head does* If the knees should say, we woll
carry the eyes, an other while: if the shulders should claim each of them an
ear: if the heles would now go before, and the toes behind? This were
undoubted a mad heryng: every man would say, the fete, the knees, the shoulders,
the heles make unlawful requests, and very mad petitions. But if it were so
in deed, if the foot had a cap, the knees eyes, the shulders ears, what a
monsterous body should this be? God send them such a one, that shall at any
time go about to make as evil a comune wealth, as this is a body. It is not
mete, every man to do, that he thinks best. The Locrians had a very good
custom among them, no man might there, come to speak against a law, that
was constituted by such, as had auctorite to make it, except he came to the
disputation thereof, with a cord about his neck. If he proved the law to be
naught, then he cast of the cord, and was highly commended: but if he did
attempt it, and after failed of his purpose, he was forthwith trust up.
They thought him worthy to dye, that did but speak against a law: albeit he
also thought thereby, to do good unto his country, in speaking against
that, that he judged much hurtefull to the comune wealth.

Plato gives less liberty to his cytezens, he will no man shall dispute any
law, in the presence of youth, or common people, that has little judgment in
such things. It is no part of the peoples play, to discuss acts made in
the parliament. Every man does well in his office, every thing stands well
in his place. Socrates fyndeth this to be the only wealth of all realms, that
every man setle him self to his own affairs and business, and intermedle with
no other man's office. The hands are content the fete go, the tethe pleased,
that the tongue tell the hole tale: the ear does not desire to see, nor the
eye to here: a pair of shoes of viii. d. does better service to the fete,
than a cappe of.v. s. though ye put thereon a fether of forty pe^ce: a pair of
gloves of lamme skin, does much better fytte the hands, than a pair of
breches of right satyn: a frese cote does better on his back, that has to do
at the carte, or at the plowe, than a gown of velvet, furred with sables. To
my purpose, Lords must be lords, comunes must be comunes, every man
accepting his degree, every man content to have that, that he laufully may
come by. We must, if we purpose ever to come to welthe, which we often lose in
wrong seeking for it, all agree, that the laws have their place. It is but an
easy remedy, that makes the sore greatter. He knows not the way to quench
fire, that powers oil into it. Chese is no medicine to drive away rattes:
neither sedytion a mean to make men welthy. What end of myserie shall there
be, where no man wexeth rich, but a another is made a beggar? Where no man is
merry, but.ii. or.iii. be sad for it? what end of robbynge and spoylynge
shall there be, if the poor may evermore rob the rich? If the stronger may
pulle from the weaker? Must not you abide the same law, that you make your
self? must not you, when you have spoiled them that are rich, and so made
your selfs welthy, suffer that they now being pore, spoil you rich? And than
must not ye be poor again? O lyghtnes of comunes, who can say so much
against the, but he may seem to have said nothing? I am ashamed to reherce the
blind folly, that the comunes of England have so often run into?

There can come no traitor, no rebel, of so base condition, of so little
wit, but if he be bold inoughe to take upon him, to be their captain,
they are foolyshe enough to follow him. How often, and whom I pray you, and
for what causes have they made their capitaynes? Whom can they refuse, when
smythes, cobblers, tylers, carters, and such other gay greeks, seem worthy to be
their governors? who will not be ashamed to see our chronicles in strangers
hands, they to se such outrageous madness reign in us, we to read such
temperancy, civility, and obedience to be among them? I will not compare us
to the best governed countries, that be, I will goo to the Barberoust nations
that be, and see how our shame increases their honesty, and good orders,
laid before our faces.

Is there any nation, that has been more enfamed of barbarous conditions than
the Scythes? any of less civility than these? yet they have been ever so true
to their princis, that there be few nations, that have obtained higher fame by
battle, than they have. Their concord and unity, their faythfulnes toward
their kings, made them, that they were never overcome. They drove Darius, that
redoubted king of the Persians, to shameful flight: They killed Cyrus and all
his host.

Alexander magnus lost both a good captain at their hands, and all the
army, that he sent ageynste them. They hard of the Romans valyantnes, but
the Romans never durst set upon them. what reverence bare they to their
king? when such as were any thing familiar with him, were wont at his death
to cut of their ears, to mangle their noses and faces, and many of them to
dye with him. They thought true obeysaunce could not be showed, neither the
loyal hartis known, but at death. Among these, the greatest oath that they
could swear by, was by the kings seat, he that forsware him self by this,
was streyghte whypped to death.

Who will not marvel, to see the Aethyops, men that never hard of goddis
law, do as they were wont to do? there was no hangeman, none to cut of their
hedes, that deserved death. Se their obedience, lay it with ours, if god were
no god, if honesty had never ben hard of, might not shame bring men from
rebellion? Se their obedience. The king, when he hard of any that was worthy
death, was wont to send one of his servants with a token, which did no more,
but tell him, the kings pleasure is, you dye. This manne, of what so ever
estate he was, without any further delay, went into some secret corner, and
there found one way or other to do the kings commandment. They had their
prince in such honor, that if he by any mysfortune lost an eye, or by some
fall broke a leg, al his householde seruantis by their own accord did
deprive them selfs of that part of their body, in which fortune had
offended their king: thinking it much unseemly, that they should not halte,
when their king halted, much unmeet, that they should not be content with one
eye, when their king had but one. They thought it a great shame, if they bare
him not company when he dyed. They took it for a high honor, to have so
glorious an end, as to depart in the fellowship of a king.

The Persians thought him worthy great punyshement, that did but nease, spyt,
wype his nose, or coughe in a kings presence: and are not they weary of their
lives, that among christen men rise against their prince? Shall these
capitaynes be suffered to live, that at any time shall styre the people to such
outrageous ryotte? Is it possible that the people pull them not a pecys, and
so show both to god and their prince, that they now know the greatness of
such an error, and that they must needs hate him, that brought them into it?
God has evermore well testified, that he favors no traitors, no rebels.
Their end (except all histories fail) can be no better then their intentes.
May not the rain, that god sent to part us, and keep us from bloodshedynge,
well show, that goddis pleasure is, we fight not among our selves, that god
loves our prince, aloweth his laws, and will that we be subject to them
both? God will not the bonds of nature to be broken, the charity and love
that should be between all men, much rather between them that are of one
country, one shire, one city, one house, one pare^tage. Nature is forgotten,
god is not hard, al humanity is trodden under the foot, where as is civil
dissension. Nature teaches brute beastis, to love them that gave them life,
that norished them. God says, Honor thy father and mother, Love thy
neighbor as thy self. Thus he says, but he is nothing hard, where as
sedition is. For what sacryfice can the father offer to god and his country,
more acceptable, than to kylle with his own hands his son, now no longer
his son, being a traitor? what act can be more worthy praise, tha^ the son
to slay his own father in such case? He is none of mine says Christ, nor
worthy to be my servant, that can not, if just cawse require him so to do,
forsake his father and mother to do me service. He is none of mine says
England, that can not hate his father and mother, that can not kill them
both, sooner than ones consent to my destruction.

Damatria a woman of Lacedemon, after she hard say, that her son had not so
fought against the ennemies of his country, as it besemed one borne in
Lacedemon, she streyghte upon his return from the wars, slew him with her
own handis, right glad, that she had showed her self sorye, to have been the
mother of such a son. What would she have done? what death would she have
thought to shamful for him, if he had risen against his prince? if he had
showed him self open enemy to his country? if he had intended to pulle
down the laws of the Lacedemoniens?

There be few or none that have red any hystoryes, but they know, what Brutus
judged his sons worthy to suffer, which by letters intended to call in
Tarquinius again. Their letters went not furthe, they weere intercepted, yet
the father gave sentence against his sons, and commanded them to be tied at
a stake, there to be whypte, and after to lose their heedes.

It is more notable that Titus Manlius did, and much more perteynynge unto us,
which so often have broken our loyal obeysaunce toward our prince. This Titus
bad, yt none of his soldiers should fight, but when he commanded them.
Genutius Metius, oone of his enemies, prycketh out from his company, and
chalengeth Manlius son. The commandment of his father was, that he should
not fight: but he being the consuls son, a romayne, thought his honor
lost, if he should not fight. Youth, courage, nobilite, the renoume of his
father, the fame of his country, would not let him suffer his enemy to
make this vaunt, that he had challenged a consuls son of Rome, and that he
durst not fight with him. Wherefore Manlius comes forth, they ru^ne together:
within short space Genutius Metius had the end, that crakers are wont to come
to. Manlius slew him, and was hyghely commended of all his fathers sowldiours
for it. But the Consule, when he saw, that his son had broke his
commaunment, and had fought, where he badde, he should not so do, Son says
he, seeing that asmoche as in the lies, thou haste broke thorder that is to be
kept in war, by the which Rome hitherto, has evermore ben advanced to
great honor, and for as much as thou have brought me into this choice, that I
must either forgette the common welthe, or else deprive my self of that I took
privately most pleasure in, sorye I am to do it, but yet let us, that have
deserved punysshement, be punysshed. I will by this exaumple, that the comune
welthe take no hurt. I will thy death teache all other our citizens, that the
Consules of Rome will be obeyed. Go hangeman go, tie him to a stake, whyppe
him, heed him, handle him, as it becomes them to be, which by evil example
hurt the discipline and obeisance of soldiers. What would Manlius have done,
if a soudiour had taken upon him, to have corrected any decree of the senate?
any plebiscite? any law? what if he had risen against the senate? Ye may well
judge, that he yt killed his son for such a crime, wherein also many excuses
might have be found, would not a made to much of a soldier, that should
have been a traitor, that should for small cause have rebelled. what can we
lay for our defense? we evermore cry we be poor. I admytte it be so, is
sedytion lawfully defended, where men lay poverty for their excuse? shall they,
that be not rich, by and by say, they will no more be ruled by their prince,
by his cou^saylours, by his laws? God send us more grace, for less wit we
can not have. There is a way to riches much better, than in seeking goods to
lose al goodness. Much nygher, than in seeking riches, to defye al regard of
honesty. There be handy crafts, there be honest occupations, whereby poverty
may be driven away.

It was a wonderful good law that Amazis king of Aegypte made, by the which
every man was commanded yearly, to put his name in the comen book, and at the
years end to show the governor of the place, where his abiding was, by what
means he got his lyuinge. Thus both ydlenes was banished, and none or few
put to injury, but the evil doer was known and punyshed. Every man had a
craft, they most esteemed, that were found most profitable to the comune
welthe. The Athenie^s had the same law, they thought it a great shame, men to
be of less polycye, then beese are, which suffer none to tarry among them,
in their hyues, but such as bring enough with them for their comens. They
will no drane bees among the^. Socrates alluding hither, says, there be two
sorts of unprofitable bees in a comune welthe, the one without stynges, the other
with stinges. Unto the first sort he lykeneth poor old men, that can not
labor, by reason of their age, feebleness, or some other just impediment. Unto
the other he lykeneth these that be young and lustye, and neither have, nor yet
will learn any honest occupation, to get heyr living in truth, but
contynewynge in ydlenes, fall to stealing, robbynge, murder, and many other
myschiefes.

Aesculapius that famous physician, would bestow no medicines on them, that he
thought incurable, saying it to be much again a common welthe, to keep them
alive, that can do nothing, but be sick and combre the hole, and consume the
vyttaile of them that labor. Socrates much commends him for it. This I do
not bring in, because I would any man should lack cherishing, when he is
sick, though there be no hope of his recovery: but that I would well show,
how all good ordered comune welthes, in time past abhorred these belyes, that
have no hands: these flies, that feed upon other men's labors: these that
being idle, without any occupation, without lands, fees, wages, do nothing
but complain of fortune, complain of them that be governors of the realm:
And thus either sow sedition among the people, or else be the feldes them
self apt to bring forth such fruits, These be they, that with their venomous
tongue, stynge and poysone the fame of them that are set in office, to see that
they do less myschiefe, then they would do. They can not without fear of
their lives, do as they most desire, except such governors be put down.
There was never ruler so good, but the better he was, the more they that be
set on riotte, robbery, murder, and rebellion, hate him. Many and shameful
seditions have been in England, they have all ben soore punyshed: this remedy
helps but for a season.

Lucius Cinna, a noble man of Rome, conspired, and utterly intended the death
of Augustus the emperor. Caesar had sure knowledge, both where, when, and after
what facion he purposed to bring his treson to pass. His intent was open, yet
Caesar long douted, what was best to be done. He thought to banysshe him, he
thought to do now this, now that. As he thus took delyberation, Liuia his
wife came in, and after she had perceived the mattier, said thus unto him: Sir,
do as physicians do, which when they see, that their accustomed medicines will
not serve, they prove the contraryes. By punishment ye have hitherto done little
or nothing, forgive a another while, and see what clemency may do. Cinna can
not now hurt your life, he may set forth much your honor. The Emperor
thinking her counsel not the worst, by and by sent for Cinna to come speak
with him. As soon as Cinna was come, The Emperor caused a chair to be set for
him. Than thus he began to reason the mattier with Cinna. This one thing says
the emperor, I must require of you, that you do not interrupte my
communication, ye shall have time, when I have said my mind, to say what ye
will. Here he began to reherce his benefittes toward Cinna. First that he had
perdoned him his life, when that he found him in his enemies tentis, and that
he did restore him to his hole patrimony, that he had also given him great
authority, many offices. If ye grant all this, says Caesar, to be true, now
I pray you tell me, what cause I have given you, to desire my death? ye to go
about your self to kylle me? Cinna here began to change color, to be
troubled in countenance, he would have laid somewhat for his defense. Augustus
made an end of his expostulation, and said thus, Cinna, I give the ones
again thy life: before I gave the it, being mine ennemie, I give it now to
the, being a traitor, and a parricide. From this day forthwarde, let
frendeshyp begin between us, let us two contend, whyther thou may show
me more pleasure, for perdonynge the thy life, or I more glad, that I saved
the. And thus by and by Caesar began with him, and made him consul. Cinna was
from that day forward, as true a friend unto Caesar, as one man might be unto
an other, in so much that he made Cinna his heir.

The king our most gracyous sovereign lord might commemorate his benefyttes
toward all his subjects. I would do it for him, but that I know I am far
unmeet, to take upon me the handelynge of so weighty a mattier. His grace
woll, I doubt not, follow the clemency of Augustus. He sees, his noble
progenytours have often punished rebels, and done no more, but cut awey the
branches of sedicion, for their time. His highness intends to pull aweye the
root. He sees, it is not possible to cure this sore, which in deed Plato
calls the greattest syckenes, that can come to a comune welthe, except he
search out, both where it arises, and what thing most nourishes it, and
then do as phisicions are wont, which often times lay not their medicines to
the part, that is diseased, but to that rather, from whens the disease first
came, and is like to come stylle, onelesse it be there stopped. As for
exaumple, when the eyes be soore, first they seek, whether the disease grow in
the eyes, or is sent from some other place nighe the eyes, as from the heed, or
else some other place further of, as the stomach. If it be not in the eyes
pri^cipally, but comes either from the heed, or from the stomach, they
begin not at the eyes, but first pourge the stomach, and so the root cut
away, the disease now no more maynteyned, can in no wise long tarry behind.
It is very true, that Zamolsis, king of Thrace was wont to say. Look, says
he, as the eyes can not be cleansed, except ye first cleanse the heed, neither
the heed, without ye pourge the hole body, even so, neither the body, without
the mind be first netted. This king saw it little auayled, to rydde the
body of noughty humors, oneles also a man so brydell his appetyte, that
afterward he can forbear such things, as did hurt him before, and will
do again, except he moderate his affections. The boat man I think, lacks
much wit, and loses much labor, that stands all day with a dis she
ladinge out water, that needs must come in again, oneles the boat be amended.
The faut is in the breach of the boat, and not in the water. Surely, if it
were any thing like to be brought to pass, it should be much better to find
a way, that none might have will to rebel, then to trusse up rebellious
people. Would god some high wit, some man borne to do such good for his
country, could as well bring this to pass, as I think it might now very
lightly be done. For if ever the cause of rebellion may utterly be taken away,
we have a prince, god will we may have his grace long, we have a prince, that
says, the time is now. Al men ought to endeavor them self, here to occupy
their wits, that such a thing might take effect. I for my part, will do
what I can, which I know is very little, how be it if I do it not so well as
my desire is, I trust good intent shall so make mine excuse, that love of my
country shall not much hurt me.

Some say poverty is the cause, that men come to be thenes, murderers,
rebels. But I think, nothing so. For I know diverse realms, where poverty
raygneth much more than in England, yet rebels there be none. The rote is
lower, dygge deper, ye may perchance find it. Education, evil education, is
a greatte cause of these and all other myschefes, that grow in a comune well
the. For where so many lack honest occupatio^s, whereby al men, that can not
otherwise live by their lands, ought to maynteyne them selves, how can we
lack any kind of mischief? No man is borne a craftis man, youth must be beter
brought up, or ever the old live welthely. The lack, the lack of honest
crafts, and the habundauncie of ydlenes, all be it they be not the hole cause
of sedicyon, yet as they bread thieves, murderers, and beggars, so not a little
they provoke men, or things like men to rebellion. There is a part in man,
which is named the mind, that is of this nature, if it be galyarde and lusty,
either to do much good, or contrary to do much hurt. If this lack good
institution, if this be not handeled and ordered as it should be, men may
lack sedition, but they can not lack a thing within them to styre them to
sedition. This must be so taught, that there be no rebellion within our selfs,
we must conquer our lusts, and compel the appetites, to obey all such
statutes, as reason and honesty shall think worthy to be enacted. Every man,
some will say, can not clyme to such perfection, Every man can not be kept at
skole. I grant, But yet I think, al ye lords sons, and also the better
part of gentlemen, might be as well brought up, as it is necessary they be, if
they had such teachers, as ought to instruct the nobles of a realm. These
well brought up, I would nothing doubt, but either we should be welthier than
we be, or else much better content with that, that god should send us, all be
it we had much less then now we have. I long have supposed, that as the
bryngyng up of ye nobles, is the saulfegarde of a comune welthe, so their evil
education is the ruin thereof. For as noble men be, so their servants are. The
master given to riot, the servant must needs think, that there is no thriuyng
for him, except he show him self a ruffler. So that though the servant be
good of him self, yet to win the favor of his master, he must
cou^terfaite their conditions, that his master most lyketh. Thus in using
them a monethe or two, he makes them his own. He now dissembleth no
longer, he is as they be, whom he has long followed. I must needs say more,
if the nobles be evil taught in points concerning religion, as if they be
popyshe, to put one exaumple for many, How can their servants chose, but be
so to? How can their tenantes, which must have their lords favor, be of a
another religion, then their lord is? How can they agree with their neighbors,
if they both be not of one faith and one believe? The kings grace shall never
have true subjects, that do not believe as his grace does. For how can they
love him, as they should do, which being in errors them self, in darkness
and ignorancy, suppose his grace to be in a wrong faith, and so to seduce
them, which entendeth nothing so ernestly, as the saving of their sowles?
How can these obey his highness, as it behooves them to do, when they think in
obeyenge his commandments, they disobey goddis. This foreyne heed, that is
in Rome, ye body being in England, has brought the sely brains of many a
poor manne, into deep errors. Alas what greatter ignorauncye can there be,
then to take him for head, that never was with the body? Him for the heed, that
hitherto has done nothing, but consumed the members? The king is our heed,
though popyshe say nay, yet let us believe the prophet Samuel, Lo says he
unto king Saul, God has anointed the, and made the prince of all his
inheritance. I pray you, think you that priests, monks, friars, and bishops,
be not a part of goddis inheritance? Has god no title, no right unto them?
If god have, the king also, whom god has made his holle heir, must needs
have. He is their prince, and yet not head, some say. Samuel is a prophet,
he says yes, he says unto Saul, Nonne cum paruulus esses 1. Reg. 10.
in oculis tuis, caput in tribubus factus es? He that says in the Tribes, I
pray you does he not mean in all the Tribes? He that is mayre of London, is he
not mayre of all London? Yet there is, Pasce 1. Reg. 15.
oues* said to Peter, and not to the king. So they say, that alleges, but
that that makes for them. But you se, that god said to king David, Tu pasces
populum meum, Thou shall feed my 2. Reg. 5.
people, and thou shall be their guide. I shall speak of this matyer perchance
a another time, at more leisure, And in place more conueniente. Now I will not
go from my purpose. We must agree in in religion, we must serve but one
master, one body will have but one heed. It is not possible men to agree
long, that dissent in relygion. No more than it is possible, christen men to
agree with turks. How be it, who will not think it much better, to dissent,
then that we all agree, upon pernytious errors? Which have no defense but
this only, that they have reigned long, and that men has long ben subiecteto
them? The nobles must be of one believe, of one faith, of one religion, they
must all agree upon one heed. The gentylmen will follow, the comunes can not
tarry long behind. And where I said before, youth must be well brought up,
specially in opinions of religion, here I say, the old must begin. It is
hard for the son to be against his father, in matters of faith. No, we se
this thing only to be a defense for all arguments: I believe as my father did
before me. Undoubtedly, if the child learn one thing at scole, or of the
preacher, and here his father at home, not only say, but see him also do the
contrary, words are forgotten, daily exaumple works fast, specially when it
is euylle. Clitipho says, as all young men will say, My father byddeth me
learn of other honest me^, what becomes me to do, he commands me to follow
them, but when he has well drunk, what shamfull acts does he tell of him
self? when he says, he has done thus, Can I think upon that he byddeth me
do? and not sooner do as he has done? No no he tells a tale, to one that
has no ears, that commands the young to do well, when they see the aged do
evil. I have often meruailed, to see the diligencye, that the Jews use in
bringynge up their youth, and been much asshamed to see how neglygente
christen men are in so godly a thing. There is neither man, woman, nor child
of any lauful age, but he for the most part knowethe the laws of Moses:
and with us he is almost a good curate, that knows.vi. or.vii. of the.x.
commandementes: among the Jews, there is not one, but he can by some honest
occupation, get his living. There be few idell, none at al, but such as be
rich enough, and may live without labor. There is not one beggar among
the^. All the cities of Italy, many places in Eecilia, many bourges in Germany,
have a great nombre of Jews in them. I have been long among them, that are
in Italy, I never hard of a Jew, that was a thief, never that was a murderer.
No I never hard of a fraye between them. I am ashamed to say as I needs must
say, They may well think their religion better than ours, if religion be
tried by men's lives. Now if Moses law learned in youth, and but carnally
understand, can so steye them, that few or none fall into other vice, than
usury, which also they do think permytted by Moses law, so yt they use it
not one jew to an other, as in deed they do not, but a Jew to a stranger.
Might not we learn so much of Christis law, as were able to keep us from
rebellion? May not poor men's children come to the sermons? may they
nothere preachers? can they here goddis laws, ye though they be but easily
preached, and not abhor sedycyon and rebellion? Who hard ever, that the
Turks rose against their prince? it is, it is undoubted, one sort of
relygion, though also it be not right, that keeps men in concord and unity.
Turks goo not again turks, nor Jews against Jews, because they both
agree in their faith. Christen men do so varye, England is so divided, that I
wonder rather that sedicion sprange up no sooner, than that now men begin to
rebel. England is little bound unto them, that at the first divided it so
madly. This North and south, east and west, is a good particion of the hole
world, it were well in England, if we were all called Englyshemen, of this
country, or that, as of York, of London, and such other: and not these
northern men, these southern, these western. The very name makes fools out
with them, that they never saw. The northorn can not but bear haulfe a
grudge to the southern, ye for no another cause, then that they be thus called.
In Italy, France, Spain, Germany, there is both north and southe, est and
west, yet they judge nothing by these, but the wind. In Oxford I know the
name of the northorn and southorne proctour, has been the cause, that many men
have been slain. They that should rule the other, are out or ever they enter into
their office. We can not get out of Paul's church, but we must pass by the
northorn door, or by the southern. Christen men are to soore divided. The
friars of saint Fraunces skace love the domynycans, the Iacobites love not the
Brigetines, or if they do love, they would love much better, if they were al
of one sort. I do know, good men, of what order so ever they be, they will do
well. But the evil be mo in nombre, they bear the swing: the other be sofewe
that skace they be seen in the chapter house. It is only Christis religion,
that can make Christian men one of us love an other, as we should do. The
precepts of philosophy, and good education, could make many of the Grecians,
mo of the Romans, not only to forsake riches, to banyshe pleasures, and to put
them selfs in a thousand perilles: but also to dye for their country. And
can not the knowledge of the word of god, the sweet adhortations, the high and
assured promyses that god makes unto us, keep christen men from contempning
the judgment and laws of god, from undoing their country, from fyghtyng
against their prince? If we were any thing well instructed in the joys, that
are prepared for them, that obey god and their prince, in the joys that
neither man's eloquence can express, neither heart feel, nor thought compass:
Who will think, that so many of them could so frankely offer up their lives,
and that we shall not abhor, such as either will dye them self, or bring
their countreye to ruin?

Who can praise Themistocles so well, but he may seem to have left out a
greatte part of his praise? Who did more for his countreye then he? Who could
be worse rewarded then he was? that was not only banyshed his country, but
also driven to seek succor at Xerxes hand, whom he had not long before
dishonored in battle? who had a greatter cause to fall out with his country
than he? who more commodity to have revenged such ingratitude? But se what
good education can do? Se what is to be looked for of them, in whose brestis
virtue and desire of honest fame lodges. Xerxes interteyned him highely, and
showed him all the favor, that a myghtie prince could show unto one, whom he
best loved. He gave him great possessions, in so much that Themistocles was
wont to say, I had been undone, except the Athenia^s had undone me. Yet all this being thus, when Xerxes would have sent him against his country, with an
host of men, he forgot all their unkindness, he forgot they had exyled him,
and put him in ieoperdy of his life, and thought it much better to slay him
self, than to be a captain against his country. And thus at the last
being weried with often calling on of the king, and seeing no remedy, but
either to kill him self, or to fight against his country: he chose of two the
less hurt, and with a drafte of Bulls bloudde finysshed his life. I will not
speak of Thrassibulus, Codrus, Ancurus, Decii, and many other, which all
thought the welthe of their country, to be preferred to their lives. I can not
think, but if Christis laws were well preached, (they be well preached, when
the preacher says as the gospel is, and does as the gospel says) I can not
think, but if Christis promyses were surely prynted in our hearts, that we
should be, and that a great sort, to testify the word of god, to be of much
more puissaunce, then vain fame. Goddis word is potente, and to say as I
think, almost omnipotent, if it be well handeled, and of such as it should
be. It is much that good men may do. In Florence, the people were set part
against part, as we were latelye here in England. The side that had the
better hand, came to set a fire the palaice of their adversaries Captain,
called Pagolantonio Soderini. As chance was, this capitaynes brother, the
bishop of Volterra, was than in his house, which as soon as he hard their
noise, and perceived where about they went, cast on his white rochet, and so
came down among them, he spoke but few words, but by and by all that were in
that rout, cast away their fire brondes. There was none so lewd, that could
in so honest a prelates presence do any hurt. This Machiauellus writes, as a
thing wonderful, how be it, if people were as obedient as they ought to be,
and bishops in such reverence as they have been in times past, for their good
life and learning, this would be no wonder. who was less beloved in the
north, than my lord Cardynall, god have his soul, before he was among
them? Who better be loved, after he had been there a while? we hate often times,
whom we have good cause to love. It is a wonder, to see how they were turned,
how of utter enemies, they became his dear friends. He gave bishops a right
good ensample, how they might wyn men's hartis. There was few holy days, but
he would ride.v. or.vi. mile from his house, now to this paryshe church, now
to that, and there cause one or other of his doctors, to make a sermon unto
the people. He sat among them, and said mass before all the paryshe. He saw
why churches were made. He began to restore them to their right and propre use.
If our bishops had done so, we should have seen that preaching of the gospel,
is not the cause of sedition, but rather lack of preaching of it. He brought
his dinner with him, and bad diverse of the parish to it. He enquired whether
there was any debate or grudge between any of them, if there were, after
dinner he sent for the parties to the church, and made them at one. Men say
well that do well. Goddis laws shall never be so set by, as they ought, before
they be well known. How shall poor men know them, except they be syncerely
preached? We must first learn to keep goddis laws, or ever we ernestly pass
of the kings statutes. All be it he that keeps the one, will also keep
the other. He that can find a better way, to avoid sedition, than first to
bring in the word of god, which our most learned king, and true lieutenant of
god in this realm of England, has holly intended this many years, Secondarily
the mind well pourged, that is restored into the good and pure nature, that
first god made it in, to purge as Zamolsis thought best the body. He that can
find a better way, shall do right well to show it, I find none. Men after that
the mind is well instructed, must se, that the body have also a way to mainteyn
it self. Every man must have an honest occupation, whereby in troth he may get
his living, without doing injury to his neighbor. Idelnes ydelnes must be
banysshed. It can not be chosen, but men will steal, though they be hanged,
except they may live without stelyng. How it may be brought to pass, that no
man have cause to stele, me think I have either showed it, or else given
occasion to some other to show it.

Now that we content our selfs with that, which god shall send us, or with
that, we by our own industry shall laufully get, me think a greatte part
lies in the prelates of the Church. They must begin, the other can not lead
this dance. If religious men begin, lay people will follow, as soon as they
shall have learned well the fotynge of it. Religion took a great fall, honesty
was sore wounded, that day that richesse entered into their hearts, hands I
would say, whom Christ left for to declare both in word and life, what
reward they were sure of, that here for his sake would refuse richesse. It is
no marvel, if a tapster or a wine drawer, reckon a penny or two more than his
duty, when they see religious men so embrace money. Let the poor lay
people here them say, and lie not, God is our portion, God is our lands, Our
conversation is in heaven, They will undoubtedly take poverty for no such
thing, that they should sooner consent to the disturbaunce of their countreye,
then to be poor. I have long sought, and can in manner find no cause of our
poverty, but the fertilite and welthynes of our country. Other men, that are
borne in bare countries, and can not live, onles they much travail the world,
avoid myserie by their great labor and toil. In England the ground almost
nourishes us alone. It is an incredible thing, to see how sore men of other
nations labor, how much we play, how little they consume on their belyes,
how much we devour, how poor they be, and how welthy we are, welthy I say
in comparison of them. God has given us to good a country, we may here to
many of us live idle. In many places of Germany, people are feign to set their
trees, that they use for their fuel. They sow corn on mountains, where
neither horse nor plowe can come, They plowe with mattockes, and harrowe with
spades. How much ground is lost in England? How much corn might we carry
into other cou^treyes, if we would use the commodities of our realm? How
many hethes be there, that would bear other frutis, than shrubbes, brakes,
bromes, and fern, if they were well handeled? how many cities are decayed,
how many towns, that are now hamlettis, quyte down, that would stand, if
the third part of England did not live idelly? Towns would up again, if
crafts were set up. There is few nations, but many be ydell, yet I think
there is not two of the greattest nations in christendom, that has half so
many, that live without crafts, as little England has. In France ye shall see
many men draw cartis about the city, laden with fagottes, and such other
small wode. In Italy, there is no man so rich, but he trauaileth in
merchandise. Dukes that are there in kings places, occupye marcha^dyse. And
yet are fain to keep small howses. I will not compare our comynaltie with
theirs. I will not handel this place as I might. This I am sure, we that have
been there, have said ones a weke, God save the welthy comynaltie of England.
I will not compare our keeping of houses with theirs, where frogs be a dayntie
dysshe, snayles, a morsel for a lady, where musshrumpes stand for the second
course. Ye would think it a mad sight, to see a quarter of a goose run
round for burning, the rest powdered and kept in stoore for holydays. I am
assured, the fare in Venys is as good, as is in the most parts of Italy.
Venys is as bygge, or very little less, than London with the suburbs: yet is
there more flesh spent in two or three months in London, than is there in a
year. We have to many sawces, to many showynge horns to draw in meat. we
know full little what we do, that make as though we cared not, who ruled in
England. If a foreyne prince had the gouernynge of us a while, think you,
we should not be far dysceyued, if we looked to live, as we now live, to do
as we now do? Think you Daces would not come in? ye know not what daces be,
no dates I warrant you? I pray god ye never know them. This I am sure, as
long as our most gracious prince, king HENRY the. VIII, reygnethe over
us, which I pray god it be, until his heirs be of age, we shall need fear
no daces. They began properly to sparse pretye rumors in the North, that no
man should eat white bread, no man eat pygge, gose, or capon, without he
agreed before with the king. They well both declared their malice, and how
little they had to lay against the kings grace, which were compelled
shamefully to feign, such abhomynable lies against his highness. The king
entendeth no such thing. Would god both his grace would goo about to get
us a better name in strange countries, and we also content our selfs to have
it. we be called, I wot where, english bealyes. Who can not but be sorry, to
se a man bye so dear so many hurtes, as come of to much meat? Who knows not,
that the english swette, no old sycknes, and twenty other diseases more, come
every day of inordinate fedynge? Memory, wit, ye the very mind, which is
immortal, almost is slain with surfettis. The eyes, change their color,
where they should be dry, they fall to droppynge, their sight departs. The
ears wax dull of herynge, to be short, all the senses be drowned with
drink, and cloyed with to much fedyng. where as the belie is greatter than
all the body beside, where the bealy reigns, does not all honest crafts,
all good inventions want? what country has inverted fewer things than
England? Be our wits worse than other men's be? No no, there is no faut but
ours, that will have them no better. Is it not a shame, that we can not be as
discrete, as wise, as the brute beasts are? Do they drink, but when they are
a thirst? Do they eat, but when they be hungrye? when did any man see a beast
dye of a surfette? Men are some time in the fault, that bestes dye of drynkyng,
they being to hot after their labor. Put a beast at liberty, let him be at
his own fedynge, it will be long or he hurt him self either by eating or
drinking? Among us, what syckenes kylleth so many, as meat and drink? what
pestyle^ce ryddeth more than sustenance? Besides yt, for the more part
pestilence comes of outrageous diet, and does little hurt, where me^ can
moderate their mouths. Bibbers will be offended with him, that shall go about to
make them live better, to make them live longer, to make them rycher, to turn
their drynkyng money into stuff of house hold. They envy the duchemen, that
drink deper than they, why do they not envy the moyles as well, that drink
as much as duchemenne, and yet fall not under the maunger, as they do under
the bourde? We have lost both the good things, that antiquity used, and
changed also the names of them that we have. He is called a lover, that does
al he may, to make an honest woman naught. If her lover entend to take away her
honesty, her good name, what shall he do that hates her? Even so we call that
good fare, that does us most hurt, and that evil chere, that does us most
good. I think he suppeth evil, that for his good supper keeps his bed a
seven night after. You will think I know London well, that make this offer
unto you. Blyndefelde me, ca^e me after to what place ye woll, I will little
fasle, to tell where ye set me, and before whose door. They that know not my
cunning, will skace believe me. I pray you can ye set me in any place, but I
may say, and lie little, I am now before a Tavern or an ale house? Fail I
may, but far I can not fail. In Italy it is all most as much shame for an
honest man to come out of a tavern between meles, as it is here to come from
the ba^ke. In Venis there is no moo tauernes, then there be innes, neither
wine is to be sold by the quarte, but in the innes, because it becomes none
to bye after such facion, but strangers, and those that can not tarry long in a
place. How much good might a few good men do? a few might so begin to redress
this error, that there should need no law to compel men to do them self
good. who was among the Romans, but he might find in his heart to have fewer
dyshes, wha^ Manius Curious, being dictatour, that is in the highest office,
that any man could bear in Rome, was contented, not only to live with wortes,
but also glad to stir the pot him self, and to give Ambassadors their
answers as he was kelynge the pot? We banyshed the best thing, that ever was
with manne, when frugalitie was driven away. we kowe not what wealth is in small
things, nor yet what riches is in contented poverty. Pouertye has been the
inuentrice of all good crafts, and of al other things, that either give
orname^tes, or bring commodities unto man's life. Reckon but one goodthynge,
that a welthy person has inverted, a thousand evil I can rehearse. Poverty
has been the maker of al rich realms. What city had a poorer beginning than
Rome? what less Riches, then Venys? What king was porer, then the king of
Portyngale?

Socrates was axed, how his common welthe should withstand the malice of a
rycher, seeing that he would the communes to have very little, and the other
never a deal to much. How they may withstand one, says he, I need not
tell you, but I am sure, they shall be good enough to fight against two, if they
both be welthy and rich enough. How so says Adimanthus? Ever says
Socrates, one poor soudiour, is good inoughe for two rich in battle. He is
quycke, these are dulle, he lean and lusty, these fat and foggy, he made to
hunger, thurst, and hardenes, these delycate and deed, if they be a night or
two out of their nestes. How shall they fight well, that ii. or.iii. shildes
woll skace cover their belyes?

Who will believe, that Scipio so worthy a capitayn of the Romans, could leave
his daughters nothing to their marriages, but the comune wealth feign to give
them their dowries? what Roman could think poverty to be refused, when so
noble a man was content with it? I can not tarry in examples. Cincinnatus,
Fabricius, and many other I must not speak of. It is skace credyble, that
Plutarche wrytethe of a captain of the Lacedaemonians. Evermore when this
went to warfare, they were feign to give him money out of the comune hutche,
to bye him botis and shows. what soldier could think him self poor, when
he saw his capytayne have so little? They were contented, with such extreme
poverty: and do we think it laufull, because we be not so rich as we would
be, to rise against our prince? and this our prince so loving, so learned, so
made of nature to a kingdom, so endued of god with all such pri^cely virtues,
as are to beautify a common wealth? could we, if we knew what we did, go
against king HENRY the VIII, of whom I will say nothing but this, that his
gracis fame and praise, can not fall, but when all good letters fall, which
can not be before men leave the earth, and the earth men. I will say nothing of
mine own. Al be it me think it much apperteyneth to him, that will handel this
matter well, both to show, how much England is bound to love his grace, and
how much we ought to hate all them, that would his grace any evil: But I will
let Erasmus, the greattest learned man of our time, speak for me, Hark what he
says of our king.

WHAT REGION of this world is there, but it may reioise at the high felicity
of England, if it love England? what nation, but it may envy the welthe of
England, if it love not England? Undoubted it is a king, that either makethe
a a Realm noble, or that obscureth it: with whatte books, with how many
sorts of tongues, shall the posterity testify, that England in all kind of
virtue so flourysshed in king Henry the.viii. his time, a prince sent of god
unto England, which may seem but even now to be borne, even now to be
England, so cleansed of evil customs and vices, so imbued with all excellent
ordinances, that Massilia it self, may here take example of ciuilytie, so
instituted with Christ's faith, that Rome now may come to skole to England:
so stuffed with learned men, that Italye may envy England, saving that envy
has no place, where good letters reign? England has a king, which may be
a rule unto all princis, that hereafter shall govern any comune welthe. Good
lord this this in deed is a kyngedome, This is a Princelyke court, that his
grace kepethe. I let pass the greatte gifts, that god has endued so
abundantly both his gracis goodly personage and mind, which al be it they
come of god, rather than of our industry: yet they are hyghely profitable to a
comune wealth, wha^ they light on a good prince. And although this many years,
it has been small praise in a prince to be well learned, yet his hyghnes shall
bring it to pass, yt as in time past it has been the chief ornament of a
king, to be learned, so it shall here after, be judged high praise worthy, a
king to excel in knowledge. His gracis singular qualities shall declare them but
fools, that are wont to say, that noble courage of princely stomach, is much
defaced, much brought down by learning and study. For what king can they
bring forth, that has been without letters, which had more dexterity, in
any feate that belongs to a prince, than his hyghnes has? so made of nature
apt to every thing, that in riding, shotyng, and such other common pastimes,
there be few, that are to be compared with him. There be few kinds of
musyke, but his grace has a good knowledge in them. Wonderfully well seen in
the sciences Mathematycall. who can be more diligenter, in oppressyng vice: he
has driven out of his realm, those that lived by myschiefe, he has netted
his realm of idle vacabundes. (would god his grace had done but the one, as
well as he has intended to do both) He has set up good laws, and
abrogated such as were unprofitable for his people. who is more prudent in
consultation? who can better forsee, that yt is like to chance, than he can?
who can be of more actiuitie? and yet in letters, he has gone so far,
perchance not by no great study, but by the rare quickenes of wit and
bou^tie of nature, that divines, ye and those that are among them best
learned, do admire, and hyghely commend the right judgment, that his grace
has in so many things. Then he has also this virtue, as chief of all the
rest his most pryncely qualities, that there is none more gentler, to be
spoken unto, none that has less dysdayne, none that has less pride, the
majesty not withstanding of a prince, evermore safe and in no point
diminysshed. The wits of learned men, whom his grace has evermore so
noryshed, and has ornated, will not suffer the memory of such his
excellent virtues to decay by any process of time. No no both the eloquence
of latin men and grecians, shall ever testify, that there was one king Henry
the eight in England, which alone had all the ornaments, that al these
princes had among them, the study and love toward good letters* yt Ptholomeus
Philodelphus had, the good fortune of Alexander Magnus, the gentle affability,
that Philip king of the Macedons had, the noble courage of Julius Caesar, the
health of Augustus, the clemencye of Traianus, the integrity of Alexander
Seuerus, the lernyng and knowledge of Marcus Antonius Pius, the religion of
Theodosius, and to make an end, where virtues skace lets me find any end,
there was nothing allmooste in any of those, which thantiquitie so highly
praises, that had any notable quality, but it may be found in this one
prince. Thus says Erasmus. I might bring in many places of Ludouicus Viues,
of al them that either have been learned them self, or loved learned men: but
Erasmus I think has said enough, for to make al us glad of such a prince. I
will say, that I am assured, all the lords of England will grant me, that if
they were all borne to be right enheritours of the Crown of England, yet
among them al, there is not one, which they might think worthy to be king,
his grace being alive, Al be it their title were as good as his gracis is. Now
when god has given his highness only good title, and made him their right and
natural king, and them his Subjects, what shall we think, they ought to do, in
defense of his gracis right and honor? They know right well, they have
declared their hartis toward his highness. The nobles have well perceived, as
they be the strength of the king, so he and his laws, are their defense and
saulfegarde. They know the fall of the one, is the fall of both. The dukes,
worthy all hye praise, all honor, all reward, have showed them selfs, both
wise, in saying their own hurtes, to be adjoined with the kings, and
faithful, in defending their prince. The lords have done semblable wise.
Knights lacked not of their part. Gentlemen, and briefly al men, have seen,
that sedition, is sooner to be stopped with loss of goods, great expenses,
then that men of one nation, should cruelly one kill an other. The kings
grace, both by his long experience, and also by his knowledge in good letters,
well perceyueth, that the chief honor, that a christen prince should seek, is
the saving of his people. His grace knows the end of ciuyle discord. He
knows the commodities, that come of concord and unity. In time of civil
dissension, men wander here and there, sure in no place, trusting no man,
suspectyng all things, affrayed almost of their own shadow. Cities made for
the welthe of then habitantes, are the destruction of all, or the most part
of them, that are within them. Walls made to keep out enemies, keep us from
flieng our ennemies. Howses, towns, ye hole cities, are hurled often to the
ground, then follows the last part of the play. Hungre, thyrste, lack of
lodgings, lack of other necessaries. Al crafts are distroyed, or at the
leest hyndered for a long season: after horse and oxen, that should till the
earth, are taken away. But the most hurt of all is, that we learn to set god
and his laws at naught. what shall he think unlawful, what dishonest, that
thinks he may wear harnes against his prince? sleye his countreye men?
neighbors? friends? kynsfolke? ye brothern and systerne? fathers and mothers?
When Pyrrhus king of the Epirotes was setting forth against the Romans, in
defense of the Tarentins, Cineas a philosopher, in much favor with him, asked
Pirrhus what he would do, when he had overcome the Romans? All Italye says he,
shortly after shall be ours. Well, when Italy is under you, what will you than
do* Than we wol sail into Secilia. This won, whether then? we wol into
Spayn. This overcome, is there any more to do? Ye then we woll set upon
Carthago. Imagine says Cineas, ye have obtained this also, Have ye it, that ye
desire? ye says he, for then, we woll return to Epirus again, and there
pass the rest of our life in myrthe and pleasure. Then I pray you, why may
we not make merry now? why be we not afraid, that somewhat chance in so many
wars, that we lose this, which we foolyshely seek, having it in our hands?

May not I say so unto ours? Put you the case, as you woll ymagine, you have
the better hand, how be it, better it is to be killed, thanne to conquer,
fightyng against your prince. Yet imagine, every thing go on your side as you
desire. Can it chance so well, but many of you must wayle? He that is
ouercomme shall weep, ye say. Trow you they shall laugh that win? Think you
myrthe can be within them, that evermore shall think, god hates them? the
world abhors them? Let us agree, let us agree, let us se, what good
concord among men does. Concord brought them together, that wa^dered without
places, ever in fere one of the other. Concord made laws, co^corde builded
cities, increased and conserved them. Concord brought in all honest crafts.
Concord bringethe riches, which by dissension we seek maddely. In time of
peace wits atteyn unto lernyng, virtue, and wisdom. Concord makes us the
friends of god, the inheritours of heaven, parttakers of all the joys, that god
has prepared for them, he best loves. All that fear god, all that love his
favor, will say as I do. we woll peace, we woll no dissension, we have often seen
the good that comes of rufflynge, the good that comes of chaungynge. We have been some times turned from Brytones into Saxons, from Saxons into Danes. The
Normans have been our governors. we have ever changed for the worse. we woll
keep our strength for an other season. We shall have a better time, a worse
quarrel we can not have, to spend our blood in. we woll our e^nemies laughe
not at our distructio^. we wol that they be not merry at our calamity, which
can not be merry, except they see us sad. we woll be friends, God save
England as it is, if al English men say so to, I am sure, God will say Amen.

LONDINI IN AEDIBVS THOMAE BERTHELETI REGII IMPRESSORIS.

CVM PRIVILEGIO.


