AN EXHORTATION TO stir all English men to the defense of their countreye,
made by Richard Morysine.

AL BE IT THE kings hyghnes is, and has been a long season in leage with all
christen princis, and having given no just cause of breach, to any of them,
might rather look for kyndenes, than think to receive any displeasure at
their hands, Yet for as much as guyle may be, where none can be mystrusted,
and deceyte hid, where great cause of frendeshyp is, me think, when tokens
of peace are taken away, and many suspytions of war left in their places,
love and dewetie bind all english men, both to say and do, all that they judge
to be for noble Englandes honor, welthe, and safety. I know right well, that
the office and part of all good men is, to desire peace, concord, and ernest
amity, between nation and nation, and yet if ennemies assaute us, it might
well be accounted extreme madness, and we more than mad, not to avoid our
own slaughter, yea though it were with the slaughter of many other. God gave
not(...) If men could as well see the danger in a body polytike, as they can
in a body natural, we should little need any commandment of god, to obey,
serve, and love our rulers. Little need any examples to provoke us to fight
our selves, and to leave them in safety, if we could perceive the loss that
a country susteyneth, when it loses a good governor. King David, where as
his people was goinge ageynste Absalome and other rebels, said to them, I
wol also go forth with you. No sir, says the people, ye shall not go, for
whether we fle or be slain, ye shall ever be able to have a new host. you
alone are counted for.x. M. men. It is a princis part, to se that his
subjects, have capitaynes, under whom they may show, what hearts they bear
to their country, what love they owe to their soueraygne: A princis office, to
provide, that the capitaynes have men well furnished, well appointed, mete to
do their feate. And as kings are bound to omyt nothing, that they judge woll
serve for the defense of their people, so is it the bounden duty of all
subjects, of what degree so ever they be, to serve their contreye in such
sort, as their prince and heed shall appoint them. He that redeth the
hystoryes of Ethenickes, and sees, what they did for their countries sake, can
not but think, that christen men little need any exhortation, to stir them
to the defense of their country. The examples of them ar so many, so
wonderful, that if nothing else moved us, shame me think were moughe to compel
men of any honest nature, not to be so far behind them, with whom they
would think great scorn to be compared. Let there be nothing else to inuit
us, to the love of it, beside their deeds, may not shame, if duty be not
able, to enforce men christened, men professynge Christ's religion, to show,
that they have learned as much by Christ, as ethenickes and pagannes took of
natural influence? when they had done what they could, spending bodies,
goods, and lives to, for their countries sake, how little was the reward
they looked for? what other thing sought they, than honest fame, of that their
so honest doing? Plutarche writes a strange storye of king Midas son.
There was, says he, in this kings realm Phrigia, a great gapynge of the
earth, much water swellynge out of it, hurlynge down as many houses as stood
any thing nyghe. Ancurus, the kings son, borne to inherit after his
father, a young man, married wonderful much to his contentation, hearing of
such as took upon them to know, how goddis ire might be lenified and
assuaged, that this breach of the earth would close again, if some one lept
into it, Ancurus I say, a frayde, lest some other should have prevented him,
kyssed the king his father and his wife, and forth with fell into that gapynge
earth. This breach did but little hurt, it had sunkyn but a few houses, and
all be it men thought it would have sunken moo, yet percase it might have gone
to gether again, though he had kept him self out of it. Undoubted it might
have done so, but love seeks no percases, ne uses any delays, where greatte
peril axeth present help. His death was very certain, and he wondrous
uncertain, whether by that his death, his country should be ryd of danger or
no.

Curtius that noble Romayne, did even upon like occasion, the like for his
countreye. If these men had been put to forbearynge a little money, their
country being in ieoperdy, their enemies assauting them, trow ye, they that
thus lost their lives, or rather bestowed them upon their countreye, would
have stagard at the gyuynge of a lyttel money?

The Lacedemoniens slew Xerxes ambassatour, contrary to the law of al nations,
which wol, both in time of peace and war, al ambassatours to come safe and
go safe. They were not long after, very sore plagued with a great pestilence,
which they took as sent for that their vltrage. And where as it was thought
the sickness encreasynge daily more and more, that some of them, must of
necessity goo to Xerxes, and there by their own death satisfy for him, whom
they had wrongfully slain, Spartius and Bulides.ii. very welthy citezens,
went thither, and there desired the hangeman, they might be trust up. These me^
passed lyttel of life where they had but a sclender hope, that their death
might profit their country. Gaius Marius dreamed, that if he did offer up his
daughter Calphurnia in sacrifice, he should overcome the Cymbriens, fierce and
cruel enemies to his country. In the morning, calling his dream to mind,
sorry to slay his daughter, soryer his country should stand in ieoperdie, he
took a knyfe, and followed his dream. Erecteus, a man wonderful much in love
with his daughter, upon like occasion did even the same. But to pass over
many an hundred hystories, worthy all eternal memory, I can not without much
my disprayse, suffer noble Themistocles, to lose his praise. This valiant
captain, not withstandyng he had done more honor to Athens his country,
then did almost any other, was in spyte of all his memorable victoryes,
banyshed Athens. undoubtedly if there were any cause, that might make a man
enmy to his country, Themistocles had sure a just cause, to be utter enemy
to Athens. He was than exyled, when there were few pryncis, few nations, unto
whom, for the defense of his countreye, he had not done some dyspleasure. The
choice was so evil, the shyftes so few, that he was constrained to seek
favor at Xerxes hand, king of the Persians whom he had not long before
discomfited in battayl. Which Xerxes in love with virtue, taken with noble
courage, yea though it were his enemy, could not but hyghly entertayne
Themistocles. To be short, there was no man less beholding to his country
than he, no man more bound to Xerxes than he was. The king lay soore upon
him, often prayenge him, that he would conducte his host ageynste the unkind
Atheniens. Themistocles stylle refused it, and where as the king would make no
end of entysyng him against his countreye, he neither finding in his heart
to do so, neither intending to deceive a king, whom he had found so
beneficial, thought it a less faut to rydde him self by poison, than to go
with an army against his native country.

Cretinus Magnesius his countreye being at war with king Mithridates, gave
his assent, that one callid Hermias his great enemy, should be captain
ayenste Mithridates, promisynge by solemn protestation, that he would in the
mean season banyshe him self his country, lest there might rise some tumulte
and busynes by their two factions. But Hermias, knowing Cretinus to be the
better capitayn of both, for the love he bare to his country, gave that honor
to his enemy, and after banished him self his country, till the war was at
an end. Percase the bishop of Rome is persuaded, that men here ar of two
sorts, some yet remaining his true friends. Reynard his man, may put this in
his heed. But I trust they both be deceived. I trust there be very few,
but they feel their knowledge much enlightened, sithe^s this good father, with
his trumpery and baggage departed hens, enforced to dispatche his wares in some
other markets of fools, Few I think, but being brought from such a sort
of errors, in to so many truths, truths that so do quiet all troubeled
consciences, but they find greatte causes, to be glad of the change. The
way, that was this many hundred years kept shut, is now, god and the kings
highness be thanked, laid open. God instilleth his faith into man's heart, by his
appointed ordinance, that is by worthy herynge of the gospel. All men, says
saint Paul, that call rightly upon the name of god, shall be saved. But how,
says he, can they call upon him, in whom they believe not? How can they
believe him, of whom they here not? how can they here of him, if no man preach
him? how can they preche him, that are not sent? so that we see by this
gradation, the only way to the knowelege of faith, to the styckynge unto
goddis promyses, is heryng his word. This way is laid open. knoweledge
approaches, errors are taking their vyage. The bishop of Rome, foreseing the
damages that ensue to him and his, by the coming forth of goddis word,
knowing also, how much his vantages may daily increase, if errors be
retained in all christen kyngedomes, does and wolle do what he can, to
ouerrunne this way, with a pestyferouse Poole, that flows out of course, that
seeks against nature, to destroy the heed, from whense it first did spring.
The bishop sees, if we walk in this way long, he must walk to that he
came fro, that is, to poverty, to preaching, to humilite, and to obeysaunce.
This is it, that wryngeth him, at this he fretteth, for this he sturreth all
these coals. They are little acqueynted with the bishop of Romes practices,
that think, he styrreth princes ayenste us, for any love or desire he has to
auaunce goddis honor. His hole acts declare him to mean al thing rather than
that. Who can believe, he would take such peynes, sustain such charges, to
seek our health and safety, when he treads them under his fete, at his own
doors, which feign would enter into our religion, and may not? He has
dwelling in his own city of Rome many, that much covet to be christened,
whom he wol in no case receive, except they forsake all their goods, and give
them hole unto him. I mean the poor jews, which are so spoiled of him,
when god gives them his greattest gifts, faith and affiaunce, that their
sins shall be forgyuen, that it would pytie an hethen heart, to se his
tyranny over them. If it please the holy gooste, to call any of them, to
Chrystis faith, this good father, starteth between them, and says there is a
plain text, except a man renounce all that he has, he may not be my
disciple. Is not this a good shepeherde, that woll not receive sheep, which are
strayed from the flock, except they give him money? A jew for money, is made
a right christian. And a right christian is taken for a miscreaunt, for a jew,
for a turk, if he refuse to give a pound for that is not worth a penye. This
good bishop loved us excedyng tenderlye, as long as we gave to him frankely
our silver. He gave us pardons plentuously, which brought us far from
purgatory, even the next way to hell, but now, that we se his chaffer is
naught worth, and therefore woll give naught for it, this good father, has
changed his affection, and is so far in love with our sowles, that he would
with sword seek for them in our bowels. I wol gra^te him for a while, we were,
as he and his are, in error, in blyndenes, if he loved us, as surely he would,
if he were our father, as he calls him self: if he loved us, would he seek
the destruction of our lives, we being in an euel belefe? ought he not rather,
if he were but a good christen man, to knele on his bare knees unto god, and
desire him, our bodies might keep our souls, while we were better instructed?
If we were in a wrong feythe, does not he slay our souls, if our bodies by
his means, be slain, er we turn? could he thus do, thus entende, if he
were gods vicar? If he loved our souls? if he sought to bring us to
salvation? Peter pence make Paul to do as he does. Our holy father enjoys
no longer our goods: this loss greueth him sore, and yet he fears thexample
worse than the damage. He is afraid, lest if god prosper us, that other
kings woll also pass as much of him, as our most noble king does. We be
gone from him to Christ, which says, Qui uenit ad me, non eiiciam eum
for as, He that comes to me, I woll not see him cast out of doors. Let our
good father, which in very deed is much meter to be a hogherde, than a
shepeherde of men, let him curse, until his tongue fall into hell, they shall
be blessed, that god blesses. Let him order his byndynge and losing, as lust
leads him, There is one, that woll one day, se his sawcye power tied shorter.
For what I pray you, is left for pride to challenge, when he ones takes upon
him to bind that, that god commands to be leuse, to leuse that that god in
any wise wolle have bounden? God wolle all subjects, pain of eternal
damnation, to obey their princis. This good interpreter of goddis will, when
affection, gain, or fear of loss wol, delyuereth all pryncis subjects from
the bonds, that god has knyt them in, and gives them pardon, that leave
their duty, that break goddis commandment, and curses all them that wol
not follow his malice, and withstand goddis pleasure. Peter and Paul took upon
them a power, and yet they granted it to be cancelled within certain
lymyttes, they went not out of their bonds, they would not pass their
rayles, but said, they had power to exhort men, power to edify, to
reconcyle, but no power to scatter, to spoil, to dystroy. This good father is
of an another schole, a student of Rome, taught in the consistory of Cardynals,
where though there be few good made, yet, there comes fewer good thither,
but they depart as evil, as they that be their readers. It is with them a gay
schole point, without any dread of god, to break that lovely bond, which
god has ordained and set in nature, to hold together, to preserve and
maynteyne a thing in this world for man's wealth and safety most needful,
ciuyle ordinauuce, obeysaunce of the members to the heed, of the subjects to
their sovereign. What thing is more beneficial unto man's life, then
polytike order, then mutual socyetie of men, knitte together in justice,
tempera^cie, modesty, and honest liberty, one to help and comfort an other.
oone to instruct and teach an other, in all things, but in especial in
matters belongyng to god, and such as maynteyne this socyetie? God ordained
kings, magistrates, and rulers, commaundynge them to be honored, even as
fathers are of them children. This is the first precepte of the second
table, wherein god sets a polycie, and teaches the works, necessary unto
man's life. He shewethe of all things this to be the first, that some rule,
and some obey. Obedyence undoubtedly is the knotte of al commonweals, this
broken they must needs run al heedlonge to utter destruction. God woll in
any case, subjects owe this obedience to their rulers, he woll they be
dettours of this, and never to cease the payenge of it. He requires not only
service of our bodies, to be at our princes commandment, but that our
hearts, honor and serve his hyghnes, with all love and feythfulnes. Mark how
this good Romish vicar, supplieth his masters office, he gives remission of
sins, to them that offend depeste in this precepte: and curses all them,
that hate not gods commandment. Good cause he can not have to do so, and yet
he knows, his thryft is paste, if gods commandments be kept, and his
curses not set by. Who would think, that gods vycar, could call princes,
that were goinge ayenste the turk, to turn their force upon christen
princes, Who would think, that he him self, could be of any good belefe,
being farther in love with turks, which seek nothing more then the utter
ruin of Christ's faith, then with us, that refuse with our money to
maintain his pride against god and his holy word. Errors have set his cheyre
alofte, he sees truth must needs abase him. He writes, he sends, he
calls, he cries for help unto all princes. If some of them, sedused by
false persuasio^, shall set upon us, because we have left Idolatry, driven away
deceytful Hypocrisy, that thus many years have lain lurkyng in celles, keeping
by force and craft the place of Christ's relygyon. When ever had England so
good a cause, to fight as now? When ever might we goo to field with better
hope of victory, then now? Were it possible, that they should have better
hearts fighting against religyon, ayenste gods word, and so against god him
self, then we, that fight for the mayntenaunce of all three? Can they have
better wylles, to lose bodies and souls, then we to save both? shall they
take pain, to come so far, to seek their own sorrow, and we not step out
of our doors, to defend our wealth, our country, our selves? have they, yea
can they have greater causes, to hate England, then we to love it? If they
pass not of gods wroth and vengiaunce, so that they may bring us into
captivity and bondage, shall not we, being assured of gods favor, as long
as we favor his word, his name, his glory, mete with these, not so much
ours, as gods ennemies? I must here say a thing, that I think woll make
a good sort of us angry at the least. Certes, if we be not, as one reported
us, it might make us upon oceasion, not only ready, but very desyreful, to
spend, yea though it were a good quantity of blood, in so honest a quarrel.

Not long since, a ientil ientilman, (I might say he was an ambassatour,
but then percase men would go nyghe, to guess whom I mean) made, at his
return home, this report of us, Thactyuitie of Englyshmen has been great, if
histories be true, but if I may judge by any conjectures, it is nothing so
now. I se neither harneyes, ne weapons, of manhood among them, they have been
of good hearts, couragyouse, bold, valiant in marciall feats: But those
English men are dead.

If we had none other cause to fight, being provoked with the assault of our
enemies, would not this contumely, this spytefull tale, make us show unto
such reporters, that as long as English bodies remayn in England, they shall
also find English stomachs, English hands, English hearts. We see very
cowardes can evil abide to be so called and taken: and are English men
nothing stirred, to be thus counted, and of them, that are in deed but very
dastardes? What thing had England ever, that it now lacks, bondage of the
proud tyrant of Rome laid apart? Were there ever at any time in England
goodlyer bodies, cleaner made me^, than there be at this day? Were there ever
mo things to set hearts in courage, tha^ there be at this hour? were there
ever mo rewacdes for virtue? mo? nay half so many, as there be now, sythens
England was England? were there at any time mo euydent signs of gods favor
toward us, than have been these many years?

We many now see, if we be not blynder than betels, why god suffered such a
number to rise in the North, and after to do no hurt to this realm, but
rather exceeding much good. For besides, that such were wieded away, as might
have done hurt, if our enemies had come betymes, how did that co^motion
furnisshe almooste all England, with weapons, with harneys, and other things
necessary for war? how sone were both the Sotherne and Northern men in a
redynesse, wantynge nothing fytte, either for men that intended hurt to
other, either for them that purposed their own safety? How many young
Ientylmen, that than were ashamed they could ride no better, ride well now? how
many, that than lacked almost all thing mete for a warry our, be now
furnyshed for all assayes? God undoubted did much for us, that of so evil a
thing, we received so many commodities. Harneys, bows, bylles, gunnes, with
the rest of the furnitures for soudiours, were prepared than. See the goodness
of god, that would them all to be prepared than, and all to be preserved hole,
sound, unhurt for a better season. They were coming, whether they dare come
on or no, we shall see: they were coming I say, against whom our bows
ought to be bente, to whose hedes our bills owe blows, into whose bosoms
our arowes ought to crepe. Pity it is, that men should be so mad, to covet
their own misery, rather than to suffer us in welthe. greatte pity to see, one
christen army against an other. But for as much as they seek to do us
iniurye, and we only to put of wrong, if it be offered, we need not doubt,
but he woll be with us, for whose cause we be compelled to fight. They can not
be to few, that have god on their side. They have a feire bend of men, that
have a good cause, a good quarrel to stand in. I wol for a season imagine us to
be the weker side, fewer in noumber, of less power than our adversaries are, I
wol not yet speak of the feats, that English men have done in battayles.

Well, we be not so many as our enemies are, what if we be fewer, yea and man
for man of much less might than they are? May not the sondrye promyses of
god, the manyfold hystories of scripture, which prove him just and true of
his promise, make us little to pass, of what number and strength so ever they
be? who so dwells under the shadow of the almighty, him, as David says,
god covers with his wings, and keeps safe under his feathers. I know says
he, the lord helps his anointed, and even from heaven hereth them. Some
trust in charyottes, some in horses, but we, in calling upon the lord. God
can, and often times does pyne man and beast, even in the mids of all plenty.
God when his will is, fedeth, where no food is to be found. And as
folyshenes, when him lusts, confounds the wits of the wise, so weakness,
where god sets to his hand, works wonders, and sturdy strength stands
in no stead. It is the lord, says Daniel, that on high rules the
kyngedomes of men, gyuyng them to whom he woll. God can as well be no god, as
not true of his promise. He says, who so honors me, him wol I make
honorable. In an other place, the same god says, speaking of king Dauyd,
because he has set his love upon me, I woll se him rydde from al his
troubles, I wol defend him, why so? it follows, he has known my name, he
seeks my glory: and therefore wham so ever he calls upon me, I woll here
him. yea I am with him in all his calamities, and wol deliver him from them, I
woll set him higher in honor, send him long life, and show him his
salvation.

God makes not this promise unto king Dauyd alone, but unto all kings, that
hartyly seek his glory, for as god promised that, unto him, upon
consideration, so fyndinge the cause, in any other prince, for which he bound
him self to be good unto king Dauyd, he falls not to perform now, that he
than promised. We have plentiful examples of this. God suffered the Moabites
and Ammonites, to set upon good king Iosaphat, to trouble him with war. This
good king complained, and made his moan. unto whom I pray you? unto the
lord, from whens comes all help, all aid, and succoure. What said he?
even that that all princes, troubled with to great a force, ought to say, he
said thus, The Moabites, the Ammonites, the inhabitants of Seir, are come in
battle against us, wolt not thou our god, se them judged, se them punished? We
have no might against this great nombre, that sets upon us, we wot not what
to do, but our eyes, o lord, be cast upon the. The lord straight hard his
prayer, putting in Iezaiels mouth these words that follow. Thus says the
lord unto you, be not a frayde, or faynte hearted, by reason of this greatte
multitude: For the war is not yours, but Gods. On the morrow, king
Iosaphat, after his coming forth toward his enemies, said in this wise to his
army: It is not your parts, at the least it shall little neade, that ye
fight in this quarrel, come forth, stand, and behold the help of the lord,
which is with you, fear not, let not your hearts fail you. Harken unto me
Judah, and ye inhabitours of Jerusalem. Trust the lord our god, and so shall
ye continue, believe his prophets, and then shall ye prosper. When he had said
thus, he commanded his singing men, with this song to laud god. Praise ye
the lord, for he is gracious, his mercy endures for ever. While they were thus
gyuing lauds unto god there rose a sedition among their ennemies, which
ceased not, till they were al slain, not one left alive.

Amasias prepared a great host, supposing through the multitude and
strength of his army to vanquysshe his enemies. The man of god (as they
called him) came to Amasias, and said, sir let not the army of Israel goo
with the, for the lord is not with Israel, neither with any of the house of
Ephraim. If thou will neades have them, make thy self as strong to batteyl
as thou canste, thou shall se, god will make the fall before thine enemies. Here
Amasias commandynge them of Ephraim to return home again, went with his own
host, a small nombre, and slew.x. M. of his enemies, and took other.x. M.
alive, whom the army of Judah, carried up to the top of a rock, and so hurled
them down.

King Josias, with all goodlye reverence, took upon him the defense of true
religion, the maintenance of true worshippynge of god, he beat down the
Idols, he cut down their woods, and distroyed their hyl aulters. All princes
about him feared him, none so hardy as to offer him battle, princes, had
learned by long experyence, how lyttel greatest power serves ayenste them,
whom god defends.

Ezechias a godly prince, of feruente zeal, still occupied in clensynge his
realm of idolatrye, was greuousely assauted, by a pusant host of Sennacherib
the emperor of the Assirians, in so much that he was required by him, to
yield up Jerusalem. Ezechias turned him from the help of me^, to the aid of
god, whom he entierly besought, that Sennacherib might be an example to all
empyres and kyngedomes, that the only god of the Hebrews, was the true god.
he had straight comfort. God said unto him, Sennacherib shall not come into
the city of Jerusalem, he shall cast no darte into it. etc. The same night
the aungelle of the lord went into the Assirians tents, and slew about an.
C.lxxxviii. M. of them. Thus Sennacherib was feign to return home again,
where prayeng to his Idolle, two of his own sons slew him.

In these exaumples, who sees not, how steadfastly god stands with kings
that stand with him, how he stylle helps, when all man's help is paste? Had
not Mardocheus be^ hanged, if god had not kept the king wakyng? Who would have
thought, Daniell could have escaped? how incredible is it to reason, that
Abram, having but.iii. C. and.xviii. servants, should vanquysshe.iiii.
kings, with all their force and power? how vnfaythfulle are they, on the other
side, that hearing god say unto him, fear not Abram, I am thy protector,
thy reward shall be great out of measure, woll not think, he should have
conquered an hole world, if it hole had come ayenste him? God often proves his
elect, sendynge them many soore brontes, he leaves none undefended, that
constantlye put their affiaunce in him. How often was that noble capitayn
Moses, in gretest perils, daungiers, and distresses? Might not reason have
brought him in fulle despair, when he caryenge the people of Israel from
Aegypte, had at his back a mighty, a cruel enemy, and before him the magne
see? Moses douted nothing, but that the sees would make him a dry pathe to
conueye his host by. They did so, of ragynge waters, they became quiet
walls, standing still on both sides, gyuyng safe passage, to the Israelites,
and abiding proud Pharaos coming, whom with all his host they swalowed up,
not leaving one alive. It is as Hieremie says, Blessed is he, that puts
his trust in the lord. God says even as much by his prophet Esaye, I am the
lord, says he, who so puts his trust in me, shall never be confounded.

What troubles suffered good Iosue, Moses successor? What battayles sustained
he, before he could drive the.vii. wicked nations out of the land of
promission? and yet he knew, god could not deceive him, which said, As I was
with Moses, so wolle I be with the, never forsakynge ne leaving the. Wherefore
his ennemies vanquysshed, he conducted his people into the land of Canaan,
maugrey the malice of all those fierce nations.

Certes, who so is leadynge his subjects to the knowledge of goddis word, to
the workynge of his will, may well assure him self, that god woll assyste him,
though that the tyrant of Rome, accompanied with a. M. legions of dyuels,
bestow all their strength and malice, to the hynderaunce of so godly a
purpose. David, being driven out of Jerusalem by his son Absalom, and
such as rebelled with him, brake his grief unto god, not doubting, but he
should come again to his right well enough. If he nothing mystrusted, to
recover Jerusalem; being lost, and in the hands of his son, whom a great
part of his realm, much favored, should we think it an hard matter, to
keep ours from them, that we all have greattest causes to hate? If they trust
in a traitor, that can do nothing, but utter his own malice and folyshenes,
unto whom all examples of scripture, thretten a shameful end, shall we, having
a prince our capitayn, unto whom god byndeth us to owe all duties, whom god
also promises to defend, not make this trayterouse Cardynalles bloody hat,
cover a bloody pate? Might not th examples of Chore, Dathan, and Abiron,
preach to him, and all that follow him, some strange kind of death? Absaloms
father much desired, that his son might escape vnslayne, commaundynge his
capitayns and soldiers, in any case to save him alive: his father would feign
have had it so, but god would none of it. David said, Save my son Absalom.
Ioab, chief capytayne, hard his commandment, and yet when he saw him hang
between the bows, by the hear, he could not but run him through with his
lance? King David wept and wyshed to have boughte his sons life, with the
loss of his own. But god that bears no such blind affection, woll allow
no such change. The father forgave his part, god would in no wise remytte
his. If deeds may speak, do not so many exaumples, as we have had a late,
preach shameful death to all traitors, to al rebels? Can any man think, but
that Poole hasteneth a pase, to that that goddis right judgment drives him
unto? Come not all they to their confusion, that come to aid a traitor
against his country, against religion, against god? Whom I pray you, can he
bring with him, but such as English men in time paste have had fair days
upon? If they were wont to leave their own countries, at the coming of a
small English host, shall we al pass of a few of them? I have hitherto
handeled the matter, as though we were even as that gay ambassatour reported
us: But now I wolle a little show, what they have won at our hands in time
paste, and how we are now as able as ever we have been, to withstand them, they
never weaker than now, never less able to invade us then now. for as our
cause is able to enstrengthen al weakness, so is their quarrel able to make
weapons faule out of the hands of men strongeste. We may say, our guide is
not oone, that being not called, took this power upon him, he is our king,
our ruler, by the will and ordinance of god, he is goddis minister, unto whose
charge god has committed this realm, the government is his, by goddis
appointment, our duties, to obey and serve him by gods commandment. What
may our enemies say, to comfort them in their vyage? we have taken this
iourneye, by the advise of an arrant traitor, we have a rebel to our
captain, we go where god has appointed us nothing to do. How many mo
things may combre them? how few put them in heart to enter among us? what
nation can come hither, but we may take our selfs, god being but
indyfferente, abler to defend our realm, then they to invade it? I woll
take record of none of our own cronicles. Let us beleaue but our enemies, let
it be true that they say? May we not have better hearts to encounter with the
proudest of them, than they to land in our realm? Read Froysarte, a french
writer. who would almost think it possible, that he writes of us? It were
right expedient. that young Ientyll men did often read their fathers noble
acts, whereby undoubtedly they may both be encouraged, to the like, and also
know the weakness of their enemies. We can not be worse matched, then we have been, and that at sundry times. We that then did so well, our quarrel often
times being but for a money matter, can we think now to do amysse, fighting
for the defense of religion, the restorynge of gods word, the mayntenaunce
of gods honor? Who can read the battle of Cressy, and not conceive
wonderful hope of victory, when we be any thing egally matched? If noble
Edward the third, could vanquishe the french king, and almost all the flower
of France, they being, as their own writers testify.viii. to oone of ours,
what shall noble Henry the.viii. do, whom god, by all ways, seeks to
enhaunce? Ought not the battle of Poyters to remain fresh in our memories,
where an handful of English men ouerthrewe all the force of France? for as
their story says, there durst none tarry from that field, but such as neither
regarded honor ne shame. The french king was taken there, and well nere all the nobles of France slain. The battle of Alroye in Britayne, may not be
forgotten, our countreye wanne there no small honor. For albeit the french
men and Britons, ordered them self in their array wonderful prudently, and in
their fight very manfully, yet were they all slain, or dyscomfyted. We have
also sometime sought honor in Spain, and found it very fortunatly. Did not
noble prince Edward discomfet king Henriche, usurper of the crown of Spain,
vanquyshe there, both the french men and Spaniardes, and settle king Peter
in his right and room ageine? Where did the hardye hearts and manly couragies
of the English men better appear, than in the battle on the sea before Sluse
in Flaunders? the fight was fierce and terrible, and our men sore matched, for
there were.iiii. of them to one english man, and they very expert men of
war upon the sea. There was no place to flee, none to recule to, without
loss of all. Here the noble Englyshemen bare them self so valyantly, that
they got the vyctorie, utterly discomfetynge and sleinge all the french men
and Normans. We may forget the battle of Agingcourt, but they woll remember
and are like never to forget, with how small an army, that most prudent and
victorious king Henry the fyfte, vanquysshed that huge host of french men. How
much to al our comfortes, may we rejoice in the memory of the battle, which
most noble and vyctorious king Henry the eyghte, called the field Des
esprons, that is the field of spurs, because both the french men, as that
day, left all their defense, and used nothing but their spurs, fleinge one
in an others neck, and we also compelled to use nothing so much as our
spurs, in pursuing them, that so swiftly fled, in following them, that in
no case would abide, in riding after them, that so fast ran away? His hyghnes
was than almost with all the nobility of England, yea with all the flower and
force of our nation in France: and yet the king of Scotts found enough at
home, to defend little England. He came, when our strength was out of the
realm, he came unlooked for, with great prouisyon, with a puisant army. His
chance might teach other pryncis, rather to govern well, that they have,
thanne to seek, that they can not come by. We that have thus ben used to
victories, often beaten our ennemies, of what nation so ever they be, can we
now look for less than great and high honor at their hands? have not they as
good cause, to be afraid of us, of whom they have received so many damages?
as we to go with all courage against them, whom we have so often put to flight, so
often shamed, so often put to the worse? had we then stomachs, and shall we lack
now? had we than cause to do valiantly, and find we none now? was there ever
prince, that did, or could better reward the service of his subjects, than
our most bountiful soueraygne? have not all we, that be Sotherne men, good
cause to show our self hearty, courragious, valyaunte, saying that we know,
the Northen men, woll do what they can, to make a large mendes, for their laate
fault? I doubt not, but they have much desired, some such occasyon, to
testyfye their hearts and fydelytie, to the kings hyghnes. They have seen,
how mercyfully his grace gave them their lives, which the laws challenged as
forfayte and lost. We may all trust, they wolle well declare to his
highness, that he rather lent them lives, than gave them any. And that they
have them in store ready to render them, when so ever his honor, his cause,
his commandemente, shall require them. They being thus set, can we Sothern
men, come any foot behind them? Shall they be gladder to wype away such
blemyshe, as tell upon them, by the crafty seducemente of such as are now
worthyly dead, than we desyrefull, to increase his gracis benevolence toward
us? I trust, as we be one realm, so our enemies shall find us of one heart,
one fydelitie, one allegiance. As god help me, even in the time of the
insurrection, I half wyshed, that some our enemies had set upon us. I did not
alone lament, that when both parties were so furnyshed to battle, there was
so unmeet a match, for men to show the^ self hardy. I had red, and often
remembered the wise answer of Scorio to his soldiers. His host hard that
the Romans were at dissension, and would needs have had him, to set upon
them, while they were so at variance. Nay, not so, says Scorio, this were
even the next way to make them agreed. And when his soldiers, would make no
end of desiring him to go toward Rome, he caused a couple of mastiues to be
set to gether by the ears, and even when they were hardest at it, he in
the sight of all his host, showed unto the dogs a wolf, which as soon as
the dogs saw, they straight way, were at one, and both followed the wolf.
Men often times fail of their purpose, and turn things quyte contrary to
that they intended. There was a good wife, for so we call them that be married,
which being very weary of her husband, thought to dispatche him by poison.
This woman a frayde, lest one poison would not serve her torn, took two,
thinking she thereby should quyckelye and spedelye have wroughte her feate.
She was deceived, for where the one poison alone had slain him, the strife of
the one with the other saved him alive. If her cruelty had been less, she had
surely brought her purpose to effect. Poison has put me in mind, here to
tell a story done in our time, not long sythens, by a noble man of Rome. I
shall little digress from my purpose, for ye may also learn by this storye,
that men often times have great hurt, where they look for great pleasure. There
is in Italye a ientil man, whom for his virtue and noble qualities, the holy
college of Cardinals, by intretie of Paul their bishop, have made capyteyne
of the church: his name is Petrus Aloisius, a branch commen of a good
stock, as ye shall well perceive by his fruits. This great captain, by
chance had to pass by the bishop of Phanes house. The bishop hearing of
this, and glad he had occasion given him, to offer kyndenes unto such an
estate, met signior Petro Aloisio, and offerid him his house. The capytayne
of the Romyshe church, was lightly persuaded, to lodge with the bishop. the
bishop interteyned him, as hyghely as he could deuyse. sparynge neither
labor, in prouydynge all such deynties as might make his chere the better,
ne cost in dressyng of them. When supper and bankets were done, the time of
rest well paste forth, the bishop brought his guest to his chamber, where
he desired him of pardon, that his chere was no better, trusting though
there were nothing mete for such a personages interteynment, that yet he
would accept his good heart and will, which feign would his fare had been
higher, and is much sorry it was not so. And there he made him the courteyse
offer of the Italyan, desiring him, if there were any thing in all his house,
that his fantasy stood to, that he would think it his own, and so to take
it. And that he, his body, his heart, and all his, was at signior Aloisius
commandment. I knew the bishop wonderful well: he was undoubted, as well
learned a young man, as few were in Italy. His style so pure, he in writynge so
elegante and eloquent, that I dare say, there were not.x. in all Italye, not
two of his age, that could match him. The capytayne, after the bishop had
bydden him good night, called.iii. or.iiii. of his men to him, telling them
all of the bishops offer, saying, I like well this part of the offer, that
his body is at my commandemente, I intend to morrow in the morning to prove,
whether he be a man of his word or no. If I can not obtain by fair
means, I intend to use your help, and have it by force. Wherefore be not
far of at his coming hither. The bishop came in the morning, to give him
good morrow, he did so. The captain thanked him much for all his kyndnes,
and most of all, that he had made him the night before so ample an offer,
saying, though there be many things here, which I fansy well, yet I purpose
to take that part of your offer, where ye said your person is at my
commandment. Certes I woll sease upon that, and leave all other things to
you. The bishop sore astonished, knew what his abomynable demand meant. and
said: Sir I know ye can little fansye, things so fylthy, mine age makes
your wisdom to attempt me, thereby to have a proof of mine honesty. No
Sangue di dio, says the captain, I mean ernest, and I pray you so take it.
The bishop now no more astonyed, but even heart angry, made him a sharp
answer. Sir says he, though I have not made you such chere, as I would, yet
have I made you as good as I could have done, though the emperor had been in
my house. for such my good will, I little thought ye would have offered me so
great vylanye, and in mine own house. but set your heart at rest, I woll be
torn in pieces, rather than you, or any living creature, shall make me willyngly
to fall into so brute and unnatural a sin. What trow ye the capitayn did
here? like a capitayn of that church I warrant you. His men were at hand,
which enforced the bishop, spite of all his striuinge, to keep his promise.
How happy is Aloisius, that has such fautes, as none his adversary dare
charge him withal? a thing to be wondered at, men can not tell without shame,
that they do nothing ashamed of. The bishop said, Sodom and Gomorra sunk for
this sin, woll god se it ever unpunished in the? though god differ
punishment, intendyng them pain everlasting, whose offenses are greatter than
any punysheme^t here may be thought mete for them, woll not the emperor one
day se laws made for such syn executed? I trust to se his majesty, er it be
long, I trust to be hard, and nothing doubt, but he woll se this vltrage,
this vylanye, that thou haste done me, punished. I woll make an end of so
filthy a matter, and trouble honest ears no lengar. This captain of the
church, provided so, that within iiii. or.v. days after, the bishop was
poisoned. Would ye not think this graffe came of good sire? his mother was
brought a bed, long er she were married, and his father is now bishop of
Rome. Trow ye, the church of Rome, whereof such a father is the head, such
a son the capitain, is not a dear darling unto Christ? Would he let her be
governed of the one, defended of the other, if he loved her not excedyngely?
Does not god rather admonyshe all princis, how little he sets by this
strompet of Babylon, whom he has left in such men's hands? Here I must needs
tell, that that I have hard Reynolde Pole, the Cardinal often say, and not I
alone, but many mo, whom I can name, men of honest credyte. This Pole, than a
perle of his country, now, a foul pocke to it, went to Rome at his first
being in Italy, thinking to have leyne there half a year or more. God let me
never speak, ne write after this day, If he has not said, and that very
often, where I have been in presence, that when he had been there.iii. or.iiii.
days, and seen the abhomynation of the cardinals, bishops, and other their
officers, with the detestable vices of that city, he could in no wise tarry
there any le^ger. He could not than abide.v. days in Rome. and now, Ambition
be thanked, he has this always in his mouth, Roma mihi patria est, Rome is my
native countreye. Has not Rome a wonderful virtue in it, that thus sone can
bring men at one with vice, in love with sin and abhomynation? If he a
traitor, forsakes his countreye, changes England for Rome, fyghting for
them, ayenste us, shall we not stycke to our country, not fight against al men,
in defense of England? They think to work us much displeasure. they may
chance to make the rod for us, and we to beat them. Aman set up a peyer of
gallows, to hang Mardocheus upon: Mardocheus even by that occasion was made
next unto the king in honor, and Aman trust up. There is a pretty greek
Epigram, which says, A poor felawe, being in great necessity, much
troubeled for lack of pence, gat him an halter, and thought therewith to have
made an end of his mysery. by chance, as he sought a tree, he found an
hourde of money. council here he neaded none, to persuade him to change his
purpose. No, he forthwith laid the halter where he found the money. But he
that had lodged his treasure there, not long after coming thither, and
finding it gone, and an halter at hand, thought the use of his money paste
him, and so used the halter. The bishop of Rome thinks to have a great pray
here, The cardinal thinks so to, they may chance to seek hurdes, and find
halters. They trust by this vyage, to win their spurs, perchance they may
lose their boots to. At the beginnynge, who could think, but the lasle
commotion would have done exceeding much hurt to England? God ever be thanked,
we could scase have wisshed it better. assuredly, we might wondrous evil have
lacked it. Mo exaumples might be brought, but the coming of this
trayterouse cardynall, the commodities that I trust woll ensue of it, shall
make us mystrust few things hereafter, except we become chaungelynges, and
for a tryfle leave that we have hitherto godly followed. The devil in an other
world might play him, He had men enough, that wrought for him, he then was at
rest, but no we he sees his kingdom is assauted, and that he must either lose
a great portion of his dominion, or else in time besturre him. he hates always
good princis and magistrates, never ceassynge to stir up sedition upon them,
to bring in ennemies, to interrupte that they go about. It is very true, that
saint Cyprian says, The devil, Christis adversary, besieges no tents so
sone, pitcheth battle with none so soon, as with the soldiers of Christ.
Men in errors, men drowned in lusts, in noughtynesse, after he has thrown
them down, and made them full his, he co^temneth and passes by them, nothing
a frayde lest they starte. But those he sekethe to hurl down, whom he sees
stand fast. Wherefore, saying no men are more troubled, none ofter assauted
with greater perils, then they that intend to do truly the office of Christen
magistrates, it is exceeding needful, that a kings reason, power, heart, and
mind be well defended with the shield of gods word, with affyaunce in his
promyses, that thereby he may stand sure, against all storms of this world,
ayenste all surges of frowning fortune, ayenste al violent force, not only of
men, but of dyuelles. God be praised, we have a prince of invincible courage,
whose heart god has so environed with his graces, so furnisshed with his
gifts, so strengthened with the assured affyaunce of his promyses, that he wol
venture al thing rather then the loss of his subjects sowles. He woll rather
be at utter enmity with all princes, the^ suffer the knowledge of gods word,
to be taken out of his realm. His highness woll in no case, his subjects
commit any fornication hereafter with that abominable hoar, which hitherto
these many years, has soused al kyngedomes in the dragges of Idolatry, of
Hypocrisy, of al errors. His grace wol, their lowsy marcha^tes utter no more
of their broken ware among us. And as his highness wol our souls be out of
peril, so I pray you, what king, sythens kings ruled first this realm of
England, has made greater provision for the saftie of our bodies? Is it
possible, that any his gracis subject, can refuse pain, when his hyghnes
rydeth about from haven to haven, from castle to castle, days and nights
deuysynge all the ways, that wit can invent, for our assurance? What
charges is his grace at, for the fortifienge of Caleys, Hammis, Guysnes, for
the repayring of Dover haven, Dover castle, for building bulwarks in the
Downs, bulwarks at Folkestone. What a Realm woll England be, when his grace
has set walls, according to the diches, that run round about us? England
wol than be much liker a castle, than a realm. His grace has devised a
bulwark in the Camber, a bulwark at Calshottes point, a bulwark at the East
cow, a bulwark at the West cow. His highness fortifieth Portismouth,
Southampton, Weymouth, Portland rode, Torre baye, Plymmouthe haven, Dermouth
haven, Falmouth haven. This ones done, what enemy, be he never so strong, wol
think, he can invade England on those parties of it? Now, that ye may know,
his highness cares for all, and not for some, he fortifyeth Barwycke, both
town and castelle, Carliel, town and castle, setting men a work for the
repayring of Warke castle, Bambrough castle, Alnwicke castle, Scarborowe
castle, Powmfret castle, fortifieng also Kyngston upon Hul, Grimisbye upon
Humber. Lynne also shall be made strong, Yermouth rode fortified, two bulwarks
set up at Lestoffe. Alborne Hoppe in Norfolk, Langers point, Orwell haven,
are to be fortifyed.ii. block houses to be made at Tilbery. iii. blockehouses
at Graves end, which with many other fortresses and munitions, for this our
country, his grace woll shortly with all speed, to be set forward. If his
highness thus diligentely watch, that we may safely sleep, spend his treasure
thus largely, that we may surely keep our goods, were it not our great shame,
to suffer his highness to travail alone? Is it not our parts, in this oone
thing, even to contend with his grace, that is, to love his honor, his
prosperytie, more than he can love our wealth and safety? We might, yea we
ought to strive with his grace, and to desire to overcome him, in loving our
contreye. and his highness goinge before, to the defense of England, can we
tarry behind? Where his highness is content to spend all his treasure, content
to venture him self for our saftie, can we be so unnatural, as not to
acknowledge such goodness of our soueraygne? can we acknowledge it, and not
think our selves bound to spend bodies, goods, for his hyghnes preservation,
though we should receive thereby none other commodity? can we being in most
ieoperdie our selves, not besturre us? Were it not our utter rebuke, that his
highness should love us better the^ we our selves? we must not think, that we
fight with ennemies, which wol be content with victory, if they get the over
hand of us: they seek our blood, they covet our destruction, and if they
spare some, yet the sack, the spoil shall touch all men. The turk suffers
men, taken in war, to keep their religion, to serve god, as his laws woll.
The bishop of Rome, much crueller then Turk or Sarase^, thinks his victory
worth nothing, except he overthrow gods word, except he drive out right
religion, except he utterly bannyshe Christ. Honor is offered us, and such
honor undoubtedly as never came to our nation, if we lust to take it. I woll
end with a prophecy, not lately commen out of wales, but found in scripture,
in the.iiii. book of Esdras. There is mention made of a proud Egle, that so
much took upon her, that al princes, all kingdoms were trodden under her fete.
What and whom this Egle figureth, we can not doubt, if we wol believe gods
own exposycion. It sygnyfieth says he, the same kyngedome, that Daniel saw
in his visyon, which was the kingdom of Antichriste, the reign undoubtedly
of the bishop of Rome. All things spoken here of the Egle, agree with him as
just as may be. This bird. says the text, made all the earth afraid, al men
trembled, at her sight, all thing became subject to it, no man, a long season
so hardy, as to gain say her. But at the last says Esdras, Ecce Leo,
concitatus de sylua rugiens, Loo, there came out of a wood a Lion a great pase,
roaring a loud, and said to this saucye and mysproude Egle, I woll speak with
the, the lord has to say to the, and woll say thus, Art not thou he, that
have overcome the other my creatures, which I would have had reigned in my
world? Art not thou he, that have ruled the world in much fear and
tremblyng, holdinge it in naughtiest labor, in works most fond, dwelling in
all parts of the earth, by deceyte craft and treachery? Art not thou he, that
have judged the earth, non in ueritate, in falshode, not in truth? Thou haste
troubled the mylde sort, and hurt them that loved quietness, peace, and rest,
me^ that sought and taught the ease of troubeled consciences. Thou have loved
liars, and destroyed the habitations of them, that brought forth good fruit,
setting idle and drane bees in their places. Thy spiteful handlynge of the
world, the contumely thou diddeste unto all princes, is ascended up even to
the syghte of the hygheste. Thy pride is seen. God has looked upon this proud
time, and Lo, says this courageous Lion, his time is at an end, the
mischefes of this Egle are almooste at a point. Wherefore, says the Lion,
appear thou no more Egle, neither thine horrible wings, nor thy mischeuous
hedes, nor thy rauenyng claws, ne thy body which is holly compacte of
vanities, al vain, the Lord cries to the, Always: the Lion, having a man's
voice, as the text says, byddeth the trudge, and why? the cause straight
follows, That thou ones gone, the earth may be refreshed: that thy kyngedome
ones fallen, men may turn again to freedom, delivered from thy vyolent
power: that thy baggage cast out of men's hearts, they may hope, to receive
his judgment, his mercy, which made the earth, and all the dwellers upon it.
While the lusty Lion spoke these words, the heed of the Egle began to stand a
wrye, the wings were no more seen, her kyngedome waxed weak, feeble, full of
travail, tumulte, and business, much a do to keep it on foot, all the Egles
body was set a fire.

That proud Rome is mente by this proud Egle, the text is plain, the
circumstaunces are such, that though it were in doubt, we might easyly
apply the Egle to the Romyshe bishop, and to none other. Now by the Lion, who
is meant, the text says nothing. What if I contend, noble HENRY the. VIII.
to be this Lion? May I not have many conjectures, to lead me this way? many
things even taken of the same place, to make other men think so to? First,
as the Egle has always ben the Romans badge, so has kings of England ever
more given the Lion in their arms: so that it can so well be applied to none
other prince. The Venetians give the Lion, but their Lion comes not out of
the wodde, but out of the water. They dwell in water, our Lion fetches all
his force next unto god, out of the woddes, our bows, our arrows, are
fetched out of the woddes. Our Lion, when he rangeth toward his enemies, well
declares to them, that he comes from the wood. But to go somewhat nygher to
our purpose: Who has told the rauenynge Egle, this terryble tidings? Who
but HENRY the VIII. our noble and courageous Lion? This Lion, says the text,
is a wind, which the lord has kept in store, for these later days, both
to toss the Egle and her birds, and also to refreshe, refrigerate, and
comfort our consciences, that so long a season have labored, panted, and
boiled in fynne, still in fear of hell. Has not our noble king, with sundry
blastes of the spirit of god, all to rent this popyshe power? al to shaken his
neste? his seat? his high trone? this wind has hurled such duste into the
Egles eyes, that her heed begins to wax gyddy, her wings to carry her, she
woteth not whither, her claws, to let fall such prays, as she thought to
have brought to her nest. This wind, our lords praise be it, has blown us
out of this cruel Egles reach, we feel no more her sharp talendes, which
in time past, so griped our hearts, so seasoned upon our souls. Our countreye
is refreshed, our hope fyxed in the judgment of the lord, our affiaunce
set fast in goddis mercy. Has not our courageous Lion, our pleasant wind,
blown up a blast, that refreshed us all, when he by his prechers, by his
proclamations, brake the cheynes, that our souls lay tied in, slaves and bond
to Romish tyranny? Came there not a gay cole to our hearts, when our Lion said,
Hens proud Egle, appear no more here in England? Went there not sundry great
lumpes of heaviness from our hearts, wha^ we that were wont to dread nothing so
much, as the mysprowde judgment of the Egle, begun to refuse mercy and
forgyuenes at his hand, and to seek it of him, which made us, and is mercy it
self, and the only forgyuer of sins? Is not this a sweet breathe, that our
Wind powers upon us all? Be not these pleasant blastes? This wind is cited
to arise, cyted by him, that rules all wyndes, in the.iiii. chapyter of
Cantica canticorum, by these words, Up thou north wind, blow upon my
gardeyn, that the smell thereof may be carried on all sides, that my derely
beloved may come thither, and eat of the fruits, that grow therein. Is not
our wind up, according to his call, has not he well blasted his commission
abroad? has not he told the Egle of her rauenynge? of her spoil, and
slaughter? If he has done thus, and no prince but he, why may not we think,
that noble HENRY the VIII is the Lion, the wind ordained and sent by god, to
toss this wicked tyraunte of Rome, to blow him out of al christen regions? Se
ye not, to what honor god calls our nation? may not we rejoice, that god
has chosen our king, to work so noble a feate? God says, a Lion shall tear
this tira^tes auctorite in pieces. God says, a wind shall shake him out of his
cheyer: shall we not think, this Lion, this wind, to be our soueraygne, our
king, Which first of all princes, durst take him by the bosom? Let this
yelling Egle approach toward us, let her come with all her birds about her,
let a traitor carry her standard: does not god say, her wings shall be cut,
her kyngedome wax feeble, the Lion wax strong, and save the residue of gods
people, filling them full of joy and comfort, even while the world endures.
Let us, let us therefore work lustely now, we shall play for ever hereafter.
Let us fight this one field with english hands, and english hearts,
perpetual quietness, rest, peace, victory, honor, welthe, all is owers.


