Chrysanaleia: THE GOLDEN FISHING: Or, Honor of FISHMONGERS.

Applauding the advancement of M. JOHN LEMAN, Alderman, to the dignity of Lord
Mayor of LONDON.

Taking his Oath in the same authority at Westminster, on Tuesday, being the
29. day of October. 1616.

Performed in hearty love to him, and at the charges of his worthy Brethren,
the ancient, and right Worshipful Company of FISHMONGERS.

Devised and written by A. M. Citizen and Draper of LONDON.

Printed at London by George Purslowe. 1616.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful, Judicious, and truly generous Gentlemen, the Master,
Wardens, and Assistants, of the ancient and worthy Company of FISHMONGERS.
IT were a mighty injury (in my poor opinion) that you, being the main
Ocean, feeding all the riuolets of this painful employment, and directing the
course of any current that way tending: should not receive the just retribution
and duty, which (by instinct of nature) all Rivers else send duly to their
nursing Mother the Sea. Therefore Gentlemen, J do but send you that, which in
right and equity belongs unto you, the Patronage and protection of this Orphan
child, begotten in your service, bredde up hitherto by your favor and kind
cherishing, and not despayring now to dye, through your want of regard. It is
your own, welcome it in love and acceptance, and J have as much as I desire,
and will study hereafter to deserve.

Yours in any service, AN. MVNDY.

Chrysanaleia: THE GOLDEN FISHING.
Or, Honor of Fishmongers.
I Find it faithfully recorded in Authors of reverend Antiquity, that when
Godfrey, Duke of Boloigne (being chosen General of the Christian Army, for
the freedom and deliverance of Jerusalem from Saladine, and al his other
heathen miscreants;) Every Christian Kingdom did aid him with their best
assistance: because it was a business to Gods high honor, and general
comfort of poor distressed Christians. As from all other Kingdoms, so from
England (among other bands of worthy men) went the Merchants (trading in fish,
oil, flax, silks and other commodities) most frequently then termed
Fishmongers, and the Goldsmithes, then in a late begun league of love and
amity, by many friendly helps and furtherances each to other, in diverse
dangerous adventures, as well on the Seas, as the land, no men being more
forward in those affairs, and in those times then they.

After the most glorious victory obtained against the Pagans, and Jerusalem
regained, they joined together in as glorious an action, of helping to build
the ruined Wall again, from the Watergate of comfort, to the Sheepe-gate of
innocence, or holiness. And so much the rather, because there was then much
necessity of their pains and endeavor, not only (by Fishing and Shipping) to
supply the daily wants of the Soldiers: but also for bringing Gold and Silver
thither, for beautifying Gods City and Temple.

And as this league of love and fellowship began upon so good an occasion: So
they continued, and declared it in Englands Jerusalem, our famous Metropolis
London, building the Wall and two North Gates therein, Moore-gate, and
Criples-gate, as yet their Arms and Memories on them do sufficiently testify.
The one performed by Thomas Faulconer, Fishmonger, and the other by William
Shaw Goldsmith.

Moreover, Fish and Oil, as well as Gold, Spices, Silks, etc. were first
brought in by those forenamed Merchants: That the golden Lamp might not want
holy and precious oil, nor rich and orient Pearls (first found in shelles by
painful and industrious Fishermen) fail to be set in Jewels and Rings of
Gold, as being the purest metal that the earth can afford. And hereupon,
honorable Antiquity thought meet, to bestow such armory on them, as (for
ever) might continue their brotherly affection. First, Peter's keys, he being
called from the condition of a poor Fisherman, to be the prime Apostle: and
those supposed keys, the Fishmongers bear in their Ensigns of Arms, not
superstitiously any way, but to declare an earnest zeal, of entering into
heavens Kingdom. Next, David's Cup of saving health, which the Goldsmiths also
bear in their Banners. So much briefly, in approving their long continued love
and amity.

The Reason of our present Show.
TIme having turned his yearly Glass, for election of a Magistrate, a Brother
of the Fishmougers Society, coming (by right of place, and general Sufferages
of the Citizens) to the high dignity of Lord Mayor of this City for the year
ensuing: our devices for that solemn and Iouiall day, were and are accordingly
proportioned, by the discreet and well advised judgment of the Gentlemen,
thereto chosen and deputed, in manner and form as follows.

First therefore, because Fishing is the absolute Emblem of our present
intendement, and Fishmongers, having been such worthy Merchants in those
reverend and authentic times: leaving their matter of Commerce and
Merchandise, and aiming at their true Hierogliphical impresse for the days
intended honor, thus we marshall the order of proceeding.

Our first device that vshers and leads the way, is a very goodly and
beautiful fishing Busse, called; the Fishmongers Esperanza, or Hope of London:
being in her true old shape, form and proportion, yet dispensed withal in
some beauty, for the days honor. It may pass (by general sufferance) for
the same fishing Busse, wherein S. Peter sat mending his Nets, when his best
Master called him from that humble and lowly condition, and made him a Fisher
of men. If not so; take her for one of those fishing Busses, which not only
enricheth our kingdom with all variety of fish the Sea can yield: but helps
also (in that kind) all other lands. Fishermen, in this fishing Busse are
seriously at labor, drawing up their Nets, laden with living fish, and
bestowing them bountifully among the people.

Next follows a crowned Dolphin, alluding some way to the Lord Majors coat of
Arms, but more properly to the Companies, and therefore may serve
indifferently for both. But because it is a Fish inclined much (by nature) to
Music: Arion, a famous Musicion and Poet, rides on his back, being saved so
from death, when Robbers and Pirates on the Seas, would maliciously have
drowned him.

Then comes the King of Moors, gallantly mounted on a golden Leopard, he
hurling gold and silver every way about him. Before, on either side, and
behind him, ride fix other his tributarie Kings on horseback, gorgeously
attired in fair guilt Armours, and apt furniutre thereto belonging. They carry
Ingots of gold and silver, and each one his dart, and in this order they
attend on him: showing thereby, that the Fishmongers are not unmindful of
their combined brethren, the worthy Company of Golde-Smithes, in this solemn
day of triumph.

We next present a singular Emblem, corresponding with the Creast and
Cognizance of the Lord Mayor, and bearing an especial Morality beside. A Leman
tree, in full and ample form, richly laden with the fruit and flowers it
bears. Near to the stock or root thereof, a goodly Pellicane has built
her nest, with all her tender brood about her. And because her love and care
(according to the opinion of Aristotle, Pliny, Gesner, and diverse other good
writers) makes her extraordinarily jealous of them, as never daring to be
absent from them (the sustenance she receives from the male Bird, being
insufficient for their nourishing:) with her beak she launceth her breast, and
so supplieth that want with her own blood. Our cited Authors variously
affirm, that this love and cherishing of them lasts the space of a whole
year, by which time, they become strong, and able for flight; and then, though
they survive, the Damme dies. An excellent type of government in a Magistrate,
who, at his mere entrance into his years Office, becomes a nursing father
of the Family: which, though he bred not, yet, by his best endeavor, he must
labor to bring up.

If his love and delight be such to the Commonwealth, as that of the Pelican
to her young ones, by broken sleeps, daily and nightly cares, that the very
lest harm should not happen to his charge: then does he justly answer to our
Emblem; and, as of her, so of him, it may well be said, his breast and bowels
of true zeal and affection, are always open, to feed and cherish them (even
with his best endeavor and diligence) to the expiration of his year. And then,
though the maine Authority of Government (in him) may be said to dye: yet it
suruiueth in other Pellicans of the same brood, and so it reaches to them in
the same manner. And because the Leman Tree (by the affirmation of Julius
Solinus Polyhistor, Dioscorides, Pomponius Mela, Petrus Mexius and Antonius
Verdierus) both in fruit, flowers, rind, pith, and juice, are admirable
preseruers of the senses in man, restoring, comforting and relieuing any the
least decay in them: we seated the five Senses about the Tree, in their best
and liueliest representations, as fitly iumping with our Moral method.

Our next device, before it be marshalled in due rank and order, is a goodly
Bower, shaped in form of a flowrie Arbor, and adorned with all the Scutchions
of Arms of so many worthy men, as have been Lord Majors of the Fishmongers
Company, and each man's name truly set down on them. It is appointed first to
stand in Paul's Churchyard: And at such a place as is thought most convenient.
In this Bower is a fair Tomb, whereon, in Armor lies the imaginary body of
Sir William Walworth, sometime twice Lord Mayor of London, and a famous Brother
of the Fishmongers Company. The reason of this conceit, aims at that
tempestuous and troublesome time of King Richard the Second, and the fourth
year of his Reign, whose life, Crown and Dignity (next under Gods
omnipotent power) were manfully defended and preserved, by that worthy man
Walworth.

Suppose his Marble Statue (after the manner of Knightly burial) to lie upon
the Tomb, and both it and the Bower to be worthily attended, by those five
Knights in Armor, and mounted on Horseback, that were Knighted with Sir
William in the field, after he had slain the proud insulting Rebel, Captain
and ringleader to all the rest. Six Trumpetters well mounted and appointed,
with Trumpet banners of the Companies Arms, and a gallant guard of
Halberdiers, being 24. in number, with watchet silk Coats, having the
Fishmongers Arms on the breast, Sir William Walworths on the back, and the
Cities on the left arm, white Hats and Feathers, and goodly Halbards in their
hands: these likewise have their rank and place near to the Tomb and Bower.
Londons Genius, a comely Youth, attired in the shape of an Angel, with a
golden Crown on his head, golden Wings at his back, bearing a golden Wand in
his hand, sits mounted on Horseback by the Bower; with an Officer at Arms,
bearing the Rebels head on Walworths Dagger. So soon as the Lord Mayor is come
near, and way made for his better attention: the Genius speaks, the Trumpets
sound their several Surden flourishes, Walworth arises, and is conuaid on
Horseback from the Bower, as you may better perceive by the speeches apted for
the purpose. The Bower and Tomb are likewise borne along before him, for his
more convenient return to rest again.

We come now to our last invention in this our Triumphall Progress,
memorizing Londons great day of deliverance, and the Fishmongers Fame for ever,
in Anno 1381. and on Corpus Christi day in West Smithfield, where the like
number of Rebels (as then) were never assembled. Leaving the matter, a case of
desperate Rebellion; the manner, a most base and barbarous kind of proceeding,
to the great disturbance of the King and State, and unavoidable ruin of this
City, but for the good Angel of defense then guarding it, and the worthy
Lord Mayor made the second instrument: let us imagine (though not in the
magnificent form as then it was done, yet according to our compass of
performance) that whatsoever has formerly been said concerning Walworths
reviving at the Tomb, his Royal attending, and the beautiful Monument
following, is all but a shadow of that triumphant victory in our aptest
allusion.

Our Pageant Chariot, is drawn by two Maremen, and two Mare-mayds, as being
the supporters to the Companies coat of Arms. In the highest seat of
eminence, sits the triumphing Angel, who that day smote the enemy by Walworths
hand, and laid all his proud presuming in the dust. With one hand (King Richard
sitting in a degree beneath her) she holds his Crown on fast, that neither
foreign Hostility, nor homebred Treachery should ever more shake it. In the
other hand he holds his striking Rod, inferring thus much thereby: By me
Kings reign, and their enemies are scattered. All the forefront is beautified
with Royal Virtues, as Truth, Virtue, Honor, Temperance, Fortitude, Zeal,
Equity, Conscience, beating down Treason and Mutiny. Behind, and on the
sides, sits Justice, Authority, Law, Vigilance, Peace, Plenty and Discipline,
as best props and pillars to any Kingly estate. These, as all the rest, are
best observed by their several Emblems and properties, borne by each one, and
their adornments answerable to them in like manner.

Having thus briefly described the order of the days service, insomuch as
appertains to my charge and place, (not omitting the Fishing-Busse, Dolphine,
Mer-man and Mer-mayd upon the water first, and afterward marshalled in such
form as you have heard on land:) we come to set down the Speeches, according
as they are appointed to be spoken, beginning first at the Bower and Tomb in
Paules-Church-yard, after my Lords return from Westminster, where the Cities
Genius thus begins.

Londons Genius, at the Bower and Tomb in Paul's Churchyard*
GENIUS.
BY virtue of this powerful wand,
Which in a minute can command
Graves, Vaults, and deepes yield up their dead,
How late or long time buried:
Thou Image of that worthy man,
That Londons Knighthood first began,
In Office of the Mayraltie,
(A high and graceful dignity,)
Though yet thou sleep'st in shade of death; Here the Genius strikes on him
with his wand, whereat he begins to stir, and coming off the Tomb, looks
strangely about him.

By me take power of life and breath.
The first sound of Surden Trumpets.
Londons Genius gives thee leave,
An ayrie substance to receive.
Speech like to Spirits raysde from rest,
Triumphs and pleasures to digest
By power of sacred Poesy.
The second Sound.
And seeing this days solemnity
Honors thine own Society
Of Fishmongers, a worthy band,
Famed both to City, and the Land,
By thy rare deed of loyalty,
Upon the Kings proud enemy:
Sir William Walworth, do what may
Remain in thee, to crown this day*
With general fullness of content: A full flourish without Surdens.

For thereto all our hopes are bent.
Sir William Walworth standing before the Tomb, and doing reverence to the
Genius, speaks this speech.
HE that above two hundred years,
(Free from disturbance cares and fears,)
Has silent slept, and raysd this day,
To do what graceful help I may
Unto that band of worthy men,
That were, and are my Brethren;
And you grave Fathers of this State,
Which I my self did propagate
Twice, as L. Mayor: Oh, yet to see,
This ancient famous dignity
Flourish so fairly: And (as then)
Blessed with as wise and worthy men;
Mooues tears of joy, and bids me call
Gods benison light on you all. Here he does reverence to the^ al,

Your Charracter, Office and place,
Well wot I by that Sword and Mace,
With such a difference, as before
This day, once happened, and no more. Never any L. Mayor a Bacheler before M.
John Leman but one, and that was Sir Hugh Clapton Mercer. An. 1491.

The Genius speaks you in mine ear,
A Mayden-man, a Batcheler.
You being the second, let me say,
This is a blessed marriage day
Of you to that great dignity
Of your dread Sovereigns Dep^tie,
No doubt, but your chaste thoughts and life,
Will be as chaste to such a Wife.
All happy blessings crown (I pray,)
Londons and Lemans wedding day.
Observing that fair Liuerie, Another full flourish.

You are of mine own Company.
How can I then, but joy to see
Such eminence and high degree:
Grace still our grave Society?
And see (my Lord) this Bower relates,
How many famous Magistrates,
From the Fishmongers ancient name,
Successively to honor came
In Londons Maioraltie. These fair Coats.
Their sever all Arms and titles noates.
Turk, Louekin, Wroth, Pechie, Mordon,
These before me were every one: Pointing to the Scutchio^s of Arms as they
hang in order on the Bower.

Then I. Next, Exton, Ascham, Faulconer.
Michel, Parneis, Reinwall, Foster,
Hulin, Hampton, Ostridge, Remington,
Kneisworth, Coppinger. These being gone
Succeeded Amcotes, Curtois, Allot,
And now John Leman, who well I wot,
Welcome as any to this place,
With our kind Brethrens love and grace.
Aldermen we had many more
That never this high Office bore,
And therefore are not ranked here;
But only such as Lord Majors were.
The Genius, as charming him again with his wand, proceeds thus.
GENIUS.
WAlworth, here stay: we may do wrong,
And hold this worthy man too long
From those great States, that at this ^east
Are every one a welcome Guest.
Those Aldermen, that on the day,
(When the proud Rebel thou did slay,)
Were Knighted with thee in the field:
Are raysde by me their love to yield
With this fair Guard, and tend on thee,
In honoring this Solemnity.
Mount then thy Courser, that we may
(In the remainder of this day,)
Do more then time will now afford,
Set on then, Honorable Lord.
In the afternoon, when the Lord Mayor returns to Paul's, all the Devises
being aptly placed in order near to the little Conduit, they are (by Sir
William Walworth) described to him in this manner.
NOw worthy Lord, there is imposed on me,
A brief narration of each several show
Provided for this Triumph, as you see,
In order to describe them as they go.
The Fishing Busse instructs you first to know
The toylsome travel of poor Fishermen,
Subjected to all weathers, where and when.
In stormy tempests they omit no pain,
To bless all lands with the Seas bounteous store:
Their labor does return rich golden gain,
Whereof themselves taste least by Sea or shore,
But (like good souls) contented evermore
With any benefit their toil can bring;
The Fisher well is termed Contents true King.
This Emblem of the Dolphine, is the Armorie
Belonging to our brethren, and beside
Speaks somewhat of that creatures quality,
By nature Musical, as has been tryde:
Poesy and Music therefore thus do ride
Upon his back, in sweet Arions shape,
Who, by a Dolphine, thus did death escape:
The King of Moors thus mounted, and his train,
Shows your affection to that Company,
Which league with you in love, and does contain
The aptnes of your correspondency
On either side, to hold inseperably.
His Indian treasure liberally is thrown:
To make his bounteous heart the better known.
This Leman Tree, your Honor may conceit
More, then I speak, because mysteriously
Some hidden secret thereon does awayte
Known to your self. It speaks ingeniously
The Character of your authority:
Figured in that fair Bird, fostring her brood:
Though with the dear expense of her own blood.
Continual cares, and many broken sleeps,
Heart-killing fears, which wait on Eminence
Hard at the heels, and (tortringly) still keeps
Within the soul imperious residence,
As whippes t'afflict both hope and patience;
These in the Pellicane are figured here:
And these you hardly will avoid this year.
But as the Senses sit about the Tree,
And show you how their virtues are supplied
Still with fresh vigor: So (no doubt) will be
Your busiest troubles sweetly qualified,
By those five helps that hold up dignity,
Discretion, Policy, and Providence,
Courage, Correction, these bar all offense.
Lastly, look on a figure of that day,
When by Heavens help, and Walworths happy hand,
That swarm of Rebels, who fought all to sway,
And have both King and Country at command:
Even in their height of pride, I made them stand,
And, in my Soueraigns sight, there I struck dead
Their chiefest Captain and commanding head.
The rest of that base rout, dismayed thereby,
And all tumultuous troubles calmely ceast,
King Richard, to requite true loyalty,
His gracious favor presently expressed
In Royal manner, Knighting me and the rest
Of Aldermen, that were in field with me.
London till then had not that dignity.
As I, 1381. Richard the fourth, Sir Nicholas Bremlier, Sir John Philpot, Sir
Nicholas Twiford, Sir John Standish, Sir Robert L^^nde.
so these do represent the men
Knighted in field, on Corpus Christi day.
And as my Dagger slew the Rebel then,
So to renown the deed; And I dare say,
To honor London more (if more it may)
The Red-Crosse, in a Siluer-field before,
Had Walworths Dagger added to it more.
And now my Lord, this goodly Monument
Or* Chariot of Triumphall Victory
Some shape of that days honor does present,
By Heavens protection of True Majesty,
And beating down Treason and Mutiny.
Adorning all the Throne with those fair Graces:
That ought about a King to have best places.
Truth, Virtue, Honor, sober Temperance,
Fortitude, Zeal, Equity, Conscience,
Justice, Authority, careful Vigilance,
Peace, Plenty, Law, Council, Obedience,
And Discipline, that whips all Errors hence,
These (as best Pillars) do support this State:
And every Kingdom else does propagate.
A blessed Bacheler are you my Lord,
By being your sacred Sovereigns Deputy
In such a State, where all these do concord,
And truly do protect his Majesty
Figured in Richards great Authority.
As Walworth then, so Leman now may say*
Never had Man a happier Wedding day.
Sir William Walworth his Speech at night, as a farewell to my Lord.
PHoebus has hid his golden head
In Thetis lap. And now are spread
The sable Curtains of the night,
Our Euenings purpose to delight.
The twinkling Tapers of the Sky
Are turned to Torches; and apply
Their clearest radiance, to convey
Our Maiden Bridegroom on his way
Home to his own abiding place.
Our Triumphs pomp shortens apace,
That could afford more time to spend,
But gladly would no way offend.
You marriage Rites solemnized
Bequeathes you to the Bridal bed:
Where you and your chastewife must rest.
London (it seems) did like you best,
(Although you are a Bacheler,)
To be her Husband for a year;
Love her, delight her. She Is a Bride,
Nere slept by such a Husbands side
But once before. She has had many,
And you may prove as good as any
Have gone before you in this place.
Twill be your Brethrens joy and grace,
That Fishmongers live still in fame,
And still renowned by your name.
Their hearty love by me they send ye,
And pray the hand of heaven defend ye
In all your actions. May your Fame,
Crown still their ancient worthy name
To all posterity. So, Londons Lord
And Virgin Husband, in a word:
Old Walworth must to rest again,
Goodnight to you, and all your train,
FINIS.

