A REMONSTRATION OF THE FRENCH SVBIECTS Professing the Reformed Religion unto
the French KING. Wherein are shown diverse notable Passages, and matters of
great weight and consideration, as well of the present as of the former
Troubles and Dissentions in France. As also A Relation, containing the
Rebellion of the Nobility and Gentry of the Kingdom of NAPLES, and the
Retreat of the VICEROY. The Sea Fight betwixt the Galleys of Spain, and
Florence, and some Pirates. The Resolution of Bethlem Gabor; besides diverse
Lords of Hungary, sent in writing unto the Emperor. The Arrival of Sir ROBERT
SHERLEY at Florence, being sent Ambassassador from the King of PERSIA. Besides
The late Proceedings of the Duke of SAXONY, being forsaken by his own
Soldiers, who were unwilling to go against the Protestants. Of the Count
Mansfeild, and the Duke Christian of Brunswick; as likewise what Spinola
determines to do, and has done, before Breda, Bergen op Zoon, and Sluice. With
A continuance of the late News of all parts of Christendom; and some parts of
Turkey likewise.

LONDON Printed by I. D. for Nicholas Bourne and Thomas Archer, and are to be
sold at their Shops at the Exchange, and in Pope's Head Palace. 1622.

A REMONSTRATION Of the French Subjects, Professing the Reformed Religion, unto
the French KING.
SIR;
IT is strange, and almost incredible, that amongst so many Subjects (which God
has been pleased to submit under the obeisance of your Majesty) who boast
ordinarily, that they are much affected to the good of your affairs, and the
conservation of your Crown; that nevertheless, there has not been one,
which has endeavored and enforced himself, to quench the fire which takes
daily hold of your State, and by little and little consumes the same: and that
to the contrary, there is found a great number that have taken great pains to
add more fuel to it, and are yet daily seeking artificial tricks and
devises to maintain and increase the same. By right, it should be their work,
who can make Peace and War when they please, if their private ends, and
particular profit which made them to raise those troubles, contrary to the
mind and intention of your Majesty, did not draw them back, and not of those
which are assaulted and pursued in their consciences, honors, goods, and lives,
and have no other intention then to defend and preserve themselves from
violences, having never detested any thing more then troubles, and seditious
commotions; and to the contrary, nothing more loved and procured, then the
conservation of Peace. Wherefore, all the Lords, Gentlemen, and all your
Majesty's other Subjects that follow them, making profession of the Reformed
Religion, moved and driven by the affection and natural Obligation that they
owe unto your Majesty, and to the conservation of your Kingdom, they neither
could or would use any longer delay, for to seek and propoune of their side
(as they have done continually) all the fit and convenient means they could
devise, to preserve your State from ruin and subversion, which have threatened
the same many times, and yet at this present do more then ever before, and to
reestablish a good Peace and public tranquillity, who having continually
showed themselves prompt and willing to embrace the same, it is manifest
enough, in what dangers and in conveniences they were likely to fall, if God
through his mere mercy had not preserved them. In such manner that they have
but small hope, to come to their desire, unless the Almighty God, will be
pleased to chauge the hearts of their enemies, which are round about you, and
incline them to a pacification, or Peace. Looking rather that this their good
disposition which they now manifest, and their endeavors which they will use,
for to establish a firm and perfect Union betwixt all your Subjects, both of
the one and the other Religion, in stead of being received and embraced. shall
be slandered, and sinisterly interpreted, as they have been continually, by
those which hate and fear nothing more then this reconciliation. That
nevertheless, the said Lords, Gentlemen, and other that follow them, having
continually taken great care, to make their actions daily more and more
manifest unto your Majesty, and to leave assured signs and witnesses of their
desire, which is to live and die in the obedience, and natural subjection
which they owe unto your Majesty, and to make it appear to all the world, how
much their hearts and wills are differing from the impostures and slanders,
which their adversaries, adherents, and ministers lay upon them; and that the
Forces which they have been compelled to gather against their minds, do tend
to no other effect then to maintain and conserve their Religion, honors,
lives, and goods. They have thought that such considerations ought not to
hinder or stay them in their hunting and purchasing the effect of such a
necessary, and salutary a Peace for this Kingdom, and to give witness of
their humility, reverence, and respect toward your Majesty, which they would
have sooner done, if they had not esteemed and judged that their enemies would
have thought, or at least have gone about to make others believe, that the
necessity had compelled them unto the same, considering their Enemies assured
your Majesty, that they were not likely to receive any aid from foreign
parts, and if they should, that they had no money to give them content. But it
is certain and known that they never have wanted aid and succor from above,
and that their forces are such that none can deny, but that they are able to
resist their Enemies, and to execute such ill designs if they would as they
are taxed withal. So then in the time of the first troubles or Civil Wars
the deceased Prince of Conde, besides the Lords, Gentlemen and other that did
accompany him, did receive and accept of the conditions of Peace, concerning
only the Religion and the liberty of their Consciences: presently after the
death of the late Duke of Guise, and the Marshall of Saint Andrew, and the
imprisonment of the late Constable Montmorancy, which were the principal heads
and conductors of the Army. If in the second troubles, as soon as was offered
unto the aforesaid Prince of Conde, and his followers and partakers the
restablishing of the exercise of their Religion, notwithstanding they were
affisted mightily by foreign forces and ready to assault the Town of
Chartres, at the sight of their Enemies camp, which was most wholly disbanded
and disordered; And that only at the denunciation of Peace, made by a Trumpet
sent in the Kings name, the said Prince did not only surcease from the assault
in hand, but commanded the fiege wholly to be raised, and his Army to retire,
reporting nevertheless no other reward for his prompt obedience, then a
bloody peace, full of perfidiousnes. If in the said troubles the next day
after the Battle at Saint Denis, the said Prince did send unto the King
Monsieur de Tiligny, to show his Majesty, the ruin and desolation that was
likely to fall upon this Kingdom, if it were suffered that foreign forces
should invade the same, which were upon the frontiers ready to enter, and to
propose and show the means, and remedies to attain a peace, touching only
matters of Religion, Notwithstanding he had the better hand in the said
battle; the late Constable Montmorancy chief of the Army there being flaine.
To be short, if all your Edicts had been always made, and the peace agreed,
in those seasons when those of the reformed Religion had means by their forces
to make their Enemies believe them, if they would have abused the same, and
that in all their parlies and treaties of peace, there is no mention made of any
thing else then of matters of Religion, and that their Enemies have never been
brought to a peace or pacification, but by necessity, being not able by open
force to attempt any thing more against them; Nevertheless to overcome more
manifestly their adversaries, of the slanders and impostures which they
publish every hour against the said Lords, Gentlemen, and others that follow
them, willingly passing by the unfaithfulness, want of courage, and desloyalty,
used and practiced against them in former time. They declare and protest this
day before your Majesty, as before God, that howsoever they have until this
time been dealt withal, that they nevertheless never thought to impute it unto
your Majesty, as very well knowing, that your Majesty's nature is not agreeing
with such rigours, whereof you have showed so many open demonstrations, that
none rightly may doubt of it: and much less have they desired to change, or
diminish in any manner the good will, and natural affection, which they have
borne continually to the conservation, advancement and greatness of your State.
And if by all the effects aforesaid, it has been seen and known manifestly,
that they had never any scope nor intention, then to serve God according to his
command, and the instruction of his holy word, under the obedience and
authority of your Acts, and Proclamations, and to be maintained, and preserved
equally with your other Subjects, in their honors, life's, and goods; but
besides this they will at this present, make such a proof and trial; that
their enemies themselves, will never doubt of it or call the same in question,
not that they intend to go about to justify their former actions. And much
less do they intend to copitulate with your Majesty, very well knowing by the
grace of God, what is the duty of good and faithful Subjects toward their
Soneraine Prince and natural Lord.

But Sir because it is sufficiently known how they valewe iour, faith and
words, which ought to be holy, sacred and inviolable, and with what boldness
have they abused your name and authority, to the great peril and danger of
your Subjects, which make profession of the Reformed Religion, it will not be
thought strange that the same in all humble manner beseech your Majesty to be
pleased to declare by a solemnell, perpetual, and irreuocable Edict, verified
and registered in all your Parlements, and other Souerain Courts, of Justices,
to the end that by the same those may be bridled and kept in, which so many
times herebefore have been so bold as to infringe and violate them (and that
without any punishment) which the late Henry the Great of happy memory, your
Father had made, and your self confirmed. And seeing that these which never
could endure the union and rest amongst your Subjects, caused by the means of
the observation of the said Edicts, they have begun to alter and corrupt the
same by new interruptions; and modifications directely contrary to the
substance of the said Edicts, and the intention of your Majesty. They very
humbly request your Majesty to grant and agree generally unto all your
Subjects, of what quality or condition soever they be, free exercise of the
said Religion in all Cities, Towns, villages, and boroughs in all places and
parts of your Kingdom, and territories under your obedience and protection,
without any exception or reservation, modification or restriction of persons,
of time, or places, with all the assurances thereunto necessary and required.

And there above to order and inioyne every one to make public profession
either of the one or the other Religion, to the intent that many abusing this
benefice and grace may not fallitno Atheism, and earnall liberty, licensing
themselves of all exercise and profession of Religion, and not desiring any
thing else but that all good orders, the policy, and Ecclesiastical discipline
be quite reenuersed and abolished. A thing certainly too dangerous and
pernicious, and insufferable.

And further, SIR, seeing your said subiectis do not doubt, that those which
always have built the foundation of their desseings upon Flanders, and
calumniations which they very impudently publish to make them odious not only
to their party, but likewise to other, shall not leave to diuulge, that your
said Subjects will rather wilfully without any reason defend that which they
have once resolved to believe, concerning the Articles of the Christian
Religion, then to correct themselves and retreat any point: They declare and
protest as they have ever done, that if in any article of their confession of
faith they can instruct them by the word of God comprehended in the Canonical
books of the Scripture: That they run astray from the doctrine of the
Prophes and Apostles. That presently their will shake hands with them, and be
of they opinion and side that shall teach them better out of Gods word; and
long ago they should have done the same if any error had been proved in their
articles.

And to this effect they desire nothing more, then a meeting at a free,
general, and lawfully called Council. Where every one may be heard, to
produce his reasons, which shall be confirmed or convicted by Gods word alone.
Which is the only course taken in ancient times in all like occasions.

By this means SIR, you shall be sure that God will show your Majesty, this
favor that you shall see shortly the hearts and minds of your Subjects
united and reconciled, and your Kingdom to return in the former estate
brightness and dignity: to the shame and confusion of your and our enemies,
which have endeavored the contrary.

Moreover your Majesty will be pleased to take the pains, and consider
exactely and judge (if you be so disposed) if it be better to tarry for a
heavy and bloody victory of the two armies, that are now in your Kingdom,
wherein the conqueror is as well to loose as he that shall be vanquished. Or
else to employ them in the service of your Majesty, and for the good of our
own affairs, upon diverse fair occasions daily offered, so much concerning
the tranquillity and conservation of your Crown as none are comparable unto the
same that have been presented in our time:

And by these means to send the tempest, and foul weather in these places,
from whence it came. Whereunto your aforesaid Subjects are resolved, as
likewise to all other things that shall tend to your good and the greatness of
your State being ready to employ to the same effect all their estates, and
means, which God has pleased to grant them, besides their bodies to their
uttermost power. Not acknowledging in this world any other Soueraing or
Principalites then yours: in which obedience and subjection they will live and
die, as your most humble, most faithful, and obedient Servants, and Subjects.

July 30. 1622.
FRom Rome they write, that there came an extraordinary Ambassador from the new
Duke of Parma, called the Prince di Sant Gregorio, who came very well
accompanied with all the noble Courtiers, and diverse others Charactered Baroni
Romani, to have audience of the Pope; now Gregory the 11. and tender all
obedience and service in the name of the new Duke his Lord: hither came also
the Sunday following, an Ambassador from the Archduke Leopoldus, requesting
his holiness, that whereas he had certain Soldiers in pay in Germany, for
the Emperor, under the command of Don Pedro Aldabrandino, it would please his
holiness to write unto the Emperor, that they might be turned over unto his
service, to defend his Country of Alsatia against the inroades, and assaults of
such enemies as now lie at the advantage to surprise such Towns, as are weak,
and not able to defend themselves:

It is likewise written, that the Monday following, after the Ambassador came
from the Duke of Parma, the Pope went in person to the Consistory, and there
transferred upon the Duke of Parma the office and dignity of Confalonire, of
the holy mother Church, as his Father had before enjoyed; they will likewise
have certain Cardinals, commanded to keep their Palaces as prisoners, for
speaking irreuerently against the Bull, which was newlly made for the strict
Election of the Popes: on the Wednesday following, his holiness did keep his
Vespro in Saint Peter's, and in the morning with all sollemnity, and
pontificially he entered the sacred College before the Ambassador of his
Catholic Majesty, where acknowledgement was made to his holiness for the
Kingdom of Naples, and the payment of 7000. crowns for that feude or fealty
was ratified, and accepted with the accustomed manner of protestation made to
the Procurator of the Exchecker; after which the whole signiory of of the
people of Rome, to keep correspondency with the Duke of Parma, sent unto him
no Ambassador; the Marquess of Lanti in the name of the whole Senate: At the
same time there died also in the City Signior Peter Nati, the agent of the Duke
of Vrbine, and the Bishop of Brugnati, with some others of good account.

From Florence they write concerning the departure of the Count de montein, by
the road of Leuca and Pisa, and that he took the way of Legorne to be
embarked in the Galley of Doria, to go to Genoa, and from thence his
Excellency would pass to Millaine. It is also reported, that there is arrived
at Florence the English, Sir Robert Sherley (with his Lady) called Il Conte de
Sherley, as being an Earl of the Empire, his train was not very great, and
yet he is sent as honorable Ambassador from the Persian to the Emperor, the
Russian and other Princes, having great credit, and means for money and
magnificent expenses.

From Madrid they advise us, that the Marquess di surego, and Don diego messia
are declared Counselors of War for the King of Spain: as also the Marquess
de la Nueuas, the Marquess dimirable, and the Count di Barasciar, are made
Masters of the Kings House, and of the Queens side or Palace, are likewise
named, Don diego Bazzero: Don Gaebriel de Velasio: Don Antonio de Toledo, and
Don Emanuel manriques. It is further written, that Don Inico Borgia, is created
General of the Horse in Flanders, with intent to pass, if occasion serve,
into other parts: and that the Bishopric of Ieguenza is bestowed upon a
brother of the Duke de Infantado.

From Naples are diverse Letters: one writes of a great rebellion by the
Gentlemen and Nobility of the Country, wherein the Viceroy was enforced to
take the City of Saint Erma, another talks of Leuca that the Cardinal
Beuilaqua coming thither to the Bathes, and expecting the government of that
Commonwealth, was at last by the Nobles and Gentiles so confirmed, and all his
kindred advanced to places and offices. A third letter affirms, that there
departed from that Port many Galleys full of Soldiers to be embarked at
Cortary, and so to go into Spain; and that there was a general imposition of
400000. crowns upon the City and Kingdom of Naples, as also of 150000. from
the City of Messina, and all for the service of the War of Flanders.

To which is added, that Don Francis Manriques was made Leutenant of the
Galleies of Naples, or if you will of a squadron so named in the place of Don
Francisco Zaphata, who was advanced to be M.r of the camp, and sent a 1000.
Spainiards in the said Galleys to Milane.

From Messina they advertise us, that the Galleys of Florence are joined with
the King, and so set upon some Pirates, with 250. slaves in 15. vessels great,
and small, and 8. pieces of brass, which they enforced sincking most of them:
the rest made a composition for their lives paying a 100000 crowns they also
took a ship laden with oil at the first sight.

From Venice they write, that in the diet of Hungary (according to the Letters
of Vienna) the Estates could not agree, but were at great variance; the Clergy
and Ecclesiastical persons demanding the restitution of all their goods,
losses, and revenues wholly, without further impeachment. The secular Lords and
Laity would by no means consent to such an account, pretending many
diminutions, and that the remainder was reserved for the good of the Kingdom:
whereupon the Catholics appeal to the Emperor, as their supreme Judge, and the
Protestants on the contrary side, will have none but the Palatine: insomuch
that the Emperor with all expedition sent the Count de Soler^ to the Elector of
Saxony, to acquaint him with the matter, that he might use the greater have in
gathering the tributes under his government, for the benefit of his Imperial
Majesty, who had newly sent 2000. Horse to the Duke of Bauaria. He also writ,
that the wife of Oleatsi, in whose custody was the fortress of Trezin, where
the Crown of Hungary was secured, would by no means depart with the same, or
consent to the delivery, before she was paid such money and treasure, which
had bin disbursed and enforced from her.

From Genoa the aduertiseme^t is, that with althose Gallaies, which are
returned from Faigne, there came in their company the nuntio Acquauiua am
Ambassador of Lenta, who was sent from the Sophy of Persia in a ship of
Legorne, which disembarked it self at Iauonaleggio without touching Geuoa at
all, and so they determined to go to Florence, and Rome, yet he landed at Genoa
Il Padre Iacinto nata Casalesio Capucino, who half a year since was employed
in Spain, for the affairs of Bauaria.

From Coyra they write, that the party, or faction of that City were
followed by a great number of the Soldiers of Baldirone, who mutined for want
of means to maintain them, and so complained on the Captains for releasing
the Prisoners, and making what composition they pleased, whereas yet they were
entertained by the Grizons, and settled in Chiavena, to defend them from the
Spaniards: but at last, the Bishop was laid hold upon, and had a Guard over
him, and Baldirone should have been sent to Prison, but that he escaped in an
unknown habit, and so freed himself of his enemies.

From Turnie they write, that the Duke of Savoy has raised many Forces from as
many places of France, Loraine, and Spain, causing them to come the way of the
mountain: Whereupon his Highness has sent his Inginers, and Pioners to
supervise the Fortresses of Asti, Vercelles, Sanchia, and San German. Moreover,
he has supplied the Garrisons of Asti, and Vercelles, with four hundred
Soldiers, and added greatquantitie of provision, both of powder, shot, and
victual, fit for a war indeed, which when they of Montferrate understood,
they made intercession to be so armed, and defended accordingly, pretending
chiefly, least some sudden innovation might fall upon them

One thing is certain, that about the Countries of Aldightera, and Confines of
Savoy, you have great numbers assembled, who came to the assistance, and
service of his Highness.

From Millane they write, that having a general suspicion of the revolt of the
Valtoline, and that the Switzers would help the Grizons all they could; there
was a hundred Carts laden with the Munition of War sent to the Garrisons,
least they should be set upon by their enemies, as the Dutch Soldiers had
been in the Count of Tiroll, which were there Mustred for the Archduke
Leopaldus: For questionless, the Grizons were divided into many troops, and
gone to the side of Pochiana, to perform some exployt upon the Fortress,
where Don John de Medici commanded: but finding some resistance, and that as
they were ready to enter, other troops came to relieve them, they desisted for
fear they were too weak to encounter with both at once; that is to say, with
the Fort, and this other supply, and so returned toward the Fort Di Santa
Maria, which belongs to the Archduke Leopaldus.

Other Letters advertise us, that the City of Millane is compelled to her
proportioned contribution, being about 40000. Crowns, not only for this
year, but to a monthly allowance for the next year 1623. and that all the
Cities within that Territory, have likewise their several Collections to
maintain the wars. That the money sent to the Catholic Switzers, has
been bestowed to good purpose, because they have stopped that Passage, by
which the Protestant Switzers meant to go and assist the Grizons, whereupon
there was a new Disbursement made of a 100000 Crowns to pay those Switzers,
who were under Colonel Berlinghier, part in full satisfaction, and part in way
of a new assignation. That the Soldiers of the Knight Pecchio, being returned
out of Alsatia, were sent to remain in Bornio, and the Spaniards resident in
Chiavana returned also to Millane, so that there remained only in these parts
the Count John Sherbolone, and his troops. That many Soldiers are fled out of
the Valtoline for want of pay, and other necessaries, who notwithstanding, are
a new lifted in the Regiment of Count Franciso d' Adda, who is deputed to make
an end of the business. That there is returned out of Alsatia to Millane, the
Marquis De Valdefuentes, and from Tiroll the Captain, John Baptista
Panteor^la, after they had given order to leavie eleven Companies of Horse, and
make other provision for the Soldiers, which they also performed with all
diligence in the Bishopric of Salzpurgh, to maintain and perfect the
government of Count di Lodron, whose Regiment was not yet full enough. And that
the Fmbassadour extraordinary of Mantua, had obtained a passage for certain
Soldiers, who were to go from Mantua to Monsferrate.

From Constantinople, the death of the great Turk is anew confirmed. It
seems, the Ianizaries were not acquainted with his death, but that it was
only contrived by a Vicebasshaw, General at the Sea, or as we call Admiral,
who underhand writ a Letter to the Basshaw of Gran Cayro, that the Turk meant
to come thither, and alter the form of Government, for the suppressing the
insolency of the Ianizaries, to which purpose, he was resolved to deny them
their donation. This Letter was found by chance, but so found, that the
Ianizaries took notice of the same, and supposing it true, were so enraged,
that they adventured upon the Seraglio; and so one rage helping forward
another, the Devil set them aworke (as you have formerly heard) but at last
the Viceers understanding all the matter, found a time to make the other
Ianizaries acquainted with the treason, and promise them the augmentation of
three aspers a day, which the great Sultana, the mother of Osman, being retired
to Milo, with her Spahies, and and certain Chauses, confirmed. Whereupon the
greater sort of Ianizaries came presently to Constantinople, affirming, that
the great Empress lay safe in the Island of Mile, that there were three
brothers alive of the slaughtered Osman, and that there were also two Sultana's
of his own great with child, and which the Mufti knew well enough: Thus new
tumults arose in Constantinople, yet neither were the shopps shutt, nor the
government altered, nor any stranger disturbed; in the midst of which
Insurrection, comes the Admiral of the Galleys to Constantinople, upon whom in
a fury the Ianizaries laid hands, who made what resistance he could, and so at
last he was burnt with 18. Galleys: yet for the time is Mustapha confirmed, and
is like to continue, unless they suspect his weakness and unaptness to such
a government, and will no doubt, and so make choice of some brave Spirit, to
guide the horses of this unruly Chariot of the Turkish Empire, containing at
least fifty several Provinces, such as in times past were reputed Kingdoms
of reasonable eminency, and opulent mightiness.

From Franckefort, the old Letters confirm the defeat of Brunswicke, who is
named in the same the Bishop of Haverstate, and this is their Language: that
there passed by this City 132. Cornets of horse, and 128. Ensigns of foot,
belonging to the Duke of Bavaria, and were quickly united to Monsieur Tillies
forces, who defeated the Bishop at the River of Maine, to the loss of 3000.
besides 1000. drowned in the River of Maine; his cariages were most surprised,
and some money taken, there were also taken prisoners the Count of Lipstat, and
Sturnne, with the Duke of Vannas, after which the Army of Tilley recovered
Holst again, and put some to death, which made resistance: here they found two
or three pieces of Artillery: not withstanding all this? Brunswick escaped with
full 10000. into Darmstrat, where he united himself to Count Mansfeild, who
taking their marches to Bergstrozen, encountered with 300. horse of Crovata, who
were al cut in pieces: this Letter was writ from one, who was willing to show
his good will, but had not the Fortune of true intelligence, but we had this
news long ago.

The newer Letters, which came the 24. of July, certefie thus much, that both
Bavaria and Tilley are retired out of the Palatinate, holding their quarters
about the Mountains beyond Heidelberge, and so mean to stop the passage into
Bavaria: and the King of Bohemia with Mansfeild are also gone out of the
Palatinate, the King went to Sedan to the Duke of Bolloigne: His General or
Count Mansfeild, marching openly with colors displaied even to the borders of
Loraine, and Lutzenbergh, and all attending the treaty at Brussels, where if it
be peace, It is supposed, that Mansfeild either enters into the service of the
States of Holland, or adventures into France.

From Lipsia in Saxony, the Letters contain, that the Elector Duke upon the
Certificate of the Emperor, has raised together 22000. protecting something
of consequence for his own honor, and the Emperors satisfaction, but as he
was in his march, both horse and foot fell from him and resolved him
peremptorily, that they would go and assist the Bishop of Haversplate.

From Prague the Letters advise, that those Country men, which were supposed
to be cut in pieces by the Cossacks in their return, were indeed overthrown
by the soldiers of Glats, who in a brave and resolute sally set upon their
Enemies, and took many prisoners and a great booty, forraging the Country, and
killing all, that resisted them, returning with their spoils to their hold of
security, and as it should seem being thereby emboldened to hold it out
against the greatest peril.

From France they write, that how ever the Kings army prevayled in the siege
of Saint Anthony, yet was Montalbon relieved, and had many supplies, so that it
is not thought convenient, that the King should hazard his person against any
of these great Towns; but they say, as he was marching foreward, the Duke de
Rohan, set upon some of his Army, and put them to defeat.

That the Queen Mother went from Nantes toward the Bathes of Pughes near unto
Nevers: That the King has granted to Signeur Pempeio Frangipane 2000.
crowns, as a pension out of the Abbey where his brother was Abbot: who now
deceased and the place void, it pleased his Majesty to dispose of some of the
revenues in this manner: and that the Cardinal Bevilacqua was at the said
Bathes, but hearing of the Queens approach made have to depart into his own
Country.

From Antwarp they write, that on Sunday the 21. of July. The Marquess Spinola
was attended thither with 2000. horse, and the Nobility of Flanders and
Brabant: having before hand taken order, that the Governor of Gaunt should
visit Sluice, and build 4. several Forts, as near it as they could, that so
they might be assured he meant once again to besiege the same: For they give
it out, he will have three Armies afoote this Summer: one against Sluice,
another against Broda, and the greatest against Borghen, which shall increase
as occasion serves: but when Spinola understood, that many men were slain by
the fallies of the Garrisons in Berghen, who by this time has 6000. soldiers
in he^, he gave order to retire his Army some half a mile from (...)
Ravelings, out of the danger of the shot, till he came himself to direct them
further, but by reason they have not yet entrencht themselves, it is very
probable, they do not determine to continue the siege long: but suddenly to
rise and go to some other place.

From the Hage the Letters are as favorable in the behalf of the States,
affirming, that there is now no going to Antwarp by the way of the River,
because the Hollanders with their men of war not only watch the same: but
have new fortifications on the land of Fertoll: as for Berghen, they are
confident both of the strength of the place, and sufficiency of the men, being
all old soldiers, and very near 8000. insomuch that they make daily
excursions upon the Spaniards, as having their Ports open all night, and by
their sallies not only put many of them to the sword, but return with great
booty: so that whenever Spinola's Army makes approches, or attempts any
onset, then do the Batteries of the Ravelings play upon them, and either
enforce them back, or kill them in the place.

Some 4. days since it was supposed, they would rise, whereupon the horse of
Breda trooped to overlooke them, and the Governor Iustinianus (as I take it)
of the house of Nassaw, sent the Prince of Orange word of their preparation:
but as it should seem, he is careless of their actions, and confident to
overwatch them what course soever they take, because the Soldiers were never
so willing to fight as at this hour, nor the States never so able to maintain
the War.

Other Letters from several port Towns assure us, that the Rochellers have
taken diverse prises, and intercepted some ships of soldiers, who have sent
prisoners to Midelborogh and other places.

FINIS.

