Gods Power and Providence: Showed, IN THE MIRACVlous Preservation and
Deliverance of eight Englishmen, left by mischance in Green-land Anno 1630.
nine months and twelve days.

With a true Relation of all their miseries, their shifts and hardship they
were put to, their food, etc. such as neither Heathen nor Christian men ever
before endured.

With a Description of the chief Places and Rarities of that barren and cold
Country.

Faithfully reported by EDWARD PELLHAM, one of the eight men aforesaid.

As also with a Map of GREEN-LAND.

They that go down into the Sea in ships; that do business in great waters:

These see the works of the Lord, and his wonders in the deep.

PSALM. 107.23, 24. LONDON, Printed by R. Y. for JOHN PARTRIDGE, and are to be
sold at the Sign of the Sun in (...)

modern bookplate ROBERT DAVIES of Lannerch Denbighshire


To the right Worshipful Sir HVGH HAMMERSLY Knight, Alderman of the City of
London, Governor of the Worshipful Company of the Muscovia Merchants: And to
the Worshipful, Mr Alderman Freeman, Captain William Goodler; And to all the
rest of the Worshipful Assistants and Adventurers in the said famous Company.
Edward Pellham dedicateth both this and his future Labors.
Right Worshipful and most famous Merchants:
THe hard adventure my poor self and fellows underwent in your Worships
service, is a great deal pleasanter for others to read, than it was for us to
endure. How ever hard, we have now endured it; and if ever afterages shall
speak of it, (as the world still does of the Dutch-mens hard Winter in nova
Zembla:) thus much of the Voyage shall redound to your honors, that it was
done by your Servants. This may also return to our Countries good; That if the
first inhabiting of a Country by a Princes Subjects (which is the King of
Spaines best title to his Indyes) does take possession of it for their
Sovereign: Then is Green-land by a second right taken livery and Seisin of,
for his Majesty's use; his Subjects being the first that ever did (and I
believe the last that ever will) inhabit there. Many a rich return may your
Worships in general, and the brave Adventurers in particular receive from this
and all other places: and may your Servants be ever hereafter, warned to take
heed by our harms. God send your Worships long life, and much honor, and
sufficient wealth, to maintain both. This is the hearty prayer of your
Worships poor servant

Edward Pellham.

To the Reader.
COurteous Reader: That God may have the only glory of this our deliverance,
give me leave to look back unto that voyage, which the Dutchmen made into
Nova Zembla, in the year 1596. In which place, they having been (like our
selves) overtaken with the Winter, were there forced to stay it out as we
were. Which being an Action so famous all the world over, encouraged me both
to publish this of ours, as also now to draw out some comparisons with them:
that so our deliverance, and Gods glory may appear both the more gracious and
the greater.

This Nova Zembla stands in the Degree 76. North latitude: our wintering place
is in 77. Degrees and 40. Minutes, that is, almost two Degrees nearer the North
Pole than they were; and so much therefore the colder. The Dutch were furnished
with all things necessary both for life and health; had no want of any thing:
Bread, Beer, and Wine, they had good, and good store. Victuals they had Gods
plenty; and Apparel both for present clothing, and for shift too: and all this
they brought with them in their Ship. We (God knows) wanted all these. Bread,
Beer, and Wine we had none. As for meat, our greatest and chiefest feeding
was the Whale Frittars, and those mouldie too; the loathsomest meat in the
world. For our Venison, 'twas hard to find, but a great deal harder to get:
and for our third sort of provision the Bears; 'twas a measuring cast which
should be eaten first, We or the Bears, when we first saw one another; and we
perceived by them, that they had as good hopes to devour us, as we to kill
them. The Dutch killed Bears, it is true: but it was for their skins, not for
their flesh. The Dutch had a Surgeon in their Company; we none but the great
Physician to take care and cure of us. They had the benefit of Bathing and
Purging: we of neither. They had their Ship at hand to be-friend them; we had
here perished, had not other Ships fetched us off. They had Card and Compass,
we no direction.

If the Dutch complained therefore of the extremity of the cold, (as well they
might) and that when in building their house, they (as Carpenters use to do)
put the iron nails into their mouths, they there froze, and stuck so fast,
that they brought off the skin and forced blood: how cold, think you, were
we, that were feign to maintain two fires, to keep our very mortar from
freezing. The Dutch complained, that their walls were frozen two inches thick
on the inside for all their fire: and if ours were not so, 'twas our pains and
industry at first in building. The Dutch-mens clothes froze upon their backs,
and their shoes were like horns upon their feet: but that was their own
ignorance; for they had Sea-coles enough with them, if they had known how to
use them. If their drink and Sack were so hard frozen into lumps of ice, that
they were feign to cut it out; how much harder was it for us, that were forced
to make hot Irons our best toasts to warm the snow withal, for our mornings
draughts? They used heated stones and billets to their feet and bodies, to
warm them: which, though an hard shift, yet was it better than we had any.

Lay now all these together, the distance of place, we being many miles more
into the cold than they: the want both of meat and clothes; and that the house
we lived in, we had but three days respite to build for nine months to come;
and then may the world see, that the Dutch had the better provisions, and we
the abler bodies. If therefore the Dutch-mens deliverance were worthily
accounted a wonder, ours can amount to little less than a miracle. The greater
therefore our deliverance, the greater must be Gods glory. And that is the
Authors purpose in publishing of it. God keep the Readers from the like
dangers. So prays he that endured what he here writes of

Edw. Pellham.

The names of the Men thus staying in GREEN-LAND, for nine months and twelve
days.
William Fakely, Gunner. Edward Pellham, Gunners mate, the Author of this
Relation. John Wise, and Robert Goodfellow, Seamen. Thomas Ayers,
Whale-cutter. Henry Bett, Cooper. John Dawes, and Richard Kellet, Land-men.

map of Greenland A Whale is ordinarily about 60 foot long

When the whale comes above water ye shallop rows toward him and being within
reach of him the harpoiner darts his harpingiron at him out of both his hands
and being fast they lance him to death

The whale is cut up as he lies floting cross the stearne of a shipp the
blubber is cut from the flesh by pieces 3 or 4 foot long and being rased is
rowed on shore toward the coppers

They place 2. or 3. coppers on a roe and ye chopping boat on the one side and
the cooling boat on the other side to receive ye oil of ye coppers, the chopped
blubber being boiled is taken (...) out of the coppers and put in wiker baskets
or barowes throwgh which the oil is dreaned and run^es into ye cooler which is
fall of water out of which it is convaied by troughs into buts or hogsheads

The manner of killing ye Seamorces

The manner of kil^^ing Bears

The Seamorce is in quantity as bigg as an ox

When the whale is killed he is in this mann towed to the ships by twoe or
three shallops made fast one to another.

The pieces of blubber are towed to the shore side by a shallop and drawn on
shore by a crane or carried by twoe menn on a barrowe to ye twoe cutters which
cutts them the breadth of a trencher and very thin^e and by twoe boys are
carried with handhooks to ye choppers

Thus they make clean and scrape ye whale fins

A tent and Coopers at work



Gods Power and Providence in the preservation of eight Men in GREENLAND, nine
Months and twelve Days.
But we had the sentence of death in our selves, that we should not trust in
our selves, but in God which raises the dead.

Who delivered us from so great a death, and does deliver: in whom we trust
that he will yet deliver us.

2. Cor. 1. ver. 9, 10.
GREENLAND is a Country very far Northward, situated in 77. degrees, and 40.
minutes, that is, within 12. degrees and 20. minutes of the very North Pole it
self. The Land is wonderful mountainous; the Mountains all the year long
full of ice and snow: the Plains in part bare in Summer time. There grows
neither tree not herb in it, except Scurvygrasse and Sorrel. The Sea is as
barren as the Land, affording no fish but Whales, Sea-horses, Seals, and
another small fish. And hither there is a yearly Fleet of English sent. We
eight men therefore being employed in the service of the Right Worshipful
Company of Muscowie Merchants, in the good ship called the Salutation of
London, were bound for this Greenland aforesaid, to make a voyage upon Whales
or Seahorse, for the advantage of the Merchants, and the good of the
Commonwealth. We set sail from London the first day of May, 1630. and having
a fair gale, we quickly left the fertile banks of Englands pleasant shoares
behindeus. After which, setting our comely sails to this supposed prosperous
gale, and ranging through the boisterous billows of the rugged Seas, by the
help and gracious assistance of Almighty God, we safely arrived at our
desired Port, in Greenland, the eleventh of June following. Whereupon having
moored our ships, and carried our caske ashoare, we, with all expedition, fell
to the fitting up of our Shallops, with all things necessary for our intended
voyage. We were in company three Ships; all which were then appointed by the
order of our Captain, Captain William Goodler, to stay at the Foreland,
until the fifteenth of July; with resolution, that if we could not by that
time make a voyage according to our expectation, then, to send one ship to the
Eastward, unto a fishing place some fourscore leagues from thence; whither at
the latter end of the year, the Whales use more frequently to resort. A second
of the three ships was designed for Green-harbour, (a place some fifteen
leagues distant to the Southward) thereto try her skill and fortune, if it
were possible thereto make a voyage. The third ship (which was the same wherein
we were) was appointed to stay at the Fore-land, until the twentieth of
August. But the Captain having made a great voyage at Bell Sownd, dispatches a
Shallop toward our ship, with a command unto us to come to him at Bell Sownd
aforesaid: his purpose being, both to have us take in some of his Trane Oil,
as also by joining our forces together, to make the Fleet so much the stronger
for the defense of the Merchants goods homeward bound, the Dunkirkers being
very strong and rise at sea in those days. Upon the eighth day of Angust
(thereupon) leaving the Foreland, we directed our course to the Southward,
toward Green-harbour, thereto take in twenty of our men, which had out of
ourships company been sent into the lesser ship; for the furtherance of her
voyage.

But the wind being now contrary, our ship could no way lie our course. The
fifteenth day, being calm and clear, and our ship now in the Offing, some
four leagues from Black point, and about five from the Maidens pappes (which
is a place famous, both for very good, and for great store of Venison,) our
Master sent us eight men here named, altogether in a shallop for the hunting
and killing of some Venison, for the ships provision. We thus leaving the
ship, and having taken a brace of dogs along with us, and furnish our selves
with a snap-hance, two lances, and a tinder-boxe; we directed our course
toward the shore, where in four hours we arrived, the weather being at
that time fair and clear, and every way seasonable for the performance of our
present intentions. That day we laid fourteen tall and nimble Dear along; and
being very weary and thoroughly tired, first with rowing, and now with hunting,
we fell to eat such victuals as we had brought along, agreeing to take our
rest for that night, and the next day to make an end of our hunting, and so
fairly to return to our ship again. But the next day, as it pleased God, the
weather falling out something thick, and much ice in the Offing betwixt the
shore and the ship (by reason of a Southerly wind driving along the coast)
our ship was forced so far to stand off into the Sea, to be clear of they
ice, that we had quite lost the fight of her: neither could we assure our
selves, whether she were enclosed in the drift ice, or not: and the weather
still growing thicker and thicker, we thought it our best course to hunt
along the shore, and so to go for Greene-harbour, there to stay aboard the
ship with the rest of our men, until our own ship should come into the Port.

Coasting thus along toward Greene-harbour, we killed eight Dear more; and
so at last having well laden our Shallop with Venison, we still kept on our
course toward Green-harbour: where arriving upon the seventeenth day, we
found (to our great wonderment) that the ship was departed thence, together
with our twenty men aforesaid. That which increased our admiration was, for
that we knew they had not victuals sufficient aboard, to serve them (by
proportion) homewards bownd: which made us again to wonder what should be the
reason of their so sudden departure.

Perceiving our selves thus frustrated of our expectation, and having now but
bare three days (according to appointment) to the uttermost expiration of our
limited time for our departure out of the Country; we thought it our best
course to make all possible speed to get to Bell Sownd, unto our Captain,
fearing that a little delay might bring a great deal of danger. For the
lightening therefore of our Shallop, that she might make the better way through
the waters, we heaved our Venison overboard, and cast it all into the Sea.
Having thus forsaken Green-harbour, with a longing desire to recover Bell Sownd
(from thence distant some sixteen leagues to the Southward) that night we got
half way about the point of the Nesse, or point of land, called Low-Nesse: But
the darkness or mistie fogge increasing so fast upon us, that it was
impossible for us to get further; even there between two rocks we coved from
the seventeenth day at night, until the eighteenth day at noone. At which time
the weather being somewhat clearer (though very thick still) we left the
Nesse behind us, still desirous to recover Bell Sownd: but having never a
Compass to direct our course by, nor any of our company that was Pilot
sufficient to know the land when he saw it, we were feign to grabble in the
dark (as it were) like a blind man for his way, and so over-shot Bell point
at least ten leagues to the Southward, toward Horn Sownd.

Some of us in the mean time knowing that it was impossible to be so long a
rowing and sailing of eight leagues (for we did both row and sail) made
inquiry, How the Harbor lay in? whereunto there was a ready answer made, That
it lay East in. Taking the matter therefore into our better consideration, some
of us judged, that it could not possibly be further to the Southward (our
reason being, our observation of the lands rounding away and trenting toward
the Eastward) and resolved thereupon to row no further on that Course, for the
finding of Bell Sownd. And though we were again persuaded by William Fakely
our Gunner, (a proper Seaman, though no skillful Mariner, who had been in the
Country five or six times before, which none of our Seamen had been) that it
was further to the Southwards: yet we, trusting better to our own reasons than
unto his persuasions, again returned toward the Northward: which was our best
and directest Course indeed, for the finding of Bell Sownd. Steering of which
Course, we were now come within two miles of Bell Point; and the weather being
fair and clear, we presently descryed the tops of the lofty mountains.
William Fakely thereupon looking about him, presently cries out unto us, That
we were all this while upon a wrong Course: upon hearing of which words, some
of our company (yea the most) were persuaded, to wend about the Boats head
the second time, unto the Southwards: which one action was the maine and only
cause of our too late repentance, though for mine own part (as it is well
known) I never gave consent unto their counsel.

And thus upon the fatal twentieth day of August, (which was the utmost day of
our limited time for staying in the Country) we again returned the quite
contrary way, namely to the Southward. Thus utterly uncertain when and where
to find the Sownd; a thousand sad imaginations overtooke our perplexed
minds, all of us assuredly knowing, that a million of miseries would of
necessity ensue, if we found not the ships, whereby to save our passage. In
this distracted time of our thoughts, we were now again the second time run
as far to the Southward as at the first: and finding by all reason thereupon,
how that there was no likelihood at all of finding any such place further to
the Southward, we wended the Shallop the second time unto the Northward.
William Fakely hereupon, being unwilling to condescend unto our agreement,
still persuaded us, that That could not possibly be our Course: but we not
trusting any longer unto his unskilful persuasions, (though all in him was out
of good will, and strong conceit of his being in the rights) bent our Course to
the Northward; and he not consenting to steer any longer, I took the Oar
out of his hand to steer any longer, I took the Oar out of his hand to
steer the Boat withal. The weather all this while continued fair and
clear, and it pleased God at the very instant time, to send the wind
Easterly: which advantage we thankfully apprehending, presently set sail. The
wind increased fresh and large, and our Shallop swiftly running, we arrived
the one and twentieth day at Bell point, where we found the wind right out of
the Sownd at East Northeast so fiercely blowing, that we could not possibly row
to Wind-wards; but being forced to take in our sail, we were feign to betake
our selves unto our Oars, by help of which we recovered some two miles
within the shore, where we were constrained for that time to Cove, or else to
drive to Lee-wards.

Thus finding this to be the very place we had all this while sought for, (he
now also agreeing thereunto) we forth with sought out and found an harbor for
our Shallop: and having brought her thereinto, two of our men were presently
dispatched over land unto the Tent at Bell Sownd, to see if the Ships were
still there; of which, by reason of the times being expired, and the
opportunity of the present fair wind, we were much afraid. The Tent being
distant ten miles at the least from our Shallop, our men at their coming
thither finding the ships to be departed out of the Road, and not being
certain, whether or not they might be at Bottle Cove, (three leagues distant
on the other side of the Sownd) riding there under the Loome of the land;
again return unto us with this sad news. The storm of wind hitherto
continuing, about midnight fell stark calm: whereupon we, unwilling to lose
our first opportunity, departed toward Bottle Cove; betwixt hope and fear of
finding the ships there: whither coming the two and twentieth, and finding the
ships departed, we, having neither Pilot, Plat, nor Compass for our directors
to the Eastward, found our selves (God he knows) to have little hope of any
delivery out of that apparent danger. Our fears increased upon us, even
whilst we consulted whether it were safest for us either to go or stay. If
go, then thought we upon the dangers in sailing, by reason of the much ice in
the way; as also of the difficulty in finding the place, when we should come
thereabouts. If we resolved still to remain at Bell Sownd, then we thought
that no other thing could be looked for, but a miserable and a pining death,
seeing there appeared no possibility of inhabiting there, or to endure so long,
so darksome, and so bitter a winter.

And thus were our thoughts at that time distracted, thus were our fears
increased; nor were they causeless fears altogether. Well, we knew that
neither Christian or Heathen people, had ever before inhabited those desolate
and untemperate Clymates. This also, to increase our fears, had we certainly
heard; how that the Merchants having in former times much desired, and that
with proffer of great rewards for the hazarding of their lives, and of
sufficient furniture and provision of all things that might be thought
necessary for such an undertaking, to any that would adventure to winter in
those parts; could never yet find any so hardy, as to expose their lives unto
so hazardous an undertaking: yea notwithstanding these proffers had been made
both unto Mariners of good experience, and of noble resolutions, and also unto
diverse other bold spirits; yet had the action of wintering in those parts,
never by any been hitherto undertaken. This also had we heard, how that the
company of Muscovie Merchants, having once procured the reprive of some
malefactors, that had here at home been convicted by Law for some heinous
crimes committed; and that both with promise of pardon for their faults, and
with addition of rewards also, if so be they would undertake to remain in
Green-land but one whole year, and that every way provided for too, both of
Clothes, Victuals, and all things else, that might any way be needful for
their preservation: These poor wretches hearing of this large proffer, and
fearing present execution at home, resolved to make trial of the adventure.
The time of year being come, and the ships ready to depart, these condemned
creatures are embarked, who after a certain space there arriving, and taking a
view of the desolatenesse of the place; they conceived such a horror and
inward fear in their hearts, as that they resolved rather to return for
England to make satisfaction with their lives for their former faults
committed, than there to remain, though with assured hope of gaining their
pardon: Insomuch as the time of the year being come, that the ships were to
depart from these barren shoares, they made known their full intent unto the
Captain: who being a pitiful and a merciful Gentleman, would not by force
constrain them to stay in that place, which was so contrary to their minds;
but having made his voyage by the time expired; he again embarked and brought
them over with him into England; where, through the intercession and means of
the Worshipful Company of Muscovie Merchants, they escaped that death, which
they had before been condemned unto. The remembrance of these two former
stories, as also of a third (more terrible than both the former, for that it
was likely to be our own case) more miserably now affrighted us: and that was
the lamentable and unmanly ends of nine good and able men, left in the same
place heretofore by the self same Master that now left us behind: who all
dyed miserably upon the place, being cruelly disfigured after their deaths by
the savage Bears and hungry Foxes, which are not only the civilest, but also
the only inhabitants of that comfortless Country: the lamentable ends and
miscarriage of which men, had been enough indeed to have daunted the spirits
of the most noble resolution.

All these fearful examples presenting themselves before our eyes, at this
place of Bottle Cove aforesaid, made us, like amazed men, to stand looking one
upon another, all of us, as it were, beholding in the present, the future
calamities both of himself and of his fellows. And thus, like men already
metamorphosed into the ice of the Country, and already past both our sense and
reason; stood we with the eyes of pity beholding one another.

Nor was it other men's examples and miscarriages and fears alone, that made us
amazed, but it was the consideration of our want of all necessary provision for
the life of man, that already struck us to the heart: For we were not only
unprovided, both of clothes to keep us warm, and of food to prevent the
wrath of cruel famine: but utterly destitute also we were of a sufficient
house, wherein to shroud and shelter our selves from the chilling cold. Thus
for a space standing all mute and silent, weighing with our selves the misery
we were already fallen into, and knowing delay in these extremities to be the
mother of all dangers, we began to conceive hope, even out of the depth of
despair. Rowsing up our benumbed senses therefore, we now lay out heads and
counsels together, to bethink our selves of the likeliest course for our
preservation in that place; seeing that all hopes of gaining our passage into
England, were then quite frustrate. Shaking off therefore all childish and
effeminate fears, it pleased God to give us hearts like men, to arm our
selves with a resolution to do our best for the resisting of that monster of
Desperation. An agreement thereupon by a general consent of the whole Company
we then entered into, to take the opportunity of the next fair weather, and go
for Green-harbour, to hunt and kill Venison for part of our winter provision.

Having thus agreed amongst ourselves, the five and twentieth day of August,
the weather and wind being both fair, we direct our course toward
Green-harbour, some sixteen leagues (as I before told you) distant from Bell
Sownd: and the wind being fresh and fair, within the space of twelve hours
we there arrived. Upon which place being now landed, the first thing we did,
was to make us a Tent with the sail of our Shallop, pitched up and spread upon
our Oars; a sorry one (God knows) though it were, yet under it we resolved to
rest our selves that night, to refresh our bodies with such food as we there
had, and the next day to return again unto our hunting. The weather that
night proving fair and clear, we made our sleep the shorter: (and alas what
men could sleep in such an extremity!) and fitting our selves and Shallop the
best we might, to Coals Park we went, a place some two leagues distant from
us, and well known unto Thomas Ayers, that was one of our Company, to be well
stored with Venison. Coming a-shoare at which place, though we found not so
many Dear as we indeed expected, yet seven we killed the same day, and four
Bears to boot; which we also intended to eat.

But the weather beginning now to overcast, and not likely to continue good for
hunting; we that night returned again unto Green-harbour: where making us a
Tent of our Sail and Oars (as is before described) we fell to eat of such
meat as God had sent us, and betook our selves to our rest upon it. Having
rested ourselves a while, and now finding the weather to clear up, we broke
off our sleep for that time, fitting our selves and two dogs again to go a
hunting; leaving William Fakely and John Dawes behind us in the Tent at
Green-harbour, as our Cooks (for the time) to dress some meat that we had,
for our refreshment at our return.

Departing thus from the Tent, we rowed toward Coals Park; in the way
whither, upon the side of a hill, by the Sea side, we espied seven Dear
feeding, whereupon presently a-shoare we went, and with our Dogs killed six of
them, after which, the weather again overcasting, we thought it to little
purpose to go any further at that time, but resolved to hunt all along the
side of that hill, and so at night to return unto our Tent. Going thus along,
we killed six Dear more; which we had no sooner done, but it began to blow
and rain, and to be very dark: whereupon we hasted toward the Tent, there
intending to refresh our selves with victuals and with rest for that night, and
the next day to return again unto our hunting. This purpose of ours was by
the foul weather the next day hindered: for it fell so black, so cold, and so
windy, that we found it no way fitting for our purpose. Lading therefore our
own Shallop with Bears and Venison; and another Shallop which we there found
haled up, and left by the Ships Company, as every year they use to do:
lading this other Shallop, I say, with the Graves of the Whales that had been
there boiled this present year, (which we there found in heaps flung upon
the ground) we, dividing our selves into two equal companies, that is to say,
William Fakely with one Seaman and two Land-men with him, betaking themselves
unto one Shallop; and Edward Pellham with another Seaman and two Land-men more
with him, going into the other Shallop; we all committed our selves unto the
Sea, intending with the next fair weather to go to Bell Sownd unto our Tent:
which was the place we set up our Rest upon, to remain at all the Winter.

Toward Bell Sownd therefore we went, with a purpose there to lay up our Store
of what victuals we had already gotten together; and with the next fair wind
to come hither again, to try if it were possible for us there to provide our
selves of some more Venison for our Winter provision.

Having thus laden both our Shallops, appointed our Company, and all ready now
for our departure; we were overtaken with the night, and there forced to stay
upon the place. The next day was Sunday; wherefore we thought it fit to
sanctify the Rest of it, and to stay our selves there until Monday, and to
make the best use we could of that good day, taking the best course we could
for the serving of God Almighty; although we had not so much as a Book amongst
us all, the whole time that we staid in that Country.

The Sabbath day being shut up by the approaching night, we betook our selves
to our Rest: sleeping until the Sun awakened us by his beginning to show
himself upon the Monday morning. The day was no sooner peept, but up we got,
fitting our selves and business for our departure. The weather was fair and
clear at the first; but after some four hours rowing, the sky began so to
over taste, and the wind to blow so hard, that we could not possibly get to
Bell Sownd that night, but Coved half way, until the next morning; at which
time we recovered Bottle Cove. To which place when we were once come, we found
the wind (then at Southwest) to blow so hard, that it was impossible for us to
reach Bell Sownd, but were forced to stay at Bottle Cove for that night. Our
Shallops we made fast one unto another, with a Rope fastening the head of the
one unto the stern of the other; and so casting our Grabnell or Anchor
overboard, we left them riding in the Cove.

But see now what a mischance, for the trial of our patience, and for the
making of us to rely more upon his providence, than upon any outward means of
our own; God now suffered to befall us: We being now all ashore, the
Southwest wind blew so hard and right into the Cove, that it made the Sea go
high; our Anchor also coming home at the same time, both our Shallops casting
along the shore, sunk presently in the Sea: wetting by this means our
whole provision, the weather withal beating some of it out of the Boats,
which we found swimming up and down the shore. For, coming out of our Tent
in the mean time, judge you what a sight this was unto us, to see by
mischance, the best part of our provision (the only hope of our lives) to be
in danger utterly to be lost, (or at least spoiled with the Seawater,) for
which we had taken such pains, and run such adventures in the getting. In this
our misery we saw no way but one (and that a very desperate one) namely, to
run presently into the high-wrought Sea, getting by that means into our
Shallops to save the remainder of our provisions, ready now to be washed quite
away by the billows. A Halser thereupon we got, which fastening unto our
Shallops, we, with a Crabbe or Capstang, by maine force of hand heaved them
out of the water upon the shore. This done, all along the Sea side we go;
seeking there and taking up such of our provisions, as were swumme away from
our Shallops. Having by this means gleaned up all that could be gotten
together, we resolved from thenceforth to let our Boats lie upon the shore,
till such time as the weather should prove fair and better; and then to go
over unto Bell Sownd.

The third of September the weather proving fair and good, we forthwith
lanched our Shallops into the water, and in them we that day got into Bell
Sownd. Thither so soon as we were come, our first business was, to take our
provision out of our Shallops into the Tent: our next, to take a particular
view of the place, and of the great Tent especially; as being the place of our
habitation for the ensuing Winter. This which we call the Tent, was a kind of
house (indeed) built of Timber and Boards very substantially, and covered with
Flemish Tyles: by the men of which nation it had in the time of their trading
thither, been builded. Fourscore foot long it is, and in breadth fifty. The
use of it was for the Coopers, employed for the service of the Company, to
work, lodge, and live in, all the while they make caske for the putting up of
the Trane Oil. Our view being taken, we found the weather beginning to alter
so strangely, and the nights and frosts so to grow upon us, that we durst not
adventure upon another hunting voyage unto Green-harbour; fearing the Sownd
would be so frozen, that we should never be able to get back to our Tent
again. By land it was (we knew) in vain for us to think of returning: for
the land is so mountainous, that there is no traveling that way.

Things being at this pass with us, we bethought our selves of building
another smaller Tent with all expedition: the place must of necessity be within
the greater Tent. With our best wits therefore taking a view of the place, we
resolved upon the South side. Taking down another lesser Tent therefore,
(built for the Land-men hard by the other, wherein in time of year they lay
whilst they made their Oil) from thence we fetched our materials. That Tent
furnished us with 150 Deale-boards, besides Posts or Stancheons, and Rafters.
From three Chimneys of the Furnaces wherein they used to boil their Oils, we
brought a thousand Bricks: there also found we three Hogsheads of very fine
Lyme, of which stuff we also fetched another Hogshead from Bottle Cove, on the
other side of the Sownd, some three leagues distant. Mingling this Lyme with
the Sand of the Sea shore, we made very excellent good mortar for the laying of
our Bricks: falling to work whereupon, the weather was so extreme cold, as
that we were feign to make two fires to keep our mortar from freezing. William
Fakely and my self undertaking the Masonrie, began to raise a wall of one
brick thickness, against the inner planks of the side of the Tent. Whilst we
were laying of these Bricks, the rest of our Company were otherwise employed
every one of them: some in taking them down, others in making of them clean,
and in bringing them in baskets into the Tent: Some in making mortar, and
hewing of boards to build the other side withal: and two others all the while,
in flaying of our Venison. And thus having built the two outermost sides of the
Tent with Bricks and Mortar, and our Bricks now almost spent, we were enforced
to build the other two sides with Boards; and that in this manner. First, we
nayl'd our Deal boards on one side of the Post or Stancheon, to the thickness
of one foot; and on the other side in like manner: and so filling up the hollow
place between with sand, it became so tight and warm, as not the least breath
of air could possibly annoy us: Our Chimneys vent was into the greater Tent;
being the breadth of one deal board, and four foot long. The length of this
our Tent was twenty foot, and the breadth sixteen; the height ten: our
seeling being Deal boards five or six times double, the middle of one,
joining so close to the shut of the other, that no wind could possibly get
between. As for our door, besides our making it so close as possibly it could
shut; we lined it moreover with a bed that we found lying there, which came
over both the opening and the shutting of it. As for windows, we made none at
all: so that our light we brought in through the greater Tent, by removing two
or three tyles in the caves, which light came to us through the vent of our
Chimney. Our next work was, to set up four Cabbins, billetting our selves two
and two in a Cabbine. Our beds were the Deeres skins dried, which we found
to be extraordinary warm, and a very comfortable kind of lodging to us in our
distress. Our next care then was for firing to dress our meat withal, and
for keeping away the cold. Examinging therefore all the Shallops that had been
left a-shoare there by the Ships, we found seven of them very crazie, and not
serviceable for the next year. Those we made bold withal; brake them up, and
carried them into our house, stowing them over the beams in manner of a
floor; intending also to stow the rest of our firing over them, so to make the
outer Tent the warmer, and to keep withal the snow from dryving through the
tyles into the Tent: which snow would otherwise have covered every thing, and
have hindered us in coming at what we wanted. When the weather was now grown
cold, and the days short, (or rather no days at all) we made bold to stave
some empty Caske that were there left the year before: to the quantity of
100 Tun at least. We also made use of some planks, and of two old Coolers
(wherein they cooled their Oil) and of whatsoever might well be spared,
without damnifying of the voyage the next year. Thus having gotten together
all, the firing that we could possibly make, except we would make spoil of
the Shallops and Coolers that were there; which might easily have overthrown
the next years voyage, to the great hinderance of the Worshipful Company,
whose servants we being, were every way careful of their profit. Comparing
therefore the samll quantity of our wood, together with the coldness of the
weather, and the length of time that there we were likely to abide; we cast
about to husband our stock as thriftily as we could, devising to try a new
conclusion: Our trial was this. When we raked up our fire at night, with a
good quantity of ashes and of embers, we put into the amidst of it a piece
of Elmen wood: where after it had lain sixteen hours, we at our opening of
it found great store of fire upon it; whereupon we made a common practice of
it ever after. It never went out in eight months together or thereabouts.

Having thus provided both our house and firing; upon the twelfth of September
a small quantity of drift ice, came driving to and fro in the Sownd. Early in
the morning therefore we arose, and looking every where abroad, we at last
espied two Seahorses lying a-sleepe upon a piece of ice: presently thereupon
taking up an old Harping Iron that there lay in the Tent, and fastening a
Grapnell Roape unto it, out lanch't we our Boat to row toward them. Coming
something near them, we perceived them to be fast a-sleepe: which my self,
then steering the Boat, first perceiving, spoke to the rowers to hold still
their Oars, for fear of awaking them with the crashing of the ice; and I,
skulling the Boat easily along, came so near at length unto them, that the
Shallops even touched one of them. At which instant William Fakely being ready
with his Harping Iron, heaved it so strongly into the old one, that he quite
disturbed her of her rest: after which she receiving five or six thrusts with
our lances, fell into a sounder sleep of death. Thus having dispatched the old
one, the younger being loath to leave her damme, continued swimming so long
about our Boat, that with our lances we killed her also. Haling them both
after this into the Boat, we rowed a-shoare, flayed our Sea-horses, cut them
in pieces, to roast and eat them. The nineteenth of the same month we saw
other Sea-horses, sleeping also in like manner upon several pieces of ice: but
the weather being cold, they desired not to sleep so much as before; and
therefore could we kill but one of them: of which one being right glad, we
returned again into our Tent.

The nights at this time, and the cold weather increased so fast upon us, that
we were out of all hopes of getting any more food before the next Spring: our
only hopes were, to kill a Bear now and then, that might by chance wander
that way. The next day therefore taking an exacter survey of all our victuals,
and finding our proportion too small by half, for our time and company; we
agreed among our selves to come to Allowance, that is, to stint our selves to
one reasonable meal a day, and to keep Wednesdayes and Fridayes Fasting
days; These be the ^eaps of the ^^t of the ^^ale, which ^e flung away ^^^er
the Oil (...) gotten out (...) it.
excepting from the*. Frittars or Graves of the Whale (a very loathsome mean)
of which we allowed our selves sufficient to suffice our present hunger: and at
this diet we continued some three months or thereabouts.

Having by this time finished what ever we possibly could invent, for our
preservations in that desolate desert; our clothes and shoes also were so
worn and torn (all to pieces almost) that we must of necessity invent some
new device for their reparations. Of Roape-yarne therefore, we made us thread,
and of Whale-bones needles to sew our clothes withal. The nights were wax't
very long, and by the tenth of October the cold so violent, that the Sea was
frozen over: which had been enough to have daunted the most assured
resolutions. At which time our business being over, and nothing now to
exercise our minds upon; our heads began then to be troubled with a thousand
sorts of imaginations. Then had we leisure (more than enough) to complain our
selves of our present and most miserable conditions. Then had we time to
bewail our wives and children at home; and to imagine what news our
unfortunate miscarriages must needs be unto them. Then thought we of our
parents also, and what a cutting Corasive it would be to them, to hear of the
untimely deaths of their children. Otherwhiles again, we revive our selves
with some comfort, that our friends might take, in hoping that it might please
God to preserve us (even in this poor estate) until the next year. Sometimes
did we vary our griefs; complaining one while of the cruelty of our Master,
that would offer to leave us to these distresses: and then presently again
fell we, not only to excuse him, but to lament both him and his company,
fearing they had been overtaken by the ice, and miserably that way perished.

Thus tormented in mind with our doubts, our fears, and our griefs; and in
our bodies with hunger, cold, and wants; that hideous monster of desperation,
began now to present his ugliest shape unto us: he now pursued us, he now
labored to seize upon us. Thus finding our selves in a Labyrinth, as it were,
of a perpetual misery, we thought it not best to give too much way unto our
griefs; fearing, they also would most of all have wrought upon our weakness.
Our prayers we now redoubled unto the Almighty, for strength and patience, in
these our miseries: and the Lord graciously listened unto us, and granted these
our petitions. By his assistance therefore, we shook off these thoughts, and
cheered up our selves again, to use the best means for our preservations.

Now therefore began we to think upon our Venison, and the preserving of that;
and how to order our firing in this cold weather. For fear therefore our
firing should fail us at the end of the year, we thought best to roast every
day half a Dear, and to stow it in hogsheads. Which we putting now in
practice, we forthwith filled three Hogsheads and an half; leaving so much
raw, as would serve to roast every Sabbath day a quarter: and so for Christmas
day, and the like.

This conclusion being made amongst us; then fell we again to bethink us of
our miseries, both passed and to come: and how, (though if it pleased God to
give us life, yet should) we live as banished men, not only from our friends,
but from all other company. Then thought we of the pinching cold, and of the
pining hunger: these were our thoughts, this our discourse to pass away the
time withal. But as if all this misery had been too little, we presently
found another increase of it: For, examining our provisions once more, we
found that all our Frittars of the Whale were almost spoiled with the wet that
they had taken: after which by lying so close together, they were now grown
mouldie: And our Bear and Venison we perceived again not to amount to such a
quantity, as to allow us five meals a week: whereupon we were feign to
shorten our stomachs of one meal more: so that for the space of three months
after that, we for four days in the week fed upon the unsavory and mouldie
Frittars, and the other three, we feasted it with Bear and Venison. But as if
it were not enough for us to want meat, we now began to want light also: all
our meals proved suppers now; for little light could we see; even the glorious
Sun (as if unwilling to behold our miseries) masking his lovely face from us,
under the sable veil of cole-blacke night. Thus from the fourteenth of
October, till the third of February, we never saw the Sun; nor did he all
that time, ever so much as peep above the Horizon. But the Moon we saw at all
times, day and night (when the clouds obscured her not) shining as bright as
she does in England. The Sky, it is true, is very much troubled with thick
and black weather all the Winter time: so that then, we could not see the
Moon, nor could discern what point of the Compass she bore upon us. A kind
of daylight we had indeed, which glimmer'd some eight hours a day unto us; in
October time I mean: for from thence unto the first of December, even that
light was shortened ten or twelve minutes a day constantly: so that from the
first of December till the twentieth, there appeared no light at all; but all
was one continued night. All that we could perceive was, that in a clear
season now and then, there appeared a little glare of white, like some show of
day toward the South: but no light at all. And this continued till the first
of January, by which time we might perceive the day a little to increase. All
this darkesome time, no certainety could we have when it should be day, or
when night: only my self out of mine own little judgment, kept the
observation of it thus. First bearing in mind the number of the Epact, I made
my addition by a day supposed, (though not absolutely to be known, by reason of
the darkness) by which I judged of the age of the Moon: and this gave me my
rule of the passing of the time; so that at the coming of the Ships into the
Port, I told them the very day of the month, as directly as they themselves
could tell me.

At the beginning of this darkesome, irksome time, we sought some means of
preserving light amongst us: finding therefore a piece of Sheete-lead over a
seame of one of the Coolers; that we ripped off, and made three Lamps of it:
which maintaining with Oil that we found in the Coopers Tent, and Roape-yarne
serving us in steed of Candle-weekes, we kept them continually burning. And
this was a great comfort to us in our extremity. Thus did we our best to
preserve our selves; but all this could not secure us: for we in our own
thoughts, accounted our selves but dead men; and that our Tent was then our
darkesome dungeon, and we did but wait our day of trial by our judge, to know
whether we should live or dye. Our extremities being so many, made us
sometimes in impatient speeches to break forth against the causers of our
miseries: but then again, our consciences telling us of our own evil
deservings; we took it either for a punishment upon us for our former wicked
lives; or else for an example of Gods mercy, in our wonderful deliverance.
Humbling our selves therefore under the mighty hand of God, we cast down our
selves before him in prayer, two or three times a day, which course we
constantly held all the time of our misery.

The new year now begun, as the days began to lengthen, so the cold began to
strengthen: which cold came at last to that extremity, as that it would raise
blisters in our flesh, as if we had been burnt with fire: and if we touched
iron at any time, it would stick to our fingers like Bird-lime. Sometimes if
we went but out a-doores to fetch in a little water, the cold would nip us in
such sort, that it made us as sore as if we had been beaten in some cruel
manner. All the first part of the Winter, we found water under the ice, that
lay upon the Bache on the Sea-shoare. Which water issued out of an high Bay or
Cliffe of ice, and ran into the hollow of the Bache, there remaining with a
thick ice over it: which ice, we at one certain place daily digging through
with pick-axes, took so much water as served for our drinking.

This continued with us until the tenth of January: and then were we feign
to make shift with snow-water; which we melted by putting hot Irons into it.
And this was our drink until the twentieth of May following.

By the last of January, were the days grown to some seven or eight hours
long; and then we again took another view of our victuals: which we now found
to grow so short, that it could no ways last us above six weeks longer. And
this bred a further fear of famine amongst us. But our recourse was in this,
as in other our extremities, unto Almighty God; who had helps, we knew, though
we saw no hopes. And thus spent we our time until the third of February.
This proved a mavelous cold day; yet a fair and clear one: about the middle
whereof, all clouds now quite dispersed, and nights sable curtain drawn;
Aurora with her golden face smiled once again upon us, at her rising out of
her bed: for now the glorious Sun with his glittering beams, began to guild
the highest tops of the lofty mountains. The brightness of the Sun, and
the whiteness of the snow, both together was such, as that it was able to have
revived even a dying spirit. But to make a new addition to our new joy, we
might perceive two Bears, (a she one with her Cubbe) now coming toward our
Tent: whereupon we straight arming our selves with our lances, issued out of
the Tent to await her coming. She soon cast her greedy eyes upon us; and
with full hope of devouring us, she made the more haste unto us: but with our
hearty lances we gave her such a welcome, as that she fell down upon the
ground, tumbling up and down, and biting the very snow for anger. Her Cubbe
seeing this, by flight escaped us. The weather now was so cold, that longer we
were not able to stay abroad: retiring therefore into our Tent, we first
warmed our selves; and then our again to draw the dead Bear in unto us. We
flaied her, cut her into pieces of a Stone weight or thereabouts, which served
us for our dinners. And upon this Bear we fed some twenty days; for she was
very good flesh, and better than our Venison. This only mischance we had with
her: that upon the eating of her Liver, our very skins peeled off: for mine
own part, I being sick before, by eating of that Liver, though I lost my
skin, yet recovered I my health upon it. She being spent, either we must
seek some other meat, or else fall aboard with our roast Venison in the
Caske, which we were very loath to do for fear of famishing, if so be that
should be thus spent, before the Fleet came out of England. Amid'st these our
fears, it pleased God to send diverse Bears unto our Tent; some forty at
least, as we accounted. Of which number we killed seven: That is to say, the
second of March one; the fourth, another; and the tenth, a wonderful great
Bear, six foot high at least. All which we flayed and roasted upon wooden
spits, (having no better kitchen-furniture than that, and a drying pan, which
we found in the Tent.) They were as good savory meat, as any beef could be.
Having thus gotten good store of such food, we kept not our selves now to
such straight allowance as before; but eat frequently two or three meals
a day: which began to increase strength and ability of body in us.

By this, the cheerful days so fast increased, that the several sorts of
Fowls, which had all the Wintertime avoy ded those quarters, began now again
to resort thither, unto their Summer-abiding. The sixteenth of March, one of
our two Mastive Dogs went out of the Tent from us in the morning: but from
that day to this he never more returned to us, nor could we ever hear what
was become of him. The Fowls that I before spoke of, constantly use every
Spring time to resort unto that Coast, being used to breed there most
abundantly. Their food is a certain kind of small fishes. Yearly upon the
abundant coming of these Fowls, the Foxes which had all this Winter kept
their Burrowes under the Rocks, began now to come abroad, and seek for their
livings. For them we set up three Trappes like Rat-trappes, and bayted them
with the skins of these Fowls, which we had found upon the snow; they
falling there in their flight from the hill whereupon they bred, toward the
Sea. For this Foul, being about the bigness of a Ducke, has her legs placed
so close unto her rumpe, as that when they alight once upon the land, they are
very hardly (if ever) able to get up again, by reason of the misplacing of
their legs, and the weight of their bodies; but being in the water, they raise
themselves with their pinions well enough. After we had made These Trappes,
and set them apart one from another in the snow, we caught fifty Foxes in
them: all which we roasted, and found very good meat of them. Then took we a
Bears skin, and laying the flesh side upward, we made Springes of Whales
bone, wherewith we caught about 60. of those Fowls, about the bigness of a
pigeon.

Thus continued we until the first of May; and the weather then growing
warm; we were now pretty able to go abroad to seek for more provision.
Every day therefore abroad we went; but nothing could we encounter withal,
until the 24. of May; when espying a Bucke, we thought to have killed him
with our Dog: but he was grown so fat and lazy, that he could not pull
down the Dear. Seeking further out therefore, we found abundance of Willocks
eggs; (which is a Foul about the bigness of a Ducke) of which eggs though
there were great store, yet we being but two of us together, brought but
thirty of them to the Tent that day; thinking the next day to fetch a thousand
more of them: but the day proved so cold, with so much Easterly wind, that we
could not stir out of our Tent.

Staying at home therefore upon the 25. of May, we for that day omitted our
ordinary custom. Our order of late (since the fair weather) was, every day,
or every second day, to go up to the top of a mountain, to spy if we could
discern the water in the Sea; which until the day before we had not seen. At
which time, a storm of wind coming out of the Sea, brake the maine ice
within the Sownd: after which, the vvinde coming Easterly, carried all the
ice into the Sea, and cleared the Sownd a great way, although not near the
shore at first, seeing the clear water came not near our Tent by three
miles at least.

This 25. of May therefore, we all day staying in the Tent, there came two
Ships of Hull into the Sownd: who knowing that there had been men left there
the year before; the Master (full of desire to know whether we were alive
or dead) manned out a Shallop from the Ship; with order to row as far up the
Sownd as they could, and then to hale up their Shallop, and travel over-land
upon the snow unto the Tent. These men at their coming ashore, found the
Shallop which we had haled from our Tent into the water, with a purpose to go
seek some Sea-horses the next fair weather: the Shallop being then already
fitted with all necessaries for that enterprise. This sight brought them into a
quandary; and though this encounter made them hope, yet their admiration made
them doubt, that it was not possible for us still to remain alive. Taking
therefore our lances out of the Boat, toward the Tent they come; we never so
much as perceiving of them: for we were all gathered together, now about to
go to prayers in the inner Tent; only Thomas Ayers was not yet come in to us
out of the greater Tent. The Hull men now coming near our Tent, haled it with
the usual word of the Sea crying Hey, he answered again with Ho, which sudden
answer almost amazed them all, causing them to stand still, half afraid at the
matter. But we within hearing of them, joyfully came out of the Tent; all
black as we were with the smoke, and with our clothes all tattered with
wearing. This uncouth sight made them further amazed at us: but perceiving us
to be the very men left there all the year; with joyful hearts embracing us,
and we them again, they came with us into our Tent. Coming thus in to us,
we showed them the courtesy of the house, and gave them such victuals as we
had; which was Venison roasted four months before, and a Cup of cold water;
which for noveltie sake they kindly accepted of us.

Then fell we to ask them what news? and of the state of the Land at home?
and when the London Fleet would come? to all which, they returned us the best
answers they could. Agreeing then to leave the Tent; with them we went to
their Shallop, and so a-board the Ship; where we were welcomed after the
heartiest and kindest English manner; and there we stayed our selves until the
coming of the London Fleet, which we much longed for: hoping by them to hear
from our friends in England. We were told that they would be there the next
day; but it was full three days ere they came, which seemed to us as tedious a
three days, as any we had yet endured: so much we now desired to hear from
our friends, our wives and children.

The 28. of May, the London Fleet came into the Port to our great comfort.
A-board the Admiral we went, unto the right noble Captain, Captain William
Goodler, who is worthy to be honored by all Seamen for his courtesy and
bounty. This is the Gentleman that is every year chief Commander of this
Fleet; and right worthy he is so to be, being a very wise man, and an expert
Mariner as most be in England, none dispraised. Unto this Gentleman right
welcome we were; and joyfully by him received: he giving order, that we should
have any thing that was in the Ship, that might do us good, and increase our
strength; of his own charges giving us apparel also, to the value of twenty
pounds worth.

Thus after fourteen days of refreshment, we grew perfectly well all of us:
whereupon the noble Captain sent William Fakely, and John Wise, ( Masons own
Apprentice) and Thomas Ayers the Whale-Cutter, with Robert Good fellow, unto
Master Masons Ship, according as themselves desired. But thinking there to be
as kindly welcomed, as the lost Prodigal; these poor men after their enduring
of so much misery, which through his means partly they had undergone: no
sooner came they a board his ship, but he most unkindly called them Run-awayes,
with other harsh and unchristian terms, far enough from the civility of an
honest man. Noble Captain Goodler understanding all these passages, was right
sorry for them, resolving to send for them again, but that the weather proved
so bad and uncertain. I for mine own part, remained with the Captain still
at Bottle Cove, according to mine own desire: as for the rest of us that staid
with him, he preferred the Land-men to row in the Shallops for the killing of
the Whales; freeing them thereby from their toylesome labor a-shoare;
bettering their Means besides. And all these favors did this worthy Gentleman
for us.

Thus were we well contented now to stay there till the twentieth of August;
hoping then to return into our native Country: which day of departure being
come, and we embarked, with joyful hearts we set sail through the foaming
Ocean, and though crossed sometimes with contrary winds homeward bound; yet
our proper ships at last came safely to an Anchor in the River of Thames: to
our great joy and comfort, and the Merchants benefit. And thus by the blessing
of God came we all eight of us well home, safe and sound: where the
Worshipful Company our Masters, the Muscovie Merchants, have since dealt
wonderfully well by us. For all which most merciful Preservation, and most
wonderfully powerful Deliverance, all honor, praise, and glory by unto the
great God, the sole Author of it. He grant us to make the right use of it, Amen.

FINIS.

