A warning against the dangerous practices of Papists, and specially the
parteners of the late Rebellion.

Gathered out of the common fear and speech of good subjects.

Vox populi Dei, vox Dei est.

Seen and allowed.

THe state of this Realm considered, and specially such accidents touching
the same, as late troubles have ministered, do make it daily more and more
evident how precious and how dear a jewel is the safety of the Queens most
excellent Majesty our most loving and beloved sovereign Lady. The Q. precious.
Compare the time of her most noble and gracious government, with ages long
ago passed, and specially with the miserable and dangerous days immediately
preceding her most happy and comfortable reign: call to memory the weakness
and perils wherein the common weal stood, before her highnesses coming to the
crown: wey the infinite benefits, both bodily and ghostly, that the whole
realm and all her subjects have and do daily receive by her means: think
upon the grievous and unspeakable miseries that we all shall be like to sustain
by loss of her invaluable presence: it shall be plain that he is wilfully
blind that can not see, he is wickedly malicious that will not acknowledge, he
is obstinately stone hearted that shall not with sorrow and trembling deeply
imprint in careful heart, those motions and thoughts that such consideration
shall lay before him. The Queens good government.
Remember the quiet of conscience, the comfort of true serving of God, the
freedom of the Realm, the deliverance from foreine thraldom of souls, the
escape of the heavy yoke of strange dominion, the recovery of wealth, the
benefit of peace, the common and egall distribution of justice, the familiar
cherishing of Nobility, the good preserving and love of the Commonaltie, the
mutual and tender kindness at home, the amity and awe abroad, the sweet
enjoying of all these commodities: match herewith the danger and fear of
losing them: how can it then be, but that the mind shall be marueilously
distracted? Great and full of diversities are the sittes of a passioned lover,
but yet greatest where reason rules least. Far greater to a good mind must
be the panges of consideration in this case, but yet greatest where reason
rules most. The silly lover is transported (as they complain poor souls in
their dities) sometime with joys of his enjoying, sometime with fear of his
forgoing, there is no mean or order of his excessive affection, and all is
because the abused creature has set his felicity in a wrong conceit: But if
such vain, short, repentable, and feeble delight of fancy have such force upon
the mind of man, how much more ought the deep, wise, natural, and true
impression of the eternal comfort of soul, the good and safe estate both of
the common weal and of the private hauiour of him self, and of those things
and persons that he holds dearest, yea and of his posterity for ever, work
more mighty, violent, and continuing effects in the mind of an honest good
man, that sets his thought upon just and assured grounds? All these
contemplacions can not but fill a good Christians and a good subjects eye with
sight and knowledge, how inestimable a treasure our Queen, our I say Queen
Elizabeth, is to the Realm of England, Resest solliciti plena timoris amor.
and the same can not but pearce his heart with strong fear and care for her
preservation, so far as surely it were able (as in the dumme borne son of
Cresus) to break the stringes of a tied tongue, to draw speech out of the most
barbarous and rudest subject, to cry out at her highnesses peril, and with
such noise as he is able to make, though it were but as a goose of the
Capitole, to give warnyng to the watchmen of the toure of all our safeties.
This has moved me to forget how unskillful and how unapt I am to treat of
matters so far above me, and only to remember how meet it is for all men to
think of those things that touch them so nerely. Neither do I altogether
allow of the manerlinesse of that good fellows courtesy, that would not
unlock a gate to the king, but made the king to stay there, while he ran
two miles to fetch a more worshipful man to open it. And far more
discommendable had such good manner ben, if the king had then ben nerely and
egrely pursued by an enemy. When traitorous affection so boileth in subjects
hearts, as it can not be contained in stomach, but must break out into open
rebellion, when the very humor that feeds such treason is so strong and so
angry, that neither lenitiues of clemency and bounty can allay it, nor
purgatiues of honesty and loyalty can expel it, it is hye time to look to
the health of the body. When the fury of treason outrageth so far, A figure
of the Northren rebellion.
that it ouerfloweth all the banke^ of discretion, and all the bounds of
remembering their own peril: when they draw every ambitious popular wit
into their fellowship, like an eating canker or infecting sore: when they can
not tarry the auantage of their own times, the ripeness of their devises, the
readiness of their aids, the fitness of seasons, nor other circumspections of
policy: when the stay or seuering of their heads can not hold them, but
that, like an Adder when her head is cut of, they will still be wrigling with
their tails and threaten a stinging, when being vanquished, they yet find
some new resorters upon old hopes: surely it must needs appear to be a
wonderfully malicious poison of treason that possesses them, and so a great
necessity to know who be enuenimed with it, the causes of the disease, Sero
medicina paratur, cum mala per longas inualuere moras.
and the signs of the infection, that convenient cure may be applied, or for
the incurable some good order may be provided, that the head and heart may be
preserved. It is now hie time therefore, when traitors them selves have given
warning of their own treasons, to search the confederacy, yea and as miners
follow the signs every way as they spread in the ground till they be guided to
the trunk or body of the metal, so to follow the apparances of suspicions
and likelihodes, till it appear plainly what light made the shadow, or what
fire raised the smoke. It is not good tarying till the flame mountyng in the
air above the house teppe, the principalls and pillars consumed, and each part
so embraced with fire that no aid dare approach, do plainly declare the whole
building past hope of recovery. Fyres oftentimes negligently raked up, sticks
ends not thoroughly quenched, embers not regarded, a candeles end not looked
unto, have brought many an honest man to pitiful calamity. I like therefore
better the honest wisdom of those that study how the Queen may stand and not
fall, then the reaching policy of those that devise how them selves may stand
when the Queen is fallen. God preserve her highness long, for her falling
would make a Samsons post with us all, yea and rightly a Samsons post, for no
dout it would broose them too, that be busiest to pull it down. I have
thought good therefore, as a faithful subject, staying my whole trust of well
doing upon the well continuing of this blessed estate, without other respect,
or rather prospect beyond it, to disclose in brief collection of the common
brute of good and honest men, that love this estate and be careful for it, so
much as I have noted, or rather common experience and evident truth has
opened, concerning the dispositions of sundry dangerous things, doings, and
persons, against God, the Queens, highness, the Realm and her most noble
government, to the intent that upon laying abroad of their faults, them selves
may be reformed, or her highness by warning so armed, as they may be less
dangerous, that is to say, more restrained and dishabled, and her majesty's
true subjects more strengthened and emboldened.

Surely all true Christians and all true English subjects ought to believe,
True couclusions.
and may well know, that these are true conclusions.

First that every papist, that is to say, every one that believes all the Popes
doctrine to be true, is an enemy and traitor, against the majesty and honor
of God, against the crowns and dignities of all kings and temporal princes,
and against the wealth and safety of all civil kingdoms, policies, and
commonweals.

Item that every such English Papist is a traitor to the Queen of England, and
hates her life, wishes the alteration of her government, and lives in hope
of an other world, which even by an ordinary byword, it is said that them
selves do call their Golden day.

Item that every such English Papist is a special traitor to the realm of
England, and has no regard into what slavery, conquest, subjection to foren
tyranny, dishonor or other misery it be thrown, so that their false
idolatrous and supersticious religion be restored, with liberty to spoil and
murder, without respect of dignity, age, sex, learning, reverence, honesty,
or nature.

Item that no clemency, gentleness, benefits, or loving dealing, can win a
Papist while he continues a Papist, to love her majesty, how much so ever he
dissemble, nor bring them to ascribe their safety to any her benefits, nor to
any praise of her own goodness, but either to their own dissimulation,
practice, and falshed, which some call cunning, or to the holiness of their
cause, for whom God forsoothe so provides as his anointed ones may not
possibly by any law, or at least execution of law, be touched: where in deed,
if they continue still unpunished, it must be thought that God so purueyeth*
because the punishments of this world are not sufficient for them. But yet in
the mean time it serves to make them inexcusable, by whose default so
dangerous wolves remain in the flock.

Item that Papistrie has this property of heresies, contrary to the nature
of Gods truth: that is, to be thrown down with adversity, and to florishe
with indulgence and lenity.

Item that as it is reason that the owner of a shepebiter mastife, knowing his
dogs quality, should either hang up his dog, or pay for the sheep that his
dog worieth, so those that have notorious Shepebiters, murderers of Gods
flock, in their custody and power, must make their account, either to hang up
or otherwise dispatch their curres, or else to answer to God for the blood of
his sheep, both such as they have destroyed, and such as they may destroy by
any possibility hereafter.

Item that all aduises to great personages, to persuade neutralitie or an
enterteyning of contrary sides in religion with uncertainty of countenance and
favor, is the way to supplant assured safety, to make sure enemies and unsure
friends, to isle open to parasites and traitors, to be unknown to other, and to
be unable to discern what other be to them.

Item that timorous policy is the worst policy that may be, what soever the
cause be, good or bad, and worst of all it is in best causes: wherein as her
majesty has neither want of constant magnanimity, nor cause of fear, so is
it meet that her enemies have no stomach to contemn her, nor by excess of
clemency to misconstrue her goodness as lack of daring.

Item that by the great novelties and alterations of times that have happened
within our memory, there is risen a common policy among people, to join to
strong and safe sides, whereby they are aliened from the fearful, and
therefore it is to be provided, that there be a boldness of safety to serve
the Queen truly and zelously, and an assuredness of danger to her enemies.

Item by boldness and sharp execution upon enemies, the friends are
encoraged, and contrariwise if the dangerous traitor be not removed, the true
subject may be left in peril, and thereby the rest of good subjects disabled,
or at lest discouraged to venture so far again, and the freedom of
consultation in the mean time for preserving the prince empeched.

Item that it is truly said Improbum hominem praestat non accusasse quam
absoluere. It is better not to meddle with a dangerous noughty man, than to let
him go: for what were it else than to set a house a fire and run away by the
light?

Item that occasions and fit opportunities ouerslipped are not recouerable.

Item that many times it is as small an offense to give a warrant to kill a
true man, as to pardon a murderer or traitor, as a wise shepeherd will rather
give leave to a hunter to kill the best lamb in his flock, than to let go a
fox or a wolf.

Item that the lives of kings and princes are the lives and souls of their
kingdoms and commonweals, whereby they are to consider that in being
prodigal of their own safeties in excess of clemency to traitors, or in
security of exposing their persons to perils, Largiuntur ex alieno, they be
liberal of that which is not their own to give.

Item that no traitor is more perilous, than he that wresteth the law to raise
an underminer of the princes crown to her danger.

Item that he is justly to be suspected that shall practice with any vain
devise of pacification, or colored clemency, to rebator blunt the edge of the
princes sword, or so to tie it in the scaberde that it may not be drawn for
her defense, as if such qualifiers, hiders, and clokers, should seek to abuse
that most reverend and holy sign of majesty to no good end or other end than
God ordained it.

Item that God can not well take it, if he be less zelously served than the
devil, that there be less feruencie showed by truly learned princes for
auauncing of Gods honor against his enemies, than has been by abused and
deceived princes for setting up of the kingdom of the devil and Antichrist.

Item that Gods commandementes of placabilitie and forgiveness extend to our
own enemies, but not to his enemies, against revenge of private displeasures,
and not against severity and sharp execution in cases of Gods honor and
commonweals: wherein is always to be noted, that the Prince is so not a
private but a public person, as no attempt against her safety can or ought to
be accounted a private cause.

The full proof and larger explication of these conclusions, though it be
easy, as a thing which not only all conuenientie of reason affirms, but also
daily experience lays before all men's eyes that have a free consideration not
accombred with corrupt zeal and affection, so yet surely were it a meet thing
to be handled by some such man, as could add thereto such ornaments of speech,
such strength of eloquence, and pith of persuasion, as might not only be
understood and believed, but be felt and mouel Here any most excellent orators
special-vertues might be well employed. A fit argument sure it were to show
wit and knowledge, but specially truth and good meaning. But till some fit
person shall take in hand to bestow his more profitable travail that way, let
us yet for vnlading of some of the abundance of our entier devotion for Gods
truth, for her majesty, and our country, have some remembrance of the
particularities thereof.

For the first article that defines papists, that accuses the^ of treason to
God, to kings, and to realms, if it be well weyed it can not but quickly be
seen for undoubted truth. Though it be true, that every one that holds any
one error or article of doctrine that the Pope teaches, varying from the word
of God, is in that article a papist, as for example the heresy of
transubstantiation, Not all Papists traitors.
the blasphemy of popish mass, or any such other, yet count I not every such
a one wholly a papist within compass of this article, that is, under title of a
traitorous Papist, but such a one as holds all the Popes doctrine to be true,
that the Roman church erreth not, that it has rightfully such superiority
and primacie in others kingdoms and diocesces as it has proudly claimed and
usurped, and that Christians are bound to refer their faith unto it, and to
hang upon the Popes determinations. Many men otherwise good and honest
subjects are not yet purged of all errors wherewith Rome has infected them,
and must have their time to be better instructed. But those that are perfect
Papists, Which Papists, be traitors
that publish the Pope to be head of the church (which yet in deed is no member
of the true church) and would have us with an implicit and bond faith, to
depend upon that sea, and for that reason will refuse by all lawful means to
confess the right of Princes in their kingdoms over all their subjects, they
be perfect traitors in deed, yea and the learned sort of them be wilful
heretics and traitors. Learned Papists wilful traitors.
For though in the dark times, when controversies of religion were not brought
into searching, the stream of error carried men away without douting, yet
since that by debating the light has been evidently opened, and men have
sought and thoroughly examined the matter, there is no learned papist but he
knows he mainteineth error, and in defending and spreading the same he
defends and spreads, and so directly, advisedly, wilfully, and maliciously,
puts in execution to his uttermost power, hye treasons against God, against
kings, and kingdoms.

Against God I call them treasons, Treason offense against majesty.
though our law, the judge of civil treasons in England, have no such name,
because the nature of the offense so properly receaueth that title, and also
the usual name of hye treason in iure gentium, in the common law of nations,
and in other languages, does so plainly express it. Hye treasons are in their
true nature, offenses against hye majesty, that is, either to the destruction
of the persons, or denial and defacement of the just dignities and authorities
of those that bear the name of majesty, and to whom the highest duty of
obedience faith and allegiance extends. And therefore is treason called
Crimen lesae maiestatis, the crime of violating or abating of majesty. Greater
majesty than the majesty of God can not be, therefore hyer and verier
treasons then against God can not be. Treason against God.
His person can not be destroyed, or touched: his dignity, honor, glory, and
authority, may be sclaundered and blasphemed, and his subjects, that is,
mortal men, may be withdrawn from their due obedience, and drawn into
rebellion against him. And this I say is hye treason to God, to violate or
abate the majesty of God: and this do papists. For though God be king of the
whole world, and so is rightly called the Lord by universal name, yea even of
deuilles: yet is his chirch his more proper and certain kingdom, whereby he
is more restrainedly and aptly called our king and our father, and so more
fitly called our head in respect of the body, which is his chirch and not the
rest of the world. In this kingdom his highest dignity is to be the only head
thereof, which the Papists take from him, and derive it to their Pope. And
though with gloses they excuse it, that their Popes take it not from God, (...)
under God, as his vicars, yet must they be admonished, that without sufficient
deputation and warrant from the king himself, (which the Pope has not) the
subject to thrust himself into governance of the kingdom is hye treason,
where he that being a stranger would seek to conquer it, were but an enemy.
And so is it rightly to be said that the Turk is to God an enemy, and the Pope
is to God a traitor, and all his adherentes principal traitors, for treason
admits no accessaries.

Also one great part of Gods majesty stands in making of laws, to govern
his kingdom, that his sheep shall hear his voice and no strangers. Against
which point of majesty, as it is hye treason to publish laws and
proclamations in civil kings names against their will, so are papists hye
traitors in publishing and receiving laws, proclamations, and decrees from a
climing and usurping tyrant to bind Gods subjects the chirch, without the
will and warrant of God.

Also rebelliously to burn, destroy, tread down, or deface in great contempt,
the commissions and laws of temporal kings, is an hye offense against
majesty, and therefore papists, that dishonor and discredit the word of God,
and destroy the books thereof, are hye offenders against his majesty.

Also hie treason it is for the subject to levy war agayst his sovereign,
and to destroy his land, his faithful subjects, and true liege people. And
therefore Papists in their persecuting and murderyng of Christians with open
hostility, have showed themselves hye traitors to the universal King of
Christians.

Also where the counterfaityng of princes hands and coins, and the clipping
and abating the value of their true coins, and the uttering of such forged and
abated coin, is hie treason: what less name than hye treason against God, can
we give to papists, that have counterfeit the writing and coins of God, and
given out false commissions, false patentes and false charters instead of his
word, that clippe from the dignity and sufficiency of his word, that have
coined false heresies, abated true doctrines, and so do publish and utter them.

Also if corrupting and counterfaityng of Princes seals, and giving out or
annexing his seals to false charters of their own in the Princes name, be hye
treason: are they not hye traitors to God, that corrupt his seals his
Sacraments, and set forth new private institutions of their own, as Masses,
and such bagages, instead of them, I mean not only the inuenters and
forgers, but also the receivers, publishers, vtterers, and cariers abroad of
such abominable untruths?

Also what greater offense against Majesty can be, than to command the
Princes subjects not to believe the Princes word or writing, nor any thing that
shall pass by his authority, without such offenders confirmation and
allowance: And that the Princes word and writing suffiseth not to direct the
subjects duty, without such offenders explication and addicions: And that
such offenders may add at their pleasure: And that such addicions are to be
holden equal with the Princes word: And that the Princes word must ever be so
taken as such offenders expound it, and none otherwise? Then must the Papists,
in their discredityng the word of God, in their dishablyng it as not sufficyng
to the instruction of our faith, for the salvation of our souls* in their
clayming false and undue authority to their traditions, and in their
restrayning the word of God to their expositions though directly against the
word and against the spirit of God, needs be accounted hye traitors against
Gods majesty.

Also the greatest honor and dignity that God has and chalengeth ielously to
him self among men, is the redemption and justification of man. The Papists,
which draw that from God to man, from grace to works, as they are most heinous
and blasphemous traitors to God in denying his free graciousnesse therein, so
are they most arrant thieves to Christian men in robbyng them of the benefit
thereof.

Also if to deny that the Prince ought to enjoy the style, kyngly name, and
dignity of the realm, with all preeminences to they same belongyng, be hye
treason: are the not hye traitors to God, that take from God the name of our
only Iustifier, and from Christ the title of our only redemer and Advocate,
and from the holy ghost the office and style of our only true and sufficient
Instructor?

Also seeing that to defile the kings wife is hye treason, whereby the
succession of his crown may grow to dishonor and oncertaintie: are not
Papists then hye traitors that have made the church the spouse of God, to
commit so many foul spiritual whoredoms, with idolatries, heresies and
yeldyng her self to be abused of strangers?

So appears it evidently that, if violatyng of majesty: if denyng the king
to be the only king and head of his own realm: if vsurpyng supreme governance
without the kings assignement: if making and receiuyng laws and
proclamations, in the kings name, without his warrant: if destroyeng and
defacyng in contempt, the kings charters: if leuyeng war against the king,
within the realm, and murderyng his subjects: if counterfaityng the kings
coin or seals: if annexyng his seals to false writings: if abatyng his
coin, by clippyng or otherwise: if utterance of such forged, or abated ware:
if discredityng the Princes word and authority, and auauncyng their own above
it: if denyeng the kings right to his kyngly office: if taking from him his
royal style name and dignity: if corruptyng his wife with adultery: if any of
these, if all these together, be hye treason: Papists are hye traitors to the
majesty of almighty God.

But these parhappes may be thought to be but allegorical or figurative
treasons, (so little the matters of God do move us) and in the eye and
consideration of the law of the realm they are none other, yet are they in
very deed truly treasons and offenses against the highest majesty, Kings
should have care of Gods honor.
even the same majesty by whom kings do reign and are vpholden, and the same
majesty for which kings ought to be careful, if they will have him to
provide for their majesty's. Yea they are the very seeds of civil and temporal
treasons. For undoubtedly, as no man breaks out into actual sin against
men, that has not first yielded to an assent to offend God: so no man proceeds
so far as to commit treason against the Prince, Papistrie sede of civil
treason.
that has not first conceived a traitorous mind to rebel against God. And as
of ordinary course and natural necessity it follows, that full and strong
seeds, thrown in ground fit for them, cherished with convenient moisture, and
comfortable heat of norishyng son, must rankly grow and bring forth herbs
or wedes of their propre kind: so these traitorous seeds laid up in fat soil
of Papists bosoms, if they be watered with wealth and indulgence, and shyned
upon with the cherefull glimses of opportunities, will surely bring forth the
fruits of their own quality, treasons against princes. Heresies punished by
temporal law.
And for this respect, other offenses that have in times past ben wrongfully
supposed to be of this nature, have been also punished by the laws of the
realm. In ancient order of Letes, and other courts, they have been enquired
upon before treasons done to the prince. They have had their several forms of
punishments, yea in some cases they have been, and in some places and causes
they yet be, exempted from the Princes power to pardon. They have been termed
by special names of heresies and blasphemies: and their punishementes, byside
temporal peynes, have been extended in opinion to the further revenge of the
eternal Majesty, whoes crown and dignity they have been thought to violate.
And surely, if in discernyng which were heresies and blasphemies, they had not
erred: if they had not mistaken, and executed the true man for the traitor: the
general care which was pretended to mainteyne truth and the church, stood well
with the duty of Christian Princes, as viceroyes and deputies justly zealous
for their superior or rather supreme Lord king of kings and Lord of lords,
the true monarch of whole universality. And though the same late and new
deceived antiquity swarued from true judgment of the persons and causes, I
can not well see how that should be a warrant to disburden Princes of
imitation of that zele, when it is ones joined with right understanding, no
more than the wrongful hangyng of a true man by mistakyng him for a thief or a
murderer, ought to be a discharge for the very thief or murderer, when he is
afterward taken in deed. And without doubt more wholesome and profitable it were
for these heretical traitors against God, Mercy to punish Papists.
I mean the Papists them selves, to be in this life, by some sharper law and
execution driven to repentance, than to be repried or reserved to arrainement
before the last judge, whoes knowledge can not be deciued, whoes iusties can
not then be entreated, whoes execution has neither end nor measure: and so a
little more hardness with them a while, would be a very beneficial and
merciful sharpness.

But now let us come to that part that touches men more nerely than any love
of God. Papists traitors to kings and kingdoms.
Let us see how they be traitors to kings and kingdoms. If we have mind to
see that Papists, which hold all the Popes doctrine, to be true, are traitors
in deed to kings and kingdoms, it behooves to call to mind what be the
Popes doctrines, doings and practices concerning the crowns of kings and
states of kingdoms. Popes have challenged, and Papists that affirm the Popes
to be free from error, Traitorous doctrines of Popes for kings and kingdoms.
their doctrine to be true, and their authority to be lawful, do also hold
that it is their due which they challenge, that is, to have the authority of
both swords, spiritual and temporal, the one in exercise, the other in
power: to have the disposition of all the crowns of Christian Princes: to have
the judgment of deciding to whom the right of any kingdom belongs: to have
power for disobedience to him, or by his discretion, to transfer the crowns
of kings to whom he will: to have lawful power, to give kingdoms to prey,
spoil, and conquest, to such as can invade and possess them: to have power to
assoile and discharge Christian subjects, from faith and allegiance to their
lawful and natural sovereign Lords, Kings, and Princes: to have power to
give leave, yea commandment, blessing, reward, forgiveness of sins, and
heaven it self, to subjects to rebel against the Prince, to depose the
Prince, disherite and destroy him: that there is of common right, and by the
mere law of God, reserved to the Pope a special subjection, resort,
appellation, and obedience of one great part of all Princes subjects, yea and
of all subjects of all Princes in one great part of their causes. Be not these
heinous treasons? And these can not be denied to be the natural and very
treasons of all Papists, that is to say, of all that depend upon credit of the
Pope, that hold him for Gods vicar, for Peter's successor, for whom Christ
prayed that his faith should not fail, that apply to him this title ad quem
persidia non potest accedere, to whom falshode can not reach, that hold him
for a constant rock, an assured preacher of truth, an apostolical man, if he
be not some other thing than a man, to whom our belefe is bounden, with such
other false titles, wherewith Popes them selves have garnished them selves and
their parasites have ouerloden them.

Consider the ordinary practice of Popes and Papists according to these
doctrines, Traitorous doings of Papists against kings and kingdoms.
and than shall you see, that from the most hye treason which the Pope
committed against his sovereign Lord the Emperor, the renting and
destruction of the Empire, all the victories and successes of the Saracens and
Turks against Christendom, all the tearyng away of most noble and large
kingdoms and provinces from the body of Christianity, all the subduing and
thrallyng of infinite Christian souls to Mahomete and the devil, all the
deposinges, murderinges, turmoyllinges, civil wars, debates between
Christian Princes, shedinges of Christian blood, indignities and oppressions of
Christian kings and Emperors, conquestes, rebellions, and mischiefs, for
these v. C. years and above, are wholly or chiefly to be imputed to the
treasons of Popes and Papists. All sometime most learned and noble Grecia yet
lamentably rueth it. All Africa the mother of most constant Martyrs feels it.
The Germane Emperors, with most heinous reproaches and foul treading in their
necks, may not forget it. The kings of France and Spain, both at home in
their native kingdoms, and abroad, as well in Naples, Sicile, Lombardie, as in
other territories of Italy and of the Empire, have sharply felt it. The Lords
and states of Italy have been daily and long shaken with it. The kings of
England have been poisoned, whipped, beaten with rods, murdered, deposed, the
land given in conquest, enterdited, made tributarie, robbed, pilled and scraped
of their treasure, brought into slauishe subjection, deprived of honor and
estimation, every way most villanously abused. To let pass the elder times and
further realms, let us speak nothing of deposing of old Emperors, erecting
of new, setting the son against the father, the subject against his Lord,
making them come barefooted them selves with their wives and children long
waiting with submission in cold frostes, treading in their necks, spurning of
their crowns, and a thousand such abominable prides of Popes and slaueries of
Princes. Let us deal, but with our selves, and with our own feeling,
knowledge, and memory. The accursing of king John, the receiving him vassal,
the making his Realm subject and feudatarie to the Pope, the arming his
subjects against him, the poisoning of him at length, the giving the land to
the French Kings son, the inuading thereof by the Dolphine of France, his
so long possessing a great part of it, the rebellion of the Barons to take the
Frenchmens part, all the mischiefs that fell in all this while, were they not
the good works of Popes and Papists? The great division of the two noble
houses of York and Lancaster, which cost so much English blood, that there
remains no house of hie or mean nobility, that has not smarted for it, so
many foughten fields within the Realm, so long and so great uncertainty
which side were true men and which were traitors, and for how many days or
hours they should be so esteemed, such desolation and miseries, to whom are
they to be imputed, but to the Popish Clergy and Papists, and among other to
Thomas Arundell Archbishop of Canterbury that traitorously practiced the
deposing of his lawful sovereign Lord king Richard the second? But come yet
to later times. How was the Queens majesty's most noble father assalted by the
Pope and Papists? His Realm was interdited and given away to him that could
catch it. Legates, and one notable English traitor, were sent about to
persuade Christian Princes, to invade England, to destroy and depose King
Henry, and to take the Realm in reward for their labor. When Charles the
late Emperor was setting forward against the Turk, Cardinal Pole being sent
by the Pope, made a solemn Oration to him, which is yet extant in Print, to
persuade the Emperor to turn his prepared power from inuading the Turk, and
to bend it against King Henry the viij. as one worse then any Turk. What
turmoile was raised then by the Northren rebels against him, whereof some by
his elemencie (a good example) have lived to this day to raise a new rebellion?
How troubled they her majesty's most excellent brother with unhappy seditions?
How vexed they and how endangered they the Realm and the Queens own person
in her sisters time? What might Charles the Emperor have done for recovery
and enlarging of Christendom, if his force that way intended had not by Popish
practice been perverted sundry ways and times, to the sheding of Christian
blood and wasting of Christendom, and to the overthrow of his victorious
course? What tempests has the late conspiracy of Trent blown up in
Christendom, that can not yet be quieted, and all because the Pope has
instilled an opinion into his Papists, Pope teaches to keep no faith.
that Princes, if he dispense with them, are not bound to keep faith and
promise, no not the word of a king, whereby no peace can yet be assured? Whereof
yet rises one good admonition, to trust them no more, and to be well ware of
them, and specially to think of this one particular, that wicked persons which
have given occasion of dangerous rebellions against the Queens majesty their
chief and only succor and refuge, will never be witholden by any respect
from attempting or procuring to be attempted any most hie and heinous treason
and mischiefs, against our sovereign Ladies safety, if auantageable
opportunity may serve them, so long as such persons are infected with
Papistrie, and can think the Pope hable to pardon or rather willing to reward
them, yea so far as they shall suppose them selves not only to win the
kingdom of England thereby, but also the kingdom of heaven. It is perilous to
think what traitorous rage may do, being armed with dronken superstition. It
is a sore thing to consider the impotentie of ambition, specially when it is
joined with the fury of reasonlesse love. The common experience is, how
dangerous those knottes of thieves be where there is a woman in the company.
Thus is it plain, that for as much as the Pope claims such wrongful
usurpation and tyranny over kings and realms, Lady of North.
and since Papists hold that he says true, and claims but his right, and
can not err in discerning it, all such Papists are traitors to all kings and
kingdoms.

As for the second conclusion, English Papists traitors to the Q.
which accuses English Papists of treason to the Queens majesty, it is
sufficiently proved, for that it is as a particular within a general, included
in the former. Yet for the special confirmation of it, it has certain
private and several reasons. It is well known how they sought her graces
death in her sisters time: what practices, what fetches were used for it: what
examinations, what searchinges, were to find color of her destruction, yea (if
it be true, which is credibly said) how far without color they proceeded, if
God had not miraculously kept her, to the preservation of this Realm and the
comfort of whole Christendom. But to make some demonstration of their hatred
to her majesty by reason, and after to descend to the examples and practices,
let us examine the causes.

Whereas the Papists hold, that the Pope is head of Gods universal Church,
and that such authority as the Queen claims in England over ecclesiastical
persons and in ecclesiastical causes, as due to her highness in right of her
crown, is not due to her, but belonging to the Pope, in so saying they must
say that her majesty claims an unjust tyrannical power. And whosoever shall
so say, though not in the same sillables, is an unjust and an errant traitor,
and can not love her that has pulled down him whom they call head of their
Church.

Also where Papists affirm the Chirch of Rome to be the true Catholic
Chirch of God, and that, as out of Noah's Ark there was no safety from
drowning, so out of the Roman Church there is no escape of damnation: is there
any hope, that they so thinking can or do love her highness, that has
dismembered them from the body of that Chirch, and plucked them out of that
Cocklorelles boat?

Where Papists hold the heresy of transubstantiation, and the bread to be
Christ's natural body, the blasphemy of Popish Mass to be an auailing
sacrifice for quick and dead, the Popes pardons to be hable to deliver them
from hell and damnation: Traian.
is it likely that they love her whom they think to deprive them of so great
treasures?

Where the Papists hold our whole form of serving of God, Papists take not
the Q. for Queen.
which form the Queens majesty has prescribed and delivered to her
subjects, to be schismatic, our laws in spiritual things no laws, our
sacraments no sacraments, our Bishops no Bishops, our Clergy no Clergy,
surely they think our Coronations no Coronations, our Queen no Queen, or at
least they are sorry she is so.

Where Papists believe a Purgatory, and that Masses, Diriges, and such other
gainful merchandise of the Popish Clergy, be beneficial for their friends
souls and their own, and do in the mean time imagine that their fathers,
grandsires, grandames, wives, and other friends souls lie frying in
inexplicable torments, and the Queens majesty holds from them the only
mean to release them: think you such persons grudge not at her exceedingly?

Where the Pope has accursed the Queen's majesty as an heretic and
schismatike, all those Papists which suppose that the Pope having the
disposition of Gods sentence and the thunderbolt of excommunication in his
hand, can not err, do also suppose that the Queen's highness (our Queen
Elizabeth I mean) is not lawful Queen of England, for so must all Papists
hold, that hold the Pope to say true, for the Pope does not so accept her.

And true it is that the refusal of the oath for the acknowledging her
Majesty's supremacy over ecclesiastical persons and in ecclesiastical
causes, Papists refuse the oath, because they believe not the Q. title to the
crown.
is for very good reasons to be suspected, that for the most part it is but
colored with pretense of conscience for ecclesiastical causes, and to be
thought that in very deed it depends chefely upon this point, that since her
Majesty has been suspended, excommunicated and declared out of the church by
the Pope, they think her Majesty not lawful Queen of England. For the like
example or prejudice have the like Papists given heretofore at many times, and
namely when Elizabeth Barton, that hipocriticall harlot, sometime called the
holy maid of Kent, with whose false traitorous practices were fowly spotted
and entangled More and Fisher the new Romish Saints, published as a
revelation from God, a traytorous article suggested unto her by popish
Priests and Monks, In the statute of her atte^^nder.
with whom she carnally and filthily lived, that the Queens Majesty's most
noble father after a time by them limited, was not King of England one hour in
the sight of God. The like interpretation did Papists make of king John. And
Papists have published that Gospellers, whom they call heretics, ought not to
have any office among Gods people, much less a kingdom.

And this point is well to be considered that they which take from the Queens
majesty the supremacy over ecclesiastical persons and causes, do transfer
the same jurisdiction to the Pope, for they never yet bouch saved to give it to
any other* and I am sure that after so many parables and examples of bees and
beasts and other things, they will not now have any particular church
hedlesse and destitute of a supreme governor, either universal like a monarch
as they would have it, or special under God of each kingdom or dominion as
Gods good disposition has sorted it. If then the Pope have in their opinion
any ecclesiastical jurisdiction in England, he must have Ius excommunicandi
lawful power and authority to excommunicate in England, without which the
ecclesiastical power can not stand. Which power if he justly have, and has
excommunicate and accursed the Queen, either by special name or generally
under title of heretics of which sort he estemeth her, then has he therein
done pro suo iure as he lawfully might do. And this being so supposed true,
Papists draw obedience from the Q.
then is it good to consider what is taken for Gods law and the law
ecclesiastical De vitandis excommunicatis, for shonnyng of excommunicate and
accursed persons which yield not to any repentance submission or reconciliation
to that church, forsothe that every Christian in pain of excommunication de
iure (wherein to dye is thought to dye in state of damnation) is bound to
withdraw from such accursed persons not repentyng, all friendly or loving
company and countenance, all aid and relefe, all service and obedience. Which
doing, for these good subjects of England to put in execution toward the
Queen, Papists meritorious treason.
were a very meritorious act: But what does it merit? the just peynes of
treason for breakyng their due allegiance, and eternal damnation (if they
repent not) for resistyng Gods lawful ordinance. This geere goes sore, it is
very evident and plain, that by necessary consequence, to this confession of
traitorousnesse they must be driven, if they will continue Papists, that is
will affirm the Popes sentences not to err, or will give the Pope any
spiritual jurisdiction in England.

Wherefore these refusalles to acknowledge her majesty's lawful power by oath,
Refusers of the oath, mete to be well examined.
would be well looked unto, and the pretenses, colors, and causes of such
refusalles would be well examined, namely in such as shall have to do with
justice and gouernyng the contrye, but specially with those that shall have
access into her highness household and presence. And well it would be sought
what defense of dispensation, Popish dispensations to dissemble.
or toleration they have for their dissemblyng their purposes in not yet
executyng the Popes sentence against her, and what devises they have for
warrantyng of their consciences in suspendyng such treasons till stronger
opportunities, what absolutions or instructions Popish Apostles have brought
at their secret steppyng into England again. For such salues are not unlikely
to come out of his shop that dispenses with breach of faith, yea that openly
proclaymeth that there is no faith to be kept with Christ's friends and his
adversaries, his shop I say that can give grace to have consecrated altarstones
or superaltares for his traitorous friends in enterdited lands to have mass
without peril, his shop that can send out badges with leave to swear and
vnsweare with so liberal permissio^, as to say, Give me thy heart and it
suffiseth. And well may it suffice, for the heart will carry the hand too, when
opportunity serves, and when their Golden day approaches, of which they make
so great account. Such good fellows would be well looked upon?

And for as much as Papists account their Popes decrees the voice of Gods
spirit free from error, it is to be weyed, how far we must needs think they
suppose the Popes curse to have extended against our most noble Queen and
realm, with whoes public service and prayer, yea where nothing is used but
the undoubted word of God and agreeable with it, they can not find in their
hearts to communicate, but abhor it as schismatic. They would be opposed
with a few interrogatories. Interrogatories for Papists.
It would be enquired, whether they think our Queen lawfully Queen of this
realm before God, notwithstanding the Popes sentence? And whether they think
the Popes sentence to reach any nerer unto her highness, then if it had been
the sentence of the Bishop of Toledo, or the Bishop of Paris, and not given by
the Bishop of Rome or under his authority? And if it reach nearer, then how
far it reaches? And if it extend to cases touching her hyghnesses crown and
dignity, or the service and obedience of her subjects, or so far as it were
treason for any English subject to put it in execution in England: then whether
the Pope in so presumyng, and publishyng that he does but as he lawfully may
do, have iudicially erred, and in matter both of fact and doctrine passed his
bounds or no?

But to come somewhat nerer to Papists, always supposing such Papists as I
have before specially described, I shall in one thing move mine own conceit
for a question in law, referring it yet to the correction and judgment of such
as be learned in law, of which sort I trust there be none that have not already
by their oaths acknowledged the Queens majesty's full authority and so have
declared that them selves be not guilty. Papists traitors by statute.
The statute made in the first year of the Queens majesty's reign, the vj.
Chap. says thus: And be it etc. that if any person or persons at any time
after the said first day of May next to come, by any writing, printyng, ouert
deed or act, maliciously, advisedly and directly do affirm that the Queen's
majesty that now is ought not to have and enjoy the style, honor, and kingly
name of this realm etc. shall be demed and adjudged hye traitors. I take it by
the same Statute that such an affirmation that the Queens majesty ought not
to have and enjoy the crown of Ireland, is hye treason, for that the kingdom
of Ireland is of right perteinyng to the crown of England, and the title
thereof is belongyng to and parcel of the style, honor and kingly name of this
realm, and is in the Queen's majesty's usual style so plainly expressed. And
so think I so much as is contained in the Queens majesty's royal style, or
as the law does in any wise say to be parcel of the style, honor or kingly
name of this realm. But the Queens jurisdiction over ecclesiastical persons
and in ecclesiastical causes within this realm, is parcel of the ancient
right of the crown, and so part of the style, kingly name or honor of this
realm, and so it is acknowledged in the first statute of the same Parliament,
where it is said, May it etc. for the restoryng of the rightes, jurisdictions
and preeminences apperteinyng to the imperial crown of this your realm etc.
Item, for the restoryng and vnityng to the imperial crown of this realm the
ancient jurisdictions, authority, superiorities and preeminences to the same
of right belongyng and apperteinyng, Also the authority of Rome is in sundry
places of the same first statute recognized to be usurped, which can not be if
the Queen's supremacy do not of right perteine to her croune. Which act is also
entitled An act for restoryng to the croune the ancient jurisdiction over the
state ecc^esiasticall etc. Moreover the same her majesty's right is playnty
expressed to be parcel of the style, honor and kingly name of this realm in
the usual style as it is set out at large in her majesty's Injunctions, and
also contained in the commonly written style under this clause et cetera, which
words et cetera can not be referred to nothing. And therefore I plainly gather
that to play the good plain Papist, to affirm the Popes hedshyp of the Church
of England, or to deny the Queens supremacy in her own realm, so far as
her majesty by the law has it, and as it is incident to her croune, is to
play or rather in good earnest to be a hye traitor.

As for the manner of affirmation (maliciously, advisedly and directly)
mentioned in the statut: if it be affirmed by a man sober, it will easelie
enough be judged to be advisedly and maliciously. And I nothing doubt that the
term directly does not restrain to the same form of syllables, but at least
to any plain, certain, or indicative proposition concluding or expressing the
same effect.

But now how have these good fellows showed their good affection in practice?
Practices of Papists against the Q.
For sothe some, the great ghostly fathers, whereof some yet live et
insidiantur saluti bonorum and reipub. and lie in wait for destruction of the
state and of good subjects, refuse to acknowledge her Majesty's authority,
and that so doubtfully, as it is not expressedly certain, how soever it be
consequently evident, whether they stick at the matter of the supremacy, or
the very title of the crown.

Other some are such, Story.
as one of them, even openly in her Majesty's hiest court of Parliament made
such moan that his counsel was not followed in Queen Mary's time to hew up the
root, as all men plainly saw and understood his grief that the Queen's
Majesty was not in her sisters time dispatched. And it is said that some other
made grave motions for her disheritance.

Other, Lonanists.
because they can not get her highness to cesse to be their lawful queen, them
selves have devised to cesse to be her actual subjects. Because they can not
shift her Majesty from her crown, they have shifted them selves out of her
highnesses dominions, and are fled beyond the oseas. Some being there send
hither their heretical, Seditious writers.
seditious and traitorous books, yet licenced there against good president of
Princes, and against the example of her Majesty's honorable demeanor toward
the same Princes, which by them selves or their Officers, rather ought to have
restrained such doings, then to leave so shrewd occasion of taking harm them
selves by the like. In these books her right is impugned: her faith is
defamed: her government is discredited: her honor is touched: her Majesty is
many ways violated and abated: the Religion that her highness holds and
publishes, is called schismatic, heretical, deuellish, and with as many ill
favored names as they can rehearse, being yet in such eloquence perfect
orators: the Preachers and professers of the religion that her highness
sets forth and professes, are termed worsse then Infidels: her title of
supremacy over all her subjects is defaced for an usurped and undue name. And
yet forsothe they think this gear gayly colored, and thereby conducted to
have safe passage among her subjects, if they can say, not that the Queen is
an heretic, a schismatike, worse then an Infidel, not to be heard, not to be
obeyed, not to be esteemed to have in deed the holy places and offices whose
title she bears, but pardie that al they be such that hold the same religion
which the Queen does not only hold, but also advise, command and procure to be
holden. They think it trimly handled, if they do not say that the Queen
chalengeth and usurps a proud, wrongful and false title, but only that her
Clergy have fastened upon her such a title, which it is well known that with
free conscience she uses. They think them selves cunning fellows, and their
books well warranted in England, if they do not call the Queen in plain
speech Tirant, Infidel, Arrian, and such like, when indirectly they implie it,
and do apply to her cause the examples of pagane, Arrian, tira^nous and wicked
Kings and Emperors. Who sees not this so gross a mockery offered to so
wise a Prince? as if for good manners sake they would forbear to say that John
is a fool, and only say that he that is in Ihons skin is a fool. God rid
their skins of untrue subjects. This is done like fine men, all together as
subtle and as false, as our late Rebels, that rising in armor with actual
rebellion against her Majesty and her governance, would yet needs proclaim
that they were true and faithful subjects, well disposed persons, and had
very good meanings. Yet were those false traitors somewhat more curious of
their honesty and truth than these good writers, for those Rebels yet
reserved one sure starting hole, to defend their fastness to the Queen,
because they have not told us what Queen they meant.

An other company of good sure men at home, Spreders of seditious books.
receive these goodly books, sprede them abroad, read them in audiences and
corners, commend them, defend them, give them great praises for learning and
substantialnesse, as matters unanswerable, they amplify them, they set them
out, much like to false seditious talebearers that during this late rebellion
spread rumors in the quiet parts of the Realm, what numbers of thousands
these rebels were, how armed, how horsed, what rank riders, what mighty
strong, active and courageous fellows, what Giantes, as if all the rest of
England were but sheep: what wondrous confederates, what aids, by land, by
sea, from Jerusalem, and no man knows whence, I think even out of
Purgatory, as the popish Festiual tells, of the dead fellows in the
churchyard that rose with their spades, shouelles, and other tools that they
used in their life, to defend him that was impeached by thieves to say De
profundis for their souls. And all this was no more but to discourage the
Queens true subjects and soldiers, and to raise up in doutfull men inclined
to papistrie, a daring to join themselves to such a supposed strong side and
faction. And yet these be not taken for seditious, as they are: the reason is
because they are not yet hanged as they ought.

An other knot of such good company be common rumorspreders, Spreders of
rumors.
of whom the public fame is that there be or have been certain notable and
noted walkers in Paul's and such places of resort, Good chirch will it never be.
so common that the very usual places of their being there, are ordinarily
known by the names of Papists corner, and liers bench, saving that I hear say
now of late many of them flock more into the middle isle, which is supposed to
be done partly for better harkening, and partly for more commodious publishing.
The suspicion, grudge and talk goes among the Queen's good subjects, how such
fellows be the coyners of news: In the beginning of the rebellion, how lusty
they were, how their countenances, their fleering, their flinging paces, their
whisperinges showed their hearts: how they had news of every increase, of
every going forward, and of every auantageable doing of the Rebels: how they
have news out of France and Flaunders with the soonest, God knows what they
send thither, and with what reciprocation they requite such news again: how
they had news of the late horrible murder ere it were done, as if they had been
accessaries before the fact: Clubbe. Basto.
how they write letters at home directed to them selves: how with these pretty
letters, while they be fresh bleeding, that is, so scarcely dry that the ink
blotteth, with their great countenaunces, with their taking upon them wondrous
intelligence and great insightes in secrets of Princes, as if they were Kings
cousines, and with their offringes of wagers, and such other braggeries, they
deface (as men say) all that can be brought or reported never so truly of any
good success to the Queen or her friends.

And other sort there is, Overthwart Papists.
like kestrelles or troutes, they ever fly against the wind, or swim
against the stream, in queen Maryes time great Gospellers, now great
Papists, ^op. etc.
men that would ever seem wyser than the present world, and would feign be
noted to see some singular thing, when for the most part themselves are the
most vain and singular fools that live. No government pleases them, and as
they be content with no world, so are they mete to live in none. But let them
beware the sin against the holy ghost, it is a perilous thing. God grant
them to see the horror of it, so far as it may avail to their tymely
repentance, before that mere apostasy bring them into it.

There is feared to be an other subtle sort, Papists counterfaiting Gospellers.
that are in deed of no religion, and yet at sundry times and places, to some
secretly, to some openly, to some one where to some an other, much like the
divided counselles in Edward the fifthes time, would seem of all religions.
These be most inclined to papistry, either because God will not vouchsafe that
such dissemblers feel true religion, or that they be rank papists in deed,
howsoever they abuse men with other show for purposes, or (which I rathest
think) for that they are persuaded that the Popish faction either for
multitude, for wealth, for foreine alliances, or for hatred to the Queen and
her government (which they perhaps would wish to be overthrown as all
perfect papists would) or for other respects, is more commodious for their
desire and ambition or for the toys in their heads, to rise to va^tage in an
other world. Such belike have a good mind to the advice that Lentulus wrote to
Catiline, Auxilium petas ab omnibus, etiam ab infimis, seek help of all
sorts, yea even of the meanest, they make much of al sides. Such can I compare
to notable pirates, that will ever have within boorde men of all nations and
flagges of all Princes and countries. If he meet with Englishmen stronger than
himself, out goes a flagge of England and Englishmen above hatches, that he
may pass in peace, likewise he does with the Frenchman, Scot, Flemming,
Spanyarde, or other, and many times he does this not to much to pass peaceably
himself, as that he may the more vnprouidedly set upon him whom he desires to
spoil. So happens it sometimes that such a counterfeit papist, as my Lord
of Westmerland and other, finding the plain show of papistry not so commodious
profitable or safe for him by reason of many occurrentes that may hap to have
overtaken him, till he were ready for his purpose, hangs out a flagge of
Christianity, deals with the Bible and other good books as the decayed
knight did to whom Bishop Cranmer upon a good hope gave fifty pound yearly
pension to cherishe his towardness, he sets his men of that nation above
hatches, he deceaueth good men that be not filij huius seculi, no children of
this world, those he abuses with protestations: and God wot with the same
faith that teaches to keep no faith, while in the mean time for all this, of
their certain purpose of pyracie, of their provision preparation and
furniture, of their former devises, nothing is changed, their other company
though under hatches yet still be ready till the opportunity of mischief
biddes them start up suddenly like the children of the earth that rose by
miracle of the serpents teeth that Cadmus had sown. These be watchers and
reach ever to an other world, they provide for succeding of times to come,
imagining what day shall follow the dreadful night. They would be looked unto
by the present day light, before the night come. These to speak plainly be
they (if any such be, as of such mind al perfect papists be) that are weary of
her majesty's government, and fall to devising by planting a hope of strange
titels to undermine her majesty's estate, such as hang upon the hope of Rome
after her decesse, which hope they know can not have effect, while her
highness lives and reigns, to whom almighty God grant to live and reign
while the world lasts, in person or in succession of her own most royal
body. Of this sort was Gardener that abused K. Henry with a false flagge of
religion, when he made his book of true obedience. Of this sort was Boner when
he fauned upon the L. Cromwell, and made a notable preface to Gardiners book.
Of this sort was Tonstall, and the rest that wrote against the Pope, Pole, and
all papistry. Of this sort are all those Catilines companions Papists that
bear a glosing show of obedience and wait for a time to utter their malice,
till they drop away into Manlius camp, or tarry with Lentulus, Cethegus,
Ceparius, and the rest to murder the Consul Cicero, or set the City, I mean
the Realm on fire.

An other lewd sort either deprave whatsoever the Queens Majesty and her most
honorable Counsel does for the safegarde and commodity of the realm, (...)
of the Q. good doings.
or of things which they can not deface, they transfer the praise to other,
being desirous as it were by false flattery to creep into ambitions bosom, to
raise up a faction against her highness: as if her Majesty do any popular or
beneficial act to the commonaltie, by and by they imagine some one or other
whom they would make an Absolon whether he will or no, to embesell the peoples
love, seeing full well but not caring at all how they burden with great
suspicious those whom they lode with false praises and perhaps draw into unjust
harms those whom they claw with untrue flattery. Howbeit I trust all men of
credit and greatness, have taken heed and will beware that wrongful praises
and imputations raise not their mind, to a wrong way of climing, for surely
such popularities and hanginges by the vain air, are not auancementes but
precipitations. But such is the corn powder of treason wherewith these popish
rumor spreaders hearts be double charged, that it must needs break forth, and
commonly to his destruction or great danger of singeing that ministers the
fire.

An other sort exercise their railing tongues, Railers up on the clergy.
which by great use at tables and other places, they have made very slippery,
voluble, and flowing, in untrue defacing the clergy of the realm, their
lives, examples marriages, and doctrines: some tell of the liberalities of times
past, some of the old merry world. And all this is but to this end, to drive
into subjects a lothing of present government, and a misliking of the state
wherein our good prelates and preachers are maintained. Papists in places of
credit.
An other spiteful dangerous sort being placed or rather left in places of
good countenance and credit, either in Colleges, houses of study, offices in
the greatest household, in Courts, in Cathedral churches, worshipful rooms
in the country, and such like, with the very show of their countenance, with
their liking or disliking, pulling forward or pressing down, open preferring
or secret pinching, so handle the matter that many times it is more safe, or at
least more commodious and auantageable to be taken for a Papist, than for a
Christian. For well you wot how men will smell men of their own faction. And
sometime by these means, unconstant Gospellers for necessity or profits
sake, become yelders, and dissemblers, till at length by Gods grace forsaking
them, and by his just plage ordinarilye lighting upon yelders and halters, they
slide by degrees from hypocrites to plain apostataes, which are in deed the
most desperate kind of Papists. And if this be not redressed, in vain the
Preacher preaches, in vain the Prince and Counsel sets forth true
doctrine. A gentle proverb. Let (...) have their words.
For this they can say: when the Preacher has said, he has done, but
continual execution carries away the power, credit, and people. Trow ye these
be good meaning men to her Majesty, that so persecute and undermine the
religion, whereof her Majesty is under God, and by Gods provision, the great
base and mean of stay in this Realm?

But above all other does it not plainly appear what hearts papists bear to
her majesty, when papists them selves and notorious open traitors and
rebels made their plain account, that to rebel against the Queen, to
practice the alteration of her government, the overthrow of her estate, the
displacing of her counsel, the foysting in of a far worse in her stead
whosoever it be, and the destruction of her person, is the very natural
humor, affection and desire of papists? Consider the rebellious Earls, look
upon their company and assistantes, view them well, note their ensigns of
wounds and crosses, the inscriptions about them, In hoc signo vinces, in this
sign thou shall over come, abusing the words of Constantine to encoragement
of their false hypocrisy. Note their procedinges, their tearing and burning
the book of God, their breaking the Communion table, their profaning of
Churches with vile Idolatry, their erecting of abominable Mass, their
chaplens lewd and seditious sermons, and chefely read their first proclamation.
Find you not there, in their proclamation, where their trust was reposed?
forsothe in men of that sort which they call the old and Catholic religion, to
whom their proclamation was directed. Find you not there in their
proclamation, the sum of their complaint* the cause and color of their
rebellion? forsothe that evil disposed persons about the Queen have overcome
the old and catholic religion within the realm. Find you not there, in their
proclamation, the declaration of their intent and purpose? forsothe to restore
old customs and liberties to the Church of England. If these be true
pretenses, then is papistrye being the ground thereof, plainly, flatly, and
truly treason. If they be not true, but false and vain colors, abused by
these rebels to deceive and draw more subjects to take their parts, then see
what follows, then must it needs consequently be evident that they them selves
yet supposed and knew papistrie to be the very likely and apt color and mean
to allure men to rebellion and treason against the Queen, as the very kindly
bait, Treason the natural humor of Papistrie.
and as their natural affection daily gaping for such opportunity, howsoever
at this time inconvenience of season, vnripenesse of matter, untowardness of
aid, vnredinesse of provision, unfitness of guides, preventing of counsels,
stay of their heds and colors, with other good means of gods merciful
providence, repressed their unhappy courages, which yet daily l^ke for new time
and circumstances of less encombrance. But in the mean time as God gathers
his glory out of al things, yea even out of sins, so let us out of this great
evil yet gather some good, a good example and a good lesson to learn to know
that papistrie is treason and he that is infected with treason is a traitor,
and so to provide against them thereafter.

Whense come I pray you the prophesies commonly talked of in the beginning of
her most gracious and blessed reign, Traitorous prophecies.
how many years and how many months her majesty should continue? Whense came
the leude coniurers conference with the devil, how long the Queens highnesses
government and this religion should endure? Comes not this gear from
traytorous affections of those well disposed persons? Comes it not from the
same fountain of treason, from whense did flow the supplications which the
late monster Gardener penned and preferred in Queen Mary's time, for
restitution to the heirs of the northen rebels that rose in her most noble
fathers days, yea and adding the consideration of their restitution to be,
because they were in armor against the king her father for defense of religion
(meaning Papistrie) and for revenge of injuries and dishoners (as they said)
done to her mother? Comes it not from the same affections that have raised
the great and lamentable tumultes in the realm? And trow you the same
affection still lodges not with the same opinion? I am half afraid, that out
of this fountain should also spring a few blind demie prophecies enterlaced
in prognostications, Prognostications.
as Nestradamus and others pretty bywordes and this that lately has written:
Alas the Moon shall be called in the house of enemies and prison, whereby is
like to happen to us specially to the common people much adversity. etc. and
some other such toys to fill the peoples heads with buzzes. But let the best
of such be construed. Yet I would for frendshippe and learninges sake tell
those authors, if I were acquainted with them, that such vanities might be
spared, and only so much out of that art would be set out to the people as is
commodious and fit for them to see, and lawful and standing with good
discretion for the writers to publish. Such a writer might hap to be a man so
holden suspected of Papistrie as he might so increase the misdemyng against
his own person shrewdly. I speak nothing of the prognosticating toy of a
marriage sent up to be printed. But let us see more examples.

Remember I pray you Gardiners sermon at Paul's cross in Queen Mary's time
upon this text Hora est iam nos e somno surgere, Gardiners traitorous sermon.
It is now time for us to rise out of sleep. There he showed how God
dispenses each thing and each success in conuenience of times, he declared
what ways had been attempted for restitution of the Popes primacie in England,
wherein he diverse ways falsely defamed King Henry with intentes of
submission, such was the bishops impudence. He named the rebellions in the
North in King Henry's time, and in the West in King Edwardes time, which he
clothed with cleanly names, as enterprises and assemblies, as our late rebels
do in both their first and second proclamations. But says he, the hour was
not yet come. He by way of objection wondered how the people could without
rebelling bear such injuries oppressions and robberies which they sustained as
he said in the fall of money and otherwise in King Edwardes reign. He did not
foresee the fall of Rose pens to nothing.
He answered him self, that the hour was not yet come. But now (says he) the
hour is come, now is the time for us to wake from sleep, as who should say.
Accipe nunc (...), et crimine ab vno ^^ce omnes.
Long have we slept, or long have we winked, long have we been holden in awe,
glad to dissemble our treasons and to semble good subjects, long have we borne
our sovereign Lord a fair face, as if we acknowledged his due authority and
detested the enemy to him and to all Kings the Pope, long have we cloked and
hidden our zeal, waiting for a good hour. Now the dreadful King Henry is
dead, the hopeful King Edward is taken away, the Christian nobility entangled
in snares of law specially if it may be partially and violently used, the
prince and time favors our side, a mighty foren match is made for the
vantage of our part, now the son of our victory, and the day of our triumph
shines upon us, now is it time for us to wake from sleep. Though the time
once were, specially in the L. Cromwelles days, when we in show abhord the
name of Papists, and would commonly say we had as leave be called traitor as
Papist, and bring actions of the case for our purgation, yet now is the time
that we glory in these titles, either of Papist in respect of these times,
Filii huius mundi.
or of traitor in respect of those times. Let us not now lose our occasion, for
we shall never have the like again, specially for that so much of the
nobility snared with treason are yielded to our (...). Note this gear well,
for Papists did never bear her majesty greater countenance of loyalty,
never served her with greater show of faythfulnesse, never protested more truth
and good meaning, than those did to King Henry the eight and to King Edward,
which afterward yet openly showed what secret disloyalty unfaithfulness and
untruth had so long lurked in their bosoms. Give once the like opportunities,
and be bold that you shall have the like speches, for they have still the like
hearts and like expectations. They comfort them selves with this, that the
remembrance of these things will one day be pleasant unto them, and in the
mean time (as Cicero says) oculis designant ad caedem vnumquemque nostrum,
they note every one of us with their eyes and register us to be destroyed. Let
us therefore take the contrary course to them. Where they look for an other
time, let us do our endeavor to maintain this time, where they reach with
expectation to altering of government, let us bend all our force, policy and
means of service to the defense of this estate. Where they pray for change,
specially of Queens, let us pray for continuance of her highnesses reign.
Where they hyde rebellious stomakes, let us show true and faithful hearts.
Where they desire that her majesty and her Counsel may be deceived with
flattering and erroneous pretense of policy, pacification, and color of
clemency, that under that shadow they may lurk and be norished as serpent in
bosom, let us pray to God to give judgment to discern them, to search the
bottom of the late treasons, that they may be shaken out and used as dangerous
vipers. Where their trust is in their Pope and Popish treasons and
conspiracies, let our confidence be in God and his providence, not shrinking
from the same with our best courage and prudence. Where they will not stick to
use all subtle vndermyninges, and will not lose the vantage of times, that they
may one day triumph in cruel violence, let us pray that on this part be used
all good policies, that Gods offered means and good opportunites be not refused
or ouerslipped, that God rent not the kingdom from his anointed for sparing
his enemies, but that it may long flourishe in the hands of his most noble and
virtuous handmayde our most excellent and gracious Sovereign Lady. Thus is it
evident by reasons and examples, what hearts Papists bear to her majesty.

The third conclusion, English Papists traitors to England.
that such English Papists are traitors to the realm of England etc. has
received two proves already, the one in the general treasons of all Papists
to all realms, wherein England and English Papists are included, the other in
their traitorous minds to the Queens majesty's person and dignity, which is
the highest treason that can be to the realm of England. Yet are there some
other particular doings more specially to enforce it, namely the experience
that has been of their casting away the care of their country, no all other
natural affections, to the end with all immanitie and outrageous unnatural
cruelty to torment English Christians and to subject the realm to foren
power for their false religions sake. I am sure there are enough and to many that
can remember both that they have red in credible histories, and seen in
lamentable experience, how the Papists have showed them selves so addicted to
their supersticion, and so captiued to an undue reverence of their tyra^nous
Pope, that they have for it rejected the care of country and of those to whom
natural duty bound them.

It is certain that that English man which can be contented for Papistrie to
raise or favor rebellion in our country: to join in conspiracy with
strangers, to help to invade and spoil our country: to convey the crown of
our country to a forener: to agree with them in faction that offer our
country to prey spoil and conquest: to color foren subiections of our
country with false titles of wrested law, to submit his faith to that
potentate that has accursed and given our country, their souls to the devil
their bodies lands and possessions to them that can catch them: to believe or
favor them that spread all vile dishoners against our country: to take his part
as the most holy one, that claymeth to him self from our natural prince the
obeisance of one great part of her subjects, yea and of all her subjects in a
great part of their affairs: to assent that a foren usurper shall by
deceaueable shows of false religion have ordinary means by colors of suits,
resortes, annates, fruits, pensions, inuestitures, and other infinite crafts
to rob our country of treasure: to like well of his doings and to hold that
he does no more than he lawfully may do, which being an alien a foren bishop
shall take upon him to extend his curse to the prince of our country and all
the people thereof, and that he has power to discharge the subjects of the
realm from their faith and allegiance, and has authority to bind their
obedience to whom he will, and is able to give heaven to rebels that shall
venture their lives in wasting and destroying our country: he I say that can
yield his consent to these doings and thinkinges, must needs be a traitor to
his country. And such a one is every such English Papist as I have described,
and can be none other if he hold the Pope for a true teacher and have good
opinion of of the Popes doctrine and examples. And to defend that we ought to
yield our saythes or submission to the Pope, is in generality to affirm all
these mischiefs and treasons. And such as be of that mind, as all such
Papists be, can not in true judgment be severed from traitorous watchers to
put the same in execution when so ever they may have times and means to bear
them harmless.

Let be called to mind the treasons of the clergy against Henry the second,
and specially the vile practices of the two traitorous bishops of Lincoln and
Heresord against Edward the second. But principally how as I have aforesaid the
Dolphin of France by color of title given him from the Pope for King John's
disobedience to that apostaticall seat, invaded and long possessed a great
part of England: how the deceived barons of England, both at that time
specially, and at some other times severally, at the Popes will and upon
pronouncing of his curse against the king, forsook their allegiance, look
part with the frenchmen, spoiled their own country, and like most unnatural
children, at an adulterous stop fathers bidding did thrust their swords into
their mothers belly. Remember Cardinal Poles message to the Emperor: the
rebellions raised in that time, and since: the late practices in Queen Mary's
days, to bring the realm in thraldom to the most insolent and intolerable
nation, and to transfer the inheritance of the crown, with not only
disheriting but also destroying the true and natural heir: their great
sorrow, that it was not performed: the great trust that our Papists in all
their countenances and speches showed them selves to have of the good success
of Henry the french king, whom God took away before his accomplishment of
thretened enterprises against this realm. Let not be forgotten their
glorienges in their champion of Guise. It is yet fresh and raw in remembrance,
how openly they uttered their as it were applaudinges, gratulations, and
cherefull significations of favor to that side, even then when, as it is well
known, the same family of Guise sought, under color of his kinswomans title,
and by that foren title which was made the title and fundation of this last
rebellion, Romish religion.
to invade this land, to overthrow the Queens majesty's estate, and to
transport the crown of our country to strangers.

Let it be considered what good practices these late Rebels have had with
strangers to the hazard of their country, Rebels confedered with strangers.
even so far forth as they feared not in their proclamations, with a little
colorable form of pennyng, to brag and put their confederates in hope of
strangers coming to invade and destroy the realm, which by a pretty, gentle,
false term they call reforming the realm. Let it be well weyed what they
mean to the realm, that under color of succeding do so far undermine the
head of our country, that by raising some to a hope of the next succeding, they
convey the countenance, favor and supportation of a great corrupt number of
such as may frame them selves any hope of gain that way, to other persons
that by such kindled ambition may be the more hastily enboldned. Such mad hopes
made lewd books to be published in print to entitle strangers to our crown,
and to give advise to cherishe the amity of France to this end that the
rebellious nation of England (as they term us) may by that means be tamed,
Proving of (...).
if we will not contentedly yield to such subjection. It is not nothing that the
same books were ambiciously published in Paris, and set up upon every post and
pillar, and by men of great place and charge most earnestly defended, when on
our Queens Majesty's behalf they were required to be suppressed. I speak not
yet of the worst books, well known to the best persons. Plures adorant solemn
orientem quam occidentem.
This to do is to show us a Sun rising to whose worship they would feign
draw us from our Sun declinyng, as they suppose. No, no, our Queen is our
true Sun: and what soever shinyng thing they would set up in her time, it is
no right Sun, Mutantem regna Cometen.
but an unlucky Comete. And it is not yet noone, I trust, with our Sun: or if
it be, I hope yet God will lengthen the day to our Sun for his honors sake,
as he did to Joshua, and the rather shall all good subjects have cause so to
hope it, if the residue of the day may be so spent as Joshua spent it, and for
which purpose God did prolong it, to rid the world of Gods enemies. Let it be
suspected what hopes of prevention, anticipation and most dreadful mischief,
which I fear and abhor to name, the encouragement of such succedyng, which
is the work of Papists, may minister where the only person of our most dear
and precious sovereign Lady stands without any more mean stays of her most
honorable and joyful issue between them and their desired effect the utter
undoing of us all, and specially where the power of revenge may by possibility
fall into their hands for whose sake it should be attempted. It is no small
mischief, danger, and apallyng of faith and courage, when our prince must be
defended against those that by possibility may aspire to hope to have color
to be our Princes them selves and to wreke it upon good subjects that serve
our Queen truly. What kindness or naturalnesse will do, has been
abundantly showed already diverse ways. And in the late murderous mischief, a
most foul president, but a most perfect lesson, this one thing is much to be
noted, that it was here by rumor reported as done, before it were done there,
which argues that the conspiracy extended hither, and how far further (or
rather nerer) is good to be quickly and earnestly searched, and by the same
example to be remembered, what harm the loss of vsyng occasion has bredde,
when it might have so been prevented, Nouissimus error peior priore.
that neither he had been murdered, nor the Queen encombred. I dispute no
titles. I have no reach beyond our Queen. I can see nothing beyond our Queen
but a Chaos of misery, therefore I am loathe to look so far. My only care is,
as my prayer is, and all good subjects ought to be, for our Q. Majesty's
preservation. What other title so ever be pretended, be it good or bad, if it
shall once threaten danger to the Q. Majesty whose title and governance we
know to be true and have felt to be good, I wish it destroyed and put out of
hope, least it hope to sone, to fast, to much, to hye, and join with to many.

Record I pray you the anathemaes of the conspiracy of Trent, their cruel and
dangerous practices against this realm, and against all other of Christian
profession, the Popes sentences against our Queen and Country, and all this
well liked of, and holden for holy by our own unhappy Papists. Remember the
devises to put the same sentences and conspiracies in execution, in France and
Flanders all at one time. Haud recte temporibus diuisa sunt tibi ista, Daue.
Consider the concurrence and evenness of time of this rebellious enterprise
in England, and that late murderous and heinous attempt in Scotland. But to
pyke a little more good out of the late ill deed of horrible murder. What say
the Queens good subjects to be the cause, why after our rebels vanquished,
the Regent was slain, that should have been done before to serve our rebels
and their conspiraters turn. For sooth their traitors there and some
conspiraters here English or Scottish saw full well the sincere friendship of
the Regent to the Queen, that notwithstanding all the practices from hense to
the contrary, he minded to deliver our rebels, whereby the counselles and
accomplices both here and there must have been disclosed, they politikely
provided, by assent to murder that noble gentleman betimes, whose blood added
to other bloudes so cry to God, as it is perilous to draw to much into
society and partnershyp of those against whom such blood so cries. This is
the common fear of good subjects: and to fear to much rather then to little,
may be more folly, but it is less fault. It may have less cause, but it has
more truth honesty and faith. Wey well if these be the means that my lords
of Northumberland and Westmerland, and their company have sought to bring the
vnityng of realms and crowns, and to work the effect of their proclamations
both for state and religion, which doing such men brag to be so beneficial,
and since the same and the titles thereof reach not so far as by any these
means to make such vnityng in the person of our most noble Queen, nor such
attemptes for religion and other effects can be atcheued with her likyng: then
what success is to be looked for of their devises and what mark is it to be
feared they shoot at? They and such other Papists and ambitious practisers
may perhaps justly and truly say, protest and swear that they intended not the
effect of such purposes while her Majesty lives, for it may be that they
mean peradventure that her highness should not live so long. God preserve her
to outlyue all them that have lived to long. This example is terrible, and
would be profitably used.

You can not forget how the Pope claims, Popish clergy no good subjects.
and our Papists do grant him the superiority over Ecclesiastical persons.
Their obedience is thereby withdrawn from their Prince, and from the service
of their Country, and they exempted from their duties to the Prince and
realm. Like is the referryng of all ecclesiastical causes to the Pope as to
the supreme judge and ruler. Great wrong thereby is done to the Realm, great
withdrawyng of the bodies of subjects from presence to serve and defend the
Realm, and great transportation of the treasure: the foul examples whereof in
pilfring and scrapyng within the Realm, to serve the insatiable couetise of
Rome, appears by the many lamentable complaints in their own histories, with
which enormities and oppressions as most burdenous and perilous to the Realm,
our Parlamentes and specially Conuocations, have before time found them selves
meruelously agreued. And yet this heuie and ouerchargeable yoke must be reduced
again by our Papists, Harding.
yea and our new angeles of Louaine, with whom the evil sprites at home do
accord, can term these intolerable exactions, but a small pitance or trifle
to acknowledge our good will to our mother church, and can call the reasonable
mislyking or just gronyng thereat as a niggardly grudgyng. Liberal men, I
assure you, and no marvel, for they be of his faction, Wolsey.
that sometime bragged that the aduauncyng of him self to the throne of Rome,
should cost him all England. So small a thing these Papists account it to
venture all England at a cast. And good reason have they, for they venture it
at the peril of other men's losses, for whosoever reign here by their treason,
they are like to keep or increase their wealths and dignities.

Let it be thought upon how much these fellows esteem the common knot of
fidelity to the Prince, whereby the peace of the land is holden together, and
each man's due property is preserved, which believe that the same faith is
dissoluble at the will of a foreine priest.

Let also this descendyng gradation be considered concerning Papists and their
hope, Traitors not true to their own fellows.
how true they will be to their Country, that are not true to God: how true
they will be to their good Prince, that are not true to their Country: how
true they will be to any subject, that are not true to their Prince: and
thereby let their confedrates beware that they be not made bottels, first
filled and then emptied, and afterward hanged up by the walls. Let the Duke of
Buckingham in king Richardes time, and infinite other beat this wisdom into
their head, to know how ill a tyrant or one that atteyneth a crown by
mischief and wrong, can bear to live detbounden to those that advanced him,
or subject to their reproach, and being once fleshed in mischiefs by their
help how little conscience he makes to proceed further and specially upon them
whom he knows in his conscience in ioynyng with him to have well deserved it.
Let them well digest the vicont of Melunes admonition on his death bed to the
English barons in the beginning of the reign of king John's heir. And let them
never say that they the late rebels and their accomplices had no such inte^tion
to overthrow her Majesty's estate, since the things expressed in their first
proclamation can not be done while her Majesty's estate continues, who has so
honorably often protested to prefer Gods truth above her crown and life, which
God long preserve.

Let all Englishmen, think of this and believe it as experience has taught it,
that where Monks and religious persons changed their surnames and had many
other solemn ceremonies at their professions, Monckes forswore their country
and natural duty.
which they said did signify their virtuous renouncing of worldly and carnal
fancies, Therefore many Bishops would not be consecrate till they were made
Monks.
the same pretense of signifiyng was utterly false, like the pretense of
refusing the oath to the Queen: and the very true meaning such as is proved by
the consequence of their deeds, was no other but that every perfect Papist
does take upon him a zeal, for defense of their God the Pope and his heresy
to throw away all due and natural benevolence and faith to Prince, Country,
parents, friends, and all those just and due respects, whereunto God by the
law of nature has bound them in this world: and this must so be, for the
other true vow of renouncing, was made before in Baptism, and remained still
in force.

To all these inconveniences and traitorous absurdities they must needs be
subject which hold that the Church of Rome is the true Catholic Church of
Christ, and that the Catholic Church of Christ can not err.

The horror of their cruelties to the people of their country, Cruelties of
Papists.
of whom their country consists, whose lives they have regarded no more then
sheep, yea no more then fleaes, and that with such delight of torment as if
they still cried out as the heathen tyrant did fac vt sentiat se mori, let him
feel that he is dying, and as the Pope himself did that caused some of his
Cardinales to be tormented in such manner by special commandment, that he
being in a garden underneath saying his devotions, might hear them cry: all
this I refer to the large, faithful and learned explication of that good
diligent and virtuous man Master Fox in his Book of Acts and Monumentes of
the Church, where as in a glass does evidently appear what nature or any
kind, respect to kin, reverence, pity, love, or country, reigned or rather
remained in the furious hearts of Papists, how smothly soever the hypocrites
with Crocodiles tears or wild Irish laughter, do feign, flatter and abuse
those in whose power they be, till they have their time of auantage. Though the
remembrance of these things be bitter, yet is it wholesome. And therefore let it
not out of their hearts that have hearty care, and specially charge of their
country.

That clemency and gentleness can not reclaim them from traitorous minds
while they continue in Papistrie, Clemency can not win a Papist*
is as plain and as true a form of speech, as if a man should say they must
needs be traitors, so long as they be full of treason, for treason and
Papistrie are inseperable while they be kept under, even as cruelty and
Papistrie are inseparable when they are gotten above. Yet for some more ample
opening of the truth of this conclusion, let us somewhat more wey their
qualities with reasonable consideration and conference of their doings.

If clemency and benefits should be hable to reclaim them, it must be for
some regard that they must have of the duty of thankfulness, for benefits
received of those persons from whose sincerely loving mind toward them, and
not from any foreine enforcing cause, they account the benefits to proceed.
Wherein is to be searched, how much they are likely to esteem such duty, by
their weying other and nere duties, and again how well they acknowledge from
whence this clemency and benefits have proceeded. For if the hiest and
greatest duties of kindness move them not, then is small account to be made of
their thankfulness for temporal commodities, or at the least for bare
suffering them to live unpunished. And again if the same impunitie and other
beneficial doings, be thought to come enforced from other, or craftily won
by their own policy, or so to come from your self as you could not chose,
then is your thank fo far lost as there is no hope that ever any such mean
can reclaim a Papist.

Surely he that regards not the highest duty, will never regard the meanest.
The duty of the love or fear of God can not hold a Papist from blasphemy
against God. The duty of faith and allegiance to his Prince can not keep a
Papist from treason to his Prince. The duty of dear love to his natural
country can not withdraw a Papist from assenting to, yea and procuring the
spoil, destruction, bondage, and alienation of his country, as I have already
proved. The duty of kind and natural pity can not stay a Papist from
murdering the feeble sex, nor the silly tender infancy, nor reverend eldest
age. The duty of familiarity in youth, of friendship in grauer years, of
continual society during all the life passed, with heaps of mutual
commodities, can not pull back a Papist from immanitie of sacrificing his
derest friends. The duty of honor of Children to parents, or love of parents
to children, remoueth not a Papist from unnatural cruelty. The duty of
entier love and fellowship between man and wife, holds no place in the heart of
a Papist. No duty of kindred, no estimation of learning and virtue, no good
respect that moves good men to love and compassion, once touches a stubburne
Papist. Al these duties we have seen broken, yea neglected and thrown away by
Papists. And is there hope that clemency can so far win them, as to hold
them in truth to the Prince, from whom they receive it, if opportunity serve
to bring them out of her danger, or her highness into their danger, which God
forbid?

Whenever (which God grant never be) her Majesty person should stand in
their courtesy, it is evident that then the gate were open to their desires, to
their flourishing, to their conquest, to their abilities of reuengyng, and to
their perfect triumphyng. And will they, trow you, omit all these that they so
earnestly gape for? will they let pass any occasion that may bring these? and
all in respect of her gracious clemency, and benefits? no no, that will not
be. It greueth me to think and I abhor to write what opportunities they are
lykely to seek and use, having now pressed so far as they have already done
with their enterprises, shadowed with such hopes as their proclamation has
uttered.

But admit kyndenesse were in them for benefits where they impute them. It is
as well known as a common proverb that, where her Majesty of her singular
goodness of nature (which yet were far greater goodness, if it be directed
to the only preservation of good men, and not further stretched and abused to
the cherishyng of evil and dangerous men) has forborne and restrained
execution of law against them, which yet are the laws made expressly for her
Majesty's safety, their ordinary saying is, you can have no law against us,
God so provides for us his chosen anointed, that you can have no law, or if
you have, you can not execute it, god so preserves their side forsooth and so
bridleth her Majesty's power, by hyw own instinct or by their own means of
policy.

See the examples of their thankfulness. Did ever those Papists, whose lives
were saved by good Bishop Cranmers means, who were brought up, who were
defended, who were advanced, who were shelded from harm and peril by him,
ones requite him with one drop of kyndnesse? And yet they spoke him fair in
his prosperity. Auayled the great liberality of king Henry the viij. to raise
up any kind remembrance in Papists, that were great in Queen Maryes days,
to stay them from assentyng to the captivity and danger and sekyng the blood
of his most noble daughter our most gracious soueraygne Lady? And yet during
king Henryes reign, they showed a serviceable face, as if they would have
spent their bloudes, to keep wrong from him and his, and did serve against
Papistrie it self, till their treason and Papistrie was ripe to be advanced.
Are not the great doers of this last rebellion and conspiracy, those of whom
her Majesty has most well and bountifully deserved? And yet while they were
in her presence, they were as desirous as any that be now about her to have her
Majesty think of them as of good and faithful subjects. Yea when they were
nere the execution of their treasons, being suspected and examined thereof,
Periuri que art Sinonis.
denied it, and made vehement hye protestations with great oaths of their
purpose to the contrary, and their readynesse to subdue them that should
break the peace, as in her Majesty's proclamation appears. The success of
whoes doings, so shortly following, amounts to as much as if they had plainly
said, Vnum noris, omnes noris.
what soever viser of faith, whatsoever promysse of true allegiance, what
soever assurance of words, what soever employeng them selves against their
own parts till perfect readiness, what soever iudgyng and condemnyng of
their own faction being not yet strong enough, Papists do pretend, it is to
no other end but to insinuate them selves into fredome from mistrust, and to
draw her Majesty's eyes to look an other way, to bring her into a security
till the danger be unavoidable, as I trust it never shall be, if good subjects
stick well together to her highness, which shall be so long as her Majesty
shall as she does stick well to God and her good subjects, and not to suffer
them to be dishabled to defend her.

Surely when Papists are come so far, that the wife can procure the murder of
her husband, the father of his son, the mother of her child, the friend of his
dearest friend, and so in all degrees of conjunction, shall her Majesty look
to have clemency and liberality requited with loyalty at their hands, that
already bost that they receive no clemency or goodness of her, but by their
own cunnyng means, or by a superior enforcement?

And truly of this their great unkindness, there is one great reason while
Papistrie remains in them, Earthly things must give place to heavenly, and
transitory to eternal. They esteem the voice of the Pope as the voice of the
eternal God. While her Majesty actually reigns over them, they suppose not
them selves to live under her highness as subjects, but to be holden as
captives, and so with all their fained show they bear to her a servile
reverence, Papists obedience untrue.
even altogether such as the bond Mores have done to the Spanyardes, and as
Gardener and his fellows did bear to king Henry the viij. and to king Edward,
and my Lords of Northumberland and Westmerland and their company with these
that have dropped to them since or shall hereafter shrink likewise from her,
do bear to her self. They are ready further at their God the Popes voice,
whenever they may be hable to shake of her yoke and government, with opinion
of meritoriousnesse, as the vile Monk that tempered a tode for his natural
king, and as doctor Mackerell in times past, and some other both then and since
have openly uttered. Again where they suppose their auncesters and friends
souls, for lack of the help which the Queen keeps from them, to lie in
unspeakable peynes: where also they suppose their own souls to lack their
ghostly comfortes, them selves to be cut from Gods church being severed from
the pope the head thereof: chiefly where they think not only them selves, but
also their children and posterity for ever, to be by the setting forth of this
Religion which the Queen's highness auaunceth, drawn into a continual
dangerous stream and unrecoverable state of damnation. And where all this
while they are further persuaded (as they must needs be, if they think the
Roman church catholic and the Pope the head thereof, and the catholic church
and the head thereof to be preserved from possibility of error) that by force
of the Popes sentence and for schismatic and unrepentant swaruyng from his
church, her Majesty is not in Gods sight just Queen of this realm, with
remembering how far they think they may or ought, when they dare, to shonne
her as a person excommunicate, and to withdraw from her all aid, relief,
service and obedience: is it, trow you, to be thought that such benefits as
they receive in clemency and otherwise, which yet they impute to Gods
preserving them for the holiness of their cause, or to their own policies in
deceiuyng her, are hable to weye down those deep and eternal considerations
of miseries which they believe them selves to sustain by her means? It is not
possible, being so persuaded of her right to the croune, and of the Popes power
over her croune and person, as they be. While they think them selves true
Israelites, the chosen people of God, and the Pope their Moses or rather
Christ, what account make they of the prince, whom they serve, other than as of
Pharao? or make they any more conscience of withdrawyng all duties from the
Prince and their whole country, than the Israelites did of robbyng the
Egyptians, how fair soever they spoke, promised, or bound them selves when
they borrowed their iewelles? Many such examples have been seen in her Majesty's
most noble progenitors days, but most chiefly and most evidently in her own.

Of like truth it is that Papistrie being an heresy, Papistrie increases by
lenity.
or rather a bondle made up of an infinite number of heresies, must needs have
the property of heresy, to flourish with indulgence and lenity. We see the
like example in the sect of Arrians, which under heretical Emperors
excedingly encreasced, and being ones condemned and restrained by punishment,
has worn away to a few. So far as king Henry the viij. went in reforming
religion, which was to abolish the primacie of Rome out of this realm (a noble
conquest) with certain gross idolatries: did not the severity of his laws,
the awe of his person, and the dred of due execution, so hold down those
parts of Papistrie which he suppressed, that they durst not ones show them
selves in his days? and yet in the same time the grievous law of six Articles
made against Gods truth, and sinisterly procured by Popish clergy, nor yet the
earnest inquiry, nor cruel executyng of it by Bishops and other, could hold
down the truth of the Gospel, but that it brake out more and more upon them.
The reason is, that Papistrie and Christian truth have two several ends:
truth respects heaven, and Papistrie the world. Whereby their adventures and
enterprises are commonly diverse: the Papist dare boldly set upon any mischief,
where he has hope to auaunce his falsehode: The Christian dare constantly
abide any torment to give witness of Gods truth. And such quality of Gods
truth have the ancient fathers described, when one of them calls the blood
of Martyrs the water to water Gods garden, an other says that they encreace
with cuttyng down, and other in other manner have expressed the same meaning.

But now being under a Christian Prince in days of rest (blessed be almighty
God, and long preserved be her majesty the instrument of it) as it is not mete
that Gods Church, after Julian the Apostataes manner, be persecuted to make it
encreace, but holden down with good discipline for manners that it grow not
wild and run out into wantonness, so is not the Church of the Devil to be
maintained and multiplied with indulgence, winking and slacknesse of
correction, but with good severity to be restreyned, that it grow not to such
rankness to choke the true church in deed. The licentiousness of Papists
speech is great, Papists dangerous^^ cherished.
they dare do and say they care not what, they have their assemblies and
ordinary conferences together, their leude and seditious books, and such
courage as the truer sort of her Majesty's part are ouercrowed, as the good
preachers daily complain, and so long I pray God they complain not that God
hear them, and be angry that other heard them not. Popish priests, who
sometime triumphed that they were so esteemed Popish, and by that mean got
those things together, enjoy the great ecclesiastical liuinges without
recantation or penance, yea and in simoniacall heaps: Cathedral Churches are
stuffed with them, as dens of thieves: they are in offices: the meaner sort
depend upon them, and partly by example, partly by common desire to crepe into
favor of their superiors, and partly also for that the great ones are loath to
have other about them, are perilously infected: the very spies and promoters of
Queen Mary's time, without change of their opinion are cherished and mark men
against an other day. Mercy may have her excess, and clemency may be great
cruelty, when it ouerfloweth to the good man's danger.

Yet is not my mind that for men's bare opinions or mistakinges in
controversies of religion, No cruelty for simple opinions.
being otherwise honest and civil men, and where the same extend not to
participation of treason, or to those Articles that implie a dangerous meaning
to the state, they should be byandby destroyed, but restrained from insolence
and licentious spreding of their errors, and with doctrine and examples be
reduced, but specially that confidence be reposed in men that be better
assured. Such manner of cruelty were to imitate Papists, rather than to
correct Papists. Meaner punishments than the pains of treason ar meter.
Convenient discipline, coming after good teaching, were profitable. But those
of them that in time past have been shepebiters, Old shepebiters perilous to be
kept.
and hitherto show no true repentance, it is likely that they have the common
quality of old shepebiters, they will never leave it, and they cannot be kept
without danger of the flock and state. Of this may Gardener and Boner (whom
God has sent from hence, I dare not say taken from hence) be notable examples.
Many more there have been and be: and some of those that be, remain not only
in her Majesty's power, but also in her charge.

The other Conclusions following have great difference from these whereof I have
made some explication. Of these yet nothing so large an explication have I made
as truth is well and easily able to furnish, nether can I so well make it as
the expedience of the cause asks to give the vantage of eloquence to the
goodness of the matter, to help to draw it into credit and effect of well
moving. But being as it is, rude and true, great conning and finenesse is the
least needful, where those for whom it is most intended are so wise as it is
far more easy for naked troth to inform them, than for any gay speech to
lead them. This is the diversity of the articles declared, Matters of fact
not known but (...).
and of the articles remaining: those that be past conteyne matters of fact,
doings, manners, and dispositions of men abroad, the certainties and
circumstances whereof cannot be understood of any the wisest men in the world
by way of contemplation, but must be brought unto them by relation of true and
faithful subjects, by common rumor and speech of the honest sort, or some
such other mean of intelligence and experience: by reason whereof I have been
bolder of things consisting in doing, and tossed in talk abroad, to gather
luch a certainty of report of things, for the better considering of danger to
her Majesty and the estate, as is in deed the very common and ordinary burden
of every honest man's heart to see them, and necessary things to be laid
before those that may amend them.

The other conclusions that follow, wherein I neither have nor will wade so
far, are matters of consultation and meditation. The effect thereof, which is
the safe preservation of the Queens royal Majesty and the realm, the
auoydyng of dangers that threaten the same, the establishyng of assuredness,
boldness, courage and freedom of her hyghnesses most good counselors and
subjects, the taking auantages of opportunities and occasions, the wedyng out
of deceivers and vndermyners, the defense of her Majesty's honor and dignity,
the means to answer charge toward God, and namely in dealyng with men as they
be affectioned to or against God, this effect I say of those other conclusions
I know does continually occupy her Majesty and her most honorable counselors
in thinkyng on them and prouidyng for them: therefore it shall no further
occupy me and other mean subjects than in prayer and readynesse to serve as
her Majesty and her counsel shall see fit to employ us. I will not therefore
in discoursing of them encomber my self and other. It shall suffice me, and so
ought it to content all other, to know as we do know, what a wise Prince we
have, what good Counsel she has chosen, how well they have governed, what
fruit we have had of it, so as nothing is left to us, but to give thanks, to
beware that our own sins give not the occasion of loss and change, to serve
dutifully and to pray deuoutely.

Howsoever the nature of Papists has showed it self, that they are most
glosing traitors till they have their advantage, and most cruel tormenters
when they have obtained it: howsoever it be true that though her Majesty heap
them with infinity benefits and cherish them with unmeasurable and dangerous
clemency, though they crepe and crouch, and with their promise of faith which
they think bound to keep no faith, speak never so fair, and for the time
dissemble their zele, holdyng them contented with glorious and false shows of
policy to persuade a certain traitorous temper and perilous neutralitie (if
they repent not their error and change not their Religion) they hate her, they
watch their times, they transfer the praises of her good government to those
that never deserved it, they be ready to undermine her estate while she lives,
as they did with her brother, and to defame and deface her being dead as they
did with her father: howsoever they now hide, or hereafter utter their
stomachs: it is on the other side true that though her Majesty should show to
Christians in bodylie and temporal things great hardness, yet is it so
recompensed and ouerweyed to us in the freedom and joy of our consciences,
that we must and will still love her how much more then being our so good,
loving and benefici^ll seueraine?

It is we that depend upon her, it is we that think it shall be more easy and
better for us (even in respect of our worldly life, and benefits, though there
were not a greater prospect beyond) to die at her foot in her defense than to
ouerliue her Majesty, the same being expressed by her enemies. Gospellers be
they, whom though her majesty can by no means make to cease to love her, yet
by overmuch cherishing of Papists, she may make less strong to defend her.
Our case is such as her Majesty may be assured of us, Only Christians true to
the Queen.
that we stand for her, not only as for our Prince, our loving sovereign, our
mother, our country, our hauiours and possessions, but also for the lives, and
(that most is) for the seules of our selves, our wives, our children and
posterity for ever. If any of this part have been seduced by Papists, as
perhaps there be, error I hope it is and not malice, And as it is error, so is
it mete to be forsaken as error, I mean not only forsaken in pursuing, but
also in defending, succoring, pacifiyng and helping. For let such make their
account to find no truth, defense, mercy, nor kindness in Papists, when they
get above, howsoever their present turn be served. To late shall they wish for
the good Prince, whom their own follies shall have lost. Let them remember the
policies of Charles used with Maurice and other for assurance of religion
against the confederates of Smalcald. Let them remember the Fremingham promises
for not altering religion. Let them remember that the very promisers either in
deed shall not be hable, or will be glad to say they are not able to keep
promise with them, or if they would feign keep promise they may hap to be sent
after their predecessors. Let them remember the keeping of edictes and word of a
king in other places, by mean of persons somewhat allied. Let them remember
that them selves shall not dare to challenge such promises, no more then the
Crane his reward for pulling the bone out of the wolves throat. Let them
remember they shall have to do with such as think not themselves bound to keep
faith with them nor any of our side, and can have a dispensation at their
pleasure. It is we therefore that pray God to give her Majesty judgment and
all timely means of intelligence, to discern her ^^nemies, and courage to use
such opportunities of times as God throws upon her.

It is we that with thanks to God do acknowledge that God has so guided the
success of this late rebellion, as if he should have said to her majesty, ^oe
daughter, al though necessity of mine ordinance, and the disposition of
things for my glory (which shall be in the end also your benefit) be such as
there must be a traitorous rebellion in your realm, yet this will I do for
you: you shall understand it in time: you shall have the means, whereby they
should accomplish their intent, in your own power: you shall make your own
match: you shall have the choice to name the parties your self, that shall be
the leders and doers of it, even the weakest of credit, wit, and power that you
can chose to withstand you: you shall choose the time, when they shall attempt
it, the most unseasonable for them, either to proceed in their own doings
together, or for having aid to resort to them, either of foraine enemies or
domestical traitors: you shall chose the place where you would have it begone,
such as lies best for danger of contagion of other, easiest for your self to
enclose, hardest for your enemies to come to, and nearest borderyng upon your
best foreine friends: they shall want furniture, your self shall have
abundance: your good and true counselors shall nobly and truly stand by you:
your nobility shall be provoked to revenge dishonor and slanderous suspicions
thrown upon them by the rebels and thereby shall have cause to strive who may
best serve you: your good subjects shall every way show their zeal in your
service: your poor clergy shall pour out their devout prayer for you and I
will hear them: I will guide the success to your victory: your enemies
shall be so snared, as the victory well followed, the treason well examined, the
faulty well removed, the root well and clean hewed up, you may sit free from
traitors while you live, and your good and true counselors and subjects may
be set in safe ability and encouraged to serve you truly and stand faithfully
and boldly by you. See now that you fail not me nor your self, and neither by
missuser, nor nonvser, forsake me, nor lose the benefits that I have so
provided for you.

We therefore acknowledge all these things to have so come to pass, and dout
not that her Majesty will ever with invincible constantie so provide that
those most noble Counselors be mainteyned to serve God and her without fear,
and be so cherished as they may with delight and free carelessness and
assuredness of their own estates from peril of revenge or any other assault,
bend them selves wholly to study for her highnesses preservation. We pray God
to give her Majesty ever the heart to suspect his truth whatsoever he be, (if
any ever be as I trust there shall not) that shall practice to abate any
credit of these most true counselors, or shall insinuate or give any advise
to stay the true and perfect serching of the bottom of these treasens to
forbear the full destruction of the root thereof, or to extenuate her
Maie^^ies peril, and to say to every such a one if any smoke or glimse of
signification may thereunto lead, et tu ex illis es. Thou art also one of
them. We confess it is time, and we pray, that all her Majesty's subjects by
oath and al other good means may be assured unto her, and that al titles, all
bonds, knottes* alliances, colors and pretenses to her Majesty's danger may
be cut of, what show soever they make, knowing and heartily desiring it may be
remembered, that no common law of nations, no title of anointed, or what soever
face they set upon it, may be warrant for for any perilous creature, Papist,
Bishop, Priest, runaway, gentleman, merchant, or other, man or woman, to be
dangerous to her Majesty in her own realm. We know well that a gallon of Rats
bane in an Apothecaries shop will not hurt a man half so much as an ounce in
his bellye. We are not so mad to have such a fond longyng for the flesh
pottes of Egypt, for marie and marie bones that we would with the rebellious
Jews desire to return again to the land of Egypt the house of bondage and
foreign slavery both of body and soul, to suck them, and that not for lack
but for lothing of fine natural and wholesome food. We pray that we may once
see every title destroyed, whatsoever it be, either in civil respect or
ecclesiastical, that has or shall any way threaten her Majesty's danger, that
has or shall any way claim the crounerom frm her head, or her power out of her
hand, that has or shall seek any dispossession of her estate and the invasion
of her land, Roman tyrannies and cruelties.
and specially the titles and lewd hopes of Romish Popes that have by notorius
wickedness excedyng the old Roman Emperors showed them selves unmeet to
live among Christian people, much less to govern them, that have by murrible
and unnatural murders and hoactise of poisoning and other mischieues showed
that them selves and their Papists are not to be won with kindness to be
true to the Queen, that could not be holden by nature from slaughter of t^eir
own, as by many evident histories appears, yea where their treason may be
rewarded with a kingdom, yea with the kingdom of heaven: those fained and
wicked titles (we say) of Romish usurpation, that have interrupted the blessed
yea^e which we have so long enjoyed, that have drawn into conspiracy,
Treasons of Papists.
alliance and knottes of favor those of whom her Majesty has well deserved,
that has armed the rebel against lour most good sweet sovereign Ladies life,
croune, and dignity, and put weapon in traitors hands to cut true subjects
throtes, and utterly to destroy the wealth, safety and honor of England.

We pray that we may see when those that shall wrest or procure to change law,
to erect the courage of any dangerous Viper to such ends, or to any aspiring
hope of preventing and undermining, under whatsoever color, name, pretense or
show in proclamation or otherwise, or to the safeguard of their persons that
have so attempted, may be declared and executed as enemies to this estate, and
to the Queen's safety. We pray that we may se such laws provided for her
highnesses preservation, and the same so executed without restraint or
slacknesse for any respect as the hope of Papists, such as be enemies to God,
the Queen, and the realm, may if they repent not, be cut of for ever. We pray
to live to see that none may have place, office nor access into her Majesty's
court nor household, no nor once to her presence, that shall not be well known
to favor both God and her, so far as any circumspection and policy may
provide it. We pray God that we may once see the administration, yea and study
of law and justice wholly taken from those that shall not be known to favor
the law of God, and to acknowledge her Majesty's right, that is head of law and
justice in the realm. We pray God that her Majesty and her Counsel may have
such particular knowledge of men that her enemies may be weakened, and her
friends strengthened, al auantages used for her safety, all neutrall aduises
suspected for surtle underminings. We trust it will be so, for God has not
drawn these late mischiefs into light for nothing. But before all things we
pray God to send us true repentance, more joyful receiving of his Gospel, and
more virtuous ensuing it, least as we lost our best king with living ill, so we
may lose our best Queen with living worse. And that therewith it may please him
to direct all the doings of her Majesty and Counsel to proceed in their
good aduauncing his glory and preservation of the state, which without ielous
circumspection for preserving the Queens most royal person can not be done,
and that such good means and provisions as God offers to that end, be not
refused or neglected, which were to tempt God, to forsake his cause, to betray
our noble Prince, and to give away or rather cast away the realm.

These be the daily and nightly prayers of good subjects. And while we busy
our selves with these prayers, we do after our principal confidence in Gods
goodness, rest our selves upon the trust of her Majesty and her most
honorable Counsel, for whom we praise God, and to them we refer the guiding
of us and ours, ready to follow them, when we are commanded with the uttermost
of our power and peril, knowing how they spare not their uttermost endeavor
and peril, with susteyning the most unpleasant life, God wot, that may be, for
our sakes, for our quiet, profit and defense.

Consider these things ye that have been and have not yet ceased to be such
Papists, Good counsel to Papists.
remember how in that state ye be neither true Christian men nor true English
men, whereby if ye repent not you are not worthy to live in the kingdom of
England, and you are sure not to come in the kingdom of Heaven. Let every good
thing move you to truth and to your prefitte. Let every evil thing fray you
from treason and from eternal undoing. Learn religion of God alone, render
your allegiance to your prince alone, live in bond of country with English men
alone. Acknowledge how God has sent his truth to shine upon you, her majesty
has poured all benefits of her good governance among you, her true subjects
desire every way both in soul and body to be comfortable to you. Put of only
the cankerd affection or rather passion of inhumanitie. Do but once come home
from those articles that can not stand with out treason to the prince and
state, bind not your selves, your souls and faith to the authority of any
mortal and sinful man, give ever infinitely to God, resort faithfully to him,
pray deuoutely to him, to show you his truth by his own word. And so I dout
not but having once forsaken foreine subiections, and being once so far
vnpapisted that ye may come into the number of true subjects, for the rest God
shall accord us, and shall reveal unto you sincerity of all truth in time,
and in such time as shall be the greatest comfort that ever you felt in your
lives. And so yet till other errors be purged by Gods grace working by the
hearing of his word, we shall al go under the gentle yoke of our natural
sovereign, there let us draw lovingly together, and then say and sing merrily
God speed the ploughe of England. Amen.

God save our Queen Elizabeth, and confound her enemies.
Imprinted at London by John Day, dwelling over Aldersgate.

These Books are to be sold in Paul's churchyard at the sign of the Crane.


