A Sermon, called GODS NEW-YEERES-GVIFT, sent unto England. Contained in these
words. So God loved the World, that he has given his only begotten Son,
that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but should have life
everlasting. Ioh. 3. 10.

AT LONDON, Printed by W. White, and* are to be sold by Y. James at his shop
without Criple-gate. 1602.

Gods New-yeers Gift, sent unto England.
Contained in these words.

So God loved the World, that he has given his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but should have life everlasting.

John. 3. 16. HE that writes himself (...) and (...) the first and the last,
signified thereby, that he is not only the eternal Word, but also the
beginning, middle, and end of the written Word: yea, the scope of all the
Scriptures. Search the Scriptures (says Christ) for it is they that witness
of me: Every line in them cries out like John Baptist, Behold the Lamb of
God. The Scriptures are a Circle, and Christ the Center, wherein all th^^
prophesies mere. They are like ye Image of Ianus which looked forward and
backwarde: So the old Testament behe^^^ Christ to come, as Abraham saw his
day, and rejoiced: the New, sees him already come, as says good Father Simeon,
For mine eyes have seen thy salvation.

And as Christ is the contents of the Scripture, so the whole Scripture seems
to be con^yned in this verse of my text. As all Joseph's brethren were frasted
with variety, but B^niamins mess exceeded them all: so all Scripture is
profitable, but this most precious: All Scripture is tried Gold, but this is
orient Pearl: So that here the Cuangelist seems to propound all the word in
a word. If thy memory be short, here is a lesson as short as sweet: so that
its doubtful whether the nuanticie of the words or their quality and worth be
more admirable.

These words are like precious Jewels, containing great riches in a little
room. Before we unlocke the Casket wherein this treasure is contained. let us
look back to the happy occasion that cast this wealth on our shores.

The occaston of this comfortable Scripture was a conflict between Verity and
Vanity. light and darkness, Christ and Nicodemus: for our Savior being that
summum boni^s, that loves to communicate his goodness with his creature: that
Light that would lighten every man that comes into the world, that Sun that
makes all things increase and multiply, the Phisitio^ that seeks out them that
are sick, the Shepherd sent to the lost sheep of Israel: his meat and
drink was to infuse grace into men, and reduce souls unto God. When did he
eat, but he brake the bread of Life? When did he drink, but he opened the
fountains of Grace? When did he walk, but he taught the ways of God? When
did he rest, but he preached an everlasting Sabbath, and happy Iubilee to the
penitent? witness so many Iour^^es, so many Sermons, so many Miracles: and
witness this present conference with Nicodemus.

This Nicodemus being a better Lawyer then a Gospeller, one that with Paul was
brought up at Gamaliels feet, but never sa^e at Christ's feet with Marie:
seeking for light in darkesse, comes unto Christ by night.

What might induce this great Doctor to come unto Christ is as full of
supposes, as far from certainty. Some think Nicodemus came to tempt Christ,
and therefore cunningly extolles him, as the Wrestler liftes up his adversary,
that he may cast him down: or as the Hyaena, who counterfayting a Man's voice,
seeks to destroy him. Some think it was a sinister influence of vainglory
that drew this fantastic to Christ, as the Athenians into their exchange
only to hear news. Some think Derision came to catch our Savior in a trap,
that so Rash-iudgment might condemn him. Others presume, that being affected
with Christ's doctrine, he came to gratulate our Savior, as the best sort of
our bad hearers, turn their own profiting into the praise of the Teacher: But
I think this lukewarm lover coming so by night, was more afraid of ye world,
then affected with the Word, which he so praised: For Ver^^ admirator virtutis,
non horret Arist^ais exilium, non Socratis condemnationem. etc. Howsoever, this
Spyder coming to suck poison from Christ's wholesome doctrine, was at the
length caught in his own net. For this plausible Doctor, as if he had the art
of flattery, ^ippes his insinuating tongue with a triple praise; whose
Syren-voyce above all pernicious swee^es in the world, tyckles the very
hart-strings of man: Therefore Saint Jerome cries out, Happy is that soul
which is neither subject to flatteries nor flatteringes. And in Epist. ad Greg.
he says: Nos ad patriam festinantes, m^r^^feros Syrenarum cantus sur^^ ^ure
transire deb^mus. And Alanus says, Quid ergo Adulationis vnctio, nisi dom^^^^*
^munctio? quid co^mendationis allusionisi Praelatorum delusio? What is the oil
of Flattery, but the foil of Families? What the poison of Praise, but the
infection of Praelats? But our Savior being thus assaulted by this Siren,
shows himself like the P^ylli in Afric, or the Mars^j in Italy; who are not
only themselves safe from all venomous Serpents, but have also power to suck
the poison from others infected: So Christ, who knew that La^dar^ a laud^to,
was vera l^us, would not applaude his vain praise: for our Savior having got
the substance, scorned the shadow: having in perfect action the possession of
all Uertues, refused the imperfect affection of Uaine glory: Therefore
Nicodemus was a fool to buckle the light Bladder of idle praise on his back,
which was ordainde to bear the Cross of humili^ie: he that loves Virtue for
praise, his mind is mercenarie. We never read that Christ ever admitted in him
self this poison of humane praise, though she often offered him her painted
Garland to adorn his Uertues: whose perfection gave a tongue of Praises to his
very foes; and out of the mouth of Enu^e, have ^aled his commendations: But
^^nding in this blind Doctor fit matter for his mercy to work upon, like a
wise Musicion, he castes not away this ^arring instrument, but after the
correction of his folly, gives him instruction in the faith, as the Physician
first lets out the hurtful blood, and then ministers wholesome food: For though
the Bull be offended with red, and the best sometimes: are not mended with
roughnes: yet Christ knew a sharp rebuke was a sovereign remedy for
Nicodemus. A child will easily grow with cherishing: but an old tree
transplanted* will hardly prosper without pru^ing* Honey is sweet, yet it is
sharp where it finds a soar. Though the bud^ing Rose perish with a man's
breath, yet the Camomile must be ^rod on, to make it grow. He that is stung of
the Aspe, must have the infected member cut off. The Ape kills her young ones
with too much cherishing, and the Iui^ choketh her supporter with too much
embracing. If Apelles should see his Venus blemished, or Protogenes his
H^aly^us broken, surely the one would turn away his eyes, and the other throw
away his Pensill: then shall we not allow Christ to be sorry, seeing his own
Image so de^aced through ignorance, and so spotted with error? Yet Christ in
his correction is like a kind Nurse, that whippes her crying Babe on the
coat, not on the carcass: and though he knittes his brow, he knittes in it a
blessing: as the father holds an Apple in one hand and a Rod in the other.
But let us first hear how Christ shakes his Rod at Nicodemus, roundly
rebuking him for his blindness in a chief point of Religion, the mystery of
Regeneration.

O Nicodemus, art thou a Doctor in Israel, and know not these things? Art
thou a Teacher is Christ his school, and have not yet learned Christs-crosse?
How art thou accounted a wise man in Israel, being a fool in Religion? There
is no Wisdom but the Truth, in qua ^e^et^^ et cernitur summum bonum. Solomon
my servant, in stead of Riches desired of God the Spirit of Rule. If this was
his prayer, much more should it be thy wish, since he was but King of their
bodies, but thou art a Corrector of souls. How can thou teach men to shun
the second death, which art so ignorant of the second Birth? A Teacher should
be Organon veritatis, the right hand of Truth, to minister to every one their
food in due season. Thou art an ouerseer in Israel, and art shamefully
ouerseene thy self. Now Age has snowne down Winter on thy head, those hairs
which should be Heralds of Wisdom, show thee to be twice a Child. I would
have thee as a newborn Babe: and thou art a Babe not knowing New Birth. I
would have my Disciples to shine as lights: but thou art a counterfeite
Diamond, made precious by y^ foil of Moses Chair, where thou art falsely set.
O Nicodemus, he must needs be the Devils Doctor, that was never yet Gods
Disciple. I appeal to thy self, Is not a small blemish in the face, more ugly
then a great blot in the rest of the body? He that com^^es himself, where
should he look but in a Glass? And he that correctes himself, on whom should
he look, but on his Elders? Though the Moon be dark, it shows no great
danger: but when the Sun is Eclipsed, it signifies death. If the blind lead
the blind, how can they but fall? Where the Ship-maister sleeps, who fears
not sinking? And where the Shepherd watches not the Sheep go round to the
shambles. Thou being a Doctor in Israel, thy lips should preserve knowledge,
and thy life should be the Laymane Books. If thy ^alt be unsavory, how will thou season the simple: If thy Rule be crooked, how can thou either direct
the weak, or correct the wicked? Finally, if thy light be darkness, how great
is that darkness it self? Thou resemblest the hear be Empetron, which the
nearer it grows to the Sea, the less salt it is: so thou, being a teacher in
Israel, are a stranger in Israel. But why do I reprove thy folly, and not
rehearse thy fault? Do thou not know, Ad veram sapientiam peru^nire non
possunt, qui falsae suae sapientiae fiducia desipiunt, They shall never attain
heavenly Wisdom, which hunt after it with humane wit. The Heart bragges in
vain of his branched horns, because he wantes courage: and in vain do thou
vaunt of Templum Domini. because thou wantst knowledge. They which would see
perfectly, wincke on one eye: so if thou will see the mysteries of God, thou
must shut the eye of natural Reason. But no maru^ll thou art so dull: for as
Cyclops exoculatus, manus quoque versum (...) nullo certo scopo, so thy eye of
Faith being out, thy blind Reason gropes in the dark, being too shallow a
Pylot to guide thee into the mystery of Regeneration. I commend thee for thy
skill in the Law, but condemn thee for thy blindness in the Gospel. The
Seaman that escapes all ^yr^es and shelues* yet in sight of the Haven suffers
Shipwreck, is counted no less foolish then unfortunate: and thou passing all
the Labyrinthes of humane Learning, yet coming short of the knowledge of
New Birth, art to be pitt^ed for thy for^une, and derided for thy folly. Thou
know I never allowed him that had all manner of knowledge, yet had not the
mean of knowing. He that seeks knowledge, must note three things, Quo
ordine* quo studio* quo fine quaequ^ n^sse opor^eat. The Order of knowledge is
to know that first, which bringes soonest to the way of salvation: the Desire
in knowledge, must be to love that knowledge chiefly, which most inforceth us
to love: and the End of our knowledge, is not to win the praise of thy
self, but to work the profit of others. But alas, that which should be the
first in thy Conscience, is the farthest from thy Care* that which should have
possessed thy Love, is diuorst from thy Lyking: and that which should have been
the end of thy knowledge, is the beginning of thy shame. Qui Epi^cop^tu^
desiderat, bonu^ opus desiderat: It seems thou desire bonu^, not opus* the
worship, not the work: the goods of the fleece, not the good of the flock:
else would thou not be ignorant in the very rudiments of Religion, and
foolishly build without a foundation. Thy coming to me shows in part thy
love, yet thy coming in the night, says thy love is but little: but I know
the flame when it kindles is mixed with smoke, and so is thy little knowledge
with the smoke of ignorance: yet I will not quench this smoking Flake, nor
break this bruised Reed: Though thou came to me without business, thou
shall not depart without a blessing. As Abraham sent his servant with Guiftes
in his hand, so I will send thee hence with Grace in thy heart: and for thy
three idle praises, I will repay thee three endless profi^es: hear therefore the
nature of Faith. the deapth of Gods Love, and the mystery of Regeneration.

Thus did our Savior shake up this foolish shadow of a Prophet, this idle
echo of his praises, this empty v^ssell containing nothing but y^ bare name
of a Doctor in I^^ael: whose example if we moralize* it teaches us, That (in
Gods matters) the greatest Clerks are not the wisest men. Philosophers have
great wits, but they are enemies to Grace: and the world has her Wisdom,
but it is enmity with God. Learning is a Loadstarre, and the knowledge of
^ongues, is the key of Crueth: but if profane Learning turn Lucife^, and
think to usurp Moses Chair. she must be thrust (with the Parret) out of
^upiters Parliament. If Ismael mock Isaac, though he be the son of Abraham,
he must be vanished: And if Learning ma^re Religion, though it be the gift of
God, it must be abandoned. The Stars give some light, but the Moon must be
Mistress of the night. As the poor Israelites ^orrowed of the Egyptians all
their Jewels but to adorn themselves: so we must borrow from profane Arts all
their ornaments, and with their ^poyles adorn the Temple of God: So doing,
Learning and Religion, like two Twin^es, will live and love together. And thus
much touching the occasion of these words.

Having found out the ^iue, let us search for the Honey conteayned in this
heavenly verse.

GOD so loved the World, that he has given his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes in him should not perish, but should have life everlasting.

John. 3. 16. THese words contain a Deed of gift: which, for our better
light, I branch into these six parts. First the giver, GOD. Second, the cause
moving him to this exceeding bounty, which is here said to be Love. Third,
the gift: his only begotten Son. Fourth, the party to whom this Legacy or
gift is bequeathed: the World. Fifth, the frui^e following this Gift, which
is two foulde: first a Ransom, in these words, should not perish: Secondly a
reward, in these words, should have life everlasting. Sixth, the hand
wherewith we receive this Gift, (namely Faith) whosoever believes in him.

CAPVT. 1. Of GOD, the giver.
First, The giver, GOD. The wealth of a Gift appears in the worth of the
giver: and if the giver be ^^ce, the Gift is contemned: but if the giver be
gra^ious in our heart, the Gift is as precious in our eye. While our Ships ride
in ou^ harbors, we regard them not: but when they return from the farthest
Ocean, we look for great riches. If a Messenger come to us from a mean
person, we give him mean entertainment: but if a Prince send his worst
Servant unto us, we give him princely regard. Well, God is richer then the
Ocean, his boosome is full of blessings: God is greater then a Prince, his
kingdom is everlasting: And as his thoughts are not as man's thoughts, so his
Guiftes are not as man's Guiftes: for as he gives without merit, so he gives
without measure: he is excellent in all his works. If he love it is without
repentance: if he hate, his anger indures for ever: if he give, he powers down
his blessings: if he take, non hab^n^^ ^^^^m quod habet, a^^eretur, he takes
away all: He loves a cheerful giver, and shall we think him a fearful
given? A poor man on a time begging a Groat of a King, the King snipt him with
this answer, Non est Regium. If an ^^rthly Prince thus stood on his Gift,
shall not the heavenly King regard what he gives* Christ telleeth us, that
Bea^^us est da^e q^am accipere* it is a part of his Fathers blessedness to
give. And saint Augustine says, Benefic^um est beneuola actio tribuens, (...)
^audiu^ ^ri^uendo* A benefit or gift is a work of good will, that pleasures as
much in the giving, as the receauer does in the Gift. So then, if Gods Gift
be a work of good will toward man, we may m^asure out his benef^^ence by his
benevolence: his work by his will, and his Gift by y^ joy that he takes in
giving. When Goods Love intendes a Larges, the gift must needs be great. The
lower the Uale, the more rain it receives: and the vnworthier man is, the
greater Gods love is, and the richer his Gift. In a word, the excellency of
this Gift appears in the excellency of the giver, whose perfection is such,
as only silence must show it, while conce^t and reason ^ie in a trance
through endless admiration. A Philosopher being commanded to tell the King what
God was, he asked a days respet: and when the day was done, and the King
exp^cted his promise, he asked two days: which being ended, he asked four
days, and after, eight: the King admyring his slacknesse, demanded why he so
abiourned his promise? Because (quoth he) the more I think of him, the less I
know of him. S. B^^nard says, Quid est Deus? Longitudo, Latitudo, sublimitas,
profundum: longitudo propter aeternitat^m, latitudo propter ^h^ritatem,
sublimitas propter ma^est atem, (...) propter sapientiam: and therefore as God
is wonderful, so are his guiftes.

Amongst men in deed, the giver may be wicked, and the gift too. In the 22. of
Numb. Baala^e was a wicked giver, and so was his gift which he offered to
curse the ^^racl^tes. So in Acts 8. Simor M^gus is a giver, but a cursed giver:
for he thought with Guiftes to buy the guiftes of Gods spirit. And such giuers
were the Pha^isies, for they gave thirty pence to betray the Lord of life: But
as Judas received the earnest penny of his perdition, so they betrayed their
own posterity to endless misery. In a word, the Devil himself is a
giver, but a wicked giver: for he offered Christ all the World for an hours
worship: as the Pope gave all the Newfound World to the Spaniards, because
they should worship him. But David tells us, D^m^^ est terra, How shall the
Devil give the World to Christ, that can not give himself an hours respite
from torment: his Thorn yeeldes no such Grapes, his Thi^tle bears no such
Figs, howsoever like a bragging suitor he boastes of his riches: Though he
promise an Angel of light, he pays with light Angels. and shall have his
portion with leawd Angels in hell fire.

But God as he made all things good, so does he give all things that are
good. James says, Omne bonum est De^ donum, Every good gift, is Gods gift.
In ^eremic God says, There is not an Evil in the City, which I have not
created: If God create Evil for a correction, much more does he create Good
for our comfort. He is like the good Father, that spendes himself in providing
for his son: or the kind Mother, which no sooner has a sweet thing, but
she gives it her child: or the cunning Artificer, who cares not what cost he
bestows on his work, to make it more beautiful. So God is affected toward
his creature: as he made all exceeding good, so he desires the good of all,
especially Man, whom he made for the Glass of his glory, and the Image of
himself, to be his Son on earth, and his Heir in heaven: and though here
Man is but Tennant at will, yet he sittes at an easy rent, the bare debt of
Thankfulness.

The sum of this discourse is, seeing God is the giver of all Good, we must
look for all good things at his hands: and desire nothing that is good,
farther then it is Gods Gift: For that which is Snatched from others, is the
Devils bayte, not Gods blessing. The world is full of such snatching Nimrods,
mighty hunters: for some hunt after Honor, some after Pleasure* and some
after Profit: And these three Hunters have almost hunted all Religion and
Virtue out of our borders. But let them know that, Quaedam dat Deus
misericorditer, quaedam sinit habere iratus: Whatsoever comes by Oppression,
Tyranny, Bryberie, Simmonie, Usury, is not Gods gift, and therefore no good
gift, but a pledge of his anger. Therefore whatsoever thou possessest or
desire, let Conscience be thy Cater, and the Word thy Warrant: so shall the
Transitorities of this life, be unto thee a Handsell of Heaven and an earnest
penny of that Bliss, which the World never dreams of.

CAPVT. 2. Of GODS Love.
THus having brought thee to the Waters of Life, namely, GOD the giver, I will
show thee the Wellspring of all Blessings, his Love to the World. etc.

The persuading cause of this Gift, it is here laid to be Love: God so loved.
Quid est A^or (says Aug.) nisi quaedam vita Du^ aliqua copulans, vel copulare
appetens, Amantem et amatum? What is Love, but as it were one life in two
hearts, one soul in two bodies* the Fire which blesses where it burns, the
Soa^her which no art can sunder, the Knot which no time can untie, the Hand
which deskantes sweet music on the heart stringes, the Cause which made God
become Man, and the Virtue which makes Man like unto God: (I speak not of that
hellish Fire which makes men slaves, but of that heavenly Flame which makes
them Saints.) As Christ was anointed with the oil of gladness above his
fellows, so this Virtue is adorned with the crown of Eternity about all her
fellows: for Paul says, that Faith bringes us but to the Coffine, and Hope
watches the Coarse till the R^surrection: These two Uertues are confined with
our life, but our Love is refined by our death, and dwelles with us after our
glorification.

But this our Love is but a shadow of Gods Love, an Arm of his Sea, a Drop of
his Fountain, a little Flame of his living Fire: neither in quality so
precious, nor in quantity so spacious by infinite degrees. God loves without
cause, our love is our duty: God loves us his enemies, we love him our
friend: God loves without reward, our love inherites heaven: God loves us
first, our love pays him back his own: Gods love is fervent, our love is
lukewarm: Gods love is infinite, our love is little, like our knowledge, and
low of stature like Zacheus: Christ must dine in our house, his love must shine
in our hearts before we can reflect our borrowed beams, and love him again.
The excellency of this Gods love can neither be expressed by our tongue, nor
impressed in our hearts: as it made the World of nothing, so the World is
nothing to it: for it comprehends all and is not comprehended of any. Our
Savior here thought best to express this Love with a sic dilexit, to show us
that his Father is even sick of love: his description is inde^^nit, because
his love is infinite. Either Gods love is so deep that Christ could not sound
it, or our reason so shallow that we cannot se^ it. As the Painter that drew A
game^non, sorrowing for the death of his daughter, ^^ew not how to figure his
grief in his ^^^^, and therefore drew a ^layl^ over it, thinking it impossible
the gazers idle eye ^^^^ld behold what the fathers grieved heart could not
hold: so Christ leaves that to our admiration, which understanding cannot
attain. A holy Father would feign ^ym^ at the dimensions of this Love, saying,
Dilexit tantus tantillos, He a God of infinite majesty, loved us men of
infinite mis^ri^: but this is obscurum per obscurius, for we know neither
quantus Deus, the greatness of his Majesty, nor yet quantu^i nos, our grievous
misery. In a word, as we cannot see the Sun but by his own light, so we
cannot learn this Love, but by Gods own words. The Star alone must lead
the Wisemen to Christ, and Christ alone must lead us to his Love. Now whereas
he expresses it with a Sic. So God loved the World. etc. a Father says: This
Aduerbe Sic, contaynes in it all Aduerbes of Love: as if Christ had said, My
Father loved the world so dearly, so vehemently, so fatherly, so fer^ently.
etc. And Ber. on the Cant. says, Deus ex se miserandi sumit mater^em, Gods
own nature is the motive of his mercy* Then he that can explain Gods Nature,
may express his Love: whereof to affirm the one is impious, and to perform
the ot^^^, impossible.

This is that Love (Christian Reader) which in the zeal of God I commend i^
thine endless admiration: this is the riches of his Grace, the chief of his
Works, the sum of his Word, the shadow of Himself, the perfection of his
Glory. This teaches our Faith to stand, and our Hope to climb, and our love
to burn: This cheereth our labors, and bears our losses, and teaches our
sorrow to smile. In a word, to this exceeding Love, alone we owe our salvation:
Therefore damnable is the Doctrine of the Church of Room, that teaches us to
err both in the manner and matter of our Faith: First, in the manner they
teach us to doubt of our salvation. O injury intolerable, to doubt of the
Promise, where such a Love is our warrant: what more free then gift, or who
more faithful then God the giver* shall his Love give Christ unto me, and my
unbelief thrust him from me* Is the Truth like unto man, that he should lie*
or is his Arm shortened, that he can not save* God forbid. This Gift is
sealed with the blood of his Son, registered in the sight of heaven, witnessed
by the holy Angels, passed with an oath to the World. O Incredulity, the wit
of fools, how many Blessings do thou bar us from* Christ could not work
his Miracles, God can not show his mercy, where this monster ^urketh. Again,
in the matter of our faith they foyst in most dangerously a ^^^pe of their own
Leaven: for God requires a Wedding garment to cover sin, they bring in a
Menstruous cloth: he will have us build on his Love, they would have us
justified by our own Labor: he will have us trust to his Mercy, they would
have ^s trust in our Merits. Paul's whole Epistle to the Romans shootes only
at this mark, to beat down the pride of Man, who would feign be his own
savior, to depresse Nature, and extol Grace: therefore in the end he adds
this vpshot, So then we are saved not of Works, but by Grace. And Augustine
says, Gratia est nullo modo, quae non est gratuita omni modo, Grace is all
Grace, or no Grace at all. Again he says, Quisqui^ tibi emunerat M^n^t^ sua,
quid tibi emunerat, nisi Munera tua? Again, Uis excidere gratia? ^acta
merotatia. Our very Faith as it is a grace in us, is beholding to Grace* it
s^ues a^ it is a hand ^o lay hold on Christ, not as it is a virtue and a work:
For all works must humbly be cast at Christ's feet^ with Marie, and there
meditate on his mercy: they must not be busy with Martha in the matter of our
Justification. As God said to Paul, My Grace is sufficient for thee* so I say
to all, Gods Love is sufficient for you: this Love made you, when you were
nothing: and this Love must save you, now you are worse then nothing. Let the
Papists cloth themselves in the rags of their own Righteousness, and the
jews trust to the^^ Templum Domini, and the Heathen dragge of their painted
Uertues; (which Augustine calls splendida peccata) but let us only triumph in
this Love of God, and esteem it the strength of our* salvation.

Thus having discovered the rech treasure of Gods Love, let us know our duty,
that we may be accounted worthy to win and to wear it. S. Aug. Lib. de Anima
et Spiritu, seems to study for this duty, saying: Miser ego, quantum deberem
diligere Deum meum qui me fecit cum non er^m, redemit, cum per^eram, etc. O
sinful wretch, how shall I requite the rare love of God, who created me of
nothing, and redeemed me being worse then nothing. etc. And after, having found
this duty out, he teaches it to the World, Si non impendere, at rependere
deb^mus, If we will bestow no Love upon God, yet let us repay his Love, which
he has showed first. The World cries shame upon an ungrateful person. If thou
should travail into a strange Country, and there fall into the hands of
the ^heeues, and in mere compassion of thy misery, the King of that Country
should set th^e free again, giving thee life and liberty, what would the
World think? yea, what then would thou esteem of thy self, if thou
should prove unthankful to so good a Prince? We are all Strangers in the
world, and Passengers from earth to heaven: now in our Journey we meet with
the World and the Devil, and these rob us of all grace, these wound us and
leave us for dead: now God of his exceeding mercy finds us out, and sendes
his Son that good Sama^itane, to power the oil of Grace into our Wounds,
and to mount us on the back of his Merit, and so carry us to the Inn of our
rest, the joys of Heaven. O Love, beyond all love, how much thou art? O
blessed God, teach us the depth of thy Love, that we may know the debt of our
thankfulness. Thine endless Blessing has made us bankruptes, for we are not
able to repay the interest of thy Love. If we proffer our goods, alas we
received them of thee: if we offer our lives, they are redeemed by thee: Surely
this shall be our thanks, the Remembrance of thy Mercy: And since thy blessed
Son has taught us, That the loving of thee, is the keeping of thy
Commandments, we will labor to be all keepers: as we have spent our time in
the service of the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, so will we spend the
remnaunt of our days in the rebuke of sin, and the recording of thy Love.
And since the Love of so worthy a creature as man, is too costly a climent to
join earth to earth, we abandon all earthly desires, and freely give the^ our
hearts, and be^roth our Love to thine.

Dear GOD, by the fire of thy spirit, draw up our affections to thee, divorce
us from the lyking of the World, and marry us to the love of thy Son: Let us
light our Candle at thy Love, and learn by thy endless mercy, never to end
our thankfulness, till death translate us from this ^ale of tears to
mount-Sion, where our love shall join us to thee eternally.

CAPVT. 3. Of the Gift, CHRIST.
NOw are we come to the Gift it self, the greatest that ever was, whether we
respect the bounty of God, or the blessing of Man: for what could God give
greater then himsefe? or what could Man receive better then his salvation* He
^^^^ given his only begotten Son. This blesse^ Gift is it that made Abraham
rejoice, and the Angels sing, and John Baptist dance in his mothers belly:
this is able to make the World wax young again, if Grace would open her eyes,
and Wisdom teach her to see her own nakedness, and the riches of this Garment
sent unto her. As the Saints in heaven follow the Lamb where so ever he
goes, so all the Blessings of the Earth follow Christ th^^ Gift, where so
ever he goes: for, Habenti dabitur, He that has this gift, shall have all
other guiftes, yea, he shall have the giu^r to: for Christ says, He that
receives me, receives him that sent me. And Ambrose says, Omnia habemu^ in
Christo, sia volu^r^ ^urari desider as Medicu^ est: si f^bribus aestuas, sons
est: si grauaris Iniquita^e, Iustitia est: si indiges a^xilio, virtus est: si
mortem times, vita est: si tenebra^ sugis, lux est: si Caelum desideras, via
est: si Cibum quaeris, alimentum est. etc.

(He has given.) God did not lend his Son, nor sell him, but he gave him to
us: Herein appears the riches of his Mercy, and the greatness of our poverty:
he did not sell him, we were not able to buy him, but he gave him: which shows
us to be Beggars and Bankrupts, and that God must for pity give us a Savior
frank and free, when we had neither means to deserve him, nor grace to desire
him. (His only begotten Son.) He gave us not an Angel, nor a Servant, nor a
Creature, but his Son. The name of a Son is music in the ear of a
Father: and the life of a Child is more precious in yt Parents eye, then their
own safety: Many Parents to save their Sons life, have willingly spilt
their own: examples hereof we have in profane, and sacred Scriptures, we will
take a handful from a heap. In Gene. 37. when good father Jacob heard of the
supposed death of his son, (his wicked children giving a false fire to his
fear) he was smitten with sorrow, rivers of tears gushed out, and his heart
bled at his eyes, for the supposed slaughter of Joseph: his affection to his
son was too hot to admit the cold comfort of his other children: he that had
wrestled with an Angel, could not wrestle with this affection, and therefore
in the grief of a father, he sets down this resolution: Joseph my son, is
surely to^^e in pe^^es, and in my son my self was torn: the claw of that
Beast has r^ut my bleeding heart, and his cruelty has killed two in one. O my
son, my life was shut in thy looks, which now is shaken in thy loss: I made
thee a Ceate of many colors, to show that thou wast y^ Rainebow pledge of my
peace: but lo the beauty of my Rainebow is rent, and in stead thereof this
bloody Meteor appears, showing the death of my joy, the deuowring of my son.
The earth is made to coue^ the root, not to contain the branch: I am the
wither^d root my Son, and thou the branch, whom untimely death ^ath ^ropt.
Why should the ^r^ue b^ d^^k^ with gr^^ne boughs, that was made for gray
hayres: If Children prede^case their Parents, we are their ^f^pring, and t^^r
none of ou^s. Well since Comfort ^ill not be my guest, ^ri^f^ shall ^^^
C^^p^nion* and seeing ^^ son forsaken ^^^ in my life, I will ^^^^tak^^ ^^ in
my death, for nothing but So^^^^ shall bring my gray-head to the ^rau^. T^^s a
good Father mourned for a gracio^s Son: But will you hear a loving Parents
mo^ne for a leawd Child? In the 2 Samuel 18. when God purposed to chastise David,
he made the Son to whippe the father* for Abshalom, that by name should have
bin his fathers joy, by nature proo^d a pa^ricide, and sought to depose his
own sire: but God having sufficiently humbled David his child, threw the rod
in the fire, and brought a judgment upon Abshalom, which cost him his life:
Notwithstanding, David being moved with the good affection of a father, more
then the bad condition of his son, was so far from rejoicing in Abshalom^
death, that it almost cost him his own life. O Abshalom my son (quoth he)
would God I had dyed for thee; o Abshalom my son, my son: But God here is
neither like Jacob lam^nting a good son, nor David beway^ing a wicked child:
he resembles good Abraham, who willingly sacrificed his son ^^aake.

This was much to give a Son yet as if this were not enough to express God
love, the holy Ghost adds his only begotten Son, he gave not an adopted
Son, as Abraham offered a Ram in stead of Isaac. But his own Son: And
herein appears his perfect Justice, a blessed president to al Iusticiaries. In
all Gods actions this virtue swayes: though his mercy be about all his works,
yet Mercy and Justice must kiss together. The dearest drop of Christ's blood
must be shed, before Gods Justice be left unsatisfied.

Nay this was not enough to satisfy Gods Mercy, his Love mountes a degree
higher, and further it cannot ascend. He gave his only begotten Son. When
the world could not yield the price of our Redemption, he searched his own
boosome for a Savior, and gave us his only Son. If God had many Sons his
mercy had been meaner, and his Love had seemed less, but he gave us not one
Son of many, but one and all, his only Son: for whose sake he spared not
his Angels, his delight, his boosome friend, the Image of himself, for the
ransom of the world.

O love beyond all love, how much thou art! A holy Father in admiration of this
Love cries out, Quam Dives ^s in mis^r^cordia, quam magnificus in iusticia,
quam munificus in gratia, Domine Deus noster! Again, Passiotua Domine, Jesus,
vltimum est refugium, singular remedium: deficiente sapientia, Iustitia non
sufficient, sanct^tatis succumbentibus meruis illa succu^r^^, cum enim
defecerit Virtus mea, non Conturbor, scio quid faciam, Poculum salutaris
accipiam. etc.

The instruction that we must learn from the consideration of this unspeakable
Gift Christ, is two fold: First, we are taught to return our Love again, as
Aug. says, Sinon amare, saltem redamare debemus: As God has given us his
only Son, so we must show our reciprocal Love to God, and for his Son,
give him our selves: as he has given us wealth, we must bestow our wealth on
him again: as he has given us liberty, honor, children, long life,
knowledge, wisdom, courage, etc. these must all weight on him, and do him
honor and service: Thus we must give him Love for Love, again.

Second use of Gods vnspeakabe Bounty, is to teach us to love our Brethren.
Christ teaches us this lesson for his Love, saying: I have given you an
example how to love one an other. Brethren must be united in the bond of
mutual Love, like S^^us the (...) Faggot: for the unity of Brothers is, ^^ce
qua^ (...), exceeding joy to all the Saints. But alas, let us see what Lovers
and what Giver, our wicked age does afford? When I study upon this Dueue, I
find four sorts of Giuers: the first, and the worst sort, have the Hand to
give, but not the Heart to grant: of whom I may say as Christ said, better this
Hand were cut off and they were as poor as Irus, then with their rusting
Riches to be cast into Hell. These are the Mammonistes of our age, whose Soul
lies creasured with their rusting Peuce: who are more vnuiercitull then the
Devil, for he would have Christ turn Stones into Bread, but these men ^urde
Bread into Stones, ^^en the Bread of the poor into Stonewalles, or else spend
it on their accursed Lusts, forgetting Mercy: therefore damnation attendes
them. The second sort have the Heart, but not the Hand: whose Myte God acceptes
above all the Mines of the Wealthy, and takes their Love for their larges. The
third sort are such as have neither Heart nor Hand in this duty: and these are
poor men every way: for he that can bring forth neither good Work nor good
Will, is a dead member in Christ's body, and shall be cut off. The fourth sort,
have both Hand and Heart; and these are they that walk in ^^oth^^ly Love, these
walk worthy of th^s (...) Christ and shall have their deeds of mercy (...)
that sweet ^^^uest So^^* (...): for I was hungry and you gave me meat etc.

FINIS.

