DEATH REPEALED BY A THANKFVLL MEMORIAL Sent from CHRIST-CHURCH in OXFORD,
CELEBRATING THE NOBLE DESERTS OF the Right Honorable, PAVLE, Late Lord
VIS-COUNT BAYNING of SUDBURY. Who changed his Earthly Honors June the 11. 1638.

OXFORD, Printed by Leonard Lichfield Printer to the University, for Francis
Bowman. M.D.C.XXXVIII.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LADY PENELOPE DOWAGER of the late VIS-COVNT
BAYNING.
GREAT Lady, Humble partners of like grief
In bringing Comfort may deserve belief,
Because they Feel, and Feyne not: Thus we say
Unto Our selves, Lord Bayning, though away,
Js still of Christ-Church; somewhat out of sight,
As when he traveled, or did bid good night,
And was not seen long after; now he stands
Removed in Worlds, as heretofore in Lands;
But is not Lost. The spite of Death can never
Divide the Christian, though the Man it sever.
The like we say to You: He Is still at home,
Though out of reach; as in some upper room,
Or study: for His Place is very high,
His Thought is Vision; now most properly
Returned he is Yours as sure, as e're has been
The Jewel in Your Cask, safe though unseen.
You know that Friends have Ears as well as Eyes,
We Hear, He Is well and Living, that Well dies.
ON THE DEATH OF THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORD VISCOUNT BAYNING.
THough after Death, Thanks lessen into Praise,
And Worthies be not crowned with gold, but bays;
Shall we not thank? To praise Thee all agree;
We Debtors must out do it, heartily.
Deserved Nobility of True Descent,
Though not so Old in Thee grew Ancient:
We number not the Tree of Branched Birth,
But Genealogy of Virtue, spreading forth
To many births in value. Piety,
True Valor, Bounty, Meekness, Modesty,
These noble offsprings swell Thy Name as much,
As Richards, Edwards, three, four, twenty such:
For in thy Person's lineage surnamed are
The great, the good, the wise, the just, the fair.
One of these styles innobles a whole stem;
If all be found in One, what race like Him!
Long stayres of birth, unless they likewise grow
To higher virtue, must descend more low.
When water comes through numerous veins of lead,
It Is water still; Thy blood from One pipes head
Grew Aqua-vitae straight, with spirits filled,
As not traduced, but raised, sublimed, distilled.
Nobility far spread, I may behold,
Like the expanded sky, or dissolved gold,
Much rarefied; I see it contracted here
Into a star, the strength of all the sphere;
Extracted like the Exlixir from the Mine,
And highten'd so, that it is too soon divine.
Divinity continues not beneath;
Alas nor He: But though He pass by death,
He that for many lived, gains many lives
After he is dead: Each friend, and servant strives
To give him breath in praise; this Hospital,
That Prison, College, Church, must needs recall
To mind their Patron; whose rich legacies
In foreign lands, and under other skies
To them assigned, show that his heart did even
In France love England, as in England Heaven.
Heaven well perceived this double pious love,
Both to his Country here, and that above:
Therefore the day, that saw Him landed here,
Has seen him landed in his Haven there;
The selfsame day (but two years interposed)
Saw Sun and Him round shining twice and closed.
No Citizen so covetous could be
Of getting wealth, as of bestowing, He;
His Body, and Estate went as they came,
Stripped of Appendix Both, and left the same
But in the Original; Necessity
Divested one, the other Charity.
It cost him more to cloth his soul in death,
Then e're to cloth his flesh for short-lived breath;
And whereas Laws exact from Niggards dead
A Portion for the Poor, they now are said
To moderate His bounty: never such
Was known but once, that men should give too much:
A Tabernacle then was built, and now
The like in heaven is purchased: Learn you how;
Partly by building Men, and partly by
Erecting walls, by newfound Chemistry,
Turning of Gold to Stones. Our Christ-Church Pile,
Great Henrie's monument, shall grow a while
With Bayning's Treasure; who away has took,
Like those at Westminster, to fill a nook
Amongst beds of Kings. Thus speak, speak while we may
For Stones will speak when We are hushed in Clay.
W. STRODE D.D. Canon of Chapter ^.

In obitum Illustrissimi Vicecomitis BAYNING
QVid voveat dulci nutricula majus Alumno,
Quam bona Fortunae, Corporis, atque Animi?
En haec Hero hoc simul omnia; quid petat ultra?
Quid potius? Coelum: quod novus hospes habet.
The same Englished.
Can Nurse choose in her sweet babe more to find,
Then goods of Fortune, Body, and of Mind?
Lo here at once all this: what greater bliss
Can hope or wish? Heaven; why there he is.
ROB. BVRTON. of Chapter Chapter

On the Death of the Right Honorable the Lord Viscount BAYNING.
SO when an hasty vigor does disclose
An early flame in the more forward Rose,
That Rareness does destroy it: Wonders owe
This to themselves still, that they cannot grow.
Such Ripeness was His Fate: Thus to appear
At first, was not hereafter to stay here.
Who thither first steps, whither others tend,
When He sets forth is at the Iourney's end.
But as Short things most vigor have, and we
Find Force the Recompense of Brevity;
So was it here: Compactednesse gave Strength,
The Life was Close, though not spun out at Length.
Nothing lay idle in it: Experience Rules,
Men strengthn'd Books, and Cities seasoned Schools.
Nor did he issue forth to come Home thence
(As some) less Man, then they go out from hence:
Who think new Air new Vices may create,
And stamp Sin Lawful in Another State;
Who make Exotic Customs Native Arts,
And Loose Italian Vices English Parts:
He naturalized Perfections only; gained
A round and solid mind, severely trained,
And managed his desires; brought often checked Sense
Unto the sway of, Reason coming thence
His own acquaintance, morgag'd unto none,
But was himself His own possession.
Thus stars by journying still, gain, and dispense,
Drawing at once, and shedding influence:
Thus Spheres by Regular Motion do increase
Their Tunes, and bring their Discords into Peace.
Hence knew He his own value, never put forth
Honor for Merit; Power instead of Worth:
Nor, when He poyz'd himself, would He prevail
By Wealth, and make his Manors turn the scale.
Desert was only balanced; nor could we
Say my Lord's Rents were only Weight, not He:
Only one slight he had; from being Small
Unto himself, He came Great unto all:
But Great by no man's Ruin: For who will
Say that his Seat e're made the next Seat ill?
No Neighb'ring-village was unpeopled here
'Cause it durst bound a Noble Eye too near.
Who could e're say my Lord, and the next Marsh
Made frequent Herriots? or that any harsh
Oppressive usage made Young Lives soon fall?
Or who could His seven thous and bad Air call?
He blessings shed: Men knew not to whom more,
The Sun, or Him, they might impute their store.
No rude exaction, or licentious times
Made his Revenewes Others, or His Crimes:
Nor are his Legacies poore-mens present tears,
Or do they for the future raise their fears.
No such contrivance here as to profess
Bounty, and with Large Miseries feed the Less;
Fat some with their own alms; bestow, and pill;
And Common Hungers with Great Famines fill,
Making an Hundred Wretches endow Ten,
Taking the Field, and giving a Sheafe then:
As Robbers, whom they spoil, perhaps will lend
Small sums to help them to their journey's end.
All was untainted here, and the Author such,
That every gift from Him grew twice as much.
We, who erewhile did boast his presence, do
Now boast a second grace, his bounty too;
Bounty, was judgment here: for he bestows
Not who disperseth, but who gives and knows.
And what more wise design, then to renew,
And dress the breast, from which he knowledge drew!
Thus pious men, ere their departure, first
Would crown the fountain which had quenched their thirst.
Hence strive we all his memory to engrosse,
Our Common Love before, but now Our Loss.
W. CARTWRIGHT of Chapter Chapter

Upon the Death of the Right Honorable, the Lord Viscount BAYNING.
O Had He been at Rome again, for there
The Mercy of his Sickness did him spare;
Acknowledging this Law, that it is but just
The place which gave him breath, should make him dust:
That as we have a Native soil, so we
Ought not to bear Foreign Mortality.
Though He was only distant then from's grave
Some store of Miles, not Years, and we can have
No worse then Absence, whether in the Tomb
He lie, or in a Climate live from home:
Yet had He been, though from our selves, removed
To any distance, if from death bestowed,
We would have buried Envy, bin content
His presence was to any people lent,
Bin glad some time was still to come, though small,
And could not long rejourne his funeral.
Death now came Hasty on him, and so quick,
He searce had leave or time for to grow sick,
But died almost in Health, and you may please
To call his very life his chief disease.
The Vrne may triumph that the fatal dart
Has won the spoil alone, without the Art
Or learned help of Physic, not a Grain
Or curious scruple from the Doctortane
Made up a skillful wound, but he did dye
By the rude stroke of plain Mortality:
Which was not give^ ^en his hair turned frost,
And wore the color which his Ashes must;
When all his Youth and Beauty were so spent,
That Age had made him his own Monument;
When it might be Humanity to kill,
And the most deadly Drug might prove good will:
But in a Spring of fresh and active Blood,
When there was nothing old in Him, but Good;
He had Graie virtues, and by view of's mind
Not years, he was so soon to heaven designed.
He who saw that, could see He lived his Age
Of fourscore, made his Race a Pilgrimage.
And still he lives, and from his latest night
Breaks out unto the world a glorious light,
Getting this conquest over death, that He
Was snatched away in's Liberality,
In's Piety to build, and care to frame
Such sumptuous Trophies as will save his name.
Had he one vacant hour from Bounty spent,
And in that hour unto his grave been sent;
'T had been less glory to his Fall, to dye
Just in the sleeping of his Charity:
But to be caught in Good, in Virtue struck,
Made him Triumphant ere He earth forsook.
So did the stout Athenian stand in Death,
Rearing his Statue while he lost his Breath.
I. MAPPLET of Chapter Chapter

To the memory of the Honorable Lord BAYNING.
Forbear ye whining Wits to rail at Fate
In viler terms then Scolds at Billings-gate:
Nor brand poor Death with baser Epithites
Then Textor has when of the Devil he writes:
All such ill-sounding Dirges ye can have
Are but as Mandrakes planted on his grave.
Your tears are now ridiculous; were I
A Poet, I would write Deaths Elogie.
She here was just, and courteous; Suppole
We should in January see a Rose
Full blown, would we not pull't, and think it worth
Myriads of those that May or June brings forth?
This early fruitful Flower being ripe in the Spring
Was a fit Present for our Sovereigns King.
Should she have left it for the Summers Fly,
Or Autumn's Worm, 't had been ill huswifery:
She cropped it suddenly, and was as nice
In killing Him, as Priests a Sacrifice.
Lest any bruise should happen, 'twas her strife
To cut, and not saw off his thread of life.
She knew he was prepared, and therefore sent
No Gout to tell him that he must repent.
A tedious sickness had his Friends more greiv'd;
He then had longer died, not longer lived.
We judge a Keeper dull and hard of heart,
That wounds the timorous Dear in every part.
He does in Skill and Courtesy excel,
That kills not hurts, and makes his Prey die Well.
Deaths quicker blow did then no injury,
But that it hindered Doctors of a Fee.
There Is none will curse a wind cause it does send
Their ship too soon unto the journies end.
Do any Trav'lers think their Horses sin,
Unless they bring them Late unto their Inn?
He now a Voyage took; He that did go
To France and Rome, must needs see Heaven too.
What would you say of him that went about
To see all England, and left London out!
'Twas for His Glory that He died so soon;
Should He have lingered till his afternoon,
We had suspected Him of grosser blood;
By short continuance we judge things Good:
A fine pure silken vesture cannot wear
So long as garments weaved of hemp or hair.
By this his early fall He did present
The Gods with a perfume of sweeter sent.
Tapers that burn and languish 'till they come
To th'socket, leave ill odours in the room.
Lords count it a disparagement, if they
Should not have suits which seem new every day.
Had it not injured his high Soul to wear
His Body till the flesh had looked threadbare?
Seeing he died so Young, it may be said
That he is transplanted rather then decayed:
By his fresh looks, and his fair youthful chin
We may believe he is made a Cherubin.
Those then that wet his Hearse, and vainly Cry,
Not Mourn, but Pine at His Eternity.
Envy that here still followed Him, is made
After His death, the shadow of His shade.
Whilst others studied how to loose their time,
Thinking that Logic would their Birth beslime,
As if it were Gentile not to Dispute;
It was his chief ambition to confute;
Who not alone aimed to deserve his Grace,
But seemed by pains to wish a Students place.
Though Heralds did to Him great Names afford,
He heard Sir BAYNING sooner then My Lord.
Lest the proud noise of Titles might begin
Thoughts that might swell His Plenty into sin,
Arts and Religion gnarded them; He knew
His Fortunes were but Crimes, without these two;
And in a noble scorn disdained to spell
The Lord in the Scutchion more then Chronicle.
His Pride was to be Eloquent, and Able
As is Our Dorset at the Councell-Table.
He knew unless a bright Retinue come
Of Virtues too, Man's but a glorious Tomb,
Carved ore with names of Honor, which may win
The eyes applause, but is but Stench within.
Did you but read his Will you would think that He
Had been a Reverend Bishop; Lords there be
That falling in their youth bequeath alone
Their Bodies to our Churches, not a Stone,
Unless for their Gwn Tomb; it was His high care
They should his Lands as well as Carcass share.
As if he meant each place his Heir should be,
He blessed the Prisons with his Charity.
Iayles are now Hospitalls; to some 'twill be
Not to be bayld or freed, a courtesy.
His Gifts will still the Newgate Cries; we shall
Hear the cag'd Birds hereafter sing, not ball.
Much do we owe to him besides that Plate,
Which is when full of fragments full of State:
The Knife and Voider's such that to a Guest
Taking away is as a second feast.
But the Example of his Life will be
To after times the richest Legacy.
R. WEST of Chapter Chapter

To the Lady BAYNING.
PArdon our Bold Tears, Madam, that we do
Presume to join our selves Mourners with You.
Grief is no Herald; there is no Rule in Moanes,
We never stand on Titles in our Groans.
Manners and Complement we prize the less,
Where a Confused sad Grief is the best dress:
Yet we do hope You will no Censure make,
And Tears swollen up with Grief for Pride mistake;
Nor call our sighs to th'Court of Honor, we
Do not lament for the Brave Company.
Where our own loss prompts us, you need not fear
Rivals in plaints, as Jealous of each Tear.
We all enjoyed so much of Him, we dare
Allow You but a Part, and Common share:
His Goodness was so much diffused, we do
Think we might love him without wrong to You.
May we not think him now but crossed the Seas,
And count His Death among other Voyages?
Sure, as no Land he here did travel over
But what in's Study He had passed before,
And first knew France and Spain in England, ere
He was a Witness of their Actions there;
So was his pure Refined soul we know
So well acquainted with the place it now
More fully dwells in, 't may be truly said
He had been much in Heavn'n ere he was Dead.
But this does only cheat our Grief, the maine
Comfort's our Hope to see him here again,
In that brave offspring which your Blood yet keeps
Alive in memory of Him that sleeps.
Which when you shall give Birth to, He being gone
We all will count his Resurrection.
ROB. MEADE Chapter Chapter

On the Death of the Lord Viscount BAYNING.
When Titles fall, and Death ambitious how
To raise his Triumph, makes some great one bow,
Not Cadmus teeth could half so soon infuse
A soul, as can Their dust inspire a Muse;
Whiles death enlivens death, and most wits have
Their Resurrection from another Grave:
Nor were the wonder strange thus to behold
Our Ice inflamed, our Heat spring out of Cold,
Did all like BAYNING dye; did every Lord
More grief for Virtue lost, then State afford,
How might bad verses be excused, when we
Found all writ truth, no other Poetry;
When height of Fancy left Expression weak,
Not able to Begin, much less to Speak
And tell to th'full, that hence what is e're called verse,
Will be but Tribute due to this Man's hearse?
Such was thy worth; whose dawning proved that Light
Which aged beams send forth, to Thine true night:
Whose Pastime spent in Oxford (for what more
Is it for Noblemen to turn Books ore?)
Proved Serious Play: True Honor does know how
To Rise to Virtue, not make Virtue Bow.
This Gaind Him Reverence, Young: Receiving, He
Gave to th'University a degree:
Thus Blossomed in his Bud, thus early wise
Grown now the Joy, not Envy of men's eyes:
Travell's His Choice, not Refuge; unlike those
Who what they want at Home, Abroad disclose,
Passing this Country to shun that; thus round
Spend all their Own to outrun Foreign ground.
Luster went with Him, and whiles He did pass,
That place was thought worth seeing where He was.
Rome entertained Him, which you then might call
The worlds Head justly, when the Cardinal
Enriched by's Presents, found his Honor more
By what He added to his Princely store.
Thus big with foreign Praises, He Is come home,
But all was only here to find a Tomb:
Where we must let him rest, thus good, thus young;
For too much grief would do His Virtues wrong;
Whose Morn though clowded, see's His hastened years
Extended to their full in his Friends Tears.
H. GRESLEY of Chapter Chapter

On the Death of the Lord BAYNING.
It Is not ambition draws my juycelesse pen
Thus to distill a Poem; amongst such Men,
Or rather Gods of Poetry it is Pride
To come behind, Duty to be descri'd
In The list of Them; besides I think it not fit
To raise a fire where floods of tears should meet;
And Poetry's a fire: but my Muse fears
A kindling from this urne, lest drowned with tears
It quickly turn to ashes, and there be
Not a spark left to weep an elegy.
Yet this, Great BAYNING'S dead! That Is all I have
Or can speak: Silence best becomes the Grave.
Yet this again, Whilst with us here He strived
To outdoe Goodness, Bounty, All, He lived
His Character; who in his carriage than
Showed of himself that, which no Poet can:
Who with his rarest art, and choycest quill
Must serve here only to express him ill.
He was so pure, so spotless, so refind,
I took Him for some Angel, Soul, or Mind,
And think it no hyperbole to call
As others From, To heaven this Angel's Fall.
I dare not write an Epitaph, for fear
The Vrne devour my Verse, being so near.
Yet thus much to their Honors at the Court,
(Two losses being known) I dare report,
(And it is no treason, these great names being read,
Herbert, and Bayning,) That all Virtues dead.
T. D. of Chapter Chapter

Upon the Death of the Lord BAYNING.
MOst sacred hearse, let it no sin appear,
If I upon thy Vrne do weep one tear!
I must vent out my sighs, it cannot be
A loss to us, to the University,
Nay the whole Nation too, should slightly pass
With this memorial only, that He was:
Whilst virtue shall be talked of, till we shall
See naught that is good, thy memory cannot fall.
If e're we shall of some Vtopian hear
That never knew rash boldness, or cold fear,
No riot, no injustice, no excess,
Nor want, but all things in just perfectness,
Actions so ruled by prudence, and so all
As if his Virtues too were Natural:
Then we shall think on BAYNING, swear that He,
That wrote it, meant it for His History,
Proper to Him: Whose Life was such, we can
Scarce Judge by which He greater Glory wan,
His Actions, or His Studies: what the Sage
Appropriate to the Wrinckle, and Old Age,
Knowledge, He compast in His Smoother Days,
And did Green Passions up to Wisdom raise.
Learning He thought no Burden, or to know
In Theoricke Virtues which He meant to show;
Nor took't a Blemish to Nobility,
To have a Schollar's merited Degree,
Esteemed it not sufficient to hear
Complete at home, and move but in one Sphere:
This Nation's too Contract; He does go over
Laden with Virtues to a Foreign Shore,
Not to exchange for Vice, or leave behind
To them the qualities of His Virtuous Mind;
As if He could no Traveller appear,
If He returned the same man He was here:
But He adds to it all the good France can
Call Proper Hers, all the Italian,
Which without Stay so easily He could,
As if He were by Inspiration good.
To them He seemed a Native, they would sweat
He never was in any part but there:
He was so perfect without travel, we
In Him both Kingdoms Virtue here did see.
Thus fully furnished with all nature's dowre,
With Art, Experience, and Uertue's Power.
We saw him flourishing, but nature here
Begins her bounty quite exhaust to fear;
And being of her lavish store now dry,
She cuts Him down full in Felicity.
Thus the best Fruits just ripe are crop't, although
Without corruption they might longer grow.
But let this serve to stop our flowing tears,
That he died Full: Age is not Numerous years;
Nor are they only Old that longest live,
Perfection and Virtue Fullness give.
THO. ISHAM of Chapter Chapter

Upon the Death of the Lord Viscount BAYNING.
TO weep one Great and Good, t'adorn his Hearse
Whose Life was above Chronicle, or Verse,
Requires those, whose fancies could create
A subject like to Him, as Good, and Great.
These Lines (alas!) they are not meant to give
Life to that Name, by which themselves must live:
That Name, Which does employ each tongue, each Quill
To sing His Praises, write his Chronicle.
BAYNING! Whose very sound perfumes the Air,
Commands a Reverence, and a listening ear.
Books were a Guide to his Youth, and Company;
He thought of them with greater Charity
Then those, who think them fit to entertain
Only the hours of a hot Sun, or Rain.
When He perused great Acts of History,
His large thoughts did suggest them Prophecy,
And Types of Him: when He the Uertues read,
And saw himself transcribed, and copied,
He with a modesty admired to find
Men so familiar with His Thoughts and Mind.
Seasoned, and ballasted with these, He then,
Leaving our Athens, went to study Men.
Not like to those who travel to bring home
A Fashion, or to say they have seen Rome;
But to observe each State and Policy,
To Enrich his Mind, more then Geography.
And now returned home, when he begun
To practice here each Observation,
While we behold Europes Epitome
Of Men in Him, of States in's Family,
While Charles expects his aid, the Realm no less,
Death stops his Glory, and our Happiness,
But Good Men have lived long when e're Fates come:
Their Age by Virtues, not by Years we sum,
SAM IACKSON of Chapter C

Upon the Death of the honorable Lord Viscount BAYNING.
GReat Lord of Ghosts, we sigh not out Thy Fall,
As only Thine, But the Muses Funeral:
We weep our College second Ruins; and
May Question chiefly Death's erroneous Hand,
That yet we boast Intents alone, an Heap,
And Breaches, only not entitled cheap,
That Those who entering Srangers, here would look,
Do Pass ours, as a College but mistook:
Yet Orphan-like we are not bereft of All,
The same that wail, share too Thy hastened Fall;
Thy Piles bequeathed yet, which shall firm and safe
With Wolseys stand thy larger Epitaph.
But we not miss His Gifts alone, nor weep
Mercy and Bounty only fallen asleep;
We boast no Scutchions, nor admire Thy Blood,
(Great Soul) but best descent by Learning Good,
Though Noble, mourning not the Loss of Thee,
As of a man but University:
Who graced our Schools with a Degree; All Parts
Arrived, A Breathing System of the Arts.
Not like our Silken Heirs, who only bound
Their knowledge in the Sphere of Hawk or Hound,
And, there confined, limit their scant disourse,
Know more the Vaulting then the Muses Horse:
Who if They rescue Time from Cards or Dice
To Lance or Sharpes, or some such manly Prize,
Advance Their Lineage, raise Their Stock, if They
But more severely loose the Precious Day.
He could unriddle each Schoole-knot, untie
All, but Death's sad contrived Fallacy:
For the Stroke was Project Here, no Siege, no Art
Of lingering Death, or Preface to His Dart;
No tedious knotty Gout, or feverish Drought
But all as Soft and Peaceful as His Youth:
He only slept in Have, as if to Die
Had no Departure been, but Ecstasy:
So gliding we descry a starry Ball,
Which from it is Sphere does rather Shoot, then Fall.
Yet Thy short Thread we will not revile, nor vex
'Cause The art not imag'd in the Nobler Sex;
For such Transcriptions we will not anxious be,
Where we discover full Maturitie:
Ripened for Death Thou art Deceased, not Killed,
Nor is Thy great Name Perished, but Fulfilled.
For what can add unto the justest Height,
Who Hopes increase to Glorie's perfect Weight,
To Him that had survei'd all Foreign parts,
Extracting not Their Vices, but Their Arts?
The Italian Brain, not Heat, was skilled from Rheine
In Their exactest Manners, not Their Vine.
Their Deepest Mysteries did only reach,
And Had more Languages, then others teach?
All Worth His Eye He viewed, that such a Fall
Might share a sorrow Epidemicall,
FRAN. POWELL of Chapter Chapter

Upon the Death of the Lord Viscount BAYNING.
DEath's Chambers are enrich't, and we may say
He did not Kill, but Stole This Prize away.
For th'now pale Mansion, where his Soul abode
Does make the Coffin precious by it is Load:
Yet that was but His Dross; search, you will find
Him at Fifteen a Sophy; 's Nonage Mind
Made the Schools boast Him Graduate; and's Wit
Writ Him the revived refined Stagerite.
And lest the Sophisters might err in this,
Granted Platonicke Metempseuchosis;
And did conclude, Maugre their Brains and Books,
Arts do not always lie in ill-fac'd looks;
And th'totred Gown no longer now should be
Held for an Emblem of Philosophy.
He did adorn the Scarlet which he wore;
And made them Robes which were but Cloth before:
Titles were truths in him; Young, Fair, Rich, Learned
No complements, but Purchase, truly earned:
No Would-be-Wits maintained He at His Board,
Naught was in him suspicious but The Lord:
Yet no Brains clothed, or Fancy fed Him; He
Rich in Estate, as Ingenuitie:
And might have (without doubt of missing it,)
Petitioned for the Monopoly of Wit:
To this vast mass of Wealth He had assigned
As ample thoughts; no narrow, griping Mind,
Mansions by Industry composed, not Hands
He fed on; and devoured His Books, not Lands.
To whose large Gifts we of this place must owe;
Since that He thought His Own He did bestow.
Thy Volumes named Our Library, and We
As well for Stones as Books indebted be.
For though no Founder of the place, yet must
We say, thou rays'dst our Buildings out of the Dust;
Thou did bequeath 'em Their Nativitie;
And they do Glory Their New Birth from Thee.
Thus liv'st Thou, Maugre Fate; Thy better Parts
Survive thus in our Memories, and Hearts:
Nor need'st Thou claim statued Antiquity;
Virtue Perpetuates Thy Nobility.
Since we may Date, from thy Departure hence,
The Dearth of Merit and Benevolence.
Tho. NORGATE of Chapter Chapter

On the Death of the Right Honorable the Lord Viscount BAYNING.
SO sets the Sun, when strait there does ensue
On the forsaken plants a Pensive Dew:
And so they hang their heads as we, the fall
Of The Sun and BAYNING are Griefs General.
There were some comfort yet in Tears could we
But mourn our Loss in worthy lines, like Thee;
Could we, by what we write, to celebrate
Thy Name to Life, rescue Our Own from fate.
But we (alas) overcome with Luster, do
Only a proud and solemn weakness show.
And some who knew Thee better sure will raise
A Loving well-meant Libell from our praise.
To speak one Good as Noble, Rich as Free,
Were but to cloud Thy worth, and conceal Thee:
To write Thy painful Study's, Learnings store
Were wrong, these had been virtues in the Poor.
So many numerous Paths of Praise we find,
Tread which we will we leave the Best behind:
We cannot Praise, nor Thank enough, the store
Of Gifts thou have bequeathed us makes us Poor.
Yet when our Ruins shall be raised (which we
May Hope for now, thriving so well by Thee)
Each Stone Thy Bounty lay's there shall become
A better Monument then a Costly Tomb.
R. DAY of Chapter Chapter

Illustrissimi Vicecomitis BAYNING fato immaturo functi P. M. S.
SIc dum secundus Penelope Canitur Hymenaeus,
Emensosque iam errores iteratae quasi Nuptiae coronant,
Redux Maritus Evanescit;
Vxorque, Virum Saevas narrantem Vias
Dum per Oscula liberare gestit,
Quaerit quem labris premat:
Ita vel Co^iugis vice Co^iugis Vmbra^ accepisse putemus,
Vel si Coniugem, ideo tantum ut bis vidua esset.
Gaudemus tamen quod Mitior Pelagi Deus
Amplexandum nobis paulisper Corpus indulserit;
Multumque Vndis debemus,
Quod non inane Sepulchrum, and solu^ titulu^ lugeamus.
Te sub undis labente
Novum stupescens Terra sensisset Diem:
Nam debitos Phaebo sinus, and facilem thorum
Delusa Thetis Occidenti praebuisset Tibi,
Pulsusque Titan etiam noctu sydera fugasset.
At O Natura!
Fatisve subij cis exemplaria Tua?
Mortique ius facis in Archetypos vultu^
Molimini certe tuo tam elaborato,
Hoc salte^ indere debuisses, non potuisse Senesere.
Quis iam,
Quis, precor, Aromatum vice Opera disperget?
Novumque Aulicos luxum edocebit,
Boni Nominis Vnguentum?
Quem non unius Artis Praesidem,
Ita Philosophantem audivimus,
Quasi Vicecomitis Praerogativa etia^ literis imperaret.
Hoc Tu testeris, Roma,
Quae, accedente ipso, Bodleiana^ in Vaticana senseris,
Mobilemque Oxoniam obstupueris.
Sed quam improvidus noster dolor,
Qui eodem flumine iam rogum deflet Tuum,
Quo olim discessum?
Vt non solenniori pompa stipatus sis moriens,
Quam itinerans olim processeras!
Parcas tamen
Cum eo dignior evadas quia non velut Defunctus lugearis,
Credimus enim Tepostrevisum Orbem Nostrum
Iam tantum Polos Peragrare,
Et nunc etiam iterfacere;
Non tam Mortem obiens, quam Legationem.
F. PALMER ex Aed. Chapter

In obitum Illustrissimi Vice-comitis BAYNING.
ERgone tam subita potuit vice lenior Aura
Turbinis isse vias, and rupta Flaminis ira
In rapidos crevisse Imbres, and Grandinis instar,
Praecipitasse Ictus? vel, quas modo Straverat undas,
Insanire jubet? Nostri haec Emblemata Morbi
Praeripiunt Loeto lacrymas: dum fortior Aetas
(Furtivos simulans risus, and picta futuri
Gaudia sola Mali,) Fato contermina, ocellos
Vix aptos lugere, docet; fluctusque serena
Mente rotat: tantos (placidae Fastidia vitae)
Eructat teneros gemitus, adeoque fatigat
Corpus, ut Ipsa salus sit tantum Aenigma malorum.
Sic Tumidum in sudo Neptunum vidimus: uno
Saltant Corda Ioco, quo consternata recumbunt:
Sic tremulam innocua cingit vertigine flammam,
Dum quo Musca prius lusit, iam conditur Igne.
Quid tamen (in Meta labor est) torquemur euntes?
Instruimusque ^ovas diris Ambagibus Vrnas?
Mortuus est: -- utinam sacrum fas dicere Nomen!
Siste tamen Gemitus, fas est and dicere Nomen,
Syllaba si gemitu mage flebilis impleat Aures;
Si quicquam emittas praeter suspiria, Bayning
Qui recitare potest, Luctus sacrata reponit
Iuramenta sui, Nostraeque est Persidus Irae.
Sic geminus, Monumenta viri, Monumenta revuisi
Nominis, Horror habet; nisi quae meliore quiescant
Vxoris tumulata sinu; nisi Praescius Infans
Iustior erumpat Tumuli vindicta Paterni.
Quid minuam, Narrando, Virum? faecundaque certain
Gramina nativis pinxisse coloribus? Illi
Debetur tantum vitae descriptio, cuius
Vita minus Meritis redolet, quam Funus Odore:
Cuius Fama levis (patitur dum fata sepulchrum)
Interitu brevior, Tumuloque angustior ipso est.
Iam morbo praerepta suo pia Fragmina vocis
Exaudire iuvat, sacro quae Prodiga Luxa
Muner a donarunt; Nudi ut ditescere possint:
Quae miranda magis, Plenas has Divitis ora
Degustare Manus; hinc and Collegia crescunt.
Inter vivaces Tua vita repullulet urnas,
Turgeat atque nou^ fama Angustata sepulchro:
Cum tamen obducta iaceas caligine, reddant
Non aliam Tibi fata Fugam, quam Nubila Soli.
R. LUTE ex Aede Chapter

In obitum Illustrissimi Vice-comitis BAYNING.
ERgo Hominum Mores tantu^ est vidisse periclu^?
Vivere dum didicit sic didicitne Mori?
Iam poterat CAROLO partemfecisse Senatus,
Vel Iuvenis Pectus iam Synodale gerens.
Iamque Vias poter at monstrasse, Artesque nocendi,
Tristius and quicquid Roma recondit opus.
Sed tantum poterat: vetuisti caetera, Fatum:
Non erat haec cultro victima digna Tuo.
Insidiosa Manus nunquam sua Munera struxit:
Pars vel simplicitas Muneris ipsa fuit.
Te testor tam digna Domus, quae Nomina iactas
Cui geminum ornatum, Semet, Opesque dedit.
Incola sic Homines auxit, sic Tecta Patronus,
Nunc Vno plusquam Nomine noster Amor.
O Impar, sed Grata Aedes! utinamque decorem
Tu poteras Illi, quem dedit Ille Tibi.
IO. GIARE ex Aed. Chapter

PVllos, quisquis es, induas colores,
Orna funerea caput Cupresso;
Ite hinc deliciae, Venus, Cupido;
Nostrae deliciae dolor, querelae.
Heu gentis periit decus Britannae,
Lumenque, and columen novem sororum,
In flore heu periit peremptus Aevi.
Vixisti Iuvenis diu, Senectam
Virtutes faciunt, brevi Tabella
Depictum videas ferum Gygantem.
At mores sileo, silere praestat,
Quam praeconia frigide refer.
Ite meae Lachrymae, tanquam de Nube procellae,
Cum nimis ingenti pondere pressa ruit.
Proh dolor! heu periit, per luctus edere Nomen
Vix possum, in primo Veris honor sui.
Non tamen hoc credam, iuvat usque favere dolori,
Sed nequeo, hoc dolor est, non doluisse satis.
Moestum Phoebe canas; lugete, haud ludite Musae,
Namque est conveniens luctibus iste labor.
Huic sacram lauri tumulo deferte Tributum,
Vos aluit, quamvis vester Alumnus erat.
Addere nil cupimus, cui nil queat altius addi:
Si nil diminuam, carmina nostra placent.
Te nimis indigno dum flemus carmine, duplex
Exoritur ^uctus, Carminis, atque Tui.
I. FELL ex Aed. Chapter

In Obitum Clarissimi, Ornatssimique Vicecomitis BAYNING.
HOspes Deorum, naenias si quis Tibi
Facilesque luctu palpebras effunderet,
Nec pauciores laudibus Lacrymas Tuis
Semper fluentes, and tamen semper novas,
Multum litabit Funeri, minimum Tibi.
Si, quos Poetae vix satis Calamis pios
Mittant liquores, hauriant suum licet
Helicona studiis; si, quot attulerint tuo
Onus feretro, Chartulae innumeras atrae
Lachrymas refundant; his amicae Coniugis
Fratru^, and nepotu^ atque omnium quot sunt Tui
Addam Lachrymulas, ut dolor siet unicus,
Vtque tot ocellis unicam Lacrymam, struat,
Quam Charus esses dixerit, Quantus nequit.
Si quis, tacendo quos Tibi numeres Avos,
A Te relatum stemma nobile computet
Seriemque laudum censeat, Merita and necis,
Pietate posthuma colentis Numina,
Donata Templis si quis, and Musis pium
Vectigal audit, quaeque perpetuum in Decus
Loquax Sepulchrum jactet, huic adhuc lates:
Aut si quis ultra, praeter has dotes Tuas
Sacramque famam, vel parum referat Tui,
Quam non modeste flere, dum memorat, licet.
Quantas iuventus nobilis, and aetas sagax
Vtriusque Terrae literas excoxerat!
Oxonia quantum debet and Conatibus
Tuisque meritis! Ast adhuc nimium lates:
Majora dictis Nomen ipsum praedicat;
Sed quisquis istud noveris, taceas precor,
Ne Fama, tanti dum subit Cineres viri,
Non posterorum Cultum, at Invidiam trahat.
RICARDVS GODFREY ex Aed. Chapter

In Obitum Clarissimi Uicecomitis BAYNING.
MVndi, Doctus opes, suasque spernens,
Uisens una hominum docensque mores;
Passim barbariem, virosque brutos
Conspectu cicurans, domansque terras;
Magnus Moribus, inde major Art:
Sub quo Regna velint coire pace,
Praesentemque colunt, timent futurum,
Legati decus Hic tulit Viator,
Flammas Italiae Alpium pruinis,
Gallam luxuriem mari Britanno
Restinguens, redit Innocens, and Anglus.
Virtutes numerans, tuamque vitam
Certans per tua computare facta,
Haud credet juvenem fuisse mundus.
Nunc ecce ad Tumulum frequens Viator
Devoto pede confluit, nec unus
Dat suspiria Lachrymasque Princeps,
Cui multum sterilem exprobrat senectam,
Et serum meritum sagax juventa:
Nunc florum vice laudibus Sepulchrum
Spargens and titulis, utrinque civem
Certat scribere, vendicatque funus
Passim terra tuum: Quirinus effert
Inter Papirios, and Africanos:
Hinc Princeps juvenum, senumque Princeps,
Et non Foemineus Quirinus audis.
Hinc and Gallus eris, sed ille castus,
Et non Mente magis nitens Lacerna:
Sic tu, dum numerus videris, exis
Multorum Invidia, Vnius Triumphus.
Hoc jactat nimium Britanna tellus,
Orbi vixerat, at Mihi recessit.
THOMAS BENSON ex Aed. Chapter

In Obitum Illustrissimi Vice-Comitis BAYNING.
MOx ergo exilium, Redux, sub ipso
Amplexu Patriae datur? scelusque
Tantum admisit Amor, quod aus^ nusquam
Gens est extera? Quaeque Te recepit
Non Adventitium, sed Inquilinum:
Gallia, perque vices Paterna Terra
Facta est Roma Tibi: Omnibus probatum
Virtus Te dedit, Omniumque civem:
Certe hoc Numinis est colitam ubique,
Dum cunabula nactus es Sepulchrum
Motus Aethereossecutus, in Te
Sacro circuitu reductus, exis
Exemplar Superum, seeds perennis
Vitae Emblema Necisque. Sic in ortus
Festinare suos, retroque labi,
Quicquid Fata jubent perire, fas est.
Sic and quod maneat perenne, eodem
Iuxta desinit incipitque cursu,
Vita hac nulla prior, beatiorque
Quam quae est Spharica, seque claudit ipsam.
ROEBRTVS SHARP ex Aed. Chapter

In Obitum Clarissimi Vicecomitis BAYNING.
OBitum nunc lugeamus an Discessum nescimus,
Has etenim exequias olim and Discessus habuit,
Cum Amentium ritu opes projecimus in Mare
Gemmamque Thetidis Gaza magis pretiosa^
Suspiriis mox nostris, and Lachrymaru^ fluctibus reve henda^.
Ostendi voluerunt Terris Fata, donari nimiu^ esse iudicarunt,
Magis Orbis Spectatore^ quam Spectaculu^,
Solis instar in transitu solo fruendum;
Hunc Reliquae etiam Gentes damna inter sua
Per vices numerarunt.
Atque utinam nunc velpascisceremur istis
Iniquis Legibus potire,
Posset ut iterum discedere
Vt secunda frueremur vel iactura!
Religione^ and Mores non ta^ perlustrare visus quam instituere:
Non extra Patria^ Lege^ licentiam pecccandi quaesivit,
Et magna scelerum Exempla:
Ista Pietate Hospitia quasi Templa pererrans,
Vt qui devotis passibus Itinera metiuntur
Numini dedicata, non Amicae,
Prope fuit ut ab eo exigerentur miracula;
Atque adeo haec miracula praestitit,
Vt Virtutis patiens, non Voluptatis
Palladem Iunoni conciliaret, Literis Divitias,
Innocentiam Potestati;
Et vel post mortem Lyceum Coleret.
Haud tame^ illud Poetas fecisse pecuniae reos, and Heli^na in Tagum vertisse
Effecit, ut Damnum Tui non Iugeamus,
Quodque unum restat, non iactemus.
Sole haec tristis Gloria nos manet, habuisse
Olim Incolam, semper Patronum:
Brevi fulgore aliis Cometa illuxisti,
Nobis mansurum Sydus,
Orbis idem spectaculum and stupor:
Solum hic Te fastus arguit, quod orbem
Videris and contempseris;
Perlustrato Terrarum Orb alium modo quaeris, quasi illum moderaturus:
Velut Cretensis Jupiter in astra evadis
Nota Peregrints, Historia, sacra Tuis Fabula.
SAMVEL EVERARD. ex Aed. Chapter

In Obitum Clarissimi Vicecomitis BAYNING.
I Vvenis moritur qui vixit Nestor,
Vnius aetatis compendium
Non vidit, qui ultrae
Tertia historiam fecit.
Corpore venustus, ut cui non defuit
Dignum suis moribus Sacrarium.
Tam Nobilis, ac si nullo caruerat a Virtutibus ornamento
Tam bonus, ac si nullum habuerat a Parentibus.
Italiam vidit, vidit Galliam,
Vna non potuit capere Regio:
Italiam deseruit, deseruit Galliam,
Nulla potuit Regie mereri.
Illic cepit, quo nos nec pervenire solemus;
dubiu^ an cunis Infantia^ debuerit, an Lyceo.
Arts nil tandem pulchri iactitant,
Nisi quod Ipse didicit.
Paucissimis vix potuit eliquari vitiis
Cadaver visus antequam moreretur,
Aliquando peccavit ne videretur Deus,
Laudandus etiam quod peccavit.
Vxorem duxit, ut and illum ornaret sexum;
Vxorem invenit, quae ornaret and nostrum.
Amaretalem satis non potuit,
Si non Amore obiisset.
Divitias numeravit, sed quas dederat;
Opum non habuit, sed Munerum Aerarium.
An dedit? en tandem sibi nec Ipsum reliquit:
Quem, cum deesset qui caperet, cepit Sepulchru^:
Gemmas recondi Nimium sic Pretium facit.
He that attempts to mourn thy noble Hearse,
Must teach his grief the Piety of Verse,
And all his tears in chaste expressions paint,
That every line may Canonize a Saint:
He ought to Preach in Numbers, as if Fate
Had destined Him for Bishop Laureate.
Who then shall weep thy loss, whose Acts we see fell,
Far purer then our vestall phansies be?
W'admire those deeds which from Thee slightly
Thy Recreation fills the Chronicle:
And Poets should be set to curb the times,
Could their Wits be so Pious as Thy Crimes.
Thou did ingrosse all goodness so, that We
Scarce thought one Hero dead, while we saw Thee.
We missed not Cato, Tully was not dumb,
Thou could (like him) but speak, and overcome.
What Stratagem has Fate? thy fading breath
Summons sage Brutus to a Second Death.
Souls treasured up in Thee rush forth, and now
Some fall, that fell two thousand years ago.
Here prune your manners, you that only are
The walking Arras of the Court, who share (face)
Your selves (like Hangins decked with some strange
To Attend the King only to trim the place.
Whose weak Gentility does fall, and rise
As Periwigs and Sattins take their price:
Whose carriage one may track, and find which Oath
Your Worships swore in silk, and which in cloth.
If you could learn this ripeness, it would teach
To court a Mistress in an unbought speech;
And your own Language might have power to move
A frozen coyness to a free Court-Love:
And make her y^e such charming pleasures hear,
That her Soul know no residence but ear.
But I do blast thy Hearse, and these weak Lays
Do only usher Some to sing Thy Praise,
As scattered beams their dawning luster broach,
Only to tell the world the Sun's approach.
As if the Priest should butcher a cheap Lamb,
To fit the Altar for an Hecatombe.
He that will speak Thee fully, must have parts
Like to Thine Own, and hunt Thee through all Arts:
His able years must bud up, till he find,
What mysteries enrich't thy well-fraught mind;
Who did so wade through Natural things, that we
May shake off Nature now, and study Thee.
Had thou bred low-pitch^t ve^ues, had thy Vein
Stooped to the shallow ebb of vulgar strain,
Each busy Muse had strove to find a room,
Where crowds of Epitaphs might load thy Tomb,
But now we fear to write, we dare no^ stay
To bring ou^ twilight Glances to thy Day:
Such is Thy Virtues flight, thou soar'st so high,
Thy weakest Acts ask our Hyperboly;
And all the elaborate Accents we can lend,
Can scarce deserve Thee where thou do offend.
Hence forth we will prize our Muse at lower rate,
And what we cannot express, we will imitate,
We Will Print Thee in our manners so, that then
Who finds Thee not in Records, may in Men.
They only, here, find their expressions safe,
Who Act their Verse, and Live an Epitaph.
MARTIN LLEVVELLIN. of Chapter Chapter

Upon the Death of the Right Honorable Lord Vicecount BAYNING.
FOrgive me, His dear Monument, that I
Usurp the Title of an Elegy;
And like a wandering Passenger do crave
My unknown tears may glaze his Epitaph!
Whoever heard his Travells, but did cease
To think Rome false, or France with a disease?
So far from an outlandish Taint, that He
Returned a chaster Mind from Italy.
Learn here you wild Apostates that deface
Your Native Souls, and mold 'em to the Place;
So that each Country gives you a new Birth,
Antaeus like reviving from the Earth:
BAYNING did scorn to change himself but then
When farthest off, He was an Englishman:
Our Laws still kept Him Company: for they
Were the Geography, and rule of 's way:
So that to foreign parts He did appear
Rather Ambassador, then Sojourner.
Why did He escape His Travells thus, O why
Did he fall down with such Tranquillity?
Horror becomes a Young man's Death, to lie
Bedewed with Blood is a brave obsequie.
Surfets, Consumptions are but Female Knives,
Nor do they snatch, but steal away our Lives.
Fates did not know thy Spirit, when they sent
So weak a dart to blast thy Monument:
Thy Genius was too mighty to endure
That extreme cowardice, to die Secure.
But since it did our great Commander please,
Thus to inflict the Death of a disease;
In earnest of our Loves, O let it be
Our wish to fall Secure, because like Thee.
For Thy sake then may Fevers be our Meat,
And 't prove a Surfeit henceforth but to Eat:
None can desire to live, unless he be
Seduced perhaps to enjoy Thy Legacy.
It Is Thy own freeness bribes us now to live,
Since 't were ingratitude not to survive.
Our Buildings by Thy Piety shall stand
No Ruins now, but Trophyes of Thy Hand:
The Rooms shall be Thy Piles, we will prefer
Their beauteous Order to thy Character:
When Printed on the doors with loaded eyes
The Passenger may read HERE BAYNING LIES.
H. RAMSAY of Chapter Chapter

On the Death of the Lord Viscount BAYNING.
SInce Sadness crowns Your hearse, and Mourners
Bestow with sighs, and tears, a Method too
Of grieving for your death, that we may see do
A good Contrivance though in Misery:
Since among all that mourn, none Order lack,
The Wits in Rhyme, Your other Friends in Black.
Pardon my grief, that dares assume that Dress,
For scattered in wild Fancles 'twould seem less:
Yet do I not presume my verse may give
Ought, that may cause Your memory to live:
I leave that great employment to the Pen
Of Abler fancies, more Discerning Men;
That can Distinguish virtues, and best know
Which from Complexion, which from Breeding flow,
Which are Innate, and which Infused, that can
But with one glaunce decipher a whole man.
It Is fancy 'enough in me, if I can weep
Your Body, not as Dead, but fallen a sleep.
Since no Continued grief, or lingering pain
No Trick of the State, nor sad stroke has it slain:
It goes fresh to the grave, before the sins
Have seasoned it, that Age, and Business brings:
Where let it sleep secure, hence coming fit
T'embalme and keep the Odours, not they It.
The groans, and sighs, that parting now it wears,
The Marble shall supply with frequent Tears.
H. BENET of Chapter Chapter

On the death of the Honorable Lord Vis-count BAYNING.
HEnce from This Tomb, you that have only chose
To Mourn for Ribbands, and the sadder Cloths,
That Buy your Grief from the Shop; and desperate lie
For a new Cloak till the next Lord shall Dye;
You that shed only wine, and think when all
The Banquet's past, there is no more Funeral:
You that sell Tears, and only Weep for Gain,
I dare not say you Mourn, but fill the Train:
Nor must we Grieve His Titles loss, and tell
The vainer World, that 'twas a Great Man Fell:
It Is not enough that we His Birth rehearse;
And only Write His Arms instead of Verse,
Or Steal Notes from His Scutcheon; perhaps we
Might Mourn Him thus in perfect Heraldry:
But it is a Strain too low, nor will it suffice
For Epitaph, that Here His Lordship Lies:
Thus I could be content to Weep His Fame,
Where nothing else was great, besides the Name;
Whence Learning felt an Exile; where That Word
Of Virtue sounded Lower then my Lord:
He whom we sadly Mourn (hear this all You
Wrapped up in Chains) was Rich in Learning too.
A College was His Home; He did not here
Sit still a while, and only change His Air,
As some, who Journey hither, and are grown
But to this Art of wearing a silk Gown;
Who, amongst Their other loss of Time, do still
Count the halfe-year thus spent against Their Will;
Who fain would cross the Seas, and think, that They
Have Traveled thus far only out of the way:
Nor did he count a Lord in a Degree
A Learned Monster of Nobility,
As if some Envious Fate strove to Maintain
That only Ignorance should wear a Chain.
Gold was not all His Treasury; We may
Reckon His Wealth in more then shining Clay;
Sum up His Stock of Arts and Knowledge; you
That prize The Estate count in His Study too;
This is the Style of Honor, which we boast
In Him, whose Fame does still Survive His Ghost.
Nor quarrel We with Fate, for we should wrong
His Virtues now, to grieve that He Died Young:
One of His worth is always full of Years;
He Died too soon by nothing but our Tears,
Ripe Early, and prepared for Heaven, He
Had all of Age, but the Infirmity:
He was Religious and Stayed, as One
Whom Four-score years thrust to Devotion:
One of That flowing Charity, as if still
In every Gift He did intend a Will:
How He Bequeathed His Alms! to all so free,
What ever He Bestowd, was Legacy.
Thus He had Many Heirs; and the blessed Poor
Did only Multiply His Successor.
But I Will not sum His Virtues; H'embrac't more
Then all Philosophy did Talk before;
They only did Dispute His Life, and might,
Had They known Him, been better Skild to Write.
W. TOWERS of Chapter Chapter

Upon the Death of the Lord Viscount BAYNING.
Were Thou an ancient Corse, of a gray head,
So spent, as to be thought run out, not dead;
Had Thou endured long gowtes, or longer rage
Of Aches, and at last dyed of long age;
At such a funeral our Tears were lost,
Where the grave makes not, but receives a Ghost.
Thou, when not ripe enough to live, did fall,
Even when thy Lady might Thee Lady call;
And like an early spring did show to the eye,
Signs of a fruitful Autumn, and then dye.
Yet though Thou dy'dst a Blossom, we were those
Who could foresee Thee blown, and judge Thee Rose.
Thy after life was wrapped up in this bud,
As in a sprout a fair flower's understood.
And as when men file rocks for Jewels, th'Ore
Shows sparks, which would be stones two Ages more:
So we might say, had this young Diamond grown,
That which now twinkled, then had lightning thrown:
And as rich Exudations sweat from the Tree,
Are first soft gumms, not touched, would Amber be:
Or as in th'Indyes men find wealthy Mould,
Which the next generation diggs up gold.
So Thou lack'st but Concoction, seven years more
Had made those virtues true Mine, which died Ore.
Nay thou were Bullion now, and we had seen,
Had Thou lived longer, Mass had Medalls been.
Thy forwardness lackt only stamp, and rate;
Thou were true silver, but uncoyn'd by th'State.
Which did perceive thy title was as good
To honors, by thy Hopefulnesse, as blood.
And had Thou staid but to be called to th'Board,
The Worthy Man had taken place oth' Lord.
Then had we seen from Letters amongst us sown
Thy Prince had Embassyes and Counsels mowne.
When that, which Thou Philosophy took'st in,
Had come forth great Example, and Life bin.
Thy virtues were not less, because yet green,
They might more seasoned, but not more have been:
Broader they might have bin, and shown more sweld,
Yet had the Leaf not more then th'Ingot held.
As from a clue Workmen large hangings call,
Yet all the silk in the Arras, was in the Ball.
In short lives, great parts hasten, and come quick,
And where they want room to be vast, are thick.
Even thy raw promises were perfect, lackt
Time but to make them aged, not exact.
Vntraveld Thou were Learned, yet the Book
In Thee fresh learning from thy Travells took.
Thou came home sober from light Nations, France
Taught Thee to sit in Council, not to dance.
Italian Policy Thou brought away,
Yet were not made more able to betray:
Their Plots had been made Service, and that skill
Had been taught to Preserve, which used to Kill.
Thy Merit, not thy Bowl, had made Thee Great;
No Office had fallen to Thee by thy Meat.
Thou did return so innocent, we could call
Nothing Italian but thy Funeral:
That was so sudden, no successors pill
Did Pope with more have, then thy surfeit kill.
Prophets translated were so ravished, bate
The sense oth'pang, thy death was change, not fate.
Had Thou bequeathed us naught, thy name had still
Bin Legacy, to have bin oth' house was Will:
And we in thy dear loss think we are bereft
Of more, then if Thou had us whole heirs left.
Now since, like Wolsey, thou art expired, and gone,
We only can pay Reverence to thy Stone;
Which equal to His will this glory win,
Thou help'st to Finish what He did Begin.
JASPER MAIN of Chapter Chapter

PENELOPE, Multum Deflendi Domini, VICECOMITIS BAYNING, Relictae Fidelissimae
Haec sacro-
VIvida quae Castos Tibi Flamma accendit Ocellos,
Accendit illa Conjugis Pectus Tui:
Et quos Ipsa geris radiantes or be Genarum,
Hos Ille Flores Moribus gessit suis:
Quique Tibi Cander totos illuminat Artus,
Diem per Animum Lucidi sparsit Viri.
Sic Artus excudit Amor, sic pingit Ocellos,
Sic spectatintus, and simul scribit Genas:
Sic Te Te exhausit Coniux, Te Teimbibit Vnam,
Partemque quivis Actus emisit Tui.
Archetypa Amissam plorabis maesta Tabellam,
Excripta tanquam posset and Imago Mori?
Quantus erat Coniux, certe Tuus integer Ille;
Vt Quanta Imago, est Corporis tota est sui.
In Te dicatur tantum hinc Redijsse Maritus;
Vt Vmbra nocte Corpus, unde exit, petit.
Si Vultus, si Verba ejus, si Basia quaeraes;
Te Cerne, Te Affare, and Tibi signs Labra.
In Te splendet adhuc, and adhuc in Te sonat Ille,
Amatque vel adhuc, Ipsa si Teipsam Ames.
Cuncta tamen maestum, dices, habet ista Sepulchrum:
Annon Sepulchrum Pectus est istud Tuum?
Sic, quod Tudefles, in Te spectamus. Amoris
Solamen hoc est grande; dum Quaerit, Frui.
GVIL. CARTWRIGHT ex Aed. Chapter

Illustrissimo Domino Vicecomiti BAYNING
QVuantusque restat Posteris, Hic est Ille
Alterius Orbis Fama, sed Stupor Nostri:
Vindex Potentum, Purpuram Scholis donans:
Opumque vindex, Seque nec Opibus tradens:
Censum Domare gnarus, and Frui Partis
Impertiendo: Gentium videns Ritus,
Uitiis Sequester: Pervigil sui Custos:
Peregre profectus, and tamen Domi semper,
Interque Mores Exteros Suis vivens:
Revehens Amorem, quem extulit, Foris Conjux:
Non Circinalis iunctior Pedi Pes est:
Dominus, and Omnes allevans, Gravis Nulli:
Satur viarum Raptus, and satur Dotum,
Aetate justa vegetus, at magis Mente:
Non plura Merito, at Gloriae dari possent.
Cunctis Dolorem Mortuus facit, Viv^
Fecit nec Vni. Levior incubes, Tellus:
Non Ipse Quenquam, Tuque nec Premas Ipsu^.
Sic Parentat GUIL. STOTEVILE ex Aed. Chapter

To the Right Virtuous, and my much Honored the Lady PENELOPE BAYNING.
Most Honored Madam,
TO All, that has been said, I Echo am,
Though with an hoarser Voice return the same:
But His was Clean, and Fair as his Intent,
And His Performances His Complement;
Who had more Virtue then derived from th'wombe,
And more Perfections then are writ on's Tomb;
Honor, such as the King could not bestow,
Unless his Great Example made him so;
Who brought from Rome, as did his Prince from Spain,
Religion, and His very self again;
Here lies That Lord All This: who had been more,
Had time but lent concoction to his Ore.
Be witness o my Grief then (for I may
Now challenge something in Him being Clay)
What Thoughts, what Spirits, what Inte^ts, what Seeds
What Acts, what Counsels, what Designs, what Deeds
Are blasted in His fall! But least I may
Increase your Night by telling what great Day
Would hence have risen, let me only bear
Sad witness, that All, which you have read here,
Is modest, and His own: and though we find
His 'State was Vast, 'twas Narrow'r then His Mind:
Look then into His Will, not Testament,
And judge not what He Did, but what He Meant.
RICH: CHAWORTH of Chapter Chapter

FINIS

