A brief and piththie sum of the Christian faith, made in form of a
confession, with a confutation of all such superstitious errors, as are
contrary thereunto. Made by Theodore de Beza* Translated out of French by R. F.

AFTER DARKNESS LIGHT.
POST TENEBRAS LUX



PRINTED AT LONDON by Richard Serll, dwelling in Flete lane, at the sign of
the half Eagle and the Key.

The principal poynctes treated in this confession.
The first poincte of the unity and trinity of God.

ii. Of the Father. iii. Of the Son. iiii. Of the holy ghost. v. Of the
Church. vi. Of the last Judgment. vii. A comparison between the doctrine of
the papists and these of the holy catholic Church.
To the right honorable and virtuous Lord, the Lord Hastinges, Earl of
Huntington. etc. Robert Fill, vvysheth long life with increase of honor in the
fear of God. Amen. ()
Having read over this work (right honorable) printed in the French tongue,
and also knowing the aucthor, and being somewhat acquaynted with him, who for
his singular godly learning, knowledge, and conversation, ^s esteemed of those
y^ be godly, for a pre^ious pearl sent amongst us from God ^^ this our
troublesome age: I thought ^t my duty to put it forth into the Eng^ysh tongue,
that those my native coun^rymen, which do not understand the French: might be
partakers of the fruit of so godly a work in English. And also have as it
were a weapon in hand, to defend themselves against the ministers of Satan,
who be ever ready to cauyll against the truth, more ready to put men in
doubt, then to establishe them in the true Christian faith. The true
understanding of our belief is the pure gift of God, and among his gifts the
chiefest Belief with knowledge of Gods word, orders the mind, governs the
body, dyrecteth all our works and affairs, teachinge what we ought to do,
and what to leave undone, without which neither can King, Lord nor subject,
well order them selves, nor those things that be committed to their charge.
Now if we esteem other things to be of valewe and can praise them: your
honor knows that the knowledge of true belief grounded upon Gods word, does
so far excel all other things, as heavenly treasures excel the commodityes
of the earth. And this is most profitable to kings, Dukes, Earls, and Lords,
(as appears in the 2. Psalm, Deutero. 17 chap. and Esaias 46. chap. where they
be named the nurces of religion) and unto all other degrees spyrituall or
temporal. And vain are all men which know not this truly. And S. Paul said
because it seemed not good to them to have the knowledge of Gods word, he gave
them up into a lewd mind, and to all uncleanness, For if God be the light, such
as know him not stumble in darkness. If he be the only way, the ignorant go
stray. If he be the truth, they that know him not be deceived. If he be only
good, all good things must be borrowed and craved of him alone. If all
knowledge and learning be his, we must be Gods scholars. If he be life, not to
know him his eternal death. For it is written, this is eternal life, to know
Jesus Christ whom thou have sent to be very god. But this knowledge must we
have and learn in the scriptures, as S. Paul says, the scripture is
profitable to teach, to control, to amend, and to instruct in all
righteousness that the office of salvation is little regarded: But this myngle
mangle of spiritual and temporal regiment, is usurped by them, as if no
Christian Magistrate ordained of God, sufficed to redress such abuses. What
marvel if man's ordynaunces be broken, where the ordinance of God is plainly
resysted. Also in the country where most need of preaching and instruction is,
there be ydell chaplaynes, which possess and withhold the Preachers livings,
and most specially in the Cathedral Churches: many of the which be but only
a very refuge and den of ydell, ignorant, and unpreaching lubbers. Is not
the ordinance of God, and good meaninges of noble founders broken here? Is not
his proclamation disobeyed, who proclaimed by the mouth of saint Paul, he who
labors not, ought not to eat? Among the Jews temporal men, and those that
^erued not the Altar, were not suffered to live of the altar, as they now do
under the gospel. Behold y^ Apostles, Timothe Tite, and many others. If we do
allow the order of the primative and holy apostolic church, let us follow their
examples. Behold the fathers, as Origin, Ciprian, Ambrose, Iherom, Augustine,
Chrysostom, and others, who spent the greatest part of their lives in
preaching and teachinge the people, as appears by their works, which be for
the most part Sermons, Lessons, Homelies, disputations, and confutations of
heresies in their times. They preached on the sondayes and expounded the
scriptures. And on the week days they procured their Sermons and expositions
to be written. There were no pluralities of livings in those days, neither
dispensations, Totquottes, nor Residences, qualifications, nor improperations.
Children and boys enjoyed no Benefices in those days by no manner of means,
or considerations to come. God grant us shortly to see a redress of
spiritual abuses, and temporal disorders, in spyrituall governors without
respect of private gain. And y^ we may say with the Prophet David the word of
God is my counseler. Exce(...) such things be amended, neither English
service* Homelies, Ceremonies, no(...) sacraments, do make us christians.
W(...) differ from the Turks but in outward rites and ceremonies, and outward
profesio^ of our faith in words. But not in th(...) true sign of Christian
integrity, whic(...) is vpryghte conversation and good ly(...) Thus here in
England many idle v(...) learned Chappelaines and Priests b(...) found of
the costs and charges of poor Parishes, so that for lack of preaching many
poor Souls be defrauded of th(...) sweet milk of Gods word* and lac(...)
teachers to declare to them their duty(...) toward God and their Prince. This
(...) a rejoicing to the enemy, and pleasau(...) news to those which gape
and loo(...) that the end of these abuses, and disorde(...) will be the
destruction and ruin of th(...) florishinge Realm. And so is to be ferred
that it will, except the insatiable c^uetousnesse, and carnal liberty ^e
w(...) (...)d out. And that wicked Idolatrous murderers of Gods people, and
disobedient to his word and laws, may be cut off, that Gods wrath and
indignation may be pacifyed by amendment, according to Gods express
word, Deuteromie thyrteene Chapter: Thine eye shall not pyttye such one, nor
show mercy to him, but he shall be slain. And so shalt thou take the
evil away forth of the mids of thee, says the Lord God. (Read the
whole Chapter.) Also Saint Paul to the Hebrews the tenth Chapter. If he that
despises Moises Law, ought to dye without mercy, how much more punishment
deserves he that treads under foot the son of God, and cou^teth the
blood of the new Testament an unholy thing? But some have not only trodden
under foot, but also mocked, despised and most cruelly brent the Testament and
word of the eternal God, and also tormented and shamefully murdered his true
and faithful servants, and preachers the dear members of Jesus Christ his
son. And most blasphe* mously contemning the holy sacraments truly
mynistred, and all godly ecclesiastical orders and discipline. To redress of
these enormities must come by y^ magistrates, for they are powers ordained and
exalted of God, for the same intent* If they be not redressed, and that short*
lie, in steed of the comfortable promises of God, we shall be oppressed with
the terryble plagues which he threatens to the breakers of his law. As
dearth, war, pestilence, and other his scourges, as we be threatened now of
late by the punyshmente of our neighbors in France. Happy are those that can
be admonyshed by the fall of others, and amend. I would think my labor well
bestowed, if I might obtain of your honor, and other that be of a godly
meaning, to read this over with good delyberation, and Judgment: And also
such as be in doubt which is the true religion. And those that think we be
in an error, I would to God they would vouchesafe to read and confer it
with the scriptures, and doctors, as is noted in the margin. And in reading,
to put a side disdain, contempt, and all singular and pryuate affections. And
then I doubt not but God will open unto them further knowledge, and move them
to be more studious in Gods word and also have a better opinion of the true
religion.

I have for my Countries sake translated this godly and necessary work,
whereunto I have added nothing of mine own, but simple, and playnelye,
according to my small understanding, I have kept the words and meaning of the
authority, as near as our English will suffer me, rather showing me self
homelye and plain, then by over much fynenesse to dissent from the mind of
him, who in the fear of God, and for his Bretherns sake set it forth.

Humblye beseechynge your honor, and all godly Readers, to take this my
small labor in good part, and accept my good meaning, which tends to the
profit of my Country men, and especially to the glory of God, and
advancement of his kingdom. Who prospere and maintain your honor in his
fear, long to continue, enrytching you with all good blessings, and
gouerninge you and yours by his holy spirit, until he shall call you to come
unto him self, there to continue in his glorious kingdom, for ever and ever.

Amen.
This whole Work or confession consists of.vij. principal poinctes. The
first number signifies the article. The second the leaf.
THe first poinct entreating of the Trinity contains these three articles.
1 Of the unity of God. Folio. 1 2 Of the Trinity of persons distinct in one
unity of substance. Eodem 3 Of the eternal providence of God. Eodem
The second poinct entreating of God the Father, contains these four
articles. 1 Of the person of the Father. fol. 2 2 How the father is creator
and preseruour of all things. Eodem 3 Of the creation of Angels. Eodem 4 The
works of ye trinity are inseparable. eode^
The third poinct entreating of Jesus Christ the only Son of God,
contains these. 26 articles. 1 Of the divinity of the Son. fol. 3 2 The
Son only mediator between God and his elect eternally ordained. Eodem 3
God is perfectly just and merciful. Eodem 4 God is immutable. Eodem 5 The
counsel of God does not exclude the second causes. Eodem 6 Man was created
to declare the Justice and mercy of God. Foli. 4 7 Why it was necessary that
the first man should be created good and pure. Eodem 8 It was necessary that
man should fall from his purity. Eodem 9 How God has created men good. Foli.
5 10 How man brought himself with all his posterity culpable of the first and
second death. Eodem 11 The way which leads to y^ first death. Eode^ 12 The
first death can not be eternal. Eodem 13 The way which leads to y^ second
death. eode^ 14 What free will remains in man after sin. Foli. 6 15 A
brief sum of original sin. Eodem 16 How God turns man's sin to his
glory. Foli. 7 17 Jesus Christ the only mediator ordained and promised.
Eodem 18 The agreement and difference of the old and new Testament. Foli. 8 19
Wherefore it behooved Jesus Christ to be a very natural man in body and soul
without sin. Eodem 20 Wherefore was it needeful that Jesus Christ should be
very God. Folio. 9 21 How the mystery of our salvation was fulfilled in Jesus
Christ. Foli. 10 22 The two natures were united and knitte in one person from
the first instaunt of the conception. Eodem 23 The Vyrgine Marye is Mother of
Jesus Christ God and man. Eodem 24 The sum of the accomplishment of our
salvation in Jesus Christ. folio. 11 25 How Jesus Christ being ascended into
heaven, is nevertheless here on earth with his flock. Fol. 12 26 There can be
no other true Relygion then this. Folio. 13
The iiii. point entreating of the holy ghost, contains the 15. Articles. 1
Of the person of the holy ghost. Folio. 13 2 Of the effects properlye
considered in the holy Ghost. fol. 14 3 The holy Ghost makes us partakers of
Jesus Christ by faith only. Eodem 4 What means the holy ghost uses to create
and maintain faith in us. Eodem 5 How necessary faith is, and what faith is.
fol. 15 6 What is the object of the true faith, and of what force it is. Fol.
16 7 How this is to be understand which we say, as Saint Paul says, that we
be justified by only faith. Eodem 8 To be assured of our salvation by faith
in Jesus Christ, is nothing less then arrogancy or presumption. fol. 17 9
Faith finds in Jesus Christ all that is necessary to salvation. fol. 18 10
Of the remedy which faith finds in Jesus Christ only against ye first assault
of ye first temptation grounded upon ye multitude of our syns, and what
assurance there is in this case either upon the saints or upon our selves.
Eodem 11 The remedy which only faith finds in Jesus Christ only against the
second assault of the first temptation grounded upon this, that we be
unfurnished of the righteousness which God requires of us. fol. 22 12 The
third assault of the same temptation, grounded upon the natural corruption
of original sin which is within us. Fol. 23 13 The remedy against the
second temptation whether we have faith or not. fol. 24 14 Those do slander
us falsely which say that we disalow good works. fol. 26 15 The first
difference in the matter of good works is, which be good and which be evil.
fol. 27 16 Which be the most excellent works, and the qualities of true prayer
according to the work of God, and the authority of the aunciente doctors of
the Church. folio. 28 17 The second difference of ye matter of good works is, to
know from whence they proceed. fol. 31 18 The third dyfference in the matter
of good works is, to know whereunto they be good. fol. 33 19 To what end
good works do serve us before God and before men. foli. 34 20 Remedies against
the last and most dangerous temptation, which is, whether we be saved or not.
fol. 37 21 Of two instruments wherewith the holy Ghost is served to create
faith in the hearts of his elect, to weete, the word of God, and the
sacraments. foli. 42 22 What is that we call the word of God, and of the two
parts, that is to say the law and the Gospel. Eodem 23 What dyfference there
is between the law and the Gospel. folio. 43 24 After what manner the preaching
of the law serves the holy ghost. fo. 46 25 Of the other part of the word of
god caled the gospel, of what authority it is, wherefore, how and to what end
it is written. foli. 48 26 How the gospel comprehends in substance all the
books of the old testament. fo. 50 27 How it is to be understand that we
have spoken of the authority of the word written, and if it be necessary to
traunslate it into all languages. folio. 51 28 How the holy ghost is served
with the exterior preachinge of the Gospel to create faith in the hearts of
the elect, and to harden the reprobate. fol. 52 29 Another fruit of the
preaching of the law after the preaching of the Gospel begins to work.
folio. 53 30 The second mean which the holy ghost uses, to make us rejoice
in Jesus Christ, and wherefore the lord is not only content with the simple
preaching of his word. fol. 55 31 The diffynition of that which is called
Sacrament. folio. 57 32 The difference between the sacraments of ye old
covenant, and those of the new. fo. 58 33 Whereby the false sacraments be
known from the true, and the abuse of them from the right usage. Eodem 34
Which things be common to the preaching of the word, and to the sacraments.
fol. 59 35 What things belong properly to the sacraments having respect to the
end wherefore they were ordained of God. folio. 60 36 How there is but two
Sacraments in the Christian Church. fol. 63 37 The four points which be to be
considered in the declaration of this matter Eodem 38 The first point is to
understand what we do mean by the name of signs in this matter of
Sacraments, and wherefore the Lord did choose for signs the most vulgar and
common things. Eodem 39 What follows the error of those which take away
the substance from the signs in the sacrament. foli. 65 40 What mutation or
change is in the things which he used in the sacrament. Eodem 41 From whence
proceeds this alteration, and the error of those which make a charm or
sorcery of the the* sacramental words fo. 66 42 The Sacraments to be no
Sacraments without the use of them. Eodem 43 The second point is the thing
sygnified in the sacrament. Eodem 44 The third point is how Jesus Christ is
ioygned with the signs. Eodem 45 The distinction of signs and of the thing
sygnified. Folio. 67 46 The manner to communicate as well y^ signs of the
sacraments as the thing signified. eode^ 47 Application of all that is
beforesayde of the sacrament of Baptism. foli. 68 48 For what cause the young
children of the faithful be Baptized. foli. 70 49 Applycation of all that
goes before of the Sacrament of the Supper, and the right use thereof. foli. 71
50 The conclusion of the matter of the Sacraments. foli. 76 51 Wherefore ye holy
ghost is called y^ consolator or comfortour, and to what purpose and end the
afflictions of the faithful serves. Eodem
The v. point entreating of the Church contains the 43. Articles. 1 That
there has always been and over shall be a Church, out of the which there is
no salvation. Foli. 77 2 There can be but one true Church. Fol. 78 3 Wherefore
we call the Church catholic. eode^ 4 In what thing lies the Communion of
Saints. Eodem 5 The Church has but one head, that is to say, Jesus Christ,
to whom there needs no lieuetenaunt. foli. 79 6 The communion of the Saints
lets nor hinders not the diuersytie of offices among the faithful. fol 80
7 The marks whereby we may discern the false Church from the true. fol. 81 8
Which be the true members of y^ church, fo. 82 9 The marks or tokens of the
Church be not always in one estate, and how it ought to be governed. fol. 83
10 Wherein consists the duty and authority of the Church generally. Folio.
84 11 Of the authority of the universal counselles, and first what is an
universal counsel. Eode^ 12 How far we may dyfferre from the counselles.
folio 85 13 To whom it pertains to call a counsel. fo. 86 14 How those ought
to be chosen which the churches do send to the counsels. folio. 87 15 Every
man ought to be heard in the counsel. provided that there be no confusion. fol.
88 16 Who ought to proceed or to be chief in the counsel. folio. 89 17 How
far extends the power of the counsels, and why they be ordained in the
church. fo. 91 18 The first point to consider the case well when or at what time
they should set up public laws in the Church. folio 93 19 The second point
which is to be considered in the Ecclesiastical ordinances. folio 95 20 The
third consideration that ought to be had in Ecclesiastical ordinances. folio
96 21 What is to be answered to those which allege counselles against us.
folio 97 22 Of particular counselles, as of nations or provinces. Foli. 98 23
How many sorts of special governors there be in the Church. Eodem 24 The
office of Apostles Evangelists and Prophets in the primative Church. folio 99
25 Of the office of pastors and doctors fol. 100 26 The dyfference between
Pastors and Doctors. folio 101 27 The pastors and doctors be but
instruments by the which God conducteth the mynisterye of his word. Eodem 28
The marks and tokens of false Doctors and Pastors. fol* 102 29 Of degrees
which ought to be among ministers of the word, according as they be disseuered
by companies folio. 104 30 The second degree of Ecclesiastical offices, which
is the office of deacons and the distribution of the goods of the Church.
foli. 105 31 Of the four orders which they call minores ordine. foli. 107 32
The third degree of ecclesiastical offices which is the jurisdiction and office
of the elders fol. 108 33 To what purpose and end serves the ecclesiastical
jurisdiction, and which be the par^es thereof. Foli. 109 34 What is ye office
of y^ elders in ye church. fo. 110. 35 How ye ecl^s^astical electio^s ought to
be. fo. 11^ 36 Of the qualities and conditions of those which they ought to
elect. folio. 112 37 The order and manner to give the voices. fo. 11^ 38 Of
confyrmation and consecration of the persons elect. Eodem 39 Of marriage, of
fasting, and of the difference of days, and meats. Eodem 40 Of the second
part of the ecclesyasticall jurisdiction, concerning correction. foli. 116 41
What excommunication is, and what the right use thereof is. fol. 118 42 Of the
civil and Christian magistrate, and to what end his office tends. fol. 120
43 how far they are bound to obey ye magi. fo. 121
The.vi. poynct entreating of the last judgment contains only this.i.
article. 1 What it is that we do believe and hope of the last Judgment. folio.
122
The vii. point discoursing a brief coparison between the doctrine of the
papists and this of the Catholic church contains these. 15. articles. ^ The
papists worship a false God, which is neither righteous nor merciful. Foli.
124 ^ If y^ doctrine of y^ papists be true, if follows that Jesus Christ is
not very man. foli. 125 ^ The papists abolyshe the true intercession ^ Jesus
Christ of none effect. foli. 126 4 The papists doctrine makes the oblation of
Jesus Christ. fol. 127 ^ The papists do not acknowledge Jesus christ to be the
perfect declarer of the will of God, neither the holy Scripture to be a
suffycient doctrine of salvation. foli. 128 6 The papists spoil Jesus Christ
of his office of head of the Church. fol. 129 7 By the doctrine of the papists
we can in no wise understand how mortal the natural sickness of mankind
is. foli. 131 8 Another execrable error of the papists in the using of the
only medicine of health, which is in the benefit of Jesus Christ. Eodem 9 They
know not the papistrie the exercise, of the law of God or the Gospel. foli.
133 10 They know not what good works be in the papistry. fol. 135 11 In the
papistry they know not what is a sacrament, nor what is the use thereof. foli.
13^ 12 In the papistrye there is no Ecclesyastica^ government. foli. 16^ 13 The
abuse which is committed in the second part of Ecclesyasticall offices,
which be Deacons. foli. 17^ 14 Of the abuse which is committed in the order of
priesthood, and in the government o^ their spyrituall jurisdiction fol. 17^
15 The Papists be manifestly culpable of re^ bellyon against the magistrate.
fol. 18^
Another brief consession of faith according to the same here before and the
same author.
The end of the Table.
The Printer to the Reader.
AFter I had read this confession, and seen the great rytches of spiritual
doctrine which is therein contained, I thought I should do a thing acceptable
and also profitable, if for your comfort I did make a Table, setting in order
the principal matter contained herein, the which thing I did for your
commodity and easynes, read it therefore with dilygence: O would to God that
King, prince and other noble parsonages of the world which be so civil
informed of the doctrine which we teach (by those which serve in the Church
for their bellyes sake) would vouchsafe to have patience to read or cause to
hear read that which is herein contained: and I believe they would not be so
angry, nor have so evil opinion of us as they have. But some will take good
head enough to beware that the wind of those Books shall not touch such
estates. For if they do some of them will not laugh at it in the end. Now God
which has the hearts of Kings in his hand, grant them his spyrite of
prudence and dyscretion to discern the light from darkness, and give place to
the King of Kings, the Lord Jesus Christ, whose lieuetenants they be, that he
may rain peaceable among his by the scepter of his word, and that all
human traditions and superstitions full of Idolatry, may be taken away and
thrown down.

Certain textes of the new Testament by the which every faithful christian is
exhorted to render a confession of their ^aith before men.
Matthew. 10. chap. Every man which confesses me before men, him will I confess
before my father in heaven.
But he that denies me before men, him will I deny before my father which is
in heaven.
Mark. 8. Luke, 9. chap. He that is ashamed of me and my words in this
adulterous and sinful generation, the son of man shall be ashamed of him when he
shall come in the glory of his Father with his holy Angels. Roma. 10. chap. The
belief of the heart justifies, but to confess with the mouth makes a man
safe. 2. Timothy. 2. chap. If we deny Jesus Christ, he will also deny us. 1.
Peter. 3. chap. Be always ready to answer to every man yt demands a reason
of the hope that is in you. For reading with Judgment ye ought not be shent.
Therefore read me often, the time is well spent.
Theodore de Beze. to the Church of the Lord, grace and peace in him.
AMong the errors which reign at this day in the world about faith and
Christian religion, there be two which me thinks be as the springs and
fountains of all the others. The first is, that all which is done of a good
intent is well done. The second is, that those which live only upon the
trafick or marchaundise of other men's souls, have persuaded the simple people
that they need not read y^ scriptures, nor particularly enquire of every
poinct of that which they are bound to believe for to be saved. But that it is
sufficient to believe confusedly and in a generality as the church of Rome
believes, and the rest to commit to the Divines or to the conscience of his
curate. Touching the first, it is needful to defyne what intent is good and
what evil. But to speak after their own manner, for as much as they believe
that all those which think they do well have a good intent* if it so were what
would have let saint P^ule to have been saved in his pharisaicall ^i^ing,
seeing that he was an earnest follower of the law of god given by Moises? And as
for that he persecuted the members of Jesus christ, it was of ignorance,
supposing to have done god good service, as he himself witnesses. Yet this
notwithstanding he says he was a persecutour and a Blasphemer, so that God
saved him of his singular grace and mercy. The like case was of many of those
which crucified Christ and stoned saint Steven, thinkinge they did very good
service, because they esteemed the^ to be false prophets and enemies to God.
Nevertheless did their good meaning keep them that they were not horible
murderers? But if God gave forgiven them, then it follows that they sinned.
And who shall assure those of the like mercy which do as they did? I omit the
manifest textes, where such good ententes or meaninges be cursed of god,
consydering where no faith is, there is naught but sin, and where there is no
word of God, there is no faith, but a lyinge and deceyuable opinion. I would
fai^^ know whether there be any Creditour that would be content and satisfied
for his full payment, that his dett^ur should allege, that he had dreamed
that he had paid him. Or if a Master had given by writing his whole mind
and will to one of his servants, and had given him in charge and
commandment, neither to ad to it, nor to diminish it: whether he would be
content with his servant that would not vouchesafe to read his remembrance,
but trusting in his own wit would do al things after his own will and
mind. And nevertheless, Christendom is thus led that to read the Scriptures
for to know the will of their Master, is heresye at this day. And if they
aledge further that the common people have no judgment for to understand y^
they do read, how happens it then that they teach not the Scriptures to the
people to remedy that? For the self same inconveniences have been in all ages*
And nevertheless the prophets. Jesus Christ, nor the Apostles, neither spoke nor
writ but in the common vulgar tongue, which was then understood of all the
people where they used. And when we say that he is not a Christian which
knows not what he believes, nor why and wherefore he believes it: do we say
that he must read the scriptures without hearing them syncerelye expounded of
those which have the charge and office to do it? No, but contrariwise, we
say and also practyse it, that the Pastors are bound to feed their flocks
with the word of life, and that the flock on their part must understand
and learn that which they teach them to be edified and comforted there by.
Also they must take heed and beware of the false Prophets and wolfs. And
certainly if this Lamp hadd always burned clear in the Church of God, they
which at these days fear nothing more then this light, and which would
take it from the common people to lead them still in their blindness, had not
so much prevailed as they have. For the kingdom of God is not a kyngedome of
ignorance, but of faith, and consequently of knowledge: considering that a man
cannot believe that which he knows not.

Briefelye, for as much as all Christians be expresselye warned of Saint
Peter, to be in a readynesse to make answer to all those which demand a
reason of their hope: So it appears by this, that the duetye of a true
Chrystian, is to have ready, and with him some brief resolution and sum of
the principal points of his Religion, and also some principal reasons,
whereby he may on the one part confyrme and strengthen himself therein, and
on the other part, repel according to his calling, the enemies of the
truth, and be ready to communicate his spiritual riches with all men.

Whereupon, I being already of that mind, and beside the some being required
to render a reason of my faith, by a personage to whom next unto God I am
most bound to obey: I have of late composed and made this Treatise which I
have intytuled A confession of the faith, wherein I have comprehended after the
best order I could, those things which I have learned in the Christian
Religion by the reading of ye Bible, with the conference of the most
faythefull Expositours.

At the first I made this but for mine own use, and to satisfy him who
required of me. But since partly by the advise of certain good and learned
me^, and also being moved with certain reasons which me thought were of
importance, I was easily persuaded to have it set abroad.

For first, I know, that among those which persecute the Gospel of God in
his members, there be many that offend thorough ignorance whom it is very
hard to make understand how much they be deceived, except before they be put
to the reading of the textes of the scripture, they have some brief instruction
which may open the matter plain unto them, and accustom them with the manner of
speech of the holy ghost for to gather out the true sense and meaning, and
refer the whole to the right use and end. Moreover, even among those which
have some understanding of gods truth, I know that there be many very
negligent and slow to read the scriptures, because they know not the treasures
which therein be contained. And many also, although they read the scripturs
diligently, as al christians ough^ principally to do, and can after a sort
discern ^^e true exposition from ye false, yet nevertheless have not so ready
judgment and such capacity, that they can aptly set and agree together those
textes which they find dispersed in diverse places of one matter for to
comprehend them w^ll, to their edifyinge and instruction. And this is the cause
why in the church of Christ so long as it was well governed, there was evermore
an instruction called a Cathechisme, for those that were lately comme to the
knowledge of the eternal god. But this very word Cathechisme declares that
this Instruction was rather by word of mouth then otherwise* And I think that
from thence did proceed the symbol of the Apostles as we call it, the
exposition whereof was declared by mouth in y^ church. After this when it
pleased god to erect ^p again the banner of his Church, which had been long
time ouerthro^en: this custom not one ye most ^audable, but also most
necessary ^as erected up again, yea to more e^ification then ever it was, as
me thin^eth, and as in very deed experience and time must needs teach the
^ysest sort of men some thing. For ^hey have not only set forth the
an^ient manner to cathechise, that is to ^ay, to instruct by mouth those that
are ^ately entered into the church of god, y^ ^rncipall poinctes of Christian
rely^ion orderly and briefly, but also too ^uoyde many inconveniences, those
Cathechismes were set forth and writtten for a singular profit, both ^^
great and small. And although ^n these beginninges of the resto^inge and
repayringe of the decays ^f the Church, the synceritie of doc^rine and
familiar manner of tea^hinge was not in all points such as was to be wyshed,
yet no^^ withstandinge these manners and form^s teachinge be very meet for to
remedy and help those inconveniences which I have spoken of heretofore. And
this I dare well say that there shall not ^^ found either in times past or to
come any such work published and set abroad whereby to have a brief and
perfect knowledge of the wholle Christian religion as is the Cathechisme of
this Church of Geneua* god be praised therefore, and his faithful ser^antes
labor acknowledged, which has so happily and profitablye trauayled in this
work Although there be I know dogs both far of and near which bark
after him, and except for barking they would be as domme, as domme Fys^hes:
but when as they meet with beasts of their own kind then they be at liberty
to prate and babble without knowledge. But to return to my purpose, I confess
that it was not greatly needful to set for the this confession after that
Cathechisme whereof I have spoken. Nevertheless because men are given in
heavenly food even like as they be in bodily meats to weete that one and the
same meat, shall please some in one kind of dressing, and other in an other
kind or way: I have enforced my self somthyng more to dilate and declare
matters at large: as one that would not so much teach the auditors which are
already bente and willing to hear and learn in the church of God* as also to
answer those which do with stand the truth of GOD, or at the least those
which be in dowte in which side to turn themselves. I hope with the grace
of him whose honor I have regarded in this little work, that my labor
shall not be without profit, neither for those which suffer them selves to
be par^wa^ed in any thing that may ^ee invented against us either in ^yfe
or doctrine, nor for those which have already some taste and feeling to
encorage and stir them up to the viligent Reading of the seripturs, and to
resort and draw water as it were out of ye very head spring or fountayn from
whence these brokes do run, not yet to establish and resolve the^ which have
need thereof. True it is ye among other faults I confess that I have not been
so brief as were requisite in such an argument wherein men ought only to
declare and open the determination of matters without disputing, yet I hope at
the length, considering y^ property of the enemies with whom we have to do, it
shall not be so troublous but it shall serve to some purpose, because I have
endeavored my self to speak of nothing but that which belongs to the very
pith of the matter, and which is necessary to resolve him which should come
read this treatise with some preiudise to the contrary.

And this was my intent and mind not to prescibe to any man living a form
of confession of his faith, but first to declare mine own to al those which
are minded to understand it to the glory of my God. And then also to help
according to my (...) power those that a^e least of the Church of God. I hope
also that at the least I shall give occasion to those which without comparison
have wherew^th better then I to furnishe and set out so profitable a work in
Christendom: to compile and make some more absolute and perfect work, whose
judgments I am so far ^^^m refusinge, that on the contrary I desire that
all those which shall see this confession will confer it diligently with the
Scripturs which are the only true touchestone to prove true doctrine by. But
i^ there be any thing herein which is worthy of reprehension, which I hope
shall not befounde in the substance of the doctrine, I am one which desires
with all my heart to understand it, to amend the fault thereof. If one the
other side, there found any goo^ thing in it, as I would be sorry if the^ were
not, his be the praise which has reveled to me his holy truth, and shall
reuele it yet more fully when we shall have the accomplishement of that which
we look for.

God be praised.
Of the trinity. The first point.
The first Article of the unity of God.
WE believe that there is one only dyuyne substance which we call God, and
that not only because the contemplation of natural things teaches us the
same, but much rather ^ Romans 1. ^
because the holy scripture witnesses and declares it unto us. Deu. 4. ^.
Ephe. 4. ^


2. Of the Trinity of persons distinct in one unity of substance.
THe word of god teaches us plainlye that this dyuine substance is dystinct
Really and truly from ^uerlasting into three persons, that Mat. 28. d 1. Ioh.
5. b
is to say, the father, the son, and the holy ghost, which be one only god,
only Act. 17. f Deu. 4. b
eternal, infinite and wholly perfect in himself. And these three persons
be of one substance together co^substau^ciall and coeternal, without confusion
of property and relation, and without any inequalities as the church has
decidid by the holy scripture against Sabellius, Samolatenus, Arrius,
Nestorius, Marcion, Eutiches, and al other heretics.

3. Of the eternal providence of God.
NOthing is done at adventure or by chance, or without the most just ordinance
and appointment of God, Ephe. 1. b Mat. 20. c Pro. 16. a
although god be in no wise author nor culpable of any evil which is
committed. For his goodness and mighty power is such and so incomprehensible,
that namely he ordains Act. 2 d and. 4. e. Romans 9. d
and does well and justly, even that which the devil and man does evil and
unjustly.

Of God the Father. The ii point.
2 The first article of the person of the Father.

WE believe in GOD the Father a a person Ioh. 1. ^
distinct from his son and from the holy Ghost.

^. How the father is creator and preseruour of all things.
IT is he that has created all of nothing, a when it seemed good to Genesis ^.
Heb. 1. a and xi. a. John. 1. ^.
him by his eternal word, that is ^o say by his son. And which has ^et,
established and ordained al things, as also he sustaineth and governs all
according to his eternal providence, by his infinite and substaunciall power,
and virtue which is the holy ghost proceeding from the father and the son.

3. Of the creation of Angels.
WE believe that god did not only create this visible world: that is to say,
the heaven and the earth and all that is contained therein, but also the
^nuisible a spirits of whose number those Colos. ^. ^
which continued in their pure Integrity by y^ singular grace of god by his b
Heb. 1. d.
blessed and happy messengers for the preservation of ye elect. The other
sort to weete the devils being John. 8. f
fallen without any hope of rysyng again, and that by their own proper
malice and wickedness be condemned to perpetual damnation which is the last
Issue 2. Pet. 2. a Luke. 8. d
of their hope. And we detest the error of the Saduciens which deny that
there be any spirits, and of the Manicheans Acts. 23.
which hold that the deuels had their beginning of them selves and be evyll of
their own nature without corruption.

4. The works of the Trinitye are inseparable.
WE do by no means separate from the father, neither the son nor yet the
holy ghost either in the creation or in the government of all things, nor
yet in any thing which appertains to the substance of god.

Of Jesus Christ the only son of God. The third point.
The first article of the divinity of the Son.
WE believe that Jesus Christ concerning his divine Ihon. 1. a and. 17. a
nature is the only son of god beegotten from everlasting and not made,
one with the father in ^ubstaunce, coeternall and consubstan^iall, equal to
God his father in all things and every where.

2 The son only mediator betvveene god and his elect eternally ordained.
THis is the only whom the father has ordained from everlasting 2. Tim. 2. ^
2. Tim. ^.
to unite him to man's nature, to ^hende to save his elect and chosen by ^im as
follows.

3. God is perfectlye just and me(...)cyfull.
GOD is perfectlye rightous a who ^^od. 2^. b ^. Cor. 6. c
upon it follows that he neythe^ will ne may suffer any iniusti^ unpunished.
He is also perfectly merc(...)full b whereupon it follows that the Exodus 34. a
good which he does to man, be does i^ of his full and only grace.

4. God is immutable.
GOd is immutable in his counsell^ a so it follows that al which comes Romans
31. c
or happens to man, hath^ been eternally ordained by him b according Ephe.
1. b.
to that we have said of his pronydence.

5. The council of god does not exclude the second causes.
THis does not let but establishe the second causes by the which all things
do come to pass. For god in ordaynynge that which ought to ^. Sam. 12. c
come, ordayneth ^^so the means by y^ which it pleases him that such things
should come to pass, yea in such sort that although there be found some vice
^r fault in ye second cause, yet is there ^o evil in y^ everlasting counsel
of god.

6. Man was created to declare the Justice and mercy of god.
THere shall be some ^aue^ and some damned, and all for the glory of god, as the
whole Scripture does declare. It follows then that for as much as nothing
does happen or come to pass at aue^ture or by chance, and that god does never
change his purpose nor mind, and god has not only foreseen but also
eternally ordained to create man to sprede for the and declare his glory a in
^. Cor. ^^. ^
saving b by his grace those which pleases him, forgetting nothing
appart^yning Rom 9. c
to his justice without the which he cannot be god, and c condemning other
Exodus 9. ^ Romans 9. c
by his just Judgment.

7. why it was necessary that the first man should be created good and
pure.
FOR to execute this counsel ^ was necessary that god should create nan good
and pure, for beside this that god himself being good he can do nothing but
that which is good, but if man had been created wicked or evil, god had not
had just occasion to punish the wickedness whereof h^ himself was the author
and maker.

8. It was necessary that man should fall from his purity.
IT was then necessary that man should so be created good that not
withstanding he should be mutable and fall from this degree and that by his own
only fault. For if sin had not so entered into the world, Romans 11. d
God had not found such cause to magnifye his mercy in saving those which
he has ordained to salvation, nor matter to declare his justice in
condemninge those which he has ordained to his wrath to the end he may
punish them for their demerites.

9 How God has created men good.
THe lord then at that time which seemed good to him to execute his eternal
counsel created men a Gene. 1. d. Exodus 7. d
male and female after his own image, and likeness that is to say with
righteousness and true holiness.

10 How man brought himself with all his posterity culpable of the first
and second death.
MAn being such Genesis 2. ^. Romans 5. ^
did willingly and without any^ compulsion Ioigne and knite him self to the
devil, and therefore became culpable of the first and second death withal his
posterity: and consequently has made himself and all his culpable of all
that, which leadethe to the one and other of these two deaths.

xi. The way which leads to the first death.
THE corruption of humors with infinite other inconveniences descendinge and
di^^yllynge from the sin of Adam by lineall succession and has Read ^.
Aug. in the 13. book de ciuitate dei. 2. 12. 13 and 14-Chap.
brought all men under subjection to the first death, which is the separation
of the soul from the body with putrefication of the body.

12. The first death cannot be eternal.
THis death cannot be eternal, for by that means the body at the least had
escaped ye eternal death which brings with it sorrow and perpetual
punishment: and likewise it should never have enjoined the eternal felicity:
and so by this means the eternal counsel of god concerning the declaration
of his mercy and justice should be made void.

13. The way which leads to the second death.
THe inward corruption of the hole man nothing reserved the which we call
original sin a makes every man even from the very first beginning Genesis 6.
^ Phil. 15. b John. 3. a.
of his conception the child of wrath and subject to the second and eternal
death. For to speak briefly, this corruption makes us altogether
vnpro(...)table, yea contrary to all goodness, and ^holly subject to sin.
Whereupon S. ^ugustine said agreing b with the scriptures Li. de perfectione
iusticiae.
that the will of man vanquished ^f sin into which it fell, nature was
^epriued and lost her liberty, and a ^aine, Lib enchiridion ad laurentium
chap. 30. Li. 2. de precatorum meritis cap. 13.
that man evil using frewill ^ath lost it and himself withal. Item d ^en
says he labor to find what good ^ere is in their own will, but know ^ot
how a man should find any.

14 what frevvyll remains in man after sin.
NOtwithstanding we deny not a but that men have sufficient Romans i. c
light to make them without ex^^se. And to spoil them not, nor dipriue (...)em
of their natural faculties and po^ers, as of reason, Judgment, will such
others to make them stocks or ^okes, nor yet of frewyll: so that they ^igne
this to it, that al is nothing but darkness and enemitie against god, and that
by this word frewyl be not understand a natural power to think, wy^ or do
good or evil, but a will not constrained the which not withstanding cannot
Ihon. 3. a Romans 8 p.
nor will not any thing but altogether evil, so much is the nature ^^ man not
being regenerate (that is to sa^ not healed nor restored by grace (not only
wounded or hurt, but utterly and altogether corrupted and also willyngly become
y^ servant of sin. Therefore said S. Li. de derfectione iusticia.
Augustine, that the fault whych^ followed the sin and which is the
punishment has turned lybertye into necessity. Item Li. 3. ad ob ^i facium.
frewyl as it is bound and thralle is nothing worth but to sin and fall.

15. Abriefe some of original sin
Original sin then is a fulle corruption of the whole nature of m^ the which
corruption is proceeded from Adam into all his raze, and brings forth in man
three manner of sins. The first comprehends every inwar^ mocion and thought
in man's understanding although the will give not consent there unto. For
god requires to ^e loved withal the understanding: and we have already said
that it is utterly and altogether corrupted. The second manner of sin is when
the will and af^ection does consent thereto. The third is when men even enforce
them selves to ^xecute that which inwardelye they ^aue conceived and willed.

16. How god tourneth man's synn(...) his glory.
SO now there remained Romans 3. c
nothing but that all the whole world should run to ruin and destruction,
but that God being not only most rightu^us, but also most merciful had
eter^ally ordained a mean to cause al those ^hinges to turn to his great
glory, to ^ete Romans 3. d
to the greater declaration of his ^^finite goodness toward those which (...)
has also ordained Romans 8. f
and chosen eter^allye to be glorified in their salvation, and likewise to the
declaration of his power d and wrath by the just iudgemen^ Rom 9 c
and condempnation of the vessels (...) wrath prepared to destruction. For
a(...) S. e Augustine said vearye well: if a^ Epist. 103 ad (...).
were delivered, that which were dew^ to sin by justice should be secret an^
hid, and if none were delivered, th^^ should not be seen which grace ha^
given and granted.

17. Jesus Christ the only med^atou^ ordained and promised.
THis one and all only mean is the misterye of the incarnation of the son
of god with all that which follows it, who was from age to ag^ promised even
from a Adam unto saint Genesis 3. c Deuteronomy. ^8 ^ ^. sam. 7. b
Ihon was published and preached b^ the patriarchs as prophets, was all
fygured diverse ways under the law as is at large contained in the books (...)
the old Testamente, to the end tha^ man moughte be saved by faith (...)
Jesus Christ for to come.

18. The agreement and difference of the old and nevve testament.
There was never but one covenant of salvation between god and man if we
consider the substance there(...), which is Jesus Christ. a But in con^^deration
Heb. 13. ^ 1. Tim. 1. ^ 1. cor. 10. ^ Read all the epistle to the Ebrues.
of the circumstaunces there ^re two testaments or couenantes wher^f we have
the names and autentike re^isters called the holy Scripture and ^orde of god.
The one is called the old. The other the new b which is the better, abolishing
the old, for as much as Ierimi (...)* Heb. ^. ^.
^e old did not propound and set forth jesus Christ but a far of and
hidden under shadows and fygures which ^ere abolished by his coming.

19 wherefore it behooved Jesus Christ to be a very natural man in body and
soul without sin.
IT behooved the Mediator of this covenant and reconciliation to be a veryman
and without any spot of origi^all sin or other for those reasons following.
First for as much as 1. Tim. 2. a. Ihon. 1. b
God (...) just and man was bound and endette^ to his wra^he by his natural
corruption as we have declared heretofore i^ the fiftenth Article, it was meet
ther^ shoulds be a very man, in whom thi^ ruin and decay should be
thorowly^ and perfectelye repaired for to pleas^ God. Secondlye Matthew. 3. c
Rom* 5. d
man is bound to accomplish and fulfill all the righteousness which god
requires of him for to be glorified: then there must be a man for to
accomplish perfitelye all righteousness to please god. Thyrdly, Romans 3. d Act.
20. f
all men be covered with an infinite number of sins as well inwardly as
outwardly, and therefore culpable of y^ maledicton of god: of necessity there
must be a man which should satisfy fullye the justice of God for to please
him. Forthlye Romans 8. a Romans 5. d
no man being corrupt could in any wise begin to do the least of these
things, but rather should have need of a ^edemer even for him self, much
less then could he redeem or deliver other men, or do any thing which
should be pleasyng or acceptable to God.

It was needful then that the Romans 14. d
Redemer and Mediator of man should be a very man in body and foul, and yet
nevertheless perfectlye and altogether pure and clean from all sin.

20. wherefore it was needful that Jesus Christ should be very God.
IT was of necessity y^ this Mediator should be very John. ^. b. and other
places infinite
God and not only man, for these reasons following. First Esaye* 43. b ^
if he had not been very God, he should not have been a Savior, but should
have needed a Savior for himself. Secondly, Rom 3. d
there must be before the justice God proporcion between the fault and the
pain thereof: the offense or fault is infinite, for as much as he is
infinite against whose majesty it is committed: therefore it was needful to
have satisfaction that is infinite and consequently that he which should^ do it
as very man should also be infinite that is to say very god. Thirdlye d for
John 14. b ^. Cor. 5. d
that the wrath of god is infinite there was no strength of man or Angel
which could have been able to bear such a burden but it should fall and be
overwhelmed under it, therefore it was needful that he which should rise
again having the victory over the devil sin the world and death joined
with the wrath of god should be not only perfect man but also very god.
Finally god the better to declare his inco^prehensible goodness would make his
grace not only equal e with our offense, but would Romans 5. c.
that it should exceed and surmount the trespass. For this cause, even as the
f 2. Cor. 15.
first Adam the auctour of our offense though^e he were created to the Image
of god, yet notwithstanding was earthy as his frailty and weakness has well
declared, so on the contrary Jesus Christ the second Adam by whom we be
delivered is in such wife perfect and very man, that he is also heavenly, that
is to say very god, for as much as the fulness of Colos. 2, b
the godheade dwells in him bodily. So that if the disobedience of Adam does
astonishe or make us afraid, ye righteousness of Jesus Christ should much more
comfort and stablishe us, and that we should hope for a life obtained us by
Jesus Christ much better then that which we have lost in Adam: yea so much
better as Jesus Christ is above Adam.

21. How the mystery of our salvation was fulfilled in Jesus Christ.
WE confess then that for to fulfill the couenante promised to the ancient
Esaie. 7, ^
fathers and prophesied by the mouth of the prophets. Rom* 1* a Phil 2, a
The true and only eternal son of God in the time ordained of the father took
on him the form of a servant, that is to say, a very humane Heb. 4. d.
nature with the infirmities of the same, sin excepted, being conceived in
the womb Math ^. e
of the blessed vyrgin Mary by the virtue of the holy, ghost without any
operation of man.

22 The two natures were united and knitte in one person from the first
instaunt of the conception.
WE confess that from the first instant of this conception Math. 1, c Luke. 1,
c
the person of the son was inseperably united with the nature of man in such
sort that there be not two sons of God, nor two Jesus Christ's, but one only
son of God Jesus Christ, very God and very man: yet nevertheless both these
natures abiding and remainyng in their several properties. For the divinity
separated from the humanity, or the humanity divided or pluckte from the
divinity, or the one confused with the other would serve us to no purpose.

23 The virgin Marye is mother of Jesus Christ God and man.
Jesus Christ very God and very Math. 1, c Luke. 1, d
man, that is to say, having a very true and human soul and a very humain
body formed of ye substance of ye virgin: Mary daughter of David by the virtue
of the holy Ghost, was by this means conceived and borne of the same virgin
Marye, deliverance: both after and before her deliverance: and all this was done
for the accomplishment of our reconciliation.

24. The sum of the accomplishement of our salvation in Jesus christ.
HE therefore came Ephe. 2, b
down on earth for to draw us up to heaven. He has borne the pain dew to
our b Math. 11, d 1, Pet. 2, d and. 3, c Esaye. 53. b.
sins, clearly to discharge us even from the beginning of his conception unto
his resurrection: Romans 5, d Math. 3, d
He has fulfilled perfectly al righteousness, for to cover our
unrighteousness, he has declared John. 15, e
to us all ye will of God his father both by works and also by words, to the
end to show us the true way of salvation. In fine, for (...) whole and full
satisfaction for our sins which he took upon him: he was bound Esaie. 53. a
to unbind us: condemned, for to deliver us: he suffered great and infinite
shame, for to deliver us from all confusion: he was nailed Colos. 2. ^
on the cross for to fasten thereon our sins, he died Gala. 3. b.
and sustained ye curse and malediction which was dew to us for to apease the
wrath of god for ever by his only oblations made, he was buried Act. ^. c.
to approve and verify his death and to vanquishe death even to the house
thereof, that is to say, even to the grave wherein he felt no corruption, for to
declare that even in dying he had overcome and vanquished death. He was raised
again in The 6 to the Romans and thorovv^ut, almost in all S* paul's Epistles.
tripu^he as a conqueror to ye end that al our corruption being dead and buried
we should be renewed into a new spiritual and everlasting life, and that thereby
the first death should be no more to us a punishment dew for sin, and as it
were an entrance into the second death, but contrariwise a finishing and end
of y^ death of our corruption, and an entrance into eternal Act. 3. a
life. Finally he being raised afterward was conuersaunt here on earth by the
space of forty days to confirm and approve his resurrection. He ascended
visible and verily into heaven, where he is set on the right hand of god his
father and has taken possession m of his eternal John. 14. a
kingdom for us and for our behoue for whose sake also he is ye only mediator
n and advocate o governing his 1. Timo, 2 Math. 28. d
church by his holy spirit until the number of ye elected of god his father be
accomplished and fulfilled.

25. How Jesus christ being ascended into heaven is nevertheless here on earth
with his flock.
WE understand that glory has brought Luke. 24. f
immortality to ye body of Jesus Christ, but has not taken away the nature of
his body, therefore concerning his humayne Act. 1* a
nature, he has taken it from us into heaven, where he shall dwell until the
time he shall come to judge the quyck and the dead, Math. 28, b
but concerning his dyuinitye and the workinge of the holy spirit, he is with
his elect and shall be until the end of the world* as Christ has said: the
poor Math. 28. d
shall ye have always with you, but me shall ye not e Act. 3. a
have. And also as the Angels said to the Apostles after his ascension, Jesus
which is lift up from you into heaven shall come again eue^ as ye have seen him
ascend into heaven, and as S. Peter said to the Jews that heavens Act. 3, d
must hold him until the restoring of al things. Whereupon saint Augustine
Episto. 57 and Dardanu.
said well agreeing with the scripture, that we ought to take heed that we do
not so confirm the divinity, that we deny the verity of the body, and not to
make this conclusion, that those things which are in god be every where, as
God is every where.

29. There can be no other nevve religion then this.
IN this mystery of our redemption which man's reason cannot attain, god is
declared to be very god, y^ is to say, perfectlye righteous and perfetly
merciful. First Romans 3, d
perfectly righteous in y^ he has punished al our sins very sharply in his,
person who made i. Tim. 2, b
himself a satisfaction and pledge, to wit, in Jesus Christ, and moreover does
not receive us nor allow us as his children, 2. Cor. 5, d Romans 8, c Collo. 2, c
except we be covered and clothed with the innocence, holiness and perfect
rightousnes of Jesus Christ. On the other part he declares himself to be
perfectly merciful in y^ he finding in us nothing but cause and matter of
damnation, Rom 5, b
yet would that his son should take our nature in whom he found a remedy to
appease his justice, Romans 8, ^
whom also he does co^municat to us freely with all his treasures to ye end
that we may be partakers of eternal life by his only goodness and mercy: so that
by faith we lay hold on Jesus Christ as shall be showed hereafter. But
contrariwise al religion ^, Cor. 2. a
which does appose or set against the wrath of God any other thing then
the only innocence righteousness and satisfaction of Jesus Christ apprehended
by faith, spoiled god of his perfect righteousness and mercy, and consequently
ought to be holden for false and deceitful as shall be declared in the seventh
point.

Of the holy ghost. The fourth point.
The first article of the person of the holy Ghost.
WE believe in the holy ghost which is the Gene. 1. a
coeternall and consubstanciall power of the father and the Son, in whom he
is resident and from whom John. 14 b
proceeds being one God Romans 8. b
with them, and nevertheless distynct in Math. 2. d
person.

2. Of the effects properly considered in the holy ghost.
THe infynit force and virtue of him is declared in the creation Gene. 1. a,
and preservation of all creatures from the beginning of the world, and
principally shall be considered by us in this present Treatise according to y^
effects which he brings forth in the children of God, in bringing with him
his grace Romans 8* b
to make them feel the efficacy and virtue thereof, and, brief to bring the^
from degree to degree to the right end and mark whereunto they be predestined
*c Ephe, 1, a
before the foundation of the world.

3. The holy ghost makes us partakers of Jesus Christ by faith only.
THe holy ghost then is the same by whom the Father does put and keep his
elect in possession of Jesus Christ his son, and consequently of all the
graces which be necessary to their salvation. But first it behooved y^ the
same holy spirit make us capable and meet to receive the same Jesus Christ,
the which he does in creating Ephe. 1, c
within us by his mere divine goodness and mercy, that which we call Faith,
the only instrument John. 3. b
to take hold of Jesus Christ, when he is offered to us, and the only vessel
to receive him.

4. what means the holy ghost uses to create and maintain faith in us.
HE uses two ordinary means, (nevertheless without communicating his virtue
to them, but working by them, for to create in us this instrument of faith, and
also to maintain and confirm it more and more: Math, 28 d Acts. 9. a Roma.
10. c James. i, c 2. Peter. i, d
That is to say, by the preaching of the word of God and his sacraments, as
shall be hereafter said. For first we will declare what this precious faith is,
and what be the effects thereof.

5. How necessary faith is, and what faith is.
WE be such Roma. 8. 1. Cor. 2.
enemies of our own salvation by reason of our natural corruption, that if God
did but only advertise us that we should find our salvation in Jesus Christ,
we b Luke. 23
would make but a mock of it, as the world has always done, and will do
until the end of the world, Moreover John. 3
if he had not joined other things to it but only told us that the means to
feel the fruit of this medicin against eternal death, is to believe in Jesus
Christ, this had served no more then the other. For concerning all this we be
but dumb, Psalm. 51
deaf, Prouer. 40
and naturally blind, John. 1
and it had been as impossible for us to John. 12
believe of our selves as it is impossible for a man y^ is dead to fly.
Wherefore it was necessary that with the same, this our Good father which has
elected us, should com and redouble his mercy ^owardes his enemies, and
declaring John. 3, b
to us that he has so loved the world y^ he has given his onel^e begotten
son, upon this condycyon, that whosoever embrace him by faith, shall not
peryshe. He creates in us likewise this means of faith which he requires of
us. Now the faith which we speak of, is not to believe only that God is God,
and that the contents of his word be ^rewe (for the Deuilles have this i
James. ^. d
faith, and can not but tremble at it) but 1. Cor. 2 c
we call faith a certain knowledge which the holy Ghost by his only grace
and goodness, engraueth more and more in the hearts of the elected of god, by y^
which each one of the^ being ass^r^eined in his heart of his election, does
apply and appropriat to himself the promise of his saluatyon in Jesus Christ.
Faith I say, believes not only that Jesus Christ is dead and risen for Romans 8,
sinners, but proceeds to embrace Jesus Christ, in whom only she trustoth and
so assures her self of her salvation that she Ephe. 3
douteth not, and for that cause said Saint Bernard First sermon of the
anunciation.
according to all the Scripture as follows. If thou believe that thy sins
may not be put away, but by him whom thou have offended, and also who is not
subject to sin, thou do well: but yet join thereto another point, that is
so say, that thou believe also that by him thy sins before given. And this is
the witness which the holy Ghost brings in our hearts, saying: thy sins
are forgeuen thee.

9. what is the object of the true faith and of what force it is.

FOr as much as Jesus Christ is ye mark of our faith, even as is declared
unto us in the holy Scripture a Romans 10, b Gala. 1, b
and word of God: There follows two points which are well to be noted, the
one that where there is no word of god, but only the word of man, what
soever it be, there is no faith but only a dream or opinion, which cannot but
deceive us, ye John. 17. 1. Cor. 1. d
other Poynet is, that faith embraces and approbriateth to it self Jesus
Christ, and al y^ is in him (for as much as he is given us on that condition
that we believe in him) from whence one of these two things do follow, that
either all that which is necessary to our salvation, is not in Jesus Christ,
or if al be there, that he which has Jesus Christ by faith has all. Now, to
say that all that is necessary to our salvation is not in Jesus Christ, is a
blasphemy most execrable, for Math. 1 Roma. 6
that were to make him no savior but in a part. There rests then the other
part, that is to say, that in having Jesus Christ by faith, we have all
Roma. 5
things in him, according as the Apostle Romans 8
says that there is no condemnation to those which be in Jesus Christ.

7. How this is to be understand, which we say, as Sainet Paul says,
that we be justified by only faith.
THe reason is because that faith is the instrument which receives Jesus
Christ, and by consequent receives his righteousness, that is to say, all
perfection. When we say than as Saint Paul said, Romans 5. ^ Gala 2 Phil. 3, b
2. Tim. 1, ^ Titus. 3. a Hebr. 11. b
that we be justified by only faith, it is not to say that faith is a virtue
which makes us righteous in our selves before god (for that were to set our
selves in the place of Jesus Christ, the which only is our perfect and en^^ier
righteousness) but we understand that we be justified by faith, for as much as
it embraces him which iustifyeth us, that is to say, Jesus Christ, in such
wise that it unites and knitteth us together with him to be partakers of all
the goodness which he has, the which being allowed and imprynted in us, is
fully sufficient, to make us perfect and accepted for righteous before God.

8. To be assured of our salvation by faith in Jesus Christ, is nothing less
then arrogancy or presumtion.
BY this it appears that to be assured of our salvation by faith is not any
arrogance Roma. 6. Hebre. 10.
or presumption, but on the contrary part, it is the only means to take all
pride from our selves, for to give all glory to god. For faith only teaches
us to go out of our own selves, and to know that in us there is nothing, but
matter of all damnation, and sends us to one only Jesus Christ, by whose
only justice it teaches and assures us that we shall find salvation before
God. For all that which is in Jesus Christ (that is to say, all righteousness
and perfection) is counted and allowed to us as properly our own, so y^ we
embrace him by faith. And hereupon Saint Bernard said, First sermon of the
anuntiatio^.
that the witness of our own conscience is our glory, not such a wytnes as the
glorious proud Pharisey had, being deceived in his own thought, and
deceyuinge his master, the which witness is not true: but the wytnes is true
which the holy ghost witnesses to our spirit.

9 Faith fyndeth in Jesus Christ, all that is necessary to salvation.
THis word ought to be expounded particularly, so that it may be known
whether by faith we do apprehende suffycient remedy for to assure us fully
of eternal life, according as is said, the Roma. 1. Gala. 3.
just shall live by faith. We say then that all that which lets man to
have acquaintance with God, which is perfitly just and good, lies in three
points, in the which we find as many remedies ready prepared, not in our
selves but in Jesus Christ only. So we have now nothing else John. 17.
of our own, but Jesus Christ, and all that which he has. Provided always
that we be by faith united and conjoined with him as pertakers of all his
goodness. For the which cause the Church, that is to say, the assemble Roma. 7.
of the faithful, is called the spowse of Jesus Christ her husband, for to
show the conjunction and communion which is between Jesus Christ and those
which by faith be joined with him, for in virtue of this coniunctio^ and
spyrytuall marriage by faith, he takes all our miseries upon him self, and we
do receive all his treasures of him by his pure goodness and mercy, as
follows.

10 Of the remedy w^hich faith finds in Jesus Christ only against the first
assault of the first temptation grounded upon the multitude of our sins and
what assurance there is in this case, either upon the sayncts, or upon our
selves.
LEt us then see how in Jesus Christ only we find^ sufficient remedies
against all the temptations of Satan and all dismaying of conscience. First
Satan and our own conscience to show our unworthiness sets before us y^
nature of God perfitly rightwyse as chief enemy and revenger of all iniquity,
Now sith that we find that we be covered with an infinite number of
iniquities, it follows that we can look for nothing, but the reward of
sin, that is to say, death Roma. 5. b
eternal. What can man allege now against this conclusion? Certainly,
nothing, that is auayleable, except it be that which I shall say hereafter. For
first if he have recourse unto Gods mercy, forgetting his justice, he
deceyueth him self. For this is a thing most sure, that Augustine, the merits
of Saints first reason.
God is in such wise merciful, that notwithstanding his justice must be
entierly and fully confessed as we have declared here before in the. 26.
article of the. 8 point. If then we will aledge for a cloak to cover our sins
y^ merits of saints, first we do them great wrong, for as much as David
himself cries out and says: enter Psalm. 143
not Lord into judgment with thy servant, and in another Psalm. 16
place he confesses y^ his works can not attain unto God. And what said Paul
of Abraham that holy person and father of the faithful? If Abraham c says he
had been justified by works, he had wherein to rejoice, but not toward God:
for what says the scripture? Abraham believed God, and that was compted to him
for righteousness. And what says Saint Paul of him self, truly 2. Cor. 4. a
says he, I know not my self to be culpable, but yet am I not thereby
justified. How can we then allege the merits of Saints for a satisfaction
for our sins, for so much as themselves had no refuge but Philip. 3
to the only mercy of god, being pacified by Jesus Christ. Second reason.
Moreover if it had been so that the saints had merited heaven by their holy
life, (the which could not be sith they do testify themselves the contrary)
had they not received already the payment and reward for their merits and
good works, by what right or title then can we allege their merits any
more? Third reason.
For to say that they had so many merits y^ there remained overplus for other,
is that not as much as fal^efy that which they have left us in writing? And what
more? Is it not as much as to say y^ they had nothing to do with the death of
Jesus Christ, because they had in the^ more merytes and goodness then they
needed? And moreover Fowrth reason.
if they had merits more then they needed, by what right know we that they be
ours? Is it because we think that we have bought them? Behold Saint Peter
reproved Simon the Magicien of this false and cursed merchandise: thy money and
thou peryshe together says he, because thou thynckest to buy the gift of
God with Acts. 8. d
money. Behold now how we thinking to honor the Saints dishonor them as
much as we can possible, but now if the works of Saints can take no place or
profit us in this point, what can we find in our selves, or in any other man
living, that can be sufficient? But for to cut of all such false
imaginations, let us consider the reasons following.

First would we not coumpt that man without his wit which would persuade
himself to be quite of his creditour under this color or pretense, to have
dreamed that he had paid his debte, or that an other had paid it for him,
even so do we toward God* when we be not content with the satisfaction of
Jesus Christ only. For what foundation or ground has all the will, works, or
merits of Saints worthyppings, but only the fantasy and imagination of man,
as though God ought to take all things well which we invent or seem well to
us? But contrariwise, here what Jesus Christ says with his own mouth: they
honor me in Math. 7. ^
vain says be, keeping commandments of men: and in another place he
says, when Esai, 1. c
ye come to appear before my face, who required such things of you to tread in
my courts? etc.

Secondly, when we say that we stay upon the only mercy of God, and yet do
allege or think that we have satisfied or paid part altogether, is not this
a derogation to his mercy?

Thirdly, not to be satisfied Roma. 4. a
with the only merits of Jesus Christ, but to go about to ioygne and annexe
other with him, is it not as much as to deny Jesus Christ to be our only
savior and to make him but a Gala. 12. d
savior in parts? Fourthly, is not this the robbing of god of his perfect
justice Roma. 3. d
and so consequently of his divine power when we be so fool hardy to set
against his merits y^ works of man (wherein be so many imperfections: how
excellent so ever they Luke. 17* ^
be) to pacify y^ wrath of god. And yet the Prophet David Psalm. 143. ^
said, enter not Lord into Judgment with thy servant. etc. Let us learn
therefore to answer to the foresaid argument of Satan after an other manner,
that is on this wise. Thou say Satan that God is that perfectly righteous
and revenger of all iniquitye. I do confess, but I will ioygne thereto an
other property of Justice which thou have left out, that is, for as much as
god is righteous, he is content with one payment. Thou wylt say then that
there be infinite iniquities in me which deserve eternal death. I do grant,
but I add more to it which y^ haste maliciously omitted, that is, Roma. 3. ^
that the iniquities which be in me were most sufficiently revenged and
punished in Jesus Christ which has horn the judgment of God in my stead, so
upon this I make my conclusion contrary to thine, that is to say, for as much
as God is righteous and Roma. 3. d
will not be paid double, and Jesus Christ God 1. Lor. 5. d
and man has by one infynite obedience made satysfaction to Roma. ^ d Phil. 2.
a
the infynite majesty of GOD* it follows Roma. 8. a
that my iniquities, can no more fraye nor trouble me, my accountes Colos. ^. c
and debtes being assuredly raised and wyped out by the precious blood of
Jesus Christ which was made accursed Gala 3. b
for me, dying righteous for the 1. Peter. a. b
unrighteous. Upon this we may be sure that Satan will set before our eyes
all our afflictions and troubles, and especially death, Roma ^. v Ephe. 5. b
alleging y^ they be as many sufficient testimonies against us that God will
not forgive us our sins, but we must reply to that concerning afflictions.
First although all kind of afflictions and also death be entered into the
world through sin, yet God when he punishes us, has not ever respect to
our sins as it appears in the history of Job, and z many other places, but
in John. 6. a 1. Peter. 1. d James. 1. a
scorging us he has diverse respects tendynge to his glory and our profit as
shall be said hereafter in the last article of the fowrth point. Furthermore,
although god* does afflict his elect for their sins, until they feel ye
very pains of death, Job. 13. c
yet is he not angry with them as a Judge to condemn them? but as a Father
chastising his children to preserve them from perishing 2. Cor. 6. b Hebr. 12. b
, or give other example 2. Sam. 7
.

11 The remedy which only faith fyndeth in Jesus Christ only against the
second assault of the first temptation grounded upon this, that we be
vnfurnyshed of the righteousness which God requires of us.
THe second assault which satan may make against us, because of our
unworthiness is, that it is not sufficient to have lived without sin, or to
have satisfied for our syns, but is required furthermore y^ man should fulfill
the whole. law, that is to say, that he has loved God perfectly, and his
neighbor as him self. Bring Deuteronomy. 17. d Gala. 3. b Roma. 4. c
forth the^ this righteousness or else how will thou bear y^ curse of the law
and the majesty of god? Now what can all the righteousness of man help us
against this assault? For here is spoken of a perfect obedience according to y^
law which was never found but in Jesus Christ only. Let us learn here again
to appropriate to us by faith another treasure and benefit of Jesus Christ,
that is to say his righteousness. For we Math 3. b (...)p. 2. a ^sa^. ^3. d
know that it is he that has fulfilled al righteousness having perfectly obeyed
God his Father, and perfectly loved his enemies Roma. 5. b
, so y^ he became accursed Galat. 3. b
for them as s. Paul says, that is to wete, he did bear the judgment of the
wrath of God Colos. 1. ^ 2. Cor. ^. ^
for them, to the end y^ we being ^lad with this perfect rightousnes, which is
imputed to us by faith, as though it were properly our own, Ephe. 1. b.
we may be made acceptable before God as brethren John. 1. b.
, and coheyres with Jesus Christ. Now for this point, Satan must perforce have
his mouth stopped, so that we have ye faith which makes proper to us Jesus
Christ with all the riches and treasures which he has to communicate to those
which believe in him.

12 The third assault of the same temptation, grounded upon the natural
corruption or original sin which is within us.
SAtan has yet remaining one assault in the temptation of our unworthiness,
which is this. Although thou have satisfied for the pain of thy sins in the
person of Jesus Christ, and that thou art also clothed with his
righteousness, yet art thou corrupted in thy nature, Roma. 7. c
wherein always remains the root of all sin. How dare thou then appear
before the majesty of God enemy to all uncleanness, Job. 4. d Psalm. 5. c
and also which sees the botome of thy heart Psalm. 44 d Ierem. 1. b
? Now concerning this point, we find yet one easy remedy in Jesus Christ
only upon whom we must stay. But we be yet so enclosed in this mortal Roma.
7. c
body that we do not the good which we would, and yet do feel the sin
Roma. 3. d
that remains in us, and the flesh that strives against the spirit, Galat.
5. c
by reason whereof we be yet defiled in body and soul concerning our selves 2.
Lor. 4. a
, but for as much as by faith we be united, incorporated, 2. Lor. 6. d
rooted, Ephe. 4. d
and Lolof. 2. ^
grafted in Jesus Christ, by whom our nature has been from the first moment
of his conception more fullye Math. 1. d
restored and sanctified, and made more pure, Hebr. 2. d
then ever it was created in Adam for as much l Roma. 6. a
as Adam was made but according to the image of God, and Gene. 1. d
Jesus Christ is very God, who has taken upon him our ^iesh conceived by the
virtue of the holy ghost, this sanctification of Jesus Christ is imputed to us
as our own, then cannot y^ natural corruption (which rests partly yet in
us) come in account Roma. 8. a
, for as much as it is covered and clothed with the holiness of Jesus
Christ, who is much more able to sanctifye and cleanse us before God, then the
natural corruption is to defyle and corrupt us.

13 The remedy against the second temptation, whether we have faith or not.
IN the second temptation Satan shall replye upon this that Jesus Christ is
not dead for all sins for as much as all shall not be saved. Then let us
have recourse to our faith and answer him, that true it is, none but the
believers a Roma. 8. c. 2. Cor. 2. c 1. John. 4. e
do receive the fruit of this passion and satisfaction of Jesus Christ. But
this in stead of desmayinge us does rather establishe us. For that we do know
in our hearts that we have faith whereby it is already said in the third
article of this fourth point, it is not enough only to believe that Jesus
Christ came to save sinners but we must particularlye every man apply and
appropriate Jesus Christ to himself Romans 8. a 1. Cor. 2. d 1. John. 5. d
in such wise that he do conclude with him self, I am in Jesus Christ by
faith, and therefore I cannot perish, but am sure of my salvation, so then to
be assured that we have overcome Satan in these three assaults of the first
temptation, and also to resist the second, we must examine our selves whether
we have this faith or not. The means is to ascend by the effects unto the
knowledge of the cause which works them. Now the effects which Jesus
Christ works in us, when we have apprehended him by faith be of two sorts.
The first is the testimony which the holy spirit brings to our spirits
that we be the children of god, and which makes us cry abba father Roma. 8. c.
in a certain assoraunce. Secondlye, we must understand when we do join and
appropriat to our selves Jesus Christ by faith, it is not by a certain vain
or folish fantasy and Imagination, but really and Roma. 6. a 1. John. 1. c.
in deed although it be spirituallye, in such wise y^ as the soul brings
forth her effects and works being naturallye united to the body, so when by
faith Jesus Christ is given to us to dwell in us, his virtue then brings and
shows forth his force and virtues. The which is understand in the Scripture
by this word regeneration, John. 3. ^ Ephe. 4. ^
because they make us become new creatures, concerning the qualities. Romans 7.
^
And this regeneration has three parts. For as the natural corruption
holds our persons captive both in body and soul, working in us both
sin and death: Likewise the virtue of Jesus Christ comes and takes
possession in us, and brings to us three effects, that is to say, S. Paul
to the Romans, and almost thorowout all his epistles. 1. Pere. 4. ^.
mortifycation of this corruption, which the Scripture calls the old man,
the burying also thereof, and finallye the rysynge and restoringe of the new
man, as S. Paul describes these things. The mortyfication of our corruption
and sin, is the work of Jesus Christ in us, whereby he quenches and
subdeweth by little and little this cursed corruption of our nature, so that it
becomes unable to bring forth her effects in us, which be moouynges,
prouocations, consentynges, and other actions contrary to the will of God. The
burying of the ^ old man is likewise the work of Roma. 6. a
Jesus Christ, by whose force this old man which received the stroke of
death, does continually by little and little diminishe and wear away. And
briefelye, as the burying or sepulture of our bodies is a proceedyng after
death, so is the sepulture of the old man a proceedyng after the death
thereof, whereunto the afflictions wherewith GOD does daily visit i us, are a
great help, with spyrituall and godly exercises, 2. Cor. 4.
which we ought continually to labor in, for to subdue and kill continuallye
this rebellion k which is called flesh in the Scripture, that stryueth
continually against the spirit. Finally ^ the first death to the faithful is
but the fynishing of this mortification and burying of sin, making an end of
the whole battle m. The resurrection of the new man is a work of the same
Jesus Christ, living and raygning in us, Philip. 4. d.
which in kyllinge our corrupt nature gives us incontinent new force and
strength, making it new concerning the quallitie thereof, so that our
understanding Ephe. 1. d.
and judgment, is lyghtened by the pure grace of the holy ghost, and Roma. 8.
c.
governed by the power which we have of Jesus Christ, begins to approve and
esteem those things, which before were counted holy 1. Lor. 2. d.
and abomination. Roma. 8. b.
And also for the second part, the will is Roma. 6. g. and. 8. c.
cleansed and purified to hate fynne, and desires righteousness. Finallye,
all the powers in man Roma. 7. d. Philip. 2. b.
begin to fly and eschew those things which God forbyddeth* and to
follow that which he commands. Behold now both these effects, which if
we feel working in us, the conclusion is infallible, that we have faith, and
consequently Jesus Christ in us unto eternal life as is aforesaid. Whereupon
it appears that all faithful ought most chiefly to have a respect to this,
and to hold fast this precious jewel, which is y^ testimony of the spirit of
God which he gives to his elect Roma. 12. c
by continual invocation and prayer to him, and to make their profit by
continual exercising of good works according to their vocation and the gift
of regeneration which they have received. In which sense it is said he that is
borne of John. 5. d.
God, synneth not, that is to say, gives not over him self to sin, but
resists it more and 1. Pete. 1. b
more, the better to assure them selves of their election and vocation: for
as much as to know certainly this generation, we must come to the fruits
thereof. For (as I said before) man being made free John. 8. e*
from sin, that is to say, from his natural corruption by the virtue of
Jesus Christ dwelling in him, begins to do those things which we call
good works. Wherefore we say as the truth is, that this faith which we speak
of 1. John. 2. b.
can be no more without good works, then shining Sun without light, nor the
fire without heat.

14 Those do slander us falsely, which say, that we disalowe good works.
THey that do say that we disalowe good works because we say that we be
justified by Jesus Christ only apprehended by only faith, do plainly and
falsely slander us. But we confess that to give God all the glory, and
confirm our selves to his holy word* we differ from them in the matter of
good works in three principal points. For in the rest^ it is so far from us
to say that Christians ought not to do good works* and abstain from evil,
that contrariwise we say that he lies falsely, which calls him self a
Christian, and does not study to esche we the evil, and do good. But this
is it wherein lies our difference of this matter.

15 The first difference in the matter of good works is, which be good, and
which be evil.
FIrst, in the distinction of good works and evil works before God, we do
content our selves with the only will of God, and take that for a most
certain rule of those things which pleases or displeases him, and so
consequently that which is good or evil, neither desire we concerning this
poyncte any better witness of the will of God, Psalm. 119 Leuit. 18.
then his holy law, a to the which it is, not lawful to add, or diminishe,
b any thing. Wherefore we hold not those for Deuteronomy. 4. a
good works, which be not stayed, but upon the fantasies of men, what soever
they be, and we say c moreover that it suffiseth not, only to have the word
of Esai. 1. c Math. 15. a
God expressly, to command to do, or not to do, things, but we must also in
doing the works have a respect to gods will, and being assured thereby, to go
forward in good works: for otherwise nothing can be acceptable to God. d For
as saint Paul says, y^ which is don without faith that is to say, all y^ is
done ^ in doubt of 1. Lor. 8. c
conscience, whether it please God or not and so consequently whether God
commanded Roma. 14
it or not, is but sin.

16 which be the most excellent works and the qualities of true prayer
according to the word of God, and the authority of the ancient doctors of
the Church.
Proceeding as we have said before y^ as the law which we call the ten
commandments is divided in two tables, y^ one comprehending those things
which we owe to God, and the other that we owe to our neighbors: so likewise
there are two sorts of good works, the one concerning the service and love of
God, the other to our neighbors. The first does excel the second, even
as much as God does excel any creature. But amongst all the fruits that faith
brings forth universally in all Christians, we think that y^ invocation of
y^ name of God by Jesus Christ is the This is approved through the whole
scripture.
chief, which we call prayer and is to god most acceptable. Whether it be that
we desire any thing of him, or that we render thanks to him. But we desire in
our prayer these which follows.

First y^ our prayers proceed from such James. 1. a Roma. 10. Math. 21. d
Hebr. 4. d
a spirit, y^ trusts assuredly to be heard as far forth as shall be expedient
for us. For s. James says a we must ask with assurance without doubting, for
he that doubts, is like to the foo^e of the sea, tossed and thrown of every
wind. Let not such a man think to receive any thing of y^ Lord. Thus far
S. James. Then follows the second point* that is to say, y^ all prayer which
is not ruled b Roma. 14.
according to the word of god is nothing worth, considering y^ those prayers
that be made without faith are but sin, and where there is no word of God,
there can be no faith, Roma. 10. c.
but only a foolysh and vain opinion, as we have said here before in the.
vi. article. That prayer the^ which is made in an unknown language to him that
prays, is a very mocking of god* 1. Cor. 14. b.
also they that desire things that be not agreeable to Gods word, do
blaspheme his majesty.

And consequentlye it follows that the prayers which be made to any e Roma.
8. Math. 20.
other intercessour and advocate, then to the only Medyatour between God and
man, which is Jesus Christ, does extreme dishonor to God, and to all his
Saynctes, for there is not written in all the holy Scripture any one word of
such manner of doings, but contrariwise expressly commanded to desire all
in the only name John. 14.
of Jesus Christ our only perpetual advocate. Cimo. 2. b
Moreover, if we have need to seek an intercessour which loves us (as we
have in deed) who shall we find that loves us so well as he that gave his
life for us, yea, even then when we were his ennemies? John. 15. b
And if it be needful to have one that has credyte and power (as we have
in deed) then who has such power as he that sytteth, and reigns on the
right hand of God?. And who shall i Math. 26. d
be sooner heard of God the Father then his own dearelye beloved Son, in
whom he most delyghteth, and without whom nothing is Ephe. 1. b.
acceptable. It appears then that only dyffedence and mystruste, has
brought in this custom, not to bonour but to dishonor the Saints, in doings
that which they never did, nor wylled other to do. And if they do allege
our unworthiness* I answer, that for as much as our requests be not
grounded of any worthynes that is in us, but only upon the excellency, and
dignity of Jesus Christ, only the which is promised and communicated to us
by faith, with all his benefytes, so this objection is to no purpose. For as we
can never sufficientlye humble and esteem our felues unworthy in our own
sight, so on the contrary, before we pray (except we will pray in vain)
let us be assured that for as much as we be reco^cyled to God by his son,
which is our only sufficient intercessour and advocate, we can not fail but
to obtain those things which we desire by him, so that it be expedyent for
us* and without this confydence it is impossyble to Homili. 12 de Cananitide.
be heard. Touching this matter Saint Chrysostom says (speakinge of the
woman of Cananee) ^ telme woman how dare thou be so bold to approach unto
him? for as much as thou art a synnefull Woman, and full of iniquitye. I know
says she, what I do: Behold the prudencie and wisdom of this Woman, she
prays not to Saint James, she makes no request to Saint John, she comes
not to Saint Peter, neither respects the company of the Apostles, nor
searches out any one amongst them, but in steed of all these, she takes
Repentance for her guide and companion, and so goes to the sovereign and
only fountain.

Item, he has likewise written that which follows in the same text.

When thou will make suit to a m S. Chriso* in the same place.
man, thou ask what he does: And they well answer thee, he sleeps or he
has no leisure, or peradventure the servant will not answer thee* But unto
God there needs no such things, for in what place so ever thou art, yer that
thou call upon him, be hears thee, there needs no Gentle man usher or
Medyatour, neither Grome of the Chamber, but say have pity upon me my God.

Item, the same Saint S. Chriso. in the homely of the profit upon the gospel.
Chrysostom in another place, says, there needs no Patrones before God,
nor circumstaunces to flatter other to come unto him. But for as much as thou
art alone and have no Patron or advocate, and thou prayest to God alone by thy
self, thou shall surely obtain thy request.

Item, Saint Ambrose reproving the symilytude, which the Papists commonly
do use. They are accustomed (says he) to allege a poor o S. Ambro. upon
the Epistle to the Romans
excuse, saying that they ought to go to God by these means. As by the means
of an Earl they have access to a King. But what man is so foolyshe and
reachlesse of his life, which will give to an Earl that honor which he owes
to a King.

Item, in the same place, they go to the King (says he) by the means of his
officers, because the King is a man, not knowing to whom he ought to give the
charge of the common weal. But to please God, which is not ignorant in any
thing, and knows what each one meryteth and deserves, we have no need of
Advocates to aid us with their suffrages or prayers, but we have need of a
holy thought and meditation. Following then the rule of holy Scripture, and the
authority of the good ancient Fathers, we do esteem and allow true
prayers to be the most agreeable things that Christians may offer to God,
among those commandments of the first table, wherein there is contained an
express confession, as well of the power as of the goodness of God, with the
fear and reverence dew to him only.

Of works of Charity.
In the second place we esteem the works of Charity toward our neighbors
according to the commandment of the second Table, which do proceed of
the true love of God, we being reconcyled to him in Jesus Christ, for whose
sake we love our neighbors although they hate us. For otherwise all that we
do is nothing woorthe, what show or apparaunce so ever it has in our life,
as Jesus Christ declares unto us by the example of the Pharisees.

Of works indifferent.
There are other kind of works, Mark. 6. thorowout the chapt.
which properly of them selves be neither good nor evil, but only having
respect to that end as they may serve to dispose us, or entertayne us, in
those works which be good. These works be fasting, sobrietye, with other
mortifications of our flesh, to the which we may join a virginity, in
those which 1. Cori. 7. cha. whole.
have received the gift of chastity.

And for a general rule, such exercises be so ordered as proceeding from a
heart fearinge God, and loving his neighbor, and that they be so exercised,
that we may be more prompte and ready to serve God, and our neighbors,
according to our estate and vocation, b and so they be worthy to be
highlye esteemed. And doutlesse every Christian 1. Cor. 7. d
ought to fly and esche we such things as shall hinder them to serve God
well, and their neighbors. But the common error of those which does stay
upon external things can not please God, as to put a certain holiness in
such works. For Saint Paul says plainelye, that the kingdom of GOD Rom^.
14. e
lies not in eating or c drinking, and that these be small things in
respect of the 1. Cor. 8. c
piety to wards God, and love toward our d neighbors.

17 The second difference in the matter of good works, is to know from
whence they proceed.
THe second difference in this matter of works, is concerning the very root
or spryng from whence they do proceed. For we deny not simplye that faith and
good works proceed from our intellygence and will, being first prevented,
changed, aided, and accompanied by the grace of God. But before all this we
affirm and say that in searchinge the root or first spring of that little
goodness which is in us, utterly there is no beginning at all of any natural
disposition in us, to receive the grace to the end that such disposition
should be assysted by the second grace. But clean contrary there is
naturallye in us nothing but darkness, Esai. 9. a. Luke. 1. g. Acts. 2. b.
and enemitie against God, Roma. 5. b. Ephe. 2. a
wherefore it was needful y^ god should of his only mercy, first of all
draw us, John. 6. c.
that is to say, to make us altogether new creatures, John. 3. 1. Peter. 1.
concerning the quallyties, lyghtning those which be not only partlye blinded,
but utterly darkness it self, geuinge us hearts to understand, Deuteronomy. 30,
Ierim, 24.
chaunginge our steny hearts into fleshie hearts, Ezech. 11.
creatyng in us pure hearts, Psalm. ^1. Ezech. 16. Ephe. 1.
that is to say, making new altogether that is within us, of a wicked will,
a good and godly will: briefelye, workinge in us to will and also to do.
Philip. 2. ^.
So that the Apostles words be verified, that we cannot only think of our
selves any thing that is good, 1. Cor. b.
and that the children of God have nothing but that which they received by
grace. 1. Cor. 4.
So then for as much as grace must make us good trees before we can bear good
fruit, it follows that there is no meeting together of grace and free Look
about in the. 14. article, the 3. point.
will: for the spirit of God by his pure grace has made us free from sin,
John. 8. c.
in vnyting us by faith to Jesus Christ, from whom we get a new life, to bring
forth fruit to God, 1. Cori. 4. b.
and likewise when our will being made free and works through grace there is
no merits, but only free reward given, not being due. For on ye contrary,
the best works that we can do deserve eternal pain, were it not for the
grace of God, for the best works of them selves do but pollute the grace,
which God has put in them Roma. 4. a. Philip. 3. b.
.

18 The third difference of the matter of good work, is to know whereto they
be good.
THe third difference is yet greater, that is to say, touching the
worthiness of good works, for our part to speak in few words, that for to
understand by what right or title we be assured of eternal life, only
Jesus Christ contenteth Roma. 3. c
us, being given to us, and applied to us by faith only, by the only grace
and mercy of God, as we have said before more at large. And therefore we
detest and abhor this word, merits, or to merit, and confess with heart
and mouth, that concerning the best works which we can do, we count our
selves unprofitable servants, Luke. 17. c Psalm. 16
and that eternal life is altogether of the pure and free mercy and gift of
God. Roma. 9. d
Wherefore I make this argument more then has been said before in the tenthe
article. Good works comes from Jesus Christ dwellinge in us, by whose
power and virtue we do them by grace, as the corrupt nature of Adam, in the
which we were borne, brings forth in us sin. For we must possess Jesus
christ which is y^ good tree, before we can bring forth good fruit in him.
For the cause ought to go before the effect Romans 6. a
. And as S. Paul declares that whatsoever is done without faith Romans 4. d.
is sin, it follows then consequently that faith goes before good works.
For by it only we embrace Jesus Christ. Now he which has true faith, is
immediately justified, being fully quieted and pacified in his conscience. Romans
5. a
How then can good works Justify us? and consequently save us. For we must
of necessity be justified, and so consequently have just title to Salvation,
before we can do any one good work. In this lies all our consolation, that
we have, our only refuge, to the special grace and mercy which is presented
to us, in Jesus Christ only, which is not our Savior and redeemer in part,
but all altogether.

19 To what end good works do serve us before God and before men.
BY this it appears plainly how wrongfully they charge us as though we did
disalow good works: where as on the contrary we do with all our powers
endeavor our selves as much as is possible for us to declare which be the
very true good works, and from what spring or fountain they proceed, that
the simple people be not deceived ignorauntlie. Notwithstanding, we do not
ground our selves in any respect upon our works, neither in part nor in all
phil. 3. d Romans 6. d 1. Cor. 4. a
when we come to declare by what title eternal life is given us, but content
our selves with Jesus Christ only. And also we acknowledge our regeneration
with the fruits proceedinge to our synguler comfort as follows.

First good works serve to profit our neighbors, and also to provoke the
very Infidels to give glory mark. 3. b ^. Pet. 2. c
to God.

Secondly, they assure us more and more of our Salvation, not as causes
thereof, but as testimonies and effects of the cause, to weete of our faith as
we have declared in the thirteenth article. Behold also why it is said that
God rendereth to every manne according to his works, Math. 16. d Romans 2. a
and also that Abraham was Justified by his works James. 2. d
not that our works be causes of our salvation in no wise, (for that our a
feeble foundation and uncertain neither do our works make us righteous e*
1. Cor. 4. ^ philip. 3. d
before God, Romans 3. c. Gala. 2. d
but because our good works be Testimonies and effects of our faith the
which apprehends Jesus Christ our true and only righteousness as has
been said heretofore.

Thirdelye, we know that water is of the nature of his first Spryng. So
likewise, for that our regeneration is never accomplyshed nor fullye perfect
here on earth, but there is continual battle between the flesh and the
Spirit, Gala. 5. d
and there remains I say great and gross darckenesse in our
understanding, 1. Cor. 13
and likewise great rebellyones in Romans 7. ^.
our flesh. It follows then that the best works which may proceed from
the perfectest man in the world, if they were strayghtlie examined, they
should be found none otherwise but de^^lynge the graces of GOD, like as we
see a clear running water which is of it self pure, is defiled and polluted
by runninge through some vile or filthy place. Wherefore David said that no
lyuinge creature is found just before GOD by his psalm. 143. a
works. Also Saint Paul cried* out and said, Romans 7. d
I do not the good which I would do, and the evil that I would not do,
that do I. O miserable man that I am, who shall deliver me from this boddie
of death? Behold how the Saints of God teach us to speak of our best
works, in stead to use this word meriting and of merits. Notwithstanding
we confess the goodness of our GOD to be so great that in consideringe his
Children, not in themselves, but in Jesus Christ his well-beloved Son, with
whom they be united and ioygned by Faith: and also regardinge the fruits of
his Graces, not as they be polluted by our infirmities and weakness, but
because they be as it were proceeded or issued from him, he does accept them
and allow them, yea, even so far as to recompense them Gene. 15. a Math. 5.
b and. 10. d. 2. John. c
as well in this life by many blessings both temporal and Spiritual Math.
19. d 1. Tim. 4. c Math. 25. b
(as is declared in the symmilitude of the Talentes) as also in this celestyall
kingdom according to his good pleasure, not because it is dew to our works,
Romans 4. 2.
as though we deserved them, but by his pure grace and mercy only,
according as God said in his Law, p not that he will pay their merits as
dew to those which love him and keep his commandments, but that he will
show mercy Exodus 20. b
to them.

Fowrthlie, good works be certain testimonies of our Faith, and also do
assure of our eternal Election, for faith is necessarily joined to Election.
Now that this is so much more necessary as the world makes less accoumpt
of it, supposing that the doctrine of election were a certain curious and
incomprehensible thing, which is contrary. Faith is no other thing but an
assurance which we have that the promyses of eternal life appertains unto
us, because we were predestined and elected thereunto. Wherefore all that is
spoken of faith and of the fruytes of faith is spoken in vain, and
unprofitable, except we Join this poynct of election as the only stay and
foundation of all that is aforesaid.

Now when Satan puts us in doubt of our election, we may not search
first the resolution in the eternal counsel of god whose majesty we cannot
comprehend, but on the contrary we must begin at the sanctification which
we feel in our selves to ascend up more hier for as much as our sanctification
from whence proceeds good works, is a certain effect of the faith Romans 8. b.
or rather of Jesus Christ welling in us by faith. And whosoever is united to
Jesus Christ is necessarily called and elected of God to salvation in such
wise as he shall never be rejected nor forsaken. So it appears r John. 9. d
that the sanctifycation with the fruits thereof be as y^ first step or degree
whereby we begin to ascend up to the first and true cause of our salvation, to
weete of our free eternal election: For whosoever says that he believes Romans
10, ^ 1* Ioh. 3. c
, and notwithstanding governs not his life by the spirit of God, declares
well that he is a liar, and deceives himself. For this cause Saint Peter
admonished us to make our 2. Pet. 1. b
vocation and Election sure by good works. Not that they be the cause or y^
foundation of our vocation and Election, (For S. v 1. Cor. 4. a Romans 4. c
Paul declares plainly the contrary.) But for as much as good works bring a
certain testimony to our 1. Pet. 3. d
conscience, that Jesus Christ dwells in us, and consequently we cannot
perish, being elected to John. 6. d
salvation.

20. Remedies against the last and most dangerous temptation, which is*
whether we be saved or not.
HEre rests yet the last and most dangerous temptations of all. Sometime it
happens that Jesus Christ deferreth to call some of his elected until y^ last
hour of their Math. 20. b
life, so ye it seems y^ they be not very well furnished with these virtues
whereof we have spoken, neither did ever feel them, for Luke. 23. f
that ye cause was not as yet working in them, and the cause must go before
the effect. And also sometimes the perfectest and most holiest persons fall
into this extremity, sorrowing and lamenting for that they feel not these
good mocions, but seems that it is utterly quenched in them: and then Satan
brings in these doubts, that where as before they thought they had faith but
was not but a shadow or vain appeara^ce of faith, Or else that whereas they
believed before, now by their own fault the gift is taken from them. Now we
must take heed to resist this temptatyon as most dangerous of all.

Concerning those which feel their vocation to be long ere it come to the^,
yet their assurance is nevertheless grounded and established upon some of
these articles and effects aforesaid. And as for their interior testimony of
conscience, of tentymes it works more lyuelye then in some of those which are
called much sooner, as the experience is well declared in the poor thief
that was hanged by Christ. And concerning the works of regeneration, it is to
be understand that the gretest and most eccellent works Note well
which the holy ghost works in us, is the hate of sin, the love of God,
the assurance of our salvation in Jesus Christ, and the invocation of his
name. Wherefore, he that feels these mocions in him self, although it be
not until the hour of death, has a certain testimony of his true faith*
and consequently of his election and salvation. And for those which feel
those good mocions quenched in them, sorowing and lamentyng, as it happens
sometimes to the holiest and most perfectest persons: Let them consider these
points following to overcome such temptations.

First, for as much as the two operations and effects aforesaid, be as the
two Ankers to hold us fast, and when one fails, to stick the more surer to
the other, until we have gotton strength on both sides again.

As when David and Saint Peter fell so beastly, yet there is no doubt but they
lamented and sorrowed, until they felt the workyng of their regeneration and
sanctification, But being in their temptation, they stayed them selves upon
the Anchor of the testymonye which the spirit of God brought into their
conscience, which caused them not to doubt (not withstanding their fall) but
that they were the children of God, and that their fault was forgeuen them.

Secondly, although both these operations and effects, be very feeble and
weak, yet there is no cause to be discouraged. For it is not required of us for
to believe Math. 17. ^
fullye and perfecttlye but to believe only, in such wise as if one little
spark of faith, and so following one little mocion of the workyng of it, (so
that it be true and unfeignedly, that is to say coming from the true root of
faith) be sufficient to assure us of our salvation. The reason is, for that
our salvation is not only stayed upon our faith (although without faith
none can be saved) but upon him whom we apprehende by faith, that is to say
Jesus Christ. And faith is of such virtue that according to the promise of
God, one little spark thereof, how little so ever it be, does apprehende Jesus
Christ fully and perfectlye.

Yet not withstandyng the greater our faith is, the greater power it has to
join us nearer and nearer, and to graffe us deeper in Jesus Christ. And we
ought to be displeased and to lament, when in steed of goinge forewarde we
recoyle and slide backwarde, and yet the Devil has not won his process.
Although we slide back, so that our slyding bring us to step up again and
go the better forward.

Thyrdlie when we be so lamenting and troubled for the feelynge of our
neclygence and sins, let us seek to the like examples of the Saints which
were as deep in as we, or rather deeper, yet nevertheless they ceased not to
pray, with assurance to be hard because they were the children of God, how
great and beastly sins soever they had committed. Set before us then their
examples not to continue in sin, for they continued not therein when they
were waked of the Lord: but let us follow their repentance and assuraunte
which they had of their salvation. And conclude that Satan is a liar when he
would make us believe that our faith was never good, although for a time the
workinge and effects thereof were bidden, which is as much as to say there
is no fire because there is no flame. Or that the trees be dead in winter,
because there is no green leaves nor fruit, or appearaunce of life.

Fowrthlie, let us have recourse unto the surer and perfecter remedy, which
is the certainetie of our Election established upon the immutable purpose of
God. And to have the certain testimony of this infallible and vnmoonable
Election, although the motions and workinges of faith, seem to be quenched
and perished in us, call to remembrance the days paste of the example of
David, and we shall find most certain testimonies of the favor of God
toward us, so that we shall not need to doubt. Also we may find that
sometimes we had the workinge of faith, and so of our Election and salvation
which were so manifest in us, that the Devil him self can not deny but then
we were in the favor of God, and had true faith. For without faith no man can
please God. But if Satan reply to that, that then we had faith, but now
we have lost it, and that God has taken his grace clean from us. Let us
answer boldly that this is as false a doctrine as the aucthour thereof is a
liar. For those two points be infallible, first God never changes his
purpose and advise. The other is, that which he has once purposed must come to
pass, whatsoever lettes and stoppes do come. Also join the third reason to
this, which is, that faith is a particular gift, and belongs only to the
elect as I will prove. For he that believes is John. 6. d
united and knit to Jesus Christ. And therefore can never dye.

These foundations being laid, I affirm that whosoever has a certain
testimony of his faith once in all his life, may be assured that it is there
still, and shall be until the end, although for a time they feel it not, nor
perceive it. For does it follow that a little child has no reasonable soul
in him, because he has not the use of it? Or that a dronken man has not a
reasonable soul, because that for a time he has lost ye use and feeling
thereof? Peter denied his master with an oath. Was his faith therefore void and
naught? or did the Lord give him a new faith? No, but on the contrary,
according to the prayer that Christ made for him, his faith never failed him
altogether. And as the vytal and lively spirit and strength is not clean out
of him that for a time seems to be rather dead then alive, not only by the
judgment of Physicians, but also by his own feeling. Wherefore let us keep
steadfast this precious testimony of our faith, and keep these infallible
arguments against Satan in this hard battle, assuring our selves, that if
ever faith were in us, it is there still and shall be. Wherefore, we conclude,
that we be the children and elected of God, and we shall never perish, but he
heard and received of him to our amendment: thus calling upon him Note.
which never changes nor alters his purpose, neither will condemn him to
day, that he was determined to save yesterdaye. Let us know then that our
salvation depends upon the eternal providence and will of him that has
given us to his son, who said piainlie that he would not lose one of those
John. 6.
which his Father had given him, nor they should never be rejected. For it is
most necessary that our salvation should remain in surer hands then our own.
But there may be alleged certain reasons contrary to this doctrine, but
they be easily refuted, as is amply declared from point to point, in su^drie
books set forth in our time of this matter.

21. Of two instruments, where with the holy ghost is served to create
faith in the hearts of his elect, to vvitte, the word of ^od, and the
sacraments.
IT has been declared in the Article going before, how it is the holy ghost
which createths us in the Instrumente of the true faith, and which be the
effects and operations thereof in us, that is to say, to apprehend and take
hold of Jesus Christ, in whom only we find all that is required and necessary
to justify and save us. Secondly we must understand with what instruments the
holy Ghost is served to create faith in us, and furthermore by what manner or
how, as we have declared before that he is served with two instruments whereof
we shall speak distinctly.

22 What it is that we call the word of God, and of the two parts, that is
to say, the law and the Gospel.
WE call the word of God the canonical books of the old and new testament,
and no other thing whatsoever it be. And we divide this word into two kinds
or parts, of the which one is called the law, and the other the gospel. For all
the rest depend on the one or other, of these two parts. We call law when it
is distinct from the Gospel, a certain doctrine whose seed is naturally
written in our hearts, the which nevertheless for a more express
declaration, was written of God, and comprehended briefly in the. x.
commandments, by the which he declares to us the obedience and perfect
righteousness, which we owe to his majesty and to our neighbors. Under a
chaungeable condition, Deuteronomy. 27. ^am. 2.
that is to say, either of life eternal (so that we have perfectly fulfilled
the whole law withont breakyng any one point) or else death eternal for lack
of the entier fulfilling and accomplishing the contents of every parcel of the
commandments. We call the Gospel or Euangelie (that is to say good news)
a certain doctrine revealed from heaven, and Matthew. 19. John. 1.
altogether surmounting the natural sense of man: by the which word God Roma.
3.
declares to us, that he will save us freely by his only son, so that we
embrace and accept him by faith, as our only wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification, and redemption, 1. Cor. 1. d
by the which also I say he testifies to us these things, yea in such wise,
that incontinent he renueth 1 1. Cor. ^.
us through the same word, to embrace the goodness which there is offered to us.

23. What difference there is betvveene the law and the Gospel.
THese things be greatly to be noted, for it may justly be said, that y^
ignorance of this distinction between ye law and the Gospel, is one of the
principal causes and roots of all the abuse, which has corrupted, and yet does
corrupt the whole Christianity, because the most part of men blinded by the
just judgment of God, have never well considered, into what malediction and
curse the law has brought us, neither for what purpose it was ordained of
God. And concerning the gospel they have almost esteemed it to be no other
thing, but an other law more perfect than the old, from whence immediately did
spring this distinction between precepte and council with ye whole ruin of
al ye benefits of Jesus Christ. But we must consider these things more nerer.
It is easy to gather of that which has been said in the former article, what
is common both to the law and the Gospel, and what each has properly
belonging to it self. Hebr. 1.
They have this in common: both be of one only very God, who remains
continually like unto him self, so that we may not think that the one
abolisheth the other, concerning the substance, but contrary, the one
establysheth the substance of the other. As we shall say hereafter* Romans 1^.
They both do purpose and set forth to us one God only, and one
righteousness in substance, Roma. 3.
wherein consists the perfyte love of GOD, and our neighbor. But behold
where the dyfference lies. The law is naturally in man, in whose heart God
prynted and engraued it from the creation. Roma. a. 1.
For those precepts which God did declare a long time after in the two
tables of his law, was not to make a new law, but only to quycken and
revive the law natural, which by little and little was quenched and blotted out
in the hearts of men through the corruption of sin. Roma. 7.
But the gospel is a doctrine supernatural, y^ which our nature could never
attayn, neither could allow without ye special grace and gift of god, 1. Cor.
1.
who reveled it unto Adam sone after his fall, as Moses recites, Gene 3.
and after to the patriarchs and Prophets, from generation to generation as
seemed good to him, Roma. 1. Luke. 1.
until such time as he sent Jesus Christ his son personally, which declared
John. 15.
and fulfilled all that is contained in the gospel: and also declares it unto
this day, and will declare it until the end of the world by the preaching of
the same word instituted in his Church. John. 17 Matthew. 28. 2. Colloss. 5.
Furthermore the law declares to us the maie^^y and justice of God severely
and straightly: Hebr. 12.
the gospel declares to us the same justice, but so as it is appeased and
satisfied through mercy, Hebr. 1^.
as it is declared in the third point. 26. article.

Thirdly the law sends us home in to our selves, to fulfill the righteousness
which it declares and requires of us, that is to say, the entire and perfect
fulfylling of the commandments, without omytting or failing in any point,
and so sets before us our curse and malediction, and subdueth us under it
as the Apostle declares. Romans 3 c. Gala. 3.
But the Gospel shows us where we shall find that which we have not, and
fynding it, how we may enjoy it, and so deliver us from the malediction and
curse of the law. Romans 3. c Gala. 3. b
For a conclusion, the law pronounces us blissed and happy in fulfilling it
perfectly, nothing left out nor omitting, the Gospel promises us salvation in
believing, that is to say, in embracing him by faith, who has entirely and
fully those things which we do lack, yea and more than we do lack. Now these
two couenantes, that is to say, to do that which ye law commands, or believe
that which God offreth in Jesus Christ, be two things not only most hard and
difficil, but utterly impossible to our corrupt nature ye which cannot only
so much as think a good thought as says S. Paul. 2. Corin. 3. Phillip. 1. 2.
Thessa 3. ^.
Wherefore we must join yet an other fourth difference, which is, that that
law does but declare unto us, yea rather augment our evil, and does increase
our conde^natio^, not by her fault (for the law is good and holy) but because
that our corrupt nature is inclined and inflamed to sin, so much ye more as
it is reproved and threatened, as S. Paul declares by his own example, Roma.
7.
but the Gospel over and beside ye declaration of the remedy and medicine
against the malediction of the law, then immediately being joined and
accompanied with the virtue and power of the holy ghost, regenerateth us (as we
have said here before) creating in us the instrument and mean to appropriate
to us this medicine. Acts. 26. c
To speak more plainly, the Gospel declares not only to us barely and
simple our Salvation, by the ryghteousnes of Christ Jesus in believing, but
also the holy ghost with the same gives us power and strength, to believe
Acts. 16.
and to perceive and see the fruit and profit of Jesus Christ, which it
declares to us. So that now the law which killed and damned us in our
selves, now saves us in Jesus Christ through faith. Roma. 3.
For this cause I said, that the law and the Gospel be not contrary in the
substance of the righteousness, which we ought to bring before GOD, but
only in the mean how to have his righteousness For the law searches it in
us, and that with good right, not regarding what we can or may, but what we
owe: Gala. 3.
forasmuch as man by his only fault, has brought himself detter, and not
able to pay, and therefore is not discharged, although he be not able to
satisfy therefore. And the law doothe us no wrong to demand of us that
which we owe, although we can not pay it, but the Gospel does temper this
rygour by the mercy of God, without diminishyng any part of the divine
Justice.

We learn to pay by him, who has set himself detter and payer for us, which
has put himself I say, in our place, and has paid our debt, as the
principal detter, even unto the vttermoste pennye, Colloss. 2. c
in such wise that the rygoure of the law, which did before fear us, now
comfort us in Jesus Christ, for as much as life eternal is due to those,
which have fully obeyed the law and Jesus Christ has fulfilled the same for
us. So it follows, that according to the extremity and rigor of the law,
Salvation can not fail to those 1. Cor. d. Philip. 3.
which by faith be united and incorporated into Jesus Christ.

24 After what manner the preaching of the law serves the holy Ghost.
Understanding well the distinction of the two kinds of the word of God,
that is to say, the law and the Gospel. It is easy to understand how the
holy Ghost is served with them for an instrumente of our salvation. For it is
not to be doubted, but the holy Ghost does join them to the use they were
ordained. For as much then as we be al so blinded, whylest our corruption
raygneth in us, that even we forgette our own blyndenesse and ignorance,
John. 9. b
and cease not to quench out the small light of understanding which has been
left to us, to make us more inexcusable, Roma. 1.
we rejoice and please our selves in that which ought most to displease us.
First, before all things it is requisite that the spirit of God who is al
goodness, and full of all piety, do make us to understand perfectely the
depthe of the malediction and curse wherein we now stand, which he can not
better do, than in setting before us the declaration of his law, what we
ought to do, and also what we be. As the color of black is never better
set forth than when white is set by it, Roma. 3.
so the spirit of God begins by the preaching of the law wherein we may
see what we do owe, and what we be not hable to pay. And consequently how
near we be to our condemnation, if there be no otherwise found some remedy.
And also the inuinsible dullness which always has raygned in the world, and
raygneth yet more than ever it did, declares sufficiently how necessary it
is that God should begin at this end, to draw us to himself, that is to
say, in declaring unto us, in how great and evident dangers those be which
make least account of it. For the law was not given to justify us, (for if it
were so the Gospel were not needful, and Jesus Christ dyed in vain, as
says Saint Paul) Gala. 2. d
but to condemn us, and to show the Hells al open to swallowe us. And also to
abase and bring down our fearce and hye pride, declaring to us the multitude
of our sins, and the wrath of God, which he declares and pronou^ceth from
Heaven against us. Roma. 1 ^ Gala. ^.
Nevertheless, the world is thus far blinded, that not only they search
their salvation, in those things which condemn them. That is to say, in
their works, either partly or all together.

But also in steed to attain to Jesus Christ, the only remedy against what
so ever may accuse them before God. They cease not to heap laws upon laws,
to their own conscience, that is to say, condemnation upon condemnation, as
though the law of God condemned them not deep inoughe. Collo. 2. Gala. 4.
Like as if a prisoner to whom the prison door were open, and in stead to go
out, would lock him self in wyllyngly, further and further, tourning the
liberty which he forsakes into a straighter prison. So now ye may behold
the first use and profit of the preaching of the law* which is the
declaration of our innumerable sins, for to displease us, and make us sorry,
and to humble and throw down our selves to the uttermost, and also to kyndle
in us the first point of repentance, which they call contrition, from whence
follows the confession of sins toward God. For that man will never come
to the Physician to be healed, which thinks not himself to be sick: so
there be no people more unapt to be taught and lyghtned of god unto salvation,
than those which think they understand and see clearly of themselves. But for
lack of understanding, they be our whelmed and doubled in the darkness
wherein they were borne, John. 9.
and so swallowe them selves continually therein.

25. Of the other part of the word of God called the Gospel, of what
authorite it is. Wherefore, how, and to what end it is written.
AFter the law, comes the Gospel, the use whereof cannot be better
understand than by the observation of these points which follow.

First, as there is but one Savior, Matthew. 1. Acts. 4. 1. Tim. 2.
so there is but one only doctrine of salvation, which is called the Gospel,
Roma. 1.
that is to say, glad tydyngs, or good news, the which has beenefully and
perfectly declared and signified to the world, by Jesus Christ, John. 15. c.
his Apostles and Euangelystes, John. 17. 1. Corin. 1^.
the which have faithfully written and registered it, Ephc. 2. b. 1. Peter. 1. d
that we might avoid the suttilties and crafts of Satan, which would more
easly, were not the Gospel, spread forth his lies under the name of the
Gospel, the which nevertheless he cease not to do continually by the just
vengeance of God, against those which have always loved darkness better
than light. And where we say that the Apostles and Euangelystes have
faithfully written and registered all the Evangelical doctrine, we do
understand three points.

The first, that they have not added or put to any thing which was given them
in charge, concerning the substance of the doctrine. Collo. 1. d 2. Timo. 3.
For Christ said to them, go ye and preach all those things which I have
Matthew. 28.
commanded you. And as Saint Paul protests in writing to the 1. Cor. 1^.
Corinthians.

The second is, that they have omitted nor left out nothing, which is
necessary to salvation. For then had they been unfaithful in their charge
and office, the which could not be. And also we see what S. Paul and S.
Peter i Act. 20. Gala. 1. b.
2 Peter. 1. d.
witnesses according to Jesus Christ's words. And S. Augustine plainly
declares and says, true it is that the Lord has done many things the which
be not all written, for the Evangelist l John. 15.
testifies, that Jesus Christ has n Augustine upon the* 11. of John. tract*
49*
said and done many things, the which be not al written, but they have
written those things which ought to be written, and which is sufficient for the
salvation of all belouers.

The third point is, that that which they have written is so plainly written
that the most simple and ignorant of all the world, if the fault be not in
them selves may learn what is necessary to their salvation. 1. Cor. 1.
For else wherefore was the Gospel written in a language that all might
understand Corin 14.
it, and also in such a manner of speaking, which was most familiar and
acquaynted among the people, that was possible to be chosen. 1. Corin. 2.
Therefore said S. Paul, that if the Gospel be hidden, it is hidden to those
which perish, whom the god of this world has blinded their senses and
understanding, that is to say, the unbelievers. 1. Corin. 4.
And certainly the experience has declared always, that God has not called
the most wise and of greatest knoweledge, but the simple and ignorant of the
world, Esaias. 29. Luke. 10. 1. Corin. 1.
much less would he hyde it, or so darken his doctrine that it should not be
understand of all men, whereof we gather two conclusions to this purpose.

The first, that nothing is Gospel which men have added to the word of God
written, or dyminyshed from it, but all is mere superstition and corruption of
the true and only Gospel of our Lord, Gala. r. 2. Timo. 3. Matthew. 15.
as Saint Paul has spoken. And Saint Hierome writing of this matter y^
says he, which is spoken without the authority of the holy scripture, is
easelie confuted and to be rejected and dispersed* The ^ome upon the 23. of
saint Mathe. v.
The second conclusion is that those which say that it appertains not but to
certain person^ to read the scripture, and for that cause will not have it
translated into the vulgar tongue, for fear that simple Women and other people
should read it, Roma. 1. b Galat n. 3. Math. 11. 1. Cor. 14.
those be the* very right Antichrists, and instruments of Satan, Math, 23.
fearing that their abuse should be discovered by the coming of the light.

26. How the Gospel comprehends in substance, all the books of the old
testament.
FUrthermore it is not our mind, neither do we understand this word
Gospel or Euangelie as the Papists have accustomablie called and used it.
That is to say certain pieces of Chapters rent or divided without purpose or
reason of the books of the four Eua^gelystes, or the Epistles of Saint Paul
in their Mass: but we do comprehend under this word Gospel, not only
all the new Testament, but also all that which has been prophesied to come,
or promised in the old Testament touching Jesus Christ Acts. 26. John. 5
Roman. 1
. For as we have said, the Gospel is the only mean by the which GOD from
the beginning of the world has always saved his elect, Hebre. 1 Acts 4.
and therefore began to declare it in the beginning of Gene. ^
the world to Adam, as Moises declares, and afterward it was declared and
preached manifestly and plainly by Jesus Christ himself in his own person
and by his Apostels Roman, 1. a ^. Peter. 1
. We call Gospel that happy tidinges which GOD by his only grace and mercy
has declared to his Church from the beginning of the world, that is to say,
whosoever believes in Jesus Christ, shall be saved Roman. 5 John. 6
.

27 How it is to be understand that we have spoken of the authority of the
word written, and if it be necessary to translate it into all languages.
THirdly, when we say that the Gospel so written and regystred as God has
given it us, Romans 1.
is the only ordinary mean, with the which the spirit of God is served to
save man, by reason whereof this word is called the word of life John. 6.
Acts. 1. Philip. 2.
and of reconciliation 1. Cor. 5.
: We do not rest nor stay upon syllables, neither upon paper and ynke,
neither upon a Gospel hanged about ones neck, or read, spoken, or pronounced
only as these Charmers do their charms, neither a Book finely carved and
gylte, or worshipped by sensing, and other fine inventions: but exclude all
fantastical inventions, which ever have served the Devil. and understand
that to be the Gospel which is well and truly preached d Roma. 10 1. Pet. 1.
and expounded, so that the substance thereof be well understand by the
people, and to lay it up in their hearts, where it may bring forth the
fruit of true repentance by faith Mark. 13. Acts. 10
, as Saint Paul and Saint Peter have expresselye declared. Also Jesus Christ
did not say to his Apostels, John. 18.
go read the Gospel in an unknown tongue, and woorshyp the book wherein it
is written, but he said, go and preach the Gospel to all Creatures. But
how shall they believe without understanding? Roman. 10.
For faith comes by hearing: as says Saint Paul. And how shall they
understand that which is soong or read in an unknown tongue, or not
syncerelye and truly expounded? 1. Cori. 14
How also shall those be confyrmed in the holy and true doctrine, and
comforted in all their temptations, and advertised to know the false doctrine
from the pure exposition of the Christian religion, Roma. 5 2. Timo. 3.
but in meditation and readyng of the word of God Psalm. 1.
night and day, as says the Prophet David, and conferryng together
diligently the sextes of the holy Scripture? Acts. 17 John. 5
And so has it been always used in the Church, until the Devil by the
just punyshement of God, did put away this light, to bring in his darckenes
before it was perceived. Sayncte. Peter is wytnes, wryttyng to all the
faithful when he prayseth them for the diligence which they took to Read
and understand the Prophet 2. pet. 1,
rightly. For he knew when the Lord had said to him feed my sheep John.
21.
, was to be understand of the preachinge of the word of life Acts. 20.
. As Saint Paul expounded it and practiced it.

Yet notwithstanding, we do not say, that every one ought to be a Doctor
and expositour of the holy Scripture. For this office appertains to those
which be called and ordained lawfullye to do it in the Church. Roma, 10.
But we speak of reading the Scripture, to be confyrmed in that which has
been expounded, and to reject the false Doctrine of false Pastors, and
Teachers. And we deny that the reading of the holy Scripture, and the
preachinge of the same (for the which the Doctors and Pastors be ordained in
the Church, 1. Cor. 4. 1. Cor. 1*
and not to Sacrifice Hebr. 10
a new Jesus Christ, or to bring in a strange Language among the common 2.
Cor. 4.
people) makes heretics. But on the contrary, there is none other mean or
way in the world, to drive away all heresies 2. rimo. 3.
. And whosoever takes away or lets the readyng of the Scripture, takes
away incontinent the only means of consolation Roman. 15. James. 1
, and the salvation of the poor people Luke, 1 Acts. 13. Ephe. 1
.

28. How the holy Ghost is served with the exterior preaching of the Gospel,
to create faith in the hearts of the elect* and to harden the reprobate.
FOurthly we say, that as this exteryour preaching of the Gospel is a savor
or odor of death to the Rebels, which harden them selves, like wise is it the
savor or odor of life to the children of God, 1. Corin. ^
not that this force and virtue to save is in the noise or sound of the
word, or that it comes from the power of him which Preaches, 1. Corin. 13
but because the holy Ghost of whose office we speak, is served with this
external Preachinge, as with a trunk or conduite, which enters and pearseth
unto the very depthe of the spirit, as says the Apostle, Hebre. 4. James 2,
1. Peter. 1
for to make by his only grace and goodness the understanding of the
Children of God capable and meet to conceive and understand this high
mystery of their Salvation by Jesus Christ Acts. 16, Ephe. 1.
Moreover to reform and renew their judgments, whereby they may approve
that to be the sapience and wisdom of GOD, which our sense and reason
esteems to be folly 1. Corin. 3
. Moreover to correct and change their will, so that with an ardent affection
they may embrace and appropriate to them selves the remedy which is given
them, and showed forth in Jesus Christ Philip. 1. Acts. 3.
against despair, into the which without the same they should fall perforce
headlong through the preaching, of the law. Ephe. 2.
Now ye may see how the holy Ghos by the preaching of the Gospel heals
the wound which the preaching of the law has discovered and laid open.
Roma. 6.
Here ye may see how the preaching of the Gospel creates in us the gift of
faith which comes incontinent, and apprehends in Jesus Christ all that is
necessary to salvation, as has been showed heretofore.

26. Another fruit of the preaching of the law, after the preaching of the
gospel begins to work.
Now among the benefytes of Jesus Christ dwelling in us, as it has been
declared, this is not the least, to create in us a pure heart Psalm. 51. 2
to know, Ierem. 2.
to will, and to do that which is of God, Phil. 2. b
that is to say, to take pleasure, and to study to serve God Romans 7. e
in steed where we were before slaves of sin, Romans ^.
enemies of God, Ephe. 2.
and could not only think any good 2. Cor. 3.
By this means the preaching of the law begins to change the effect in
us, after that our disposition is changed, in such wise, that in steed where
it made us afraid, it comfort us, 1. John. ^ 2. Peter. ^
in steed where it showed us our condemnation ready prepared, it serves us
now for a guide to show us Ierem. 31 Roma. 7
the good works, into the which we be prepared to walk in them. Ephe. 2
In steed that it was a yoke unpleasant and importable, now it is agreeable
to us, easy and light. Math. 1^
There rises now no more but a sorrowfulnes for that we cannot obey it
wholye and altogether as we would, because of the rest of our corruptions
that been in us, which strive against the spirit. But faith which Roma. 7
is the testimony of the spirit of God, testifying in our hearts, Roma. 8.
assures us, that the malediction and curse of the law is wyped out, Roma. 8.
by the blood of Jesus Christ, with whom we be united and knit. Also, for as
much as we be assured by the same faith, that the spyrite of God shall be
vanquisher, and have the victory, although it seems that he taryeth long,
Romans 6.
but especially* death shall be the means of our victory John ^ 1. Corin. 5
H^b^^. ^.
. This heauynes and sorrow does not thrust us into any despair, but inciteth
and moves us fervently to pray to our father* to fortifye and strengthen us
more and more. ^oma. 8
So that by this means shall be accomplished and fulfilled in us from degree
to degree the rest of true penance that is to say, of the true conversion and
repentance, the which begins by contricion or feeling of sin, and ends
by amendment of all that which is in man within and without* Philippi. 3
Wherefore we do conclude, that necessarily must follow in all true repentaunt
bartes, the confession of their faults, before whom it appertains, that is
to say, before those which have been offended. And namely, before all the
assembly of the Church, if it be needful, with the restitution and
satisfaction toward their neighbor, according as it may conveniently be
done, considering that without these things repentance can be but feigned and
counterfeit. And now ye may perceive easily, that we refuse not true
repentance and confession, but contrariwise we require it as necessary to
salvation, and confess that true confession was ordained of God. For we do
not burden and torment the consciences of the people, with that which the
Papists have invented, in the steed of the true confession and repentance,
nor appoynte to God any other satisfaction then the sacrifice of Jesus Christ
only.

30 The second mean which the holy Ghost uses to make us rejoice in Jesus
Christ* and wherefore the Lord is not only content with the simple preaching
of his word.
WE have said before, that the Sacraments August. 2 book de doctr* christia.
be the other means and instruments wherewyth the holy Ghost does
appropriate and join to us, that which is necessary to our salvation. But for
as much as by this word Sacrament is sometimes understand all those signs
by the which some sacred and spiritual thing is signified to us, we must
first restrain the signification according as our nature may S. Chriso hom^l.
83* upon saint Matthew.
bear it. And is to be understand that our God moss mercifullye using our
poor and misserable nature as a mean to declare his goodness and pacyence
the better to us, is not only content to declare to us simply the means by
the which it pleases him to save us, and to use an incomprehensible sweetness
and mercy, in teaching us his will by mortal men like to our selves, Deuteronomy. 18,
philip. ^ ^, Cori. 5
and as it were dallying with us as nurses* do with little children: ^. These. ^
but principallye for to heap in us a number of his infynite mercyes and
goodness, would join to the preaching of his word certain things to do*
which should come to move and styre up the most rude and grossest minds of
the world, to believe more and more, that God does not mock them, in
declaring to them eternal life by so merueylous a mean, which is the death
of his own son So that by such signs* and means of doing all their
understanding is moved to give consent to y^ evangelical doctrine, as though
they were all ready in possession and fully enjoying that salvation which is
promised them. As we see (if it be lawful to make comparison of y^ affairs
of the world with such inco^prehensible goodness of God) now is an open
court of justice, when the possession or property of a thing is judged to one*
they use certain ceremonies and means in doing the act of taking possession.
Or in execution of process likewise. For to assure us* and also to witness to
others that such or such thing* appertains to us, namely in our cynyll and
wordly affairs. Or when a Notarys does signify a testimonial, and put to
the names of the Witnesses, beside* all that, he puts to the Seal of the
Office or City, where the instrumente is made and passed, to make the
Instrument appear to be of greater credyte and authority. Romans 4,
So likewise from the beginning of our Lord God, not being only contented to
show unto Adam the grace and goodness which he would do to his Church by
Jesus Christ, but did join to it the sacrifices, as the lively figures of the
sacrifice to come of Jesus Christ, for the better assurance of the faith in
the children of God, according to their hope. ^^b^. 11.
And afterward in renewing this covenant of grace and mercy to Abraham, he
joined to it the Sacrament of Circumcision Gene. 1^
. And also in the time of Moses he joined to it the sacrament of the Pascal
Exodus 12
Lamb, with other ceremonies almost infinite, which were also Sacraments
representyng unto them those things which Jesus Christ should fulfill in his
time, that is to wit, all the mystery of our salvation, as the Apostle
declares playnelye in the Epistle to the Hebrews. But when the time ordained
was come* then Jesus Christ by his coming ended all those things which
figured and were shadows of his coming. Yet nevertheless, although he has
ended the shadows and ancient sacraments, and has brought into the world
another more greater light to worship God from hence forth, with service more
pure and spiritual, and more agreeable to the nature of God which is a spirit
John. 4
: Yet nevertheless having respect to our gross and rude nature, would join
certain Sacraments and exteryour signs to his word, the better to increase
and entertain our faith. For although Jesus Christ has already gotten us the
kingdom of heaven: yet we possess it not but by hope, Roman. 8 1. Corin. 1^
so long as we be here upon earth, wherein it is necessary that we do
increase and persevere unto the end Ephe. ^*
.

31 The diffinition of that which is called a Sacrament.
THese ^hynges considered it is easy to be understand what we call
Sacraments. In this present treatise we call them certain signs, marks, or
visible testimonies ordained of God, for the continual use of all his church
added and joined by himself to the word of his Gospel, whereby he will
freelye save us in Jesus Christ his son. And also be added and joined the
better to represent to our outward senses as well those things which he
lets us understand by his word, as also those which he works inwardly in
our hearts, Romans 6. Galat. 3. ^. Cor. 1. 10 Augu. 10 upon* John 8.
to seal and ratify in us the salvation Roma. 4
which we do not possess as yet but by faith and hope. Moreover for to
stir and quicken us on our part, as well concerning* our duties toward
his majesty, a^ to our neighbors* ^. Cori. 10.
, according to the tenor of the couenaunte which is to labor and strive
continually by the force and virtue of the spirit which he gave us Romans 6.
Ephe. 6.
, in serving him as our God, and loving our neighbors for the love of him
John. 13. ^. John. 4
.

32* The difference between the sacraments of the old covenant* and those
of the nevve.
THis difinition appertains as well to the sacraments of the old, as to the
new covenant, and shows the difference of them.

The first, those of the ancient alyance or covenant were ordained but until
y^ coming of Jesus Christ: 1. Cor. 10. Heb* 20
but those of the new alliance, be established until the consummation and end
of the world Heb. 12.
. The second difference that those sacraments of the ancient alliance,
directed the faithful to Jesus Christ which was to come: but those of the new
alliance to Jesus Christ already come 1. Cori. 10 S. Augu. 19. cap. 14 against
Fa^stine.
. The third difference is in the signs and ceremonies which differ much 1.
Cori. 10 Augusti. 2. book against Parmeniu^ c. 37 S. Augu. in y^ epistle to
Lam. ^ 3. book of Christian doctrine.
.

The fourth is in the number of them, and in the measure of the signification.
For as says Saynct Augustyne, ^ we have now fewer Sacraments then our
elders, more easy, and of better signification, and by cons^q(...) of more
greater efficacy* and power. Here be all the dyfferences which we find
^^Spand^^d to conclude the one and the other (...) proceed^ and come from (...)
(...) that is to say from the goodness of God Hebre. 1.
only, and they both tend(...)ne other end but to make man (...) of Jesus
Christ; to enjoy eternal(...)* as S. Paul declares, 1. Cor. 10*
and also Saint Augustine Augustine ^ upon John. 26. tract. ^ alias.
.

33. VVherby the false sacraments be known from the true and the abuse of
them from the right usage.
FOrasmuch as it appears by the diffinition aforesaid, that the sacraments
be ordained of God, to be as ^^ales of the ^^angell(...)l*doctrine preached* in
the Church of God, it follows y^ where there is no word o^ God, there can
neither be faith, nor sacrament, Augustine upon John 13. ho(...)*
whereof ^nfue^h two things well to be noted although they have been very evil
considered heretofore.

The first, all the ceremonies and sacraments* instytuted by the inuencion of
man, whatsoever they be* are even as many sa^religes against God. For as it
belongs to him only to promise, also it pertains to him to put to y^ seal.
Galath. ^. 1. Cori. 1^
Wherefore al those which have presumed to make new Sacraments, or to add to
those which he has ordained in his Church, by his word written, or
diminished from them, have falsified the seals of his majesty. Wherefore we be
contented and satisfied with those which God has promised us and appointed by
his word.

The second, that where the word is not preached and expounded in
thadministration of the sacraments, but only lyfted up and ministered in an
unknown language and mingled with the invention of man's brain* there must
needs be an horrible pollution, and profanation of the holy Sacraments of
our Lord God.

34. Which things be common to the preaching of the word and to the
sacraments.
IT is necessary to understand and know what it is that the simple word of
GOD has in common with the Sacraments, and likewise, the difference between
these two instruments.

First, both these two instruments do serve the holy Ghost to one end,
that is to say, to unite and knytte us nearer and nearer to Jesus Christ to
receive our salvation Roma. 4. 1. Cor. 10
.

Secondly, the holy Ghost is served with both those instruments, and yet
does not communicate or impart to them his virtue, but all the virtue springs
from him only Roma. 2
.

Thirdly, as we have said before, the word serves us to no purpose, except it
be preached intelligibly, and as it may 1. Cor. 2.
be understand: and further except that which it declares and represents to
us, that is to say. Jesus Christ with all his goodness, be received by the
faith of those which hear it. Also the same ought to be understand by ye
sacraments, that is to say, if we bring not faith, which is the only means
to receive that which is preached to us represented and offered by the same
word, much less do they serve us to salvation. But contrariwise, in despysing
them by our incredulity, and rejecting that goodness which god offers with
the same to us. we seal our own condempnation Augustine 13. hom up on Ihon.
1. Co. 10. 11 1. Peter. 3 Acts. 15 August. 13. book of Christian doctrine.
. Notwithstanding, as the Gospel cease not of his nature to be the word of
life and salvation, although the wicked turn it into odoure of death and
dampnation by their contempt, so the Sacraments cease not to be true
Sacraments, although they be mynistred by unworthy August. 26. homil. upon S.
John 2. book against Parmemu^ 8. c the second book. 22. c against Perilion.
persons, or received unworthily, for so the malice of man can not change
the nature of the ordinance of God.

Fourthely, as the seed how good so ever it be, brings not fourth fruit
at the instant that it is sown, but continues a certain time in the earth,
so it is not convenient to restrain the fruit and virtue of the word of God,
to the same hour that it is sown, or the sacraments to the same instaunte
that they be ministered, but the fruit shall be showed in the elect when it
pleases God.

35 What things belong properly to the sacraments having respect to the
end wherefore they were ordained of God.

Behold in general the pryncypall points which these two things have in
common. And follows what they have properlye by them selves. First as the
sacraments be appertayninge and dependynge upon the a August. 13. homil upon S.
John.
word of God, and also be ordained to seal that which is already in us, that
is to say the union and coniunctio^ which we have already by faith in Jesus
Christ Roma. 4
it appears plain, lie that the true preachinge: of the word, must
symplye* proceed and go before, and also there ought to be an vnfaygned
confession of faith, before the Sacraments be dewlye mynistred: I understand
of those which be of age and dyscression: concerning Baptism of young
Children of the faithful, there must be a partycular respect, of the which
we shall speak hereafter. For as in all Churches well reformed if it happen
to receive a paynyme or infidel, he oughtto be Cathechument, that is to say,
Discypline, and to make, confession of All the Fathers make mention of this
custom.
his faith before h^^ be receyned, to Baptysme, c Acts. 4. g. and n. c.
which is a publyke and autentike ratificatio^ of our Christiantye. Therefore
Saint Paul especially required that every one examyne himself before he
come to the table of our Lord 1. Cori. 1^


Secondlye there is a dyfference between these two things (as it appears by
that which has been said before.) For the word may be mynystred without
Sacraments, August. in the questions upon ^^ Leuiticall question.
but the Sacraments can never be lawefullye mynystred without the word:
Augustine 13. homily upon saint John.
as it may be that an instrument may be of valewe without a seal, but the
seal is utterly unprofitable, namely not called a seal if there be not a
certain instrumente to the which it may be put for a confyrmation.

Thyrdelye, for as much as without faith we have no part with Jesus Christ,
and so consequentlye without faith we have no part in the kingdom of heaven,
Romans 14. d John. 3. d Hebre. 11. b
for the preachinge of the word is the only ordinary mean wherewith the holy
ghost is served, to create in us true faith, as we have showed here before
according as saint Paul Roma. 10. c
says, that faith comes by hearing.

Whereupon we conclude that the preaching of the word of God is the only
necessary mean to salvation, for those which be within age of discretion,
except it please God to work extraordynarilye in the heart of some one, and so
has not the use of the Sacraments. But to bring for the fruit, true faith
must go before, as we have declared Hebre. 11. b
and he y^ has faith has attained to Jesus Christ, and consequentlye eternal
life: John. 6. c
It follows necessarilye that first we must have title and right to eternal
life, before we can discern rightlye the Acts. 4. g and. 8. g. and. 10
Sacraments. But those which have faith, and yet have not the means to be
partakers of the Sacraments, shall not be deprived nor excluded from
salvation. For the necessity of the Sacraments extended not so far as to
exclude those out from eternal life which cannot enjoy the use thereof, but
thus far to him that despises them, which no doubt is an act of infidelity,
and worthy of damnation, if he reknowledge not his fault. As S. Bernard has
very well declared, Bernarde in the. 77. epistle to Hugo S. Vic^or.
Saying that it is not y^ privation or lack of Baptism which damneth some:
dut the contempt of it. Wherefore, we do content our selves with that order
which is appointed in the scriptures, as is aforesaid.

Now he ought not to be called a contemner of the Sacraments, which has not
the means to communicate with the^ according to y^ rule of the scriptures
established in the Church of God.

Fourthly, for as much as the simple word preached, touches but one of our
senses, but the Sacraments touch more as the sight and other corporal
senses, and also be distributed with express Ceremonies, and of great
signification: So it is easy to be perceived how necessary it is to us, the
use of the Sacraments to increase and entertayne our faith S. Chry. 1^. homely
upon S. Mark.
which after a manner to say touch our finger and eye, and already tastes and
feels in effect, the commodity of that which we look for, as though we
had it and possessed it already, and therefore so far is it from us, ^o
dispi^e the holy Sacraments, that on the contrary we protest that we cannot
worthily as our duty is, extol and magnify the dignitye and lawful use of the
Sacraments.

36 How there is but two Sacraments in the Christian Church.
IN this manner and signification we find but two Sacraments ordained of God,
for y^ perpetual use of all his Church: as also S. Augustine August. 3. book
of Christian doctrine. 100. qu^st.
, ^ S. Ambrose, b did content them selves with two and no more. That is to say,
the holy Baptism, which succeaded the Circumcision, and the holy Supper which
succeeded the pascall lamb. For in these S. Ambroso in the tract. of Sacraments.
two Sacraments be represented to us our full and perfect salvation, and in
this respect succeeded not only a part of the aunciente Sacraments but all in
general. For the plainer understanding hereof we will speak first of them
generallye, and after of each of them particullarly.

27. The four points which be to be considered in the declaration of this
matter.
THere be four principal poynctes which we co^sidar in the sacraments

The first is concerning the signs

The second that which is signified by them.

The third the coniunctio^ of the signs and the things singnified

The fourth touching the manar by the which they participate as well the signs
as the things signified.

38. The first point is to understand what we do mean by the name of sign,
in this matter of Sacraments, and wherefore the Lord did chose for signs the
most vulgar and common things.
Concerning that which we call sign, we mean not by that word a bare sign,
naked and empty, as a thing represented or painted by a Paynter, or some other
simple memorial, but we understand of signs which represents to us most
great and excellent things, declared effectually in the lively word of God,
as hereafter we shall declare. Also in these Sacraments be offered
spirituallie and veritablie those things which be outwardly represented by
them. Moreover, it is to be noted that we do comprehend under the name of
signs, not only the material things of the Sacraments, as the water of
Baptism, the bread and w(...) in the supper, but beside the word joined with
the signs (which declares the will of God in us, being preached and expounded
plainly) we understand furthermore by the name of signs, the Ceremonies
ordained of God in all this mystery, the which have no less signification
then the materyall things, to the which Ceremonies it is not lawful for man
to join or put to any new things, neither to diminish without sacrilege: I
speak of those(...) spiritual of their own nature, but by the ordinance of
Jesus Christ. For water of his nature is made to wash when we will wette us
with it. Bread and wine is to nourishe the body being eaten and dronken. But
in the Sacraments these things have another purpose clean contrary, as we
shall say* hereafter We may use a similitud for yt better understanding hereof.
Take ware which is fastened to a writing or public instrument, and it
differs not from other Ware of it self, but only because of the use to the
which it is appointed, that is to say, to serve for a testimony that the
instrument is effectual and available, the which it has not of nature, but
by the ordinance of man. But concerning the Sacraments they be ordained of
God for a more excellent covenant.

40. From whence proceeds this alteration and the error of those which make a
charm* or sorcerie of the sacramental words.
THis mutacion then whereof we spoke changes not the substance of the signs
neither of bread, water and wine, but only the use of them, and is done by the
holy ghost, according to the ordinance of the good will of God which is
testified to us by that promise whereto the sign is joined, and not by the
pronuntiation of words, after the manner of Sorcerers or charmers, but the
promise is as the soul of the sign so accordingly the water, the bread and
wine, become Sacraments, that is to say, verytable signs, of those things
which the word promises and which be represented by them.

42. The sacraments be no sacraments without the use of them.
FOr as much as this mutation or change is only in the use thereof it
follows also that before, or after thadministratio^ of the sacraments it
takes no place, but only during the action and the use to the which this
change or mutation tends.

43. The second point is of the thing signified in the Sacraments.
THe promyses whereto the Sacraments be joined as Autentyke seals, tend to
one only Jesus Christ. For G^la. 3 ^. Cor. 10
it is he only which is declared to us, and represented with all his goodness
and treasours by the signs of sacraments, and by that word which is joined
with it for to quicken and confirm ou^ faith, wherewith we do embrace him,
and to advertise us of our duty, a^well toward him as toward our
neighbors.

44. The third point is how Jesus Christ is joined with the signs.
THe thing signified, that is to say: Jesus Christ with all his benefits is
always presented ^^^itably, and without any fraud on Gods pa^te, which is true
in his premis, so that the sign and the thing signified be always knyt
together in this respect, that is to say. God offers both the one and the
other truly* and not by the virtue of words pronounced, (for it is for^ery to
speak so) nor by a natural and local conjunction, for the body of Jesus
Christ is not a fantastical body, nor an invisible body which occupies no
place, nor by the holiness of him which pronounces the words ordained of God,
or ministers the Sacraments. (For the Son of man cannot make void the will
of God) but by the virtue of the holy Ghost* which works, that
notwithstanding Jesus Christ being as he is man corporallye in heaven absent
from us, as the scripture witnesses, yet nevertheless is presented truly and
verily to us, so that our faith do embrace him in spirit inwardlye, as the
signs do represent to us outwardly, lysting up our minds into heaven, for to
enjoy and possess him more effectually, and join us to him.

45. The distinction of signs and of the thing signified.
NOtwithstanding such conjunction, we confound not the signs with the thing
signified, nor abolish the substance of the signs, but make a distinction of
that which is conjoined.

94. The manner to communicate as well the signs of the Sacraments as the thing
signified.
FOr as much as the sign and the thing signified (as we have said) be so knyt
and joined together and yet nevertheless not confounded the one with the other*
but a distinction between the^, concerning y^ exterior and outward sign it
is received by a corporal and natural manner, as well of y^ faithful as y^
unfaithful, but to diverse ends and purposes. For the faithful receiving a Iere.
4 book chap. 13
the thing signified with the sign, do perceive augmentation and increase of
their faith unto salvation and eternal life. But the unfaithful not receiving
but the bare sign only, receive it to their condemnation: because that
refusing the thing signified which is offered to them of God with the sign,
they polute and dishonor it, as much as in them is. Thus much concerning the
communicating of the sign. But concerning the thing signified, which is Jesus
Christ with all his benefits and goodness: We have already declared, that the
only mean to communicate with him is by true faith. And therefore he that
brings not true faith cannot receive him, but he that brings faith,
receives him truly and effectuallye, but not with teeth, nor by the bellye
after a corporal manner but spirituallye by faith Cipriansermon of the supper
of the Lord Augustine upon John 25. treatise Origin up on Math. 11. ca. 15.
embrasing that which God promises us by his word, and offreth to us by the
exterior sign, or to speak yet more properly, in ioyenynge our selves more
nerer then we were before unto Jesus Christ. Augustine sermon of sacraments
the. 2. fearie of Baster. Prospere in y^ book of sentences Innocen. 3 book.
3. cap.
For the virtue and power of faith is such that in stead to bring Jesus
Christ down on earth (which can not be until the day that Judgment) it
ascended up from the earth into heaven, and there does knytte and incorporate
us with Jesus Christ: which was the cause of the primative Church did singe
sursum Corda, that is lift up d Hillary. 8 book to the Trintie.
your hearts.

47. Application of all that is before said of the facrament of Baptism.
THe sign of Baptism in water, the substance of the ceremonies agreeing with
the Scripture (to the which may not be added or diminished without
sacrilege) be these: the parson is weat with water, and then the water
tarieth a certain space, before it be clean dried or passed a way, and
finallye the water vanishes and consumes.

The thing signified and verily represented, Acts. 22 Roma. 6 1. Cori. 6
Ephesians. 5 Titus. 3 1. Peter. 3 Galat 3 Colo. 2
is the aspersion or sprinkling of the death and passion of Jesus Christ in
remission of all our sins, and imputation of righteousness. Also by the exterior
wetting with water is signified y^ mortification and sepulture or burying of
our old man, that is to say of our natural corruption, dead and buried by the
bertue of the death and burying of Jesus Christ, is signified by this, that the
person is wet, and continues under the water, or the water upon him a certain
time. And finallye the generation of the new man with a certain and sure hope
of the resurrection of Jesus Christ, is signified by this, that he which is
Baptized, comes out of the water clean purged and washed.

Beside this Baptism is an exteryour and solemn profession of the Christian
religion by the which we all do bind our selves to accept and take Jesus
Christ for our only Savior 1. Cor. 1 Ephesians. 4
, and to live in brotherlye charity, as being all together but one boddye
baptized with one Baptism and by one spirit united and knit in him. The word
Mark. 2^ Mark. ^6
that is to say: the ordinance of Jesus Christ joined with the promise
sincerely as God spoke it, is this, to Baptize in the name of the father, the
son and the holy Ghost, whosoever shall believe and be Baptized, shall be saved.

The accord and agreement of that sign is most proper and meet because the
water is the element most convenient of all things, to wash and put away all
bodily fyithynesse, and therefore is most mate to figure and represent the blond
of Jesus Christ the son of god, by the which only the Church is made clean:
1. Pet. 2. d
Moreover one uniformity is appointed and common to al 1. Cor. 12 Ephesians. 4
and to one end and purpose, which declares the concord and charity which
we ought to have together.

The mean whereby this is communicated to us, is ye holy ghost, John. i 1.
Cor. 12
freely communicated to the elect, who condiscendynge to our infyrmitye, will
be served by a mortal man ordained and appointed in the Church for that end
Math* 28
. Secondlye with the word Ephesians. ^
truly and intelligybly pronounced and expounded so that it may be understand
and believed. And for the third y^ exterior oroutward sign with the ceremonies
aforesaid, yet nevertheless without communicating his virtues to any of these
instruments, but as S. Paul says he that planteth and he that waters is
nothing, but GOD which gives the increase. 1. Cori. 3 Mark. 3 1. Peter. 3
*

The means of our part is faith, acording as fayeth S. Augustine Augustine
upon John 80. homily.
. The word makes us clean, not being spoken or pronounced only, but being
believed. Now this faith comes not of our selves, but is freelye given us
Ephesians. ^ Philip. ^
in dew time, ^o that we be of the number of the elected 2, These. ^
, the which secret we leave to god to judge. For it is he which knows those
that be his 2. Tim. ^
. Notwithstanding we accept all those as faithful which make exterior
profession, if it appear not to us the contrary, leaving the judgment of the
Hypocrites to God, which shall reveal them, and judge them in his good time,
1. Tim. ^
and pleasure.

48. For what causes the young children of the faithful be baptized.
Concerning young Children, because their faith is unknown to us, and we
have said before, it is requisite that they be partakers of the fruits of the
sacraments Acts. ^
, and it is not very likely that they have faith, because they have not the use
of understanding, Deuteronomy. 1 Roma. 10
except God do work in them extraordinarilye, the which appears not to us,
nevertheless we cease not to communicate to them Baptism.

First, for as much as there is now the same cause in Baptism which was
sometime in Circumcision, which is called by S. Paul, the seal of
righteousness which is by faith Roma. 4
: and also by express commandment of God, the male children were marked the
eyghte day Genes. 17
.

Secondlye, there is a special regard to be had to the infantes of the
faithful. For although they have not faith in effect such as those have that
be of age, yet so it is, that they have the seed and the spring, in virtue of
the promise which was received and apprehended by their elders. For God
promises not us only to be our God, if we believe in him, but also y^ he will
be the God of our offspring and seed, yea unto the thousand degrees Gene. 17
Exodus 20
, that is to the last end. Therefore said S. Paul that the children of the
faithful be sanctified from their mothers womb 1 Cori. 7
. By what right or title then do they refuse to give them the mark and
ratification of that thing which they have and profess already? And if they
allege yet further, that although they come of faithful elders or parents, it
follows not that they be of the number of the elect, and by consequent that
they be sanctified. (For God has not chosen all the children of Abraham and
Isaac Roma. 7
.) The answer is easy to be made, that it is true all those be not of the
kingdom of God, which be borne of Faithful parents, but of good right we
leave this secret to God for to judge, which only knows 2. Tim. 2
it, yet notwithstanding we presume justly to be the children of God, all those
which be issued and descended from faithful Parents, according to the promise
Gene. 17 1. Cori. 7
. For as much as it appears not to us the contrary. According to the same we
baptize the young children of the faithful, as they have used and done from
the Apostels time in the Church of god Origin* 5 book upon the epistle to the
Romans
, and we dout not but god by this mark (joined with the prayers of the Church
which is there assistant) does seal the adoption and election in those which
he has predestinate eternallye, whether they dye before they come to age of
discretion: or whether they live to bring forth the fruits of their faith, in
due time and according to the means which god has ordained:

49. Application of all that goes before of the Sacrament of the Supper and
the right use thereof.
THe signs of the sacrament of the Supper be bread and wine. The substanciales
ceremonies, according to this holy word (to the which no man has any more
power to add or diminishe, then to make new promises of new Sacraments)
Math. 29 Mark. 14 Luke. 25 1. Cor. 11
be concerning the minyster, who representing Jesus Christ, after the
rehearsinge and expounding the ordinance of the lord, with invocation and
publyke prayers, then to break the bread and distribute to the people, and
likewise the cup. Also for those which receive the supper, with the minister
particulerlye in his office it is for them to take, eat, and drink: and
finallye altogether to render thanks with one heart and with one monthe.

The thing signified is the same which the doctrine presents and declares to
us ordinarily. And of Baptism likewise* that is to say, Jesus Christ 1. Cor. 10
conceived, borne, crucified, dead, buried, risen, ascended into heaven, to be
made for us the entry and perfect sapience, righteousness, sanctification and
redemption. 1. Corin. 1
So the^ we doubt not but according to the promise of our God, the very body
and the very blood of the Lord* that is to say Jesus Christ himself, with all
his goodness and treasures, is offered to us verily and without fraud, to be
received of us inwardly in faith, by the virtue of the holy Ghost, into
everlasting life, even as verily as is offered to our outward senses the
bread and the wine, for our corporal sustenaunces and life, which for this
cause is called the body and blood of Jesus Christ, that is to say, they be the
very exterior signs and corporal marks, of that which the Lord offers
spirituallye on his part, that is to say, of the very body and blood of Jesus
Christ: For it is an accustomable manner of speaking in the matter of the
Sacraments, to give to the sign the name of the thing signified by it. As it
is said, that the Cup is the new alyaunce Luke. 22
or covenant, that is to say: the mark and true sign of the new covenant,
which is made by the sheddyng of the precious blood of Jesus Christ. So is
said also that the Circumcision is called the alliance Gene. 17
, that is to say the very sign and ratifycation of the alliance. Also the
Lamb is the passage Math. 26 Mark. 14 Luke. 23
, or passover. Item the stone in the Desert was Christ 1. Cor 10
, that is to say: verily representing Christ. Also it is said of S. Paul
concerning this matter, 1. Cor. 10
that the bread is the communion of the body of Christ, that is to say: the
true sign or gage of the communion which we have with Christ. And this
exposition is not forged by us, but expressly and plainly observed by all the
ancient Doctors of the Church, as follows: in that the bread is broken, is
represe^ted to our senses the passion of our Lord, which was broken with
dolor and sorrows of death, and the judgment of God in his body and soul
for us. In that it is distributed, and the cup likewise to all the
Communicantes, represents to our senses, that Jesus Christ him self with all
his treasures and benefits is given to us of God the Father into eternal life.

These places followyng be alleged by the Fathers, touching this exposition.
Irene against the Valentians, Tertulian against Martion, Origin upon the
book of numbers, hom. 16. Item upon s. Matthew, 15, and, 26, chap. Item upon
the Leuit. homely. 7, ^, 9. Item against Celius, 8, book. Cyprian, 6, epistle
of the first book, and the, 3* epistle of the second book. Item in the sermon
of the supper, Athanase upon s. Matthew chap* 12. Ambrose upon the first to the
Corin, and fourth book of Sacraments, Chapter, 4. Chrysostom upon saint
Matthew in the perfect work, homely, 11. Upon the, 2, Corint. hom. 27. Upon
the Psalm. 22. Item in an epistle to Celarius, Augustine upon the Psalm, 8,
and, 89. Item August. upon the words of the Apostle second sermon. Item in
the sermon made to the children, as Beda recites in his collection. Item, 3,
book of the Trinity chap. 4, and, 10. Item against Fastus, xx, book, chap.
xxi. Item of the city of God. Item upon the, 54. Psalm. Item upon, xxvi,
homily upon Saint John. Item upon Saint John xxvii, treatise and, 6, chapter,
and 30, treatise, xxi, chapter, xxv. Item upon saint John tract, xx, and* 30.
Item against Adamantus chapter, xi^. Item, 3, book of the doctrine of a
christian, chapter, 16. Item in the epistle to Boniface, and in the epistle to
Dardanus, and in many other places. Leo Pope in the Epistle written to the
clergy, and to the people of Constantinople. Cyrill upon Saint John, 4, book,
chap. 14. Item in the Epistle to Calo^^rius. Theodorete in the first and second
dialogue against the heretics, touching the very body of Jesus Christ.
Hesichius the twentye book upon the Le^iticus the eight chapter* G^la^^us
against Eutiches. Bartram in the book of the body and blood of the Lord. 1.
Corint. 11.

In that we take and eat the bread and after drink of the cup is a witness
of that which is interiorly done truly by the virtue and power of the holy
ghost. For he can through the bond of faith, join and bind those things
together which of themselves be far divided a sunder, concerning the distance
of the places, that is to say, y^ as verelye as we take and eat the bread and
drink ye wine by a natural manner, the which in continent after by digestio^
turns into our substance and nourishment of our corporal life: likewise as
verily (although by a spiritul and celestial manner, and not with mouth and
teeth) is Jesus Christ him self which is now in heaven on ye right hand of
his father, communicated to us, that we may be flesh of his flesh, 1. Cor. 10
Ephe. 5
and bones of his bones, that is to say, being knytte John. 17
and incorporated with him by faith, Colos. 2
our souls and our bodies does attain to eternal life: yea even whylest we
be in this world his spirit does sanctifye and govern our bodies q John. 6
and souls, to dedicate and sacrifice all our life to his service Romans 8.
, and to the charity of our neighbors for the love of him. Finally, in that
we take all of one bread and of one wine corporallye and visibly, so on the
other part spirituallye and inuisibly by faith, we come al to participate and
be partakers of Jesus Christ only, the same I say shows to us the bond
and knot which ought to be between us all, as the mystical body of Jesus
Christ our head, according to the public and common protestation which we do
make 1. Cor. 10. and. 12. b.
.

The conuenaunce and agreement of the things signified, with the signs and
ceremonies, is very evident and plain by this which we have already said:
namelye that as one loaf Augustine in the ser(...) of the ^^craments of the
faithful in the 2(...)erye of ^asque.
is made of many graynes gathered and joined into one loaf or piece of
bread, and likewise the Wine being made of many grapes, declares unto us the
agreeing of the signs with the signifycation, whereof we have spoken
heretofore, that is to say the knotte and union which we have with Jesus
Christ, and the mutual charity with all the faithful in Jesus Christ their
head, the word that is to say the ordinance and promise of the Lord,
whereunto the signs does send us, be such as saint Paul has expresslye
touched 1. Cor. 11.
together left to us according to the Evangelists.

The Lord Jesus the same night in the which he was betrayed took bread and
when hae had given thanks, brake it and said, take, eat, this is my body
which is broken for you, do this in the remembrance of me, and likewise he
took the cup, after he had supped, saying. this cup is the new alliance
or Testament in my blood, do this as often as ye drink it, in the remembrance
of me, for as often as ye eat this bread, and drink of this cup, ye shall
show forth the Lords death till he come.

The means to receive Jesus Christ (as we have said before) is faith, John.
5. f. and. 6.
and therefore said saint Augustine, he that is not of the body of Christ,
Prosper in his book of sentences S. ^^^ro. upon Esai 6^ c^^. and on Iere. 4
book. 22. ^ August^ne of the life of God. 25. cap. 21.
eats not the body of Christ, and (as he said in an other place,) the
heretykes which be without the Church, may well have the sacrament, but not
y^ benefyte of the sacrament, from whence it follows* that a man must prove
himself, according to the doctrine of the Apostle, 1. Cor. 11. f
that is to say, enter into our selves, to see if we have such sorrow for our
sins as it appertains, and such certain and sure trust in our God
according to his word by Jesus Christ our only mediator. And yet is not
required such a perfyte says as no imperfection can be found, but such a
faith as is true, and not feigned. In those then that be such, the union and
conjunction which they have obtained with Christ, by their faith, is more
and more confirmed, and sealed by the holy ghost, in receiving the signs and
sure seal of this conjunction and knot as it is said, that ye circumcision
was in Abraham a seal of the righteousness of faith, Roma. 4*
the other on the contrary, in despysing that which is offered to them, that
is to say, Jesus Christ, and dishonoring the signs and ceremonies instituted
of the Lord, bring themselves culpable and guilty of the body and blood of
Jesus Christ, from the which continually more and more they recoyle and fall
backwarde 1. Cor. 12
.

The declaration of the death of Jesus Christ, and consequently of all that
which he did for us, with thanks giving for the benefits received, and the
examining and proving of our selves, be of the substance of the supper, 1.
Cori. 11
and therefore cannot be left out, nor perverted or altered, without great
sacrilege. Whereupon follows that the Supper of the Lord ought not to be
communicated to those which can not prove nor examine themselves, because they
have not the use of reason, as young children and such like, 1. Cor. 11
nor to those which have not made profession of their faith, Acts. 8
or which be Judged unworthily, that is to say, excommunicated by the right
judgment of the Church Math. 28 1. Cori. 5
, the which shall be spoken of hereafter.

50. The conclusion of the matter of the Sacraments.
THese things considered, it follows that the sacraments be not only
ordained, to offer to God giving of thanks which also is called a sacrifice and
acceptable offering: but rather that we should receive of his grace and
liberality, the which is more precious then heaven and earth, that is the
confirmation of our faith, and to be the nearer united, and joined to Jesus
Christ into John. 14 and in many other places.
eternal life.

51. Wherefore the holy ghost is called the consolator or comforter and to
what purpose and end the afflictions Acts. 9
of the faithful serves.
FInally it is easy to perceue for what reason the holy ghost is called the
comfortor a: Because his office is to join us to Jesus Christ by faith Roma. 8
1. Cor. 1 Gala. 4
, and he that has Jesus Christ has all 1. Cor. 2
, it follows that by him only our consciences have wherein to be so
pacified, and so well contented and fullye satisfied, that namely we have
wherein to rejoice in our afflictions Roma. 5 James. 1
, for as much as we know and be assured, that they come not to us at
adventure, but be sent of him, who has reconciled us unto himself by Jesus
Christ, entreating us in the fame wise that he has done his own Son Roma.
8
, and so by little and little to learn us to hate sin, and despise the
world 1. Peter. 3
, and moreover by this means he moves us to pray and call unto him more
earnestlye Cori. 1^. Roma. 8
and deuoutlye: and also chasticeth us in trying and proving our faith 1.
Peter. 1
, and in fine makes us a show or a mark for all the world to look at, to
declare how great is his virtue and power in those which he has armed and
strengthened with his holy sririte 2. Cori. 4 Colo. 1
.

Of the Church. The fyft point.
1. That there has alvvaies been and ever shall be a Church, out of the
which there is no salvation.
ALl those things whereof we have spoken to be established and performed by
the goodness of God, be in vain, if there were not certain people which felt
and tasted of the fruict and commodity hereof. But for as much as Jesus Christ
has an eternal kingdom, 2. Sam. 7 Luke. 1 Psa. 98 and. 110.
he can never be without subjects: it was meet then from the beginning of the
world, that there should be a church, that is to say, a Congregation and
assemble of people, such as it has pleased God to choose by his grace, ye which
have acknowledged and served the true God according to his will, by the means
of Jesus Christ only attained by faith, as it has been amply declared. And
we must confess moreover, by the same means, that his Church and assemblye
shall last for ever Psalm. 132 Ierem. 31 Math. 28
, what soever assaults that all the Deuyls in hell can invent or prepare
against them Esaias 54 Math. 18
, Finallye, it must be confessed necessarilye, that without Jesus Christ there
is no salvation. And whosoever dies, not being a member of this congregation
and assembly, is excluded and locked out from Jesus Christ, and from his
salvation Joel. 2. 3
: For the virtue to save, which is in Jesus Christ, appertains not but to
those which acknowledge him for their God and only savior John. 3 Galath. 3
.

2. There can be but one true church
AS there is but one God Ephesians. 4
* one faith, and one only Mediator between God and man, even Jesus Christ
1. Tim. 2
, head of his Church Ephesians. 14. ^ Cole. 1 1. Cori. 11
: So likewise there can be but one Church.

3. Wherefore we call the Church catholyke.
FOr as much as God has spread forth his Gospel, that is to say, the
preaching of salvation, which is the Scepter of his kingdom, through the
universal world Psalm. 2 Esa. 54. 55 Mark. 16 Acts. 1 Colos. 1
, and has chosen of all nations such as seemed good to him: For this cause
there ought to be confessed one catholic Church, that is to say, a universal
Church: Not that it comprehends al men generally (for the greatest part be
not of it Math. 20
) but because the c Acts. 10 Apoc. 7 Math. 21
faithful be dispersed over all the earth, according as the Lord has chosen
them, not being restrained to any certain place, time nor nation.

4. In what thing lies the communion of saints.
BEcause the church has but one only Lord and sovereign prince Ephe. 4. 3
Colo. 1
, all the faithful in what place soever they be dispersed, be conjoined and
knyt together as ye burgesies or inhabitants of one communaltie, being all
partakers of y^ same pryuiledges Roma* 1^ 1. Cor. 10 and. 12 Colo. 3 Psalm. 49
: that is to say of the goods and treasures of Jesus Christ. who for this cause
is called their head, as they be called the members of him, for that he only
by his virtue uniting and joining them to himself, does quicken them,
justify them, and sanctifye them Ephe. 4 John. 17 Roma. 8 1. Cori. 1
: wherefore none may lawefully use this title head of the Church but he
only. And behold this is it that we call the communion or communaltye of
saints: For in the scripture this word Saint is attributed to all faithful,
living yet in this world, for as much as they have attained to Jesus Christ by
faith, their only righteousness and sanctification.

5. The church has but one head, that is to say Jesus Christ, to whom
there needs no lieu tenant.
Jesus Christ head of this Church, for the reason which we have said will
have no companyon 1 Cori. 3 Ephesians. 4
, as the wise woman in the scripture (to the which the Church is compared)
has but one Husband 1. Cori. 11 Roma. 7 Ephesians. 5
, and one body has but one head. He has no need of any Successor, (for he
is God living eternally Roma. 6
) nor any Vycar or Lieuetenaunt, for we have all his will by wrytinge John. 15
Acts* 20 2* Tim. 3
. And moreover being God, he is ever present him self in the myddest of his
Church by his infinite power, never departing from it, as he him self has
promised Math* 28 John. 14
* which neither Vycar nor Lieuetenaunt can do. And in deed the blindest man
in the world may see whether those men he toumbled and fallen beadlonge, which
would rob or depr^ue Jesus Christ of this pre-eminence, where as in deed
they have scarce one little ^^rner of the world to govern, in comparyson of
the whole world.

9. The commu^ion of the Saints lets nor hind^r^^h not the diversity of
offices among the faithful.
Jesus Christ governs his Church so by his holy spirit, that
notwithstanding he uses men as instruments, for to plant and to water, as S.
Paul speaks Colo. 3 1. Cor. 5.
: moreover, be distributeth his gifts and graces diuerlly, how, when, and to
whom seems good unto him for the entertainment and government of all the
body of the church 1. Cor. 1^ whole ch^. bphes. 4
, in the which he wylleth all things to be done by good order and policy 1.
Cor. 14
. It is not Gods pleasure nor will that we should accept all the members of y^
church equal, in their charges and offices, and by this means bring a
confusion into the house of God. But contrariwyse one of the principal
differences that we have with our adversaries, is we require that the
ecclesiastical policy be established and set up again according to the
word of God with the advise and counsel of the ancient fathers, which have
left us their Canons for testimonies of the conduction and government which
they held in their time: yet notwithstanding all things to be ruled by the
word of God* and consider dilligentlye what things are expedient to be
retained or to be altered for the edifycation of the Church: For in matter of
policye, every man knows well that all things be not convenient in all
times nor in all places, mark I say, this is it that we have always
required, and we yet earnestly require it: But seeing the negligence of many,
and the small hope that we have to be provided for in a general or common
consent: force has constrained certrine princes and Lords, having known and
seen the common disorders, to provide and set orders in their own
countries as we do see. Now they do not well that fill the ears of Princes,
that we be sedicious persons and Heretics, and that we allow no counselles
nor ordinances of the Church, which be manifest slanders and false rumors,
as ye may perceive it ye will give us hearing as appertains, and not to
make our enterparties and enemies Judges of our own causes.

7. The marks whereby we may discern the false Church from the true.
WE require first that there be put a difference between the true Church and
that which is not, although they borrowe this name: And also between those
which be in such wise within the Church, as they be also of the Church:
and of those which be not of the Church although, they be in the Church.
For it is most certain, that Satan desires and is busied to work so, that
his Synagog be esteemed for the true Church: and so long as the Church
strives here on earth, it is certain and sure that the chafe shall be
meddled amongst the good grain Math. 13. 1. Cor. 11.
, and the Cockle among the Wheat. Now to the end that we be not deceived,
if it be possible, these differences be to be understand. The mark of the true
of God there we acknowledge to be the true Church of god, in what soever place
it be, how small a number Matthew. 18. Luke. 12. Luke. 10. 1. Cor. 1. Matthew. 11.
or little appearance so over it has before man.

8. Which be the true members of the Church.
THose be of the Church which have the mark of Christians, that is to say
faith John. 8. and. 17. John. 4. 1. John. 4.
. Those have faith which receive the only savior Jesus Christ as has bin
said b. Flying from sin following righteousness, John. 3. Roma. 16. Roma. 8
Gala. 5.
that is to say, which love and fear only the true and eternal God, and
their neighbors, according to the word of God, without turning or swaruing
either to the right hand or to the left: John. 1. and 2. and 3.
not but that there are great infirmites in the most perfitest, 1. John. 1. 1.
Cor* 15. Philip. 3.
and also there is great dyfference between those in whom sin reygneth
fullye, and those in whom there are yet but rem nantes of sin. Roma. 6. 2.
Cor. 7. 1. John. 3.
Brief, those same be of the true Church in whom the spirit (which is the
gift of grace proper to the elect and not of nature) strives against the
flesh, Roma. 7. and all the chap. Gala. 5.
and which may say with S. Paul, I do the evil which I would not, Roma. 7.
that is to say, to the which I give no such consent. As those do which be
not regenerated by the spirit of God. Behold here those which be of the true
Church, but as for the others, of what estate or degree soever: they be in
the Church, yea though they were Apostles of as good authority as ever was
Judas, John. 6. 1 John. 1.
yet be they not of the church. But as soon as God has revealed them, they
ought to be John. 15. 1. Cor 5. 2. Thessa 3 2.
rejected and eschued of all Christians, so long as they be irreformable: for
such be not of the church this day in effect, which may be or shall be to
morrow, or when it shall please l 1. Cor. 2.
God, who according to his eternal council, has disposed the months and
times, in the which he will call his elect to himself. Matthew. 20. 1. Cor. 7.


9 The marks or tokens of the Church be not alvvayes in one estate, and
how it ought to be governed.
FUrthermore we know that the marks and tokens of the true church be not
always in one estate, nor they be not always one concerning themselves. But
God according to his incomprehensible wisdom, in punishing the ingratitude of
the world, sometimes withdraws and takes from us part of his light, in
such wise, that sometime it seems that the Church is at an end or
destroyed as we see it happened in Israel in the time that Christ came into
this world. (For set the Jews aparte, there was not one trace or step of
the true marks of the Church in the world. And as for Jerusalem, what
ignorance, what corruption of doctrine, what wickedness* was there when Jesus
Christ the true Messiah, had no greater enemies than the blind guides
which conducted and taught the other? Matthew. 15. John. 1. Luke. 11. Esaias. 29.
But yet the Lord does never take away the whole foundation of his Church,
but always has a certain flock, Matthew. 28.
sometime greater sometime c ^. Kings. 19.
smaller, as him self declared to Helias. Also we may see how it is come to
pass in our time, that there is no people in the world more abused, than
those which would knit and tie the church to a certain place, and to the
succession of those, which they call bishops, which in very deed be nothing
less, both by the word of God and by the ancient canons. Whereby it is easy
to show that from the head of them al to the smallest, they be excommunicated
and cut off from ye church, if they change not their life and ma^ners. Now the
duty of the children of god is not only to serve god, in what place soever they
be, or whatsoever ruin or decay there be in the Church, but when it shall
please God to establishe and build up again her ruins and decays, either here
or in any other place, not being bound to any people or Nation, whatsoever
they bo: but when it pleases him to set up again his standard, which is ye
ministration of his holy word: ye duty I say of ye children of God, is to
join themselves to the true flock, and separate themselves from those which
be not. Following the admonitions which the prophets Esaias. 49. and. 52 ^. John.
3.
gave, and also that the Lord said, where the dead carkas is, thither will the
Egles resort Matthew. 24.
.

10 Wherein consists the duty and authority of the Church generally.
THese things considered, we be come now to declare what is the power and
authority of the true Church, to the which we may answer in one word,
that she consists in the obedience which she owes to her only spouse Jesus
Christ, as to GOD, Luke. 1. ^. ^^t. 1.
and to give order for the service of Jesus Christ: considering that y^ members
be ordained for to aid one an other. 1. Cor. 14. Matthew. 5.
But this ought to be yet more fully expounded. We will speak in the first
place of the authority of the universal Church, and of the particular members
of the same, I speak of those which have charge of the ministration.

11 Of the authority of the Universal Councels, and first what is a
universal Council.

THe name of universal Church comprehends properlye the general assembly
and congregation of all the faithful together. But for as much as the Lord
did seatter and deuyde them into diverse parts, it was necessary to use
distinction of parishes and dioces, for to keep a certain order. Moreover it
is not expedient nor yet possible, that all those which make profession to be
of the Church, should be assembled together one by one, when it shall be
requisyte or needful to appoint orders Acts. 14. Titus. ^. 1. Cor. ^*
concerning the whole body of the Church. We call then the universal Church,
in this matter y^ we have to entreat of, an assembly whereto all the churches
(as farforth as may be) be gathered or assembled together: although it happen
sometimes y^ one man do appear in the name of one whole Church or of one whole
nation. When it shall be expedient so to do Acts. 15.
it must then be understand what is the power and autheritie of such an
assembly, which they call general council.

^^ How far we may differ from the councels.
SOme there be yt contemn the councels of ye church as things of nothing: some
other think, that all that comes from the councils, ought to be received as
the word of God without exception. But we do not agree with the one nor the
other. For we doubt not but the lord is amongst those which be lawfully called
in his name, as he has promised, although they were but two or three: Matthew. 18.
then much less do we dout, but that he governs with greater power in ye
greater company of his church which he governs by his holy spirit. Acts. 15.
And we know and be assured, that the truth of God is stedfastlier grounded
tha^ upon nie^, 1. Cor. 2. 1 Thessalonians. 2.
whatsoever they be: for we al know not God as yet, but in a part. 1. Cor. 3.
Moreover experience shows us sufficiently, how easy it is to abuse this
title of councels, and namely what co^trarietie there is among the^. Wherefore
we conclude, y^ a mean must be kept which is neither to despise the^, nor
yet to extol and set them up above god, who only cannot err. And saint
Augustine says, the church ought not to be preferred before Jesus Christ.
For he judges always truly, but the ecclesiastical Judges oftentimes may
deceive themselves, and truly so they do. For who condemned Jesus Christ? A
counsel lawfully assembled, if we consider the outewarde succession and
appearaunce. Who concluded, that those which were baptized by Heretykes,
should be rebaptysed? A Council of Africa, where as was saint Cyprian. And
to be brief, if it shall be nedeful to consider the inconstancy of the
Judgment of the councels, I speak namely of those, which without
controuersye have been gathered in the name of God: It shall be easy to
declare, that such have but a weak stay which have no surer foundation. But
yet we marvel of those which reprove and condemn us as contemners of
Councels, which nevertheless, will keep themselves no one jot of them.
Witness the council of Basile, which was abolished by all the Popes following
and others. Now to the end that they may the better understand, whether our
sayings be conformable to the truth of God or not, see what we shall say in
this matter hereafter.

13. To whom it pertayneth to call a council.
THe communaltie ought to be assembled by order, and then by authority of
some one elected among them, we doubt not but that it is the office of the
magistrate, to give order and provide that the ecclesiastical estate may be
well governed and ruled in peace, and to increase therein. Timo. 2.
Now if the chief Magistrate be a Chrystian, by his authority such
assemblies ought to come together, as it has ever been practiced in the
Church of God without contradiction, until such time as the ambition of the
Patriarchs, and especially they of Rome, has reuersed and ouerturned the
whole order. Notwithstanding we confess, that for lack of Christian Princes,
or when they shall Read all the ecclesiastical history, and ye shall find the
Emperor commands and not pope^ bulls to hold general cou^cel^.
not do their duty, then must the Pastors which watch over the flock, take
heed to those things that be necessary for the Church, but in such sort as
all things may be done without ambition or disorder, as we see how the
Church of Antioche has practiced, as it is written in the Acts of the
Apostles.

14 How those ought to be chosen, which the Churches do send ^o the
councels.
WHen it was requisite, that things should be done extraordinaryly in a
General assembly, in the name of a whole Church or of a communaltie: as if it
were needful to send one man or diverse, or many men, in the name of a whole
parish, Diocese or nation. Although it were supposed, that those persons
which had the ordinary charges and offices in the Church, were then the
most meetest to deal with the affairs in councels, which was in that time
when the offices were given to such persons as were most meet, by a free
ecclesiastical election, which was then done with fasting and prayer. Yet
nevertheless, in those days there was great choice, so that all the church
with a common consent had respect to choose men which were indewed with gifts
and graces of the holy Ghost, as well in life as in learning. As it appears
in the history contained in the Acts of the Apostles, concerning the first
council holden at Jerusalem, where the Apostles were gathered together. Acts.
15.
Much more now when all is ouerturned, and in stead of Pastors, they are
Mummers or Maskers, as all the word may see. Now who that would choose and
gather together into one heap and company, all the filthy and abominable
rabble of the world, let him assemble those which they now call Prelates of
the church, and he shall find that from the greatest to the least, they be
all bound by their The form of the oath is prynted.
oath to maynteyne and uphold the tyranny of him, against whom the counsel
should be assembled and gathered. And the whole rabble of them be entered into
the Church by brykes and symonie against the commandment of God, Matthew. ^0
against the manacyng and threatninge of Saint Peter, Acts. ^*
against all the customs of the primative Church, against all the ancient
Cannons, decrees, and Councels, whereby all such persons be excommunicated,
and thrown out of the Church: then much less ought they to be holden for
Prelates and gouernoures of the Church whylest there is such disorders. I
say, what folyshnesse Beside the history ecclesiastical read the synodes and
decrees.
is it to all such an assembly, a godly or lawful Council, where s^ant one
can be found which is a member of the true Church of God? We say then to
assemble a lawful council, those ought not which (be nothing less than
that they be called) to enterprise any thing on their own authority. But
the Churches ought to assemble together, with fasting and earnest prayer, with
a common consent (where it may be suffered or at the least with the best order
that may be done) every church to elect and appoint those which be known to
be unreprovable in their lives, endued with the spirit of wisdom and
understanding, and other gifts meet and necessary to such an office,
without respect of crosses, myters, double crowns, or any such maskings,
under the which all the world may see what knowledge or gifts of the holy
Ghost dwells.

15. Every man ought to be heard in the council. Provided that there be no
confusion.
FOr as much as Hypocrites may deceive a whole multitude, and also the Holy
Ghost distributeth his gifts and graces, to whom he sees good, 1. Cor. 12.
and oftentimes to those which be of least estimation, 1. Cor. 1. 8.
as it happened to Hieremie, Jeremy. 11.
and to Amos, Amos. 1.
at that time when all the Prelates of the church had conspired against the
truth of god, and as we see in our time the great works of God, which he does
daily by thosely simple ones and most dispysed in the world: we say that the
assembly of a Council ought to be so appointed to certain persons as has
bin said before: yet notwithstanding no man ought to be shut out or excluded,
but all to be heard, for to know if God would reveal any thing by his
mouth, without disorder or confusion, as it was practiced in the first
council of Nyce. Nicephore in his history ecclesiastical, 8. book 14.
chapter. and ^. book 15. chapter


16. Who ought to presede or be chief in the council.
IF it be needful to know who ought to presede in this assembly, for
togather the voices, and to govern all the whole action of the council. It is
well known what order was set among the bishops, at the first council at
Nyce, 6. Canon. 7.
but it appears by the historye that at that time there was no certentie of
this proheminence to prefede or be chief, but voluntarily the bishop of
Alexandria did presede among the bishops, as it appears by the acts of
the first council of Nice, and of the first and second Council of Ephesus.
And as concerning the Bishops of Rome, his Vicars had not out the fourth
place in the Counsel of Nice. And where as he presed in the Council of
Chalcedon, it was of favor. As it appears by the request, which Leo bishop
of Rome made to Martion the Emperor, and yet the successor of Leo, s^^yned
not for the first place, in the fifth council of Constantinople, against Menas
Bishop of the said place. And also at the Provincial Council of Carthage,
Aurelius prefed without^ contradi^^ion. There being present the Vicares of the
bishop of Rome, who at the same council was condemned of falshoode, in the
presence of Saint Augustine. But notwithstanding, Reason and Experience
teaches, that to give this degree to one certain place, without respect of
the person, is a thing of it self most unreasonable. Although it were that
the elections of the eccl(...)sticall pastors were done in such order as
appertayned. For as it ought to be he who is most meet as far forth as man may
judge, ought to be preferred before al others, as we see y^ in the general
counsel of Aquile, S. Ambrose governed without any mention making of the
Bishop of Rome. Who shall assure us y^ the greatest towns has always ye best
learned Pastors although they had respect (in chosing them) to learning and
godly life? If reason do not content us, come to experience, yea, namely in a
time far better without comparison then this our time. Let them read the Acts
of the four first synodes, and they shall find what disorders be happened of
such Prelators of hye pontyficall s^ges, let them ioygne to it the falseho^^ of
Boniface the. xl. Bishop of Rome, discovered and revealed in the third counsel
of Carthage, about the year of God. iiij. C xxi. where as was Saynct
Augustyne, and ye shall see what credit the Bishop of Rome had then in
Affryca, even he which said he ought not to be judged of man, and was judged
there and condemned. Read the history of the fowrth counsel of Carthage, not
as it is falsified in Latin, but as it is in the Greek text prynted at Paris.
And yet it cannot be found that this patriarchall presidence, the which at
that time contented the Bishop of Rome, did stretch so far as to have
authority to demand the suffrages, and to have conclusions, but only to
have the first place among the Bishops: where as at that time we find,
that there was no certain order kept in the first Counsels. Also it appears
by the Acts of the. iiii. universal counsels that the deputies for the
Emperor demanded the voice, and governed the action of the Counsels, the
Emperors being d Nicephore 13. book 30. chapter. The acts of the counsel of
Chalcedon.
but lay men b* far was it from them to use that tirannye, which increased and
sproonge up by little and little after the decease of Gregory the nynth. In
fine, we say that in the general counsel (set aside all ambition, and take
those means which shall be most easy to find, among those which seek but the
glory of God only) those ought to proceed and be chief, which shall be
found the most meetest without respect of sea or trone. And concerning the
distributions of the seats and ranks he which distributeth and appoynteth
them, shows sufficiently with what spirit he is led.

17 How far extends the power of the Counsels, and why they be ordained in
the Church.
BEhold here how the lawful counsels ought to be assembled, without respect to
any thing, save only to the honor of God, and the edification of the
churches. As I do understand and have learned by the holy scripture, and by
reading of the most ancient ecclesiastical authors. Let us come now to
consider how far extends the authority of a Counsel lawfullye assembled.
We say that a Christian counsel shall not be assembled, nor never ought to
assemble, to make any new article of our faith. And that for. ii. reasons. The
first is, because it appertains to God only to declare what and how
dangerous it is to syn against him, and what is sin, and what is not.
Briefly, it is he only which has power over our conscience, and upon our
faith, so that no man can usurp his office, but he will (after a manner to
say) drive God out of his seat Colos. 2. 1. Cor. ^. Math. 15.
. The second is, that God* before the coming of Jesus Christ, has
sufficientlye instructed and erected his church by the Patriarchs. First by
visions and other means as it pleased him, and after by Moses and by the
Prophets, Preachers and publishers of that doctrine which was given and also
written by Moses: who Hebr. 1. Deute. 21.
expressly forbids to add or diminish any thing Deuteronomy. 4. Esai. 1.
. Much less then it is lawful to alter or change Hebr. 2. 1. Cor. 11.
any thing. Finally, Jesus Christ at his coming* has fullye and perfectlye
declared to us the will of his Father, leaving out nothing John. 15. Hebr. 1.
. Also ascendyng from us into heaven (concerning his corporal presence) did
give his holy spirit in such measure to his Apostles, and other godly
persons which were styrred up, that they did understand all truth John. 14.
, the which they have preached and written to the intent to put back and
prevent Satan, that he should not abuse the world with his lies so easelie.
And in this doing we see how warelie and dilligentlie the Apostles observed
the same. Neither Acts. 20. Galath. 1.
adding nor diminishing to the substance of the word of Jesus Christ: who
nevertheless were the very organes, and as interpretours or spokes men (and
after a manner to speak) notaries of the holy ghost, which office was not
given to their successors who ought to content them selves with the foundation
of the Prophets and Apostles Galath. ^. Ephe. 4.
. For if the Apostles did not know all those things which be required to
salvation, who then has known Note.
amongst men? And how can that be true, which the Lord has expresselye
declared and promised to the contrary John. 14. d. and. 16. b.
? And how should they have been saved? But if they had known, and had not
published and declared it, they had not been faithful 2. Tim. 5. 1. Corin. 4.
. If they had preached and had not written but half or a part, what assurance
had there been in their doctrine? And as S. Augustine speaking of the
Traditions which they call Apostolikes: If Jesus Christ had kept back any
thing from us, who could say it is this, or that? Or if any should say it,
how could he prove it? we conclude then that it is open and manifest blasphemye
against the authority of Jesus Christ, the only espouse, Lord 1. Cor. 8. 2.
Cor. 11. Ephe. 5.
, master, and head of the Church, against the Prophets, and Apostles,
against the word of God and all the Ancient and faithful Doctors. Brief it
is to reuerse and ouerturne the foundation of the Church, to esteem and
think that it were lawful to men whatsoever they were, to put to or take from
that doctrine, contained in the holy scripture Gala. 1. 1. Cor. 1.
. But here ye may see what has caused oftentimes y^ faithful to assemble and
come together.

First to maintain the pure and sincere doctrine contained in the holy
scripture, against the heretics which would corrupt it. Also to render and
give an open testimonye of the healthful doctrine of salvation, preached and
written by the Apostles. Far was it from them to assemble or congregate to
add to it any thing, in condemning it as imperfect Acts.1^.
. Brieflye, they did not assemble to stablishe and confirm the scriptures, the
which be grounded and stablished upon the eternal truth of God, and shall
continue for ever: but for to confirm them selves by the scriptures against
Satan and his adherentes. So then we believe the holy church, not as the
foundation of the Scriptures 1. Corin. 3.
, but grounded upon the doctrine of y^ scriptures, which be pure and the only
truth Acts. 17. 1. These. 5. 1. John. 4.
, so that for this cause the Church is called by S. Paul, and with good right
the pyller and stay of the truth 1. Tim. 3.
. And consequently we esteem that assembly for a false church, which swarueth
from this foundation Galath. 1. Colos. 1.
, and for a whoorishe Church that which hears the voice of a stranger, not
being content with y^ voice of her spouse Roma. 7. John, 10.
Secondly, the faithful be gathered together for to appoint and set orders in
the church, a^ it is to be seen in the Acts of the ancient counsel. For of
necessity al things must be done in the Church of God by good order 7. Cor. 10.
as S. Paul said. But this may not be, but when necessities do happen. But of
this let us mark well the points which follow.

18 The first point to consider the case well, when or at what time they should
set up politic laws in the Church.
FIrst there ought to be put great difference between the doctrine of
salvation, and those things which they establish only for to keep the civil
order required in the church. For the doctrine under the which also we do
comprehend the Sacraments, do teach the conscience, and depends not upon
man, who is bound to mayntaine it, under pain of damnation, without
chau^ging, putting to, or dyminishing any thing, in no manner of wise, as we
have declared heretofore: but the canonical ordinances concerning the manner
of doing, is all exterior and outwardlye, according to the cyrcumstances of
places, times and persons: by reason whereof they can neither be perpetual nor
universal without exception.

For such order and fashion may be holden in one place, which can nor may in
no wise be used in another place. Such thing also is good in one place, or in
one time, which should be unprofitable or domageable in another. And for this
cause there is often times contrariety among ye Canons, as it was needful to
have respect to those which were expedient. For as much then as such
ordinances be mutable, and made by man, it follows that they concern not
the conscience, but in cases of slander and dysorder which should be a let
or stop of the purpose for the which they were set up, that is to say, the
edification and quietness of the Church, as for example. It was agreed upon in
Jerusalem by the Counsel where the Apostles were, that the only grace of God
justifies us by faith: against those which would join the Ceremonies of the
law, with the Sacrifices of Jesus Christ. And moreover, fornication is
forbidden Acts. 15.
. Behold a doctrine which was not newly set up by the authority of the
Counsel, but with good right approved by this assemble. For as much as it is
the true doctrine revealed to the world from the beginning, and confyrmed by
all the preachynges and writings of the Prophets. Finally, it is ordained
that the Gentiles should abstain from eating the Sacrifices of Idolles, from
blood and beasts that be suffocate or strangled, I say that this is an
ordinance dystiucte from the other going before, the which partayneth not to
the conscience, nor to salvation simplye, but only to the exterior and
outward life, for to attain an end more excellent and perfect, that is to
say, that the doctrine of salvation might take place among the Jews Acts. 15.
. For if it had been otherwise, the Apostles had been contrary to them
selves. For in the beginning they agreede and stayed upon this, that grace
only justifies by faith, without the works of the law Acts. 15.
, and also they had been contrary to the doctrine of Jesus Christ, which
witnesses and says, that which enters into the mouth, defiles not the man
Mark. 15.
: and Saint Paul which was in this Counsel, should be contrary to him self
Roma. 14. 1. Cor. 8. Colos. 3.
For shortly after he wrote, that the kingdom of God was not in meat nor
drink, and that one might eat of al things, without making any difficulty
for conscience sake. Such prohibitions be diue^lishe doctrines 1. Tim. 4.
: except they be used at liberty, to the edification of their neighbors. For
avoiding slander Roma. 14. 1. Cor. 7. and. 10.
, let those then which will not understand this dyfference, declare to us
wherefore they have abolished the Apostolycall ordinance, or whether they have
greater power the^ the Apostles, or else whether they will give place to the
truth of God, and study with us to see that which may serve to the glory
of God, in steed to serve their own avarice and ambition, in abusing falsely
the title and authority of the Church Colos. 1.


19 The second point which is to be considered in the ecclesiastical
ordinances.
THE second point, for as much as such ordinances and statutes be made to
increase the doctrine of ye Gospel, let them be established and set up in such
wise, that not only there be no abuse or kind of superstition, but also ye
man which of his nature is prompt and ready to turn the best things in the
world into abuse, should not so easily abuse them. And this must needs be
granted that for lack of taking good heed in the beginning to this point,
has been the very means to serve Satan's turn for to abolyshe and destroy
the true service of God in his Church: so that if need were, we could she we
before ^he eyes of all men, from time to time and point to point, from what
original and beginning Idolatry did spring and proceeded, which at this day
they call Gods service, and how they have degenerated from degree to degree,
by the negligence of the Bishops, and especially by the fault of those which
have been to quick to bring things into the Church, without having respect to
those things which after did come to pass.

20 The third consideration that ought to be had in ecclesiastical
ordinances.
THe third point, for as much as men be so prompte and ready to love their
own inventions, and to turns the true Religion into superstition, and also the
time of the shadows of the law is passed, and that God now will be served in
spirit and truth, and not in outward ceremonies John. 4. Galath* ^. All the
Epistle to* the Hebrews.
: Therefore above all things special regard must be had that nothing be
brought into the Church, but that which is profitable and also very meet and
necessary. Wherefore concerning this point we do content our selves with
that state which we know was ordained and used in the Church in the time of
the Apostles, and accept that for the most pure and most holy state: although
of a long time many traditions have been attributed to the Apostles, which they
never thought* as Saint Augustine well knew and confessed. But certainly the
purest simplicity is the best, and the more Jesus Christ is plainly and simply
declared, the more it is agreeable to his word. So on the contrary, these
other religions which feed the world with outward shows and tryfles (and
in deed if the Church of God had need of so many Ceremonies, wherefore have
they then abolished those of Moses law, consydering that they were instituted
and commanded by the mouth of God) do they think it lawful to make new
ceremonies and sacraments according to their own desire, for to shadow and
hide Jesus Christ from us again? Such ceremonies then ought to be abolyshed
as not only unprofitable, but also condemned, being directly against y^
institution of Jesus Christ, and him self witnesses John. 4. Math. 15.
Acts. 10.
. And S. Paul likewise after him Roma. 14. Colos. 1.
, and to be short it is at this day most euidentlye perceived and seen in
the poor blind and miserable state wherein y^ most part of christendom is now
led. Wherefore Saint Augustine complained of his time Epist. ^^8. ad ^auua.
. Which would have spoke otherwise if he had seen those things which were
brought in afterward, yea and without any authority of the Church, and such
as seemed good to them selves. But what shall then be said of those which be
dyrectlye forged and invented against God? And nevertheless, all passes under
the name of the Church, as though the Church abolished or put away the word
of God, or all those which call themselves the Church were truly so in deed.
If they will not believe us in this point without further declaration let them
give us the bearing and we will declare it to them truly, or else let us dye
for it.

21 What is to be answered to those which allege councels against us.
Behold brefely the very end and mark whereunto the Councelles ought to
have regard. But to conclude this matter, we do not reiecte the Councels,
but take occasion by this means to declare how great enemies they be to the
Counsel, which brag and vaunt them selves most of the counsels. We do not
entende to establish the authority of Counsels in such wise, that our faith
be grounded thereupon. For S. Paul declares that he would not enterprise this
pre-eminence, which appertains to the only Lord and master of the church
Jesus Christ 1. Cor. 7.
, but first we must consider what Counsels they allege: How they have been
conuocated and assembled: In what time, in what place, and who were the Judges:
To what end and purpose. But principally the doctrine must be considered
whether it be conformable to the word of God, and as it was heretofore in the
Apostles time by the doctrine of Saint Paul, as S. Luke does wytnes Acts. 17.
, and as Saint Paul him self ordained 1. These. 5.
. In fine we hold and agree with the testimonye of the Church, so that it
accords with the word of God, and that it be the true church and none
otherwise. And as I have often said, so far is it from us to reject the
ancient counsels, that on the contrary if we had none other defense for our
selves we hope to declare before GOD and the world, that there is no more
greater and open enemies to the Counsels, then those which make the poor
i^n^rants to believe, that they be the pillars of Christendom, and for this
cause do ma(...) and keep the world in ignoranc^ and ^^yndnes (...).

22. Of particular Counsels as of nations o^ provinces.
THat which we have said hethert^ of general or universal counsels, ought also
to be understand of particulars, as of one or many churches when necessity
requires, to maintain the doctrine of salvation with one common consent and
testimony against the heretics, and to provide for the preservation and state
of the ecclesiastical ordinances and discipline, as we may see of those which
were ordained in the primative Church, concerning the provincial synodes and
counsels.

23 How many sorts of special governors there be in the church.
Having finished the point of y^ authority of the body of the Church, it
rests to see what is the duty and authority of ye principal members thereof,
the which I think may be very well divided into.4. kinds: the one has charge
to teach, the other to distribute the ecclesiastical goods, the other to
govern the spyrituall affairs, which is the ecclesiastical ordinances and
disciplyne, the other to have respect as well to the publyke affairs of this
life, as generallye to mayntaine the tranquillity of the whole Church, with
the power of the sword. But those which have separated themselves (being called
the Church or the cleargye) from those which be called lay people, as though
they were not members of the Church (yea from the most noble) have greatly
erred, consydering that Kings in the scripture are called the anointed of the
Lord, This is common in all the books of the kings and Psalms.
(as are all the faithful Psalm. 105.
) and S. Peter did understand by this word clergy 1. Peter. 5. 1. John. 2.
(which is as much to say a portion or heritage) all the whole Chuch of God.

24 The office of Apostles, Evangelists* and Prophets in the primative Church.
Concerning ^oose which had the office of publyke teaching in the Church, we
find in the scripture but five degrees. Which are Apostles, Evangelists,
Prophets, Pastors, and Doctors 1. Cor. 12. Ephe. 4.
, which are all sometimes generally called Bishops, that is to say, watchme^,
or overseers Acts. 20. Philip. 1.
, sometime Deacons, that is to say ministers 1. Cor. 3. Colos. 1.
, sometime Presbiter, that is to say Senator or Elder Acts. 20. 1. Peter. 5.
. Now concerning the three first of these degrees, we are certainly persuaded
that they served only at the beginning, when the Lord establyshed the
kingdom of the new allyaunce or covenant throughout the world. For the
Apostles were ordained immediatelye from Jesus Christ, with equal charge
among them Math. 18. Luke. 22. Acts. 20. Ciprian in the book de simpl.
prelatoru^. Augustine homi^y. 50. S. John. Gasath. 1.
, but yet as principal conductors of the whole buylding, not being restrained
to any certain Church or place, as they have dreamed of Saint Peter, who by
this means they have made bishop in steed of Apostle. But being sent to
preach through out y^ world Acts. 1.
, according as the spirit of the Lord conducted and lead them as Acts. 16.
the history of the Acts of the Apostles declared. And not as these fall
legendes, full not only of folyes and lies, but also of blasphemies, wherewith
Satan has stuffed and filled the church, the Euangelystes were as coadiutors
of the Apostles, whom they followed, as we see of Sylas, of Timothe, and of S.
Luke, and others which ordinarelye accompanied Saint Paul, and were sent
forth and appointed by him, as the necessity of the churches did require. The
Prophets were restrained more to certain places who had syngular gifts for
to expound the secreetes of the scriptures, and sometimes they had the gift to
understand and reveal things to come, for to approve and confyrme by those
miracles, the doctrine of the Apostles in these first beginnings of the Church.
Then remains now to declare of the pastors and doctors, whose office is
necessary and perpetual in the Church of God in such measure as it pleases
God. We shall speak of those here particularly.

15 Of the office of pastors and doctors.
THe charge and office of those in general, and namely of pastors, is to be
diligent, and take he de to their doctrine Acts. 6. 1. Timo. 4
(under the which also we comprehend the sacraments) and to prayer under the
which also we understand the blessing of marriages of the faithful, according
to the ancient custom of the Church: although often times the deacons have
supplied that office, of the administration of the sacraments 1. Cor. 1.
, and also that which concerns marriages: all the which things Jesus Christ
did understand by byndinge and lowsynge, shutting and opening, and by the
keys of the kingdom of heaven Math. 17.
, which is a matter very evil understood, and as yet much worse practiced.
For as much then as Heaven is proposed and set open to us as a perpetual
dwelling place, and there is none other way to go, nor other gate to enter in,
then Jesus Christ John. 14. and. 10.
: And for so much as the only means to have Jesus Christ is faith Collos*
^.
, the which is created and preserved in us by the holy Ghost, through the
preaching of the Gospel Roma. 10. 1. Peter. 1.
, and the Sacraments, as it has been said heretofore Acts. 8. Roma. 4.
: Behold then wherefore it is said that the pastors or doctors, to whom this
word and administration of sacraments is committed, have the keye of the
kingdom of heaven Math. 17.
. Because that by their preachings, the world may be brought to eternal life,
having in their mouths the word of reconciliation and truth. Moreover,
because that our sins hold us bound. And the preaching of the Gospel annexed
with the Sacraments, ^ 2. Cor. 5.
declares to us the delyuerance from sin, from death, and from the devil
Acts. 26.
. For this cause it is said, that the Ministers have power to loose and to
bind, with the authority of God. But here must be noted the points that
follows.

26 The difference between Pastors and Doctors.
THe first dyfference between Pastors and doctors, consysteth in this, that
the doctors ought to expound the scriptures symplie ^. Cor. 2.
and truly* for to have the true understanding and sense, and also to examine
the Cathacuminie, that is to say, those which be yet learning the principles
of Christian religion. As Origin did in the Church of Alexandria. But the
pastors office extends yet further, which is to minister true doctrine by
preaching for the necessitye of the Church, to teach, to reprove, to comfort,
and exhort Acts. 6. Roma. 12. 1. Corin. 14. 1. Timo. 4 2. Timo. 4 Titus 1.
, according as is requisite, publicly and particularly, making common prayers
and also watchinge day and night over their flock which they be charged
with, to feed publykely^ and particularlye Acts. 20.
with the word of life.

27 The pastors and doctors be but instruments by the which God conducteth
the ministry of his word.
THe second is, that neither of them dyrectly, do either bind or lose, nor
open nor shut the kingdom of heaven, for it appertains to god only which
has made our hearts, to change them Psalm. 501.
, and to draw them John. 6.
, it is he only that gives remission of sins Mark. 2.
* to save and dampne body and soul Luke. 12.
. But for as much as he is served with men to declare his word, and mynister
his Sacraments 1. Cor. 4. 2. Cor. 5.
who be as troonckes or conduites through whom he destilleth and powers his
grace, into the hearts of his elect: so it appears that this is the cause
that so excellent tyttles and testymonies have been attrybuted to the faithful
ministers of the Gospel John. 20. Acts. 26. Math. 5.
. Christ him self says: He that despises you despises me Luke. 10.
having respect to him that works in them and by them. 1. Cor. 15. Galath. 2.
2. Cor. 3.
. As for the ministers being considered a part by them selves, it must come to
this which Saint Paul said 1. Cor. 3.
: he that planteth and he that waters, is nothing, but God which gives the
increase, there must also be a respect that the Ministers of God ve not
despised: and on the contrary not to extol them into Gods place nor set them in
his steed, as men do often times. Yea even those which be nothing less then
the Ministers of God, how shall we do then? Let us follow S. Paul, who in
speaking of Pastors and doctors said: let every one so esteem of us as the
ministers of Jesus Christ, and distributers of the secrets of God 1. Cor. 4.
.

28 The marckes and tokens of false doctors and pastors.
THe third point lies in this which S. Paul joins in y^ same text, the
which is required also on the Ministers part, that every of them be found
faithful 1. Cor. 4.
. Now we accoumpt not them for faithful, and so by consequent worthy of the
honor due to the ministers Roma. 6. Galath. 5. 1. John. 1. 1. Tim. 5.
, nor yet to be accepted as ministers Philip. 3. 1. Timo. 6.
, which have not received ye office and charge of the Lord, that is to say
those which have been thruste in without consent, as is appointed by the
Church. And namely when the Lord gives this grace in the world, that there is
a Church erected, (except God does stur up some one or two extraordinaryly,
as he has always done when it seems good to him). For how shall they
preach says Saint Paul, if they be not sent Roma. 10. Ierem. 2. 3.
? And to say truth what earthly Prince is there that would allow those
things within his Realm, which be done without his commandment?

Wherefore we do exhort all faithful to take dillygent heed and beware of
those which contempne the ordynarie means of a lawful and godly election,
which imports a true and free examination of manners, learning, and doctrine
without ambition or wicked means, whenever it shall please God to erect his
order in any place of the world. For when this order by gods just judgment
cannot be kept, it will be folly to hope for any reformation confirmed by them
who be the very enemies of the Church.

Also all extraordinary vocations ought to be suspected, and in no wise to be
admitted, when God has opened the way to ordinary means, except there
appear evident and manifest causes. Also these be false pastors which be not
able or meet to execute the office and charge 1. Tim. 3. Titus. 1.
. Item all such as be defamed, and slanderous persons. Item those which
execute not their office and duty, for he is no Pastor that feeds not his
flock. Item those which exceed their commission, that is to say, which
expound not faithfully the word of God, either changing, putting to, or
diminishing Galath. 1. 1. Cor. 4.
, but declare their own fantasies or other men's traditions in steed of the
word of God: all such persons I say be holden and declared namely by the
ancient canons for false pastors and ministers of Satan, and not of God.
Wherefore all that ever they can say or do contrary to this order, is in vain
and fryuelous before God, although they had fifty crowns upon their heads,
and as many Bulls: Psalm. 110. John. 9. Acts. 4. 1. ^or. 4. ^a^^. 6.
for the power to bind and lose, to open and shut, is appointed and lymitted
to the mystery of the word Math. 28.
of God, and pertayneth not to those which hold the place of Lordly Pastors,
but to those which be true godly Pastors. And if Magistrates in steed to
chastise such, do maintain them, it follows y^ God does not allow them nor
their deeds, but reproves them.

29 Of degrees which ought to be among Ministers of the word, according as
they be disseuered by companies.
IN all companies it is certain that there must be an order* as we see there
was among the Apostles in Jerusalem, where S. Peter Acts. 1. and other place.
had the voice freely and wyllingly. But this establysheth not a pre-eminence
of a state or dignity, for it was but for a certain order and time as was
expedient, and it was in such wise that Saint Peter must render accoumpt to
the Church of his voyage, after he was burdened to have misused him self Acts.
11.
, and also suffered him self to be reproved by S. Paul at Antioch Galath. 2.
* For to conclude we confess y^ there must be a distinction among pastors and
doctors the more orderly to assemble together when need shall require and to
keep a decent order, y^ one proceed and be chief among the^ who was called
in the beginning by the Greeks proestio, y^ is to say president as Iustine
witnesses Iustine in the apologetique.
. Now we call him in France Doien, and in some places superintende^t. And
although we be not ignorant how often the ancient church has established
degrees among ye bishops, in thinking to do well, nevertheless, considering the
horrible tyranny and confusion which by this means is sprung up in the church
of God, we content our selves with the custom of the Apostles which was to
chose those which should conduct their affairs, y^ were most godly and
meet, according as it was requisite* whose power exte^ded no further nor longer
time, the^ the consent of assemble did import, much less then had he power to
do any thing on his own head or authority, or to allege that he could not
err: as it playnlie appears in the election of S. Mathias Acts. 1.
, in the election of the Deacons Acts. 6.
, in that S. Peter and Saint John be sent to Samaria by the other Apostles
Acts. 8.
, and in that which was said and done in the counsel of Jerusalem Acts. 15.
* and in Antioche Acts. 11. and* 14.
, and by Saint Paul in many places The Epistles to Timothe and Titus.
.

54 The second degree of ecclesiastical offices which is the office of deaco^s,
and the distribution of the goods of the church.
THe second place of ecclesiastical offices lies in the ministration and the
distribution of ecclesiastical goods, whereof the Apostles dyscharged them
selves with their good wylles, for that they could not bear so great a burden.
Far* unlike we^ they to those which at this day call them selves men of the
Church a. First in the church of Jerusalem were elected 7. persons full of the
holy ghost, and of wisdom* and of life approved by sufficient testimony, which
were called Deacons, that i^ to say Ministers, although this name oftentimes
extends further Roma. 17. and many other places.
, this order ensewed, and continued as all the ancient ecclesiastical
Histories declares. Also it appears by the ancient canons that the
ecclesiastical goods were divided into four parts The. iiij. counsel or
synod holden at rome anno. 330. Item in the 3. Epistle do simplicitate Epis.
Romans an. 447.
, whereof one was distributed to clerks, that is to say to those which were
norished and maintained with the consent of their parents for to serve
afterward in the Church according as they should be found apt and meet,
and also those which served presently, yea which served in effect and not only
in name, for the workman is worthy of his hyre 1. Corin. 9. Deute. 21. Math.
10.
, and on the contrary, he that trauelleth not, is not worthy to eat 1. These. 3.
, wherein nevertheless this mean was kept, that they respected to that which
was necessary. So far, that those which might be mayntayned and kept of the
goods of their Parents, and yet nevertheless, took the goods of the Church,
were reproved 1. Timo. 5.
, yea as sacrilegers C. clericos 1. q 2
.

The second part of the four, was dystributed to the poor, the third
employed to maintain the buyldinges, and such other ecclesiastical
necessities* Yet nevertheless, all the ornaments of the Temples (in the which
as yet they kept a measure and mean order) was employed for the poor in time
of necessyties, The Epistle to Nepotian.
although S. Jerome complained of his time, and Saint Ambrose A book of
offices. 28. chapter.
also, that they were to much given even then to such excess and pompes,
rather like Painims then Christians. The fowrth part was assigned to the
Bishop Canon apostolic. 30.
, net for to dispose at his appetite or pleasure (the which could not be done
without great sacrilege and evident contrariety of all that which is ordained
and limited by the counsel of Carthage the fourth Canon. 15. 17. 20. 31.
) but for his necessary charges, and to comfort the prisoners Canon
apostolic. and. c sacrotum 12. q. a
, and to receive and relieve the poor strangers 1. Tim. 3. Titus. 1.
, as recyteth Gelasius C. Pres^^um. 16. q. 3
, and S. Ierom Epistle to Nepotian.
declares it plainly. The offices to receive and to distribute and other
such like were given to the Deacons, which nevertheless rendered Read the
Epistle of Pope Clement* which they say was written to saint James, but it is
a false title.
a count to the pastors, and especially to the Bishop, as it appears by the
canons, which they call apostoliques Canon. 15. and. 41.
, in such sort that it was not permytted neither to Deacons, nor to Bishops,
to distribute or employ any thing without consent the one of the other, as it
appears by the counsel of Antioch Canon. 24. and. 25.
. Afterward because of the difficulty of the great charge they ioygned to
them subdeacons as coadiutors of the Deacons, there where it was expedient. And
also archdeacons to govern althings in good order, one or many according as
need required, of the which Saint Hierome Epist. 10. Nepotian
, and Saint Gregory Epistle. 10. of the first book.
makes mention. Also there was appointed to the subdeacons certain Wyddowes
which were entertained to keep and govern the sick, and for other
necessyties of the poor, wherein the ministry of Women is more handsome and
meet then of men. The same is spoken of in Saint Luke, Acts. 6.
and in Saint Paul 1. Tim. 5.
, where it was ordained that no wydowe should be appointed under. lx. years
and also to have good testimony of her chaste life and conversation.

31 Of the four orders which they call minores ordines.
Beside this among the old writers, there is mencyon of three degrees, which
afterward were called Minores ordines, although some count of four, and other
count more. There was also Porters, or Ushers, which were called Ostiarii, who
kept at the gates of the Church to open and to shut, especially because of
the Cathacumines, the excommunicated, and the penytentes which were not
permytted to be present at the mynistration of the Sacraments Canon. 9. the
fowrth counsel of Carthage.
. There were those also which followed the Pastor ordynarylye, as well to do
him reverence and honor, as to be witnesses of those things which he did or
said, and also to acquaynt and make them selves known to the church, and also
to learn to know and exercise their offices, and those they called Acolites,
that is to say, following, and also they did use to set them to other small
affairs needeful in the assembly Canon. 6. the aforesaid.
. Moreover there were those which they called Lectors who did read openly the
textes of the scripture which the pastor or doctor afterward expounded in the
Church Canon. 7. the same counsel.
, they ioygned to them Exorcistes, that is to say, coniurers, the which office
as I think is now ceased, or at the least ought to cease in the Church with
the gift of miracles, which was not but for a time, for to confyrme and
stablyshe the veritye of the word of God, newly declared and revealed to the
world, they served for all those small affairs, which concern the
ecclesiastical service. To try and prove by little and little those whom they
might afterward appoint to offices of greater importance. And whenever
good orders shall be set up and appointed in the Church, for such or so good
purposes, we will not gaynsaye or refuse them: provided that they have
respect to that which is necessary to edification.

32 The third degree of ecclesiastical offices which is the Jurisdiction and
office of the elders.
THe third estate of ecclesiastical offices lies in the spiritual
jurisdiction, ye which was committed to those, who were called in the
wryttinges of the Apostles and ancient Doctors both counsels, and canons,
partycullarly presbiter, that is to say, Senior or Elder, which also sometimes
be called governors by saint Paul 1. Cor. 12. Roma. 12.
, and were chosen not only by the clargye, but by all the body of the
Church, as it appears evidently by the complaynt which saint Ambrose S.
Ambro^e in the first Epist. 5. c. to Timothe. 5. Epistle. 2 book. epistle,
item 10. 14. 15. and other following the. 3. book.
made, that even in his time certain persons took upon themselves this
office. And by that which S. Cyprian c has written, wherein it is easy to
gather, that the Bishop proseded and was chief in this company, not for to
rule and raygne over them, but to do nothing without the advise of the Church.
Now this jurisdiction lies not in worldly and temporal things, but
altogether in those things which concerns the conscience. So that it is
fully distinde from the office of a cyuill magistrate, according as the lord
Christ not only said to his Apostles, but practiced Luke. 12. John. 18. Acts. 6.
, and S. Paul after him 1. Cor. 10.
. True it is that in the time when there were no magistrates, which made
profession or vowed openly to be Christians, s. Paul would that for to eschew
slanders and offenses, the faithful should decyde and end all controversies
among themselves when need required, but this was but for a certain time. And
surely as f* 1. Cor. 6.
I think such persons were but as arbitrers, chosen by the parties, or at the
least was an office distinct from those which we spoke of. Also it is certain
that even under Christian Emperors the good Bishops have been marvelously
let and troubled, about the ending of controversies, but it was more for to
appoint and agree the parties by amiable and friendlye abytrement, then to
meddell the spyrituall Jurisdiction with the temporal. And Saint Augustine
shows plainly in many places, how it grieved him for that he was constrained
to employe, and bestow so much time for the importunity of the people. All
Bishops have not so done, but rather have desired nothing more, then to serve
their ambition under the shadow of holiness, whereof it came to pass that the
Emperors have granted to them more in this case then was needful or
appertayned to them, or the profit of the Church required.

33 To what purpose or end serves the ecclesiastical jurisdiction and which
be the parts thereof.
THe cause and purpose of the ecclesiastical, jurisdiction tends to one
end, that is to say, that all the body of the Church in general, and every
member of the same in particular, be p^esor^ed and entertained in doctrine and
well doing according to the will and word of God. Now the continuance hereof
consists in good laws, and in the good observation of the same. And that ye
laws either be made, touching the doctrine of salvation generally, that is to
weete, concerning their duty which they owe to God and their neighbors, or
concerning the regiment or manner of doing, which every one ought to keep in
his charge or office. It follows then that this iurisoiction ought to be
divided into two principal parts. The first is concerning the authority to
ordain and appoint those things which concern as well doctrine and manners,
as the regiment which every one ought to keep in his degree. The second in the
punishing of those which offend, in the observation of any of these two things,
But concerning the first part, which lies in the power to decree or ordain,
we have already declared here above, that God has received to him self,
fully and entirelye to preseribe laws pertaining to the conscience, for us to
walk in them uprightly before God and man. Wherefore there rests no more but
the other part, which concerns the discipline and regiment which is required,
that all things be done by good order, as we have treated amply in speaking of
the authority of the body of the Church.

34 What is the office of the Elders in the Church.
IT is the office of the Elders principally to watch, that the Church which
is committed to them, begouerned by good order, according to the rule of the
Gospel, and that the ecclesiastical laws and ordinances, either universal
or particular, be mayntained and executed dilygentlye, according to their
charge. And if there shall happen any new inconvenience, their duty is to
provide therefore by new ordinances and injunctions conformable to the
Christian religion and charity: Without burdening of men's conscience, neither
to charge the Church with a multitude of laws, nor brynging in superstition
according to that which has been said herebefore, where it speaks of
counsels, either to be done by themselves, or to take the advice and counsel of
other churches, and the said laws and ordinances to be incontinent allowed and
auctorised by the magistrate, if so be that he be a Christian. And for this
cause in all the prymatiue Church they have been accustomed to hold
provincial synodes twice a year. It is their office likewise when any peril
or danger does happen among them, to appoint prayers and fasting
extraordinarilye, and to practice and use them in their churches, when any such
chau^ces do happen with the consent of ye Christian magistrate if there be any:
so that the godly orders of the church may be maintained with discipline. And
above al things let the word of god be diligently and sincerely preached, with
the sacraments truly ministered, ye ecclesiastical goods well governed, and
althings well ordered. Their duty is also to elect men meet for the same: I say
elect, for it cannot be found that ever there was any other lawful,
ecclesiastical vocation in the Christian Church, since it was brought into any
good order of government, but by the way of ellection, except God called any
extraordinarily, without ordinary means. Now concerning the election that it
may be lawful, behold the points which we consider therein. First who ought to
be electours, what persons ought to be elected, and how they ought to elect,
and how to confirm the election.

35 How the ecclesiastical elections ought to be.
FOr the first poyncte, we neither find it a custom nor yet reasonable in
the Church of God, that be which should serve a Church, already erected, can
be elected without the good will of the same Acts. 14.
. Yet nevertheless according to the places and the conditions of the people, it
is requisyte that the ecclesiastical governors have first a respect to those
and appoint most meetest, and then to aduertyse the people who oftentimes the
greatest part be ignorant who are meetest for them Acts. 1.
. And in the primatyue Church it happened sometime that good Bishops have
named those which they desired to have for their successors, but it was without
respect of their own private or partycular affections. And this nomination
was none otherwise then a declaration of their opinyon, which incontinent after
was considered and examyned by the whole Church Read the acts of the counsel
holden at rome in the time of Pope Hilarie.
, as we see by the example of S. Augustine Epist. 110.
, and of Anastasius Theodorete in the ecclesiastical history. 4. lib. c. 20.
. Moreover the ecclesiastical rulers ought to take order, to prevent all
things which may be a let or hyndrance that the election be not freelye done as
it appertains. And first to be authorized by the Christian magistrate, when
God shall appoint him after by good delyberation and admonitions. But without
the approbation and consent of the body of the Church where they be, the
election cannot be lawful Leo epistle 60. and. 52. Nulla ratio.
. Also good he^de must be taken, that this approbation and election of a
multitude, be done without confusion. As it was ordained and decreed in the
counsel of Laodicia Canon. 13. of the counsel of Laodicia.
. The same order we see was kept in the election of saint Mathias Acts. 1.
, and of the deacons, Acts. 6.
by the Apostles. Such order also was dillygentlye kept and observed in the
Church by a long space, as it appears by all the ancient writers,
especially, when there was occasion to receive any into the clergy, as it
appears by y^ S. Cypria^ Read Cyprian. 4. Epistle, first book, and. ^
Epistle. ^. book.
wrote And concerning priests that is to say Elders, there is a plain Canon
for them which has the title of Anaclete, which they coumpt for the fowrth
Bishop of Rome. Item Leo first of that name in his Epistles, has expressed the
same in a dosen places, at the least Epistle. 87. and others often.
. S. Gregory in his Epistles writes the like 1. Book. 5. Epistle, and 2.
book. 9. Epistle.
. And also let them consider the manner of electing the Pope him self, which
Nicolas the second Did. 28. c In nomine.
ordained about a five. C. years paste, and they shall find that the consent
of the people was among them although the Emperor did ratify and allow
altogether afterward.

36 Of the qualities and conditions of those which they ought to elect.
AS concerning the conditions required in those which should be elected and
chosen, it is manyfestlye declared at large by the spyrite and word of God
Acts. 1. 1. Timo. 3. Titus. 1. 1. Peter. 5.
. Wherefore we may conclude that he which will dyspence with any for money or
rewards cannot be led but with the spirit of Satan.

37 The order and manner to give the voices.
COncerning the manner to elect, we find that fasting and prayers were the
beginning of the electio^s, the which don Acts. 13. and. 14.
shortly after in the most best and wysest manner, they gave their voices in
the great fear of God, after they had examined the lives and sufficiency of
those which were named, according as God ordained by Saint Paul 1. Timo. 3.
Titus. 1.
.

38 Of confyrmation and consecration of the persons elected.
COncerning the confyrmation and consecration of the person elected it was done
by laying hands upon the head of him which was elected, and commendyng him to
the Lord by the prayers of all the Church which were there assembled: which
ceremony has been used from the law of Moises and after retained and used by
Jesus Christ and by the apostles Acts. 6. 1. Timo. ^. and. 5.
. Nevertheless in the election of bishops, this was added by the ancient Canons
that the next Bishops should be there at the least, to the number of three
with the metropolitan.

39 Of marriage, of fasting, and of the difference of days, and meats.
BEcause that matrymonyall causes be partly ecclesiastical Math. 19. 1. Cor.
7.
, and also fasting pertayneth to the^ exterior discipline of the Church, I
have gathered in a few words that which we believe and use according to the
scripture.

We do not put any part of our salvation in those things, that is to say,
either in marriage, or virginity, either in flesh or fyshe, either to eat or
not to eat 1. Cor. 7. Roma. 14.
: but we do stay and establishe our selves in Jesus Christ only as has been
said before. And as for good works wherein the Christians ought to ex^^^yse
them selves, they do far excel these aforesaid according as is commanded or
forbidden in the two tables of the. ^. commandments 1. Timo. 4.
* Yet notwithstanding we do commend and praise such things, as far forth
as the spirit of God does commend them to us. That is to weete as follows.
First we know that y^ seat of chastity rests in the heart. And therefore let
not those brag or boast of virginitye, which do abstain from the outward
act, but those in whom the natural concupisce^ce is so mortified, that they
have no need of y^ remedy of marriage 1. Cori. 7
. Secondarily, we know by the word of God, and by most evident experience,
that continency is a special gift, which God gives to those which seems
good to him. And for as long time as it pleases him 1. Cori. 7 Math. 12
. Thirdly to abstain from marriage, is not a thing that of it self does make
us acceptable to God, nor yet marriage. But he that is unmarried has more
leisure to execute the public or particular office that God has given him,
and in this respect we praise continency as a thing which serves us to use
our vocation better and none otherwise 1. Cori. 7. and unto the end of the
chapter.
*

Concerning marriage, first we say that it is ordained of God Genes. 2 Math. 19
Ephesians. ^
, and honorable in all estates as the holy scripture Hebre. 1^
teaches, so that who so ever has not the gift of continency, that is to
say, who y^ feels in him self such a natural desire, that he may be
drawn to evil thoughts, is oblyged and bound to mary 1. Cori. 7
.

Secondlye, we admonish the married persons, both men and women to take heed,
for there is a kind of whordom in marriage, that is when they over flow or
exceed in abusing the gift of God, which of it self is pure and holy. And
also each of the^ are bound to live and keep themselves in all chastity and
conjugal honesty 1. These. 4. 1. Peter. 5
. Thyrdly, we keep the distinction of marriages and degrees of kinreds
according to the ordinance and word of God And contrary to that we think
there is no wysdom of man ought to prevail Leuit. 18. 1. Cor. 5.
Nevertheless, for Cosins garmaines which is a degree not forbidden of God, we
exhort and admonish all men to take heed and beware, not what may be done,
but what is expedient to edifye, according to the doctrine of S. Paul 1. Cori.
6
.

Fourthly for y^ reasons abouesayd, we call with s. Paul ^. Timo. 4.
in the for bidding of marriage and by consequent the vow of perpetual
virginity, a diuilish doctrine and diabolical. Forasmuch as it is invented flat
against y^ word of god 1. Cori. 7. 9 1. Timo. 3 Hebre. 13. 41 ber. 2. Historia
tripertit. ^ 14. canon. 5. of the Canons Apostolyke, Canon. 10. of the counsel
of Ancite. Look did. 26. where is recyted the words of Innocent. the first,
and Augustine in disti. 27. canon. 13. of the counsel of Constantinople which
was called the 6. universal counsel.
And also y^ fruits thereof declares very evidently with what spirit it was
brought into the world, and how all the earth is by that means defiled and
almost changed into a Sodom and Gomor. By y^ same reason also we condemn and
punish all whordome without exception, and we think y^ it is in no wise
tolerable in christe^dom to tolerate and suffer brodels or open whorehouses.
Yet nevertheless we see y^ y^ great fair or market of ba^dry is kept most
nerest to y^ se which they call (falsely) the catholic and apostolic church,
and by those which would be seen to be the protectors of virginity. As
concerning fasting first we commend it in all sobriety, not for certain days,
but for all y^ life of a christian. Secondly, we call not fasting to fyl us at
once for two days, nor for to eat fish in stead of flesh or such like
mysteries. But to restrain our dyete and fare, more then it has been
accustomed, and to use a more strayte temperaunce in feedyng then was ordinarye
used before. Thirdlye we allow not fasting symplye as a work that makes us
acceptable or pleasing to God of it self, but because it serves us to three
good ends, the first to press down our flesh, abating y^ strength thereof 1.
Timo. 4
, touching many violent and evil affections Luke. 2 1. Cori.
: the second, the earnestlier to make and dispose our prayers and spiritual
thanks giving to God Acts. 13. 1. Cor. 7.
. The third, to be an exterior testimony of our in ward humility before
God, and before men as is expedient Judges. 20. 1. Samu. 1 Jonas. 3
. Fourthly, we make no laws for certain fasting days and times, knowing
that this were even to bring in again the Iewishe law Look the history
ecclesiastical 5. book. ^
, but for particular fasting, it suffices us to exhort all persons to fast in
sobriety, and do their duties: and as for such causes as concern ye whole
church, we remyt it to the discretion of the Governors of the Church, for to
ordain and appoint fastinges according as the case and time requires Joel. 3.
and. 3. ^.
. Concerning the dystinction or dyfference of days, we say that it is a
beastly superstition, to esteem one day more holy then another, or to think
that abstayning from work were a thing of it self that pleases God Colos. 2.
. Notwithstanding among the seven days we observe and keep one, according to
the commandment of God Exodus 20.
, for to bestow it to hear the word of God in the Congregation, and
principallye to dedycate and give our selves to learn and understand our
duties toward God, and toward our neighbors. Thus we spend the Sunday.
And concerning other Festival days, we have put away as many as is possible
for us: knowing the abuse that has come thereby, and the little need that
Christendom has of them. Yet nevertheless, because there be certain days
dedycated to the mysteries of our redemption, we use the Christian liberty,
and have respect to that which either may hurt, or serve to the edification of
the Church, according to the circumstaunce of time, place, and persons.

As concerning the distinction or difference of meats, we desire all
te^perance to be had, as has been said, and then eat and drink with giving
thanks for those things which God gives, without scruplos^ty of conscience 1.
Cori. 10.
, knowing that the kingdom of God lies neither in meat nor drink Roma. 16.
1. Cor. 8. Colos. 3.
, and al things be pure to him that uses them purely Roma. 14. Titus. 1 Mark.
7.
, and without offense Roma. 1. 1. Corin. 8.
, as S. Paul bath plainly said in many places. And with him we call the
forbidding to eat certain meats in certain times, a diuellyshe doctrine* 1.
Tim. 4.
and vain superstition Colos. 2.
.

40 Of the second part of the ecclasiasticall jurisdiction, concerning
correction.
THe second part of the office of the ecclesiastical Senators, is to reprove
those which breed trouble in y^ church, wherein it is to be noted: First, the
manner to punish which the Church uses, is contrary to the ciuyll
punishments. For the Church uses no prisonmentes, nor amerciamentes with
money, nor corporal pains, but only with the pure word of God, as it shall be
said hereafter Luke. 22 John. 18. 2. Cor. 10.
. And if the apostles did at any time proceed with corporal pains Acts. 5
, it was by an extraordinary power because that at y^ time, there was no
Christian magistrate. Secondly, all the ecclesiastical causes may be divided
into three kinds, the one concerning the doctrine: The other concerning the
manners of Christians, the third touching the order which al men ought to
keep in their estate, according to the ecclesiastical law. Concerning the
doctrine, they may fail and err by Ignorance, or by malice, or by the^ both.
Also malice brings forth his fruytes according to his quantity, and
according to that article of faith which it enuyeth against. In all such cases,
first there must be used y^ most easiest means. As in teaching the ignorant,
and reproving the fault of those which offend by malice or purpose,
according to the quallytie and greatness of their offense, and so to bear
with them, if it be possible to win them by admonitions, both particularly
and publicly, and also to call them before the ecclesiastical senators, if it
be needful. Not to confound them but to bring the^ again into ye right way,
if it be possible Roma, 14. and. 15. Ephesians. 4. 1. Timo. 2.
. If all this will not serve, then they must proceed to the lastremedy which is
against the stubborn and incorrigible, of the which we shall speak hereafter.

Concerning behauour and manners there ought to be a difference between the
offenses committed against a particular person, and public offenses, and
between the offenses which be publicly committed. And also he which enforces
himself to do evil, who deserves to be otherwise dealt with all then he
which is fallen by humane infirmity.

Concerning particular faults, or where the offense is not manifest, our Savior
Christ has set an order which ought to be kept in all degrees Math. 18.
. Concerning public offenses, S. Paul wylleth that they should be reproved
publicly 1. Timo. 5.
for to redress the slander, and also practysed it him self in reproving S.
Peter Galath. 2.
. If the most easiest means can profit, it suffices: if not they must
proceed from degree to degree, until they come to the last remedy Math. 18. 1.
Cori. 5. 1. Tim. 6. 1. Timo. 4. Titus. 3. 2. John. 2. 1. The^. 3.
with such discretion that principally the honor of God may be kept, and that
all may be done to the edification of the body of the Church Colos. 5. 1.
Cor. 2.
. As for offenses which concern the ecclesiastical order, there be ancient
canons ordained, from degree to degree, yet nevertheless the rygour ought to be
moderated, and out of them to chose those which be most connenient for to
edify.

41 what excommunication is, and what the right use thereof is.
THe ecclesiastical corrections has to degrees, the first is admonition.
Sometime easy and sometime sharp, according as the offense of the case
requires. The second and last degree is that we call excommunication, wherein
must be noted the point following.

First what is excommunication? We call excommunication 1. Cor. 9.
a sentence whereby the ecclesiastical Seniors after lawful knowledge of the
cause, does declare in the name and authority of God and his holy word, that
such or such, one or many be iustlye excluded and separated from ye company or
communion of the Saints that is to say ye Church of God, and by consequent
delivered to satan, for as much as without the Church there is no salvation:
yet not to continue for ever, but so long as they continue unreformed, and
until that they have satisfied for the slander or offense given.

Secondly, it must be understand that such a power is not grounded upon man,
for man has no manner of power over the soul, but by the authority of God,
who uses them in the Church as organes and instruments by whom he
speaks, and therefore it is not to be doubted, but such sentences be ratified
and confyrmed in heaven. For as much as Jesus Christ has so said and
promised to all his church in the person of his xii. Apostles, under the name
of keys of the kingdom of heaven Math. 18.
and to bind and unbind, as also S. Paul practiced the like with the Church
of Corinthe and others 1. Cori. 5. 1. Timo. 1
. Yet nevertheless, the Church ought after lawful satisfaction, to receive him
again which has been cast out, that is to say, if afterward be shall satisfy
to the Church, and make amends for the publyke offense, according to the
ordinance of the Church and sufficient proofs had of true amendment, as far
forth as man may judge. And there is no doubt but such absolutary sentence is
ratifyed and confirmed in heaven 2. Cor. 2. Ciprian, 1. book. 2. Epistle, and
1. book. 14. Epistle and. 16
.

Thirdly it is to be noted diligently that such authority never pertayneth to
one man alone (except God works at any time extraordinarilye) but to the
whole ecclesiastical senate Math. 18. 1. Cori. 5.
.

Fourthly, this is not given to al those which call them selves of the
Church, but to the true ecclesiastical senate lawfullye and cannonicallye
elected, as we have said for to govern the affairs of the Church.

The fifth point is, y^ the very true ecclesiastical senate, cannot, nor may
not use it at their wyls, as we see al men be subject to many infirmities. But
this power is lymitted and appointed by the word of God. And for this cause
Jesus Christ and his Apostles despised the excommunications of the Scrybes and
Pharisees John. 16. and. 10
. And according to ye same, Irene a most ancient Bishop of Lions, reproved
very sharplye the temerious excommunication which Victor Bishop of Rome
made, about the year of God, a hundred nynetie and eight, which declares very
well what was the primative or first be gynninge of the Bishops of Rome,
where as then they walked in vpryght conscience. And there were other Bishops
y^ understood their office: and one of the causes that the prouincial and
national counsels were ordained and holden for, was to hear and decide the
causes of those which complained of their pastors Canon. 5. c first counsel
of Nice.
. Also it appears sufficiently thorowout the whole ecclesiastical hystorye,
how the Bishops in these cases ought to help one another to edyfye without
ambition. Beside this the Metropolitans ought to be content the^seues with
their lymites, and ought to do nothing without the devise of their brethren in
their Jurisdiction Canon. 116. of the first Counsel of Nice, and. 9 Counsel
of Antioche.
. But ambition has so wrought, that of long time the Bishops of the
principal towns, (and above all he of Rome) has drawn all to themselves:
witnesses the falsehood of Boniface which was discovered and revealed at the
Counsel of This counsel was holden at Carthage, about the year. 422
Carthage, where as was S. Augustine, where it was ordained that those of the
Clergy of Africa, which appealed over the sea to Rome, should be deposed from
their office.

For the sixth point it is to be noted to what end excommunication was ordained
of God. First that the church of God should he as pure as might be possible,
and that there might be no occasion to think, that it should be a refuge or den
of the wicked 1. Cor. 5
. Secondly for fear that the infected should not defyle those which were
whole. 1. Cori. 5.
Thirdly if it were possible y^ the sinner might be brought home to l 1. Cor.
5. 2. These. ^. 2. Timo. 1.
the flock again. It follows then that this punishment must be applied and
used for to edify, as may be expedient, and that there be good heed taken,
least they confound the sinner by too much heauynes and sorowr, when he gives
a sgyne of repentance, but there to mitigate the punishment when need shall
require*

42 Of the civil and Christian magistrate and to what end his office tends.
IT rests now to speak of Magistrates, which be in their estate the
pryncipall members of the Church ordained of God, yea namely above al others
in their estate Roma, 15.
. To these appertains the doing and execution of ciuyll and temporal
affairs, so as their subjects may live in peace. By reason whereof the
taxes, and subsidies, are due unto them Math. 22 Roma. 13.
, and to them appertains to use the sword which God has given the^ Roma. 13.
, for the preservation as well of the countries which be committed to them, as
also for the defense and mayntenaunce of good laws, and punishment of the
evil and wicked doers. Secondlye, the duetye and office of the magistrates is
not to regard simplye the peace and concord of subjects, but principallye
for this end, that the peace and concord may tend to the honor and glory
of God, that all men may live not only in a certain ciuyll honestye, but
also with pyetie and true worship of God* as witnesses Saint Paul 1. Timo.
2.
. For this cause especially it appertains to the Magistrate, that the Laws
which he uses and executes may be conformable to the will of God: and
pryncipallye to give order that the relygyon be perfect and holy, and that
all the Church be ordered according to the word of God, forbyddyng and
punyshynge, as the case requires, All those which trouble the Church or
concerning the discipline thereof. Also David discribed the estate of a
faithful Prince Psalm. 108 and many other textes.
, as himself has used, with all those which have wyllinglye done their
duty, as Solomon, Ezechias, Josias and other faithful Kings and Emperors.

33 How far they are bound to obey the magistrate.
AS there is no faithful man exempt from the obedience which be owes to
Jesus Christ, reigning in his Church, be it king, prince or subject, so there
is none from the greatest to the least which owes not voluntary obedyence to
his Magistrate, as ordained of God Roma. 13 Titus. 2. 1. Peter. 2*
. Yea, although the Magistrate were a tirant, except in one point only, that
is to say, if he command to do things which were against Gods word. For
in this case as the Apostles said, we must rather obey God then man, for
otherwise we extol me^ above God Acts. 4
. It is not then rebellion to disobey Princes, when they would cause us to do
that which God forbyddeth, or to defend^ or forbid that which God commands.
But in this poynt^ there must be such a mean kept, that they do not pass
or exceed their vocation. For the Apostles obeyed not to those which for bad
and defended them to preach Jesus Christ, as also they took to them no weapon
or armor, which appertayned not to them. Also we must note, that there is
difference between doing wrong to another and to suffer wrong done to us. Now
for the first, it is forbidden us* never to do wrong: But especially
commanded us to suffer the iniuryes done to us for the honor of GOD 1. Peter.
2.
, as much as may or can be done without prejudice, or against our vocation,
as we read that Jesus Christ although he were free, nevertheless paid
trybute wyllynglye Math. 17
. It is then a manifest and false slander to say, that the doctrine which we
teach and use brings men to be sedicious, and disobedient to kings and
superious. But clean contrary, the Gospel establishes their power. But this
is impudently done of those which have notoriously exempted themselves from the
subjection of Princes, and which do understand no otherwise by the lyberties of
the Church, then that which they have usurped upon Princes, against all right
both divine and human: and yet have no shame to burden us with that wherein
they them selves be notory^^slie culpable and offenders.

Of the last Judgment. The. vi. point.
1. What it is that we do believe and hope of the last judgment.
FInally, we believe according to the word of God, that in the time ordained
of God Acts. 3. ^. Peter. 3
, the which time the very Angels know not Math. 24. and. 25. 1. These. 5.
* Jesus Christ seeing the number of his elected accomplished Apo^a. 6. 1.
Peter. 3.
and fulfilled, shall come from heaven corporally, with his divine majesty
Acts. 1. Math. 24.
, this old world being consumed by fire 1. Peter. 3.
. And then shall appear before him all mankind which were from the beginning
of the world Math. 25. 1 Peter. 4. 2. T^mo. 4.
, and all those which were dead before, shall be united, and ioygned with
the same body, from which the soul was separated: and those which shall be
living at the hour of his coming* shall be changed in one momente: changed,
say, concerning the corruptible quallitie of their bodies 1. Cor. 55.
, and then the Lord shall Judge the one and the other, according to his
word Math. 25.
: and those which believed (as shall appear by the fruits of their faith)
Math 25.
, shall he made partakers of the kingdom of GOD Math. 25.
, not only in their soul, (the which even before, and after the first
death, has been in the Joy of his Lord GOD) Luke. 23.
: but also in their bodies John. 14.
, the which shall be unclothed from all imperfections and infyrmities, and
again clothed with incorruption and glorious immortalytie 1. Cor. 2.
: For to behold that which never eye could see, nor heart could think 1. Cor.
12.
, and in brief to receive fullye the fruit of their faith and hope, by the
only goodness of God in Jesus Christ 2. Cor. 5.
: And on the contrary, the wicked, condemned and vanquished by the testimony
of their own conscience Roma. 2.
. shall be made immortal, eternallye to suffer the pain prepared for the
Devil and his Angels Math. 25.
.

A brief comparison between the doctrine of the Papists, and this of the holy
catholic Church. The. vii. point.
1 The Papists worshippeth a false God, which is neither righteous nor
merciful.
WHo so ever knows what the Popyshe Relygion is, and consydereth well this
here above written, shall easelye know whether it be with good right and just
occasion that we be separated from them, and joined us to this Church of God
according to his word.

And moreover they shall find those men to abuse them selves very much,
which think that our dyfference only lies in certain light abuses
concerning the manners of life. But so it is that the principal dyfference is
concerning the substance of the doctrine wherein consysteth our salvation,
the which I will sh^we plainly by the way. Although the matter requires well a
Treatise wholly by it self* for to be dylated as it requires* I say then that
the black is not more contrary to the white* then the Relygion of the
Papists is to this Religion of the Church of God. And to declare the same, I
will not stay nor ground me upon the fylthie stynking life of those of
their own Church, from the least to the greatest: But I will come directly to
their doctrine. And when there shall be none other thing to declare and show
that their Relygion is proceeded from the Prince of darkness, but this one
that they will not have the word of God to be used and understand of all
people, and also that they Iuggell forth all their mysteries in an unknown
tongue, to the most part of the people, yea to themselves, namelye, that
utters them. This should be a suffycyente testymonye of my saying to all
men of an vpryght judgment: but we will go further with them.

First concerning GOD, I say* that where as they do set forth the meryts of
any creature to pacify his wrath, they spoil and rob him of his perfyte
righteousness, the which by this means can not be perfyte, if he take for
payment either all or part of that which may proceed from a sinner. Although
I deny not but the good life of a faithful person is acceptable to God, but
not to obtain salvation and eternal life by this title.

Item, they rob and spoil him in so dooynge of his perfyte mercy. For
consider: if we can satisfy to GOD in any part or piece, it follows that he
does not quitte, or forgive us all, but the rest which remained. Wherefore I
conclude, that in stead of the true God, who is perfitely ryghteous and
perfitely merciful in Jesus Christ, only as we have declared, they
worship a dream and fantasy of their own bead, to whom they have given the
name and title of God.

2 If the doctrine of the Papists be true, it follows that Jesus Christ is
not very man.
ITem, concerning Jesus Christ, by whom only we have salvation whether we
consider his person, or that we regard his office of mediator: I say that in
stead of the true Jesus Christ, they worship a Jesus Christ which they
have made and forged. For concerning his person, although they say well that
be is very God and very man, yet nevertheless when they give him an
inuysible body, a body which can not be touched, which holds or occupyeth
no place, do they not spoil him of his humanity? And when they say he may
be in many places at once, is it not to bring his body to be infinite, and
consequently to turn his humanity into divinity?

3 The papists doctrine makes the oblation of Jesus Christ of none effect.
ANd concerning his office, it consysteth in this, that he is only King and
governor universally. The only Prophet and declarer of the will of his father,
and the only eternal sacrificator or hie priest, ye which priesthood lies in
two points, that is to say, in the oblation which he has made once in his
own person for to sanctifye the Church for ever Hebre. 10.
, and in the intercession toward God his Father, the which continues to this
day, and shall do Hebre. 7. 1. Timo. 2.
. I conclude then that the doctrine of the Pope wypeth away all this.

Now for the beginning of the first point of priesthood, if it be so that
Christ must be offered up by the Priest every day for the quick and for
the dead, is not that as much to say, as that the oblation which he has
made him self once for all in his own person, is not sufficient?

Moreover, if the death and passion of Jesus Christ be sufficient to
salvation and if he be the true Jesus, that is to say, true and only
savior, how then shall that be true which they say, that there is but the
fault or offense pardoned? and concerning the pain, that it is only
changed from eternal into temporal, in such sort that we must pay it in
this world, or in another. But if this be false, as it is most false, what
ground have they then to build their merit and satisfaction toward God,
their Purgatory and indulgences and such like?

Item, if man ought to satisfye and pay of his own, for the pain due for his
offenses, the which can not be done without the merytes and suffrages of other
by reason whereof he must be in the fire of Purgatory, until some other
have paid for him and in his name: From whence then comes the merits of
Saints which the Pope sells to us? and how can they dyscharge other, which
cease not to augment their own debte daily? And what notarie has made or
written any such covenant or contractes? Behold many of the ancient doctors
condemned this opinion, as S. Cyprian against Dimetrian in the first Traycte,
Saint Therome upon the syxthe Chapter of the Epistle of Saint Paul to the
Galathes. Saint Chrysostom in the Sermon of Lazarus, yea namely Saint Gregorye
in the fowrthe Book of his Dialoges nine and thyrtie Chapter leaves not to be
purged in Purgatory the least offense.

Item, if they must yet go to purgatory, wherefore serves their confeffion
and absolution?

Item if Jesus Christ be the Lamb, which only takes away all the sins of
the world, when did be resign this office to holy water, and an infinite
number of such other toys?

4 The Papists aboly^heth the true intercession of Jesus Christ.
ANd concerning the other point of this priesthood of Jesus Christ, y^ is to
say the intercession toward God his Father, although y^ papists put Jesus
Christ always before as y^ principal, and without whom they can no thing do
(as they say*) nevertheless is he not spoiled by them of his honor when they
be not contented with him only? And in stead to go directly to him, which
^yddeth us come to him so louynglye, they run to others (yea which often
times be rather in hell then in Heaven) as if there were some creature in
Heaven or in earth, which might bear us more affection, or that were more
redyer to hear us, or who might be more acceptable to the Father, then the
only son of God John. 14.
. It is he only which gave him self to death for us: which is with us, and
continuallye does as it were desire us by his holy word, to assure our selves
of his love, and to prepare us to him, as to the only way to go right to the
father. But there is yet a worse, which is yt they will make Jesus Christ
subject to his mother. In crying out with a loud and hie voice, Roga patrem,
iube natum: that is to say, pray the Father, commau^d thy son, and iure
matris impera, that is to say, command as a mother. And in brief, there is
scant one title given to Jesus Christ nor prophesy of him which they do not
attrybute to her, calling her Queen of Heaven, porter of Paradise, their life,
their sweetness, treasourer of grace, ye refuge and advocate of sinners, in
dishonouring him all that they may, and also making the poor people to
understand that they honor her, contrary to all the word of God, and to the
wrytynges of the most ancient Doctors: witness that which Epiphanius wrote
against the heretics, which they call Colliridians, Saint Chrysostom in the
Homely of the Samaritane, S Augustine in the last Chapter of the true
Relygion. Saint Ambrose upon the first Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans.

5 The Papists does not acknowledge Jesus Christ to be the perfect declarer of
the will of God, neither the holy Scriptures to be a suffycient doctrine of
salvation.
COncerning his office of a prophet, that is to say, declarer of ye will of
God, what man is there, of an upright judgment, which they can make believe
ye Jesus Christ, neither by his own mouth nor by his apostles, did not
suffycientlye declare all that which is requisyte to the Salvation of man? For
them selves has written the contrary John. 15. Acts. 15. 1. Cori. 7 Galath.
1. Collos. 2.
. And if the Scriptures be suffycient, from whence comes this infynite number
of humayne tradycions and commandments, imposed to the poor consciences, as
necessary to salvation, not only above, but contrary to the Scriptures? For
concerning the au^thorytie of Counselles, it has been suffycyentlye declared
how far it extends. And put the case it were that thing which they do
say: how prove they that the Counsels were led and conducted by the spyrite of
God* the which be dyrectlye contrary to the Prophets and Apostles, and other
counsels before?

For example the marriage is approved in all degrees of ministers in the church,
as well by the express Scriptures, as we have showed, as by the first Counsel
of Nicene, from whence comes then the forbyddinge of marriage, but of the
Devil, as witnesses Saint Paul 1. Ti^^. 4.
? Item, the falsehood of the Pope of Rome which desyring to have, and usurp
the jurisdiction over Africa, is revealed and condemned in a Counsel of
Carthage, Saint Augustine being present* and was concluded that none should
appeal from Africa to Rome, from whence then comes the authority of the
Pope as head of the universal Church?

Finally, if the counsels be set and stablyshed by the holy Ghost, from whence
comes it then, that there be none y^ do less esteem them when they list,
then the Pope and all his sequiel? I will say yet more that there is at this
day neither Pope, Cardinal, Bishop, nor Priest which may not be reproved,
excommunicated and accursed, if they shall be judged by the counsels. And if
they dare deny I shall prove it.

6 The papists spoyleth Jesus Christ of his office of head of the church.
COncerning the office of King and governor of the Church, of which Jesus
Christ is head both in heaven and in earth, sytting on the right hand of God
his father, and yet nevertheless present in his Church, by his spiritual
virtue, from whence comes it then, that they will appoynte him a Uycar in his
presence? considering principallye that it is directly against the word of God,
against the Metropolytans jurisdiction, ordained by the first counsel of
Nicene, Look the Epi. of S. Gregory 32. 34. 36. 38. 39. The 4. book and the.
24. 28. 29. 30. The 6* book.
against all the history of the primative Church, yea against saint Gregory
himself, which witnesses in many places that the name of universal
Bishop, ought not to be upon earth, but to Antechrist. Moreover put the case
yet that he were Uicare of Christ, in the universal government of the
Church, from whence comes* this power to dyspense with the word of Jesus
Christ, and to abrogate the doctrine of the Apostles, and namely of Saint
Peter? And yet nevertheless are not ashamed to say that they are his
successors? saint Peter was he not sent to H^erusalem Acts. 8. and. 1^*
by the Church? refuses he to render account of his office? and what did he
teach to others? I (says he? beseech the Priests 1. Peter. 5.
(that is to say, those which have office in the Church) I which also am a
Priest with them, and a witness of the afflyctions of Christ, and partaker also
of the glory which shall be revealed: Feed the flock of Christ as much as
ye may, watching over it, not by constraint, but willingly, not for dishonest
gain, but with a ready will, and not as having lordship over the clergy,
(that is to say, over the heritage of the lord) but so y^ ye be examples of the
flock: and when the principal pastor shall appear, you shall receive a crown
of incorruptible glory. Behold y^ proper words of s. Peter which are far of
from appropriating to himself y^ segniory or lordship of Italy, and
superintende^t as well of Kings and Princes, as of all other churches. And
briefly, if they look well, they shall find, that there is nothing agreeing or
any comparison between S. Peter and these which falsely call themselves his
successors, but in one thing, y^ is to wete, the denying of Jesus Christ, for
the which S. Peter repented, but these do not.

7 By the doctrine of the papists, we can in no wise understand how mortal the
natural sickness of mankind is.
IT is no marvel though such people understand not the office of Christ our
only savior: for they know not how deadely their sickness is, nor by what
mean Jesus Christ our only medycine, is applied and united to us. For first
in stead to declare, that man is altogether dead by original sin, otherwise
called natural corruption, they teach that the understanding and will of man,
is so sore hurt, that the first grace does but only ease and comfort us in
our infyrmitie. So that if this doctrine ^e true, our regeneration proceeds
not only of grace, but there is a participation or concurrence between grace,
and that which they call freewyll, of which is spoken amplye in the 13. 14*
and 15. Articles of the third point. Moreover, to ioygne and heap together
error upon error, they will have a certain disposition proceeding from the
nature of man, to receive the first grace, and that God may be provoked by our
merits, for to give us the second grace.

Item, that the concupiscence which continues after Baptism, is not sin of
it self before God. Item that al smnes deserve not eternal death, for there
be some which they call venyall sins. Item, if our salvation be grounded
upon our good works, in all or in part, to what end does grace serve us
then, but as an instrument to help our free will ^o save our selves? Which be
all execrable errors, wholly abollishing the benefits of Jesus Christ, and
the virtue of the holy ghost in us.

8 Another execrable error of the papists in the using of the only medicine
of health, which is the benefit of Jesus Christ.
AS there is but one only Justice by imputation for the which we be esteemed,
and holden for ryghteous before God, and be consequent saved that is to say, by
the righteousness of Jesus Christ, which is declared to us in the gospel. So
is there but one mean to be joined and united with Jesus Christ for to have
salvation in him, that is to we^e faith, which is an assurance that all
Christians ought to have of their election and salvation by the only grace and
goodness of God, in Jesus Christ. Faith and assurance is created, and daily
increased by the virtue of the holy ghost, within the hearts of the elect, by
the mean of preachinge the word of God, and the ministration of the
sacraments, as we have amply and largely declared in the third and fowrth
poyncte of this confession. So then this faith is as the hand, which only
does receive and apprehende Jesus Christ to the salvation of him that
believes. It follows that those do take away all means of salvation from
men, which dyrectly strive and fight against this doctrine, not knowinge them
selves what faith is, much less can they declare it to others. For according
to their doctrine, faith is no other thing than to believe in general, that
which is contained in the holy scriptures to be true, and that the Romish
Church as they call it, cannot err, what soever they say or do.
Notwithstanding, concerning the first of these two points, it is forbidden to
translate the Scriptures into the mother tongue, and to read it, to know what
is contained therein, to the end it may be known what it is that they do
believe, except he be a Doctor or a man of the Church, as they call them. And
so by this means it is folly to permyt the greatest part of their priests to
read it. For consider the greatest part of them cannot scarcely read it
truly. And of those which ca^ read, yea even the greatest Prelates, (setting
aside those which have not much more knowledge of Christ's doctrine, than
beasts which feed in the field, and those which pass not greatly for it, in
exercysing them selves rather in other things than in their vocation, and
namely mock it with open mouth) I believe the rest shall be found marvelous
few. Notwithstanding according to their own doctrine all this is not without
faith, although he know not what he believes, and what may happen of this.
Certainly y^ which Jesus Christ said, if the blind lead the blind both falls
into ye pyt. Here ye may see ye heaven, whether this which they call faith may
bring us unto. But there is yet more for namely they say and maintain (so
shamles are they) y^ to be assured of election and salvation in Jesus christ,
and to pray with al trust and assurance, as says s. James is a presu^ption: but
to trust in good works as they call the^, and to stay and wait upon whatsoever
they teach of their own brain, this is no presu^ption after their doctrine, but
a true and catholic devotion. Behold the 2. point of their faith, y^ is to
wete, to believe al y^ which seems good to them, and not so hardy to enquire
whether y^ be according to ye scripture or no. Now y^ reason why, for sooth,
because whosoever has a Myter and a cross, can never err in the faith. And
above all the Pope, yea although he led into hell souls by cartloads (as
themselves are not ashamed to declare by writing to their Cannons) reuersyng
and overthrowing the word of God and all the ancient counselles? But who
shall believe them, but he that will be deceived willingly? Look what was
prophesied by the Apostles of them, and ye shall see it as clear as the Sun
in a fair day come to pass.

9 They know not in the papistry the exercise of the law of God, or the
gospel.
WE have declared that the law of God is the only perfyte rule of justice
before him, and that it pertayneth to one only God, to bind the consciences.
But these here on the contrary cease not to heap laws upon laws, not
only above, but also against the law of God, which they make void by
their own ordinances. We have also declared by the manifest Scripture, that
the yoke of the ceremonial law, is put away by the coming of Jesus
Christ, in whom lies the fulfilling of all that was fygured by the
ceremonies of the law. But these fellows have on the contrary, so abolyshed
the Ceremonies of the law, that they have made a C. for one, yea of their own
fantasye, notwithstanding that the Apostles, yea, namely those of whom they
vaunt and boast to have their auctority, have clearlye determined the
contrary. Acts. 15. 1. Cor. 7. Collos. 2. Timo. 4. Timo. 3.
Item, where as the law is not given us for to seek our salvation therein,
but for to declare to us our condempnation, and that we should seek health
and life in Jesus Christ only (beside other exercises of the which we have
spoken in other places) these clean contrary do not only seek their
salvation (which is as much as if they sought their life in the death) but
much worse, as if the commandments of God did not condemn us enough, they
have joined and put to them, and do join daily new lynkes and snares, to
strain the poor conscience. Yet notwithstanding have no shame to say, that
those which hold them to the pure word of God and his doctrine, seek a
carnal liberty, but God and his angels be wytnes whether they seek it or we.
If y^ abuse be great in the use of the law in us, yet is it worse on ye other
part in ye ignorance and malice of the word of God, which we call gospel, that
is to say good news, for as much as it set teth forth and declares to all
believers, a righteousness freely in the blood of Jesus Christ, which only
delyuereth us from ye curse and malediction, which the law pronounces us
culpable. But these people be very diligent to sing it by pieces, and chop it
in a language which they understand not, and to sense him y^ pronounces it,
and to hang it about their necks after the manner of Sorcerers: but to preach
it, or make it to be understand diligently and purelye., this should be
found very strange. Except some one certain day in the year, that one
do preach that seems good to him self, to keep an order in their covent.
Moreover they think, that the Gospel is no other thing, but an other law
more perfect than the old law, and so they abolyshe entierly the use of the
Gospel, sending us to our own works.

10 They know not what good works are in the papistrie.
THe error is not less in this which concerns the fruits of faith, than in
that which touches the faith it self. For it apeareth by that which we have
declared here before in the articles 14. 15. 16. 17. 18. and. 19. of the
fowrth point that we entend nothing less than to reprove good works, when on
the contrary, we maintain that regeneration from whence good works does
proceed, is inseparable conioygned with faith in such sort, that he is a liar
which says he believes in God, and notwithstanding, studyeth not to live
after ye rule of God. But these persons contrariwise, neither know from whence
springs good works which he acceptable to God, nor what they be, nor to
what purpose they do serve. And notwithstanding, they will say (to them that
list to hear them) that they be the advocates of good works.

But we believe that whosoever will look narrowlye to their doctrine, or to
their life, or to both, will confess that it beseems them as well to speak
of good works, as for common harlottes, to dispute of the nature and
excellency of chastity.

But principallye how have they turned into an execrable blasphemye, the most
excellent work, y^ is to say prayer? For over and beside the abolishing of the
passion of Jesus Christ they use to join and accompanye it with the merytes of
whom they list, and sow together the textes of the Scripture at their
pleasure without any reason: hyerynge other to By ^^ades they count their
prayers to God, and at length bring God their det.
pray for them, babbling in an unknown language (to the most part of them
which do pray) as the popingaies speak in a cage: and would pay God by co^nt
or by tale. Yea they will advance and set forth all this for satisfaction and
paime^t for sins, as well of the living as of the dead.

What is all this any other thing than to mock God openly, what so ever good
intent or custom they can allege?

11 In the papistry they know not what is a Sacrament, nor what is the use
thereof.
A Monge all the horrible corruptions which are seen in the papistry, this of
the Sacraments is marvelous, as I hope that those will confess which have well
considered that which we have summarily said here before. Now for to declare
here all the abuses, it should be a matter to long, for the which me thinks
it sufficient to touch the principal points.

First these great Theologians know not well what a Sacrament is, nor to what
end God has ordained the sacraments, for all his Church. Neither be
contented to have polluted the holy baptism, and abolished the holy Communion
of our Lord, as we shall say hereafter, but also of a simple Ceremonye of the
laying on* of hands, they have made four Sacraments: that is to say,
confirmation, penance, the orders, and annealing. And moreover because the
number of 7. pleases them very well, they would also have marriage a sacrament,
whereof we will speak something briefly.

First of confyrmation.
Concerning confirmation it is certain that the true ancient Bishops examined
those which were baptized in their infancy, and caused them to render
confession of their faith, when they were come of age, for to confirm them.
And after in laying hands upon their head (which is a most ancient ceremony,
the which Jesus Christ and his Apostles have used) commended the^ to God. The
same also was done to those which were seduced by Heretykes, and after were
teturned to the Church. Now for us, God be thanked, this examynation and
instruction is reestablyshed, and dilygently exercysed in our Churches. But
these contrariwise, having utterly abolyshed the cause of any such manner of
doings, notwithstanding, have made a fair sacrament without word, promise, or
ordinance of God, after they have put to their cream, oil, and what they
list else, because ye laying on of hands with prayer, seems to them, to be a
very light thing. Finally, for to join an execrable blasphemy to their
ignorance, have not ben ashamed to prefer their sacrament of confirmation
before the holy baptism, as their Canons declares plainly.

Of penance.
It has been declared here above in ye articles. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18. and.
19. of the. 4 point which be the causes and the effects of true penance: then
much less would we abolish penance. Moreover in the article 46. of the said
fowrthe point, we have showed how Baptysme is the true Sacrament ordained of
God, by express testimony on the scripture. Math. 5. Mark. 1 Luke. 3 Acts. 13.
But these not content with the ordinances of God, under this shadow that open
and publyke sinners, according to the discipline of the Church (of the which I
have spoken in his place) were reconcyled to the congregation, with prayer and
imposition of hands, after they had fulfilled that which was enjoined them, by
ye ecclesyastical senate (not to saitsfice to God, but for to amend the
slander, and to give sufficient testimonye of their amendment) these I say
under this shadow, have confounded and overthrown all together, in making a
new Sacrament of penance, of which they make three parts, to weete,
contrition of the heart, confession of the mouth in the Priests ear, and
satisfaction by works. Whereof we do principally reprove these which follow.

First, of their own brain and fantasy only, they have brought in this
Sacrament, which can not be but false because there is no word of God for it.

Secondlye, for that they require as necessary to salvation, all the parts
above said, wherein they show themselves not as Physicians, but very murderers
or killers of the consciences, as it shall be said hereafter.

Thyrdlye, they require an entyre and full perfection in all the aforesaid
three parts* the which is impossible for man to do. So all men may, see to
what end their doctrine tends.

Item for to make up the whole heap of wickedness, they add to it this
blasphemy, that by the merytes of those things, their sins be pardoned. And
so by this means abolish and make of none effect, the benefit of him, by
whose blood our souls be purified and made clean.

In the fyfte place* because they shall not slander us, ye shall perceive how
we do under stand of these three parts of their penance.

Of contrition.
Concerning the contrition of the heart, we know that the very true
amendment of a Christian, must begin by the feelyng of his sins as we have
said in the article 23. of the fowrth point but in such wise that it may be a
way to lead us to the free mercy of God, and not to think to wype out our
sins, by the merit of our contrition, which is not a merit of
righteousness, but a sorrow due to our sin.

Of confession.
As of confession we find five kynds, the which we teach and practice warely
and dilygently according to the word of God, not for to seek therein
remission of the sins, but as fruits and effects of the true feeling of our
sins.

The first, is publyke confession of the whole Church toward God, when they
do assemble themselves ordinarylye to hear the word of God, or
extraordynarily, in some afflictions or trouble Leuit. 15 Exodus 10 Nehe. 10
.

The second, is of every one partycularly, opening his heart ordinarilye
before God, to ask pardon of him, after the example of the Publican John. 13
Daniel. 9 1. John. 1 Math. 18 Luke. 17
.

The third is, when a sinner extraordinarilye, touched with the true zeal of
God, comes so far as to confess openly his myserie, and the mercy of God
toward him after the example of David, and many other Psalm. 51 Math. 3 Luke.
23 1. Corin. 15 1. Timo. 1
.

The fowrth is particularlye James. 5.
, that is to weete, when a sinner desyringe consolation and assurance of his
salvation, comes to his neighbor, and principallye to his Pastor, whose
office is to show the use of the word of God, as well to the whole flock
which is committed to him, as to every person particularlye. But he must take
heed how he lays this yoke upon their consciences, for God has not made
it as a law.

And also there* must be heed taken more nearer, that they ioygne not nor
attribute absolution either to the person of the Pastor, or to the virtue of
certain words pronounced.

Nor to any other thing, the^ to the pure grace of God in Jesus Christ,
apprehended by faith. As is declared to us by his word, as has been spoken
before in the Articles. 25. 26. 27. and. 28 of the fifth point.

The first is when a sinner reconcyleth himself to him whom he has offended,
be it to one particular person, or to many Math. 4. and. 6.
, or to the whole Church: which is a ^ 2. Cori. 2
confession and reknowledging of syns ordained of God, which follows always a
true repentance.

Behold then the manner of knowledging our sins, grounded upon the holy
scriptures: and teaches us moreover that none can be sufficiently sorry and
penitent for his sin. But concerning the necessity to confess our sins to
priests as they call them, leaving out nothing at all, as if remission of
sins depended upon such a recytall: we dare by Gods word boldly affirm,
that it is a very deuellishe and wicked ordinance, whereof no fruit can ensue
in the Church of God. As also it appears y^ it was never instituted of God,
by the opinion of the canonistes, but by Innocent the third C. omnis vtriusque
sexus de su^ma trinitate in antiq.
. It is apparent that of a long time there was in some Churches, a certain
person ordained among the elders or ancients for the use of the fowrth and
fifth kind of confession, whereof we have spoken: But there is no cause why to
impose this law to any people, or to bind the consciences to a thing
impossyble, that is to say, to perfyte recytall of all his sins, much less
to establishe the remission of sins, in the same. But afterward this custom
was abolyshed in Constantinople, by Nectarius, predecessor to S. John
Chrysostom, who afterward specially condemned this auricular Confestion.
And yet there was in that time no such servitude or bondage joined to it, nor
was never used or done by Nectarius, nor yet Chrisostom had not approved it, as
to have been ordained of God, either necessary, or profitable to the Church
Nicephore in the history ecclesiastycall. 112. book. 28. c. Chrisost. on the
Psalm 50. homil. 2 I te^ sermon of penance and confession. Item. 5. homily of
the incomprehensible nature of god. Item. 4. homily of Lazarus.
.

Concerning satisfaction, we know thanked be God, that true repentance
requires that he which has offended, shall satisfye to him that is offended,
as much as may be possible. Moreover, we receive and embrace, (with good
moderation) the ancient custom of the ecclesiastycall disciplyne, toward
those which have offended the Church, and which desire to be united again into
the flock: but as to God to appose and set against his wrath, any other thing
then ye only satisfaction of Jesus Christ, we say and affirm boldly, that it
is the most wicked and excreable blasphemy that can be. For consider their
penance, as they call them, for the most part be vile Idolatries and
superstitious infamies, partly of their own nature, as Pylgrimages, Masses,
prayers, nu^bred and compted, and none understand them, worshipping of Idols,
and such other abominations, covered under ye shadow of good ententes, and
partly because of the abuse, of fasting, almoses, afflictions of body: all the
which things and such other like tend to Idolatry, when they join to them the
opinion of deserving or merit, in mingling them with the blood of Christ.

Of the extreme unction called anealing.
Among other things, whereunto a past or is bound, we do count ye visitatio^ of
ye sick, whom he ought to comfort and to assure the^ of their salvation as is
required, and according to the contents of the word of God. Now the apostles
and other of the ancient Church, so long as ye gift of miracles endured, have
used in their visitations, not only this ceremony of laying on of hands but
also oil, wherewith they anointed the sick Mark. 6. James. 5
, not after form of medicine, nor yet to make an ordinary sacrament in the
Church. For they themselves never used it, and yet much les did they bless or
worship the oil, or to cross it, or to join it to certain virtues: and in
brief, nothing les then to conjure or charm it. But to assure the sick
person, certainly by this visyble sign and ceremony. But these men on the
contrary they come never to the sick, but as do the Ravens to the carrayne,
and also know well that the gift of healing by miracles was not given to the
Church(...) for a certain time. Nevertheless they have retained and kept the
sygn^ and mark, yea, as necessary to salvation for souls abolishing the
benefyte of Jesus Christ, after they have utterly disguised it, with a
thousand manner of apyshe plays at the least. For the Apostles used not the
oil, but in those which they healed myraculously. Therefore these ought to be
ashamed, not only to use as they falsely allege as the Apostles did, but use
it in those which be out of all bope of life: by reason whereof they call
extreme unction, or the last annoynting.

Of orders.
Concerning their orders as they call the^. Nay what disordex was there ever so
great in the whole world. For they be not yet accorded how many there be. For
one names seven, the other nine, and some thyrteene. But to speak as it is we
may answer truly, that there is no one order in altogether* And as concerning
offices, we shall show hereafter that they have not retained one of those
which God did appoint in his Church.

And for their sacraments as they call them, where is any one word or promise
of God in their trompery? Secondly concerning the Ceremonies which they do
use in their orders. ca^ they show any one of them ordained of God? By what
title then should they be sacraments? But consider we the same more nearely.
It appears that in the Church of God the persons lawfully called and elected,
for to serve as well to to the word, as the government of the ecclesiastical
affairs, were as consecrated and dedicated to God, by the ceremony of laying
on of hands, with the prayers of the whole Church. But these people not
content with this simplycitie, what they have done? They have quite put away
the custom of the ancient Church* and brought in this which follows, yea
with a strange language.

Of the clericall tonsure.
First, their must be a clericall tonsure where as they clyp three or four
little ^eaires in his crown, and he must have a little blow on the ear, and
then put his head in a surplyse, as they call it, and behold a Priest ready
made, able to have a benefice, paying honestly for it, and to be exempte from
the secular magistrate in time of need, except being of age he were married to a
widow, or were twice married. Behold the foundation of the Popish clergy, as
comfortable and agreeing to the word of God and the ancient Cannons, as the
devils be to the Angels.

Item, if one look on the ceremonies of the iiij. orders which they call
Minores, they give the keys of the Temple into the hand^ of those which they
call Ostiarie. A book to handle to those they call Lectors: to their Exorcists
certain forms and manners of coniurations, and to their Acolytes, they gave
tapers and crewets to touch. Notwythstandinge, those which receive these fair
sacraments, have neither Temples to shut, nor Bybles to read, nor Devils to
conjure, nor Bishops to follow: and what more, they receive all those offices
at one time together. Who is it now that sees not that all this is a very
apyshe play and mockery to God and his Church.

Also for the three orders which they call Maiores, behold how it goes. Those
which they call Deacons, receive a stole upon their left arm, with a text of
the Gospel chopped in pieces. Then my Lord the Bishop (without calling or
Byshopryke) puts his hands upon him, to make up the measure of the ancient
ceremony. And yet notwithstanding, these godly mysteries they play all in a
strange and unknown language. And how shall he be a Deacon which has no
goods for the poor to distribute? No, for it is not given him in charge by my
Lord Bishop.

But to put wine in the chalice and bread on the paten* To make clean the
alter and dress it fair, to bear the cross, to sing the Gospel and the
Pystle to the people in a strange tongue, and to do other apyshe play in
their high mass. Behold how correspondent the Deacons in the Church of
God, were with these of the papistry.

The subdeacons receive of the Bishop the Chalyce and the paten. And of the
archdeacons, the crewettes with water, for (as they say) their office is to
bear the crewette and the to well, to give the Priest to wash, to set the
implementes for the mass upon the altar, to receive the offeringes, whereof
the poor get nothing. Behold an other mommery.

Finally, their priests be ordained manifestly for to abolishe and bring to
none effect, the only oblation which Jesus Christ has made in his own
person. They be greased with Oil, to bring again the leuiticall high
Priesthood, abolyshed by Jesus Christ. Moreover they may receive a breathing
of my Lord Bishop as though he had the holy ghost closed in his stomach.
Beside this they do give him a chalice with a paten and the bread not to eat,
nor to feed other, but to sing Their low Masses be all said, which is
against this order to sing mass.
(as they call it) which is a word as me thinks that should be suffycient to
condemn the use of their low masses, as they call them. Here ye may behold
for their mysordered orders.

Of marriage.
For marriage it has been said before in what reverence we have it according
as it is Printed in our service Books, plainly to be seen. But these men be
for the most part, as great contempners of marriage, as they are great lovers
of all kind of lechery and whoredom (as heaven and earth can wytnes) puttyng
marriage when they lysfe, in the place and number of the Sacraments, by a very
apishe and ignorant manner. As it has been declared to them, I think a
thousand times. Yet notwithstanding will they permit the spyritualtye as they
call them, to use this sacrament? No truly, least that Christendom should
be lost. So much seems this sacrament to them to be polluted and filthy.
And in deed I confess that whoredom of all kinds appertains and agrees
better with them: I leave out the means by the which they pollute the holy
state of matrimony, as much as in them is, their foolyshe benedictions, their
false opinion touching the second marriages, the bondage and servitude laid
upon the conscience touching affynitie, both spiritual and temporal. I pray
them of one thing, if they would not be angry with that I shall say, that they
would accord and show me their opinion that marriage is a sacrament, with one
sentence regystred in their decrees, (whom it makes aucthor one of their
Popes named Sircius) to weete, whether that which Saint Paul said, those
which be in the flesh can not please God, be understand of marriage or not.

Of Baptism.
Concerning Baptism, certain it is that the Lord having respect to his
elected, has not permytted that this Sacrament should be abolished in the
papistry. For they baptize in the name of the Father, the Son, and the holy
Ghost. The effect of Baptism, depends not in any wise of him which
ministers it: but yet notwithstanding, in how many sorts have they polluted
it, for to bring it to nothing, and utterly to abolyshe it, if it had been
possible.

First, all is said and done in an unknown language, and although they had
spoke in the vulgar tongue, what declaration is there of the right use of
holy Baptism, in this form and manner which they use in the papaltie.

Secondlye, how many signs and Ceremonies, have they ioygned to it, without
the word of GOD, wherein they stay and trust more then on the simple and
holy ordinance of Jesus Christ and the Apostles? And it serves them to no
purpose to allege antiquity. For time can not, nor may not spoil God of the
honor which pertayneth to him only, as we have said in the 22. Article of
the fowrth point. Moreover they know well, that the ceremonies of Baptism,
were never holden by the Fathers for to be of the substance of the sacrament.
Therefore, when as super stition springs, it is necessary to abolish and
suppress it. For certainly it is not possible that the foolysh devotion of
men will be domegeable to the Church when they cannot be contented with the
ordinance of God.

Thirdly, the grace of God it is not tied or bound to the sacrament, as if the
promise were not suffycient and strong enough of it self, but the Sacrament
is only added and put to the promise, for a greater confyrmation, namelye,
when there is neither contempt nor negligence, and we be out of all doubt
that the children of the faithful are sanctified from their mothers womb. But
these have so tied our salvation to the exterior baptism, that they have
willed women to baptize children in case of necessity as they call it, against
the express decree of the third counsel of Carthage. Canon. 100.
Item in baptism we be so regenerated by the virtue of that which is there
figured to us, that oryginall sin, that is to say our corrupt nature, is not
imputed to us to damnation, and yet notwithstanding, cease not to be in us.
Although daily it be quenched, and suppressed by the virtue of Jesus Christ
dwelling in us. Nevertheless these do not understand of what importance
original sin is. But do teach that it is utterly quenched, by the doppyng
or sprinckling outwardely of water, and that it puts away that sin
wherein we be all so culpable that it draws our lives to ruin and confusion.
And so attributing that to the water which appertains to the only blood of
Jesus Christ, represented by the same.

Of the Supper.
Concerning the holy Supper of the Lord, what desolation is there in all the
Papistrie? It is requisite that there be signs for to represent the thing
signified, otherwise it can be no Sacrament, as we have amply and largely
declared. But these abolish the signs, saying that there is neither bread nor
wine, but only the whiteness and sauoure of bread and wine, wherein they
utterly abolyshe the proportion, which is between the signs, and the thing
represented by them.

The conjunction of the thing signyfied with the signs, depends on the only
ordinance and promise of God, without being either local, or in any wise
natural. But so only as God offreth to us verytably, that which he promyseth
to us by his word, and represents to our sense by vysible signs, that is
to say, the very body and blood of Jesus Christ, to everlasting life. But
these on the contrary, will have by the virtue of four or five words, the
bread to be changed into the body, and the Wine into the blood of Jesus
Christ, which is a very Iuglyng or Sorcerie. For in so saying, they destroy
by consequent, the humanytie of Jesus Christ. If they allege furthermore,
that God is Almyghtie, the annswere is soon made. For there is no question to
know whether God can, (for we doubt not but he can do all) but whether he will
or not. Now that he will not, it appears by this, that he has not declared
it by his word. But on the contrary, it is said, Act. 1. and. ^.
that Jesus Christ has taken his body from us into heaven, and shall not
remove from thence, until he come to Judge the quick and the dead. Although
concerning his divine nature and virtue he is over all. Moreover when Jesus
Christ did take a very body, he did sufficiently declare that he would not
be invisible, nor infinite concerning his divine nature, as he said to his
Apostles. Finally if they allege that the body of Jesus Christ is now
gloryfied, the answer is peremptory, that when the Lord instituted this
sacrament, his body was not as then gloryfied. And nevertheless his words
were then as true and veritable, as they be now at this day: wherefore their
saying is to no purpose, for the glorification, makes but one body, to become
one infinite thing, for it appertains but to one God to be infinite.

The ordinance of God ought to be plainly declared, and expounded in the
ministration of the sacraments, according to his word, otherwise no faith can
be there. But these have wrapped the ordinance and word of the supper, among a
number of things, utterly contrary to it, for to turn away the people from
that which they ought chiefly to consider. Also they say nothing, but in an
unknown language to the most part: and finally much less expound they any
thing, but on the contrary, they enforce themselves to speak at that time
basest and softeste, so that then it seems they blow rather than speak. And
then they have done their great consecration, by reason whereof they esteem
themselves more worthy than the Virgin Mary, for (say they) the virgin Mary did
but bear Jesus Christ, but we make him.

The supper is the Sacrament of the communion of the faithful, as well with
Jesus Christ, as one with another: but these against the express word of god,
against the nature, and the end for which this Sacrament was instituted,
against all the custom of the ancient 1* Cor. 11.
Church, have changed it into their base Masses, and particular Masses, from
whence shortly after, were hatched and sprung up this great and horrible
multitude of Massing Priests.

We ought to come to the Supper, there to receive in our own persons by
faith, the body and blood of our only Savior. But these give in their Masses
neither bread nor Wine, but eat up all themselves (for all the Paryshe as
they say.) But put the case that their Sacrament were a true Sacrament, where
find they that the sacraments do profit them which receives them not, or
whether one may receive it by a Cap. reiecta consecratione. dis. 2. d.
consecrat in decret. Note this well.
Proctoure? But what say they to Calixte one of their Popes, which would that
al they should be excommunicated, which be found at Mass, not communicating
the Sacrament with the Priest.

Also we ought to come to the Supper of the Lord, to the end to receive Jesus
Christ to everlasting life, by the virtue of the oblation, which he once made
of himself. These on the contrary, what say they that they do at their
Mass? They offer Jesus Christ to God his father, for the quick and for the
dead. Now if this be true, where is this only oblation of Jesus Christ, where
is also his hie priesthood, and by consequent, where is the only hope of our
Salvation? God has instituted two Sacraments, that is to say, bread and
wine. These of their own authority (beside that in their hye and low Masses
there is no communion, no when they keep their Easter, as they call it) have
taken away the usage of Wine, from all those which they call lay people. And
they cannot deny, but it is against the express ordinance of God, and against
the custom of all the ancient Chrystian Church. But what say they of their
Pope Gelasius, which excommunicateth expressly al Note. De consecradist. 2. cap.
comperi(...).
those which be content to take the bread, and abstaineth from taking the
Sacrament of the blood?

The Sacrament of the body, and the Sacrament of the blood, were ordained
severally, and namely the bread ought to be broken to be dystributed. But
these in the Sacryfice of their Mass, (where as I have said before there is
no Communion, and consequently no Sacrament of the Supper, but an horrible
profanation of the sacrament, make 3. morsels of that which they seek no more
in Heaven by faith. But they say they hold in their hands* and so eat their
soppes and wine: what say they then to Iulie, one of their Popes which did
expressly forbid them to De consecra. did. 2 chap. crimen.
wet the bread in the wine?

The sacrament of the supper ought to serve us as a ladder, for to ascend up
to heaven by faith, and there to embrace him, which is represented in the
supper, by signs and visible ceremonies. By reason whereof they also yet sing
Sursum corda, that is to say, not to stay themselves upon visible signs on
the earth, but to lift up their hearts and mynds on hye, for to eschew all
Idolatry, but these after they have song it, do prove themselves liars, going
clean contrary, willing the people to stay and gase upon that which they hold
in their hands: and do worship it as very God, furely a thing so detestable,
that it is marvel that the earth does not open and swalowe them up.

The sacraments be ordained, to be ministered and used as has been said,
according to the word of god. And therefore without this use and ministration,
they be no sacraments, as S. Augustine decla^eth Third book of the Trinity.
10. c.
plainly speaking of the bread of the supper saying: such things be honorable,
and religious things, but not maruelious, or miraculous things, but these
contrariwise, close it in their boxes, worship it as very God, and yet the
worms will eat it: they make it rest some certain days of the year, and
make him to walk some other days. Which was instituted by Pope Vrbane the
fourth, a boute the year. 1264. for the Christian church did never know what
that meant which they call in some places the feast of god, or corpus christi, but
since. ^97. years which declares sufficiently which ^orm and order of the
Church is now, either theirs, or this which we now hold. Certainly it is
marvel that they do not reserve and cause to walk, or to lead about the
wine, as well as the bread, for the one is as precious as the other. It were
out of order to say, they fear the wine will eger or wax palled. For they
hold that it is no more wine, but the pure blood of the Lord, the which being
glorified, is no more subject to corruption. But how much wants it after
their doctrine, that Saint Hierome is not an heretik, the which spoke
honorably of Exuperius Bishop of Toulouse, for that he kept the blood in a
cup of glass, and the body in a basket of osiers, without any pomp? What
shall become of all the ancient Church, which gave the bread, not into the
mouth, but into the hands of the faithful? What shall become of the time of
Saint Ciprian, S. Ciprian Sermon. 5. de lapsi^.
where there were women which without reprehention, did keep the residue in
their coffers? Although there were in it we confess, Superstition proceeding
of ignorance: but yet this was far from Idolatry, the which we see at this
day maynteyned, with all kind of cruelty, as though we did not believe in God
to say this (which is true) that we must seek Jesus Christ in Heaven by
faith, and not with corporal eyes in this world.

The effect of the Sacrament, concerning the conjunction of the sign with the
thing signified, depends upon the only ordinance of God, lawfully observed
and ministered. And these contrariwise tyeth and byndeth their consecration, to
the intention of him which does consecrate, so that no man can be assured,
whether he be an Idolater, or no, in worshypping of that which they would have
to be worshypped. For if the intent for to consecrate be not in the Priest,
they say themselves there is but bread. Now to woorship bread is very
Idolatry. But who can be assured of the intent of the Priest, considering
that men know for the most part, what people they be?

The virtue and effect of the Sacrament, concerning the receiving of the thing
signified, that is to say, of the body and blood of the Lord, consists in
the faith of him which receives the Sacrament, because it is the only means
to receive Jesus Christ: but these contrariwise, will have Jesus Christ to be
always received, as well of the faithful, as of the unfaithful, which is as
much as to lodge God and the Devil, life and death together.

Finally how agrees the garments and the apparel of these game players,
with the supper of the Lord, which is so much more excellent and celestial, as
the sign is homely and simple? For we be no more commanded to worship God by
figures and shadows, but in spirit and verity: and if it were needeful as
yet to have such apparel or figures, can they find any better, than those
which God himself appointed to his people by Moses? But if God has abolyshed
those things, yea namely forbidden them, as things shadowing and darkenyng the
bright Sun, now that the clear day appears, what other spirit, but the
spirit of the Prince of darkness has moved those which have forged to us,
and do daily invent and forge, new figures of their own pleasure, and after
their own desire and appetite? As aulters, Napkins, Idolles, Towels, Corporas,
Chalices, and Couers, Crewe^s, Amises, Albes, Gyrdels, Cappes, Stoles,
Manipuls, Crosses, Missals, Tape^s, Torches, Copes, Tunicles, Paxes, Sensors,
Ships, Banners, Apyshe things on feet and hands, demaundes and answers,
neither knowing what they demand, nor what they answer. And in brief, such
a working and iugling, that themselves be constrained to laugh at them, and
turn to jesting and pastime, even at their own folk. Notwythstandyng they
say, we be Sacramentaries, which hold us to the very simple ordinances of
Jesus Christ, in all fear and reverence. And these here which mock god, and
the world which live to diminishe and bring to nothing the sacrifice of Jesus
Christ, and which sell Jesus Christ daily, as much as in them lies, for as
much or more money than Judas did: these I say be the prelates of Christendom.

12 In the papistry there is no ecclesiastical government.
IT appears by this above said, that there is neither word of God purely
declared, nor prayers duly made, neither Sacraments ryghtly admynistred in
the papistrie. But all is notoriously reuersed and changed, which be
nevertheless the very substantial and true marks of the Christian church,
as has been said. It follows that the Papists, or otherwise the Romish
Church, be in no wise the holy Catholic Church, that is to say universal:
the which we do believe: for as much as God has ever preserved and kept
his church, as was answered to Elias, in the time of the reuolting of the ten
Trybes of Israel.

But because they allege to us the succession of the Apostles, as if that
were a sure argument, it must be seen of what force this reason is, at the
least in the gouernemente which they call the ecclesiastical Hierarchy.
First I say, they presuppose a foundation utterly false, that is to wit, the
Church to be joined or tied to a certain nation see, or place, consydering
that all the Scripture, and the experience of that we see with our eyes, be
all together contrary.

Secondlye, these which enter not by the door of the house, be not called
pastoures, neither successors of true pastors, although they occupy the same
places, but rather robbers and thieves: And it is not ordained that false
pastoures or Prophets should be obayed as successoures of Prophets. But we
must take heed, and separate our selves from every one, that teaches any
other doctrine than this of God. Also S. Paul said, that he is accursed, and
to be cut off from the Church, which should bring any other Gospel (that is
to say any other doctrine of Salvation) than his. He excepteth not the Angels:
but he passes further, and propheu^eth that those which should do thus,
should sit in the Temple of God, that is to say, should hold the place of
Pastors and Elders. And S. John declares sufficiently in his Apocalips, that
it should be namely within Rome, as the ancient writers have understand it.

And for to show in few words, there is not one among them from the gretest
to the lest, which after this reckning is not a robber and a thief, if the
word of Jesus Christ may take place, I say not one excepted, as their
Provisions, Presentations, Collations, Signatures, Bulls, Mandates,
Preuentions, Dates, Consentes, Permutations, Concordates, Resignations,
Pencions, Annates, Vacantes, Process, Fulmines, takynges of possessions,
Dispensations, (which be the windows where through they enter in) be dyrectlye
against nature, against al right and reason, against the holy scripture,
against all the ancient counsels and decrees, against all the wrytinges of the
ancient Greeks and Latins: briefly, they be things of them selves most vile,
infamous, and execrable in the Church of God: That never since the world was
a world* was there any such abomination, nor so open merchandise, of that
which of it self is more precious then Heaven and earth, that is to weete, the
poor souls of the Christians bought with the precious blood of Jesus Christ
the Son of God. And let all kings and Princes of Christendom understand,
that they shall render a ^o^^ts to the great King of Heaven and earth, for that
they suffer thee^ery and robbery to have place in their lands and countries,
which has no title or cullor of right either divine or human.

Thyrdly, if they be the successors of the Apostles, then must the Apostles be
their Predecessors. But that case is clean contrary, for in their
ecciesiastical regiment there be two sorts of estates, of the which one of
them was utterly unknown, not only to the Apostles, but also to all the
Christian church, the which may not, neither ought to be maintained or
supported in any case. The other, concerning their names, be not now in the
Church, but notwithstanding, they be so disguised in effect, as the light is no
more contrary to the darkness, then these be contrary to those* whose names they
bear. Then I conclude, that there is naught in all their case, but an horrible
confusion, declaring sufficiently of what father they be children.

In the first place, I will speak of the Pope, for as much as he calls
himself head of the Church with the Cardinals, the Suffraganes, Officials,
Proctours, Vicars, Chaplains, Prouostes, Priors, with all their sequels.

I put in the second place the Archbyshoppes, Bishops, Curates, Cannons,
Priests, Deacons, subdeacons, Clerks, and such other officers.

As concerning the order of S. Peter S. Jerome upon the Epistle of S. Paul to
Titus.
and S. Paul* S. Iherome witnesses sufficiently (as appears also by their
epistles.) For in y^ beginning there was no dyfference between Priest and
Bishop. But if they will regard that which has happened since, the bishop of
Rome has be not his limits and bonds assigned as the other* Metropolitanes*
had in the first counsel of Nicene, confyrmed by the subsequence* When S.
Irene and S. Ciprian wrote to the Bishop of Rome, yea in reproving him
sharplye, did they call him by any other name then brother and fellow? Gregory
the first* did he not detest the name and office of head Bishop, or Patriarch,
declaring in more then twelve sundry textes, that it is the very title of
Antechriste? Who has conuocated the ancient universal Sinodes? Who has
assygned the place and the time? Who has enjoyed namely the Bishops of Rome
as well as all other to be there, but the Emperor?

If they believe not us, nor the acts of the Counselles, let them believe the
requests, intercessions, and excuses contained in the Epystles of Leo the
first, a man among the rest full of ambition, which nevertheless did not
once think of that which his Successors has usurped. Gregory the first,
which they hold as a Saint, did he call the Emperor any otherwise then his
sovereign Lord?

Epistle. 5. of the first book.
Namely, did not he witness that it is by the commandment of the Emperor,
that he was Bishop? Much less then did the Pope make the Emperors. In the
time of Constantine, in the cause of Augustine expounds at large against the
Donatists.
a Bishop of Carthage named Cecilian, was not the Bishop of Rome with other
Bishops Delegates, as Judges appointed by the Emperor? And afterward, because
there was an appeal from his judgment, the Bishop of Arle was he not sent as
Delegate by the Emperor, for to know the cause of the appeal? When Look
the. 6 lesson of the counsel of Calcedon.
Leo the first would extol his pre-eminence, by his Ambassadors in the
counsel of Calcedon, although that which he pretended was a small thing, in
respect of that which is done since: was it not put back and denied quycklie
by the Counsel? Was it not expressly forbidden in the counsel Mileuitane
(where as Saint Augustine b Canon. 22. of the counsel Mileuitane, more there.
1100.
was) that from Africa they should not appeal over the Sea? And when three
Popes one after another, to weete, Zozinius, Boniface, and Celestine, alleged
in the sixth counsel of Carthage, a false Canon of the counsel of Nicene, for
to usurp iurisdyction over Africa The epist. is in the end of the counsel of
Africa.
, this falsehood was it not dyscouered and condemned by express letters? In
the which it is also declared to Celestine, that he has not to do to send,
neither Legates, nor other of his part into Africa, for as much as it was
not so ordained in the Church, nor in no wise to be received. Now these
testimonies being most true and certain, by what title does he call himself,
successor of Saint Peter, and head of the Church, under the shadow of
ordynaunces, which they alleged notoriously false, and attributed unjustly to
thrice whom they list. As has heretofore been said, and partly also made by
them selves, after their own appetyte, against God and all the ancient
decrees, of whom they would seem to be the defenders. Or shall it be for
that about the year. 607. Boniface the fowrth, did bye first of this horrible
monster Phocas, (murderer of Maurice the Emperor his Master) the title of
universal head or Bishop, which Gregory his predecessor so earnestlye did
refuse, saying that it was the very manifest title of Antichriste? Or shall it
be because that Zachary and Steven the second (for the reward of their
cruelties, This was done about the year. 752.
and infamous treasons) received the seigniorie of Italye, which they
afterward did call the patrimony of saint Peter? This shall suffice them for
this time: for if it be needful to enter into further matter, there is well
wherewith to banquet them of another sort.

Concerning Cardinals, it were needful that they should first of all declare
from whence they be come, the which were very diffycill for them. Certainly
(if we will believe the godly iuglyng of that Synod, which they have
attrybuted to Syluester Pope) their nativity did begin at Constanstine. But
there is yet worsse, then in so long a time, and in so many Counsels, and so
many books of the ancient Doctors, there is made no more mention of my Lord
Cardinals tytles, then if they had never been hatched. Wherefore if there were
any then, it must appear that their office and charge was very small. And in
deed it is euydently seen by that which they allege of Syluester, that they
were none other but Deacons, that is to say, dystrybuters of the goods of the
poor, every one in his quarter of the Town of Rome, at that time being
divided in 7. quarters which they called Cardines. It is then no maruayle 7.
quarters of Rome called Cardines.
though they be not named by such things as concern the affairs of the true
doctrine, or the government thereof, wherein they are not seen, neither do
they understand what it means. But afterward when their Bishop was
exalted. the Priests of Rome would also be a lofte: and by this means the
name of Cardinal was given to them, and their authority increased and grew up:
For it was more then reason, but that they should have part of the bootye. And
for to hyde or dissimule their original, they have agreed to be called.
Cardinals, as if they were those upon whom the catholyke Church were stayed,
as a gate hangs upon his post: For Cardo signifies a gate or door post.

But they are not determined to leave their title, so long as they add to
them, as Saint Cross, Saint Sabine, and other. The which declare yet plain
their oryginall and first office. Yet that not withstandyng, by a long space,
it was thought a strange thing, that a Cardynall of Rome should hold a
Bishoprike, for he could not have it at Rome, where he must do his office of
Elder, or of Deacon, and so feed his flock. And for to be a Bishop, and
not to preach, was a thing no less strange, then to see a Shephearde dwell
in a City, and be called Shephearde, and to receive the wages, without keeping
or feeding any Sheep.

Far was it from their custom, to be absent from their charge and office,
or to have a Vicar under them: and yet less to keep them in the courts of
kings and Princes, and to be charged with Abbyes and Byshoprikes. But after the
horrible confusion was come, then their charges and offices were converted into
dignities, and my Lord the Pope desired no better, then by these traffykes and
means to entertain himself with Kings and Princes, even by the means of his
Cardinals, who of good right he calls his Creatures. And nevertheless, of
such gre^ force is the Truth, that in the year ^* ^8. the principal among
them, yea, na^^ly the same which at this time, or of late was Pope, and called
Paul the fowrth* declares freely to Pope Paul the third, that to be a
Bishop and Cardynall, were things utterly not to be suffered. The book is
imprinted, and open to be seen. What lacks it then, that they be not judged
by their own mouths? I leave out to speak of their Buggeryes, Auarices,
Symonies, Treasons, poysoninges, and other Cardynall virtues, used of many
among them, which all the world styncketh with the sight and knowledge thereof.
To speak of their estate (although they were the most honest men in the
world) yet I say* they have no approuation nor just title, neither in the
scripture, or in Counsel, neither Decree, or ancient Doctor: although they
set them selves above the Metropolytanes and Bishops.

But truly I agree with them in one thing, that is to say, that their
universal head (which Saint Gregory calls Antichriste) cannot better be
chosen then of such an honest company. But of one thing I much maruayle, that
so many great men of so noble and ancient houses, yea even Princes, have
through this curssed son of perdition been so bewytched, deceived and
poisoned, to make them Mynisters of his crueltyes, that they have no more
regard to the dygnitie of their ancestors, nor the building and restoring of
the poor Christian Church, and the authority of kings ruinated and overthrown
by the false persuasions of this wicked beast. But to be so contamynated with
such fylthynes to maintain that which they see and know in their own
consciences ^owe evil it is.

Behold here how the Pope and his Cardinals be the successors of the
Apostles and Disciples of* Jesus Christ: Concerning their Suffraganes,
Officials, Proctours in the Courts of the Church, Notaries Apostolycall,
Promoters, Auditors, Bullists, Copists, Courriers, Vicars, Chaplaynes,
Prouostes, and other such innumerable vermyne, what can I say otherwise? For
one shall find as soon the devil among the Angels, as one word or mention of
them in the holy scripture, or in the ancient Counsels, Decrees, Doctors,
Greeks, or Latins for to approve them. I say more, that it is as possible to
accord these estates with the true form of the Christian Church, as to
accord light and darkness, truth and lies.

I come now to the other, which have more appearance, for as much as they have
their foundation in the scripture: yet notwithstanding, because they be nothing
less, then that which they be called, to what purpose does these names serve
which they bear, but the more to condemn them of falsehoodde and deceypt.

We have here before declared and showed that there is in all two degrees of
Ecclesiastical offices, as well for the mynistration of the word of God, as
of publyke prayers and Sacraments, to weete, the office of Pastors and
Doctors. Such was the manner and the custom in all the primatyue Church.
And for as much as the Pastoures are divided into many degrees, to weete,
Archbyshoppes, or Metropolytanes, Bishops, or Curates, this was not only in
respect to the office of the word, but in consyderation of the orderyng of
the affairs which concerns the Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, of the which
we shall speak in his place.

Wherefore there is in consideration of the office, to mynister the doctrine of
the Gospel, no dyfference before God, between the Archbishop, the Bishop,
and the Curate, so that each of them be Pastor of their own flocks. And
for this cause be they all named with the common name of Bishops. So has
Jesus Christ and his Apostles both exercysed and spoken, and all their true
Successors Mark. 18. John. 15 Acts. 18.
. As if they consider all the ancient Counsels and decrees, concerning the
election and the life as well domestical as public, of those whom we speak
of, they shall find there and perceive things yet more straight. Now then is
it possible that the stubborn impudency of these horned beasts should come
so far, to be called Successors of the Apostles, and vaunt them selves of
names which appertains least to them of any men under heaven? For who set
them in this estate? By what door be they entered in? Where is the election
and examination of all their life, according to all right orders both divine
and human? Is there one among a hundred of them, that is meet or disposed to
think only of his charge or office, or knows certainly what office and
charge he has, or which only enquyreth after his flock? And if there be
found one among a hundred, how does he occupy himself, but rather to do any
other thing, then that which pertayneth to his office? And if of a thousand
Bishops or Curats in the papistry there he found one which teaches his
people, what doctrine is it but such as is directly against the truth, as we
have declared? And what Sacraments can he mynister, what orders may he
keep, where there is naught but all pollution and falsifying of the true
sacraments, and all abhomynable confusion, as here before has been declared?
The prouincial cou^selles, how be they kept? Now many Archbishoppes be there?
How many Archbishoppes be there? How many Bishops be there, meet to dyscerne
and give counsel? Concerning Sinodes of every Diocese, how be they
practiced? Wherefore be the Curates called, but to pay their tribute and
procurations? What assemble, what doctrine, or what order is there?

But I will demand of them, according to their own ordinances, whether one
that is excommunicated, ought not to be rejected, and not to be taken as a
member of the Church? How much less then ought he to be a Pastor? Secondly,
I demand of them, if he be not suffyciently excommunicated, which is
notoriouslye such a one, as are those which Jesus Christ and his Apostles
command to eschew as one infected, or full of pestilence, and which be
expresselye entered and mayntayned in the Church, against all the
constitutions, and ordinances of Counsels, Decrees, and ancient Doctors,
conformable to the scriptures. Now for to know if they be such, I send
them, beside the Scryptures, which we have already often times alleged 1.
Corin. 9. 1. Timo. 6
to the Epistles 3. and 4. and fourth book of S. Ciprian, and to the third
Treatise of the same, entitled, The simplicity of Prelates. Item to the
Epistle 85. of Leo the first. Item, to the Canon 4. and 6. of the counsel of
Nicene. Item to the Canon 23 and 25. of the counsel of Antioche. Item to the
Canon 14. and 15. of the counsel of Sardicque. Item disti. 23. ca. Cleric^
plebisque, and 8. q. 1. c. Sicut vir. Paragr. Epis copum vere, and 9 q 3. c.
Archiepiscopus nihil. There and other where in an infinite number of textes
they shall find by what title they be called Archbishops Bishops, and Curates,
how auayleable the title of their Hierarchy is.

13 The abuse which is committed in the second party of ecclesiastical
offices which be Deacons.
COncerning those which ought to wait and watch upon the doctrine and
prayers, let us come first to the dispensation of the goods of the poor, for
the which it was declared, that the Deacons were principallye established. Also
in the Papistrie, what examination, what election, or what order is there in
the making of Deacons, and Subdeacons, what charge also is given them?
Forsoothe to be able to iuggell in their mommerie, to be assistaunt at the
renouncinge of the sacrifice and intercession of Jesus Christ, as has been
declared before in the third and fowrth Article, to sing a gobbet of the
History of the Gospel, or of an Epistle in an unknown language, and without
exposition, to handell the Challice, to hold the Crewetes, to receive the
offering, whereof the poor shall have nothing, to give the Pax^, to say Ita
missa est in a hye Mass. But in what Church? forsoothe where they may. And
for how long? Untyll they them selves may be Priests even the first day. And
because that long time before he be a Priest, that is to weete, before he have
the office of doctrine, or of ecclesiastical jurisdiction, according to the
old Canons, be must be for a time exercised and proned in these base offices.
Therefore it was needful for these Master Apes, to work some invention for
to say they keep the ancient decrees. Now I pray you these things
considered, by what title dare these wicked wretches be called Deacons,
against the testimony of the scripture, against all the ancient decrees and
Doctors? For the which they spoke of the office of the Deacons, in the
ministration of the Sacrament of the supper, how can it agree with that which
is dyrectly against it? And especially of Archdeacons, by what title are they
called by that name, consyderinge they have not followed one iotte of their
office? And for the admynistration of the goods of the Church, where is the
distrybution of four parts, ordained by ancient Counselles, as it has been
amplye declared, in the thyrtie Article of the fyfte point?

From whence comes that every Benefyce as they call it, has his revenue a
part? But that the Lords coat which the Soldiers would not tear, is by
them parted into infinyte pieces?

Where is the fowrth part committed to the Bishop, and how is it
dystributed? I report me to their whoores, to Bawdes, to Dogs, to Hawks,
Popengayes and Birds, to Horses and Cooks. Where be the Cleargye that ought
to be norished with his fowrth portion? But rather in what Church have they
any learned Clerks or Scholars? I report me to the Cathedral Churches and
Collegyalles, as they do call them, where the bootye and spoil is parted.
Where is the fowrth part of the poor? I report me to those which keep the
accoumptes of Hospytalles, how much they be helped by the part of those which
have the goods of the Churches?

Where is the fowrth part for the reparation, not of their superfluous Palaces,
unmeet for Christian men, and yet less for the entertaynement of such
horrible Idolatries? But to maintain the buyldynges necessary for the
congregations, I report me to those that see it. Behold in sum the godly
order of this Ecclesiastical Hierarchy in these points.

14 Of the abuse which is committed in the order of Priesthood, and in the
government of their spiritual jurisdiction.
IF it be needful to speak of the abuse which is committed in the third
part of Ecclesiastical offices, of the which has been spoken in the fifte
point, in the Artycles. 32. 33. 34. and other following, by what end may we
begin to enter into so great a confusion?

First, by what authority have they changed (for the most part) the nature
of the spyrituall jurisdiction of the Church into a m^ere temporalitie,
appertayninge only to the Ciuyll Magistrate, by all right both divine and
human?

Secondly, although the Priests or Elders be especially ordained to do their
office by Gods word, from whence comes it, that it is so out of use in all
the Papacy? For I doubt not of that I speak, and also it is manifest
throughout the Scripture, and by all the ancient Counselles and Doctors, that
those which be called Priests at this day, be no more like that they bear
the name of, then black is like white. For after their manner, what is it to
be a Priest? It is to have authority to Sacrifice and to offer up Jesus
Christ for the quycke and for the dead: that is to say, in one word, to
turn the roots upward, as much as in them is, of all the ground of our
salvation, as in other places has been said. And from thence is it sprung
that of Governors, they have made hyreling Sacrificers for wages. And so there
is become two sorts of Priests, that is to weete the Beneficed, and the poor
hyrelinges, which live under the other, and be more busyed in offeringes
as well in their daily butchery for money, as Judas was, as also affyrming their
office to save and dampne for money, yea of those which be so occupied to
dampne them selves, that they are forced to have Uicars under them to dampne
others. And to advance this occupation, they must yet have goodlye Bulls and
Dispensations, to dystribute to all that comes, paying honestly for it: to
the end that those which live to eat up, devour, and dampne all the world,
as much as in them lies, also may devour and dampne one another by
privilege. For truly it is easy to see in this confusion which is
apparaunt to all the world, and to those which be of the best of them, if
their bellye do not overcome their consciences, that the Devil fyndeth him
self as it were combered and ouerladen to receive so many at once, and would
invent some manner of way, that each may come in bys rank and order, drawing
and tollyng after him his company: a thing certainly most miserable and
pitiful amongst the Christian people.

Notwithstanding, who has this jurisdiction which deuowreth the quycke and
the dead, under the name of the Church? I will not enter here into the great
bottomless court of Rome, but I leave it to be scanned to Saint Barnard in his
books De consideratione, to Pope ^^gene: although that which they then did,
was nothing, in respect of this which is now. But I will speak of the
Ordinary.

First, my Lord Bishop, master Offyciall, master Uicar, their Promoters,
Procurers, and such like have taken the place of my masters the Sacrificers.
On the other side, the Canons as well in their Chapter, as in their dygnities
Capitularies, likewise have taken their part* Now for the first, that is the
Officialles and their sequel, who has set them in this degree? Truly. the
same Spyrite that does conducte them, as the experyence declares. For as I
have said in other places, it was not possible to have brought them into the
Church of God, until they had driven him out, which is the only master,
even our Christ. And there is neither holy Scripture, neither Counsel, nor
Decree, nor any ancient Doctor which ever did know such monsters.

Concerning Chapiters, there is some more apparaunce: For the name only of
Cannons, and Prebendes declares that they have succeeded in the Clergy, of
those that were norished of the fowrth part of the goods of the Church, among
whom were chosen willingly, those which were employed to charge an office,
and to those which had with the Bishop the spiritual government, where of has
been spoken in the. 32. Article of the fyfte point. But notwithstanding what
is the office of Canons? truly nothing less then to govern a Church? For
namely, the Bishops would never suffer them, and in deed they could not.
And if we shall come to speak of the lives of those Gentlemen, I would know
if there be any man that has his natural wit, that can tell what dyfference
there is between the most part of Cannons and the Hogs. This question
avoided, they shall have a respect what order they keep in their Hierarchye.

It has been spoken of the person of those Lords the governors of the
Church who having so good a foundation* it is easy to perceive what may be
their government.

First if they would, or did understand how to do it, were it lawful for
them, or either Archbyshoppe or Bishop to reform the doctrine? No, for that
appertains to the Theologians and Divines. And as for them I confess they
be no such. And certaynlie there may be perceived in the same only the
just Judgment of GOD, against those which have contempned so excellent an
office, as to declare the the secreetes of GOD to men. Yet the Archebyshoppes
and Bishops which only will have their voice delyberatiue in the
Counselles, notwithstanding must come behind both in sight and knowledge, of
those which have not removed out of the puddell of one popyshe school, and
ought of right themselves to be ordered by the Bishops, according to all
good order. For where was it ever seen that the Doctor (put the case that
such were Doctors, which neither ^ To the Sorbonists doctors of Paris, and
Inquisitors of Spain.
have doctrine, neither flock to teach) should go before the Pastor? And
yet notwithstanding, some of these Gentlemen, takes no less upon them over
their native kingdoms. Yea the Pope him self, attrybuting to them the
knowledge of doctrine in such wise, that it is not lawful for to gaynsaye
them, under pain to be judged and punished for an heretic.

Concerning manners, who is he that will meddle with it among them? For there
is nothing in the world that they fear more, and principallye in that which
concerns the service of GOD. For they can do no otherwise without perjury,
then to maintain and augment all the tyranny of the Romyshe court.

Concerning elections, how is it among them utterly abolished, and changed
into this horrible and abominable merchandise of Symonie, whereof has been
spoken here before, and especially, in the elections of Canons and Moonkes, as
they be accustomed to elect? Who shall call this a lawful election, where as
is not but an open most execrable poluting of that which is required in the
true elections, according to the word of God, and all the ancient decrees?

Concerning confyrmations of Officers elected, what other thing is it then a
very apish play, from the highest degree which is the Metropolytane, unto the
last which is to be received into the Clergy?

As for Ecclesiastycall causes, and namely in corrections, where is the
Ecclesiastical Senate? Where is the lawful judgment to teach the ignorant,
to call sinners with meekness lowly to repentance? Where is the word of
God? Where is the ancient Counselles and Cannons, for to vanquishe and
convince Heretics? Which be those that have the charge and office to
excommunicate?

Where be the persons excommunicated? What be the causes Excommuncation? How be
they ordered? What absolutions have they? What satisfactions to the Church?
Hereby ye may plainly see what their Succession and Hierarchy is, of which they
boast so much, and consequently what is the whole government of the Church.

Of Moonkes.
If the name of Moonkes (that is to say solytarie) be not sufficient to declare
that those which at this day be named Moonkes, be nothing less then that
which they be called, there be other reasons sufficient for to convince them.
For ancient Monasteryes were as Collegies, into the which men resorted for
two causes. First, the better to be at quiet to study the Scriptures. The
second to exercise patience, and austeritie of life. Not withstanding, it was
not to be strayned and bound to one place during life without exception. But
contrarywyse to be the more meet to serve the Churches, when they should be
called and elected thereto, as it appears by Gregorye Naziancene, Basile, and
Chrysostom, and namely in Saint Augustine Epi. 76. and 82.
. To be idle, or not to work with the hands was intolerable: for on the
contrary they lived only by the labor of their own hands, yea and they did
give the rest of their labor to the poor. So that a Moonke not trauayling for
his living, was esteemed as a Thief Histori. tripertit. 1. book.
, according to the rule of saint Paul 1. These. 3. August. de moribus eccle.
catho. Cap. 3. and de opera monacorum.
. And to put salvation partly or altogether in their abstinances, how
extreme or hard so ever they were, they never thought it. For they knew very
well what it was that Saint Paul had written of that point 1. Timo. 4.
. Moreover Saint Augustine testifyeth Augu. de moribus eccl. cath. capi. 33
and says. Let none be oppressed above his power, least there be
superstition in the abstynence of meat: for the weak refusing foolyshlie the
use of Wine, were admonished brotherly, that by their superstition they brought
them selves rather more weak, then holy.

It appears moreover by that which Saint Ciprian First book 11. Epist.
said, that it were better for the Vyrgins which were dedycated by promise to
God (that is to weete, to the service of the poor, and not to be idle in
Coouentes) if they would not, or could not continue, that they should marry,
rather then fall into the fire and burn by their delyghtes, as also Saint
Paul has ordained ^. Timo. 5.
. If this be veresie, Saint Cyprian must be an heretic. Nevertheless, ye may
see the manner of the ancient Monastaries, whereunto what shall we find like
or agreeing in these stynckinge corners, or dens full of all superstition.
apyshnesse, blasphemies, enuyes, treasons, drunkenness, ambitions, Sodomyes,
poysonynges, and all other styncking fylthynesse, so styncking, that they them
selves cannot endure it, which appeared long since, and sproonge up by little
and little. For Saint Chrysostom had no greater enemies, then such false
Moonkes and Friars, runnyng by the streets from town to town, and namely of
these which be called Mendicantes. Is it not maruayle that the Cardynals, and
namely among others, he that was Pope of late, named Paul the fowrthe, is not
set aside, and all their tail is not sent again to the Devil, from whence
they came? For behold their own proper words, in the book which they did
offer to Pope Paul the third, in the year. 1538. Entitled, Concilium
delectorum Cardinalium, mendicantium ordines tollendos censemus omnes, that is
to say: We are of that opinion, that all the orders of Mendicantes, or beggyng
Friars ought to be abolished. Although a certain Friar of late days bathe
Imprynted a Book of the Counselles, and has put in Conuentuales ordines, that
is to say, the orders Couentuels. It may be thought he did it to save his
own order. But what need is it to enter into these puddelles? Truly they
must needs be utterly blind, which seek not only Christianity, but also
the perfection of Christianity in such an hell,

But for this time, to the end we may declare what title they have to meddle
with preaching, or with any manner of Ecclesiastical charge or office, I will
desire them of four things.

The first is, if ever they have been compted, but among those which they call
the Laity ever since the Church was reformed, let them declare.

The second, let them deny and they can during the time, namely of Gregory the
first that to be of the Clergy, and a Moonke, were things intolerable
Gregori. 3. book. 11. Epist.
except he renounced the Moonkerie. But during such time all Ecclesiastycall
affairs of theirs were interdited.

The third, they deny that they be subjects to the Bishop within their
Diocese, i Canon. 4. of the. 15. lesson of the universal counsel of
Chalcedon.
by the general counsel of Chalcedon, one of the which they themselves
compare to the four Evangelists. And if they allege their Privilege of
exemption, let them show that the holy ghost does ever deny or gainsay
himself, or that the Pope can abolysh the decrees of a general counsel
ratified and approved so many times, and so autentike.

The fowrth, let them declare if there be any idle monk, that is to say which
does not his good will to get his living; which is not an Apostata and
perjured, by the contents and rules of his own order.

These points answered it will be time to consider what order they ought to
keep in their goodly Hierarchy.

15 The Papists be manifestly culpable of rebellion against the magistrate.
THe impudentie of those which burden us to be rebels against kings,
Princes, or other Magistrates, is to much, and to extreme. For concerning our
doctrine, it is clean contrary, as we have declared in the sixth point. And for
experience, we make Judges (with our Princes and Lords) all the whole world,
yea even our cruel persecutours. But if there be Anabaptists and lybertines,
which do ^owe abroad the contrary to defame the verity of the gospel, be we
in ye fault? It is we only that at this day do strive and inueigh against
them, more firmly and lively then all the rest of the world. But what need is
it in this case to attrybute it to the Anabaptists? For there be no people in
all the world less subjects to kings and princes, then those which burden us
falsely and against the truth. For who is he that abaseth and brings down
kings and Emperors under his feet? And namely, is there ever so vilaine a
Moonke, or so wicked a Priest in ye world that is not exempt from the
jurisdiction of the secular magistrate, as they call him? Let those here answer
us, in steed to accuse us: For consider what we say and maintain, for as much
as Jesus Christ himself has practiced (although he were exempt being the
son of God) Math. 17.
and the Apostle expressly co^mau^d that Roma. 13.
every person shall be subject to the superior powers with a threate, that he
which resysteth them, resists God. Also S. Peter 1. Peter. 2.
has ordained and declared largely as foreseeing that which those should do,
which falsely would be called his successors. From whence think ye does come
their exemptions which they call ecclesiastical, and these their temporal
jurisdictions which have destroyed the Church? Those which now a days
maintain and think that in such things consists the prehemine^ce of the
Church, be they not the same of whom s. Jude Jude. 8.
has spoken, which follow ye flesh, walking after their old filthy lusts,
contempning powers and seignory? which also be audatious and pleasers of them
selves, not having any fear or shame to contemn and despise rulars and powers.
If they will not believe us, nor experience at the least let them hear what is
written. S. Chri. e Chrisost* on the beg^^ning of the 13. chapter of the
Epist^^ of S. Paul to the Romans
expou^ding these words of S. Paul: let every person be subject to y^ hyer
powers, this says he is ordained to the ecclesiasticals and clergy, and to
Monks, and not only to the seculars or laity, although y^ were Apostle,
Evangelist, or Prophet, or any other whatsoever it be. For thy obedience and
subjection does not alter thy service toward God. Behold also what S. Bern. S.
Bernarde in the boo^es, De consider^^^one, writter^ to Pope Eu^ene.
has written: by what title says he is it, (speaking of the temporal sword)
that the Pope sells these things? It is not according to the right use
Apostolical. For Saint Peter could not give that which he him self had not,
but he has left to his successors that which he had, to wete the care of the
Churches. Item says, he, your powers are not over possessions, but over the
sins, for as much as ye have received the keys of the kingdom of heaven,
not for to be great Lords, but to have the correction of vices. Which
dygnitie seems greatest to you? To forgive sins, or to distrybute
possessions? There is no comparison. These earthly superiorities have their
Judges, which be Kings of the earth: and wherefore usurp you the office,
dignities and lymittes of other men? Learn says he, to have a spade to delue,
and dress the Vineyarde of the Lord, and not to bear a Scepter. And yet
more, it is a clear thing says he. that all Lordshyppes is forbidden to the
Apostles. Go then thou which vsurpest the title of an Apostle in ruling
Lordlike. Go where as the authority and power is set in the Apostolyke seat.
Behold the proper words of Saint Chrysostom, and Saint Bernarde, which
heard not the blasphemies of Boniface the eight, and other such Monsters. And
if this suffices not, let them add to it the Epistles of saint Gregory to
the Emperor Maurice, and the answer of Pellagius Pope, to Chyldebert. 25.
quest. 1. Chapter Satagendum, and likewise the answer of Leo the fowrth. 2.
q. 1. Chapter nos si incompetenter. By this shall appear more clear then the
day, from whence their tyranny does come, which at this day has brought
under them, the kingdoms of the earth. It serves them to no purpose to
allege the donations and gifts of Kings: besides that which they have
forged, and make men believe what they list. It is certain that kings may
not, nor ought not to change the order, which is establyshed of God, that
which has divided and separated these two iurysdictions. And also they cannot
allege prescription. For there is no prescription against God. Besides that in
them there is nothing to be had but most evil conscience and infidelity.

The conclusion of that is aforesaid.
THese things considered, I hope by the grace of God, that all men of a sound
judgment, may easily know by the conference, as well of the doctrine, as of the
exterior government, on which side the verity of God does stand, and what
slanders they bring upon us, against all reason. Wherefore we require in the
name of God, those which by ignorance hitherto have persecuted the innocents,
to have more regard to them selves, and to the judgment of God, which is to
come. If they be kings, Princes, or other noble and worshypfull men, that they
will so much the more be dillygent to hear the verity, which only may make
them long time and happily to reign: and also take heed of those which under a
false semblance of Relygion do abase and bring under the scepters and crowns
of kings, to their boods, hats, miters, and crosses: yea so far as to make
them serve to their insatiable covetousness and extreme crueltye. If they be
Judges and magistrates, let them consider for the honor of God, that when they
shall come to render a count of their judgments, it shall be a poor defense or
excuse for the^ against the wrath of God, to allege that they have hen but the
mynysters of the laws and statutes which them selves did not make. This is the
excuse of such as do set other a work to shed innocent blood. If they be
private persons, let them understand that where there is no understanding or
godly knowledge to render a reason of his fact, there can be no zeal of God,
but a very wilful rygour, for the which they shall give accomptes. And at the
least let them take the leysour to confer the lives of those upon whom they
have been so cruel (without understanding) and what was their case with those
other which have provoked them to be polluted with innocent blood: and by that
means they shall judge the tree according to the fruit.

Concerning those which by a wylfull malice have conspired against the truth
and extend all their power to anymate and stir up kings and princes against
us, but the only Lord has kept his Church against their rage and fury
betherto, and will do to the worlds end.

Notwithstanding, let them enterprise and do all that they may, and do the
worst to us they can. Which is to cut us of and destroy us utterly: for
that is the best we hope to have at their hands. But if it please the Lord
they shall win no other thing, but in despyte of them our poor Paper in the
end shall quench their fyres, our pens shall break their swords in their
hands, our patience shall vanquishe their cruelty, and they shall see with
their eyes, that truth shall have the victory, and their wicked kingdom
overthrown. For it must needs be, will they, nyll they, that this word
pronounced by the Son of God be fulfilled, every plant which my heavenly
Father has not planted, shall be plucked up: such is that faith for the which
we suffer, in the which we now live in, and hope to dye, to live for ever.

FINIS.
Another brief confession of faith, according to the same herebefore and the
same author.
FOr as much as God is perfectlye right I
wise and just, and all men wholly and altogether sinners, then out of these two
things must needs be, that either God must renounce his ryghteousnes and
justice which cannot be, or all men without exception be utterly lost and
condemned, except they satisfy fullye, and perfectlye the divine justice.

But he satisfyeth perfectly the divine II
justice, which pays all that be owes to God. Wherefore we must first seek
what it is that man owes to God, and then whether he be able to pay him,
thyrdly if we cannot find in our selves wherewith to pay him, we must see then
where we may borowe to pay, that we perysh not by the just judgment of God.

Wherefore to the end we may know III
what it is that man owes to God, we must consider the form and manner of
the oblygation wherein we be bound in our creation, and what is written in the
two tables of the law, and then we shall find that we are bound to love God
above all things, and with all our heart, and our neighbor as our selves. So
it is aparent that we owe to be paid perfect love to God and to our
neighbors.

But how can this be done, if first we IIII
be not naturally apt and enclyned to do this? For experyence teaches that
our nature is clean contrary to this. For all men of them selves or of their
own will be enclyned rather to hate God and their neyghbor, contrary to love.
Now if our own nature draws us to hate, how can we pay the love which we
do owe?

Of this we may gather three conclusions, V
that is to say, that all men of their own nature be haters of God being
corrupted. Then it follows that they cannot only pay that they do owe, but
also they bind them selves daily more and more, and endebte them selves by
new sins to the just judgment of God, from whence it follows necessarily,
that either all men without exception must be condemned, or else find some
one that will pay their debtes.

Now where shall we find such a VI
pledge or suretye that is meet and able to do it. Certaynlye in no place
among the things that be created. For if we search among the Angels, the
answer is ready, the Angels be not bound for the sin of man. For the
ryghteousnes of God cannot demand of the Angels that which man owes. And
also there is sturred up the wrath of God which must be borne: and it is
certain that the Angels them selves be not able to bear so great a burden.

But if Angels be insufficient and unable VII
to bear so great a burden, what creature can be found that is able to do
it? Wherefore we must necessarily have refuge to some one that is more mighty
then all creatures, and also that must be very man. For if he be not more
myghtyer then any creature, that is to say, very God, he can not bear the
burden of the wrath and ire of God, but should him self be overwhelmed under
it, then much less could he satisfye for others. And if he be not a man, how
should he deliver man by his satisfaction? It is necessary then that a
mediator be found which is God and man, and such one is Jesus Christ, as the
Christian religion teaches us.

Now let us see whether Jesus Christ VII
be such one that we may find in him all that is requisite to our salvation.
First Jesus Christ is very God, from whence it follows that he can be a
sauionr.

And also be is very man, from whence VIII
it follows that he is of nature meet to suffer that which the Justice of
God requires to be revenged for the sin of man. For if be only were God he
could suffer nothing, and if he were only man, he should sink under the
burden of Gods wrath. Because he is God and man, therefore he was able to dye,
and vanquyshe death in dying.

Moreover, for as much as be is man IX
most pure and most holy conceived by the holy ghost, this purity being
perfect, pleases God. Wherefore we have in Jesus Christ, a man agreeable and
pleasing unto God. Now out of this purity springs two Ryuers, as out of the
fountain or spring, that is to say, a perfect righteousness, and a whole and
perfect abstayning from sin* For Jesus Christ very man bath fulfilled all the
will of God, for as much as he never sinned in any manner wise. Therefore be
is most just and righteous before God, as well because of this natural purity,
as of the fruits sprynging out of the same purity and cleanes.

Wherefore we may with good right X
conclude, that we do find only in Jesus Christ perfect remedy against all
the euyls that does or might fear our conscience, or let us from coming to
the glory of God, or might cause us justly to be condemned to eternal death.

But yet nevertheless we must ioygne a XI
condition to this, that is to say, if we do take or join to us these
remedies in Jesus Christ. For as it profits not a sick person to have a good
medicine except be use it, nor a hungry man to be at a tables end garnished
with plenty of good meats except he eat of them: likewise be there medies of
Jesus Christ against ye wrath of God and eternal death set before us in vain,
except we use them. Now we cannot use them, except first we know by what
manner, and after what sort it may be done. Wherefore first we must see how
Jesus Christ is, and may be applied to our profit and advantage. Then to
declare how Jesus XII
Christ may be applied to our salvation and eternal life, we will use this
preface. As it is not in our power to find a medicine of salvation* so ca^ we
not find the manner how to use this medicine. For as in the sickness of the body,
the sick person is past al hope of health and utterly dispaired, then it is
needful for the Physician not only to find and prepare the medicine, but also
to dispose the sick person so as he will and may use this medicin, and y^ he may
understand how to use it: so the sickness of the soul, which is most precious
above althings, and in the which mankind is not only ignorant, but also
enemies of their own salvation, then we must understand by the Physician of
the soul what is the medicine, then after what manner it must be used, yea and
in such wise y^ the same Physician do prepare and make us apt and meet y^ we
both will and ca^ use those remedies which he prepares and apoynteth to us.

God then is he which in the beginning XIII
of the world spoke by his Angels to y^ first man, y^ is to say, Adam and
others until Moses, declaring to them the only remedy of salvation, as before
is declared, that is to weete Jesus Christ, in whom only we find all y^ is
needful and requisite to salvation. And after the rejecting of al other nations
and people made apoyntment with the posterity of Abraham, and multiplied them
exceedinglye and expounded to them his will most abu^dantly, as it is comprised
in the. x commandments of God. and also joined thereto certain sacrifices and
ceremonies, the which did not only deuyde the people of God from al other
nations, but also were certain testimonies of Christ's coming* and of all the
things that he should suffer, for to deliver us from the wrath of God: so y^
they might certainly trust and believe in him which they hoped should come.
Moreover, because God knew that the devil would move and stir up false
Prophets which would spread forth their lies as the true commandments of
God, he wylled Moses and the Prophets to write all that God revealed to them,
to the end that the false Prophets should not so easily deceive the people.

But in the end when ye time was come XIII
which he had eternally appointed according to his eternal and infinite
wisdom, he sent down and presented from Heaven his promise, that is to say,
his eternal son, the which took upon him a very human body, by the
virtue of the holy ghost, of the substance of the virgin Mary of the seed of
Abraham and of David, with the which body God conioygned a most pure and most
holy soul, created by the same force of the holy ghost. He was made the very
mediator as is said before, and has truly fulfilled and accomplyshed all
that was necessary to be fulfilled for to reconcyle man unto God.

But in the end when all these things XIII
were fulfilled, Jesus Christ ascended up into heaven, and wylled this
doctrine not only to be preached by mouth of the Apostles and Evangelists,
but also that their hands should write it in such wise, as the Church should
have to the end of the world one certain doctrine, upon the which she might
stay and rest, and also by it might separate most clearly the lies of the
false Prophets and Antichrists from the only verity of God, which is
comprehended wholly and perfectly in the books of the old and new testaments,
so that it is not lawful to change any thing, either add to it, or take from
it.

Moreover this doctrine had been written in vain, if it were not preached and
declared faithfully. And man cannot endure nor sustain the face of God or of
Angels. And God having pity of the seed of man, in this point has
ordained and constytuted Pastors and Teachers in his Church, by whom he
wylled that this doctrine should be faithfully declared and applied to the
necessyties of the Church publykely and partycularly, that man should not
allege any ignorance of the will of God.

Wherefore to the end I may comprehend all these things in few words, we
learn by the mouth of the faithful Ministers of God, which declare his word
to the church, all that we have heretofore declared to be necessary to
understand our myserie and our salvation. And for as much as when the word of
God is preached unto man, it is as if they spoke unto insensible stones,
therefore we must know that as God works to the external senses by his word
pronounced by his Ministers, even so he works inwardly by his infinite
power, that is to say, by his holy spirit, whose office consists in these
effects here following.

First, that as this part of Scripture (which is called the law) testifies to
our ears, that we be most miserable sinners deserving eternal death, even so
the holy ghost teaches the same, and sixeth it in our consciences (which
otherwise were dull and insensyble) and makes that we be touched with the
true and perfect feeling of our sins, which is the first step or degree to
salvation, as in the sickness of the body, it is needful above all things,
for the recovering of health, to know that we be sick, and how grievous our
sickness is, and what manner of sickness it is.

The second effect or work of the holy ghost is utterly contrary to this
aforesaid. For it afflyeteth us, because it declares to us our damnation by
the law, and how the hels be open to devour us. But this again does comfort
us, when the certain and only remedy of salvation is applied to our
conscience, which is declared unto us by the other part of the scripture which
is called the Gospel, that is to say, the happy and blessed message of
salvation freely in Jesus Christ, as we have declared here before in order at
large.

Now this remedy is applied by a double effect and working of the holy Ghost.
For first the holy Ghost disposes our intellygence, to the understanding of
the doctrine of the Gospel, which otherwise seems to the world very
foolyshnesse, and so incontinently after it makes our spirit believe that
this doctrine of salvation freely in Jesus Christ, is not only true (for the
Devils know also that this doctrine is most true, and yet therefore be not
saved) but also that it appertains to us: and this is it that is called
faith, the which is so highly commended in the scripture, which is to be
understand when any man does persuade himself certainly, that salvation and
eternal life does properly and partycularly appertain to him self, because
Jesus Christ is declared to us in his word under this condition, that we do
taste of him, and apply him to our selves by faith. It follows then, that
faith is the only instrument, by the which as by ones hand salvation may be
felt and taken in Jesus Christ. And therefore S. Paul said, that we be
iustyfied by faith only, and also do live by it only: not that faith is our
righteousness and life, but because that by only faith we embrace Jesus Christ,
and be certain that he is our righteousness and life. For when any man
believes that he is appointed and ordained to salvation and eternal life in
Jesus Christ, incontinent he is made partaker of all the benefits of Jesus
Christ to eternal life: for Jesus Christ is offered to us upon this condition.

The third effect and work of the holy ghost is fixed and set on our hearts on
this manner, that as he does unite and knyt us into Jesus Christ, as is said
before, and that Jesus Christ can not be idle within us, it is necessary that
the same holy ghost which engenders faith in us (as is said) do sanctify our
hearts, that is to say, do consecrate us to God. Now this sanctyfication has
two parts, that is to say, the abolishing of this corrupt nature and
qualytie, which before caused the law of God to dysplease us, and the creation
of the new nature or qualytie makes us to begin to will and to do
cheerfully and couragiouslye those things which we know do please God.

Now this abolishing is first begun in the understanding, by the which the
darkness is lightened in such wise, that we begin to know and approve that which
we did think before was foolyshnesse. Then after in the will which is
consecrated to God in such wise that it hates sin, not for the pain, but
for the love of God, and loves righteousness, not because of reward, but
because that righteousness of it self pleases God, so that if there were not
yet death appointed and prepared for sinners, or eternal life appointed and
prepared for those which study to do ryghteousnes: yet had he rather for the
love of God to follow righteousness, that is to say, to serve God holyly, and to
love his neighbor as his law commands, and to endure and suffer all manner
of pain for his names sake, then to serve the Devil and his covetousness.

Wherefore to the end that I may gather all sumarily together, how only in
Jesus Christ we find all that is necessary to salvation, likewise only by the
holy Ghost we aply Jesus Christ to our selves by faith. But because this faith
in the beginning is very small in us, it is necessary that it be increased in
us daily: wherefore now we must declare by what entertainment or means it is
nooryshed for to increase more and more in us. First, as it is created in us by
the holy Ghost through the means of the word of God* which is sown in our
hearts, and for that cause is compared to seed: So likewise it is noorished and
increased by the same word, when we hear it dilligentlye and truly preached
in the Church of God, and also when we read it in our houses, and think upon
it diligently, and meditate in it day and night, forsaking all humane and
worldly affections which might turn us from God, and hold us in
worldlynesse. Therefore David said he was happy, who? not the rich, not Kings,
or princes, or Merchants, or any other Citizens of this world, but he, that
thinks continually and meditateth diligently in the doctrine of God.
Therefore they be called strangers in this world, wandering and marching
toward the celestial country.

Secondly, we must know, that God aydeth and helps our debylyte and
weakness in such sort, that not being content to declare unto us by his
word with what love he loves us in his son Jesus Christ, but would also
join to his word certain outward marks or signs, to the which also he added
certain ceremonies or manner of doings, representing (by a certain manner) to
our eyes, and giving into our hands his son Jesus Christ with all his
goodness and virtues, of the which we have before spoken, to the end that our
faith being aided and supported by these helps, should be more and more
confyrmed in us, to draw us nerer to Jesus Christ. Now these marks be called
in Greek mysteries, that is to say, secreetes, because that God does signify
and represent to us by them things which be very secreete in deed, because
man should never doubt in them, that is to say, Jesus Christ with all his
virtues and goodness unto eternal life. But in latin they be called
Sacraments, because of an other manner of use of them, of the which we shall
speak hereafter.

Now there is in the Church of Christ but only two sacraments, that is to
say, Baptism, and the Lords supper: because that after the abolishinge of the
Ceremonies of the law, and that the son of rightousnes is sproong up, God
would not again wrap us in a multitude of figures and shadows, but only
has ordained two Sacraments, and wylled that they should be composed and made
of most simple things, that is of water, bread and wine, and that they should
be celebrated with most simple Ceremonies, that is with sprinkling of water, in
eating of bread, and drinking of Wine, least that man which of nature is sore
given to superstition, should abuse these things. For if they should see any
great preparation or some gorgeous or exquisyte Ceremonies, they would stay
and be utterly occupied in these external pomps. And in steed where they
should by these marks ascend upward into heaven by faith, and there embrace
the things which to us are signyfied by these marks and tokens, yet
contrariwise forgetting heaven, would stay altogether in these outward marks,
and there would search his salvation. Therefore those did wholly and altogether
corrupt the use of the Sacraments, the which not content with the simple and
bare institution of Jesus Christ, have burdened and charged the Church with
infinite Ceremonies, so that of a Christianitye, they have made not only a
Iewery, but also a Paganrye.

The Sacraments be ordained of God for the same and and purpose that the word
lyuelye declared is, without Sacrament, that is to say, to be means to us to
serve and aid us more and more to unite and join us to Jesus Christ by
faith, the which cannot be without the word. For the word declares to us, that
which God does represent and ratify by them, for as much as they be disible
signs of the spiritual conjunction which we have with Jesus Christ. Now
there is 4. pryncipall points to consider in this matter: the first what the
signs be, the second what is the thing signified and ratifyed by them, the
third what is the conjunction of the signs and the thing signified, the
fowrth how we may communycate with the signs and the things signified. The
signs be as well things needful to serve us in the Sacraments (which be
water in Baptism, bread and wine in the Supper): as be the Ceremonies and
manners of doings or ordinances by the word of God in the use of them, as we
shall say hereafter.

The thing signified is Jesus Christ with all his goodness, by the which we
be united together with him to have eternal life.

The signs be not transported or transubstantiated into the thing signified,
but be conjoined with the same, not by pronounciation of certain words, but
by the ordynance of Jesus Christ, author of the Sacraments: and not by a
corporal manner, or natural, but only so as God offers always
spyritually, that which is signified by the corporal signs.

The means to communicate with the signs is visible and natural, but the
thing signified, that is Jesus Christ with all his goodness, is received
spyrituallye by faith only, as is said before. Then it follows, those that
be not in the faith receive but the bare signs, but be never thelesse
culpable, as well for that they receive but the bare sign unworthily, as also
for that they have no respect nor regard to the thing which was offered to
them, and signified, that is to say, Jesus Christ with all his goodness, the
which they have rejected by their wickedness.

The sign of Baptism is water, with the which we be wete according to the
ordynance of God, in the name of the father, of the son, and of the holy
Ghost. The water represents to us the blood of Jesus Christ, which was shed
for the remyssion of sins (as the visible water is shed upon our bodies)
the which sanctifies us to live righteously, as was said before.

And forasmuch as the Sacraments ought to proceed after the word, because
that the thing for the which they were ordained to signify and zeal into our
hearts cannot be received but by faith, and faith is given to us through the
preaching of the word: Yet nevertheless concerning the young children of the
faithful, we do communycate and receive them into Baptism, although as yet
they be not capable to hear the doctrine, or to make confession as they ought
to do, if they were come to age, yet neuerthesse they be comprised in the
covenant with their fathers, for the which by consequent the mark or sign may
not, nor ought not to be denied them.

The second use of Baptism is to join us together to live all with one
accord, without changing, putting too, or diminishing the mark or badge we
all hear.

In the holy Supper of the Lord, celebrated according to his holy ordinance,
without changing, or putting too, or diminishing, the bread is a Sacrament to
us, that is to say, a seal and mark of y^ very body of Jesus Christ, which
ascended up to the right hand of God his father, after his death and
resurrection. The wine likewise to us is the Sacrament of the very blood of him
which shed it for us. The breaking of the bread to us, represents the
precious body of Jesus Christ to be broken with the sorrows and pains of
death: the pouring forth of the wine, the shedding of his precious blood: the
Mynister giving us bread and wine, represents Jesus Christ giving him self
to us. In that we take, eat, and drink the bread and wine, testifies to us,
and seals into our hearts, the unity and knot of our bodies with Jesus
Christ, to possess him more and more with all his goodness to eternal life.
Not with teeth or mouth, but with true and lively faith, which lyfteth us up
into heaven, spyritually to embrace him (and yet nevertheless most truly)
which is our norishment to everlasting bliss, as the bread and wine
corporallye and visibly received, does entertayn and noorysh us in this
corporal life. For we doubt not but God will accomplish and fulfill that
which he promyseth by his word, and offers by his Sacraments to all
believers.

The second use of the holy supper is to unite us together as members of one
body, like as we do eat of one bread, made of many grains of wheat, and
drynk of one Wine, made of many grapes, to be partakers with Jesus Christ.

And as we must eat daily to entertain and preserve us in this life, so
likewise it is requisite to come to this spyrituall Table, as often as is
possible, the which cannot be in Baptism. For it is sufficient to be once
entered into y^ church never to depart. Likewise, forasmuch as it is required
that every man prove and examine himself, to wete, publicly and openly to
auowe and declare the death of the Lord with thankesgeuing, in the holy
Communion. Also it appears that it appertains not to those that be not
meet to receive it, to wete little children, which nevertheless be saved,
forasmuch as they be comprised in the covenant of salvation with their
fathers: neither appertains it to those which be not instructed, or do not
understand the law of God, or have not so much profited as to make profession
of their faith: nor likewise to those which be declared excommunicated, that is
to say, thrown out of the communion and company of the faithful, by the lawful
judgment of the Church.

Behold in sum what is the doctrine of our salvation through Jesus Christ
only, by the means of our faith. And whosoever receives this doctrine (the
which cannot be, but where it is faithfully preached, and the Sacraments truly
ministered, according to the order establyshed by the word of God) is a member
of the church of Jesus Christ, which is called catholic, that is to say
universal, and out of that Church is no salvation. Moreover, all congregatio^s
and assembles whatsoever they be which has not those marks, although they
call them selves the Church of Jesus Christ a thousand times, what soever
place or succession they allege or show forth, can be no other but the*
Sinagoge of Satan, wherein there is but damnation. And therefore it is good and
needful for all men to separate them selves, and depart from them according
as S. Peter said, save your selves from this peruers generation, speaking of
Aarons successors, and of the Church of Jerusalem.

FINIS.

