THE BIBLE-BATTELLS. Or The Sacred Art Military. For the rightly wage^ng of
war according to Holy Writ.

Compiled for the use of all such valiant Worthies, and virtuously Valerous
Soldiers; as upon all just occasions be ready to affront the Enemies of God,
our King, and Country.

By RIC. BERNARD Rector of BATCOMBE SOMERSETSHIRE.

IOAB the Generals speech.

Be of good Courage, and let us play the men for our people, and for the Cities
of our God, and let the Lord do that which seems him good. 2 Samuel 10. 12. St
PAVLS encouragement. Watch ye, stand fast, quit yourselves like men, and be
strong. 1 Cor. 16. 13. Printed for Edward Blackmore, and are to be sold by
James Boler at the Sign of the flower de Luce in Paul's Churchyard. 1629.

TO THE MOST HIGH AND MIGHTY MONARCH CHARLES King of Great Britain, France
and Ireland, Defender of the Faith.
Puissant-Prince.
STRONG be Your Arms, and victorious Your Armies, the Lord of Hosts be with
You, and the mighty God of Jacob* Your Refuge.

That foretold by Christ is now verified: a noise there is of wars, and a
rumor of wars: Nation rises against Nation, and Kingdom against Kingdom:
and now, as John saw in the vision, is the Holy City trodden under foot. It
must be so for a time. On they go and have prevailed: but yet there is hope,
if we war aright. The great Man of war (as Moses calls him) has directed
us in the Bible battles; useful I hope, for these times: but yet I leave this
to Your Majesty's Heroical wisdom to judge. Into method and order I have
collected them: and am bold in all humility of heart to present them to Your
Sacred Person. Your Highness the Saints look unto for safeguard The poor
distressed Churches cry aloud for help. Is not their habitation become
Aceldama, the field of blood? Many Valorous Courages do attend the opportunity
of time; many valiant Martialists expect direction, and all hearken after but
only a word of command. Disconsolate Princes crave aid: Religion it self
says to her Defender, set forward. The hearts of the people, ready with
purse, I hope, will appear, as now they pray, generally for the Churches
safety.

Stand therefore (o King) in the Forefront of the Lords Battles; though not
in person, yet in the power of Your Might, to suppress the insolency of high
hearted Enemies. And the strong arm of the Subduer of Hosts be with you, that
this great name of Charles the First, amongst our famous Kings, may become
renowned by wisdom and piety, Prowess and Victory, throughout the Christian
world. This be the prayer of all faithful Subjects, and ever mine.

Your Majesty's humble and and most loyally devoted Subject and Servant:
RICHARD BERNARD.

TO THE MAGNANIM OVSLY HEAR TED READER, to every heroicke spirit, of worthy
Resolution, and whosoever is generously affected to Military Profession, and
well deserving the name of a Soldier, and place in so honorable an employment.
Wisdom, valor and victory attend ever their service for God, for Religion,
for his Church, for their King and Country.

Amen.
Noble Worthies
NOW is the time to show wisdom and courage, for acclamatur vbique ad bellu^:
yet to rush unadvisedly into Battle, is not the way for victory. I here in my
labor do not so undertake to prescribe Rules, as to write an History of Holy
Wars. Here is a Pattern from Gods people, who fought many set Battles, and
commonly got the day; for God was with them. They stood out stoutly for him,
his worship and service. Their footsteps if you follow, you shall surely speed
the better. Let none say that this Treatise will not suite well to these times.
For the true differences are not many heretofore and now in the universal
Course Military. But whatsoever the differences be therein my principal aim
in the use of Arms is to bring into the Camp the Practice of Piety. For the
ill (though an overtrue saying) has been, Rara fides, pietasque viris qui
castra sequuntur. These seeming exiled Virtues I desire to be welcomed amongst
you Valiant Worthies; and Vices sent packing from every true Soldier with
detestation. To this purpose tend my endeavors with full current. To follow
this Stream is to make your Armies strong, and your selves victorious.

And here I have a Suit to you (o you Sons of Valor) In going forth,
consider what you be, against whom you fight, and for what. Remember that Great
Britain is inferior to no Nation; and that by the prowess and valor of
English and Scots, glorious victories have been obtained. You cannot you may
not forget the valiant acts of General Norice in the Low Countries; of the
worthily honored Lord Gray in Ireland, of the never dying Names of Drake,
Furbisher, and Hawkins, of the right famous Earl of Essex, of the deservedly
eternized Veres, of the invincible* spirited Green* field, of the noble Cicill,
with many others worthy of an everlasting Name: Be courageous still, and cease
not to uphold the renown of this our Name and Nation.

Weigh your Enemies. They prosper you will say; oh that our Sin and
Slacknesse were not the cause. Their success is but now of late, consider you
the former times; stay and wonder at our incredible victories: we may yet hope
well, if we would do well for our selves. They are in their height of Pride,
and their downfall is near: Courage then, and expect the issue.

Our cause is just, though God please a while to afflict us. Set the worth of
our Religion before your eyes: Its the truth of the eternal God. The
Scriptures command it; and thereby our consciences bound* do tie us unto it.
It has been confirmed by the blood of Martyrs, Reverend Bishops, and godly
Divines, learned Lawyers, and innumerable others. Our Kings have established
it; good Laws are inacted for it; peaceably we have enjoyed it: Miraculous
deliverances we have had, since we professed it. And what still maintains it?
Power or Policy of man? No, no such thing; but the hand of the Almighty. Who
it was that delivered us from the intended Invasion; who it was that prevented
the hellish Powder Plot, who it was that freed us from the many Treacheries and
Treasons practiced against us.

Remember these things (o ye true-hearted English) stand ye (ye Valerous
Minds) closse to the cause of God. Fight under his Banner against these Enemies
of our Faith, our King, and Kingdom: go on so, and prosper; and the Arm of
Jesus strengthen you.

Do not marvel (Honorable and honored Martialists) that I, Vnus de multis
inter Obscuros, and not de magnis inter Notos, should thus presume to speak
unto you. I hope you will rather consider the worth of the matter, then weigh
the defects of the man. Neither let me be blamed, that being by profession Vir
Pacis, Minister Ecclesiae Anglicanae, should thus thrust my self into Campum
Martis. The Sacred Bible, my daily study, gave me the grounds; my delight in
Histories of this subject enlarged my meditations. That I find in holy Writ. I
think I may write of: Hoc instituto meo alienum esse non putavi. The Priests
of God went out with the Lords Hosts in former times, and that by his
appointment. John the Baptist spoke unto Soldiers; they asked him what they
should do; and he advised them in some things. I have labored for your good,
bona saltem intention: I pray my endeavor may not be reckoned minoris pretii,
quia ego Minister. The worth of a true Soldier I have ever honored; I prize
at an high rate a Man os valor* and he well deserves it. I wish ex animo that
illustrious eminency may ever attend him, that is by virtue Valiant.

I doubt not therefore, but that this Work, from the word (not hitherto
published by any) will be favorably accepted of you. That if it make you not
Soldiers according to Men, (because perhaps more you know already by practice
and experience) yet am I s^re it may make you virtuously valiant, and good men
according to God. And being so, then, though you die here in Battle, you may
hereafter live in blessedness: Which I heartily wish you may attain unto,
there to triumph for ever.

Yours in his prayer, and at command in all Christian Services, RICH: BERNARD.

The Contents of every Chapter in this Book.
CHAP. I. OF the excellency of the History of the wars in Holy Writ. CHAP.
II. Of the wars of God with man. CHAP. III. Of the wars of man with man,
and of the lawfulness of such wars. CHAP. IV. Of the honorable calling and
employment of a right Soldier. CHAP. V. Of the just causes and true grounds of
making war. CHAP. VI. Of necessary war. CHAP. VII. Of the chief Authority
moving to war, and of Kings going out with their Hosts. CHAP. VIII. Of Pressed
men, and Voluntaries. CHAP. IX. Of the mustering and choice of Soldiers. CHAP.
X. Of the Arms in old times, the view of them, and of the exercise before
Soldiers go to war. CHAP. XII. Of the General over the whole Army. CHAP.
XIII. Of Counsel for War. CHAP. XIV. Of the disciplining of an Army, and
orderly government thereof. CHAP. XV. Of the evils to be avoided in a Camp,
and to be punished. CHAP. XVI. Of a convenient Army, and of necessaries
prepared aforehand to maintain the same. CHAP. XVII. Of means abroad to be
used before the war begin. CHAP. XVIII. Of the religious preparation before
the Army march. CHAP. XIX. Of laying good grounds aforehand to speed well, and
of a peaceable and lawful proceeding against such an Enemy. CHAP. XX. Of
marching forward and encamping.
CHAP. I. Of the excellency of the History of wars in Holy writ.
MOst that delight to read, or almost all, so delighted, do spend their time
in perusesing over humane stories, and do highly extol the histories of the
wars of Heathen Commanders, as of great Alexander, of Julius Caesar, of
Pirrhus the Epirote, of Hanniball the Carthaginean, of Scipio Africanus, and
many other praise worthy Cheiftaines in war: but do lightly price the
Scriptures History of wars, the right art military indeed, which was
commanded to be penned by that great man of war, (as Moses styles him) the
Exodus: 15.
only chief and highest commander whose name is the Lord of Hosts.

And yet this Sacreed story surpasses al other, and is above them to be
commended for many things; as first for the undoubted truth in all and every
thing therein delivered. 2. For the antiquity thereof before all other extant
in the whole world. 3. For the great authority thereof, divine and heavenly. 4.
For the short and pithy relations. 5. For such admirable things as be therein
recorded, not else where to be found. If withal the certainetie of such things
be considered; as

I. The Lords most valiant and religious General, never to be matched for fame
and glory. Who can compare with Joshua, judged to be one of the Nine Worthies?
Who can match with some of the Judges, as Shamgar, who slew 600 men with an Ox
goad, or Sampson, that slew a 1000 with the jaw bone of an Ass? Judge. 3. 31.
Or who can compare with David the King, another of the Nine Worthies, for
wisdom, valor and piety? Or who has excelled a third of the nine worthies,
Judas Machabeus for courage, for magnanimity of spirit, and vndauntednesse of
heart?

II The Captains and worthies as David had, who among the Heathen like Adino,
that in one battle slew 800 men with his own hand? Who could break through an
whole host of armed men, as did only three of David's worthies to fetch some
water for David to drink? Then worthy Acts are recorded in the 2. Sam. cap:
23. and 1. 11. whereto I refer the Reader, as not to be paralleld among the
true histories of any Heathen or Christian.

III The set Battles therein mentioned, in number found 37; what one History
has the like number in so compendious a relation*

IV The huge Armies set down: The Army which Gedeon fought which was very
great, for then above 120000 were slain: The Army of Israel against Benjamin,
was 4^0000: The Army of the Philistines at one time was 30000 Charets, 6000
horsemen, and footmen as the sand for multitude; Saul's first host, which 1 Sa
11. 8.
he levied against the Ammonites, was 330000: Amaziah against Edom had 300000:
Shishake the King of Aegipt came against Judah in Rehoboams days with 1200
Charetts, 60000, horsemen, and footmen without number, Jeroboam and Abijah
brought 2 Chapter
into the field at one time 1200000, the one 800000, the other 400000: Zerah
the Ethiopian came against Asa with 1000000, and Asa met him with 580000, so
there was that day in the field fifteen hundred and fourscore thousand men to
fight, striving who should overcome, and be victorious: Greater armies I never
read nor heard of in any History, save only that of Xerxzes the Persian, and
that of Tamberlain, and Baiezett the Turk and Tartar, if the relation of the
numbers be true, as we are sure these all be.

V. The story is rare, In respect of the incredible slaughters in those Iud.
8. 10.
days in one foughten field: Gedeon in his wars did sley of the enemies
120000; David slew 40000 horsemen 2 Sa 10. 18
in the Syrian host, with their 2 Ch 3 17.
General, and the men also of 700: Charetts in one battle; Jeroboam lost
500000 chosen men in his fightings against Abijah: Ahab slew of Benhadads 1 K
20 29 30.
Army 100000, besides 27000 that perished by the fall of a wall, and 2 Chapter 28.
6. 8.
Pekah King of Israel destroyed in one day of the men of Judah, 120000 and
took captive 200000 prisoners.

VI. In regard of the most strange and unheard of victories; some miraculous,
as when God set the sword of the enemies of his people against their own
selves to slaughter and kill one another; as he did the Midianits and
Amalakits, so the Philistians Judge. 7. 2^
and likewise the Moabites, and Edomites and Ammonites, when they came against
Judah. Some other 1 Sa. 14 20
though not such, yet so prosperous by Gods protection and ayding power 2 Ch 20.
to overcome, as the like is no where recorded, to omit the victories of Joshua
against Og, against Sihon, against all the Kings of Canaan, the victories of
Judah, of Ehud, Baruk, Judge. 1.
Iephte, of Saul, of David, Asa, Ahab, Amaziah and others. I will mention but
that one levied host of Israel in number 12000 only, which went out against
Midian; and slew five Kings, burnt all their Cities, and Number. 21. 5 8. 10. 32.
35. 50 Verse 49.
goodly Castells with fire, and took prisoners 32000 persons; brought away for
booty and spoil, besides Jewels of gold, chains, braceletes, rings, earings,
and tabletts, 675000 sheep, 72000 beeues, and 61000 Asses: and yet lost not
one man in obteyning this victory.

VII. To these former may be added, the great number of the valiant and
matchless men, not in any Nation under heaven to be found, at one time so
many as was there. There came to David to make him King at once 1222,
Captains, and with them in number altogether 1 Chapter 12. 28. 32. 34.
339300, all men of war very many thousands of them commended to be famous,
mighty men of valor, expert in war, able to keep rank, and to set the
Battle in array. Besides these, there were in valor peerless, all the 37
worthies of David, with many other mighty men, such 2 Sa. 2. 22. 1 Chapter 11, and
12.
as could use both the right, and left hand, for hurling stones and shoting
arrows out of a bow, yea men of might, fit for war, that could handle
shield and buckler, whose faces were like the faces of Lions, and as swift as
the Roes upon the mountains. Afterward when David was settled, and Ioab
commanded to number the people throughout the 12 Tribes, besides Levy and
Benjamin, there were found 1570000 men that drew sword: and yet that Nation
was not above 200 miles long, and 50 miles broad, not near the half of
England by much. Yea when the Tribes were divided, and only Judah and Benjamin
made a kingdom, as much perhapps, as two or three of the lesser shires of
England, yet could Abiiah raise up of chosen men 400000; Asa had an army of
580000 all mighty men of valor; to say nothing of Amaziah his host of 300000
nor of the 2600 chief of the Fathers 2 Chapter 26.
very valiant men, under who^ was an army of 307500 which made war with
mighty power to help 2 Ch, 17
King Vzziah against the enemy. In the reign of Iehosaphat was an host of
1160000 men, mighty men of valor. Of what Nation so little has been, or can
be the like truly spoken?

Lastly, the Nation was ever in military exercise by reason of continual
wars at home or abroad; In the days of Joshua, of the Judges, of Saul and
David, after the peaceable days of Solomon, Israel and Judah being divided,
then began wars, and almost perpetual between the two kingdoms, besides
the wars of foreign Enemies, the Egyptians, Moabits, Ammonites, Edomites,
Philistims, Ethiopians, Sirians, Assirians, and Babylonians, until both
kingdoms perished, and were led away captive: So as this people could not be
but good soldiers, for number many, in skill by daily use exquisite, in valor
incomparable, in brave leaders, chief Captains and commanders, not to be
matched. And therefore why may not much art of Souldiary and military knowledge
be collected hence at least in many maine points, as well, yea why not better,
then some other human writers? Seeing the relations are most true, matter to
work upon plentifully administered, the warrant from God, the examples from the
people of God, which being set for examples before them, will put soldiers in
mind of the ways of God, to move them to seek help and aid of God, as those
did against their enemies, when we go out to battle.

The II. CHAP. Of the wars of God with man.
War is the opposite to peace, and is by the Prophet called evil; being Esa,
4 5 7 Lev, 26, 25.
the fruit of sin, the punishment for sin, yea so fearful, as David once
put to his choice, desired rather 2 Samuel: 24.
the pestilence, then the sword of an enemy: It brings with it for the most
part innumerable evils, even as well to the Conquerours, as to the Conquered.

This war is either of God with man, or of man with man: before I speak of
the latter, I think it very fit to say something of the former in the first
place; that men may consider of another kind of war, then usually they dream
of.

God has war with man, yea he has some where sworn; that with some sorts,
he will have war from one generation to another, even for ever; there is no
peace to Ex 17, 16. Esaias 57. 21 Ex. 15, 3.
the wicked; God therefore is pleased to be called vir belli a man of war,
the Chaldee expresses the title thus, the Lord and victour of wars; he
causes wars, and makes an end of them, at his own will.

Hence it is, that he is said to be armed, Rev. 19, 11 Judge. 5, 8. Psalm. 46, 9
Esaias 59. 17. and to have his Armorie, which he opens, that he brings
forth the weapons of his indignation, the Chariots and horse, the Army and
power, that he rides upon horses and charets, that he mustreth Hos. 2. 18.
Ier. 50. 25. Esai. 43. 17 Hab. 3. 9. Judge. ^. 4. Esaias 13. 4. 2 Chapter 25. 8 Esaias
46. 10. 11. Ps. 24. 8.
his host, and marches against his enemies, with assured victory: for he has
power to help himself, and to cast down such as will resist him, his council
does ever stand; what he purposes, that he can bring to pass, and he will do
all his pleasure: for he is strong and mighty, even the Lord mighty in
battle.

Therefore has he the title of King of Kings, of King of glory and the Lord
of Hoasts, a name given him by Esai and Jeremy, above an hundred times, and
mentioned in the old Testament above 240. times, so did the Lord, in those
times, (if I may so say) give himself to wars and thereby vexed the Nation^
and destroyed 2 Chapter 15. 6
them for their sins.

Now Gods host or army is either more general or more special. The more
general, consists of four Regiments. The two first fall upon his enemies
covertly, suddenly and at unawares; but the other openly in the view of the
eye.

The first is of good Angels, called Genesis 32. 2 Luke 2 13. 2 K. 19 37 2 Chapter
32. 21
for the great numbers, Gods host for their quality heavenly soldiers, of
which (such is their power) even one was able to sley, in one night, 185000.
and among them all the mighty men of valor, leaders, and Captains, in the
camp of the Assirians.

The Second Regiment is of bad Angels, Ps 78. 49.
with which he plagued the Egyptians, among whom he sent Iud. 9.
these wicked and evil spirits. By one of these he vexed and set at odds
Abimilech 2 Chapter 29. 23. 1 Samuel 14. 20
and the Sichemites to seek by a furious and bloody rage the utter ruin, and
destruction of one another: And by these it is very like, he wrought the deaths
of great Iud. 7. 22.
Armies, when they slew one another, the Lord setting every man's sword against
his own fellow, throughout the host.

The third is of all other his creatures, except man, this is a very mighty
strong and irresistable Army: with these he goes forth in battle; He set
the stars in their Exo. 9. 23, 24. 34. 1 Sa. 7. 10. Ios 10, 11. Psalm. 11. 6.
courses to fight against Sisera: with thunder, lightning, reign and hail
mingled with fire, he set upon the Egyptians: with great stones from heaven he
slew the Canaanites, Job 38. 22 23. Amos 4. 9. Hag. 2. 8. Number. 16. 35. 31, 32.
1 Sa. 14, 15
which hailestones he reserueth in his treasury against the time of war, with
bl^sting winds, with fire, with Earthquakes he consumes, overthrows and
deuoureth up his enemies: He shoots out his arrows, hot thunderbolts: with
these he smites them through; yea says the Prophet, with thunder, earthquake,
great noise of storm and tempest, Ps. 18. 14. Esa. 29. 6. and 30 30. Joel 2.
25. 2 Kin. 17. Deu. 32. 24
with the flame of devouring fire he will rise up against them; and show the
lighting down of his arm, in the indignation of his anger, with scattering
and tempest and hailestones. He comes forth with his great hosts, as Joel
calls them Canker-wormes, locusts, Cater-pilpillers, and palmer-wormes: He
armeth the teeth of the beasts and Lions to fight for him, and uses the poison
of serpents to vex and slay his enemies. He sends out Ios 24. 12. Exodus 8.
frogs, flies, and very lice to plague his enemies, and hornets to drive them
away before him; so as he wants no means to annoy, no power to work the
destruction of such as he shall arm himself against.

The fourth Regiment is of men out Joel 2. 11. Esa. 10. 5. and 13. 4, 5.
of his Church; these are his army or camp, as they be termed, as also the
weapons of his indignation. These he calls forth and mustereth them; over
whom he has appointed his generals, as once oue the Babylonians his
Lieutenant and servant Ier. 25. 9. Esa. 45. 1, 2, 3.
Nebuchadnezzar, and over his host of Medes and Persians his Lieutenant and
anointed Cyrus.

These his armies of men he imployeth diversely as he pleases; Sometimes
several Nations of them one against another, as the Babylonians against the
Assyrians, Egyptians, and other Countries: the Medes and Persians against
these, the Grecians against them, and the Romans against all: So he arms the
Turk against the Persians, and so to fight one against 2 Chapter 15. 6.
another: for when Nations rise against Nations, and Cities against Cities,
Gods hand it is that vexes them, says a Prophet.

Sometime he lets them agree together, even several Nations and Kings, to
gather together against the Church, and then sends an ill spirit among them to
fall together by the ears one with another, and utterly to destroy one
another, as the 2 Chapter 20. 23.
Moabites, Ammonites and Edomites did.

Sometime the Army of one and the same Nation he sets at odds, and the sword
of every man against his own fellow, as fell out in the great 1 Samuel 14. 20.
Iud. 7. 22.
host of the Philistims, and those enemies against which Gideon went forth.

But this his host he does not thus only employ one against another, their
own selves, but he uses them against his own people, as appears by many
examples in sacred story; Note this, and herein consider.

1. That though these enemies Joel 3. 11.
seem to come of their own accord, or are gathered together by ill
instruments, such as the unclean spirits like frogs be in Reu. 16. 14. or by
the devil set on as Gog and Magog. Reu. 16. 16 Joel 3. 2. Iud. 4. 7.
Reu. 20. 8. yet know we must, that God also gathers them together, where
and whither he will. He did draw Sisera with his Charets and multitude to come
forth to the river Kishon; Gods hand (though the enemy thinks not so) is in
their conduction.

2. The number of the enemy is not at their own will to come forth, Esa. 13. 4.
but the Lord numbereth and mustereth them, and so knows, to a man, how many
he sends forth against his people.

3. These enemies of his Church, yet his host, he gathers together, he
numbreth and mustereth them, and brings them out against his people, for
several ends.

Sometime only to terrify his people to make them fear before him to humble
themselves with fasting and prayer, which being performed, he will set himself
against those their enemies, and destroy them, as he did the three Nations 2.
Chapter 20.
which came against Iehosophat: and as he did the proud Spaniards in their
great Armado coming against Queen Elizabeth in the year 88. to their own
shame, and the confusion of their conceited invincible power.

Sometime its to give his people some glorious victory over their Enemies, to
let them see his power, mercy, and preservation of them, to stir them up to a
more zealous service of him, as he did in the days of Asa, when the dreadful
host of Zerah the Ethiopian his ten hundred 2 Ch: 14.
thousand came against Judah, and were utterly discomfited.

Often the Lord has hardened these enemies hearts against his people, that
those enemies might be overthrown; Exo: 14. Number. 21. Ios. 11. 19, 20.
so he hardened Pharaoh and his Egyptians to follow after Israel, that he might
drown them in the sea: So dealt he with Og, and Sihon, and withal the King of
Canaan, that his people might utterly destroy them. In like sort he dealt 2 Samuel 5. and 8. 10.
with David's enemies who made war with him, but to their own ruin and
overthrow, and to the infinite enriching of David and his people the Israelites.

But some other time he gathers these Enemies to this end, that they may
indeed afflict and punish his own people, yea to rule over them, making them
to serve with rigor, cruelty and great contempt; Thus he sent out the King of
Assyria, and gave him a charge to take the spoil, Esa. 10. 6.
and the prey; yea and to tread them down like the mire in the streets.

Yet observe in this hand of God.
1. That the Enemies prevailing against the Lords people, as from God Iud. 3.
8. and 4. 2. and 3: 3. 12. Leu. 26. 36 37.
himself: He sells them into the enemies hands, he strengthens the enemies
to get the victory, and if people be weak, fearful, fly away, be overcome
and spoiled, it is he that does it; He turns back the weapons of war in
their hand, it is he that gives Jacob to the spoil, and Ier. 21: 4. Esa 42:
24. Ier. 21. 5. ^
Israel to robbers, for he fights sometimes against them with an
outstretched hand and a strong arm, in anger, fury, and in great wrath.

2. That all this happens for sin; because his people rebel and vex his
spirit, do evil in his sight, and Esa, 63. 10 Iud. 3. 12. Leu. 26. 14 15,
with v, 17, 36, 37.
will not obey nor hearken to his commandments. For Idolatry and despising
Gods message by his Prophet was Amaziah overthrown in battle: Rehoboam for
his Idolatry was spoiled by Shishake King of Egypt; for Ioash his Apostacy and
his murder of Zacharias was a very great host delivered by God into Esai 42.
34. 2 Ch: 25. and 12. 2 Ch: 24. 2^
the hands of the Sirians a small company; For his wickedness was Ahab brought
low, and at length Judah led into captivity by Nebuchadnezzar.

3. That although the Enemies be thus the rod of Gods anger, and his Esai 10. 5.
indignation, the very staff in his hands to punish his people, for their
hypocritical service; but not to destroy them utterly: yet because the enemies
think not this, that they Esai 10. 13.
are only Gods rod and staff; nor that their power is from him, because his
people have sinned; but are proud, glorying in their own wisdom and
strength, and intend in their hearts to destroy the Lords inheritance, he will
at length turn his wrath upon them.

For mark what the Lord says by his Prophet, when the Lord has performed his
whole work upon Verse. 12. 16 17, 24, 27.
Mount Sion, and on Jerusalem he will punish the fruit of the stout heart of
the King of Assyria, and the glory of his high looks: And this is Gods manner
of dealing, when he has humbled his people, then to bring upon their enemies a
day of Ier. 50. 17, 18, 23, and 51. 11. Amos 1. 3, 6 9, 11. 13.
vengeance, and a time of recompense as he did upon the Assyrians first, and
next upon the Babylonians for their merciless cruelty against his people.

The Lord now afflicts heavily his Church, her enemies prevail mightily, and
think to devour her up: false friends undermine her walls, open enemies
assault her and tread her under foot in many places; but when God has
performed his whole work, he will take his time to gather them together to
their destruction, and this he foretells us Joel 3. 2. 11
plainly in Reu. 16. and 19. and 20. In the mean space, let us humble our
selves under his mighty hand; be warned by our former great losses, by our
breth^ens calamities, by the signs from heaven, by the extraordinary storms
and tempests, winter thunder and lightning so often and unusual, by plagues
and other punishments fallen upon us; and if we turn and repent, then let us
believe 2 Chapter 20.
and wait with patience, yea then hearken what is said, stand still let us not
fear, but behold the salvation of the Lord which he will show unto us,
undoubtedly in that day; Amen. And thus for the general hosts of God, and the
armies of his power in heaven and in earth.

Now the other more special host, of this Lord God of Hosts is his trained
soldiers, the Army which he has in his Church for defense thereof, Exo. 12.
41 51. and 14. 20. and 23. 18. and 14. 2. and 15. 27. Number. 11. 10. and 16.
or to send out against their enemies, and his also for their sakes. This Army
was the Israelites coming out of Egypt which are called Gods host and Camp
who went up harnessed; their resting places were called encampings, and their
lodging was in Tents; The Lord caused a muster of them and to be numbered, and
found among them to be 603550. able men to draw sword all that were 20. years
old and upward. He set them in order in marching, and appointed them standards
and the several armies to attend the same. This Ios. 5. 13. Exo. 13. 21. and
14. 19. Ps. 77. 20. Esa. 63. 12. Deuteronomy. 33. 5 Ps. 18. 32. 34. 38. and 144. 1.
host was the host of God, Christ their Prince and their Conductor: His
Lieutenant general Moses, who was as a King among them. After Moses he set up
Joshua to be general, after him Judges, then Saul, and David the King, whom the
Lord girded with strength to the battle* teaching his hands to war, and his
fingers to fight, so as by he could by his arms break a bow of steel. Thus
he trained him up to fight his battles

This Army of his people is called 1 Samuel 17. 36. Ios. 5. 15. Esa. 31. 4. Deu
20. 4. 1. Sa. 17. 47 2 Chr. 20. 15.
the host of the living God, and the Lords host, with this he takes part, and
for it fights as a Lion; with this he goes to fight against his enemies; for
the battle is not theirs but the Lords; and therefore the Lord was for them, to
give them many glorious and incredible victories over their enemies.

And as the Lord was glorified in victories by these, so will he assuredly be
now also for his Church in his own good time. For albeit the beast must war
with the Saints, and for a time overcome, Reu. 11. 2. and 13. 7. yet at length
shall the lamb with his elect, called, and faithful prevail, Reu. 17. 14. He
shall ride upon the white horse with many crowns upon his head, the armies of
heaven also following on white horses, as triumphing over all their enemies,
for he Reu. 17. 16.
is the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; And thus of the wars of God with
man.

The III. Chap. Of the wars of man with man, and of the lawfulness of such
wars.
War is the contention between Princes or States by arms or force of men,
under order and good government to obtain victory, and so ^he conquering and
subduing of the Dominions, bodies and goods of one another, to live the better
afterward in peace and honor. For S. Aug: ad Bonifac.
says a Father, the true servants of God make wars, that the wick^d may be
restrained, and good men be relieved.

War upon just cause undertaken is undoubtedly lawful: And this is necessary
to be known and believed of all that undertake wars. For there is nothing
more for encouragement, in any action then to have conscience satisfied in the
lawfulnes thereof.

Some, as the Anabaptists, hold it not lawful for Christians under the Gospel
to make war; but such are but dreamers; for

1. God is pleased to he called a Exo. 15. 3.
man of War; now he never admits a title of a thing unlawful.

2. He has given commandment to his people sometimes to fight: Numbers 31. 3.
1. Sam. 15. 3. Deuteronomy. 2. 24.

3. He made laws for direction to them, when they went to war, Deuteronomy. 20.
10. 15.

4. Holy men of eminent place and graces have made war, as did Genesis 14.
Abraham, Joshua, David, and others.

5. God would send his spirit upon them to encourage them to the war, as he
did upon Gideon, Ehud, Sampson, as we may read in the book of Judges.

6. God raised up some Prophets to comfort, and set forward his people to
war; thus he moved Deborah Iud. 4. 2 Chapter 20. 14, 15.
to call Barak into the wars: and Iahaziel to encourage Judah to go against
their enemies.

7. God taught David to play the part of a valiant Capraine and soldier; Ps.
144. 1. and 18, 39, 40.
he made his hands to war, and his fingers to fight, and made his arm strong
to draw a bow of steel, as before is showed; for which David rendered thanks
to him: yea David often consulted with God aforehand 2 Sa. 5. 19. 23.
and had answer from God, with promise to give him victo^ie in* battle before
he went out, which he would not have afforded him in an action sinful and
unlawful to be done.

8. In Battle, when his people rested upon him, and cried to him, he 1 Chapter 5.
20.
did help them and made them Conquerours.

Lastly, war against Gods enemies, and the battle fought against them, is
called the Lords battle, and his work 2 Chapter 20. Ier. 48 10.
which they do, which God so allows of, as he denounces a curse against them
that shall do it deceitfully or negligently.

Thus we see what warrant war has from the Lord of Hosts in the old
Testament. But they will grant this to be so in that time, for then God showed
himself a man of war, and was as it were delighted with the title of Lord God
of hosts so* often given to him, and seldom hardly once the name of the God of
peace.

But in the new Testament the case Iam. 5. 4.
is otherwise, for he is but once or twice at most called there the Lord of
Hosts, more often the God of peace: we be now under the Lord Jesus the Prince
of peace, and do profess the Gospel, the word of peace, which should move
all Christians to live in peace and have wars, battle, and slaughtering of
men.

Its very true, that all men should Ps. 34. 14.
seek peace and ensue after it, as a blessing of God: yet just and necessary
war is not to be condemned, for as a Father says, it is a part of justice by
war to defend our Country and Ambros de Of.
confederates, and such as need aid from spoylers and oppressors. Neither does
the New Testament disallow of war so it be just.

1. Our Prince of peace tells us of wars, and is pleased to be set out Mat.
24. Reu, 19. and* 17.
as a Captain of an Host riding on horse back, and subduing his enemies; and
making a slaughter of them. Hereby showing that his Church shall have wars,
and he will take their part and help to subdue their enemies, as he has often
done and yet will do.

2. When the soldiers asked John Luke 3. 14.
Baptist what they should do? he did not will them to forsake their calling:
but admonished to do violence to none, to accuse none falsely, and to be
content with their wages, as allowing the calling, but reforming the abuse.

3. We find religious soldiers in the new Testament, the religious Centurion,
Cornelius a Captain, Mat. 8. 8 10 Act. 10. 1, 2, 3, 4, 7.
and a soldier fearing God that waited on him.

4. Saint Paul makes it a fruit of faith, to be valiant in battle; if the Heb.
11. 34
lawfulness of war had been out of date under the Gospel, the Apostle would
have left that out, as now no fruit of faith.

5. God has now appointed Kings to use the sword: not only Romans 13. 4.
to punish offenders under them; but also to defend their subjects from
violence and wrong at home and abroad.

6. The Lord in calling the Gentiles to the Gospel made choice in the first
place to begin with one of this calling before another: even a Captain called
Cornelius, to whom he sent his Angel, and after Saint Peter to instruct him,
and to make him and his, the first fruits of the Gentiles, so far was he from
disesteeming of the calling.

7. We must know that the Gospel takes not away the law of nature to defend
our selves by forcible means against violent enemies: yea with a good
conscience may we take up arms when there is no safety but in arms. And what
hinders Princes and States to recover what is justly their own, if otherwise
not to be gotten but by force of Arms?

8. Hereto add the practice of all Christian Emperors, Kings, Princes, and
States in all ages using upon just cause arms. Militare non est delictum,
says Saint Augustine, but abuse it: yea says Ambrose, a work it is of
righteousness when the cause is just. Therefore from all these sayings and
former reasons we may conclude war, if not abused, to be lawful.

IV. CHAPTER. Of a right soldiers Honourarable calling and employment.
A Right soldier in his vocation: well qualified, and behauing himself
worthily like a true soldier indeed, lives in a course of life worthy Honor,
and his employment in warrlike affairs is very honorable: for,

1. God himself is pleased to carry the name of a soldier; God is a man of
War, says Moses; and Genesis 15. 3. Ios. 5. 14, 15.
the Son of God professed himself to be a Captain of the Lords host; Now
titles which great personages bear, graceth much that calling which these
titles imply though formerly that vocation had been never so mean and base in
esteem.

2. The most renowned in holy Writ, and in humane stories have attained to
great fame and glory by their valiant Acts and ^eats of arms; as we may see in
Joshua, in Gideon, Ehud, Baruc, Sampson, David, and his Warriors. What speeches
are there of the Nine worthies, whereof Joshua, David, Judas Machabeus are
three* is it not all for their valor and victories in battle? By wars the
fame and memory of Julius Caesar, of great Alexander, of Pirrhus, of
Themistocles, of Scipio, and Hannibal, of Scanderbag, of Charles the fifth
remain immortal, with innumerable other both in profane and divine story.

3. Whence came all those so greatly affected titles now in the world? rose
they not from valor, prowess, military ^^ployments and exercise of Arms?
whence came Esquire, but by being Armiger of bearing weapons of war, an
armorbearer. Whence came a Knight of old? not by scraping of wealth, and
buying the title, but by being Miles a soldier: whence a Noble man Eques? but
from a generous spirit and being a man at arms. The title of an Earl Comes
was a Lieutenant or Provost Marshall. A Duke, Dux came of leading a Company, a
chief captain in the field: yea whence came the highest name of dignity the
name of Imperator Emperor, but from honor in the field bestowed upon him that
knew how to rule and command an host of men? And if I may guess at the name of
our yeomen in Latin valecti, what were they but stout men ob valorem electi,
chose for their valor and courage to do their country service.

4. Solomon the wisest King that ever 2 Chapter 8, 9.
was, held such as were men of war, to be more honorable then to be employed
in servile work, such as he employed strangers in, and the people of Canaan the
Hittites, Amorites, Perizzites, Hevites, and Iebusites. These accursed and base
people were not worthy to be men of war, the function was too honorable for
for them, as it is for to many admitted now into it, more fit for Stocks,
Bridewell, Jail, Galleys, or the very Gallous, then to be enrolled among the
honorable, and men truly worthy the name of soldiers, if the wotth of a true
soldier were well weighed.

5. In old times the best in Nations, as Kings, Princes, Nobles, were men of
war: the best in stature, the properest and tallest men, as the three 1. Sam.
14. 52.
sons of Ishai; the best that surpassed other in excellencies, in courage,
valor and strength, such as Saul chose, were commonly men of war.

6. By the profession of arms many have attained from mean conditions, to
great honor; David from a shepherd to be a King of Israel, was not Iephte
base of birth yet by valor became a Judge in Israel? Isicrates the Athenian
who was Lieutenant to Artaxerxes was he not a Cobblers son? Eumenes one of
Alexanders Captains was a Carters son, Servius Tullius, who triumphed three
times, was the son of a poor servant, whence he was called Servius.
Dioclesian though a bloody persecutor of Christians, yet a valiant man, who
obtained the Empire by his prowess and valor, and yet but a Scriveners son.
Nicholas Pi^hinnino the great Captain and Commander of the Armies of the
Potentates in Italy was but a butchers son, Ochiali of a poor Mariner for
his valiant service, became Admiral of the Turks Navy, and one of his
Counsel. It were too long to relate the number that have risen and have become
renowned by wars.

7. The famou^est Nations of the world, the Romans, who subdued Kingdoms,
never held any profession worthy so great honor, nor ever rewarded any so much
as they did, valiant men, generous-spirits, noble courages, adventuring their
lives, and obtaining thereby praises to themselves and glory to their Nation, as
their histories do show.

That Calling must needs be honorable which requires so many honorable parts
and praise-worthie endowments requisite to make a man deserving to be admitted
into military profession, as to be a man of understanding, of sharp and
quick apprehension; of a stout and undaunted courage, and yet not foole-hardy
but prudent and patient; of an able body, yet no lubber of a luskish and
sluggish Disposition, but nimble and lively, to execute designments, and
crowning all this with true religion and zeal toward God, with a loyal and
faithful heart to his King and Country.

9. For the honor of this profession, how great volumes are written of men of
wars, their valiant deeds and memorable acts have caused them to be registered
to all posterities; by the pen of the learned, which cannot be read, but with
both great delight, and great profit, even to make valarous and courageous
spirits emulous of their fame and glory.

Lastly, what profession procured more honor to people and Nations, then men
of war have done? How famous was Greece for her Achilles, Diomedes,
Themistocles, Pericles, and others? what praises everlasting did Epirus that
little Country obtain by her peerless Pirrhus, and that terror to the Turks
Scanderbeg? Remains not Macedonia alive by her great Alexander, Troy, by her
valiant Hector, Rome, by Caesar, Pompey, Scipioes Horatii, Fabii, and the rest:
Lacaedemon by Simon and Leonidas, Carthage by her Hannibal, and so other places
by their valiant worthies, well exercised and experienced Cheiftaines? And in a
word who is more worthily honored in the hearts of all virtuous men, then a
man of courage, so be it he be otherwise well qualified, that by some base
condition he wrong not himself, which true generosity of spirit will utterly
disdain to do.

V. CHAPTER. Of the just causes and true grounds of making war.
AS we see the undertaking of war to be lawful and honorable, so must it be
ever therein understood that it also be just; for the cause as it is either
good or evil, so is the war, so may the issue be thereafter expected. The
wars undertaken of the Israelites by warrant from God prospered: True it is,
that unjust wars sometime may have good success, for the iniquity of the
people against whom they are undertaken: and therefore by the event, the
justice of the war is not to be ever judged; but by the just cause thereof.
Now in ancient times wars defensive and offensive have been made upon these
grounds.

I. A war just, by reason, by the instinct of nature, and by custom of all
Nations, and by religion it self, is that which is undertaken in defense of
our Country, religion, liberty and state.

God allows to go to war against an enemy coming upon us; upon this
ground was the wars of Number. 10. 9 Exodus 17. Judge. 6. and 11. 1 Samuel 14. 47,
48. 2 Chapter 14. 1 K. 20.
Joshua against the Amalekites, of Gideon against the Midianites, of Iephte
against the Ammonites; of Saul against the Philistims and others spoiling them,
of Asa against Zerah the Ethiopian, of Ahab against Benhadad the Syrian, of the
Romans against Hanniball, and of the ancient Britains, here against the
Romans, Saxons, Danes, and Normans. A Heathen could say, lustum est bellum,
and pia arma, ^iv. 9.
quia nulla nisi in armis relinquitur salu^: It is both just and godly, when
otherwise we cannot live safely.

II. It is just war to bring under such as rebel, having formerly yielded
subjection; upon this ground went Chedorlaomer with the aid of Genesis 14. 2 K.
3. 2 Chapter 25. 2 K. 24. 20. Eze. 17. 15 2 K. 17. 3, 4. 2 Samuel 18. and 20.
other Kings against the King of Sodom, and the rest; so Iehoram against Moab,
Amazias against the Edomites; Nebuchadnezzar against Zedekias, whom he had made
King, and taken an oath of; Salmaneser against Hoshea, which conspired against
him. Thus Kings justly make war against Native Rebels, as David did against
Absalom, and against Bichri.

III. It is just war to help friends, Allies and Associates unjustly oppressed
and wronged. Upon this ground Abraham armed himself, and set upon the four
Kings to recover Lot, whom they had carried away Genesis 14. 1 Sa. 23. 3. and 11.
Ios. 10. 6, 7
Captive: David rescued Keylah from the Philistims, Saul Iabesh Gilead from the
Ammonites; and Joshua the Gibeonites from the Amorites, Judas and Simon 1 Match.
5. 10. 17. lib. de Offic. Bell. Gal. 7.
his brother helped the other distressed Jews. The Romans made war against
the Samnite^ in the defense of the Campanians, who had put themselves under
their protection: This St. Ambrose says is Justice: Caesar Ibucid. 1.
gave succor to his friends in Gergovia; for neglect hereof was held a kind
of treason, and it was just cause of reproach to forsake friends, Confederates,
and such as should be holden in their distress: God wills Pro. 24. 11
us to see to this, allows of it, commanding us to help in such a case.

IV. It is lawful, (if otherwise peaceably it cannot be obtained) to make
war for passage of an army; to get it by the sword, if passage be hindered.
This made Israel to fight with Sihon King of the Amorites, and Deuteronomy. 2. 26. 30.
Number. 21. 23. 24. 33. Deuteronomy. 29. 7 Iud. 11. 30.
Ogg the King of Basan, for that they hindered their way to Canaan. This was the
cause of the war by Necho against Josias, because he rashly went out against
him, going against him, going against another Enemy the King of Assyria. For
this thing Judas 1 Match. 5. 48. 51.
destroyed the City Ephron, and the Inhabitants thereof, because they could
not be entreated to give him and his host passage peaceably, but stopped up his
way.

V. It was lawful to the Israelites Number 25. 1 17, 18 and 31. 1. 3.
for religion sake to avenge the Lord upon Idolaters, which by wiles and
inticements corrupted the people of God. This is warranted by the Lord; upon
this ground Israel sent an army against the Midianites, Joshua and all the
Elders held it lawful upon such a supposed ground, (had it been true) to make
war against the two Tribes Ios. 22. 12. 33. Judges 20.
and half. Also the Chief in a State consenting to punish notorious,
offenders, if they cannot get such delivered peaceably, by war may set upon
their maintainers, as Israel did upon the obstinate Beniamites.

VI. Indignities unjustly offered unto Ambassadors, or messengers sent from
one state to an other is just cause of war, for this did David set upon the
Ammonites, and handled them ^ Sam. 10. and 12. 30, 31. Live. 4. Florus Caes.
com. Phil. Comm.
with great severitie. This wrong the Romans revenged upon the Fidenians,
Illirians, V^ians, and Armoricaus. Charles Duke of Burgundy put all the Castle
of Nele to the sword to the Sea Dr. Sutcliffe his practice of the law of Arms.
sword for killing his messenger. For Ambassadors or Messengers are
privileged by the Laws of all Nations and suffered to pass safe among the
points of weapons.

VII. Reproaches offered and injuries done to principal men in a State is just
cause of war: This caused the war between Ieptah and Judge. 12. 4.
Ephramites, who called the Gileadites fugitives, whereof Ieptah was the head;
The taking away of Sampsons wife, being a Judge in Israel made him seek
revenge upon the Philistims. The Rhodians abusing the Romans with insolent
terms when they took part with Perseus cost them dear: Frederick Barbarossa
besieged and took Millan for a scorn offered to him. Gideon for that he was
contemned Judge 8.
and slighted of the Elders of Succoth and Penuel after his victorious return
did fall upon them. For high authority is sacred, and the injury, reproach or
contempt offered thereto, is not to pass unpunished.

VIII. Upon the injuries and wrongs unjustly offered and spoil made and
subjects carried away, Princes and States have cause, by war to get
satisfaction and recover their right, if otherwise they cannot be righted:
This was David's war with the Amalekites to regaine from them their wives,
children, and goods carried 1 Samuel 30. 1 Samuel 23. 1, 2, 5.
away, and with the Philistims robbing the threshing floores. The Romans with
sharp wars prosecuted Mithridates, for that by one general proclamation he
had caused diverse of their people to be massacred: They also warred upon the
Sabins for spoiling the Roman Merchants. This was the cause of the Romans
third war with the Carthaginians; also with the Hetruscians, and other
neighbors: for injuries done to subjects: redoundeth to the Prince, which he
is to right and to cause restitution to be made; which if reasonably offered,
is not to be refused.

IX. Breach of Covenant and promise has been cause of war. Upon 1 K. 22. 3.
and 21 34.
this, did Ahab war upon the King of Syria to recover Ramath in Gilead, which
Benhadad had promised before to restore to him: for this cause the Romans
began their wars Live. 42.
with Perseus the King of Macedonia.

X. To get peaceable possession of a Crown justly claymed; as David did the
Kingdom of Israel; therefore he warred against Ishbosheth and 2 Samuel 2. 8 10.
and 3. 1.
the house of Saul.

XI. To revenge old injuries offered by predecessors, the same being
continued in their posterities; upon this was the war performed by Saul, and
commanded by God against Exo. 17. 8. 1 Sa. 15. 3. Deuteronomy 25. 17, 18, 19.
the Amalekites, for the evil they did to the Children of Israel coming out
of Egypt. And least this might seem to be something hard unto the present
generation against whom Saul was sent, we must know, that the Amalekites
continued Enemies to Gods people, the Children living in the stepps of their
forefathers from Joshua to the days of the Judges, and to the days of Saul;
yea Agag whom Saul took prisoner had made many a child fatherless, (no doubt
of Israel) else old Samuel Judge. 3. 13 and 6. 3. and 7. 12. and 10. 12. 1 Samuel
30. 1.
would not have so laid to his charge nor so revenged it upon him, as he did.
They were ever taking part with the Enemies of Israel, as all the cited places
in the margin show. Now to take part with an enemy is just cause of war:
upon this the Romans warred against Philip of Macedonia, for that he aided the
Carthaginians, and joined league with Hannibal against 2 Samuel 8. 3
them.

XII. David made war upon Hadadezer 1 Chapter 18. 3
King of Zobah, (and some think justly) being jealous of his greatness,
coming with a great Army to establish his Dominion and to border so near
upon him, as at the River Euphrates. It is wisdom for Princes to look unto
the dangerous attempts of high and aspiring spirits, over much seeking to
enlarge their power and Dominions.

Lastly, wars have been justly made by Israel Gods people, at Gods command,
to subdue Nations, and to possess their Kingdoms as they did the Kingdoms of
Canaan, and in herited them. Thus also warred Nebuchadnezzar the Babylonian,
Cyrus the Persian, Alexander the Grecian, and afterward the Romans to subdue
people under them, and they undertook it, and prospered: but whether they had,
all of them, and in all those wars, that immediate divine warrant, and did it
lawfully, I dare not affirm: and therefore much less let any aspiring spirits
now take liberty to do so.

1. The Israelites had a word of Deuteronomy. 2. 24. Ios. 14. 6. Genesis 15. 18. 21.
Command from God to subdue Sihon the Amorite, Ogg of Basan, and all the
Kingdoms of Canaan, and a word of encouragement to have aid, to get them, as
they had before a word of promise to inherit the Country.

2. Concerning Nebuchadnezzar and Cyrus, to them was Gods will revealed, and
they were foretold of their success to set them forward to the subduing of
people, and to bring them under their Command; It was Dan. 2. 28. 31. 43.
foretold Nebuchadnezzar in a dream and expounded by Daniel to him: and Dan. 4.
19.
confirmid by Jeremy the Prophet to the Jews in Judea, and by Ezechiel in
Babylon: whose words came no doubt to the ears of Nabuch: to whom God had
given all Kingdoms, people, Nations and tongues. Cyrus the Persian Esai 44.
28. and 45. 1. Esdr. 1. 2.
was by name foretold hundreds of years before he was borne, of his rising,
rule, and Dominion, of which he had gotten knowledge, and ascribed his success
to be from the Lord God of heaven. This knowledge the 2 Chapter 36. 23.
might have from Daniel who lived in Babylon, when Darius and Cyrus reigned
that subdued the Babilonians. How Alexander the Grecian Emperor, and the Roman
knew of their power and Dominion assigned to them of God, is not so plainly
recorded in holy: but it may be, that Daniels prophecy, and his interpretation
of Nabuchadnezzars dream, might go abroad, and become known either by the
writing it self, or by relation and tradition from one to another: or they
might have it from the Oracles of their own imagined Gods, but indeed devils,
who well knew the Oracles of the true God, and so told the Grecians and Romans
such things, as from themselves, promising to them victories, and dominion over
Nations, which the Scriptures of the Prophets had foretold should surely come
to pass. Now they finding success according to the voice of those
counterfeiting Oracles, they ascribed all to the power and gift of Iud. 11. 24
those, Idol gods and Devils: and so Ireld it lawful to hold those Kingdoms
which they could subdue, as t(...) a then did imagine, as appears by the
speech of Iepthah to the King of the Ammonites.

Thus we see upon what grounds wars in ancient times have been made to make
them lawful and just; which is the first thing to be considered o^. For as
the cause is good or bad, so may we expect the issue: howsoever a good cause
will encourage to battle, let the event be, as shall please God.

Unjust wars do work the Authors confusion very often; as may be seen in
the unjust war of Amaleck against Israel, of Sihon and Exo. 17. 1 K 20. 2 am.
10. 16. 17, 18. 2 Chapter 14. Iud. 20. Ios. 7. and 8
Og without cause, coming out against them, of Benhadad his war against
Ahab, of the Syrians against David, of Zerah with his ten hundred thousand
against Asa; True iris, that just causes have sometime an evil event, for the
sins of the people; and sometimes the unjust may prevail, as Benjamin and
Gileah, in two battles against Israel, for their greater ruin at the length,
as it happened to these Beniamites, and to the Inhabitants of Ai, and Bethel,
though before they had made Israel fly before them.

VI. CHAPTER. Of necessary Wars.
ITs not enough to look only to the justice of the cause in making war; but
also it is to Ps. 68. 30. and 140. 2. and 120. 7.
be considered how necessary and convenient it may be. The evils of war
should make men not to be hasty to go to war: Its an evil quality to
delight in war; against such David speaks and desires God to scatter them,
as being Leu. 26. 25. Reu. 20. 8, 9, and 16, 14
evil men and violent, especially when they make themselves ready to battle
against such as be for p^ace. The sword is threatened as a punishment, and to
shed, blood is the Devils delight, he it is that seduceth the Nations to make
war, and he sends out the unclean spirits, like croaking froggs to gather
Kings to battle.

Besides these considerations, the calamities and miseries of wars are
unutterable, who can recount them? Lusts of unruly Soldiers reign, without
respect of friends, or foes, many times. The battle of the warrior (says Esa)
is with confused Esa 9. 5. and 14. 17. and 13. 16. 18.
noise, and garment rolled in blood; and he tells the people that the sword
has made the world a wilderness and destroyed Cities; yea children have been
dashed to pieces, houses spoiled, Temples robbed, Lam. 1. and 2. and 3 and 4.
and 5.
strong men slain, and women ravished, and cruelty committed without pity.
The woeful effects of war are lively set out in Ieremies Lamentation, and in
the book of the wars of the Jews in the last destruction of Jerusalem, who
can read either book without tears, except their hearts be of Adamant?

Yet a just war, if also necessary, forcing to take arms against an
infesting Enemy, is to be preferred before an unjust peace. That which has
been uttered concerning the evil of war is not to dishearten valorous
hearts, nor to abate the courage of the valiant, who know that true fortitude
is only seen in perils, and borne patiently without daunt of spirit: but it
is only spoken to prevent rash war, for Duloe bellum inexpertis; as also to
advise such to consider in whose power it is to make war, that just causes of
war be not pretended only, and ambition, desire of Sovereignty, and other
motives finister be indeed the causes thereof.

Offensive war upon just and necessary grounds is lawful both from command
from God, and the practices of just Princes, as we may observe in Divine and
humane stories: But Defensive war, magis est iuris naturae and politici
officij: yea and better becomes the people of the Prince of peace; and
indeed, the wars foretold in the Revelation, which the Church shall have with
the beast, the Dragon, the whore, the false Prophet, and with God and Magog are
altogether Note this.
defensive. For its ever said (a point worthy observation) that the beast made
war, the Dragon went out and warred, the spirits of devils went out to
gather armies to battle; the beast, the whore, and ten Kings made war with
the Lamb; Reu. (...), 7. and ^2. 17. and 137* and 16. 14. and 17. 14. and 19.
19. and 20. 8, 9.
Gog and Magog gather together against the Saints, So that the offensive war
is on the enemies side, and the Defensive war is altogether on Christ and his
Churches part, by which yet they shall overcome: would God this were considered
of; if the Enemy begin, let us stand for our Religion and lives with courage,
Christ will take our parts and give us a glortous victory in the end. The Lord
has spoken it; if we believe his Prophets, we shall prosper; and he that
believes makes not have, if we ^ake a right course, let us stand still, not
fear, fight valiantly the Lords battles, for and in the cause of Religion,
seeking to avenge the Lord on those Romish Midianites, and behold then the
salvation of the Lord, which he will show unto ^s ^n his appointed good time,
even so, Amen.

The VII. CHAP. Of the chief authority moving to war; and of Kings going out
with their Hosts, very usual in ancient ages, but yet ever arbitrary.
Upon mature deliberation, and well advised judgment, the justice of war
being approved, as also that the same is necessary (least men embroyle
themselves in needless use of the sword, to their own ruin) then is to be
considered in the next place by what authority this war is to be undertaken;
for a necessary and just war does not warrant every one upon their own
heads to make war, though they be able to gather a power together; but the
first moover thereto must be the supreme authority in the State, whether it
be Monarchical, Aristocraticall, or any of the rest, by which the people of
that stare is governed.

The wars which God allowed, and so just, which he also commanded, Exo. 17.
8. Number. 31.
and so necessary were made ever under, and by the authority of such as he set
over his people. Thus the war against Amalek was commanded by Moses; so was
that against Midian; in like manner Israel warred under the command of Joshua,
after under the Judges, and then under Kings, as under Saul, David, and the
rest, who did in their own persons go into the wars.

And this same was usual in all former ages, even from the beginning of wars
mentioned in holy writ, that Kings themselves went out to ^^o. 14. 2 Chapter 12.
and 35. 20. 1 Kin. 20.
war, as the four Kings against the five in Genesis 14. Pharao in his own
person pursued Israel, Shishak King of Egypt came with his host against Judah,
and so Pharao Nech^ went forth with his own forces, Benhadad the Syrian came
himself, and with him thirty two Kings into the field.

All the Can^anitish Kings came Joshua 10. Number 21.
themselves with their hosts, so the two mighty Kings Sihon King of the
Amorites, and Ogg the King of Basan. And thus did all the Kings of Israel and
Judah: Saul went into the field continually; David was often there in person;
so was Jeroboam, Rehoboam, Abiiam, Asa, Iehosophat, Amaziah, and the rest; yea
by the appointment of God some were appointed to order the battle themselves,
as was Ahab against Benhadads host; This was the custom of great Monarchs
subduing the world to go out in person; as may appear in Salmanezer, and
Senacherib the Assyrian 1. K. 20. 14 2 K. 18. ^. ^3.
Kings in Nebuchadnezzar the Babilonian, in Alexander the Macedonian, 2 Chapter 36.
6. Ier, 39. 5.
in Cyrus, Darius, Zerxes, the Persians, in Julius Caesar, and other Roman
Emperors* in Tamberlaine the Tartar, and Baiezet the Grandsiegneour; in
Charles the great, Emperor of Germany. This made Princes famous, their wars
to be maintained, the battles to be fought with more courage even to the
utmost; and so a more speedy dispatch one way or other to make some end, and to
bring peace, the good and blessed conclusion of all just wars.

Though it seemed expedient unto Kings in those days to go in person with
their Armies; yet no doubt care was had of their safeties, that they should not
be suffered to expose themselves rashly into the battle, 1 K. 22. 3^ 2 Chapter 35.
22. 2 Samuel 21 17. 1 Samuel 26. 16.
as Ahab did, and Josias, which cost them both their lives; For the valiant
Captains would expose themselves* desperately when they saw their Kings in
danger, as Abishai did, who res^ued David with great hazard to save his life
from the st^oke of Ishbi-benob the Gyn^* He are upon it was, that David held
Abn^r and 2 Samuel 18. 3.
others about Saul wo^thy of death, because they had not kept more safely the
King. Faithful Subjects esteem the life of a good King, more worth then ten
thousand of themselves; Princes may be in the field, 2 Samuel 21. 17.
but its not necessary to go into the battle, least (as David's servants said
of him) the light be quenched, and 1 K. 22.
the people be scattered, as upon Ahabs death.

Whether they go forth, or stay at home (which is free unto them, and may be
done according to their own pleasure) yet is this sovereign authority that
which must first moove to make war; People may not if they would gather
together to war against an open enemy of their own heads, for God has
punished such attempts as may be seen in the presumptuous Israelites arming
themselves Number. 14. 40. 44, 45. Deuteronomy. 1. 1. Match. 5. 56. 60. 61. 67^
without command from authority, and were overthrown by the enemy. Such was
the attempt of one Joseph and Azarias, who in a vainglory to get a name,
would gather troops to fight against the Heathen, and obeyed not I^das
Machabeus; and therefore were overthrown: and so were certain Priests slain^,
upon such a vain undertaking. Among the Romans those that thus offended, by
their laws were in case of treason. People must F. ad L. ^ub. maitst. and L.
vine C. vt arm^rum vsus.
therefore have warrant; for otherwise even to spoil or kill an enemy is
theft, and murder; and the battle on their parr no better then a fi^ld of
blood; and their doings, but disorder and confusion; except it be to repress a
sudden rising of Rebels, or to withstand a violent and sudden coming in of an
open enemy. Otherwise none are to be acounted public enemies in war, but
those whom public authority so declares to be: yea, and if any rise up in
rebellion, if authority know it, the Captains are to await for command,
before they gather power against such rebels: as may be manifest in Abishai
and the rest, who moved not the rebellion of Bichri, 2 Samuel 20. 1-4. 6, 7.
till David, who knew it, gave command to follow him: But when men have such
warrant, then let them obey readily, and be as serviccable to Ios. 1. 16.
to their Leaders, as the Israelites promised to be to Ios^a*

VIII. CHAPTER. Of Presse-men, and Voluntaries.
OF such as go to war, there are two sorts; such as be commanded, and such as
offer themselves. The former we call pressed; Deuteronomy. 33. 5
who without enforcement would not go, Moses was as King in Israel; and he
waited not for Voluntaries, but commanded Joshua to choose out of every Tribe a
thousand, to make an Host of twelve thousand to go against Midian. Saul
threatened revenge upon those that would not come forth to war at his
command; 1 Samuel 21. 6, 7.
and God did aid his authority by striking the people with fear of him. That
authority was in David to assemble and gather a power of his Subjects for
war; without which command Princes 2 Samuel 20. 4
could not have waged battles so, as they then did. And the Lords command to
Officers to give some leave to depart, argues their power otherwise, to have
retained them.

The other sort are termed Voluntaries, Deu. 20. 5.
which are either Natives or Foreigners. That men may offer themselves to the
wars, and enter into the profession of a soldier, its not to be doubted.
Ehuds soldiers were all Voluntaries at the sound of a Trumpet, So were the
three sons of Iud. 3. 27. and 5. 2.
Iesse, and such were David's worthies which came and offered themselves* and so
was Ittai the Gittite. Again, Deborah the Prophetess praises the Voluntaries
which came to help Baruk* besides she complains of such 1 Samuel* 17. 13.
as following their ow^e private business neglected the war^es* and withal
cursed Meroz for* not coming to Iud. 5. 14, 15, 18.
help the Lord.

Moreover, that which may be lawful by pressing and compulsion, may as well
be lawful for Voluntaries, if there be not very just cause or impediment to
hinder these. It is the judgment of Churches reformed beyond the Sea; among
whom some are trained up for war, to go as Voluntaries. We know that Princes
do help their associates voluntarily, what hinders, but that others in
their due place, and within their power may also freely offer themselves? A
lawful calling may be as well undergone freely, as by compulsion
circumstances and other considerations well weighed aforehand. And to conclude
this, how should Princes and States do, that have not power to press, if
Voluntaries might not in good conscience offer themselves.

But here Voluntaries must know, and be resolved of some things.

1. Of the calling of a soldier, that it is lawful, and that a man may
therein live, and as well receive wages* as men do for discharge of their
duties in any other lawful vocation. Be content (says John Baptist) with Luke
3. 14.
your wages, speaking to soldiers; therefore may they serve for wages.

2. Of the justice and lawfulness of the war into which he thrusts
himself, seeing he goes not by command of supreme authority, for this is
another case, when men go not of their own pleasure and will; but when any so
does, if the war be just, a man may serve with a good conscience of his own
accord: but if it be apparently unjust, let men beware that they embrew not
their hands in blood, going Voluntaries. If Princes command, the case is
altered, for private persons may not sit and judge of Princes actions, not
notoriously unjust as it was when Christian soldiers would not draw their
swords against Christians under Julian the Apostate; though they served him
willingly against others. Saul's servants would not fall upon the innocent
Priests of the Lord to Live. 12. contra Faust. man* ca. 7.
slay them. But where the fact, as in such cases, is not notorious, a good man
(says Saint Augustine) may serve under a sacrilegious Prince: for the unjust
command shall bind the Prince, when the duty of obedience shall make the
soldier free.

3. They must consider of what religion those be, that do make the war,
and whom they go to serve under: for Iehosophat vva^ in danger of his life,
and reproved by a Prophet of God for helping Ahab an Idolater, who was an
hater of God as all Idolaters be, though they themselves think better of
themselves.

4. They must have the leave of such as have sovereign authority over them;
for a subject to one, cannot dispose of his own person to 2. Chapter 19. 2
to the service of an other Prince without leave: but he may put himself
voluntarily into the service of his own Sovereign, whose subject he is.

5. Voluntaries are to weigh with themselves what special impediments they have
to vvithhold from going, in respect of some particular calling, requiring their
own person for discharge of the duties thereof: or some charge of a family,
wife and children depending upon their personal being necessarily among them;
or whether apparently their being at home may do more good to their country,
then their service in war.

6. Their end must be good, Pro lege and grege Christi, as one says, for
defense of religion; and of the Church of God, for releeuing the unjustly
oppressed; for maintenance of right, and such like, and withal to learn^
experience for the good of their country, but not to run in unadvisedly, out
of male contentedness, nor of an idle humor, nor of foolish vainglory, nor of
a bloody disposition, nor of a base mind for prey and booty; but as a man of
valor, for more praiseworthy and better ends.

Lastly, that Voluntaries put themselves under the command of authority to do
service, and to be subject to rule and discipline, observing order, keeping
their places; from which they may not in certain cases depart without leave of
such Commanders as they have submitted themselves unto. For though they enter
voluntarily; yet being under authority, they may not think themselves then free
at all times to depart at their pleasure: For if they should, upon necessary
service, such wandering stars would fall of and such straglers would utterly
fail the expectation of their Commanders.

Thus with these considerations* men may be Voluntaries, and put themselves
into military service and authority may admit of them as David did of Vriah, of
Ittai the Gittite, with his followers* And as others have done, as histories*
show. But here yet the General and others with him must be ca^telous, and
weigh what voluntaries they entertain.

I. Beware of such as fly from the Enemy* let them be tried before they be
trusted: for we may read in stories, that such somet^mes have bin sent of the
Enemy ^o do mischief. Two Spaniards fained themselves fugitives ^^i^^iard.
to the Venetians with a purpose to kill Alvian their General. So History of
Scanderbag
did certain Turks with an intent to kill Scanderbag. The Munidians which
seemed to forsake Han^ibal, and to fall to the Romans in the battle of Canna,
were a great help to Hannibal to get the victory in turning against the Romans
upon a sudden: This wisdom was in the Philistims 1. Chapter 12. 19.
going to battle against Saul, they would not admit of David and his comp^nie.

II. Not to go too far in admitting of friends and associates; but only to
entertain so many as the Natives and natural subjects are able to command and
ouerrule; least they take advantage of the Natives fewness, and have them in
contempt; and trusting to themselves, make good their own secret designements
and revolt from them, as the Gauls did from the Romans, because they saw no
strength in the Roman Army, T^ cit. 3.
but that which was of strangers.

III. Never to hire, or receive any of a contrary religion, Amaziah the 2. Chapter
25.
king of Judah was reproved for hiring of Idolaters the Israelites to go with
him against Edom, whom he was commanded to cashiere, for God is not with such
as the Lord by his Prophet told him.

Before I end this chapter, it may A quest.
be here asked, whether going into wars may spoil the people of that State
against whom they go to war, seeing many thousands of the people and families
there live harmelesly at home, and desire to be there in peace and so forth? I
answer; in a just and Number. 21. 24, 25, and 31. 10, 11.
necessary war the conquered are in the hands of the Conquerours, lands and
goods are then at their disposition, whatsoever they have taken or won is
justly theirs. God allowed Israel to take what they did wi^^^n then just wars;
therefore 2 Samuel ^. 11, 12.
they possessed the kingdom of Si^^n, and of Ogg; they took the Midianites
P^^oners, carried away infispoyle, and burnt their towns and Cities with f^re.
David spoiled the Nations which he subdued. It is accounted by the law of
Nations a lawful Lib. de Offi^ 3.
purchase and the practice of all people in time of war. For nothing is
proper by nature, but either by ancient possession or seisme, or victory, says
the Heathen Orator; The Enemy, and that State can no otherwise be weakened, but
first in their Subjects; the hands of all which, though they be not in war,
yet are they in heart and in contributing: but if not, nevertheless, they are
one body, and therefore must be content to suffer together till their Head
make peace, and satisfy for that, which the justice of the war does require,
and for which it was begun. But if any be, 1. Sam. 15, 6.
as were the Kenites among the Amalakites consideration is to be had of them,
as Saul had of these for their preservation and safety.

IX. CHAPTER. Of mustering, and the choice of soldiers.
WHen a war is resolved upon as both just, and necessary thn must soldiers
be levied, a muster and view made of them and their armer.

The Kings in Israel were sometimes 1 Samuel 1* 4. Number. 1. 19. and 3, 4, 2.
at the muster. Saul gathered his soldiers together and numbered them. So did
David, 2. Sam. 18. 1. So Moses, numbered Israel.

And there was a principal Scribe Ier. 52. 25.
of the host which mustered the people of the land: for which mustering, there
was a command went forth to levy men and to call them together, as Saul did;
and as David appointed 1 Sa. 11. 7 2 Sa. 20. 5. Esai. 13. 4.
Amasa to do: to this custom God alludeth in his word when he mustered his
host.

In this, they considered of the number, which were to go into the wars,
sometimes more, sometimes fewer; Moses appointed but 12000 to go against Number.
31. 1 Sa. 11. 8. and 15 4. 1 Sa. 18. 1. with cap. 17. 24. 1 K 20. 15. 2 K. 3,
6. 2 Chapter 25 5 2 K. 20. 25, 26.
Midian: whatsoever the number was, the custom was to number them: as Saul
did his in Bezek, and in Telaim; David in Mahanaim, Ahab in Samaria; Iehoram
he numbered his, and Amaziah his Army: and thus did also the Heathen.

Now in sending forth an Army, great care must be had, what sorts of persons
are to be sent forth.

I. Let them be Natives and subjects living under that sovereign authority
that sends them our, though they be of several countries, yet subject to the
same power, and it were well that they had something to take to at home, or
friends of whom they expect good. For these soldiers are bound by the bond of
nature to their King, kindred, and Country. These are easy to be corrected,
if they should happen to run away. These will therefore be awed in the field,
and for fear to be punished at home, become more obedient, endure more
constant, be more loyal, even when they feel want of necessaries, and have
short pay, then any other will do, not subjects, or having nothing, or no
friends that they care for; Isreal's hosts were of Israel, and when the Tribes
were divided into two kingdoms, either State furnished themselves of their
own subjects most usually, as may be seen in their battles.

II. Consider their years; such as the Lord held fit for war, were in Israel
20. years old and upward; Number: 1. 20 and 22. 26. 2 2 Ch: 25. 5
and such did Amaziah take: for younger are hardly grown up to strength: and
above 46. except some old and expert soldier for skill, are not to be
admitted, because strength decays, as says a learned experienenced soldier.

3. Touching their bodies in Israel were chosen strong men, able to 1 Sa. 14.
52 2 Chapter 17. 14. Deuteronomy. 20. 8 Iud. 7. 3.
go to war, men also of valor and courage; so they must be stout and strong
of a vigorous and courageous mind, not fearful; for such were put out of the
host by Gods appointment and this did also that valiant Judas Machabeus; for
the fearful the first 1 Match, 3. 56.
in rank of the damned crew, what good will they do, but fail in
performance, Rev. 21. 8.
make others to be faint-hearted, and so give the victory to 2 Sa. 2. 9. and
23, 24.
the enemy. Men of a sharp countenance, sinowie arms and legs, promise both
strength and courage, and not the great lusks, fleshie lubbers, though Pyrrhus
and Marius chose men of big and great statures. In Israel such as could run
well, were commended, men swift of foot; active and nimble, as was Asahel Ioabs
brother, and one of David's worthis; This was also a commendation in Achilles,
and in Papirius, who was called for it, the Rinmer. In the Cursor.
Tribe of Gad were men for strength callen men of might, for courage to 1 Chapter
12. 8.
have had faces like Lions, and for footmanship, as swift as the Roes upon the
mountains.

IV. For their skill in arms, raw and ignorant men are not to be put suddenly
to service: for not a multitude, but art and exercise gets the victory: for
the ignorant soldiers may not only endanger himself, but his fellows too.
Therefore Iud 20 16. 1 Chapter 1. 40 and 12 35. 1 Ch 12. 2 ver. 32, 33.
the soldiers in Israel were very expert men. In Benjamin were 700. choice men
left handed, that is, such as were so skillful, that they durst with their left
hands use their slings against their enemies, and were so excellently cunning,
that they would cast stones at an hair breadth, and not miss. In Asher were
choice and mighty men of valor apt for war 40000: In Saul's time were many
which could use both the right hand and the left in hurling of stones, and
shooting arrows out of a bow. In Issachar were men of great understanding,
knowing what ought to 2 Chapter 12.
be done, whose Chiefetaines were 200. In Zabulon such as were expert in war,
and could keep rank, 50000. In Dan expert men 28600. also in the three Tribes
beyond Jordan skillful men there were an hundred and twenty thousand. So they
then brought no ignorant and raw soldiers into the field: Skill heartneth a
soldier, and increases his courage, and strikes some fear into the enemy.
A small number of skillful men, and experienced in arms, will easily rout
multitudes of others, as histories and experience do tell us. The Romans by
their excercised soldiers got so great and so maine victories. Epaminondas by
his exercised Thebanes overthrew the Lacedaemonians Live: 27. 21
at length; Hannibal at his coming into Italy at first, put to flight 35.
thousand with a small company of old soldiers.

V. Besides all these, it is fit that soldiers should be religious, yea very
requisite, because they expose themselves so to the danger of death, which
none, but such as be religious can be prepared for. Besides, they may expect
Gods aid, they may fight with their hands, and pray with their hearts, by
which means, that renowned Machabeus, 2 Match: 15 26, 27.
conquered Nicanor, and slew of his enemies 35. thousand. Let not the roaring
boys, the Machavilian Atheists, the profane Esaus, the drunken sons of
Bacchus, the blasphemous swearers, nor the filthy Adulterers laugh at this: for
God requires, 2 Sa. 23. 3.
that all should fear him. Religion will make men valiant, never any in holy
writ recorded for religious, but were indeed valiant, as Abraham, David, Asa,
Iehoidah the high Priest, Josias the religious king, all valiant men. And how
can they See Doct. Sut. Dea^e of Exet. his b of war. page 37, 38 mooving the
Army to be religious.
be otherwise but valiant, when they know that God is reconciled to them,
death, if it come, will be to them advantage. These only have faith in God,
and so will be courageous. Who can doubt that these will adventure life in the
field for religion and a just cause, that dare willingly yield their bodies to
be burnt for their faith and profession? They adventure their corporal life,
but with assurance of a heavenly life after: Whereas all other, (be what they
may be) hazard the damnation of their souls, with the death of their bodies; a
desperate attempt in careless wretches; The religious of conscience will be
obedient as Israel professed Ios. 1. 16, 17. Mat 8. 9.
to be to Joshua, and are like the Centurions servants going and coming at
command, and not mutinous; they are of a quiet behavior and temperate; not
brablers not drunkards, nor quarrelsome. They will esteem of and love a worthy
Captain according to his worth; who must be to them as a father, and 2 Chapter 25.
13. See the reading in the marg.
they to him as sons; for in Isreal's language, they were called the sons of the
band. Their prayers are of more force to prevail with God to take their parts,
and to vanquish an Enemy then all other means beside Israel fought, but Moses
did procure the victory by prayer.

And least any scoffing Ishmael should deride this care of the choice of
religious men, as having no pattern of warlike Chieftaines to follow. let them
look to the mighty Exo, 15. 3.
man of war, the Lord of hosts, the king of Kings, and consider what manner
of soldiers he did choose to fight his battles. The Commanders were religious,
as Joshua, the Judges, Ehud, Gideon, Iepthah, David, and others. His Armies
mustered by the Lord, were called his sanctified ones, set apart by him to
military employment; They were also mighty ones and strong, Esa. 13. 3. Joel 2.
5. they Joel 2. 7. 8, 9.
were skillful to march, and did not break rank, keeping way and just
distance, not thrusting one another they cared not for wounds, though the sword
pierced them: they were such as were runners, quick and nimble in execution:
and to conclude, they, rejoiced in the Lords highness, and in his excellency,
Such did the Lord muster and choose for his host.

But it will be objected, that Iepthtah had in his camp vain men: Iud 11. 1
Sa. 22. 2. and 30. 22.
There gathered to David men in distress, in debt, discontented persons, ^e^
and wicked-men, and sons of Belial, who fought with courage, recovered their
losses, and slew the Amalakites.

It is very true: but these were some 1 Ch: 12. 33.
only among the rest, the Commanders themselves, and other among them were
well given. Again, they had such as pleased to come to them in their
distresses; but they did not hyre such as the bastard Abimelech Judge: 9.
did, who hired vain and light men, a company fit for such a Captain.
Authority that may press, may find fitter men for their service is a good
cause, if they look to prosper, then sons of Beliall, Rogues, Loyterers,
Pikars, Swearers, Drunkards, Bastard breeders, Gaole-birds, Scurfe and Scum of
a people, held unworthy to live among honest men, very Outcasts of parishes,
not to be admitted indeed unto the honor of being a Soldier,

But some will perhaps say, that of these Routs of outcasts some have proved
very serviceable, also many unclean livers, profane swearers, whore-master,
and Cup-Captaines have showed great courage in war^s; And its known, that
Heathen men Julius Caesar, Alexander, Hector, Achilles, Themistocles,
Epaminondas, Pyrrhus, and infinite others have bin valiant soldiers.

First for these latter though Heathen, Xenophon in exp. Cyr. 2. Cicero de not
Deo. Esai 47. 12, 13.
yet moral virtues have been commended in them, and according to their Pagan
profession they were religious; asking counsel of their gods, without which
they would not go to war, and they hearkened to their Priests, Diviners,
Southsayers, Prognosticators, Astrologers, Chaldeans, and such as were
Revealers (as they thought) of the will of their gods. For the rout of outcasts
it may be some very few of many have been serviceable, but what have all the
rest been? An Heathen could say, That of a Company riotous Clea^chus ^n
Xenophon exped Cyr^ 2
and disorderly there is no use. For the other that are held so valorous, true
it is, that humane fortitude may be in an Abimelech, that murderer of his
brethren, in an Abner, a Ioab, as it was in those forenamed renowned Heathen,
yea, in other most lewd and vicious, and most profanely irreligious, there may
be out of pride and ambition, out of a furious heat of heart, out of a resolved
fool hardy desperateness, out of hope of spoil, out of a vain desire of
getting honor, and out of some such like grounds* perhaps out of an inflamed
spirit of the Battery, showed a kind of valor.

But this is not Christian fortitude, such as was in David, and others
accompanied ever with other laudable virtues. What desperate companions were
the three seditious Captains in Jerusalem and their followers, they prodigally
shed the blood of one another, and like Lions fought with the Romans: but at
length to their own utter confusion. And what becomes of these sorts of such
seeming valorous men? what commonly is their end? How prosper they? to say no
more of them but this, let experience speak.

Happy were it, that Christian armies were gathered of religious, or at least
of civil and morally honest men*, that the commendations of them might be like
Scipio Africanus Plutarch.
his Army, the meanest of whose soldiers seemed to be a grave Senator.

The soldiers then, as they now be were of two sorts; Footmen and Horsemen.
For horsemen in Isreel there were none in the days of Joshua, the Judges, Saul
(though he beset out like the Heathen Kings) nor in David's time, nor Solomon,
to wit, horsemen for war, indeed there is mention of Salomons horsemen and
Charrets for magnificence (as it seems) but not for war; as Absoloms
Charrets Ier. 17 25. and 22. 4 Ios. 11. 6, 9 2 Samuel 8. 4
and Horsemen were, and others also. In Joshua his time they were commanded to
hough the Heathens horses, and burn their Charrets with fire, and they did so;
and in like manner did David afterward, least Israel should trust therein. Yet
afterward in Iehosophats and Ahabs days we read of horses, which they had 1
K: 22. 4. 2 K. 10. 2.
with them into the field; and in Iehoazas his reign, mention is made of
Chairets and horsemen a few; but of mustering or numbering of them, we read not
at all.

The Heathen Armies were ever very strong in horsemen and Charets, and also
Charets of iron, Camels they brought with them for burden it may seem, and
for their Kings to ride upon, which had chains of gold about their necks. They
would bring in their host many horses, as 60000. Judge: 8. 26 2 Chapter 12.
at a time; so did Shishake of Egypt; Sisera had 900. iron Charets. The 1 Sa:
13. 5. 2 Sa: 10. 18
Philistims came against Israel with 30000 Charets, and 6000 horsemen; Zobah
had 40000 horsemen, with many Charrets, their horses were not hackney Iades, or
mean cart-horses, but horses for war, and mighty Iud: 5. 22. Job. 39. 19-25.
tramping and pransing horses, neighing terribly, very strong, pawing with
their feet, as full of fiercenes and rage, and such as were trained up, not to
fear the rattling quiver, the glittering spear, the sound of the trumpet, nor
shout of an host of men; but durst go on in their strength to meet the armed
men, and not to turn back from the sword: They had horses also that were very
swift, and strong ones, whose snorting and Ier. 4. 13. and 8. 16.
neighing might be heard a good way of, the sound whereof seemed to 1 Match. 1.
17. and 8. 3. 34. and 6. 30
make the earth to tremble. The Heathen brought also Elephants into their
battles, so Antiochus trained such up for war: how they used them, read the
1. Match. 6. 34 and 25.

The chief Charriots and horsemen of Israel were Eliah and Elisha, 2 K 2. 11.
and 6. 17.
and the hosts of heaven: The Armies of Israel were commonly footmen, these
they did muster, and choose to fight their battles, as is before declared.

In this mustering and choice, due care should be had of public good without
corruption; for the faithful choosing of fit men for the king and the country
is a special service, a very weighty business, and of great importance. For
Vegetius affirms, Lib. 1. cap. 7 dear milit.
that the strength of the Roman Army, and the foundation of their Empire was in
the first choice and trial of their soldiers. They employed in this choice of
men sit for war; men of knowledge, gravity and honesty; and those that of
favor or covetousness corrupted the right order in musters were punished. For
this, one Pedius Blaesus was with reproach put out of the Senate. They were by
law forbid, either to admit or dismiss a soldier for money. In Traian the Val.
Max. lib. 6. ca. 3.
Emperors days, one that made his son unable to serve in the wars, was
banished his country.

CHAPTER. X. Of the Armies in old times, the view of them; and of the exercise
before Soldiers go to War.
IN the muster as the persons are to be well chosen, so must the arms be well
looked to: what they be now, is well known to soldiers.

The furniture for soldiers in old time recorded in the Bible for preservation
Ez: 23, 24. 1 Samuel: 17. 6, 7. 38. 2 Chapter 26. 14. Eze: 38. 4. 2 Chapter 14. 8
of their bodies were these; a Helmet, a Brestplate, a Coat of male, a Gorget,
an Habergion, and Greaves, and they had also for defense, Bubklers, Shields;
and Targets.

The weapons they used were, the sword, which was sometimes twoedged, girded to
them with a girdle to their side, a Dagger upon the Joel 3. 10. Judge: 3. 16. 2
Sa: 20. 8. Judge: 3 16 Psalm: 45. 3 Cant: 3. 8. Joel: 2. 10. Ezech: 39. 9. Ier:
51. 42. Joel: 2. 8. 2 Sa: 18. 14
thigh, as was sometime a short sword. Also they had Spears, Lances,
Handstaues, Battle-axes, Darts, Slings, to sling stones in, in which some were
so cunning, as they could use either hand, and strike at an hair breadth. They
had their bows and arrows which did them great service as in former times
Archers have done with us, and by whom this Nation* has been famous; of the
commendation of Archerie, let any that please, read certain diseourses of one
Sir JOHN SMITH Knight. They had in Zach: 9 15 Ier: 50 42. Judge: 20. 16.
stead of Cannons, Battering ramms and Engines cunningly invented to shoot
Arrows and very great stones.

The Arms must be viewed, 1 Ch: 12. 2: page: 20. 26 Eze: 4. 2. and 21, 22. 2
Ch: 26. 14. 1 ^am: 17. 39.
both for goodness, that there be no defect therein, and also for fitness,
serviceable for the time, and convenient for those that are to use them: for a
Saul's armor will not fit a David.

Atmes good and fit must be Eze: 21. 9, 10. Naum 3. 3. Ier: 51. 11.
well kept, the sword must be bright and sharp: so must the Arrows, the
Spear heads are to glister. For he is surely a baseminded Soldier, that is
a Sloven in his Arms. The Heathen Live: 26.
took care of this. Scipio Africanus commanded his Soldiers to have their
Arms clean and fit; so did the Emperor Aurelius give a charge for this, that
the Arms of his soldiers should be kept clean and bright.

Now having fit men, fit and Gen: 14. 14 Live: 26. and 29. and 23. and 34.
good Arms, before such yet do go into the field they must be trained up,
so was Abraham's servants, he armed his trained servants to sit upon the
Enemies, as did Scipio, Titus Sempronius, Cato, and other Romans. It is great
Genesis 14. 14. Lev. 26. and 29, and 23, and 34. Guicciard. li 8. and 11. Dr.
Sutclif. page 85. part. 2.
folly to thrust an ignorant multitude into battle. And yet also its not good
too much to trust unto trained Soldiers at home that never were abroad. For
the Venetians making themselves too confident upon their trained bands, were
ouetthrowne. And evil were the Florentines apaid in trusting to their trained
men. For they may be as one says, and though well instructed, yet never having
seen wars, nor been in the field to skirmish and fight in good earnest, may
fail the soldiers expectation. Nevertheless it is necessary that soldiers
be made skillful in the use of arms, and exercised in feats of actiuitiy, to
march, to keep ranks, to use right their postures, and to be ready at command
to do what they ought do. And this must be in time of peace, as no doubt the
Israelites were, which made you so expert in time of need. This care had
Cassius Pacit. 12.
the Roman, and Epaminondas the Theban. And to say as it is, though there were
no enemies to be expected or scared, yet cannot youths be better employed, then
in military exercises, and use of Arms.

XI. CHAP. Of the Officers in War.
WHen there is a good wise and fit choice made of the souldidiers, as of men of
understanding, strong active, and honest, and also trained well, then special
care must be had of appointing such Captains and Officers for them, as may be
worthy of such soldiers, able to command in wisdom, and to rule them well
prudently*

When David had numbered the 2 Sa: 18. 1. 2 Ch: 25. 5.
people, as likewise Amaziah; they placed Commanders over them. Of which some
were over thousands* Number: 31. 14. 48 1 Sa: 8. 12 1 Match: 3. 5
some over hundreds, some over fifties, and some but over ^ens. They were
called Praefecti, or Principes, the Officers of the host, Chiliarchi over
thousands, Centurions over hundreds, Pentacouta^chi over fifties, and Decurions
over tens: called they were Captains and Leaders. The chief had command over
many thousands, some over 280000, some over 30^000. All the sorts of them 1 Ch:
13* 1 2 Ch: ^7. 14. 15-18. 1 Ch: ^2. 8 15: 20. 21: 32, 33
were choice persons, valiant men, men of might, skillful in use of arms, an^
fit for battle, tried soldiers in the field, worthy their places. They were
wi^e, valiant, and not of a double heart, not traitorously minded, not
disaffecting the State, nor the professed religion. They were such as set God
before them, and in the service of war, offered themselves 2 Ch: 17: 16
to the Lord, as the learned Translator interprets the place, Alacerrimo and
promptissimo animo ad bella gerenda eius; with most lusty courages, and most
readily bent to fight the Lords battles.

Though all were worthy praise, yet among them some excelled other some, and
were more renowned, as 2 Samuel 23,
were the special worthies of David, and that without pride in themselves not
contemning others, and without envy of the less famous, for any thing the
Scripture speaks of.

These Leaders, Captains, and Officers were none of them young stripling, raw
and unskillful soldiers: but all known men of might, fit for battle. If a
David, a young man, a youth, a very stripling be advanced to be Captain over a
thousand by Saul, it was extra ordinem indeed, because he was known, and had
sufficiently 1 Samuel 17 59, 56, and 16. 18. and 17. 34. 50. 51. and 18 13, 14.
and often showed himself to be a valiant man, a man of war, prudent in
speech, and wise in his actions and behavior. For he had slain a Lion and a
Bare, and had overcome the Giant Goliath before this his advancement. Such
youths as he, if any such were, might well be admitted to command. Otherwise,
Adrian the Emperor is to be followed, who expressly forbad beardlesse youths
to aspire to such a charge: Alexander Lamprid. in vit^ ci^^.
in his expedition against Darius, chose such for his Commanders, as were
experenced in his fathers service, and of ripe judgment. Such as have not
attained to the grace of a manly countenance in such manlike services, cannot
procure authority sufficient to command brave spirits. And such as procure
their Places without desert, desire to be removed. Caesar being in Africa,
dismissed some Colonels and Captains with disgrace, because they had got such
places by favor, and not by just deserving. Buying and selling of places is
base marchandizing, and such as so come in, will surely make poor soldiers
pay dearly for it, if they be not prevented. It were a rare worthy Sovereign
authority that for every place in camp, deserts should only advance all and
every Officer, such as be valiant, loyal, diligent, men of skill, and aiming
at public good, true honor; and not chiefly or only at profit, or at other
courses unbefitting a right soldier much less a sound Christian. Worth in men
advances the work intended, wars by Gods blessing will prosper, soldiers
will be more obedient, and the whole host be better governed.

CHAP. XII. Of the General over the whole Army.
THough as has been showed, that Kings in person usually did go into the field
with their hosts; yet did 2 Sa. 2. 8. 1 Chapter 11. 6 2 Samuel 23. 37. 1 Sa. 14. 1.
Iud 9. 54. 1 Sa. 16. 21 and 14. 1. 1 Chapter 19. 16. 1 Match. 7. 8. and 4. 100
they appoint one Chief Ruler over all, called the General, or Captain over
the host, and Chief over all the rest who had his armor-bearer, as it
seems, every great Commander had, as well as Kings, Abimelech had his, Saul
his, (in which office was David at the first) Jonathan his, which
Armour-bearers were also valiant men. The Heathen had also such Generals, as
Phicol was to Abimelech King of Gerar, Shaphach to Hadadezer, Naaman to the
King of Syria, Sisera to Iabin, Bacchides to King Demetrius, and so others to
other Kings. And when there was no King in Israel, the Lord made Joshua his
General to fight his battles, and after him he raised up Othniel, Ehud, Barak,
Gideon, Iepthah, and other Judges. This has ever been the constant order, for
preservation D. Sutcl ca. 4. pa. 51.
of unity. None had equal authority with them, though others were of great
place, as was Abishai and Ittai under David, who divided his host into three
parts, one to Ioab, another to Abishai, and the third to Ittai. In Iehosophats
time there were then four that had divided among them into distinct numbers
1160000 a million an hundred and threescore thousand: Sometime we read how 2
Match. 8. 9.
the Heathen joined two together, as Antiochus with Nicanor, Gorgias as an
adviser and a man of great expe^ience.

The Generals appointed by God were ever assisted by his spirit, to become
wise, valiant, and religious. Kings choose their Generals, sometime, as nigh of
blood; but ever worthy men, as Saul did Abner his uncle 1 Chapter 11. 6.
one wise and hardy: So David did choose Ioab his sisters son, but it was
upon his desert. For if such be chosen, as be without due desert; valorous
spirits in heart disdain them; whence disorders, contentions, disgraces, and
ill success. The Enemy being a wise Commander despises the power of such a
Leader; So did Caesar even the old Company of the De bell^ civil^.
Spaniards, because he knew Petreius and Afranius their Commanders to be men of
no worth. Brave Generals, if God be not against them, further the victory
mightily, like Marius Coriolanus leading the Romans Live.
got them the victory over the Volscians; but after taking the Volscians
Plutarch.
part he made them Conquerours over the Romans: Its better of the two, that a
Lion lead an army of Hearts, then a fearful Heart an Host of Lions: For C^sars
invincible soldiers ^^llo Cir. 5
were by their cowardly Sabinus their leader overcome. So as Princes had need
of worthy Generals well qualified.

I. They should be religious, for if this be required of all the soldiers, if
possible; much more of the Chiefetayne, the General that commands all. Such
God who is to be followed did choose; such a one was that valiant Joshua, valiant
Judas Machabeus and others, and they prospered.

II. They must be wise, for wisdom, Eccles. 10. 10 12:
says Solomon* is profitable to direct, and a wise man's words are gracious. A
General should be as David behaving himself so wisely that 1 Sa. 18. 13 14, 15.
his Enemy may fear him, his friends love him and honor him. And the Wiseman
says also, that wisdom is better then weapons for war: for consideration
and well foreseeing, and wise managing of an Army, and finding out of
stratagems may prevail, where mere force cannot. Pyrrhus the Epirote, and
Scanderbag, and Hannibal by wisdom and forecast obteiend great victories.
Courage and strength has gotten many a glorious day, but policy has the
pre-eminence. It was by policy that Prince Edward, King Edward the thirds
son with 8000. overthrew the French Army of 60000. and by policy Henry 5.
prevailed with 15000 against all the power and Nobility of France likewise;
cunning contriving of matters wins often* where strength would fail. So
wise should a General be, as that he should not need to be tied to particular
instructions, but to be able to proceed wisely* with large Commission, and to
use it according to present occasions, and difference in the times, and
variety* of things falling out for advantage to him: which he may lose by
bridling instructions. David wise and valiant prescribed not to Ioab what to
do, how, when, nor where in particulars: nor did so the Roman Senate to their
Generals, they were not limited: see for the commodities herein, and yet the
cautions withal, in Dr. Sutcliffes discourse of war. Cap. 4. part 4.


III. Generals should be, as religious and wise, so also very valiant men,
such as God chose were valiant, the Angel called Gideon a valiant man, such a
one was David; Among the Heathen, the Generals were found to be valiant;
Alexander the great performed many valiant Acts against the Persians and
Indians; and so did Julius Caesar against the fierce Nervii, and at the battle
of Mumida he showed himself most valiant in leaving his horse, and setting
himself foremost in the front of his foot, to stir up their courages.
Scanderbeg was wise and valiant, so was Pirrhus: for the fearful soon turn
Cowards; and in Cowards is no trust: for they will betray King, Country, Gods
Cause, even true Religion, and all, for bodies safety. So hateful are Cowards
Rev. 21. 8.
and the fearful as they are the foremost in the rank of the damned crew
going to Hell.

IV. Generals should be courteous and affable to their soldiers, not proud,
nor disdainful, courteous behavior, in a wise, valiant, and worthy Commander
steals away the hearts of inferiors, and knits them to him: How did Absalom
win all hearts in a manner to him: which I note, for the Courtesy, not for his
Craft therein, which a General must be far from; least he prove a Traitor,
and find the Reward of such a one. The ^ff^ble Courtesy here intended is the
gaining of the hearts of soldiers to obey from love, rather then of fear.
Caesar would call upon his soldiers, and term them by the name of companions
and friends. Disdain is proper to a dunghill Knight; Mithridates, Cyrus,
Scipio, yea great Alexander, were very courteous and respective to their
soldiers, so also was Charles the fifth.

V. Generals should be faithful of their words, to perform what they promise,
or what others by their warrant do promise for public good: this was the
valiant worthy, the religious Joshua, very careful of, even to Ios 6. 22, 23.
and 9. 19
the deceitful Gibeon^t^^, as also afterward to Rahab according to the Iud.
1. 15. 1 Samuel 30. 15.
word of the spies, and their promise unto her; and in like manner with the man
of Luz the spies kept their word: So David performed what he promised unto an
Amalekite.

It is much derogatory to the honor of a General to be found false on his
word: Alexander being advised by Parmenio on a time to break his word, said,
if I were Parmenio, I should perhaps do so, but its not lawful for Alexander
so to do. The Roman Commanders were most praiseworthy in this. A General to
be a treacherous Triphon to a Jonathan is odious to any noble and valiant
heart; and he detesteth to be a fedifragous Hamilcar; the faith of a soldier 1
Match. 12 42. 49.
should be inviolable.

VI. Generals should be temperate, sober and chaste, virtues ever accompanying
true graces: we never read of any of the valiant worthies, such as Joshua,
Ehud, Othniel, or David's worthies to be given to gluttony, drunkenness, or to
filthy lusts of Adultery and fornication; where read we in Israel or in Judah,
of valorous spirits to have been drunkards, or to have ravished women or
mayde^s? Indeed this was 1 K* 20. 16. Lam. 5. 11. 1 K. 16. 9. Joel 3: 3 Iudeth
13:
the course and custom of* the Heathen; and of some idolatrous Elah, who in
his drunkenness lost his life, as did drunken and lustful* Holofernes; Ioab,
though otherwise bad enough, yet we do not read of any drunken humor in him,
nor to be addicted to filthiness, nor yet his valiant brethren. Indeed
Sampson was something given to lust, but he paid well for it, even contempt,
loss of his eyes, imprisonment, and death. This sin of lust and drunkenness
in Captains and soldiers is heathenish, which yet some Heathen have so
detested, as they may rise up in judgment* against many called, but unworthily
Christians. Great Alexander used the wife and daughters of Darius and other
beautiful women of Persia very honorably, without any suspicion of unchaste
behavior, yea so he hated filthy lusts, that when two soldiers one Damon, and
an other Tymothe^s, under Parmenio had forced men's wives he commanded them to
be put to death as brutish and wild beasts. Young Scipio the noble Roman, not
then above 22. year old is praiseworthy in this also, who commanded (as
Plutarch records) that women taken in wars should not be defiled, and when
a beautiful d^mosell was at a time presented to him, he did not only contain
himself from violating her chastity, but sent her to the Noble man to whom she
was betrothed, with an enlargement of her dowry: behold these you Commanders.
It were too long to enlarge every worthy quality required in a General:
briefly therefore for the rest* he should be without envy, not an envious Saul
to see a David do well, and have his deserved praises, but rather rejoice
thereat, and be like the noble M^tius Scev^la, who to match the good service of
Co^les done for Rome, adventured into the Hetrurian Camp to kill their King in
his tent. He should be like Fabritius the Roman besieging Fideva, who when a
Schoolmasters perfidiously betrayed his Scholars, Children of the chief
Citizens, into his hand, refused the advantage thereby to gain the City, and
sent the Traitor bound, and caused the boys to whip him again into the
City, by which he won the affection of the Citizens, and wrought them by
this act to become Tributaries to the Romans. He should be watchful, as the
eye of the whole host, and very painful; Julius Caesar may be a pattern
herein to such as please to read his Commentaries. Alexander the great to
keep his soldiers from sloth, in the intermission of wars, exercised them
in hunting wild beasts which were of fierce natures, and he himself fought
with a Lion very dangerously, a Lacedemonian Ambassador beholding the combat.
By industry and great pains taking Hanibal and Iugurthe vexed the Romans. He
should be temperate in diet; as was Alexander, for when a Princess called Ada
sent him delicate dishes of meat, he sent her word again, he knew not what to
do with them: for his Governor appointed him, said he, for his dinner to
arise before day, and to march in the night, and for his supper to eat but a
little at dinner: a spare diet for a King. A brave Commander says, one should
more fear a wanton banquet, then a bloody battle: For after Alexander gave
himself over to effeminate delicacies, he lost his honor and life. The
conquering Romans so hated belly cheer and voluptuousness^, that when Lucius
Pius got the Sarm^tes by his often banqueting them, to submit to the Romans,
and he coming to Rome demanded to triumph, they did not only deny it him,
but in detestation of his belly* victory* they put him to death, set an
Epitaph of reproach upon his tomb, and set the Sarmates free from them again
as dishonourably won to their obedience. The General must be tenderly
respective to the life and health of his soldiers: and a liberal rewarder of
the worthy; this was Caesar's excellency, who said to Mamillus, that he* held
himself in nothing more honored and happy, then in liberally rewarding the
well deserving, and mercifully pardoning the Enemy: for the one will make
soldiers resolute in execution, and the other will allure the enemies to yield
and not in a desperate obstinacy stand out, as they will do in fear of a
bloody Tyrant, a Turk, a Tartar, and a proud Spaniard.

CHAPTER. XIII. Of Counsel for war.
NO General is so well qualified, though with the best endowments of body and
mind; but needs counsel and advise. Counsel and strength is for Esa. 58. 5.
war. Hezekiah a wise King took counsel with his Princes and his mighty men
to withstand Senacherib and to hinder him, as much as he could: Absalom would
proceed by 2 Samuel 16. 20. and 17. 7.
advise in his rebellion to ask counsel, though God in his wrath confounded
it, by David's friend, in his mercy to David. Gedaliah not hearing truth, nor
receiving advise when timely offered was traitorously slain by Ismael; The King
of Syria took 2 K. 8. 1 Match. 5. 67. Pro. 15. 22.
counsel to proceed in war against Israel. To war without advise is not
good: without counsel, says Solomon, purposes are disappointed.

The Romans had their Counselors with their Generals. L. Furius in his
wars against the Gauls had five, Casar against France ten, Pompey against
Pirates had more.

And as good Counselors were appointed, so the wise would take their advise:
as did Cam^llus* before he fought with the Gauls: Curio in Afrike, S^iplo
before he set upon Asdr^ball. So did Cyrus before he charged Artaxerxes his
brother; Zenophon refused not to hear the counsel of a mean soldier.
A^tonius Piu^ would do nothing but first he advised. And where good advise is
heard and wisely followed good success often follows thereupon: But where
one will do all alone, as Charles Duke of Burgundy did, he may soon overthrow
his estate as he did: Such a one was Lautreck who brought his Guiccard. lib. 19.
forces of France to ruin before Naples, because he would hear no counsel nor
be advised. The high conceit of himself that was in Lewis Sforce to rule all
after his own apprehension, brought him to a tragical end, as Guiccardine
relates. Counselors must yet be first taken heed of, to wit, such as are
envious, such as think through pride their own counsel best, are not easily
to be followed; nor those to be Advisers* who are Pensioners to the Enemy, as
some English were under Edw. the 4* to Lewis of France the 11. such Pensioners
are Traitors to their (...) and Country.

Concerning Counselors, their qualification must consist in these 4 things,
number equality, ability, and good hon^sty. For the first* in the multitude of
Counselors is saf^ty, says Solomon, and purposes are by them established. To
be led by one is vnadvisednesse; Prove. 11. 14 and 15. 22 and 24. 6
many eyes see more then one, though that one be very wise. In the number one
may not over sway the rest in superior power; for then one is all, and the
rest are Ciphers to make up the number, but are not of value, many in name are
there, but in effect one is the substance, and they all in him: Therefore in
some sort equality is necessary, and freedom without fear to advise for the
best. They must be wise men able to give counsel, from knowledge and
experience* Live. 44.
Aemilius Paulus hated those which would be counselling in that which they
understood not. The Counselors of the Roman State in Judas 1 Match. 8
Machabeus days were many, among whom was neither emulation nor envy, nor any
one of them that domineered over another. They were for wisdom and age called
Senators, and for loving care of their Country, Fathers. Severus the Emperor
had many in Counsel of war, but all of them ancient experienced Soldiers in
Arms: Also if they be scholars, good historians, able to relate their reading
in military matters, they may do much good. Whatsoever their number be or their
equality, or their skill, its most meet principally that they be honest, that
is, faithful in their Counsel, fearing God, and detesting treachery Prove. 12.
5.
and al falshhood: for the Counsels of the wicked are deceit, neither are
flatterers and fearful to be judged good Counselors. Also their honesty must
bind them to faithful secrecy; there must be no false brother to discover
their Counsel; Such a perfidious wretch if espied, is to be made an example to
other with terror.

CHAPTER. XIV. Of the disciplining of an Army, and orderly government thereof.
AN Army gathered, a fit General appointed, and well deserving Officers chosen,
and by good counsel the war established; yet all is nothing without military
discipline: which is the very vinculum belli; The Lord therefore when he he
brought forth his host of the Israelites from Egypt, under his General Moses,
he appointed a strict discipline, which is the strongest Guard to preserve an
Army from destruction.

Alexander Severus, so called for his strict observing of discipline, so held
discipline the preservation of the Commonwealth, as the letting of it slip,
should be loss both to his name and Empire, Scipio Africanus so observed
discipline, as his soldiers seemed Senators, as Plutarch witnesses. The
cruel Turks observe discipline, and that to our admiration, Hist. peregr.
by which they have mightily prevailed against us Christians, who may be
ashamed of our overmuch loosenes herein.

The well ordering of the host of Israel by the Lord, stood in these things.

I. In the making of excellent laws for good govtrnment: for his laws were so
righteous, as no Nation Su^cl. 303. 4. Deuteronomy. 4. 8.
could come near them, nor had the like: as Moses told them. Good laws are
the foundation of order and discipline, the guide of men's actions, and
preservation of an Army, without which there* would be nothing but disorder,
and so confusion.

II. In the execution of these Deuteronomy. 5. 32
Laws, from which none might turn either to the right hand or the left. The
life of all Laws is to see them observed, and strictly obeyed, for else Laws
be made in vain.

III. In not allowing any privilege to any one, or any dispensation to any
person to transgress the Number. 20. 12. 24.
laws. Moses the General was a strict obseruer thereof, and so his Deputy
Lieutenant Joshua, and if Moses himself offended, he tasted of the kings, the
Lord of hosts displeasure. Though David for just causes forbore Ioab his
General for a time, yet for his breach of laws he took order to have him
punished after his desert. Moses was so just and strict a Iusticer, that in
just proceedings he would have none spared, not the heads of Number. 25: 4. Exodus
32. 27. 29:
the people, nor any to spare his brother, nor his companion, nor his son. Saul
would have put Jonathan to death, for not keeping the charge which he imposed
upon the whole host. And the Romans without respect of persons, punished
offenders. The Consul Titus Manlius caused his own son, for breaking the law
of discipline, though otherwise his act in slaying an vpbraiding enemy, was
both honorable, and to the Romans beneficial to be beheaded. None in a camp
may think themselves free from observing order, no not the General, for he
that commands others must order well himself, or his command will grow into
contempt. This made Papirius to purpose the death of the General of his horse,
because he fought without command, though he returned victorer. Alexander the
great would desire of his soldiers the observation of no stricter laws, then
himself would undergo; Adrian the Emperor was singularly prayse-worthy for
this, and so was Scipio, Severus, Pyrrhus, with others.

IV. In promising rewards to the obedient, grace and savor to such as kept
themselves within bounds, within the lists of good* order and Number. 14. 24. 38.
government, the promises are set down at large in many places by Moses, and
were faithfully performed to the well deserving, as to Caleb, to Joshua, to
Phineas, and others. This will procure love to the laws, make them more
remarkable, and take up the minds of the well disposed with a watchful care,
to obey them. For as impartial execution of laws terrifieth some; so the
reward promised and performed, puts life and courage into the hearts of
other some, to do worthily.

CHAPTER. XV. Of the evils to be avoided in a camp, and to be sharply
punished.
THere is nothing disple sing to God, but sin, and sin it Deu. 23* 9,
is which prevents Gods blessings, and causes ill success. Therefore special
care is to be had, to avoid sin and evil: as Moses exhorted Israel, and as
Aurelianus the Emperor said to his General in a military epistle of his, if
thou be a Tribune* yea, if thou will live; keep back the soldiers hands from
doing evil*

I. Evil to be taken beed of is Atheism, Lev. 24. 16 10.
deriding of God and Religion, cursing God and blaspheming his n^me; this God
punished with death; for where God and Religion is contemned, what can prosper?
Q. Fabius a Heathen imputed, the calamity which befell the Romans in the
overthrow of Flanimius, to be the neglect of Religion, and the only means
said he, to recover Gods favor was to reverence Religion* Live. 22. and 5.
and to have a care to please God* should then a Christian deride God and
Religion? what came of Rabsakah and other blasphemers, God did slay in his
host, 85000. Julian the Emperor* after he apostated and became Christ's enemy,
he soon came to destruction, and Julian his Uncle, who in contempt of Christ
and the Sacrament, p^ssed against the Table before he dyed, he fell into such
a disease, as made his entrall^ ro^, and he to void filth at his mouth.

II. Evil is Idolatry; this greatly Exo. 32.
provokes God to wrath, makes people naked of his protection, and to leave
them. This overthrew Jeroboam, with his 80000. Valiants in fighting against
Judah. This overthrew the Armies of Ioash, fighting 2 Chro. 25. 7.
against the Syrians, and by this was Amaziahs host beaten, by the Israelits,
the ten Tribes. God will not be with his people that shall have Idolaters with
them. So the Prophet told Amaziah going against Edom.

III. Evil is the Abuse of Gods Zach. 5. 3.
name by horrible swearing, and damned oaths, the Lord tells us that a curse
remains upon them, and he threatens to cut them off, yet some hold
themselves no soldiers til they can gracelesly, as a grace to them, thunder
out bloody oaths: common swearing makes one apt to forsware himself, which
is a fearful sin not left unrevenged of God in great persons, as in
Zedekiah, king of Judah, 2 Chapter 3. 6.
given captive into the hands of Nabuchandnezzar, with whom he had broken his
oath, for this was the power of Vladislaus utterly ouerthrown, and he slain
by the Turks under Amurath the Grand-Signeour: with swearing and forswearing,
must be abandoned, execrable cursing of others, and of themselves. For which
many fearful examples may be produced, which might cause men to tremble; some
have been possessed with the devil, by wishing the devil to take them, some
hanged, by using this form of execration, I wish I ^ight be hanged if I do
this or See exam: in the Theater of Gods judgments.
that; some drowned in a Privy, as by a corrupt custom they used to wish,
some rotting before they dyed, according to their cursing.

IV. The ill use of much gaming, a thing that was not in use in Gods host; and
good it were that it were less in use in our Camp; for God is dishonored,
monyes wasted, and many evils h^ppen thereupon; our enemy the Spaniard in time
of service does banish al unlawful games. In the siege of Poytiers the
Admiral caused a certain Ensign to be hanged for that he was found playing
at Historia de troubl. de Fra. li. 8.
cards, while his company did watch in some peril: Manly exercises should be
appointed them, and such as can read, to get histories of war and other good
books to read and discourse thereof; thus the mind and body will be well
employed. It may be some soldiers would be so well exercised, if there were
Commanders like Caesar, who read much, and did write his own wars, or like
Pyrrhus the famous Martialist in his time, who wrote many books; and as
Hannibal in whose tents were found many books which he studied: brave and
generous spirits should be delighted either to read, or hear read the acts of
valiant warriers, and scorn base play, and childish gaming.

V. The profanation of the Sabbath Rev. 1. 10.
the Lords day, as now Saint John calls it. God punishes this in Number. 15.
32. 36.
the camp of Israel; the valiant Judas Machabeus took special care to keep
the Sabbath with his host; 2 Match. 8. 27.
when Nicanor King Demetrius General would in contempt of God fight with Judas
on the Sabbath day there were slain of his men 35000. and he killed, his head
struck off, Ca, 1^. 1. 27. 28.
his tongue cut out for his blasphemy, and his right hand which he had
stretched out against the Temple, with his head sent to Jerusalem Eccl. hist.
Cent. 12.
to be hanged up upon a Tower. One of the Kings of Denmark contrary to the
dissu^sions of Divines, would needs join battle with an enemy upon the day of
Pentecost, but he lost the field, and his life withal. All vain sports on
the Lords day, are to be abandoned in a Christian host.

VI. Is Rebellion against lawful authority: this the Lord punished, yea he
extraordinarily plagued Rebels, Number. 16. 31, 11, 32, 33, 41, ^2, 49.
making the earth to open and swallow up some, and fire to devour some others;
Rebels can look for no good end, see it in Absalom, though he had most of
Israel to take his part. Let the end of him, Bichri and Zimri, make men take
heed of r^be^lion.

VII. Treasonable practices and conspiracies, and secret working with the enemy
are to be carefully looked unto, and to be prevented, and the parties found ou^
severely to be punished, Ier. 40.
for good Gedaliah being warned, and not making timely inquiry was by
traiterous Ismael cruelly murdered. So one Quintilius Varus for being too
slack to search out the Treachery of one Narminins, of which he had
intelligence, was slain with all his company. Of such was Nehemiah in danger,
but his wisdom prevented them; and Judas Machabeus Neh. 6. 17. 10. 2 Match.
13. 21.
had a Rod^cus among them, a discloser of secrets to the enemy: but he was
found out: Cyrus the younger executed one Or^ntes which went about to betray him
to the ^my. Marcellus executed many in the City N^la, for treason, having had
secret talk and intelligence with Live. 24.
Hannibal. For such worthily deserve death.

VIII. Is Mutiny. God punished the murmurings of his people, and their
malecontentednesse, such as cause sedition; and stir up others Number. 11. 1, 9,
21. 5, 6
to grow rebellious are to be punished, Scipio upon a mutiny of his soldiers
in Spain, put to death the chief moovers, and so pacified Live. 28. Tacit. 1.
the rest; so did Tiberius when his did mutiny in Pannouia, but it is hard
measure to poor starving soldiers, for coming and demanding their pay in
extreme need, to be held mutinous, and that only for this, Captains should
hang some to make others willing to dye rather for hunger, then any more to
complain. Oh unchristian cruelty* and merciless inhumanity.

IX. Disobedience to command, and to make attempts upon the Enemy without
warrant, or when a charge is given to the contrary, this God suffered not to
go unpunished in the presumptuous Israelites. Manlius Number. 14. 41. 45.
his dealing with his son is before noted, and Papirius his purpose and
intent toward the General of his horse. Men upon their own heads without
command of authority to fight with the enemy, seldom Live. 5.
prove successful: which the Romans found at the siege of Vey with loss of
their soldiers: yet Jonathan and his Armor-bearer secretly ^et upon the enemy
and prospered, and was honored for it. But such an example is extraordinary;
as soldiers are not to presume upon their own heads without command, so being
commanded, they might readily obey; else all Military order would decay and die.
We may read in Livie that a General of the Romans Live. 4.
slew an Ensigne-bearer, for refusing to advance himself forward toward the
enemy, as he was commanded; yea the Is^aelites held him worthy death that would
refuse to obey Ios. 1. 18.
the just commands of their General Joshua.

X. Is envy and pride, and words of reproach the fruits thereof, tending to
provoke to the breach of peace, this God punished in the Prophetess Miriam,
this envy, pride, and Number. 12. ^, 9, 10.
words of contempt are pestilent evils, and cause much mischief. Hence arose
the bloody civil discord and war between Ieptah and the Ephramites, of whom
were slain 42000. Hence the slaughtering and Iud. 12. Iud. 9.
killing one another between Abimelech and the Sichemites, caused by the
reproachful and disdainefull words of Gaal, these things should be prohibited,
and sharply punished.

XI. Is murder and the killing of 1: Kin. 2. 30. 31.
one another; God gave a very strait charge against bloodshed. Ioab the
General being guilty must die for it, even at the Altar: God never allowed
Asyles for murderers, and men of blood, Captains may not like rash brained
and bloody men, disorderly kill soldiers; he that In l. 18* and 19. 3. (...)
rem^^*
shall so do among the Spaniards dies for it: the Romans put to death such as
stroke their fellows with a sword, if they offered other violence as to throw
stones at them, such were displaced with shame; Quarrels and Chalenges
thereupon with acceptances thereof have been the loss of many lives
unworthily; hereby Princes loose their subjects, the army is wea^^ned, the
enemy hereby advantaged. Soldiers lives should be precious one to another,
their blood should be spilt in the public cause against the enemy, and not in
private quarrels, no not if a man put the lie upon an other; Iehu a right 2 K.
9. 12.
valiant Captain, marching furiously, did not quarrel with the Captains in
his company, when they said it was false which he spoke, so putting the lie
upon him, neither held he it such a disgrace, as now men do judge. Jeremy
said to a Ier. 37. 14.
Captain of the Ward, unjustly accusing him, that it was falsehood or a lie, as
it is in the Hebrew Text, which he spoke. Gedaliah put the lie upon Iohanan a
Captain, a high Ier. 40. 16. Note this.
and proud spirited man, and valiant too, yet none of these offered to any of
them the stabbe, nor did make a quarrel thereof, nor did beastlike more then
manlike, rush upon one another, and kill one another: for these quarrelsome
fellows, and Spadassiues (as one calls them) are not ever the best men.
Drunkenness, whoring, swearing, and no doubt but hereupon forswearing, are no
matters of disgrace to them, but forsooth the term lie, by which the father
of all lies deludeth them, to make them strain at a gnat, and swallow Camels;
to seem to detest a lie, and yet in their vicious courses to be faithless to
God, and their own souls; Away, away with this delusion of Satan, you that
are truly valiant, and right Christian Soldiers, and suffer not your selves
to be transported with this conceited disgrace to seek revenge, and so be
guilty of blood; a crying sin before God.

XII. Is careless negligence, and slothfulness; this is to be punished, Ier:
48. 10. 1 K. 20. 39, 40.
the Lord pronounces a curse upon him, that does his work negligently, and
keeps back his sword from blood, when he may slay the Lords enemies. It was
death by negligence to let an enemy put into a man's custody to escape: so for a
watchman not to give Eze. 33. 6. Live. 5.
warning* the watchman which suffered the Gauls to enter into the Capitol,
while he slept, was thrown from the rock of the Castle, and so punished with
death for it, the valiant Commander Epamino^das the Theban going the round slew
the watchman Plutarch.
whom he found asleep; by the Roman Law it was death: But this is to be meant
in time of most necessary watching, because of the enemy, but no^ else, God
forbid, that the blood of poor soldiers should be needlessly shed.

XIII. Is cowardlinesse, when a souldi^r dare not for fear perform his
charge, this is to be punished. Cowards God put out of his camp, when he sent
his to war; and so did Machabeus. Appius Clandius did behead those soldiers
that throwing down their arms fled from their enemies; Lic^rgus made a law
among the Spartans, that no man should return Live* 2.
home that turned his back upon his enemy. Caesar put certain Ensigns from
their places, because they lost their ground in an encounter with Pompey at
Dirrhac^ium; The Coward does not only help the enemy, but disheartneth his
friends; The Lacedemonian women would deliver shields to their sons,
exhorting them going to war, either to bring them again, or to dye
valiantly; There was among them one Damatria who hearing that her son had not
fought like a Lacedemonian, when he came ^lew him; so much did women there
detest a cowardly spirit.

XIV. Is flying away out of the host to the enemy; this is worthy severe
punishment: such base and traitorous spirits among all the soldiers in Israel
I never read of to my remembrance; not in all the wars of Joshua, nor of the
Judges, nor of Saul, nor of David; The Romans punished such with death, Caius
Matienus coming ^l^ru^.
but home from the army in Spain, without leave, was beaten under a gibbet,
and sold for one piece of money, to signify the base esteem of such a
fugitive; to fly to the enemy is to further them very much, by discovering to
them the present state of those from whom they run, and therefore is to be very
sharply punished.

XV. Is Fornication, Whoredom, and fleshly filthiness in any kind, not to be
suffered. God for this sin slew in the camp of Israel in one day 24000. Number
25.
Phineas in his zeal for this slew Zimry and Cozbie a Prince and Princess.
Scipio the younger banished women out of his camp. Before is showed how
Alex^nder punished this beastly filthiness in soldiers. This sin is yet
nothing now in the thoughts of unbridled lustful soldiers; which yet some
have well paid for. The Sicilians enraged against the Ga^risons of soldiers,
for their adulteries, Ni^. Gil. V^l. 1.
whoredoms, and rapes, in the reign of Rodolphus the Emperor, took arms,
and upon Easter day set upon them and slew them all. The Emperor Aurelianus
caused a soldier for committing adultery to be tied by his feet to two trees
bent to the earth, which being let go rent him in pieces, half of him hanging
on the one, and the other half on the other tree.

XVI. Discontentednesse with the allotted provision convenient, and lusting
after belly-cheere. This evil the great man of war, and discipliner of
Armies, the Lord God of hosts, punished Number. 11. 4. 20. 33.
in his Camp. Nothing less befits a soldier then the love of his belly and
ease; some are like summer locusts, which are all belly, and live of spoil;
strong in warm months, but in pinching cold they are gone, pind away, and die;
you have heard before how basely Lucius Pius was esteemed of by the Romans, for
his gaining of the Sarmates to obedience with belly-cheere.

XVI. Is theft, filching, rapine, robbery, Ios. 7. 21.
and sacrilege: God punished Achans theft; yet these are too common with
soldiers now. For many base fellows fitter for the Jail, yea the Gallows
then the wars, are no sooner pressed, and in the Kings service, but are bold to
lay hands upon other men's goods, which they carry away with many a bitter
curse, year curse is upon the thief and the Zach. 5. 3.
swearer, who also brings a curse upon others as Achan did; That one thief
caused the overthrow of the Army; oh, what evil will then a multitude of
thieves do in an host? Great care must be had of committing sacrilege, and
robbing of Churches, Crassus the Roman for Sabellic. li. 4 ca. 3.
robbing the Temple of Jerusalem, was soon after overcome by the Parthians.
Cambyses the King of Persia his army, was destroyed by a tempest, going to rob
a Temple. These by Draco the Athenian Lawgiuer was death; So among the
Hetrurians, and Herod. l. 1. Vapisc in vita Aurel.
Vacceians; The Locrians put out the thieves eyes; Aurelianus the Emperor would
not suffer his soldiers to take a pullet or chicken from country people, his
friends. Tyberius made one of Suetonius in Tiber.
his Guard to be put to death, for taking a Peacocke out of a man's yard*
Tamberlaine caused a soldier to be slain for taking a poor woman's milk and
some cheese, and not paying for it; The Romans under Marcus Theat. hist.
Scaurus were so disciplined, that they would not pluck the fruit of one tree,
as they passed by it, and left it untouched. Pescenius Niger would have put to
death diverse soldiers met together feasting themselves with that which they
had stolen, though through entreaty their lives were spared, yet they were
punished, and their punishment was to lie in Tents during the war without
fire, to live only with bread and water, and to make restitution to the
husbandmen; and the reason given of this severitie was, because, such acts did
tend to rebellion. Aurelian writes an epistle to Tribunes and soldiers, to
keep their hands from other men's goods.

But theft is not only to be restrained in soldiers, but also in Captains
and officers which they may many ways commit.

1. In false musters robbing so the state, by having pay for more in the roll,
then be in service. This abuse Guice. l. 15*
was the ruin of Francis the first before Pavy, they that give in false
numbers by the Laws in France, suffer Live. 28.
death. The Romans paid every soldier by the poll; so at musters do now the
Spaniards.

Secondly, in robbing poor soldiers of their pay, Caesar was severe against
Caesar de b^llo Civ.
this villainy; so as two of his Captains of horse, Roscillus and Ae^us having
defrauded soldiers of their pay, fled to the enemy, as soon as they knew that
Caesar had notice thereof. Its an indelible Character of infamy, says one, to
defraud a poor soldier of his due.

Thirdly, in taking from a soldier that which is his own, as his weapon, Of
Capt abusing poor soldiers, read Sir Toh: Smiths epistle to the Nobility of
England* l 3. 6. qui aliena F. de remilita.
or horse, etc. Theophilu^ the Emperor of the East, banished a Commander out
of his Dominion for taking a soldiers good horse perforce from him, for want
whereof he was afterward slain in battle, and withal bestowed the Commanders
possession upon the soldiers widow, albeit that Captain had bestowed the
horse upon the Emperor himself, unwitting to him, till the widow claimed him,
as the Emperor rode on him. As Captains and Officers may not wrong soldiers,
so soldiers may not rob one another. Modestinus judged him worthy of death
that stole his fellows arms. To conclude, great care must be had that
soldiers do no spoil, nor rob such, by whom they are permitted to pass by
peaceably, nor such as be Merchants and Victuallers of the Camp, but such
must be suffered to go and come very securely: The Army of the Prince of
Orange besieging Florence, had like to have been famished, through the
disorder only of three or four soldiers which robbed the Merchants and
Victuallers, which came and went from the Camp: but those were therefore
hanged, and then plenty was brought in. The punishing of this sin in
Tamberlaines Camp made his huge Army of many hundred thousands to be
plentifully served.

XVII. And last is, the spreading of rumors, raising of false reports, to
dishearten an Army is worthy death. This the Lord of hosts punished with death,
and sent the Number. 14. 37.
plague upon them, that brought upon the land an ill report, which daunted the
peoples hearts for going forward: it set them in a rebellion. A false
imagination conceived and rumoured in the host of the Syrians* (to wit, that
Ieh^ram had hired the Charriots and horses of Pharaoh to come upon them, when
they besi^dged Samaria, and in a manner had won it) made them fly suddenly, 2
K. 7, 6, 7.
none pursuing, and to loose the victory, ^ea and what else they had running
away as for their lives. Rumors of falsho^d are often uttered of the enemy ^o
work fear, and so to da^nt m^ns spirits which rumors therefore are not to be
believed.

These are those sinn^full evils, which principally in an army are to be
suppressed and punished, yet in proceeding against offenders, as need must be
taken of to much levitie, so also beware of too great severitie. Lucul^us undid
himself by this and ^as forsaken of his soldiers, who went to Pompey, to whom
they proved most faithful and constant. Rigor may rule, but gaining
affection by ^lemency causes true obedience, yet offenders must not go
unpunished. For by suppressing disorders, God is honored, the Army
strengthened, the enemies disheartened, neighbors and friends secured, and so
encouraged to abide constant; but where sin does reign and disorders
suffered, there all things fall out clean contrary, misery and want will
follow, to their ruin and overthrow: God will be against them, and friends
will abandon them as unworthy of aid.

CHAP. XVI. Of a convenient army, and of necessaries prepared aforehand to
maintain the same.
VEgetius exhorts those that purpose to begin wars carefully Li. 3* ca. 3.
to weigh and consider their store and charges: And provision is to be made
long before: for in action then to provide will be too late. The Kings of Judah
made 2 Ch 14 8* and 17 2: and 26.
in the days of peace great preparation for war, and had soldiers in
readiness to withstand sudden invasi^^s. As may be seen ^n the reign of Asa,
Iehosophat, Vzzi^h, and other Kings. It is the saying of one, That Long a
praeparatio belli celer^m facit victoriam, Long preparation by good
deliberation makes qu^cke dispatch in the execution, and speedily gets the
vi^tory.

In going to war, first the number Number. 31. 3* ^. Ios. 8. 1.
convenient to be employed, is to be considered of: both for horse and foot,
for powers both by sea and land. The number is uncertain; sometimes Moses will
appoint but twelve thousand, the least number sent forth to speed well;
sometime Joshua must take all the strong men of war to fight with the enemy as
need is, so must be the number.

The heathen in former times had ever mighty hosts, some hundred thousands: the
Midianites, Philistims Ios. 10. and 11. 4.
Canaanites, Ethiopians, Hol^phernes host was an hundred and seventie thousand,
and twelve thousand Arc^ers Judge. 6. 5. and 7. 2. 2 Chro. 14 Luke 14. 31
on horseback: now according to the power of the Enemy, so must we go out
against him, if we be able, as Christ reaches in his parable.

To subdue enemies it is ever very necessary to have a full army if we look
for victory: for

Touching a handful or small number 3 or 4000 these do rather injury
themselves then the enemy, they rather kindle and nourish war, then end it;
and do rather hearten the enemy, then strike him with fear: anger him, then
hurt him. What got Israel unadvisedly by sending a small number 2 or 3000
against Ai? It was but loss to themselves, and encouragement to the Enemy. The
Lacedaemonians could do no good against the Ath^nians as long as their numbers
Thuci^. 1.
were small, but did hurt to themselves. But now for a full power, and to use
our best strength to obtain the victory many reasons may persuade.

1. God taught Joshua to do; when his small number was overthrown, he
commanded him to take all the men of war. Ios. 8. ^. T^ucid ^.


2. The heathen Oracle consulted with, by the Lacedaemonians, before the
Peloponensian war, to know by what means they might best prevail, gave this
answer, that the means to overcome was to use their full strength.

3. Thus ever did Sa^l and also David, and other Kings in Israel and Judah:
when they went against an enemy, 1 Samuel 11 8. and 15. 4. 2 Samuel 10. 7.
they led out mighty forces, Saul against the Amaleki^es conducted an host of
310000: David sent against the Ammonites all the host of mighty men, which were
many thousands.

4. The Romans in their wars sent forth strong Armies against their enemies
50 thousand, or 24 thousand the least, 15000, or 12000, as their stories show.

The benefit of a strong Army is great, it strikes fear where it comes, and
if not presently resisted, it enricheth it self with spoils; if it get the
victory, it will maintain it self upon the enemy, and abide without fear.
Caesar maintained his wars in France upon the French nine years; Hannibal
his Army upon Italy sixteen years; Scipio his host upon Spain all the time
of his stay; a strong power prevailing gets confederates, to give aid and to
help with supplies; yea through fear it gains from the enemy, many falling
off from him to the strongest side as the Kings which were servants to
Hadarezer did, when Davi^ overcame 2 Samuel 10, 19.
his host. One victory got with a full army is the winning almost of a Country.
Caesar's victory at Alexia, drew almost all France to him: The French by one
victory recovered the Kingdom of Naples. Its necessary therefore to put to our
strength in war, if we hope to prevail, and not da^ly with our Enemy, to our
own hurt: but yet we must avoid two evils.

1. Not to presume of our great strength against a weak enemy, as Benhadad the
king of Syria, and his 1 K. ^0
32. Kings with him did, when he came against Ahab: which great host of his was
overthrown; so was Zerah with his ten hundred thousand. 2 Chapter 14. Anno 1588 ^
Match. 3 16.
And how soon was the Armado of Spain called invincible, scattered and
brought to naught here in our coasts? For victory stands not in the multitude
of an host, but strength comes from heaven.

2. Not utterly to despair if we be enforced to fight with a small power
against a proud boasting enemy* For in such cases God strangely gives victory,
as shall be declared, Chap. 18. Thus much for the number.

Now when an Army of men, for the number is resolved upon, necessaries must be
provided answerably thereto.

I. There must be great store of arms* such of Zebu^un, Reub^^ God, 1 Chapter 12.
33. 37. 2 Ch 26. 14.
and Manisses, as came to help David, were furnished with all instruments of
war for battle. King ^zz^a^ provided for his men of war throughout their
hosts weapons of warr^, such as were then used, spears, shields, bows, slings,
and other Arms. Gorgius host was strong and well harnessed, as the story
relates. Scipio going into Afric against the 1 Mac. 4. 7 Live. 29.
Carthaginians any made exceeding provision of Arms.

II. Provision of victuals, Of this Iud. 20. 10
the Israelites had care, before they warred upon Gibeah; Holophernes Iud. 2.
17, 18.
his great host had plenty of victuals, and carriages for all provision; that
they might not want, for, indeed hungry bellies can neither fight, nor observe
order. Saul by his rash restraining of his Army from taking food, made them to
faint, and after through hunger to fly upon the 1 ^am 14. 24, 30, 32, 33.
spoil, and by eating blood, to sin against God, Fames severior est bell^,
Hunger is more sharp then the sword. Alas, how can they have courage, that
pine with hunger? How can they stand against an enemy, that want strength to
go, upright? Good leaders should take to 2 K. 3. 9, 10
heart the distress of their company in such a case, as even Idolatrous
lehoram did. But some are like the 1. Sam. 30. 13.
Amalek^e, who left his poor weak Egyptian servant to help himself, or to
dye for hunger. Alas what service can poor hunger-starved soldiers do? or
how can they be made obedient when belly has no Bell. Gal: Live. 29
ears? Therefore famous Generals have ever seen to this. Caesar would not
once moove toward the Enemy, before he had provision. Scipio landing in
Afrike, had his storehouses filled with provision. Cyrus in his expedition
against Xeno^h. ex^. Cy^ 1.
his brother had, besides his ordinary Carts, four hundred Wagons, laden
with victuals, not to be spent, but in time of necessity. Where provision is
not to prev^nt famine, there the host is overcome without dint of the sword: To
have victuals, bring store, be moderate from the first day in the use, give
free and safe pa^sage to Merchants and Victuallers to bring, and make ready
payment; what is gotten from the Enemy, store it up, procure from confederates
favor ^o make supply in this kind; and to summon, as a strong Army goes along
the Towns and Villages to bring in victuals and provision, unless they would
be ruinated.

III. There must be sufficient money to help every way all wants; money is the
sinews of war. Holophernes with plenty of food, had very Iudeth 2. 8 2 Mac.
3. 28
much gold and silver. King Anti^ch^s opened his treasure, and gave his
soldiers pay for a year; Soldiers well paid have the better courage;
council and money prevail where force cannot effect. By gold Tacius the
Captain of the Sabines got the Capitol of Rome, Asdrubal with money
Celt^ber^ans from the Romans. Money may hire soldiers, buy victuals, and supply
what is wanting for the most How to make provision for money, read Dr. Sutchss
his book of war., ca. 2. pa. 18.
part; therefoer wise warriers were not in this careless, the Carthaginians
had in their new Carthage in Spain a treasure to serve for the wars there.
Caesar had for his store in Noviodunum, For his wars in France.

But though there be store of money, yet must the General see to it, that poor
soldiers be paid, the fraud in Officers must be prevented, and severely
punished; money is not to be turned into provand, of which deceit See Sr. I^h^
Smith preface to hi^ book o^ this cousenage. Live. 28. and 2
a skillful Commander has written at large. Neither should Captains be
paymasters to soldiers, least they be, as they have been notoriously* abused,
Scipio in Spain paid his soldiers man by man; Porsena Commander of the
Hetruscians stood by while every soldier took his own pay, and so were they
such that every one had his due; see what evils have happened by non-payment, or
slack paying of Pa. 74. ch^. 4. part. 9.
soldiers in Dr. Sutcliffe his book.

CHAPTER. XVII. Of means abroad to be used before the wars begin.
ON Prince, nor Nation, may presume upon their own strength, worth and power;
The Kings of old time making war, had beside their own, aid from othere,
Genesis 14. 1: 24.
and had confederates joining with them: Chadelaomer had Kings with him:
Abraham also had Aner, Eschal, and Mamre, assistants with him in his war. The
Kings of Canaan did help one another; and the Ammonite procured help of the
Syrians to fight against David. The Syracusans Ios. 10. 3. and 11. 1. 2 Samuel
10. 6: Thucid 5.
by the help of the Spartans withstood the Athentans. Yea, the Romans
themselves sought for help of others against Philip of Maced^nia.

But here let not an Amaziah take 2 Chapter 25.
aid of Idolatrous Israel, least they be his ruin; nor let a Iehosophat help
an 2 Chapter 19. 2.
Ahab for it pleases not God; secondly, let not wise men rest upon the help
of Confederates, but have evermore of their own, both to resist the enemy, and
command ayders* as Tullius Hostilius had; for confederates may prove Cowards
and false* the Switzers which came to aid Lewis Forze, sold him at Navarra
into the hands of Lewis the twelfth. G^i^ca^.


Next is to make peace with such as may be injurious, when we go to war with
others. Israel in their hot war against the Philisti^s, had Peace with the
Ammonites. This is necessary, least while we set upon one, we be invaded by
another, 1 Samuel 7. 14 Esa. 37 9.
as it happened to Senacher^b, who whilst he invaded Judah, had Tirh^kah king
of Eth^opi^, coming forth to make war with him.

The third thing is, to entertain intelligence from the Enemies friends and
subjects, to gain them from them, to cause division between them. The Romans
before they transported their forces into Afric, they assured themselves of
the Kings of Numidia. Before they set upon Philip of Macedonia, they caused a
revolt of many from him The disioyning of the hearts of such as be at one with
the enemy, is a great weakening of his power, and a way more easily to get the
victory.

To make a rebellion, and to cause civil wars, is the ruining of the Enemies
state, and a ready passage to attain our own purposes; for they that stand
for their own safety at home, cannot well agree to resist the attempts of
foreign powers. They may like the seditious Captains in Jerusalem join
together to fight against the Romans, but by slaying afterward one another the
Enemy shall at length prevail, and they come to destruction.

CHAPTER. XIX. Of the religious preparation before the Army march.
WHen the Host is prepared and ready to march forward, before it be moved in
former mer times; among Gods people these things were observed and done.

I. There was a divine exhortation, or as we call it, a sermon appointed by God
before they went forth, to be preached to them by an ordinary Deuteronomy 20. 2, 3,
4. 2 Chapter 20. 14 and 13. 12. 2 K. 3. 11. Iud. 4.
Teacher; sometime they had extraordinary men raised up to encourage them. The
Priests go into the wars, and sounded Trumpets, Elesha followed the Camp of
the three Kings, going against Moab. And Deborah a Prophetess went down with
Barak. It Is no question but Ministers may go into the wars, its necessary to
have men of good gifts to preach* to soldiers, but they must be good and
conscionable to give example, zealous in reprooving, and gracious in prayer,
that as Moses did, while the other* fight they may pray, and help forward Exo.
17.
the victory. If such were in a Camp and reverenced, the Army would prosper
the better. Abiiah gathered 2 Chapter 13. 12.
courage by having the Lords Priests with him when he set the bat^le in array
against the Idolater I^rob^am. The prayer and sacrifice of Samuel 2. Sam. 7. 9
furthered Israelites against the Philistims. The French had an Archbishop in
their host when they fought with King Henry the fifth. The Spa^iards have their
Priests with them, and do punish those that in word or deed do offer them
injury. Why should our Armies go forth without good Teachers. King Henry the
first had with him Priests whom he commanded to pray whilst he fought the
glorious battle at Agen-Court.

II. The people of God in former times humbled themselves, not those only
which were at home, but the host of men which went out into the wars, they
fasted, they prayed, and sought the Lord with tears, offering Sacrifices to
God, and asked counsel of the Lord before, so did the Is^a^lites going
against* Be^^min. So did Iud. 20. 18 23. 26. 1 Samuel 7. 8
they in the days of Samuel, whom they entreated to pray earnestly for them. I
so did Iehosophat when he went out against his enemies. In like 2 Match 3. 44,
47, 50
sort did Judas and his people with him, they fasted, read holy Scriptures, and
prayed fervently unto the Lord for help. King Henry the fifth before the battle
of Agen-court with great devotion made prayers and supplications with his
Priests and people* unto God and prospered. For what is it for us to pray for
those who in the mean space neglect prayer, despise it, and preaching, and
give themselves instead of fasting and humbling themselves, to swearing,
drinking, and whoring, filching, and other villainies, by which they call for
vengeance against themselves? The Emperor O^ho when he was to have a set
battle with the Hungarians, proclaimed a fast, and commanded to call upon the
name of God before, that God might go with them. The Romans before they began
war sacrificed to their gods, and prayed for success; Live. 22. 31*
as is evident in their attempts, against Hannib^l, and in their wars
against* Philip of Macedonia and Antiochus; Xenop: i^ exped: Cyr: C^c. de not:
deorum 3. Live. 29.
yea they imputed their ill success to the neglect and contempt of Religion
not seeking to appease the wrath of the gods and to win their favor before.
Scipi^ going against the Carthaginians, made a prayer for success, expressed
in Livie, Archidamus bringing his army before Pl^tea began with sacrifices
crave help of the gods. Among the Lacedaemonians, T^ucid 2. Plutarch.
when their King went to join battle, he first offered sacrifice. Isaac Bassa
going against Scanderbeg would not moove forward, before he had made his
prayer to God for success. All which condemns the Atheistical Commanders
and soldiers which in these days dare contemn these religious duties which
are to be performed unto the Lord God of hosts.

III. They had a strict charge to keep themselves then from every thing: and
withal to put away wickedness, Deu. 23. 9. 1 Sa. 7. 3, 4 Ios. 7.
especially Idols, and to punish ^oule offenders as Joshua* did Achan, before he
went the second time against the Enemy, and to separate Idolaters 2 Chapter 28. 7,
8.
from them, whom God hates. Solomon tells us, that wisdom is better then
weapons of war, but, says he, one sinner destroys much good; If wisdom and
weapons cannot save where there is but one vile and notorious ill liver, how
shall we imagine that they shall prosper, where a most there are an whole host
of them? Some are swearers, some beastly drunkards, some filthy whoremasters;
and not a few contemners of Religion; and many of them the scumme and out casts
of Parishes: How can we expect God to be with them? or for us, by them without
reformation? That worthy Scipio in going to give battle to the Numantines
abandoned all Bawdes, Whores, Coufeners, Coggers, Diviners, and
Figure-flingers, Should the Heathen cleanse their hosts of such wicked ones,
and shall Christians make no conscience hereof?

IV. They labored for faith and confidence in God, Iehosophat pressed 2 Chapter
20. 20. and 14. 11. and 13. 18. 1. Chapter 5. 20
this hard upon the people, when they went forward: Asa had his eyes upon God,
and its said the victory was given to Abiiah and his army, because they relied
upon the Lord. This confidence in God delights him* and they shall prosper
that trust in him.

To rest upon any means is vain; though the best is to be used, and not
neglected; For, though a horse be prepared for battle, yet is he a vain Pro.
21. 31
thing for safety, neither is a King saved by the multitude of an host, nor
Psa. 33. 17 Psa. 33 16.
the mighty delivered by much strength: Jeroboam with his 800 thousand lost the
battle. The Persian Xerxes, who had his ten hundred thousand by land, and ten
hundred thousand ships by sea* an incredible host, yet was vanquished and
overthrown. Amurah the Turk, coming with sevenscore thousand against the
poor Prince Scanderbeg, was wearyed in warring, dyed in the voyage, and so the
army returned with shame; A great King says Solomon, may come Eccles. 9. 14,
15.
against a little City, and not be able to win it, though few be in it, being
governed by the wisdom of a wise man, though but poor. Its folly therefore to
rely upon strength and multitude of men, but upon God alone in the use of all
lawful means.

Neither though their strength was small, and their power weak, did they
faint, when they had warrant from God to fight. For the Lords people know, that
God can deliver, and safety is from him. It is nothing Pro. 21. 31 2 Chapter 14.
11. 1 Sa. 14. 6. 1 Chapter 25. 8. 3. 18. Lev. 26. 37. Psa 89: 43 1 Sa 13. 5. and 14
13: Iud. 14, 15 Iud 7. 12. and 8. 10.
with him to help, either with many, or with few which have no power. He it is
that has power to help, or to cast down, to make to stand in battle, or to
fly and run away. One Sampson shall beat down a thousand sometime; By two,
Jonathan and his Armor-bearer, the Lord can dismay an host of 30 thousand
Charets, 6000 horsemen, and innumerable foot. By 300 Gideon that godly valiant
man, he can affright a huge multitude of which there were slain on hundred and
twenty thousand with their Kings in one day. By 318. men he gave Abraham and
his confederates victory over Genesis 14.
four Kings and their Armies, who before were conquerours over five other
Kings and their hosts. By 7000 conducted by a wicked Ahab, he put to flight the
host of Benhadad with 1 K: 20. Number 2^. 5. 49.
32. Kings. By 12000 he made Israel to subdue the Midianites, to ^ay five
Kings, to take prisoners 32000 persons, the prey and spoil of 72000 beeves,
61000 Asses, and of sheep 675000, and all his glorious victory obtained
without the loss of one Wars of the Jews.
man. The Jews fighting with Cast^^us the Roman, slew of his host 516 horse,
and 27. thousand foot, and (...) but 22 persons of their own. (...) least men
might think these to ^ell rare and extraordinary, and not the like help now
from God to be expepected; let such consider of after victories given of God.
For though some of these were miraculous, yet other some of them were such, as
God in after times has showed the 2 Match. 8. 20.
like. Judas Machabeus with 8000, destroyed an hundred and twenty thousand; at
another time with ten thousand men he vanquished one ^^sias with sixty
thousand chosen foot: and five thousand horse. The like victories God by his
aid and providence has given to the Heathen. Milciades the Noble Captain of
1 Mac. 4. 28. 29.
the Athenians with 11 thousand overcame above an hundred thousand horse and
foot, sent by Darius, son of Hisdaspis to invade Grecia, Lernidas with an
handful of Lacedaemonians slew twenty thousand Persians. Great Alexander with
an Army of thirty two thousand, conquered the world, and subdued mighty
Opposers. Among Christians incredible victories have been hotten by the lesser
number; Charles Martell father to King Pippin fought with a very few against
four hundred thousand Saracens, of which he slew three hundred and seventy
thousand. Zissa that everlastingly renowned Bohemian, in eleven set battles,
and blind in three of them, went away victorer over all the powers that the
Emperor ever made against him. But to speak of our own, and almost
unmatchable victories in France; King Henry the fifth with 15000 men at
Agencourt, overcame the whole power of France an army of 52000, and slew one
Archbishop, eight Earls, twenty six Barons, fifteen thousand Knights, and
above ten thousand others, with the loss of only six hundred on our side,
and only two of great note the Duke of York, and the Earl of Suffolk. Great
and glorious was the victory gotten at Poictyers by Edward the blake Prince,
Edward the third his son, who with eight thousand wearied soldiers
vanquished King John of France, whom he took prisoner, and scattered his Army
of 40 thousand, of which ten thousand were slain: in which victory were
taken prisoners besides the King, Philip his son, seventie Earls, fifty
Barons, twelve thousand Gentlemen, so they took and slew more, then they were
themselves. The battle at Cresy was wonderful; for there were but of English
commanded by King Edward himself one thousand, one hundred and eighty, yet
prevailed they against the French King and the King of Bohemia, who had an host
of seventy thousand, in which were slain the King of Bohemia, eleven Princes,
eighty Barons one hundred ane twenty Knights, and thirty thousand common
soldiers. So as we may see how that glorious victories have been obtained by
handfulls of men in comparison of the conquered. When God will have men to
prevail, neither wisdom, nor counsel nor understanding can be against his
will, no nor power be it never so great; For many are the devices Prove. 19. 21
of man; but the council of the Lord, that shall stand; as he has thought so
shall it come to pass, and as he has purposed, as the Prophet Esaias 14. 24
speaks, so shall it be.

Therefore let all the care be to have God on our side; for if he be with us
who can be powerful against us? Surely none. Xenophon that worthy Xenoph. exp.
Cyr. 3.
Philosopher, and noble Captain being but a heathen when his men were in
distress encouraged them thus, willing them to put confidence in God; for that
(says he) he was able to save a few out of the hands of many, in what danger
soever they were; he can strike fear 2 K 7. Iud. 7. 22. 1 Sa. 14 20 2 Cro 20.
23. and 32. 21.
suddenly into the hearts of almost Conquerours, and make them run away and
none pursuing them, as he did the Syrians; he can set the sword upon the neck
of one another, and cause them to kill one another; as he did the Philistims,
Midianites, and the armies of three Kings; he can send an Angel to kill an
host of mighty men of valor, even an hundred and fourscore and five thousand
in one night* In a word, he can do what he will in Heaven and in Earth.
Therefore let us thus prepare to meet him, to make him our Captain, our Guide
and Commander, then shall we ^a^e good success, and prosper, as others have
done.

CHAP. XIX. Of laying good grounds aforehand to speed well, and of a peaceable
and a lawful proceeding against an Enemy.
THere is nothing more desired in making war then to prosper in the enterprise:
This all wish, and without some hope of his, who would adventure to enter
battle? Therefore men should study above all other, this point chiefly. Now to
speed well the way is,

I. To hearken to Gods voice, and serve him. For, says the Lord, Oh Psalm.
that my people had hearkened unto me, and Israel had walked in my ways,
(mark now what would have fol^owed) I should soon have subdued their Enemies,
and turned my hand against their Advers^ries.

II. To have him with us, and to 2 Cro. 13 12.
fight for us; Abijah said, behold, God himself is with us for our Captain:
And it was Hezekiah his comfort, 2 Cro. 32. 8
with us is the Lord our God to help us, and to fight our battles; Exo. 14. 14
Fear not, stand still, says Moses to Israel; and why? For the Lord, says
Deuteronomy. 20 4
he, shall fight for you: He goes with you against your enemies to save you:
when God went out before David against the Philistims he smote their host and
subdued them.

Oh but it will be demanded, How ^ Cro. 14. 23 36.
may we have God with us, to fight for us, and give us victory?

Surely if 1. the war be of God, (...) and warrantable: in this war he 2
Cro. 5. 20.
helped the Reubenites, and other Tribes, and cast down their enemies. 2. That
it be taken in hand with good advise, and be established Pro: 20: 18
by counsel. 3. That such a holy preparation be made, and such duties
performed, as before is set down in the last chapter; for such prospered. 4.
That they rest upon God, trust in him, rely upon him, and go out in 1 Cro: 5:
20 2 Cro: 14. 11. and 16. 8 and 13. Heb: 11. 33
his name against the enemy; for who ever trusted in God and were confounded?
Its said that by faith the valiant subdued Kindomes; So much is ascribed to
confidence in God. To this, and for resting upon God the Scripture ascribes
the happy success of Asa, of Abijah, of the Reubenites, and other, against
their many and mighty Enemies.

But if men will needs go to war, and God not with them, the war unjust, the
attempt rash, as in the Israelites, Deuteronomy: 1. 42
in Amaziah, yea and in losias; the wicked sons of Eli in the 2 Cro: 25. and
35.
host, drunken, whoring, profane Priest, sacrilegious Achan unpunished for his
sacrilege; and no pious preparation unto so weighty a work, wherein so many
thousand lives do lie at the stake; But open profaneness, b^asting of our own
strength, vaunting of our valor, resting on the Generals wisdom, the courage
of Captains, disesteeme of the Enemy, as Benhadad did of Ahabs army; to go
poorly provided with small provision, with a Company of raw and unexperienced
fellows, but ripe enough in wickedness, without order, without government,
what good success can be looked for? How can God go out with such rebels
against him, seeing he hates iniquity, and abhors presumptuous
Transgrellours.

If good grounds be laid as aforenamed, then may an host go forward with good
courage; but yet before the force of Arms and hostility be showed, God (who
h^teth unnecessary bloodshed, and abhors men of violence) commanded Israel
Ps. 5. 6. Deuteronomy 20. 10 2 Samuel 10. 18, 19.
to offer peace first; for it may be the matter may be ended without bloodshed:
The Israelites before they went against (...) and Benjamin, sent to have the
sons of Belial delivered to them to be punished, if they could have obtained
it. Iephtah before the war began sent messengers again Iud: 20. 12 13. Iud:
11.
and again to the King of the Ammonites to prevent bloodshed, if it could have
been prevented.

In ancient time those that first began war used to speak before they did
strike, and showed the cause of 1 Match: 6, 48.
their taking up arms. Machabeus desired passage through Echron first. Caesar
minding to assail Ariovistus, Lib. de Bello Gal. 1.
sent him a defiance aforehand; the Lord himself in^eading to punish
rebellious mankind, alludeth to this course, and acquainteth them with his
determination, to come against them; and therefore he speaks as a man of
war, commanding to blow the Cornet in Gibeah, and the Hosea 5. 8.
Trumpet in Ramah, and to cry aloud at Bethaven. Because the A Exodus 17. 8
malekites came stealing upon Israel, to fight with them, the Lord revenged
Deuteronomy: 25. 17, 18.
it severely upon them, and would have a book of remembrance written against
them, to have war with them for ever.

Its wisdom to demand right, and to propound conelusions of peace, with a
prepared host. Thus proceeded Israel against Benjamin, and Ieptah against
Ammon; for if so, peace take place, it is well, if not, the party wilful may
consider what he certainly may expect: yet in honestly intending peace, take
heed of circumvention, in dealing with a dishonest and subtle Adversary, who
under shows of treaties of peace intends nothing less, as did Scipio with
Syphax, and Metellus with iugurth, Live. 29.
and the false hearted Spaniard Salust.
with the upright minded Queen Elizabeth. By his treaties he only sought to
make her secure, and to distrust nothing, till he had suddenly invaded her
land; He that eats with such a devil had need of a long spoone: while
plaine-meaning Abiiah was speaking honestly to Jeroboam, he craftily laid an
Ambush in the mean space, for to overthrow him; whence note, that an
idolatrous Politician, is a very Machivilian, and not to be trusted. He that
upon policy frames his religion, and makes that a cloak, for getting and
keeping an earthly state, he is no more to be trusted then a devil.

CHAPTER. XX. Of marching forward and encamping.
WHen peaceable means cannot prevail, but that the cause must needs be tried
by the dint of sword, then must be considered and care had of marching on. The
Lord himself set an order in going forward* and in marching to his people:
first, he himself went before them in a cloud by day, and a pillar of fire by
night, to Exo: 13. 21
lead their way: but when the enemy with a mighty host was behind them, then
the Lord got himself between his people and the Egyptians, to overthrow them;
for as a General he cared for the safety of his Army which he had brought out
of Exo. 14. 19 24. Deu. 20. 9. Number. 2. 34 with verse 2 Number. 2. 17. Joel 2. 7,
8. Chro: 12. 33. 3. 5. See the margin. Deuteronomy. 25. 18.
Egypt with a powerful hand. 2. He appointed that Captains chosen should lead
the people. 3. That the people should set forward every one after their
families according to the houses of their fathers with the Ensign thereof, the
clo^d being taken up. 4. Before they marched the trum pets sounded, and in
marching they kept rank, observing order; the weakest went hindermost. The
Heathen also did see to this: They could march every one in his way, not
breaking ranks, not thrusting one another, but every one walking in his path;
so they kept an equal distance from one another; If they be too ne^re they are
trouble some to themselves that they cannot use their weapons; if too far
asunder they make way for the Enemy to break in upon them; disorderly marching
may not be endured. Scipio corrected Flor exit* Live. 58. and 34.
such as he espied out of rank; so did Cato, who would strike them with his
leading staff, and commanded the Captains to chastise them.

In going on, spies were wont to be sent forth before, to discover the 1 Samuel:
^3. 22, 23.
Enemy; This did Saul when he went against David; Ios^a sent spies into Ios:
2. 1. 9.
the land before him to know how the people were affected. For to hear of
fear and terror in the Enemy is a great heartening to go forward. This
whetted on Godeon to set Iud: 7, 10, ^1, 13
upon the Midianites, and much strengthened his heart. This sending forth or
going to learn somewhat from the enemy, was commanded Gideon by God himself.
So David sent out spies to understand what ^ Sa: 26. 4 1 Match: 5: 38: and 12: 20
Saul did. And Machabeus sent spies into the host of the Enemies, and so did
Jonathan. Its wisdom to have some with the Enemy to discover his purposes and
designements, if it may be, as David had Hushai with Absalom, and men secretly
in Jerusalem to bring him news. Gabrias the Athenian Pluta. Apotheg: Live: 122
Captain said, that he deserved no then me of a General, that understood not
the estate of his Enemies. Livie reports that Hannibal understood what was
done in the Enemies Camp, as well as they, partly by espialls sent into the
Camp, and partly by his own diligence. God 2 K. 6. 9.
himself sometime by his Prophet did extraordinarily reveal the secret
counsel of the Syrian unto the King of Israel to prevent mischiefs. From God
and man Generals are taught to learn, and see, and understand what their
Enemies do.

When they march and do secure themselves from ambushments, and dangerous
passages, they must consider 2 K 6. 8.
well where to encamp; as the Syrian King did warring with Israel. The
encamping of Israel by the Lords direction was fouresquare; and the Tabernacle
in the midst with Priests Number: 2.
and Levites to attend their office. There were four standards pitched; the
first of Judah Eastward, the second* of Reuben Southward, the third of Ephraim
Westward, and the fourth of Dan Northward. To every of these belonged two
Tribes; so as three Tribes was under one standard, and the whole host of all
three numbered together; Then were there ensigns, which were pitched also by
the standards, which were the ensigns of their Fathers houses: In marching
Number: 10. 5, 6, 14, 18 22, 25.
they kept this order: 1. the East side went forward, and then the Southside,
then the West, and then the North; before all which went the Arc, to search
out a resting place for them; and when if set forward, or rested, a holy speech
was uttered by Moses either time; this was the Number: 10 33. 36.
manner of encamping, and marching in the wilderness.

But they had also another kind and form of entronching which was round, as
appears by the manner of speech according to Innius and Tremelius
translation; David is said ^ Sa: 17. 20
to come, ambitu plaustrorum: so asthey lay it may seem entrenched round with
carts. They had a care to lodge safely by intrenching themselves. Gorgias camp
was strong 2 Match. 4. ^.
compassed about with expere horsemen. This Caesar had special care of, he
would not neglect this work at any hand, nor be deterred by his Bell. Gal. 2.
Civ. 1. Live. 27.
enemies, sending to offer battle to hinder the same. Fulvius the Proconsul
neglecting this was suddenly set upon by Hannibal, and overthrown and all his
company. So was Lod^wike Nassa brother to the Prince of Orange slain, and most
Anno 1568
of his company, through idleness, and want of skill withal, to entrench well
themselves. In Israel the General was ever in the Camp. Saul was always in
the Camp; so was Moses, and Joshua, Ioab in the 2 Samuel: 11 11. 1 Match. 4. 4.
host, and Gorgias in his Camp. Heroical hearts should disdain to follow
pleasure, though lawful, when they should be in the field; this contempt of
pleasure was in Vriah, one of David's Worthies, because the General and the host
lay in their Tents.

They did encampe in as convenient Number: 21. Exodus: 15. 27. and 16. 12. 15 1 Sa:
29. ^ Iud. 7. 1.
places as they could, by wells of water, and tr^es, as Israelites did, and as
did the Philistims by a fountain; (...) by the well of Harad; and Timotheus
the wicked Heathen, and Jonathan at the water of Gennesar, 1 Match: 5. 37. and
11. 67. Exodus: 18. 6 and 19. 2. 1 Sa: 26. 3. and 28 4. and 31. 1. Nu: 21. 12.
and 22. 1. Deuteronomy: 10 7 Judge: 6: 33. and 7. 8. 1 Chro: 11. 15:
upon or by a hill or mountain, as Moses with Israel did; and Saul upon
Hachilah, and on Mount Gilboah. Also in valleys and plains, as Israelites did
in the valley of Zared, and in the plains of Moab near Jordan: and in Iothah
a land of rivers of water. The host of Midian pitched in the valley of Iezreel,
and the Philistims in the valley of Rephaim, which a strong host may dare to
do.

Wheresoever they encamped, they Iud: 7. 8 2 K: 7, 7 1 Match. 9: 2 and 4. 20
Judge: 7, 11 2 K: 7: 8: 10 1 Match: 4: 23
had their tents to lie in, every one had his tent; not only Israelites in
their own land, but also the Heathen: so had the Syrians, and Dem^trius host
under Bachides and the lewd Aleimus and others. And in these tents they lay by
ranks* by which they tied their horses and Asses, and in which they laid up
their victuals, treasure, and such things as they had; For in them were found
gold, silver, raiment, blue, silk, purple and great riches.

Before they remooved there was Ios: 1. 10, 11. and 3: 2, 3, 4 Iud: 7: 19 1
Match: 12 27.
warning given throughout the whole host, and it was told them what they
should do. Till they remooved they set diligent watch, and carefully keep it,
especially when they thought an enemy ready to set upon them.

CHAPTER. XXI. Of ordering an host in drawing near to the Enemy, and what is
else to be done, and considered of before the coming of the battle.
DAvid sending out an Army to subdue his proud rebellious son Absalom, divided
the whole host into 3. 2 Sa. 18. 2.
parts, and set principal Commanders over the same. Ioab over one, Abishai
over the other, and Ittai over the third. So did Judas divide his Army into
three Companies 1 Match 5. 33. 2 Match: 8. 21.
and sometimes into four parts. Against Cendebeus, he divided his men, and set
his horse in the midst of the foot; because the Enemies horse were very many.
Bachides in his battle against Judas, divided his horse into two troops, and
put his slingers Ca. 16. 7.
and Archers before the host, and in the foreward were all the mighty men, and
Bachides himself in the right wing. Wise and experienced 1 Match: 9. 11, 12.
Commanders, know how to order and embattaile their men. The Enemy, the place;
the occasion offered are in this matter seriously to be weighed; Hanuibal
ordered his Army, some time one way, and sometime Live: 30. and 31. and 23. 29.
another as reason led him; And so did the Romans, Caesar and others. Saul set
his battle in array against the Philistims, but the manner how is not ^et
down. 1 Sa^ ^ 7. 2. 23.


Before the joining of battle foresight and great wisdom is required. For
1. here lies at stake the precious lives of men. 2. These ^^^ error may bring
great damage. 3. The due commendarions of all former preparations,
deliberations, and wary proceedings, is here retained or lost. 4. The victory
procures renown, and causes triumph and joy. 5. But the overthrow brings
sorrow, disgrace, and the prisoners taken captive, to be at their enemies will;
the very conceit whereof in some, has been so contrary to their minds, as
they rather have desired death then to fall into an enemies hand. This made
Saul to kill himself, which he did (says Josephus) In the wars of the Jews
because he was a faint-hearted coward. Zi^ri did burn his palace over his
own head. And Razis acted 2 Match: 14. 42. 46.
a desperate part upon this ground. In Numantia, where 4000 soldiers, who held
out ^4 years against many thousand Romans; yet wearied at length they
resolved upon a strange, and desperate end, which was to gather all their
Arms, moneys and goods together, and to set them on fire, and to bury
themselves in the flame, that so Scipio might not have any of them captives to
triumph over. This makes many stout courages in battle desperate, to fight
like Lions, and will not yield till the fatal wound come, and they be deprived
of life.

Great consideration therefore must be had before a General put all to hazard.
1. Of his own number and strength, and then of his Enemies. 2. Of the quality
and condition of his soldiers, whether young and raw, or old and experienced;
for its not number, but valor and skill which chiefly prevails. 3. Of their
fitness to fight, if it be after travel, when they be hungry, thirst, and
Live. 44.
weary, perhaps against fresh, lively, and a well prepared Enemy.

Aemilius would not charge upon Xen^ph: in exped. Cyr.
Perseus in Macedonia, because of his soldiers unfitness by travel, though
they desired to fight, until the next day. Clearchus would not set upon his
enemy, because he perceived his soldiers to be saint and hungry. Therefore
the Romans before they Live: 28, 21
entered battle refreshed well their men with victuals, and rest, as Vespatian
did when he encamped about Wars of the Jews.
Iorpata where in Josephus was. So Hannibal would have his men dine well, to
lie warm, and take rest before they fought with the Romans at Trebia; Such
commonly as have fought when their Army was wearied with travel for want of
^est, or faint for food, have miserably perished. As did Asdrubals army at
Metaurus, and so the Gauls Historia de troubl. de Fra. l. 13.
by the Romans. Puigall^re his men were cut off by La Nove, when he would
needs set upon the Protestants after two days and nights continual march. 4.
The General is to consi^er, whether fear possess the hearts of his
soldiers: Its Live: 26. 37.
a great hinderance to the victory: Its threatened as a punishment; fainting of
heart seized upon the Canaanites, Ios: 2. 9. 24.
and gave courage and assurance of victory to Joshua. A trembling through fear
is a sign of destruction. We never read of Saul's daunt of spirit, and
fearfulness in 1 Sa: 28. 5:
all his many battles, but only before the last, in which he and his were
overthrown; then its said, that he was afraid, and his heart greatly trembled.
Some fear may possess the heart of a Commander sometime, but a sudden and
unwonted fear in a General as Saul, is an ill token, as it was in one of the
Kings of Hungary, when he put on his helmet to go against the great Turk: In
which battle he lost his life, and the chief City of the Kingdom; A great
fear over a whole host at the sight of the Enemy, foretells their overthrow,
as it happened with the host of Timotheus consisting of 120000 foot and 2500
horse at the sight of Judas 2 Match: 12 20, 22.
with a handful: and as it happened to the Army of Sigismund upon which fell a
panick fear, when Zisca was but coming near. Till fear was removed Caesar
would not set forward against Ariovistus and the Germans. Judas Machibeus
would needs fight, when many of his company was in fear, and conveyed
themselves out of the host, but it cost him his life. 1 Match: 9. 6. 10, 18.


Therefore to prevent or remove fear the Lord himself spoke to his Generals,
exhorting them not to fear to Moses, to Joshua, to Gideon, yea he sent his
Prophet sometime to encourage Deuteronomy: 3, 2 Ios: 1: 8. and 10: 8: and 11 6. Iud:
6: 4: 2 Cro: 20: Deuteronomy: 20: 3, 4:
them; and appointed a sermon or set speech for the Priests to deliver before
the host went out. Hence it was that Kings made Orations to their Captains and
Soldiers, and so did other Generals. Histories humane are full of them, and
very many sp^eches are recorded in the Bible, the scope whereof was to remove
fear, and to encourage them to fight. In Exodus 14. 13, 14. is Moses speech. In
Deu. 20. 2, 3, 4* the priests: in Iud. 3. 28. Ehuds: in chap. 5. 14. Deborahs:
in chap. 7. 15, 18. Gideons: in 2 Samuel 10. 12. 1 Chro. 19. 13. Ioabs: in 2
Chro. 20. 15. 17. 20. Iehaziel and Iehosephats; in Esai. 7. 4. Esaiahs; in 2
Chro. 32. 7, 8. Hezekiahs: in 1 Match 3. 18. 22. and 4. 8. 11. and 2 Match. 8.
16. and 9. 44. and 11. 7. and 13. 14. and 15. 8* 10. Iu^as Machabeus his
orations: in 1 Match 9. 44. Ionathans: in ca. 13. 3. Simons. Out of which may be
gathered good matter for a General to speak unto his soldiers.

CHAP. XXII. Of many things to further the success in the battle.
THere are no^ a few things which may greatly help to gain the day, if men
must fight: but if thou dare not, then wisely prevent it, or if the enemy
will fly, give him leave; King John of France found the mischief in forcing
the black Prince to fight; and so Charles the fifth lost his army by
intercepting our Henry the fifth. Hereupon Themistocles would (...) permit the
Grecians to break the bridge over Hollespent, which Xerxes caused to be made,
least the enemy having a desire not to fight, might want a means to retire
back, and so be forced to fight against their wills, which will make Cowards
valiant.

But if it be resolutely determined upon to fight. I. Foresee the secret traps
laid, and ambushments, which may in the fight suddenly come upon the soldiers
when they 1 Match, 10 79. 80. and 11-68, 60:
be fighting. This Jonathan foresaw, and so got the day, though at another time
not wary enough, his host was scattered by an Ambush. Hannibal by such a
subtletie overthrew the Romans at Trebia, and Thrasament bake, and was hereby
much helped in the battle at Cannas.

II. Not to trust too much upon Associates, least they fail as the
Celtiberians did the Scipio^s in Spain, and the Albanes, Tullius Hostilius.
The Swizers which came in the aid of Lewis Sforza sold them to his enemy Lewis
the twelfth: secondly, do not trust fugitives from the enemies; for two
Spaniards in the wars against the Venetians feigned themselves fugitives with
intent to kill the General of the Venetians called Alvia, as before is noted.
And 500 Numidian Horsemen at the first encounter between the Romans and
Hannibal, left Hannibal and fled to the Romans, leaped from their horses, threw
away their apparent weapons and humbled themselves at the feet of the Romans,
who gave them credit and entertainment: but these not now mistrusted having
weapons secretly, when the Romans were busy in fight, came upon them behind
unexpected, and so mightily furthered Hannibal to get the victory at Cannas.
Lastly, trust not such as may justly be suspected, the Lords of the Philistims
had learned this, and therefore would at ^o hand admit 1 Chapter 12. 19.
of David, and his company, to go into battle with them against Israel.

III. To strive for advantages as much as may be, as 1. of the place; the
Syrians imputed much to the ^ K. 20.
place, making a great difference between the hills and the vallyes; our
victory at Newport was much holden by the benefit of the place: secondly, of
the wind behind them, as it was to Hannibals host at Cannas, but on the faces
of the Romans, which being Southeast and somewhat strong carried the dust into
the eyes of the Romans, and so did them much hurt. By the wind God helped
Theodosius against the Tyrant Maximus: thirdly, get advantage of the Sun, if
it be hot, and shining forth, it is hurtful to those that have it upon Theod.
hist. E^cl. Live. 35
their faces; it fainted the Gauls fighting with the Romans. Fourthly, take
advantage of the discord when it happens between Commanders and Captains in
the Enemies camp. By this the Aequians prevailed against the Romans, This
overthrew Live. 4. Thucid 6. Sl^idan.
the Athenian Army in Sicile: this gave the victory to Charles the fifth over
the Protestants, when the Duke of Saxony, and the Lansgrave of Hessen could
not agree. Through dissension of Captains, the French lost Naples, and
Amurathes the Turk got Nicopolis through the discord of the French and
Hungarian Captains. Fifthly, make advantage of the Army parted, or 1 Match: 4.
1. 4.
not the whole met together; This advantage Judas Machabeus took at Gorgius
coming out from his camp. So the Romans set upon Asdubal to prevent his
joining with Hannibal in Italy. Sixthly, when the enemy is out of order:
seventhly, when he is setting his men in array: Eighthly, in the time of
encamping, then to let upon them as many wise Commanders have done; These and
such like advantages are to be observed, taken, and wisely pursued.

IV. To use stratagems, so did Ios. 8. 2 K: 3. 22, 23.
Joshua; yea the Lord himself wrought so a work miraculously, as the host of
Israel was refreshed thereby, and the enemy strongly deceived, by the
sunshine upon the water: by stratagems Hannibal and Scanderbeg prevailed
mightily, for inventing whereof they both were very subtle. But stratagems must
be such as are not to the breach of oath, against godliness, against the law
of nature and nations.

V. To use means to make the enemy secure, that so they may be surprised upon
a sudden. Thus those of Iabesh Gilead did with Nahash 1 Samuel 11. 3. 10.
the king of the Ammonites, till Saul came suddenly upon them, and utterly
discomfited them.

VI. To use good expedition, and suddenly to come upon an enemy, as Saul did
upon Nabash, Joshua, upon 1 Samuel 11. los. 10. 9. and 11. 7. 2 Match: 4: 1, 2. 2
Match: 13: 1.
the five Kings besieging Gibeon; and so upon four Kings at an other time. By
this sudden rushing upon Judas, Gorgius hoped to have prevailed, but was
prevented. But Judas by a sudden coming before day into the camp of Antiochus
Eupater which consisted of an 110. thousand foot, of horse, 5300, Elephants 22,
and 30 Charets armed with hooks, he went to the Kings Tent. and with his
company slew 4000, men, and the chiefest of the Elephants, and so filled the
camp with fear and tumult, returned with good success; Hannibal speedy
coming from far upon Flaccus, overthrew him at Herdonea. Sylanus by this Live:
26. 27
means chiefly vanquished his enemies in Spain.

VII. To be all of one heart, for God, for their King and Country, and the
safety of the whole host, and so of themselves, faithfully endeavoring to
perform the trust committed Iud. 20. 21. 8, 11. 1 Sa, 11. 7.
to them, every one in their place, to the helping of one another for obtaining
the victory. The great host of 400000 Israelites were gathered together as one
man, and were knit together as one. Israel came out to go with Saul against
Nahash, Ios 2. 9. 2 Samuel 10.
with one consent, as one man. The Canaanitish Kings and several Nations of
them could join together as one, with one accord to fight against Joshua, Ioab,
and Abishai consented to succor one another ar need should require. We never
read that the Commanders iy Israel were at odds to hinder the good counsel of
one another, but agreed as one man against their enemies. Of discord and the
mischiefs thereof, you have heard before. The Jews, though their leader
Jonathan was traitorously slain, taken in a trap, by the false dissembling
Tryphon, yet they encouraged 1 Mac: 12. 50. 2 Mac. 9, 10.
one another, and went close together to fight, being of Judas mind rather to
die manfully for their brethren, then to stain their honor.

VIII. To have a watchword, as 2 Mac 8. 23 and 13, 15.
Judas gave his bands, The help of God, and at another time, victory is of God.

Lastly, be sure of a place of retrait for the wearied, to refresh themselves
Hannibal even in Afrike, neglecting this, was overthrown by Scipio.

CHAP. XXIII. Of such lets and impediments, as are to be avoided and
prevented, which may either overthrow the attempt, or hinder the success.
AS there are many furtherances of good enterprises, so there may be not a few
hindrances of the same, which are carefully to be taken heed of and prevented.

I. And chiefly take heed of sin and rebellion against God. This God warned his
people of, when they went to war, when the host Deu. 23: 9.
goes forth against the enemy, then keep thee from every evil thing says
the Lord. Such sins as before Ier: 10. 2.
in Chap. 15, are recorded; as also beware here of all heathenish fears,
superstitious observations of days luckie and unlucky, of the flying and
crying of birds, beware of divinations, enchantments and charms; abhor
Wi^ards, Figurecasters, Southsayers, Sorcerers, Fortune Tellers, Stargazers,
Astrologers, Prognosticatours, Interpreters of good and ill success by casual
accidents: wear no superstitions vanities, Deuteronomy: 18. 10, 11, 12.
aa conceited hallowed crosses, Amulets, and such like heathenish trumperies.
For God has straightly forbidden all these abominations; they are the practices
of the Heathen Idolaters. All such as use them, are Esa: 19. 3, 4. and 47: 12,
13 and 8. 9. Eze. 21. 21
abomination to the Lord, says Moses: And he has punished it in the
practisers. Saul sought to a Witch; but did not he then thrive the Deu. 18.
12. 1 Sa: 28. 3. and 31, 3. 1 Chapter 10. 13.
worse? did it not then cost him his life? Pompey by consulting with wizards,
made way for his overthrow, for Caesar despising such things, made use of his
enemies superstitious fears and came upon them at such times; what got Inulia
the Apostate, or Richard the third of England, or James the third of Scotland,
by taking advise of witches and wizards, and following their counsels?
Certain Jews in Machabeus his host, hoped by some superstitious vanities 2
Mac. 12. 4.
which they wore under their garments secretly, to have avoided death: but they
were deceived, they died in battle. ^ In the year 1502. when the French went
against Geneua some of them had gotten charmed Amulets about their necks to
save them, but their trust deceived them, for they were found dead in the
field. Scipio though a Heathen man, of whom you have before heard, he banished
Diviners, and Figure-flingers out of his camp, and when he landed in Africa,
it was his hap, as soon as he came on shore, that he slipped and fell forward on
the ground, which his company held to be ominous, and a sign of ill luck, but
he turned it another way, and willed them to be merry, because he had thereby
taken possession of the country.

II. Great care must be had, to prevent all discord in the whole host,
especially between Commanders, and to effect this the spirit of pride, envy,
vainglory, boasting, wrath, secret grudge, and whatsoever else may cause
dissension, must be utterly laid aside: every one being ready to hear one
another, to be counseled one of another good; and no man to think himself at
this time his own; but now his countries; but now the causes for which the
war is undertaken: not now to do after his own will, but what sound reason,
true religion, the honor of his King, the necessity and fitness of time and
place, and the authority of the General upon deliberat: advise and counsel
requires. Singular was the praise of unity 1 Mac: 8. 14, 15, 16.
among the Roman Senators in the days of the Machabees; For though there were
320 which sat in counsel, yet was there neither envy nor nor emulation among
them; nor any one in pride overtopping another, but all consulted for the
general good, and prospered. But after through Caesar's pride, and the evils
that happened through civil dissension, the Empire grew weak, and at length was
overthrown. Its an old saying, Vi^ vnita fortior, at parts in plures secta
peribit, of which many examples are given before.

III. To prevent danger of death to the General to have care of his life, for
the head cut off, the body is but a trunk. Ahad rashly going into the host to
fight was wounded to death, and so the people left the field 1 Match. 7: 43, 44.
^
and went home; Absalom slain, the host was scattered; when Nicanor was cut
off, presently his host cast away their weapons and fled. On the General the
life and motion of the Army depends. For David's worthies 2 Sa. 18. 3.
had special care of his safetle; sometimes not to let him go into the field,
holding him to be worth 10000. of them, and if he did go into battle and was
in danger, rather ^ Sa 21. 16, 17.
then he should be slain, Abishai will step between death and him: so
precious was the life of a General among the Romans, that when Q. Petili^s the
Consul was slain in fight against the Ligures, the Senate decreed Front. li.
4: ca. 7. ^
that the legion in whose front he was slain, should have no annuarie
stipend, and there arms should be broken.

IV. To beware of conceit of strength with contempt* of the enemy, such seldom
or never prosper: 1 K. 20. 2 Mac. 11. 4, 11, 12. and 12, 13, 16.
this overthrew Benhadad, also Lysias going against Judas, and this brought the
Citizens of Caspis to confusion. Antiochus E^pater, though he had a dreadful
Army, yet through light reckoning of his enemies and haughtines of mind in his
own strength, had ill success. The insolency of Senacherib, ^ Mac. 13, 12, 9,
15, 16.
his blasphemy against God, and base esteem of Hezek^ah was punished by God
from heaven.

V. Not to be provoked to fight by any instigation of a subtle enemy, for he
surely knows his own advantages, as Themistocles did; who incited Plutarch
de Themist:
the Persian by his sons Tutour, called Sicinus, under the show of secret
friendship, to come and hemme in the Grecians, as fearful, ready to run
away, which he, which he accepted of v^aduisedly, and so was overthrown at
Salanus. But if a heady, and proud enemy puffed up vainegloriously will needs
ptovoke, as Apollonius 1 Mac. 10. 69: 82.
Demetri^s his General did, Jonathan may wisely encounter him, and humble his
pride with his overthrow, as did also Hannibal proud Flaminius.

VI. Not to be circumvented by See exam: for some of these in Dr: Succl: his
hook of wars: ca 14. of Stratagem^
slights and policies of the Enemy, by false rumors of more succors coming
to them, by feigned re^ait, or counterfeit, flying away, by seeming to intend
some other course, by feigning sickness, by pretenses of fear, by color of
secret friendship, by treaties of peace, by vain shows, by false fugitives;
by secret intelligen. geneers, and such like, which Scipio and other Romans,
and Harnibal also 1 Mac. 1. 10. 27. 2 Mac. 14. 22. 1 Mac. 12. 43, 46. and 13.
23.
practiced: Bachides and Nicanor used deceits; and under show of friendship
sought to have betrayed Judas, but he was aware of them, and also stood upon
his guard: but honest Jonathan was overtaken by Tryphons subtlety, in feigned
love, and slain.

VII. To take heed of an hired Ismael, Ier. 40: 14. 2 Mac. 13 24.
by whom good Gedaliah was cruelly and traitorously murdered: so also beware
of having any Rhodocus that gives secret intelligence to the enemy.

Lastly, make no delay upon good resolved grounds to execute design: ments, for
nothing is more hurtful then delays, when advantage is offered and necessity
calls on. Joshua made no delay to help the Gibeonites, nor Saul Iabesh
Gil^ad. And David upon Bichri his rebellion. held 2 Sa. 20* 6: B^^. Gal: 2. 7
delay very dangerous. C^sar his expedition prevented the Belgians in their
conspiracy, so did it the French at another time by his speedy coming among
them. On the contrary, the Romans delaying to prevent Hannibals coming into
Italy, made them feel the misery of their ^olly and slacknes* 16 years
together afterward* To loose fair advantages, which are not always offered,
may bring great loss to themselves, which being taken might press down an
Enemy. Delay is a traitor to opportunity: and such as either of purpose, or of
carelesnes, or persuasions of others, do make delays, may be blamed much, and
judged sometime the sale-man of prosperous success, and purchasers of much
loss and sorrow. All these things are to be carefully avoided, if we desire to
thrive in our attempts.

CHAP. XXIV. Of going forth* and joining battle.
AT the present going forward to charge the 2 Ch: 13, 14. Number. 10. 9 Iud. 7. 2
Chr. 13: 1 Match. 4. 13. and 5. 31 and 7, 45. 2 Sa. 2. 28, and 20: 22.
trumpets did sound. This by God was appointed the only instrument; and these
they used in on sets, as did Gideon, Abiiah, Machabeus in the time of the
battle; in pursuit of the flying enemies, and in a retreat to call back from
pursuing. The Heathen Romans also used trumpets; but some other Nations, as the
Indians used Cymbals and Drums; The Saracens drums, the Lacedemodians, the
flute and trumpet, the Cretans the harp.

Besides the trumpet, they used their voices, as shouting in the very sight of
the Enemy, and first charge, uttering words sometime, as the host of Gideon
did, saying, The 1 Sa: 17: 20. and 4, 5: 2 Chapter 13. 15:
sword of the Lord and Gideon. They did shout at the rooting of the enemy, and
when they thought the enemy was come into their hands. Thus the Philistims
shouted when Sampson 1 Sa: 17: 5. 2
was brought bound to them: and Wars of the Jews. Iud: 15. 14 2 Mac: 15, 26.
the Romans when they saw Josephus taken taken and brought prisoner into their
sight. In the onset they also cried with prayers for help unto the Lord, when
the Trumpets sounded. When they went toward the Enemy before they came to
charge they would sing Psalms, till they came near him, as Iehosophat 2 Chr.
13. 14. 1 Mac. 4. 13, and 5: 33 2 Ch 20.
did, and Judah with: him, yea the Heathen used to go forward with trumpets
and songs. And least this might seem a mockery of a too over religious
Iehosophat, who was foretold that he needed not to fight, and therefore might
well sing, or that it might be judged an act of an addle-headed Nicanor not to
be regarded, 2 Mac: 15. 25.
the renownest Lacedaemonians used it, the King after a sacrifice offered,
commanded all his army to crown their heads; and the flutes to sound the
measure of Castor, then he the King himself, began the Paean, a song proper to
Apollo, and so Cap. Bing. on Elians Tacticks. pa. 70.
went they on, as one keeping measure in a stayed pace cheerfully, and without
astonishment.

It is to be observed, that Joshua in all his Battles, gave the first charge,
and so did Saul, David, and Ioab his General. It was the use of the Romans
commonly to begin the battle, as does appear in the wars of Hist. of the
troub. of France.
Caesar in France, and Scipio in Spain, and one notes it of the Protestants in
France, that they always prevailed more, charging first the Enemy, then
abiding to be charged: which course Dr. S^ctel. his book pa. 177. ca. 22.
as one says, is the best, if there be a resolution to fight. It argues in
those that begin the more courage; They may the more easily take the advantages
before mentioned, and set upon ^he Enemy, where he is weakest; yet this first
charging must ever be considered thus, as that the army be able to wage battle
with the Enemy, else by first charging, they may justly be charged with folly,
and pay well for their rashness.

CHAP. XXV: Of that' which os to be done in fighting.
THe people of God in their fighting, had mind of God, so as while they 1 Ch 5:
20. 2 Mac. 15. 27.
struck him with hands, they prayed to him in their hearts, and trusted on
him, and so procured a blessing upon their encounter. They had care to
understand the mind and pleasure of their General, whether manifested Ios. 8.
18, 19.
by words or signs. Thus those that were in ambush against Ai, observed Ios;
4. 7-8.
Joshua his stretching out of his spear, understood his meaning, and speedily
executed his will. For they remembered his instruction, and charge before given
to them, being Ca. 6. 10, 11, 16, 20,
ever obedient to him, doing as he would have them, as he himself did, what
God commanded him. In the 2 Mac: 12 50. 2 Sa. 10. 11
fight they encouraged one another, and kept close together, and were ready to
help one another, as need should require. Here I think it not amiss to bring
in the words of the Apostle spiritually intended, but fetched from warfare, and
the duty of Captains and soldiers in the battle against their enemies, which
(omitting the Apostles scope) I will handle it after the letter very fitly to
this my purpose in hand. The Apostle 1 Cor. 16. 13. sets down four 1 Cor.
16. 13.
duties of soldiers there expressed.

I. Is to watch, and this is 1. To observe and take the advantages given by the
Enemy, but withal to see to our selves, to beware of mistakes, least we give
them advantage, carefully taking heed to prevent this, or speedily to amend it,
before the Enemy espy it, as wisely and quickly, as once Hannibal did.

Secondly, to take heed of the signal, crier, trumpet, and the Commander for
directions, the mind of the General may not be mistaken, as Lieuienant Yakestey
did General Vere at the battle at Newport. A good soldier must watch with the
eye, attend with the ear, and obey with his whole mind.

II. Duty is to stand fast. 1. To the Justice of the cause, the King and
Country. Secondly, to the General, and to fellow soldiers in the battle. The
Athenians took an oath not to leave their fellows in the fight. Thirdly, to
stand fast in this resolution, rather to die like men manfully, then to run away
fearfulfully, or to yield cowardly, or which is worst of all, to fly to the
Enemy, traitorously, Stukely, York, and others, Traitors, betrayers of our
Country have been.

III. Duty is quit themselves like men: which consists in these things. 1. In
having the right use of reason for circumspect carriage for their own
safeties, without amazedness through base and vain fear: By this present 2 Samuel 21. 16, 17.
use of reason and circumspection did Abishai save David from Ishbi-be^ob the
Giant. 2. In a quick and prompt alacrity of spirit manifested in a ready
discharge of every action, in duty to be performed orderly and in due time and
place; detesting sloth and negligence, and to beware of a confused
distraction. Joel commends the warriors which had a lively courage, Joel 2.
8.
and were quick in execution of service And Jeremy pronounces a Ier: 48. 10.
curse upon such as do the work of the Lord in battle deceitfully or
negligently 3. In a ma^like va^our, a heart not daunted in a present peril;
being like to a vids Worthies, and 2 Samuel: 23. 1 Ch: 12. 8
like those of the Tribe of G^d men of might, skilfu^l in Arms, and having
faces like Lions; and not hearts like fearful hares.

IV. Duty is to be strong: This is not only to be understood of the body when
men are lusty and strong, and well refreshed, as Hannibals men were, before he
fought with Sempranius the Consul at Trebia; but this is meant of the strength
of the heart chiefly. Be strong, says God, to Joshua, Ios: 1. 6.
and to show the meaning he adds, Be of good courage; which is, not to be
conquered in mind; but to hold out to the last. A brave spirit should be like
Shammah, fighting til the hand cleave to the sword; So that though 2 Samuel: 23.
13, 12.
the hand be wearied, yet the heart holds out, which may get the day, as it
did our men in the battle at Newport.

Such Soldiers and Captains as these are worth treasure, they that thus
discharge their duty, are no mercenary and base fellows, commonly false and
faithless; A few of the other are worth an host of these, that make pay booty,
and spoil their only ends.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the means how to have such as are valiant and of a good
courage into the field.
TO have such as in the former chapter are mentioned, men that will stand to
it, and quit themselves like men, the way is,

I. To choose such before hand as naturally be hardy, which show it in
countenance, in use of manly exercises ^o which they be given, as leaping,
wrestling, casting the bar, and such like: in their will and readiness to
go into wars; In their well set bodies, though little men, and by their hard
labor in some calling not without danger sometime, as workers in mines, and
such like sort of men.

II. Is train up such well in arms; for of such it seems by the History 1
Ch: 12. 2 13. 33.
of their acts were David's Worthies. To be ignorant in arms is a great
disheartning and discouragement.

III. ^s whatsoever the Profane Esau, mocking Ishmael, and machavilian Atheist
thinks, to have them religious: for in Scripture never any religious, but they
were truly valian* If any sons of Belial say, that they find it not so, No
marvel, for (...) is had of the choice of such* but of the riff, raff, and
scumme of the people* what religious man will g^e with these, if he may choose;
(...) swearing and cursing are their prayers ^n their greatest dangers; whoring
and drinking, carding and dicing their best exercises when they do nothing. O
hosts of spirits and devils, and not of Christians! Its pity that any truly
religious Cornelius, or pious Centurion, (and such there be) should be over
them, or any fearing the name of God to be among such.

IV. Is as the Lord commanded Moses, to make proclamation, that if any be
cowards, they should depart the Camp. Which rule Gideon followed; Judge: 7. 3 1
Match: 3 56.
and Judas Machabeus; But perhaps some will say, this were the only way to
send away most of the Army. Surely no: For if as before it is observed, such be
chosen as are naturally hardy, acquainted with the use of Arms, be at least in
appearance, religious, they will detest the name of cowards; yea the
Proclamation would ( Viderint quorum est de huiusmo. de rebus ^^dicare.)
make them put on a better resolution, then to take the benefit of departing,
and be ever after branded for Cowards: and if any such departed, whom shame
would not retain; better were their absence, then presence; For surely such
would never fight with courage; and those shamelesly departing; good it should
be, that an open brand of infamy should in their return home be put upon
them, with sharp punishment.

V. Is when they are come abroad at the first to employ them in light services,
where hope is to come off with some encouragements; and not to cast them into a
desperate actions, of great hazard at the very entrance, except extreme
necessity compel thereunto.

VI. Is to promise good rewards for well-doing, with due and faithful
performance thereof; Thus the Lord of hosts encouraged his host promising them
Canaan, lands, houses, Cities, Deuteronomy. 1. 31. 35. and 3 2. 2 Samuel 5. 8 1 Chro: 11
5.
and inheritance for them and theirs. David offered honor to such as would and
could prevail against the Iebusites, and he performed his word faithfully to
Ioab. This did the Romans with their Soldiers; and therefore had very valiant
men: For nothing more stirs up valor, then due respect, and deserved
rewards. Caesar so won, and tied fast to him De bell^ civili, l. 3.
the hearts of Soldiers by bounty and liberality, as many revolted from his
enemies to him, but none could be drawn from him to them. The Turks reward
greatly worthy Captains, not regarding birth, but the quality of the party and
his deserts: For one Och^ali a poor Mariner for his valor and good service
was made Admiral of the Turks Navy. The Romans rewarded Horatius Cocles Live:
2.
for repelling the Hetruscians with a statue of Marble, and with lands. Deci^s
Live. 7.
had a Crown of gold, and every soldier of double allowance, and double
apparel, for his and their service. Scipio gave Coronets of gold to those that
first mounted the walls Live: 26
of new Carthage in Spain. If Generals and Captains were chosen not for
Nobility, Gentry, friends, but for very worth in them, and soldiers well
rewarded for their valor, we should not want Armies of valiant men.

VII. And last is to punish cowardice, treachery, disobedience, mutinies, and
other offenses without partiality. The other, to wit reward, is not to be
wanting, and this namely, due punishment is not to be neglected; For what the
hope of reward in some base spirits cannot effect; yet the fear of this will
work it in them. Fear made thousands with one consent to come unto Saul, to
go against the 1 Sa: 11. 7.
Ammonites: By these especial means men shall be made valiant.

CHAP. XXVII. Of the means how to make the basest spirits and Cowards in
battle to stand to it and if they do fly away, how to make some use thereof
as some have wisely done.
THough never so good choice be made, and means used, yet some will be found
faint hearted, God and good men in the Bible, took no other course with them,
but dismission: but if they be retained, the courses taken in former times by
great Commanders were these.

I. To hemme them in, and environ them with the choicest troops, and so
perforce to hold them to it.

II. When they begin to shrink back to cut off some of the foremost for
example to terrify the rest; ^ Attilius Live. 10.
by killing the first with his own hand, when his soldiers gave ground, made
the rest to make head against the Enemy. The Roman General gave charge to
his men, that whom Live. 2.
they perceived Cowards, and to fly, to take them for enemies, and thereafter
to deal with them. For indeed a Coward is a betrayer of his fellows and an
incourager of the enemy, to get the victory.

III. To take from them all hopes of help, though they should ru^^ away. And
this sometime did wise Commanders though they did not lead known or suspected
Cowards. As General Vere did send away all the ships from shore at the battle
at Newport. William the Conqueror, to make his to fight, and hope of no help
but victory, landing here in England, he burnt the ships that brought them
over. So did Tariff the Moore entering into Spain. Charles Martell when he went
to encounter the infinite host of the Saracens, commanded the City of Tours to
keep the gates shut, and to open them no more but to the Victorers. The basest
spirits have been made thus to stand to it: But if fear sometime cease upon
better Spirits, as it has done, then some rebuke may make them take heart, or
fear of future shame; A speech and example of Caesar's valor withal in the
last battle that ever he fought; which was with Pompeys sons in Spain, when
his soldiers began to shrink encouraged them to a new onset, and so got the
victory, only he said but this, Remember that at Munda they had forsaken their
General. The courage and act of the Co^mander will quicken the spirit of such
as have not lost all heart. Judas Machabeus seeing his people fearful to 1
Match: 16 6.
pass a brook to the Enemy, led the way, and then they all followed.
Jonathan when his company fled from him, yet standing to it, and something
prevailing made the runawayes, to return and to pursue the Enemies. Lucius
Sylla seeing the Legion to give to Archelaus the Commander of Mithridates
forces, he drew his sword and made toward the battle; and said to his
Soldiers, If any ask you for your Leader you may tell them, that you left him
fighting in Bo^sia: At which words they were stricken with shame, and went on
to the Service. M. Furius Camillus seeing his Army slack to charge the Enemy,
plucked the Ensign out of the hand of the bearer, and carries it himself upon
the Enemy; which the Soldiers seeing with much shame set forward after him.
Thus valiant Leaders have put courage into the hearts of their company; of
which rank with the old and ancient Generals may be reckoned, the renowned
^o^ice, the redoubted Vere, and with these the never dying Sidney as one
calls them.

Sometime traiterous spirits will dare in the face of the General to fly to
the Enemy: whereof some wisely have made good use. When Lucius Lucellus saw the
Macedonian horse flying to the Enemy, he presently caused an allarum to be
given, and so sent out other after them; by which the enemy supposed the former
to make the onset, and the followers to be ready to second them, whereupon the
Enemy shot at the foremost, and the Runnawayes seeing their course welcome
before them, and the danger behind, fell in good earnest to fight with the
Enemy, and so against their intended purpose, quit themselves as it were like
honest men. So one Damates when he perceived some of his flying to the Enemy,
presently did follow after, and cunningly falls to commend their forwardnes,
that they would first charge the Enemy, which made them turn their minds, and
to do otherwise then they intended, even to make indeed the first onset upon
the enemy, clean contrary to their former purposes.

To conclude this, if so be yet that fear happen, and that there be great
insufficiency to fight with the Enemy, one way also withal be made to avoid
the stroke, then it is best, not disorderly to fly, yet to make a fair
retreat, or a secret flight as many Roman leaders have done, or openly to fly
so it be orderly. Abner 2 Sa: 2. 17 ^9.
after a sore battle did fly: That completely qualified Commander, General
Norice, made a retreat at Ga^nt. To fly well, as one says, is as
praiseworthy, as to fight well. For nature, reason, and religion too, do
concur in this, that in a manifest peril! to save life by lawful means, is no
disgrace but a duty. And what is desperate hazard when there is no absolute
necessity to compel thereto, but a foolehardnesse, a fleshing of a prevailing
enemy, a loss of serviceable men, and discredit to the Commander, who cannot
but herein have his wisdom questioned.

But put case, men cannot possibly fly, neither in any humane reason be able
to withstand the Enemy, what should then be done? To answer 1 Sa. 11. ^
men of Iabesh, that so they might bring not only base shame upon the parties,
but a reproach upon the whole nation; Its better to dye then to hearken to such
conditionr, or to such as Benhadad propounded to Ahab, 1 King. 20 6.
which made him adventure the battle, as also did our black Prince with the
King of France, whom no reasonable conditions could satisfy: moreover it must
be weighed whether any succor may in convenient time come, to help in such a
strait as the men of Iabesh did; furthermore, whether by adventuring life; yet
the enemy may receive more loss by selling to them their deaths more dear,
then by yielding and living they may profit-their country. These and such like
considerations must be had before yielding: but if the enemy be faithful of
his word, and merciful, the conditions reasonable, no hope remaining of help,
and the adventuring to fight it out, in all likelihood to procure little hurt
to the Enemy, in reason it is better to save life, then to lose it. Very
valiant spirits have yielded sometimes without any disparagement unto them.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of getting fully the victory, when the enemy is in part subdued.
AN Enemy may seem to be overthrown when he is not: therefore to get a full
victory,

I. Beware that the Emies giving way and seeming to fly, be not a stratageme,
as it was in the Israelites to the Beniamites; and Joshua with his company to
the men of Ai, and Bethel; by which subtlety he did utterly overthrow them,
when they were too confident of the victory. Scanderbeg that Prince of Epirus,
thus overcame Amose his kinsman that had fled from him, and brought against him
60000 Turks* from whom be seemed to fly, and for fear to leave his country;
by which apparent flight so far he made them secure; and so after certain
days returned back upon them secredy, overthrew them, and took his
traiterous kinsman prisoner.

II. If the enemy be routed, then to pursue the victory as Abraham did in Gen:
14. Ios: 7. 25. and 8. 11, 12 1 Samuel: 14. 22. 1 Match. 10 49, 50. and 4 15. and
7. 45.
chasing his enemies, Gideon the many and mighty Kings with their hosts; Saul
the Philistims, king Alexander son to Antiochus Epiphanes king Demetri^s
host; and as Judas did Gorgias; and Nicanors host, Caesar obtaining the victory
over the Helvetians so pursued them, as he left them not till all yielded; so
having foiled Vercingetorix he followed him till he got into Alexia* Scipio
vanquishing Asdrubal pursued him to the De Bell. Gal: l. 1. 7.
utmost coast of Spain, Hannibal in not pursuing his victory gotten at Cannas,
lost Rome; he had skill to overcome, but wanted wisdom to use well the
victory.

III. Yet in the pursuit, 1. Beware it be not too heady, disorderly and
scattered, least pursuers fall into Ambushments, or come to near some garrison,
or give so advantage to the flying Enemy to fall on again, recover their
losses, and become of Conquered suddenly Conquerours. Philopoemen charging the
Enemy, that Live: 35
too eagerly did chase his men, overthrew him. Carus the General of Segadans
having overcome. Quintus Fulvius; yet by disorderly pursuing and too securely,
lost his victory, was by the same Fulvius horsemen, charged suddenly, and so
Carus himself killed, and six thousand more put to the sword; Gaston de fois
having foiled the Enemy at Ravenna by advancing himself too far, and ill
followed, lost his life. Moses Scanderbegs General with other worthy
Commanders by too forward pursuit Hist of Scanderbeg
of the Turks were taken prisoners; And by Mahomet the merciless Tyrant were
fleyed alive, and that by little and little, for the space of 15. days
together.

Secondly, take heed of pursuing one part routed, that an other part of the
enemy entire and strong remain not behind to follow the pursuers; This
oversight cost worthy Mach^beus 1 Match: 8. 14. 18
his life.

Thirdly, not to follow too late, Ioab followed Abner till night, and
Alexander, 2 Samuel: 10. 49, 50. 1 Match: 10. 49, 50
Demetri^s, but beware of darkness, it hides many mischiefs, not to be
foreseen, nor prevented.

IV. The Enemy once scattered is not to be suffered to recollect his forces:
for thus Pyrrhus, that Noble Warrior, yet once herein ouerseene; lost his
victory over Valerius Lavinus. The Carthaginians in Spain, after the deaths of
the two Scipioes; suffered the relics of the Romans to Live: 24.
breath and gather head again, where hereby at length they were vanquished
themselves* Alexamen^s having slain Na^^^, yet suffering the Euemy to gather
head and to wax strong, was with all his company by them cut in pieces.

V. To abstain from spoil till the enemy be utterly vanquished, driven away,
and they secure from peril. Of this Judas forewarned his followers in chasing
enemy: which charge they 1 Match: 17. 23.
well observed. Hannibal lost a more full victory of the Romans at Trebia,
because the Numidian horsemen hastened too soon to the spoil. The Dutch at
Gunigast extorted the victory out of the hands of the French; which almost they
had gotten, while they too hastily followed the spoil. The Italians at Taro
had foiled the French, but that at the beginning Anno 1596
they fell to spoil the baggage. The Germans at the battle of Erlam in
Hungary, having thrice defeated the Turks, were yet at last by untimely
falling upon the spoil overthrown.

Therefore Iehoram King of Israel in the strait Siedge of Samaria by the
Syrians, when he heard that they were suddenly fled, and 2 King. 7.
left great store of victual and treasure behind them (though the Inhabitants
were almost all famished) yet did he withhold them from falling upon the
spoil, till he certainly understood that he might with safety do so.

VI. Having gotten a full victory, and none seen to make head against them:
yet it is good not to be over secure; as were the Amalekites, ^ Sam: 30.
when they had burned Ziglag, and carried away all the Inhabitants captive. For
they being careless, eating, drinking, dancing, and not suspecting any
pursuit after them so far, were suddenly overcome by David. The Captives
were rescued, the prey recovered, and all the Enemies almost slain, and so
David returned with joy. Neither may they unadvisedly, while they be in their
Enemies Country, divide their army one part from another. This was the
destruction of the Cimbri, who being together three hundred thousand, and
having overthrown Manlius and Cepi^, two Consulls, Marius let them pass by
his Camp quietly; but afterward when for their easier march over the Alps,
(they fearing no Enemy) divided themselves into three companies; he severally
set upon them, and put them to the sword.

CHAP. XXIX. Of using religiously the Victory.
WHen God has given us the victory, we should do as did the Lords people in
old times.

They did see and acknowledge the 2 Cro: 20, 26 2 Match: 15 29 Gen: 14 20 Exodus:
15. 2. 10. Ios: 10. 12. Judge: 5. 4. and 15, 18
hand of God therein, and together blessed him for it; Melchisedech said to
Abraham when he was returned with victory, Blessed be the most high Go^, who
has delivered thine enemies into thine hand. So did Moses ascribe all to God*
likewise Joshua, Deborah, Sampson, and David. And this their acknowledgment and
thankfulness they expressed many ways; to show it to be true, hearty and
unfeigned.

I. They made rehearsal of the 2 Samuel: ^^. 18. 30 40, 41. 48 and ^^. ^0. Iud:
5. 11.
righteous acts of the Lord in particular. 2. They framed Psalms, and pious
songs of deliverance, as did Moses, Miriam, Delorah, David, and the valiant men
of Machabeus 2 Match: ^0 38.
company. 3. They would sometimes put a remarkable remembrance upon the place
where the victory was gotten giving to it a name, as David 2 Sa: 5 20.
did, calling it, Baal Per^zim, where he overcame the Philistims: So Iehosopnat
called the valley, in which 2 Chro: 10 26.
they bless God for the victory gotten, Beracah. 4. They would do outward
worship and service to God Exodus: 17. 14, 15. Ios: 8. 30. Iud: 21. 4
Moses built an Altar. upon the overthrow of Amalek. Joshua did so when he won
Ai, and so did the Israelites when they vanquished Benjamin, built an Altar
whereon they offered thanksgiving; They gave the Altar sometimes a name, as
Moses called 2 Cron: 29 26.
his Iehuva Nesse, that is, the Lord my banner. 5. They would repair to the
Temple with great joy and rejoicing: as did Iehosophat and the people 1 Match:
4. 26. and 5. 54. 2 Match: 8. 27.
and he before them; so did Judas and his army, carefully keeping the Sabbath,
yielding exceeding praise and thanks unto God. Yea, the heathen Philistims
would after victory honor their Idols, and had their Priests to make speeches
thereof, as we now do sermons unto the people in their Temples. 6. They by
their 1 Sa: 30. 9.
victories were the more moved to advance true Religion, and to root out
Idolatry, (mark this.) Thus did Asa and Judah with him, upon the victory
obtained against Zerah the Ethiopian; 2 Cro: 15.
and after the Sermon preached by Azariah the Prophet the son of O^ed, they put
away the abominable Idols, they entered into covenant to seek the Lord, and
confirmed it with an oath; and that with great joy, and vprightnes of heart,
Asa hereupon put down Ma^chah his mother from being Queen: because she was an
Idolatresse, whose Idol in a grove be cut down stamped it, and burnt it in the
fire, so dealt David with the Images 2 Sa. 5. 21.
of the Philistims after his victory; he did not foolishly as Amaziah 2 Cro: 25
did, who having subdued the Edomites, took their Idols and set them up
inludah to be worshipped, both to his own ruin and the destruction of the
people. 7. They took of the prey Number: 3 50
and spoils, and thereof first offered part unto God for his service; the
Captains of thousands and Captains of hundreds, in their great victory over
the Kings of Midian, gave freely, besides 700 and odd head of cattle, of gold,
jewels, eare-rings bracelets, rings and such like, to the value of A shekel is
2 ^ 6^.
16750 shekels. Ioab David's General dedicated something unto God, and so other
valiant worthies offered of 2 Sa: 8. 11.
the spoils. So David gave to God very much of his victories. In like Genesis 14.
20
manner did Abraham unto Melchisedech, the Priest of God. Thus these valiant
warriors respected Religion and Gods service, and therefore offered for the
maintenance thereof. As also for the Lords Priests and for the places wherein
God was served, and not herewith contented, we may read what care some had of
the poor, for Judas Machabens gave of 2 Match. 8. 2^.
the spoils to the maimed, to widows and Orphans; so these valorous
worthies spent not all they got upon themselves in braverie of apparel, much
less any of it in gluttony, drunkenness, whoring, nor did they basely hoord
up all to enrich themselves. To these courses valiant 1 Match. 7. 48, 49.
spirits in those days were very strangers. 8. And lastly, they kept sometime
a day of joy and rejoicing unto the Lord for their victories obtained, and kept
it yearly; for we may and Psalm: 58. 10 Pro: 11. 10. Rev: 18. 20. Ier: 51: 48,
49,
ought to rejoice over our enemies subdued, and with joyful triumphing praise
the Lord our God. And thus should we use religiously our victories.

CHAP. XXX. Of the Generals carriage toward the persons conquered, and
toward their Country when he has obtained a full Victory.
Victory as the heathen Orator says, Est sem per infolons, it makes
mansheart haughty, if the Conqueror does not know how to subdue his corrupt
nature, if he remember not the instabilitie of things here below; that he
which is to day victorer, may to morrow be vanquished, if the great commander
and Ruler of hosts be so pleased to alter the course.

The people of God, sometimes dealt with the subdued enemies very severely; but
this was upon some special charge from God so to do; as we may see in Isreal's
dealing with Ogg, and S^hon, with all the Kings of Canaan and their people, as
also in Saul's destroying of Amalek, these by Gods commandment were utterly to
be destroyed. Upon special reason we may read how David took a sharp course
with the Ammonites, in putting them under sawes, iron Harrowes, axes of iron,
and made 2 Samuel: 12 31.
them pass through brick-kills: because they had violated the law of Nations
in abusing his messengers, Cap: 10. 2. 6.
maliciously perverting his honest meaning: They also first prepared war
against him, gathering mighty powers, of the neighboring countries against him
causelessly; they caused hereby war between Verse. 15. 18
David and Hadarezer; they were abominable Idolaters in offering their
children to the Idol Molech; and therefore they wilfully standing out, till
perforce the City of Rabbah Deuteronomy: 20. 12, 13.
was taken by the law of Moses, their males were to be put to death, if their
offense had been no greater.

But commonly Generals after victory should not be without humanity; but show
clemency and mercy. To be cruel is a sign of a savage nature. Elisha only
foreseeing the brutish cruelty which Hazael would use against the Israelites,
made him 2 King: 8.
to weep, yea Hazael himself seemed so to detest such inhumane carriage, as
he asked Elisha, whether he held him to be a dog or no. Oded the Prophet
condemns 2 Cro. 28. 9.
the merciless slaughter that* Israel made of Judah in one day, Pity and
compassion is therefore to be showed, and respect had to all sorts Ezekiel. 39. 11
both of the dead and the living. First for the dead, they were allowed
burial; Ios. 10. 27. and 8. 29 Wars of the Jews.
so shall Israel do to Gog and his multitude. The very Heathen performed this
to their slain enemies: for at the request of Scipio, Asdrubal did bury the
Roman Tribunes. Appion.
To cast out to dogs, and fowls the bodies of the slain, and Psa. 79. 2, 3
not bury them is inhuman: cruelty. As it was in Tyberius forbidding to bury
the dead, or to use cruelty to their bodies, as the King of Moab did to the
dead body of the Amos 2. 1
King of Edom, which he burned with fire in lyme, for which God threatened his
destruction. Again, concerning the dead, when they are looked upon, it must be
with humane Tatit in Ann el. (...) ^^.
compassion; The Israelites did weep for Benjamin, because they were
destroyed. It Is recorded of Epaminondas the Theban; that when he came forth the
next day after his victory, at Leuctra among his soldiers, with a sad
countenance, the cause being demanded, he answered, that he did chastise
himself for the blood that was shed. Agiselave the Lacedemonian, after his
victory at Corinth, when he saw a great number of the Corinthians and
Athenians lying slain, in sorrow cried out, woe is me for Greece, who in
civil combustion has lost so many brave soldiers. These men were not like to
Charles the ninth, in the bloody massacre in Paris, who said, oh how good is
the smell of the dead enemies. An unfit speech of a Christian, but as he
delighted in blood, so came he to a bloody end.

Now concerning the living.

I. There must be a reverend respect had of men of the Church, ever sacred by
the law of Nations. Nebuchadnezzar gave a charge to Ier. 39. 11, 12
look well to Jeremy, and to do him no hurt.

II. To keep good quarter with Ios. 1: 20
all such as do yield themselves, and to whom faith has been promised to
give them life, and to use them well: when Josephus was taken, having yielded
to Nican^^, who in the In the wars of the Jews
name of the General Vispasian promised him life, and some Romans persuaded
Vespasian to kill him, but Titus reprooved them for it, and held it treason to
moove Vespasian to break Caesarael fidelity as he called it. Cato accused
G^^ba for slaying the Lusitonians after composition made. Faithlesnes and
breach of word in this kind makes men desperate, and to sight it out as one
man to the death rather then to yield; as it did the Jews in Iorpata, when the
Romans were come into the City, not one yielded, though Josephus was fled, and
the reason is given, because they had heard how a Jew had yielded to a Roman
soldier, who had sworn to give him life, and yet afterward slew him
perfidiously. This unfaith. fulness caused also others so to deal with them; as
did the Rebel Eliezar the prime Author of the last wars of the Jews, and
their utter destruction with a valiant Roman, who had upon Eliezers oath
yielded himself

III. To show mercy to prisoners and Captives, and note to be bloodthirsty:
The Israelites did not 2 Kings 6. 22 2 Chronicles* 28. 15.
slay such as they took captives: but showed mercy and great compassion unto
the lame, poor, and wounded, so mercy should b^e showed to women, children,
and old folks. To sley all that are taken, as once the Lacedaemonians did of
the Athenians, and the Athenians of them, is great cruelty, and inhumane, of
which at length they will be made to repent, as those two sorts did, as
Thu^idides writes. To slay poor Thucid.
prisoners in cold blood is a note of a savage and implacable nature. But here
is to be excepted, such prisoners taken as do deserve justice to be executed
upon them, as did Agag 1 Samuel: 15 32, 33.
the King of the Amale kites, as also such great ones, as have caused
rebellion, as the Princes of Judah did, who counseled Zedekiah to hold out
Ier: 39. 5, 6
against Nabuchadnezer, contrary to his oath, and the word of God deliver by
Ier^my: These Nabuchadnezzar took and gave sentence upon them. Also when there
is treachery found in the Captives, or just cause of fear, if the Enemy
should make head against them, that then they would help to work the
Conquerour^ destruction, in such a case Caesar^ Hist de ^^h H^span.
soldiers at Munda in Spain flew their prisoners, and so did the English
theirs at Poytiers.

IV. Among Captives and prisoners to consider persons according to their
qualities; and to respect them according to their place, as Prince Edward did
King John of Frace his prisoner, attending him at his Table. And as Tamberlaine
did Baiazel whom first he went out to meet, then brought him into his own
Tent, and set him down to meat with himself, and did him all the honor he
possibly could, till the proud Tyrant provoked him to deal with him, as he
would have done with Tamberlaine, had he been the Conqueror. Great Princes and
Commanders should consider what may befall themselves. It was Tyrant-like in
Adonibezek to use kings Iud. 1, 7
as dogs, and cruelly to handle them, in cutting off their thumbes and great
toes: but he was rewarded thereafter. It was too great height of heart for King
Edgar to be rowed over the river of Do by seven Kings; Tyranes the King of
Armenia, was too much puffed up to make so ^re Kings to wait at his Table: but
most unmindful of mutabil^ty and regal majesty was Sesostris who made Kings
to draw his Chariot: and most inhumane was Albonius a King of the Lombards, who
vanquished Cu^emed^^ a King of Iepidi, slew him, and of his skull made a
quaffing Cup. We read how Joshua commanded his Captains to tread upon the
necks of Kings; but that was extraordinary, and it was upon such as they were
commanded to kill, whose posterity they were to root out. Nabuchadnezzar did
put out the eyes of Zedekiah, but he was a perjured wretch having contrary to
his oath rebelled, when Nabuchadnezzar had made him King.

After victory gotten in the Field over their persons, the Army being
sufficient, and a Conquering host; the Generals in old time were wont to make
use of their victories in the Country.

I. They took the Cities of the Enemies from them, as Abijah did from
Jeroboam after the battle fought Bethel, Ieshanah, and Ephraim, with the Towns
belonging to them. Hannibal should have gone to Rome upon his victory at
Cannas. When Scipio overthrew Hannibal, he forthwith went to Carthage, which
made presently composition with him.

II. They set strong garrisons among 1 Sa: 13. 3 and 10. 5. and 14. 2. 4. 2 Sa.
8. 6.
them, as the Philistims did in Israel, and David did in Syria of Damascus, to
keep the people under; and while the army is abroad to have places of safe
retreat,

III. They disarmed them to keep them from rebellion, when they intended to
hold them in subjection. Thus did the Philistims with 2 Samuel: 13 19. 22.
Israel, and Cyrus thus used the Lidians: for upon such a course taken a Herod.
less force may serve to hold the Country in obedience.

IV. They removed their King sometime, and placed another over them; thus dealt
Pharao Nec^o with Iehoahaz King of Judah, he carried 2 King. 23 33, 34.
him away Prisoner, and made Eliakim King in his stead. In like sort
Nabuchadnezzar with Iehoiachim, in 2 Kings 24, 17.
whose room he placed Zedekiah; yea they have translated most the
inhabitants, and sometimes placed other of other Nations in their stead. So did
Salmaneser with the Israelites, and set a collonie in Samaria and in 2 Kings
17. 24.
Cities thereof. The Athenians taking the Island Cyth^ra from the
Lacedaemonians, removed the old Inhabitants, Thucid. 4.
and peopled it with other their friends. By peopling of Caleis with our own
Nation that Town continued long in obedience to the English; if so Rochell,
Poytiers, Burdeanx, and other places had been, we had not so lost France
perhaps as we have.

CHAP. XXXI. Of the Generals carriage toward his own Army, State and Country.
HE that is of an honorable disposition to others, he cannot but ^e worthily
disposed toward his own, and to the honor of his King and Country. A worthy
Comman^er will take the sum of the host, to see who are lacking and not
lightly pass it by, but at the death of valiant and serviceable men to do^
Number. 31, 10
them honor being dead, as David did Abner. And to cause that all the slain
be buried.

II. To have a great care in a special manner to the sick, ^aimed and wounded,
that they perish not, nor being brought home, to be neglected, so as they be
forced to beg like Rogues, but that some convenient allowance be provided, till
they can recover, and be able to live by honest labor.

III. It was the manner of r^nowned Christians to take diligent heed that all
their whole army did behave themselves worthy the victory; Charles the great
after victory, in the long wars against the Lombards and Saxons, was pleased
to call his Soldiers Nobles, and Kings fellows, charging them to carry
themselves as Kings over their own corruptions, which if they did a^ g^n^^ous
spirits, he promised to maintain them, and account the injuries done to them,
as done unto himself: but if they did let loose their raines to disorder,
shame they should have for honor, and suffer punishment as a due reward.
Frederick the Emperor after his victory over the Gunzians in Hungary, said
thus to his soldiers, you have done a great work, my soldiers, but yet there
remains a greater, to overcome your selves, and not become through the
victory, insolent, cruel, and revengefull. They may not be given to
drunkenness, as Elah King of Israel was, as was Be^hadad with his 32 Kings, as
was Alexander the great at length to his everlasting dishonor; nor to Luxury,
as H^^ibal was at Capua, by which he received more hurt, then all the Romans
could do him; neither defile themselves with women; nor abuse captive maids,
no^ matrons.

IV. The worthy valiant and such as have done good service are to be
encouraged. 1. In giving them due praises, as David his worthies had, every 2 Samuel: 23
one after his desert; and as David cap. 26.
himself had after his desert; and as David himself had after his sleying of
Goliath. 2. In rewarding them; The Romans did many ways return their worthy
Valiants, as is before noted; Some had honor bestowed upon them, some money
and lands, some had places given them, some titles and names; great care was
had by one means or other to reward the well deserving.

V. As care is to be had to reward the worthy; so the ill deserving, and such
as be worthy of punishment should surely have it; this the Romans did not
forget, when the wars were ended. The great Ones felt their displeasure;
Fulvius was banished, Liv^
because through negligence his Army was discomfited by Hannibal, at Herdonea.
M. Posthumous had a mighty fine set upon his head, for that the Romans at V^ii
were overthrown through his default; Rutili^s spared not his own son, Val.
man
who by his negligence lost the Castle of Tarentum in Sicily.

VI. A worthy General, is to have care of dividing the spoil, and using of it
aright. 1. That in it justice be observed, that what belongs to one, may not
be given to another. This care had Abraham, that wha^ belonged to his
Confederates they should have. Scipio restored diverse things to the Sicilians;
which he found in the sacking* of Carthage, and had been taken from them. The
Romans took not that for spoil which did belong to their friends and
Confederates. David had a care in 1 Samuel 20. 20. 25.
this to order the spoil in giving to those that kept the stuff, as well as
to those, that went forth to fight. 2. That charity be showed first unto such
of their own as be in misery by reason of the war, the wounded, and lame:
Great reason is that these be pitied, and made partakers with the sound and
whole in the spoil. Then to manifest charity also 2 Chro. 28 15.
to such of the Enemies, as stand in extreme need, whom the General is pleased
to send away, as did worthily the Nobles of Israel, to the miserable captives;
And after this to reserve some portion among them for their poor at home,
poor widows, Orphans, and other impotent by age or sickness. As Judas
Machabeus and his Army did. 3. To 2 Mac: 8 28
show gratitude and thankfulness unto friends, this is no^ to be neglected;
David forgot not this; as you may read in 1 Samuel 30. 26. to the end of the
chapter. Thus did Scanderbeg send of the spoils of the Turkish army led by
Isaac Bassa which came with Amase Scanderbegs Nephew with 50000 horse to subdue
Epyrus. 4 Piety may not be omitted, Number: 31
but that some part be for Gods service, as before has been noted, in the
example of the Israelites: among the Romans to uphold their wars it was a
custom for the Generals Cap: 29
to bring into the public treasury of the spoils, as did Furius, Live: 30.
34, 35.
Helvius, Minutius, Cato, Scipio, Aemilius Paulus, and others.

Lastly, a General is to be wary and wise in dismissing of his Army, least he
do as King Demetrius did who procured hatred of his Fathers 1 Match. 38 39, 40.
55.
forces. Of which one Tryphon took occasion to lift up young Antiochus against
him, with who^ against Demetrius the foresaid dismissed forces took part. A
discontented Army set at liberty may do very much mischief, as those of
Israel did which 2 Ch: 25. 10-13
were sent home by Amaziah; they fell upon the Cities of Judah, smote three
thousand and carried away much spoil. Therefore must there be special
wisdom in this point, especially, if there be spied any such Tryphon among
them.

CHAP. XXXII. Of some things concerning those that be vanquished, and how they
should demean themselves.
IT is an excellent praise in such as be put for the present to the worse, not
to lose their wisdom nor valor.

Their wisdom in flying must ^each them to watch advantages given by the
pursuer, to mark his, it may be, over hasty following, or disorder therein, or
scattered companies or too suddenly, or untimely turning to the spoil; or the
slack pursuit, giving them that fly leave to breath, and to gather together,
that by some of these advantages, they may make head upon the pursuers; and so,
perhaps turn the course of present loss and defeature, into an unexpected
victory over the Victorers.

Their wisdom must also teach them, when they have escaped by flight, seeming
far enough, yet then not to be secure and careless, as not yet out of danger
of an hot pursuing enemy, who may follow them farther then they would imagine;
as Gideon did the two Kings of Mid^an, Zebah and Salman^ah, whom he Judge* 8. 10.
followed to Karkor, where they and their host of fifteen thousand remained
secure, which he utterly* discomfited, and took the Kings Prisoners, who might
have escaped, had they not been over careless, not fearing any other pursuit
of them after the slaughter of Oreb and Zeb, and 120000 with them that drew
sword.

As they may not lose their wits; to be as men amazed, distracted, and without
understanding; so may they not lose their valor, nor be daunted when they be
taken, and fall into the Conquerours hands: Base dejection of spirit befitteth
not a soldier; the truly noble heart will not debase himself below his worth;
drunken Benhadad foolishly proud in his prosperity 1 Kings 20. 16. 31, 32.
did slavishly in adversity humble himself, in sending his servants clothed in
sackcloth, with ropes about their heads in his name to beg life. King Perseus
being taken by Paulus Aemilius, fell down very basely on his face before him,
held up his hands and as one of a womanish heart with tears cried
forgiveness; upon whom Aemilius did look with a stern countenance, and told
him, that he was a miserable man, indeed, and more worthy to be a Captive, then
a King, holding himself without glory in conquering so unworthy an Adversary,
and one of no worth. Josephus took a Roman Captain belonging to V^spasian,
and commanded Wars of the Jews.
both his hands to be struck off, and he sent so to the enemy: but the Captain
said to Josephus, I beseech thee my Lord, let me lose but one; for which suite
Josephus and his soldiers laughed him to scorn, and judged him to be
therefore no valiant man, nor of a haughty courage.

The chief Commanders taken Prisoners should be of unconquerable spirits, like
King Po^us* that would Q. Curti^^
not acknowledge himself vanquished by Great Alexander, though he had lost the
field, and almost wounded to death: Or like Cato* who being persuaded to submit
to Caesar, said, it was for the conquered and delinquent so to do, but Cato
had not behaved himself so in all his life as one ever either conquered or
taken; Its recorded of Fra^ci^ the first, that being taken Captive by Burbou,
yet he showed such inbred majesty in his countenance, speech, and behavior, as
made his very enemies honor him no less, then, as if he had been in the top
of prosperity; such great courage and magnanimity of heart should be in a
soldiers breast.

They may not lose their quiet patience, which is not a stupidity or
senselessness of the present misery; but a willing constant bearing of the
burden: They may not poison themselves as Mithridates did, nor like a*
cowardly Saul, (as Josephus held him* for that act) nor as his Armor-bearer)
slay themselves; nor rage and swear, and curse, foaming out the filth of their
furious natures, blaspheming heaven it self for the overthrow, as some have
done: Nor by quaffing down the cups, and potts of strong drink to make
themselves senseless of their calamity, nor as Valence the Emperor, fly upon
his religious and valiant General, one Traian, with base terms of cowardice;
nor as Israelites murmr against 1 Sa: 4. 3.
God, and say, why has the Lord smitten us this day, before the Philistims? As
if God had not just cause so to do. Nor as Cato, foiled by Caesar, to say that
a great deal of mist was over the eye of divine providence. Impatiency of
loss should not make men guilty of such blasphemy. Christian soldiers should
be religious, as before is showed, and in their overthrow they have need of it,
to work this royal virtue of patience, and to manifest other graces in their
defeature and overthrow; For now religion requires,

I. That they should acknowledge their overthrow to be the very hand of God; as
the Scripture teaches, Amos 3. 6. 1 Samuel: 2, 3, Iud: 4. 2. 1 Samuel: 4. 3. Esaias
42. 24 Ier: 18. 17. and 12. 7. Lam: 2. 3. 1 Kings. 20. 23.
as the Lords people have acknowledged; as God himself said he would do; and
did unto them: They are not to ascribe their loss as the Syrians did to the
hills; nor to the disadvantage of the place; nor to man's rash attempts or
oversight, nor to this man's sloth, and negligence, nor another treachery, nor
to their small number, nor to any secondary means whatsoever, which yet no
doubt may all concur therein; but unto Gods hand upon them. They Bell. G^l.
may not with Caesar ascribe it to fortune, nor to chance as the Philistims
did, nor to destiny as the Stoics, nor to Planets, as idle starr-gazers, nor
to any power, but Gods from heaven. When Xerxes with his so huge an host was
overthrown, Mardon^us the Persian his General ascribed it to Gods will, and
said, what God would have done, none was able to avert.

II. In acknowledging it to be Lam: 3. 3^. Number: 1. 42 43.
Gods hand, they must confess it to be for sin; For otherwise, God does not
afflict, nor grieve willingly* any of the Children of men. Therefore Esaias 42. 24
said Esaias, the Lord gave Jacob to the spoil, and Israel to the robbers,
because they had sinned against him. When Valence the wicked Emperor* blamed
Trai^n for the foil, Traian Niceph^ Eccle. Hist.
was bold to tell him, that it was his warring against God, in persecuting
De^: 28, 25
of good Christians that gave his enemies the victory. God threatens overthrow
in battle for sin.

III. In confessing of it to be for sin, religion teaches them to humble
themselves for their sins; to acknowledge 2 Ch^on^ 12. 6.
God to be righteous, as did Rehoboam, yea and as did the cruel Canaanitish
King, Ado^ib^z^k, who said, that as he had done, God Iud. 1, 7
had rewarded him.

The people of Israel upon their Iud: 20: 23 26.
losses received, humbled themselves with fasting, prayers, and tears, so
often as they had the foil: yea that Ios: 7. 6, 7
most renowned worthy valiant Joshua, when the Israelites were chased by the men
of Ai, (though the loss was small, only thirty men slain) yet he took it to
heart, fell to humbling of himself, to fasting and prayer for the same, with
the Elders of Israel, and when he knew the sin for which God was offended, he
found out the party and rewarded him with death, that had caused by his sin;
the death of the slain, and the Enemy to get the victory. Thus should worthy
Generals do; Esaias reproves it as Esaias 42: 25
an evil in the people, when the strength of the battle was against them, and
they beaten* that they did not lay it to heart. Alas for our times, where in
too many mock at such humiliations, scorn with disdain to be so cast down,
for the lives of men. They know not, that this is in them, great contempt of
Gods displeasvre: Its not so much the loss of men, which those Valiants
bewailed, as for sin, the cause of the defea^e; for Gods absence from them in
his anger, giving them into the power of the Enemy; for the Enemies pride and
triumph over Gods people; for the dishonor which comes to God thereby: for
these things, Joshua 2 Samuel 1. 11. 17-26.
mourned, David wept, and other very valiant men lamented; and not only for
the death of the slain. And yet in their sorrows they neglected not to think
of these as David did, even of his Enemy Saul, and his sons, with his faithful
friend Jonathan; being much grieved for the rejoicing of the Philistims, Gods
Enemies when they should know thereof: This did he lay to heart; as we should
the Enemies of God, his Church, and his people, glorying over us, at this day,
as if God had utterly forsaken us.

But there is hope, if we will seek Gods favor, cut off sin, repent, and be
reformed; for do we not read, how after Iosua's humiliation, Ios: 8.
God was with him in the victory; and we may find upon the Israelites true
repentance, their deep sorrow, with abundance of tears, their putting away of
Idols; and preparing of their hearts to serve God; after their 1 Samuel: 7. 3
miserable overthrow, and the great slaughter of the people; when Hophni and
Phineas were slain, the Arc taken, and 30000 put to the sword; how graciously
did God look upon Cap: 4: 10: ^^.
them took Isreal's part, and thundered with a great thunder upon the
Philistims, and so discomfited them, Cap* ^: 10
that from that time they came no more into the Coasts of Israel.

Therefore to make a conclusion, Oh you valiant hearts, you truly v^lorous, you
sons of the worthy, you undaunted spirits, yet religious, yet faithful, yet
chaste yet just in your man i^esse* yet full of humanity, even to the enemy,
and truly respectfull of your own companions, yea, and common soldiers,
fellows in affliction* do well, be reconciled to God* crave his aid and he
being with you, go forth with confidence, and prosper. Even so Amen.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
WHich for with page 3 line ^4. Then for their line 12. as for is pa: 18. l.
21. have for hat^ pa: 27. li: 18. Munidians for Numi^ians pa. 70 li. 7. Add
men pa. 75. li: 15* in^^ for infinite. s^isime for s^ism: pa: 72. li: 7. armie^
for arm^s pa: 68. li: 2. Put out And though pa: 92. li. 15. you for them pa 9^.
li 28. Narminius for Harm^n^u^ p: 128. l. 9. need for h^ed p: 142 l: 17. Pu^
out b^ p: 158. l: 9. and mer. l. 11. Add evil p. 162. l. 15. hake for l^ke p.
194: l 20 holden for helped p. 190. li: 4. ar for as p: 199. l. 24. Inulia for
Iuli^^ p. 203. l: 8. Add for p. 204. l. 18. Put out him l. 8. One for a p.
230* l: 6 Salanus for Salamis p: ^07. l: 12. Numida for Munda p. 104. l. 12.


