A Commentary OR EXPOSITION UPON THE FIRST Chapter of the Prophecy of AMOS.

Delivered In XXI. Sermons in the Parish Church of MEYSEY-HAMPTON in the
Diocese of Gloucester.

BY SEBASTIAN BENEFIELD Doctor of Divinity, and fellow of Corpus Christi
College in OXFORD.

EPHESIANS. 5.16. Redeem the time, because the days are evil.

LONDON, Printed by John Hauiland, and are to be sold by Hugh Perry at the
Harrow in Britains Burse. 1629.

THE PREFACE TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
Gentle Reader,
THese Sermons were provided for the Pulpit, not intended for the Press. Yet,
since I live in a prodigal age of the world, wherein too many with their
unprofitable, if not obscene Pamphlets, do run Ad prel^m tanquam pralium.
to the Press, as a horse to the battle, and are entertained with applause; I
have the more willingly now published them to thy view. Thou will say: There is
already great store of Sermons abroad; more than we can well use. I deny it
not. Yet to the fullness of this Sea I add more, and repent not. Is abundance
a burden to thee? If thy soul may be fed with variety, as well by the eye as
by the ear, have thou any reason to find fault? But weak stomachs may surfeit
at the sight of too much. Let such favor their eyesight. They may easily
look off, and please themselves with their old choice. There is no reason that
their daintiness should prejudice that profit, which others might reap from
this abundance. We that are called to be laborers in the Lords Harvest, must
resolve with the Lord of the Harvest. His resolution was, Ioh. 9.4.
I must work the works of him that sent me while it is day: the night
comes, when no man can work. Our day is our life time; the only time for us
to work in. If now, in this our day time, we will in stead of working, only
treasure up knowledge in our hearts, as that Hoarder in the Cap. 11.26.
Proverbs did his Corn in his storehouse; or will wrap up the gifts, wherewith
God has blessed us, in waste Papers, as the slothful servant in the Luke
19.20.
Gospel did his Talent in a Napkin; the night will come upon us and we shall
not work. Suffer us therefore, while it is our day, to work. Our work
consists in the preaching of the Gospel. The Gospel is preached as well
Ambo verbum praedicant, hic quidem scripto, ille vero voce. Clem. Alexan.
stromat. lib. 1. interpret Gentiano Herueto, p. 57. edit. Basil. in fol. An.
1556. and paulo post. Praedicandi sci^^tia est quodammodo Angelica, vtrouis
modo inuans, seu per manum, s^u per linguam operetur. There is not any thing
publicly notified but we may in that respect rightly and properly say it is
preached, Luke 8.39. and 12.3. Ho^k^r Eccl Pol^t. l. 5.. 18 p. 28. Moses and
the Prophets, Christ and his Apostles were in their times all Preachers of Gods
truth; some by Word, some by Writing, some by Both. Hooker ibid.. 19. page 29.
The Apostles in Writing, are not untruly nor unfitly said to preach. Hooker
lib. 5.. 21. page 39. vide ibid. plura. Euangelizo Manu, and Scriptione,
Rainold de Romans Eccles. Ido^^lat. Praef. ad Com. Essex. page 7.
by writing as by speaking; as well by p^n as by tongue. The word spoken, for
the time is most piercing, but the letter written is of most continuance. I
shall account it my happiness, if I may do good both ways. My place in that
worthy Foundation, whereof I am an unworthy member, wearing me out in the
reading of Humanity, now the fourteenth year, has hindered me from doing
that good I wished to have done, the one way by my speaking by my tongue. If
the other way, by my writing by my pen, I may redeem the time past, and by
these my poor labors may do some good, not only to The inhabitants of M^isey
Hampton, Marston, and Dunfield, in the Diocese of Gloucester.
them, among whom I first sowed this seed, but also to other Congregations of
my Country, I have enough. If (dear Christian) thou find in these my Sermons
the same things iterated, marvel not thereat; I have my Prophets warrant for
it. He in this first Chapter repeateth the same things five times over. May not
I after his ensample do it once or twice? I must profess unto thee (good
Christian) that my chief intent in this Commentary is the destruction of
sin. If to any of the learned, I seem to have failed of my purpose, my
earnest desire is, that they will be pleased to take the pains to amend it.
The rest, who to this poor labor of mine shall afford their gracious and
favorable good liking, I heartily entreat to help me with their godly
prayers, that this work and whatsoever else of like kind I shall hereafter
attempt to publish to the censure of the world, may wholly redound to the glory
of God, and good of his Church. Now the God of peace, that brought again from
the dead our Lord Jesus, that great Shepherd of the sheep through the blood of
the everlasting covenant, sanctify thee thorowout, that enjoying the peace of
thy conscience in this world, thou may hereafter have full fruition of that
eternal peace of God in Hea^^n.

Thine unfeignedly in the Lord, for thy good, S. B.

THE First Lecture.
AMOS 1.1. The words of Amos, who was among the heardmen at Tekoa, which he saw
upon Israel, in the days of Vzziah King of Judah, and in the days of Jeroboam
the son of Ioash King of Israel, two years before the earthquake.


ONE of the Pharisees in the Gospel, as if he were unwilling to be ignorant
in so weighty a matter, as is man's salvation, in a tempting manner asked Christ
this question: Master, what shall I do to inherit eternal life? Our Savior
for answer put forth another question, and said, What is written in the Law,
how read thou? Luke 10.26. Where we may note that the Law is written for man
to read, that so he may be instructed, what he is to do in discharge of his
duty toward God.

The rich man in Hell, prayed Abraham that ^^^rus might be sent unto his
fathers house to testify unto hi^ (...) brethren, lest they also should come
into that place ^^ torment. To whom Abraham answered, They have Moses a^^ (...)
Prophets* let them hear them, Luke 16.29. The parable teaches us thus much,
that unless we delight in hearing the word preached, we shall never attain to
the means of escaping eternal torments. Two notable uses of the word of God,
Reading, and hearing; They lead man as it were by the hand to the very point of
his felicity. For what more blessed than to possess eternal life? Yet was the
Pharisee taught, that by reading of the law li^e eternal might be purchased.
And is it not a blessed thing to be freed from Hell torments? Yet was the rich
man told by Abraham, that his five brethren by hearing of Moses and the
Prophets, might be saved.

It was a settled opinion of Deuteronomy 8 3.
old, though uttered in fullness of time by our Mat. 4 4. Luc. 4.4.
Savior, that a man lives not by bread only, but by every word that
proceeds out of the mouth of God. The truth of which is confirmed by the
practice of godly men in former ages. I will not trouble you with many
instances. Many and excellent were the revelations which God gave unto the
Prophet Daniel, yet notwithstanding all them, as himself witnesses cap. 9.2.
he omitted not the reading of the Prophecy of Jeremy. Much doubtless for the
spiritual food of his own soul: yet for our ensample also, that we should be
conversant in the Scriptures too. It was a worthy commendation which Luke gave
the Beroeans, Act. 17.11. for that as soon as they had heard the word preached
by S. Paul, they diligently conferred the scriptures, to know whether it were
so, or no; and thereby confirmed themselves in the truth which they had heard.
This their zeal and diligence, should stir us up also, for the confirmation
of our faith upon the hearing of the word, to search the scriptures. That great
heathen Lord, Queen Candaces Eunuch: as he was riding on the high way in his
chariot, did read the Prophet Esaias, and the Lord of heaven had regard unto him
for it, Act. 8.28. So Daniel by reading, the Beroeans, and the Eunuch by
reading and hearing of the word, were spiritually fed, and nourished unto
everlasting life.

To these holy exercises both of reading and hearing the scriptures, the
scriptures are full of exhortations, fit for all estates: for Unbelievers, that
they would search the scriptures, because in them they think to have eternal
life, and they do testify of Christ, Ioh. 5.39. for Believers; that besides
other parts of their spiritual armor, they would take unto them the sword of
the spirit, which is the word of God, Ephesians. 6.17. for young men; that they would
rule themselves after the word of God, and so cleanse their ways, Psalm. 119.9.
for all men, that they would meditate in the law of God day and night, Psalm.
1.2.

Now, that the scriptures, the sword of the spirit, the word and law of God
might be much used to the dividing asunder of the soul and the spirit, of
ioints and marrow, it was decreed in a Nicena Synodus decretu suis cauit ne
quis ^ numero Chri^^anorum sacris Bibliorum lib^^^ careret. Corn. Agrippa de
Van. Scient. cap^ ^^. De verbo Dei.
council of Nice; that no house should be without the holy Bible: which In
capite Je^^nij. Sieve de Tempore Sermon. 55. Feria quarta post dominicam in
Quinquagesima. Sic etiam author Sermonum ad fratres in Eremo, Sermon. 56. Non
vobis debet sufficere, quod in Ecclesia lectiones diuinas audiatis, sed in
domibus, and in conuiniis vestris, and quando dies breues sunt, etiam aliquibas
horis in no^^ ^^ctioni diuinae debetis ins^stere. Vt in horreo cordi^ vestri
spiritale possitis triticum comparare, etc. ^^ Homil. 2. upon Esai.
S. Austen also intended, saying: Nec solum sufficiat, quod in Ecclesia diuinas
lectiones auditis, sed etiam in domibus vestris, aut ipsi legite, aut alios
legentes requirite. Let it not content you to hear the holy scriptures read
unto you in the church only: but in your houses also at home, either read them
your selves, or cause other to read them. Vtinam omnes faceremus quod scriptum
est: scrutamini scripturas. It ise Origens: Would to God we all did as it is
written, search the scriptures. Chrysostom Homil. 9. upon the Epistle to the
Colossians.
says, Comparate vobis biblia animarum pharmaca, seculares: Ye lay m^^ get you
Bibles, for they are medicines of your souls. Whereof the godly and first
christened Emperor Constantine was well persuaded, who therefore gave Eusebius.
de vita Constantini, lib. 4. cap. 36. Theodorit. Hist. Eccles. lib. 1. cap. 16.
commandment that the Bible should be written out, and sent abroad into all
the kingdoms, countries, and cities of his dominion. And what other might the
persuasion of Iewe^. Reply Art. 15.. 13. and 16. and Babington upon the Lords
prayer, page ^5. Before this, K. Alfred began to translate the Psalter into
English etc. Fox in Mary^^ ^dan. 899. ex Guliel. de Regib. Ang.
king Adlestane here in England be, when he caused the Bible to be translated
into the English tongue, that all might read it?

The much preaching and often reading of Gods holy word in the congregations of
this land in the days of her, whom of late you loved, Queen Elizabeth, have
set up and established her never dying praises. And is not God much to be
blessed for our good Josiah, our most dread Soueraign, King James? His heart is
from above replenished with a religious zeal to free the passage of Gods most
holy Gospel. His desire to have God sincerely worshipped throughout this land,
is made known by the good order he has taken to set before you, and all other
his liege people, Gods word, if possible, in greatest purity. Let God be with
the workmen, I mean, the Translators of the old and new testaments; This
sermon was preached in the year of our Lord 1605. Nou. 3. Since the
Translation is perfected and published; the exactest that ever this Land had.
Let God be with them in their holy labors; and let the remembrance of our
King for it, be like the composition of the perfume that is made by the art of
the Apothecarie.

Hitherto (beloved) I have by way of preface exhorted you to the reading and
hearing of Gods word; and I doubt not of your obedience to it. Yet if any of
you shall except against the reading of it for the hardness of the phrase,
being of the Eunuchs mind, Act. 8.31. that you cannot understand what you
read except you have a guide; let it be your comfort, that his Majesty in
giving his royal assent to those laudable Canons, and Constitutions
Ecclesiastical, agreed upon in the latek Synod at London, Begun at London,
Anno Do^. 1603.
has by the 45. and 46. canons, provided guides for you, such as are soberly,
and sincerely to divide the word of truth to the glory of God, and the best
edification of his people.

And now it being my lot to be sent unto you, to you I bring an inestimable
pearl, the word of the Lord, which the Prophet Amos saw upon Israel. In
dividing it, I promise you in the words of Paul, 2 Cor. 12.19. by the help of
God, to do all things for your edifying. Wherefore (beloved) give ^are I
beseech you, with reverent regard and attention to the word of the Lord, as it
is written, Amos 1.1.

The w^^ds of Amos, who was among the heardmen at Tekoa, which he saw upon
Israel, in the days of Vzziah King of Judah, and in the days of Jeroboam the
son of Ioash King of Israel, two yea^^ before the earthquake. This first
verse we may call the title of this book, or the preface unto it. It yields
to our considerations sundry circumstances.

1 The Prophets name, Amos. 2 His former condition of life, He was among the
heardme^. 3 The place of his usual abode, Tekoa. 4 The matter or argument of
his Prophecy, implied in these words, The words which he saw upon Israel. 5
The time of his Prophecy, In the days of Vzziah, King of Judah, and in the
days of Jeroboam the son of Ioash King of Israel, two years before the
earthquake.
Amos] Epiphanius in his book of the lives and deaths of the Prophets, holds
this Amos to be Esayes father. To which opinion a learned and late Divine
Prolog. in 12. Proph. min.
Danaeus seems to give his assent. But S. Hierome is against it, and so are
most Interpreters; so also is Drusius in his sacred observations, lib. 4. cap.
21. And worthily. For as much as the Hebrew writing of these two names, (...).
the name of Esayes father, and (...).
this our Prophets name, is evidence and proof sufficient, that they were not
one but two names: and consequently not one but two men. Again Amos the father
of Esaias, is by interpretation fortis, and Hieronym. Nic. de Lyra.
robustus, stout and valiant, but Amos our Prophet is Hieron. ep. ad Paulin.
Onustus, a man burdened and laden; or Hier. Lyran.
auulsus, one that is separated from others. These diverse interpretations of
these two names, the name of Esayes father, and this our Prophets name, is
evidence and proof sufficient, that they were not one, but two names, and
consequently not one but two men. Besides Amos our Prophet is in the ancient
monuments of the Hebrews surnamed (...), id est, balbus.
a stutter^r, stammerer, or maffler, as Drusius notes upon my Text. We find
not any such surname given Esayes father. Therefore our Amos is not Amo^ the
father of Esaias. From our Prophets name let us come t^ ^s condition of life, and
vocation, expressed by himself in these words, Who was among the heardmen.

There are two sorts of heardmen: the one is of such as do use the feat and
trade of graziers, or are sheep-masters; such as have under them in pay other
heardmen, and shepherds. In this sense Mesa King of Moab, 2 King. 3.4. is
called a heardman, or shepherd; and is registered to have rendered to the King of
Israel an hundred thousand lambs, and an hundred thousand rams, with the
wool. The other sort of heardmen, is of such as are hired to keep cattle, to
see to their feeding, and safety: such we properly call heardmen, or
shepherds, and such a one was Amos our Prophet: witness himself, cap. 7.14. I
was no Prophet, neither was I a Prophets son, but I was a heardman, or
shepherd. You see now his former condition of life, profession and vocation;
see also the place where he lived.

At Tekoa] This town Lib. d^vit. Prophet.
Epiphanius ascribes to the land of Zabulon: Apud Mercerum.
R. David to the inheritance of the sons of Aser: but S. Hierome (whom with
the rest of the expositors of this book I choose to follow) places it in the
tribe of Judah, six miles southward from Bethlehem. Adrichom in his description
of the holy land says it is two miles from Bethlehem. More or less; its not
much pertinent to my present occasion. For the place it self: Tekoa is 2 Chronicles. 11.6. rehearsed among all those strong Cities which Rehoboam built in
Judah. Beyond the City Tekoa (as Saint Hierome observes) there was not any
little village, no not so much as a cottage; only there was a great
wilderness, called 2 Chronicles. 20.20. the wilderness of Tekoa; a fit place for a
shepherds walk. Here Amos for a time led a shepherds life. At length God
separated him to carry his word against Israel. Which is the fourth
circumstance of this verse, the matter or argument of this prophecy, implied
in these words.

The words of Amos which he saw upon Israel] The Hebrew manner is to call
sermons, words; as Ierem. 1.1. The words of Jeremy. And Eccles. 1.1. The words
of the Preacher. And Haggei 1.12. The words of Haggei. And Luke 3.4. The words
of Esaias. By these words we understand sermons; the sermons of Jeremy,
Ecclesiastes, Haggei, and Esaias. So here the words of Amos, are the sermons of
Amos.

Which he saw] this adiection shows that these words of Amos were committed
to him, by that kind of prophetical instinct, and motion, which is termed
vision, as Arias Montanus observes in his common disputes of the prophetical
books. Indeed vision is one of the kinds of prophecy: In which regard (as
Saul's servant bears witness, 1 Samuel 9.9.) Prophets were in the old time
called seers. Well then does Drusius expound this place; The words which Amos
saw] that is, the words which God did disclose or reveal unto Amos in a
vision. These words which Amos saw] this vision, or prophecy was concerning
Israel, upon, or against Israel.]

Upon Israel] Israel was a common name to the 12. tribes which issued out of
Jacobs loins; and was so from the beginning of Saul's reign to the end of
Salomons. After whose death a rent was made in the kingdom. Jeroboam son of
Nebat seduced 10. tribes. Rehoboam Salomons son could keep with him but two.
Thus of one kingdom, Israel, were made two: Judah and Israel. A strange
division. Israel divided from Israel: ten tribes from the other two. Two
tribes, the tribes of Judah and Benjamin, continued in their obedience to the
house of David: the other ten forsook it, and fell away. The two tribes, Judah
and Benjamin (called but one tribe, 1 King. 11.13. because of the mixture of
their possessions) these two tribes settled in their faithfulness and obedience
to the seed of David, are in holy Scripture called sometimes Amos 2.4.
Judah, sometimes Ierem. 6.1.
Benjamin, sometimes Micah. 1.1.
Jerusalem, sometimes Amos 6.1.
Sion, sometimes Zach. 12.7.
the house of David. The other ten tribes which fell away from, and forsook
their rightful King, and holy religion, have in like sort their diverse
appellations: Hos. 10.15.
Bethel, Hos. 10.5.
Bethauen, Micah. 1.1.
Samaria, Hos. 2.22.
Iesreel, Amos 5.6.
Joseph, Hos. 4.17.
Ephraim, Hos. 10.11.
Jacob, Hos. 10.1.
Israel. These are the names in the sanctified writings of the holy Prophets
appropriate to signify the 10. revolted tribes: Israel you see is one of them;
and that is the Israel in my text. Thus was Amos by the holy spirit deputed,
and directed with his message peculiarly, and properly, to the kingdom of the
10. revolted tribes; the kingdom of Israel. Some mention is made of Judah
incidently, and by the way; but the scope of the prophecy is Israel. The time,
which was my last circumstance, follows.

In the days of Vzziah King of Judah, and in the days of Jeroboam the son of
Ioash King of Israel. The time is set down in general, and in particular.
First in general, thus.

In the days of Vzziah, etc.] Vzziah, or Ozias, called also Azarias, 2 King.
14.21. succeeded his father Amazias in the throne of Judah. This he did in the
27th year of the reign of Jeroboam in Israel, as appears 2 King. 15.1. That
same Jeroboam (that you may distinguish him from a former King of the same
name) is called in my text Jeroboam the son of Ioash. Hereby we see in
general, the time of his prophecy; which is more particularly set down in
the last words, two year before the earthquake.] He means that same notable
and famous earthquake, mentioned also Zach. 14.5. Ye shall fly (says he)
like as ye fled from the earthquake in the days of Vzziah King of Judah. In
what year of Vzziahs reign this earthquake happened, it is not to be collected
out of holy scripture. Flauius Josephus, Lib. 9. antiq. Iudaie. cap. 11. says
that this earthquake happened then when King Vzziah usurping the Priests office
went into the temple of the Lord to burn incense. Ribera disproues Josephus
his judgment; and says that the earthquake happened within the fourteenth
year of the reign of Vzziah. Some do hold it was in the 22th year; And the
Hebrews (whom Funccius follows in his Chronology) do ascribe it to the 25.
year. For my part I say not in what year it happened. Why should I speak
where the holy spirit is silent? It is out of doubt that there was such an
earthquake, in the days of Vzziah, witness the Prophet Zachary: two years
after Amos had begun this prophetical function; witness Amos here in my
text.

Thus (dearly beloved in the Lord) have I briefly run over the exposition of
this first verse: let me now upon it build some doctrine, for the building up
of our selves in our holy faith. You will be pleased to remember with me, that
Amos of a heardman or a shepherd became a blessed Prophet to carry a terrible
word, and fearful message from the living God, to the King, Nobles, Priests,
and people of Israel. The doctrine to be grounded hereupon, I deliver in this
proposition; God chooses vile and despised persons, to confound the great and
mighty.

Vile and despised persons, I call such, as to the world, to humane wisdom,
and to the eye of reason are of no price, esteem, or worth. Such as Joseph
was, when he kept sheep in Canaan with his brethren, and was by them sold to
the Ismaelites, Genesis 37.2, 27. Such as Moses was, when first he was cast into
the flags, Exodus 2.1. Such as David was while he meddled with sheepfolds, and
followed the ewes great with young, Psalm. 78.70. Such as were Peter, Andrew,
James, and John, while they busied themselves about mending of nets, and
catching of fish, Matthew. 4.18.21. These, Joseph, Moses, and David, shepherds;
Peter, Andrew, James, and John, fishermen, vile and despised in the account of
the world, were chosen by the wisdom of the great God of heaven, one to be a
ruler in Egypt; another to be a leader of Gods people; the third to be a King;
the rest to be Christ's Apostles.

Hear now a word of eternal verity, and full of comfort. You shall find it,
Psalm. 113.7, 8. The Lord who is high above all nations, and glorious above the
heavens, he raises the needy out of the dust, and lifts up the poor out of
the dung, to set him with Princes. S. Paul's discourse touching this point is
more large and spacious. You shall find it, 1 Cor. 1.27, 28. God has chosen
the foolish things of this world to confound the wise, and the weak things to
confound the strong, and vile things, and things despised, and things which are
not, to bring to naught the things that are. The reason of Gods dealing thus in
the advancement of the foolish, weak, vile, despised, needy and poor, to places
of dignity, is expressed, 1 Cor. 1.29. It is, that no flesh should rejoice in
his presence, that is, that no man should glory before the Lord. In this reason
are two things worthy our religious considerations, as Musculus well observes.
For hereby our God first suppresseth and beats down the pride of flesh, and
takes from it all glory of wisdom, power and nobility; and secondly,
whatsoever glory there is of wisdom, power and nobility, he does claim and
challenge it for his own peculiar. Thus have you (dearly beloved) the
confirmation of my doctrine. The doctrine was: God chooses vile and despised
persons, to confound the great and mighty.

Be patient, I beseech you, while I point at some uses of it.

The first use is to lift up our minds to the contemplation of Gods good
providence. Poor shepherds and fishermen God exalts and aduanceth into the
highest places of dignity in Church and commonwealth. Hereby we know that
neither Empire nor Kingdom, nor place in them of dignity, prioritie, or
preeminence, Ecclesiastical or politic, is gotten by the industry, wisdom,
wit, or strength of man: but that all are administered, ruled, and governed by
the deputation and ordination of the highest power, God almighty.

A second use is to stop blasphemous mouths, such as are evermore open against
heaven, with Cic. d^nat. Deor.
Epicurus, and Cic. ibid.
Diagoras, and their adherents, to affirm that the God of heaven, in as much
as he is absolutely blessed, is not to trouble himself with cares for this
lower world: that it stands not with Gods majesty to care for the vile,
abject, and despised things of this world. This impious rabble, and Satan's
brood, do think that al things below the Moon are ruled by their blind
Goddess Fortune and by Chance.

Here must I beseech you, to let your hearts be joined with mine in the
consideration of God his sweet, and neuer-sleeping care and providence over
this lower world.

Let us not suppose our God to be a God to halfes and in part only; a God
above, and not beneath the moon: a God upon the mountains, and not in the
valleys; a God in the greater and not in the lesser employments. The holy
scriptures do teach us, that our God examineth the least moments and tittles
in the world, that we can imagine, to a 1 King. 17.14.
handful of meal; to a Ibid.
cruse of oil in a poor widows house, to the falling of Mat. 10.29.
sparrowes to the ground, to the Mat. 6.26.
feeding of the birds of the air, to the Psalm. 29.9.
caluing of hinds: to the Mat. 6.30. See my 2 Ser. on Luke 9. p. 32.
clothing of the grass of the field; to the Luke 12.7.
numbering of the hairs of our heads: to the trickling of Psalm. 56.8.
tears down our cheeks. Why then are we troubled with the vain conceits of
luck, fortune, or chance? Why will any man say, this fell unto me by good
luck, or by ill luck? by good fortune, or by misfortune? by good chance, or
by mischance?

We may and should know, that in the course of Gods providence all things are
determined and regular. This is a sure ground: we may build upon it.

The fish that came to devour Jonas, may seem to have arrived in that place
by chance; yet the scripture says, the Lord had prepared a great fish to
swallow Jonas, Ion. 1.17.

The storm it self which drove the pilots to his straight, may likewise seem
contingent to the glimse of carnal eyes; yet the Prophet says, I know that
for my sake this great tempest is upon you, Ion. 1.12.

The fish which Peter took might seem to have come to the angle by chance,
yet he brought in his mouth the tribute which Peter paid for his Lord and for
himself, Mat. 17.27.

By the diversity of the opinions among the brethren touching the manner of
dispatching Joseph out of the way, we may gather, that the selling of him into
Egypt, was but accidental, and only agreed upon by reason of the fit ariuall
of the merchants while they were disputing and debating what they were best to
do: yet says Joseph unto his brethren, you sent me not hither, but God, Genesis
45.8.

What may seem more contingent in our eyes, than by the glancing of an arrow
from the common mark, to strike a traveler that passes by the way? yet God
himself is said to have delivered the man into the hand of the shooter, Exodus
21.13.

Some may think it hard fortune, that Achab was so strangely made away,
because a certain man having bent his bow, and let slip his arrow at hap
hazard, without aim at any certain mark, 1 King. 22 34.
struck the King: but here we find no luck, nor chance at all, otherwise,
than in respect of us, for that the shoot^^ did no more than was denounced to
the King by Micheas from Gods own mouth before the battle was begun, 1 King.
22.17.

What in the world can be more casual than lottery lyet Solomon teaches that
when the lots are cast into the lap, the providence of God disposes them,
Prou. 16.33.

See now, and acknowledge with me the large extent of Gods good providence.
Though his dwelling be on high, yet abaseth he himself to behold us below.
From his good providence it is, that this day we are here met together, I to
preach the word of God, you to hear it, and some of us to be made partakers
of the blessed body and blood of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Let us
power out our souls in thankfulness before God for his blessing.

You are now invited to the marriage supper of the lamb; every one that will
approach unto it, let him put on his wedding garment. A garment nothing like
the old rags of the Gibeonites which deceived Joshua, Ios. 9.5. A garment
nothing like the suit of apparel which Micah gave once a year to his Leuite,
Iud. 17.10. A garment nothing like the soft clothing worn in kings courts,
Mat. 11.8. But a garment something like the garment of the high priest, which
had all the names of the tribes of Israel written upon his breast, Exodus 28.21.
For this your garment is nothing else but Christ put on, in whose breast and
book of merits are written and registered all the names of the faithful: but a
garment something like Elias Mantle which divided the waters, 2 King. 2.8. For
this your garment is nothing ^lse but Christ put on, who divides your sins
and punishments, that so you may escape from your enemies, sin and death: but a
garment something like the garments of the Israelites in the wilderness, which
did not wear: 40. years together they wandered in the desert, and yet says
Moses, neither their clothes nor their shoes waxed old, Deuteronomy. 29.5. For this
your garment is nothing else but Christ put on, whose righteousness lasts
for ever, and his mercies cannot be worn out.

Having put on this your wedding garment, doubt not of your welcome to this
great feast-maker. If any that hears me this day has not yet put on his
wedding garment, but is desirous to learn how to do it; let him, following S
Pa^^ his counsel, Romans 13.12. cast away the works of darkness, and put on
the armor of light: let him walk honestly as in the day, not in gluttony and
drunkenness, neither in chambering, and wantonness, nor in strife and
envying: let him take no thought for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts of it: so
shall he put on the Lord Jesus.

Psalm. 24.7.
Lift up your heads you gates, and be you lift up ye everlasting doors, that a
guest so richly apparelled may come in, and sup with the King of glory. And the
King of glory vouchsafe so to clothe us all, that those gates and everlasting
doors may lie open to us all. So at our departure from this valley of mourning,
we shall have free and easy passage into the city of God, where our
corruptible shall put on incorruption, and our mortality shall be swallowed up
of life. Even so be it, (blessed Father) for thy well-beloved son Jesus Christ
his sake, to whom with thee in the unity of the holy spirit, be all praise and
power, might and Majesty, dignity and dominion for evermore. Amen.

THE Second Lecture.
AMOS 1.2. And he said: the Lord shall roar from Sion, and utter his voice
from Jerusalem, and the dwelling places of the shepherds shall perish, and the
top of Carmel shall wither.


IN my former Sermon upon the first verse of this chapter (beloved in the Lord)
I commended to your religious considerations five circumstances.

1 Touching the Prophets name: It was Amos, not Amos Esaies father, but another
Amos. 2 Concerning his former condition of life: He was among the heardmen,
that is, he was a heardman or shepherd. 3 Of the place of his usual abode: At
Tekoa; a little village in the confines of the Kingdom of Judah, beyond which
there was not so much as a little cottage: only there was a great wilderness,
called 2 Chronicles 20.20. the wilderness of Tekoa: a fit place for a shepherds
walk. 4 About the matter or argument of this prophecy, implied in these
words: The words which he saw upon Israel. Then you heard that Amos was by the
holy spirit deputed and directed with his message peculiarly, and properly to
the 10. revolted tribes, the kingdom of Israel. 5 Of the time of the
prophecy, which I told you was set down in that verse generally and
specially. 1 Generally; In the days of Vzziah king of Judah, and in the days
of Jeroboam the son of Ioash king of Israel. 2 Specially: Two years before
the earthquak^.

After my exposition given upon those five parts of that text, I recald to your
remembrances, that Amos of a heardman, or shepherd, became a blessed Prophet to
carry a terrible word and fearful message from the living God to the king,
nobles, priests, and people of Israel. Thereupon I commended to you this
doctrine: God chooses vile and despised persons to condemn the great and
mighty.

That doctrine proved, I recommended to you the uses of it. The first was to
lift up your minds to the contemplation of Gods good providence. Poor
shepherds and fishermen God exalts and aduanceth into the highest places of
dignity in church and common wealth. This might persuade you that neither
Empire, nor kingdom, nor place in them of dignity, priority or preeminence,
ecclesiastical or politic, is gotten by the industry, wisdom, wit, or
strength of man, but that all are administered, ruled, and governed by the
deputation and ordinance of the highest power, God almighty.

The second was to stop blasphemous mouths, such as are evermore open against
the God of Heaven, to affirm, that all things below the moon, are ruled by
their blind goddess fortune and by chance. Here my desire was, that your
hearts might be joined with mine in the consideration of Gods most sweet and
never sleeping care over us in this lower world: that we would not suppose our
God, to be a God to halfes and in part only, a God above and not beneath the
Moon, a God in the greater and not in the lesser employments.

To this holy meditation I exhorted you, taught by the holy scriptures, that
our God examineth the least moments and tittles in the world, that you can
imagine, to a handful of meal, to a cruse of oil in a poor widows house;
to the falling of the Sparrowes to the ground; to the feeding of the birds of
the air; to the caluing of Hindes; to the clothing of the grass of the field;
to the numbering of the hairs of our heads; to the trickling of tears down
our cheeks. Thus far as Gods holy spirit assisted me, I led you the last
time. Now let it please you with patience and reverence to give ear to the
word of God, as it follows, verse. 2.

And he said: The Lord shall roar from Sion, and utter his voice from
Jerusalem, and the dwelling places of the shepherds shall perish, and the top
of Carmel shall wither. In this verse I commend unto you two general parts: 1
A preface to a prophecy: And he said. 2 The prophecy it self: The Lord shall
roar from Sion, etc.


In the prophecy, I must further commend unto you 3. things: 1 The Lord
speaking: He shall r^are and utter forth his voice. 2 The place from whence
he speaks: from Sion and Jerusalem. 3 The sequels of his speech. They are
two; 1 Desolation to the dwelling places of the shepherds: The dwelling places
of the shepherds shall perish. 2 Sterility and barrenness to their fruitful
grounds: The top of Carmel shall wither.



The first general part, the preface to the prophecy I must first speak
unto. And he said] He, that is, Amos: Amos the heardman, or shepherd, whose
dwelling was at Tekoa. He said; what said he? Even the words which he saw upon
Israel, that is, he spoke the words of God committed to him, by that kind of
prophetical instinct and motion which is commonly termed vision: the words of
God, which were disclosed or revealed to him in a vision; Amos spoke, but his
words were Gods words.

Here (dearly beloved) we may learn whence the holy Scriptures have their
sovereign authority. Their authority is from above, even from the Lord, whose
name is Jehovah, whose Matthew. 5.34.
throne is the heaven of heavens, and the Habak. 3.15.
sea his floare to walk in, the Esai 66.1.
earth his footstool to tread upon, who has a chair in the conscience, and
sits in the Psalm. 7.9.
heart of man, and possesses his secret reins, and diuides betwixt the flesh
and the skin, and shakes his inmost powers, as the Psalm. 29.8.
thunder shakes the wilderness of Cades.

This powerful and great Jehovah, God almighty, spoke in old time to our
fathers by the mouth of Moses, Exodus 4.12. and in the mouths of all his
Prophets, Heb. 1.1. Know this, says S. Peter in his second epistle, 1 chapter ver.
20. That no Prophecy in the Scripture is of any private motion. Mark his
reason, ver. 21. for the Prophecy came not in old time by the will of man, but
holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost. Hence sprang these
usual and familiar speeches in the books of the Prophets: The word of the
Lord came unto me: The Lord God has spoken: Thus says the Lord; and the like.

This Lord, who thus spoke in old time by his Prophets, did in fullness of
time, when he sent his Son to consummate, and perfect the work of man's
redemption, speak by his blessed Evangelists, and Apostles. This appears by
the faithful promise made them, Mat. 10.19. Take no thought how, or what ye
shall speak, for it shall be given you what ye shall say. It is not ye that
speak, but the spirit of your Father that speaks in you. It must stand for
truth in despite of all the powers of darkness, which is recorded, 2 Timothy 3
16. (...); The whole Scripture, and every parcel thereof, is given by
inspiration of God, and has inward witness from that Spirit, which is the
author of all truth.

Hence arises this true position: Scriptura est authentica regula tum fidei,
tum vitae nostrae: The word of God, which by an excellency we call the
Scripture, is an infallible rule both of our faith, and also of our life. And
another posi^ion follows hereupon: The authority of holy Scripture is
greater, than the authority of the Church.

Our observation here may be: Since such is the worth of holy Scripture by
reason of the author of it, as that it is the perfect rule for our faith, and
life; and is of greater authority than the Church, it must be our part to take
heed unto it, to hear it, and to read it with reverence, obsequie, and
docility.

This worth, dignity, and excellency of holy Scripture, which is Gods holy
word, now commended unto you, yields a very harsh and unpleasant sound to
every Popishly affected ear, and may serve to condemn the Romish Church of
impiety, and sin for her neglect, and contempt of so inestimable a treasure.
How little they esteem of Gods wri^ten word, the word of life, and sole food
of our souls, the grave and learned B. Jewel defense of the Apology par. 4.
chap 19. and 20.. 1.
Brentius in his preface upon Iacobus Andreas against Hosius, makes it plain
unto us, while he tells of the crying out against the holy Scriptures, as if
they were blind, and doubtful, and a dumb schoolmaster, and a killing writ,
and a dead letter, yea, and if it may like those reverend fathers, no better
than Aesops fables.

Now lest Brentius may be thought to charge them wrongfully, be patient I
beseech you, while I show you out of themselves, how they harp upon this This
point see tou^h^d in my Sermon upon Psalm. 21.6. page 12, etc.
blasphemous string.

A Cardinal of great name in his time, Hosius the Popes Legate, and President
of the Council of Trent, in his book De expresso verbo Dei, says, as some
have thought, of himself; as others, in the person of Zwenkfeldius. Vanus est
labor, qui Scripturis impenditur. Scriptura enim est creatura and egenum
quoddam elementum: These words are alleged out of Hosius, by John Jewel B. of
Salisburie, in his Apology of of the Church of England, part 4. chap. 19 and
20.. 1. Thomas Harding in his Confutation, says, that neither Hosius nor any
Cathol^ke speak^th them, but one Zwenk-feldius. Yet before B. Jewel, the words
are alleged by Nicolaus Gallus, for the words of Hosius. So are they by
Iacobus Andrea, de authoritate Sacrae Scripturae, with this censure upon them:
Qua verba, sinc Hosius suo, sine aliorum nomine recitet, certe hanc esse Asoti
and Hosis, de Sacra^ Scriptura sententiam, non est obscurum. Flac^us Illyricus
in his seventh Treatise, de Norma Concilii, touching these very words of
Hosius, says; Hosius alterius cu^^sdam sententiam hac de re citans, comprobat:
that Hosius though he utters these words in the name and person of
Zwenkseldius, yet never the less he allows them as his own. In the London
edition of the Apology printed in 12. impensis Thomae Chardi, 1591. upon these
words of Hosius, you shall ^^nde this marginall no^e in the 208. page: Haec
Hosius in libro de expresso verbo Dei, s^d apute, and sub alterius persona,
quamuis and ipse alias eadem in ^odem etiam libro disertis verbis affirmet.
It is but lost labor that is spent in the Scriptures: he gives this reason;
for the Scripture is a creature, and a poor kind of outward element. Citatur
ab Illyrico, in Norma Concilii.
Ludonicus Maioranus, a Canon of the Church of Lateran in Rome, in an Printed
at Dali^ga. Ann. 1563. Vide H. 2. b. where also he calls the Scriptures in
disgrace, literarum monumenta, scriptiones, chartulus, macrocolla, membranulas.
oration of his pronounced at Trent, said, Scriptura est quasi mortuum
atramentum.
the Scripture is as it were And Mart. Peresius, praef. ad l^br. de
traditionibus. a. 3. b. Vnus hic in primis est fons and origo omnium errorum,
quod nihil sit pro certo and indubitato. in iis que ad Christianam attinent
pietatem, a quoquam fideli recipiendum, nisi Atramento Mortuo in sacris
codicibus expressum inueniatur.
Dead Ink. The Bishop of Apud Sleidanum comment. lib. 23.
Poitiers in a speech of his at the same Trent, spoke to like purpose: The
Scripture is Res inanimis and muta.
a dead and a dumb thing. And think ye was Apud Ch^mnitium exam. Conc. Trid.
part. 1. de sacra Scriptura.
Eckius more modestly conceited, when he called the Scriptures Euangelium
nigrum and Theologiam Atramentariam.
the black gospel, and inken divinity? or Contro. 3. de E^cles.
Pighius, when he called the Scriptures Mutos iudices.
dumb and speechless judges, Sunt Scripturae, velut nasus cercus, qui se
horsum, illorsum, and in quamcunque volueris partem trahi, retrahi, fingique
facite p^rmittit. Pigh. Hierarch. Eccles l. 3 c. 3.
like unto a nose of wax that is easily molded and fashioned what way soever
you will? or In his answer to Jewels defense, Attic. 15. Diuis. 9. The dangers
and hurts which the common peoples reading of their Scripture in their own
language brings -- be great, sundry, and many.
Harding, or De sacrorum Bibliorum in vulg. idiom. translatione. (page 492.) Jn
propatulo est quantam perniciem in totum orbem Chris^ianum ea, res inuexerit,
and adhuc inuectura sit, si Laicis ill. teratis liberum sit, pro ipsorum
arbitrio and curiositate sacras literas rimari, ac perferutari.
Staphilus, who spoke of the Scriptures, as of mischievous and poysonfull
books, if so they be committed to the view of the common people in a vulgar and
known language.

But all these blasphemers are long since dead and gone. Is their blasphemy
dead and gone with them? No: that sticks fast by their posterity, as a
leprousie that will not be cleansed.

In the Colloquie held at Ratisbone of late, Anno 1602. between the Ministers
of the Augustane confession and Papists, when it was alleged Scripturam esse
normam fidei, that Scripture is the rule of faith; it was answered by a
Jesuit, hoc esse fontem omnem heres^^n: that this was the fountain of all
heresy: as M. Willet makes relation in his Fo. A. 3. b.
answer to the libellers Introduction. It may be he means the Jesuit Tannerus
whose foul, reproachful, and dishonorable speech against the holy Spirit,
the author of holy Scripture, is set down by Hunnius in his Page 26.
historical narration of that Colloquie at Ratisbone: Nulla, nulla, nulla
vnquam fuit haeresis, quae ex sola Scriptura sufficienter resutari potuit. A
speech vehement enough, Never, never, never was there any heresy sufficiently
refuted, only out of Scripture. He r^quires their imagined infallible
authority of their Church to be joined.

There was another Jesuit at the same Colloquie, by name, Gretserus, of no
less impudency, and egregiously blasphemous. For when it was alleged that the
holy Scripture, or the holy Ghost speaking in the Scripture, is the highest and
the infallible Judge of controversies of religion, this Gretserus, as one
possessed with the spirit of contradiction, vtters this proposition: Colloq.
Ratisb. per David Rungium. K 1. b.
Neque Scriptura sola, vt est verbum Spiritus Sancti, neque ipse Spiritus
Sanctus vt loquitur per Scripturam, est iudex supremus, and infallibilis
controuersiarum religionis: Neither the holy Scripture, as it is the word of
the holy Ghost, nor the holy Ghost himself, as he speaks by the Scripture,
is the supreme and infallible Judge of controversies of religion. This he
undertook to prove by experience. Ecce stamus in consp^ctu huius iudicis (haec
dicens assurgebat, and ^odicem biblicum altera manu tenebat, altera p^lsabat)
Ecce adsum: veniat Sp. Sanct. faciat id, si potest; iudicet me per hanc
Scripturam; condemnet me, si potest per came: dicat, si potest: err^^ Iacobe
Gretsere, tu causa cecidisti; id si dixerit, statim. transi^^ ad vestrum
scamnum, non ^^ est me Spiri^us Sanct. iudicare per hanc Scriptura^. Rung. ib.
k. 2. a.
Behold, says he, we stand before the face of this Judge (with that he rose
up, and took the Bible in one of his hands, and struck it with the other) we
stand (says he) before the face of this Judge. See now, I am here. (I use his
own words, as they are set down by David Rungius, in his description of the
forenamed Colloquie) Ecce adsum: behold now I am here, let the holy Spirit
judge me if he can by this Scripture: let him condemn me, if he can, by
Scripture; the holy Spirit cannot judge me by Scripture; he cannot; let him do
it if he can: he cannot condemn me by Scripture. Increpet te Deus Satan:
Gretser, we doubt not, but that the Lord has, or will rebuke thee.

Dearly beloved in the Lord, Scholars can tell you of Brontes, Steropes,
Pyracmon, Polyphemus, and others of that rabble of Cyclops, and Giants, who
made a head, and banded themselves together, to pluck Jupiter from out his
throne. Behold in this Jesuit, Vere Cyclopicam audaciam, as great impudency,
as ever was seen in any Cyclops face; that a man by profession a Christian* and
among Popish Christians of the precise sect, a sanctified Jesuit, should
challenge to a single combat, God Almighty, who would think it?

Some that were at the Colloquie at Worms, An. 1557. have often remembered in
their common talk Rung. Colloq. Ratisb Q. 2. a.
a new, insolent, and unheard of assertion, maintained by the Papists; Sacram
Scripturam non esse vocem iudicis, sed materiam litis, that the holy Scripture
is not a Judges voi^e, but rather the matter of strife and contention. It was
indeed a strange assertion, and by a cons^quent, striking God himself, the
author of holy Scripture. Yet you see, it is by our modern Jesuits this day
matched, forasmuch as with their impiou^ assertions touching holy Scripture,
they do directly strike the holy Spirit.

It is an old saying, Ex vngue Leonem: A man may know a Lion by his claw.
Surely, let men of understanding consider the audaciousnesse, impudency, and
fury of railing, with which those Jesuits beforenamed have been thoroughly
replenished, they must acknowledge and confess, that those Jesuits were guided
by the Spirit of lies, and blasphemies. You already see the readiness of
Popish Doctors to tread Scripture under foot, and to do it all the disgrace
they can. Yet give me leave, I beseech you, by some instance to show the same
unto you.

The instance which I make choice of, is Gods soueraignety over the Kings and
Kingdoms of this world. Hereof I entreated in a Sermon upon Hos. 10.7.
Kings and Kingdoms are wholly and alone in the disposition of the Almighty.

A truth included within the general doctrine, commended by S. Paul to the
Romans, chap. 13.1. All powers that be, are ordained of God: acknowledged by
Elihu, Job 34.24. God shall break the mighty, and set up other in their stead:
expressed in the prayer of Daniel, chap. 2.21. God takes away Kings, and
sets up Kings: proclaimed as in the Lords own words, Prou. 8.15, 16. By me
Kings reign, by me Princes, Nobles, and Judges do rule. This truth has 3.
branches, displayed in so many propositions by Lipsius in his In Monitis
Politicis.
politic aduertisements, Lib. 1. c. 5.

1 Kings, and Kingdoms, are given by God. 2 Kings, and Kingdoms, are taken
away by God. 3 Kings, and Kingdoms, are ordered, ruled, governed by God.
All three are further made good in the infallible evidence of the written word
of God.

The first was: Regna a Deo and reges d^ri. Lipsius, Mouit. Polit. lib. 1. c. 5
p 24.
Kings, and Kingdoms are given by God. Thus says the Lord of Saul's
successor, 1 Samuel 16.1. I have provided me a King among the sons of Ischai:
and of the revolt of the ten tribes, in the rent of the kingdom of Israel, 1
King. 12.24. This thing is done by me: and of the victories which
Nabuchodonosor was to get over the King of Judah, and other his neighbor
Kings; the Kings of Edom, of Moab, of the Ammonites, Trem. Ps. 75.7.
of Tire, of Zidon, Ier. 27.6. I have given all these lands into the hand of
Nabuchodonosor the King of Babel, my servant. It is true which we learn, Psalm.
75.6. Advancement is neither from the East, nor from the West, nor from the
wilderness. Our God is judge; he alone aduanceth. You see now it is plain by
holy Scripture, that Kings and Kingdoms are given by God.

The second was Regna a Deo and Reges tolli. Lips. ib. page 28.
Kings and Kingdoms are taken away by God. That Gods hand is likewise
exercised in the remouall of Kings, and translation of kingdoms, its well
known, as by the aboue-cited texts of Scripture, so by divine examples, whereof
I might make along recital, would I remember you out of Genesis 14. of the fall
of those Kings delivered into the hands of Abraham; out of Exodus 14. and 15. of
Pharaohs overthrow in the red sea, out of Dan. 4. and 5 of Nabuchadnezz^r and
Belshazzar his son dispossessed of their crowns: and out of other places of
the divinely inspired word of like patterns. Its plain without any further
proof, that Kings and Kingdoms are taken away by God.

The third was, Regna a Deo and Reges temp^rari. Lips Ibid. p. 34.
Kings, and Kingdoms, are ordered, ruled governed by God. For proof hereof I
need no more, but remember you, of that which I recommended to you in the
beginning of this Sermon, even of the wonderful extent of Gods care and
providence to the least and b^sest things in this world: as I said to a
handful of meal; to a cruise of oil in a poor widows house; to the falling
of sparrowes to the ground; to the feeding of the birds of the air; to the
caluing of hindes; to the clothing of the grass of the field; to the numbering
of the hairs of our heads; to the trickling of tears down our cheeks. Shall
God care for these vile and base things? and shall he not much more order,
rule, and govern Kings, and kingdoms?

Now (beloved in the Lord) you see by the evidence of holy Scripture, that
Kings, and kingdoms, are wholly and alone in the disposition of the Almighty.
Give care I beseech you, while I show you how this doctrine, and the holy word
of God whereon it is grounded, is in popish religion neglected, disgraced,
trodden under foot.

Romes chiefest champion, Cardinal Bellarmine in his fifth book De Romans
Pontif. cap. 7. does exempt Kings and kingdoms from the disposition of the
Lord of heaven, notwithstanding the eternal truth in the holy Scriptures. This
he does in four positions.

1. Bellarm. de Romans Pontif. lib. 5. cap. 7.. Probatur. Tenentur Christiani non
patisuperse Regem non Christianum, si ille conetur auertere populum a fide.
Princes if they go about, auertere populum a fide, to auert their people from
the faith, (the faith of the Church of Rome) then by the consent of all, they
may and must be dispossessed of their scepters and regalities.

2. Jbid.. Quod si. Quod si Christiani olim non depos^erun. Neronem and
D^ocletianum, and Iulianum Apostatam, and Valentem Arianum, and similes, id
fuit quia d^erant vires temporales Christianis.
If the Christians in times past deposed not Nero, Diocletian, Julian the
Apostata, Valens the Arian (and other like tyrants) id fuit quia deerant vires
temporales Christianis, it was because they wanted power, and force, and were
not strong enough for that attempt.

3. Ibid.. At non. At non tenentur Christiani, imm^ nec d^bent cum euidenti
periculo religionis tolerare Regem infidele^.
Christians are not bound to tolerate a king that is an infidel; or a King not
a Papist.) Not bound to tolerate him? Nay, says Bellarmine, they must not
tolerate such a one cum euidenti periculo religionis; if the toleration of him
be an evident danger to their religion.

4 Ibid.. At non.
De iure humano est, quod hunc aut illum habeamus regem: It is by the law of
man, that we have this, or that man to be our King. This last position is
formerly auowed by the same author in the same book; but in the second
Chapter, with opposition and disgrace to the sovereignty of the Lord of
hosts.. Quod ad primum.
D minium non descendit ex iure diuino, sed ex iure gen^ium. K ngdomes and
dominion are not by the law of God, but by the law of nations. It is an
impious, blasphemous, and atheologicall assertion.

From these positions of the great Jesuit, by a necessary inference do follow
these two conclusions.

1 That the Papists would most willingly deprive our most gracious Sovereign
of his royal throne and regality, if they were of force and power so to do.

2 That all subjects of this land, may stand in manifest rebellion against
their King, because he is no Papist. Both which are summarily acknowledged by
his royal Majesty in his excellent speech the 5. of November Ann. D^m. 1605.
last: The C. 2. a.
Romish Catholics by the grounds of their religion do maintain, that it is
lawful or rather meritorious, to murder Princes or people, for quarrel of
religion. By the grounds of popish religion, it is lawful, yea meritorious for
Papists to murder Kings, which are not Papists. You see his Majesty's royal
acknowledgement of impiety in the grounds of Romish religion. You will not
doubt of it, if you rightly esteem that same late, thrice damnable,
diabolical, and matchless plot, conceived in the womb of that religion, with
a full resolution to consume at once our pious King, and this flourishing
kingdom.

You perceive now, in what contempt and disgrace the popish faction holds the
holy Scriptures, the written word of God. The written word of God expressly
requires obedience unto Princes, as placed in their thrones by Gods sole
authority. But the Popish religion maintains rebellion against Princes, as
placed in their thrones by man's sole authority. Which will you follow? the holy
word of God, or the doctrine of the Romish Church?

Beloved, remember what I told you in the beginning of this exercise; though
Amos spoke, yet his words were Gods words; remember that God is the author of
holy Scripture: and then for his sake, for the authors sake, for Gods sake, you
will be persuaded to take heed unto it, to hear it, and read it with
reverence, obsequie, and docility.

We, the branches of the same vine, that bare our predecessors, to whom by
deuolution the sacred Statutes of the eternal God, the holy Scriptures are
come, must esteem of them all for D. King B. of Land. upon Ion. lect. 1. p. 2.
Gods most royal and celestial Testament; the oracles of his (...) ^^nly
(...) ^led counsels, milk from his sacred (...), the (...) ^pledge of his
favor to his Church* the light of our (...), Ierem. 15.1^.
^oy of our hearts, Lament. 4.20.
breath of our nostrils, (...) of our hope, gro^nd of out love, (...) future
blessedness.

Behold the value and price of the words, which Amos saw upon Israel, which God
willing, with all my diligence, and best pains, I will expound to you
hereafter, as occasion shall be ministered.

Now le^ us p^wre out our souls in thank^uln^sse before the Lord, for that he
has been pleased this day to gather us together to be hearers of his holy
word, and partakers of the blessed Sacrament of the body and blood of our Lord
Jesus Christ, thereby to confirm our holy faith in us. We thank thee
therefore, good Father, and beseech thee more and more to feed us with the
never perishing food of thy holy word, that by it being made clean and
sanctified, we may in due time have free passage from this valley of tears to
the city of joy, Jerusalem which is above, where this corruptible shall put on
incorruption, and our mortality shall be swallowed up of life. So be it.

THE Third Lecture.
AMOS 1.2. And he said, the Lord shall roar from Sion, and utter his voice
from Jerusalem; and the dwelling places of the shepherds shall perish, and the
top of Carmel shall wither.


Upon the preface to this prophecy [these words, and he said] my last lecture
was bestowed: wherein because whatsoever Amos, the heardman spoke, was the word
of God, I endeavored to show forth the worth, dignity, and excellency of the
word of God, commonly called by the name of holy Scripture. A point that
yields a very harsh and unpleasant sound to every popishly affected ear, as
then at large I made plain out of popish mouths, and practice. Order now
requires, that I go on to the next general part of this text, to the
prophecy it self. The first point therein to be recommended at this time unto
you, is the Lord speaking.

The Lord shall roar, and utter his voice] wherein I desire you to observe
with me, who it is that speaks, and how he speaks.

Who speaks? It is the Lord.

How speaks he? He roareth, and utters forth his voice.

First of him that speaks: He is in the Hebrew text called Jehovah; which is
the (...). King B. of London, upon Jonas, Lect. 11. page 152.
honourablest name belonging to the great God of Heaven. Much might be spoken
of it, would I apply my self to the curiosity of Cabalists and Rabbis; as
that it is a name (...), Zanch. de not. Dei lib. 1 c. 13.
not to be pronounced, or taken within polluted lips; that it is a Cael.
Rhodiginus L^ct. antiq. lib, 2. cap. 9. Quem nos Deum nun cupamus, Aegyptii
Th^^t, Persae dicunt Sire, Magorum disciplina Orsi, vnde profluxit Oromasis.
Tam apud Hebraeorum gentem ellebre est quatuor vocalium Dei sacr^^ nomen (...),
quod inde Tetragrammaton dicunt, and alia voce exprimitur (...) Graetis vero
(...) appellatur, Arabibus Alla. Sic and Zanch. de natura Dei lib. 1. c. 13.
Apud Graecos, post Hebra^s, nomen Dei, nempe (...) quatuor conflat literis. Sic
apud Latinos Deuteronomy, vnde and Hispani dicunt Dios; Itali Idio; Galli Dieu;
Germanis quoque and Anglic quatuor est li^erarum GOT. Sic Chaldaei^, and Syris
(...), Arabibus (...), Aethi^pibus (...), Aegytiis (...), Assyrijs (...),
Persis (...), Magis est Ors^, Dalmatis scu Illyricis Bogi, Maometanis Ab^d.
Gentibus in mundo no^o repertis Zimi.
name of four letters in all tongues and languages; and that these four
letters in Hebrew, are all Lit. rae qui^scentes.
letters of Rest, to signify unto us, that the rest, repose, and tranquillity
of all the creatures in the world, is in God alone; that it is a Zanch. vbi
supra.
powerful name for the working of miracles, and that Christ and Moses had by
it done great wonders.

But my tongue shall never enlarge that which my soul abhors, such
brainsick, superstitious, and blasphemous inventions. Yet this I dare avouch
before you, that there is some secret in this name. It is plain, Exodus 6.3.
There the Lord speaking unto Moses says: I appeared unto Abraham, to Isaac,
and to Jacob, by the name of a strong; omnipotent, and all-sufficient God, but
by nay name Jehovah was I not known unto them. I unfold this secret. This
great name Jehovah; first it imports the eternity of Gods essence in
himself, that he is Heb. 13.8.
yesterday, and to day, and the same for ever, Apoc. 1.8.
which was, which is, and which is to come. Again, it notes the existence,
and perfection of all things in God, as from whom all creatures in the world
have their Act. 17.28.
life, motion, and being, God is the being of all his creatures; not that they
are the same that he is, but because of Romans 11.36.
him, and in him, and by him are all things. And last of all it is the
Mem^riall of God unto all ages; as himself calls it, Exodus 3.15. the memorial
of his faithfulness, his truth, and his constancy in the performance of his
promises. And therefore whenever in any of the Prophets, God promises or
threatens any great matter, to assure us of the most certain event of such
his promise or threatening, he adds unto it his name, Jehovah.

In stead of this Hebrew name Jehovah, the most proper name of God, the 70.
Interpreters of the old Testament do every where use (...), a Greek name, a
name of power, well ^^iting with the living, true, and only God. For he has
plenum (...). The power and authority which he has over all things, is
sovereign, and without controlement. He that made the heavens, and spread
them out like a Psalm. 104.2.
curtain, to cloth himself with light as with a garment, he can again
Esai. 50:3.
cloth the heaven with darkness, and make a sack their covering. He that
made the sea to Psalm. 104.3.
lay the beams of his chamber therein, and Ierem. 5.22.
placed the sand for bounds unto it by a perpetual decree, not to be passed
over, howsoever the waves thereof shall rage and roar; he can with a word Job
16.12.
smite the pride thereof. At his rebuke the floods shall be turned Esai 50.2.
into a wilderness, the Sea shall be dried up, the fish shall rot for want of
water, and die for thirst. He that made the dry land, and so set it upon
Psalm. 104.5.
foundations, that it should never move, he can cover her again with the deep
as with a garment, and so rock her that she shall Psalm. 107.27.
reele to and fro, and stagger like a drunken man. So powerful a God may well
be named from power, (...), the absolute Lord, ruler and commander of all
things.

This name of power, (...), fitly put for the Hebrew name Jehovah, commonly
rendered in our English tongue, Lord, is in the writings of the Apostles simply,
and absolutely, (if the learned have made a Zarch. de Attrib. lib. 1. c. 17.
just calculation) ascribed unto Christ a thousand times: and may serve for
sufficient proof of the deity of Christ. Heb. 1.3.
For it imports thus much; that Christ the engraued form of his Father,
sitting at the right hand of the Majesty in the highest places, is together
with the Father and the Holy Ghost, the author and governor of all things; and
in a very special manner, he is the heir of the house of God, the mighty
protector of the Church.

Christ, the only begotten Son of God, he is the Lord: yet so, that neither
the Father, nor the Holy Ghost are excluded from dominion. The Father is Lord,
the Holy Ghost is Lord too. For in all the works of God ad extra, (so we speak
in the schools; but to speak more understandingly to your capacities) in all
external works, each person of the Trinity has his operation.

Yet so that a common distinction ^re observed. For these external works of
God do admit a double consideration, Zanch. de Incarn. lib. 2. c. 3. q. 1.
These. 2.
either they are begun Extra diuinas personas.
without the Divine persons, and ended In aliqua personarum.
in some one of them: or they are both begun and ended, without the Divine
persons. The works of God begun externally, and ended in some one of the
persons, what are they? They are such as was the Voice of the Father concerning
Christ, Matthew. 3.17.
This is my beloved son: a voice formed by all three persons, yet uttered
only by the Father. They are such as was that Matthew. 3.16.
Dove, descending upon Christ, at his baptism: a Dove framed by all three
persons, yet appropriate only to the Holy Ghost. They are such as were the body
and soul of Christ: a body and soul created by all three persons, yet assumed
only by the son of God.

This is that obuious, and much used distinction, in school divinity:
I^ch^^ti^e, and termin^^^e. I thus expound ^t. In these now named works of
God, the voice that was spoken unto Christ, the Dove that descended upon
Christ, the body and soul of Christ, we are to consider two things: their
beginning, and their end. If we respect their beginning, they are the works
of the whole Trinity, common unto all, but ^^spect ^^ their perfection, and
(...), they are ^^ I (...) common, but hypostaticall and personal for so the
voice is the Fathers ^one; the Dove is the Holy Ghosts alone; the reasonable
soul, and humane flesh, are the Sons alone.

Besides these there are other works of God, as begun, so ended also extra
personas; externally: and they are of two sor^s: either supernatural (such I
call the ^^raculous works of God;) or natural; such as are the creation of
the world, the preservation of the same, and the government of it. All these
works of which kind soever, whether miraculous, or works of nature, are
common to the whole Trinity. The Father works, the Son^^ works, and the
Holy Ghost works, as in doing of wonders; so in creating all things, in
preserving all things, in governing all things. Whereupon follows that which
before I affirmed; that as the Father is Lord so the Son is Lord, and the Holy
Ghost i^ Lord also. So the Lord, whom I commend unto you for the speaker in my
text, is the Unity in Trinity, one God in three persons, God Almighty, the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

Before I go on, to show you, how he speaks, I must make bold upon your
patience, to tell you of some duties, necessary duties, to be performed by us
toward him, as Lord. God is the Lord, we are his servants. The duties we ow^
him in this respect are three: to obey him, to serve him, to profit him.

The first duty required of us, is obedience unto God his word, laws and
commandments. This duty whosoever performs, shall easily perform the second
duty, to wit, faithful service, with all care and diligence to do whatsoever
work it pleases God to employ him in: and shall not leave undone the third
duty, but shall do good, and be profitable unto the Lord.

All these duties were well discharged by our first parent Adam. As long as he
was invested with his robe of innocence, he was perfectly obedient, a faithful
servant, and profitable to his Lord.

Now if it will be doubted here how a man should be profitable to God, thus I
answer: That Gods riches do consist in his glory, and therefore if his glory
be increased and enlarged, his advantage is procured. The parable of the
talents, Mat. 25.14. confirms this point. The parable is there plainly
delivered unto you. The meaning of it is; that God gives us his graces to this
end, that we should use and increase them for his advantage. Yea God there
compares himself to a covetous usurer, ^o greedy of gain, as that he
reapeth, where he sowed not, and gathers where he scattered not. By all
means he labors to gain glory to himself.

Eliphaz in the 22. chapt. of Job verse. 2, 3. seems in word to thwart, and
cross this doctrine. For says he, may a man be profitable unto God? Is it any
thing to the Almighty, that thou are righteous? Or is it profitable to him,
that thou make thy ways upright? I answer, that God indeed is not so tied to
man, but that he can set forth his glory, without him, or his righteousness;
yea he can glorify himself in the unrighteousness, and destruction of man:
yet I say, that to stir up man to holiness, it pleases God in mercy to
count only that glory gained, which is gained by the obedience of his servants.
And therefore I say again, that Adam in the state of his innocence was
perfectly obedient, a faithful servant, and profitable to his Lord.

But alas, man once beautified with innocence, with holiness, and with the
grace of God, is now spoiled of his robes; the Queen once clothed with a
vesture of needle work wrought about with diverse colors, is now str^pt of her
jewels: and the soul of man once full of grace, is now robbed of her
ornaments, and rich attire. My meaning is, that man once able to present
himself spotl^sse, and without blame before the lamb, is now fallen from that
grace.

The Preacher, Eccl. 7.20. does assure us that there is no man just in the
earth, that does good and sins not. So much does Solomon's question import,
Prou. 20.9. Who can say I have purged my heart? I am clean from my sin? O,
says Eliphaz unto Job cap. 15.14. What is man that he should be clean? and he
that is borne of a woman that he should be just? Behold, (says he) God has
found no steadfastness in his Saints, yea the heavens are not clean in his
sight; how much more is man unsteadfast, how much more abominable, and filthy,
drinking iniquity like water? When the Lord looked down from heaven, to see
whether there were any child of man, that would understand, and seek God, Ps.
14.2. could he find any one framed according to the rule of that perfection,
which he requires? He could not. This he found, that all were gone out of the
way, that all were corrupt, that there was none that did good, no not one.

So sinful is man in his whole race: sinful in his conception; sinful in his
birth; in every deed, word, and thought, wholly sinful. The actions of his
hands, the words of his lips, the motions of his heart, when they seem to be
most pure and sanctified, yet then are they as unclean things, and filthy
^^uts, Esaias 64.6. So that that which is spoken of cursed Cain, Genesis 4.14. may
in some sense be applied to man in general; that for his sin he is cast
forth from the presence of God, and is now become a fugitive, and a vagabond
upon the earth.

I will not prosecute this point of man's nakedness any farther. By this which
has been spoken it appears plainly, how unfit man is, to fulfill those good
duties required of him by his Lord God. For his first duty, in stead of
obedience he continually breaks the commandments of his God, in thought,
word, and deed. For his second duty, in stead of waiting upon God to do him
service, he serves Satan, sin, and his own corrupt desires. For his third
duty, in stead of bringing any advantage of glory unto God, he dishonors him
by all means, leading his life as if there were no God.

You have seen now the miserable and wretched estate of man, by nature the
vassal, and slave of sin: with whom it fares, as it did with Pharaohs
servants when they had sinned against their Lord, Genesis 40. You know the story,
how Pharaohs chief Butler was restored to his former dignity, when as the
Baker was hanged.

These two servants of Pharaoh, may resemble two sorts of men exiled from
paradise, and from the presence of God, because of their sin, to live upon
the face of the earth, as it were in a dungeon full of misery; namely the
reprobate, and the elect. For the reprobate; as they live, so they die in this
dungeon, and do die eternally; but the elect, they are pardoned, and restored
to their former dignity, and enabled by Christ their redeemer, and reconciler
to God, to perform their duties to their Lord, their duties of obedience, of
faithful service, and of profitablenesse; to obey the commandments of God, to
perform whatsoever service is enjoined them, and to procure advantage of glory
to their Lord.

Beloved, I doubt not, but that all we, who are now religiously assembled in
this place, are the elect of God, chosen by him in Christ Jesus Ephesians. 1.4.
before the foundation of the world, to be holy and without blame before him
in love: yet I fear me, should we enter into our own hearts, and examine our
selves, how we have walked in dutifulness toward him; our best course will be
to run unto him with a Peccanimus in our mouths. Lord we have Luke 15.18.
sinned against heaven and before thee, and are not worthy to be called thy
servants.

By the first branch of our duty we are required to be obedient servants, but
we have been Ezech. 2.4.
hard offace, and stiff hearted, a rebellious offspring like unto our fathers.
By the second branch of our duty we are required to be faithful servants; but
we have made a covenant with Romans 6.19.
uncleanness, and iniquity, to serve them. By the third branch of our duty we
are required to be profitable servants; but when we should have Mat. 25.27.
put our Lords money to the exchangers for his greater vantage, we have Verse. 25.
hid it in the earth. Lord enter not into account with us, Job 9.3.
we cannot answer thee one of a thousand.

Now (dearly beloved) suffer a word of exhortation, let the remembrance of
your holy duties by you to be performed to the Lord your God, be like Ecclus.
49.1.
the composition of the perfume that is made by the art of the Apothecary,
sweet as honey in your mouths, and as music at a banquet of wine. Be it unto
you Ezech. 16.11, 12.
as bracelets upon your hands, as chains about your necks, as frontlets upon
your faces, as earings in your ears, as beautiful crowns upon your heads;
let it be written in your hearts as Ierem. 17.1.
with a pen of iron, or point of a Diamond, never to be razed out.

Shall I deliver this your duty unto you in blessed Paul's words? In blessed
Paul's words this is your duty, to 1 These. 2.12.
walk worthy of the Lord, Coloss. 1.10. To walk worthy your vocation, Ephesians.
4.1. To walk as children of the light, Ephesians. 5.8. To walk in newness of
life, Romans 6.4. To walk in love, Ephesians. 5.2. To have your conversation as it
becomes the Gospel of Christ, Phil. 1.27. To behave your selves honestly
toward them that are without, 1 Thessalonians. 4.12. To walk honestly as in the day,
Romans 13.13. If you take thought Romans 13.14.
for your flesh to fulfill the lusts of it; if your eyes are 1 Ioh. 2.11.
blinde^ with 2 Timothy 3.4.
love of pleasures; if you have Ephesians. 5.11.
fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, you are out of the way,
and do much fail in the performance of your holy duty.

And to keep you the better in the right way, let me plainly tell you out of 1
Cor. 6.9. and Ephesians. 5.5. That neither Idolaters, nor the covetous, nor
extortioners, nor thieves, nor adulterers, nor fornicators, nor buggerers, nor
wantons, nor drunkards, nor raylers, shall have any inheritance in the kingdom
of God. Have not some of us been such? yet to such there is ministered a word
of comfort, 1 Cor. 6.11. First is our accusation, Such were some of you: then
follows our comfort, but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are
justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of God.

Is this true beloved? Are we washed, and sanctified, and justified in the name
of the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of God? why then; resolve we to follow S.
Paul's advice, Phil. 4.8. Whatsoever things are true, and honest, and just, and
pure, and do pertain to love, and are of good report: if there be any virtue,
or praise, resolve we to think on these things: think we on these things to
do them, and we shall well perform our holy duties to our Lord. Thus far of
my first note touching the speaker, who speaks. Now follows my other note;
How he speaks?

He shall roar, and utter his voice] The metaphor of roaring with reference
unto God, is frequent and much used in holy Scripture. You find it as here, so
Ierem. 25.30. joined with the voice of the Lord: The Lord shall roar from
above, and thrust out his voice from his holy habitation. And so again, Joel.
3.16. where you have the very words of my text: The Lord shall roar out of
Sion, and utter his voice from Jerusalem. You shall find it without any mention
of the Lords voice, Hos. 11.10. The Lord shall roar like a Lion: when he shall
roar, then the children of the West shall fear. You shall find it with
application, Amos 3.8. The Lion has roared; who will not be afraid? The Lord
God has spoken, who can but prophecy?

S. Hierome acknowledges this metaphor to be very fit out of Amos his mouth,
for as much as it is fit for every man to use in his speech such examples and
similitudes, as are most familiar to him in his own art, daily course, and
trade of life. Its fit for a sea faring man, to compare his heaviness to a
tempest, his loss to a shipwreck, his enemies to contrary winds: fit for ^
soldier, to tell of his sword, his buckler, his coat of male, his lance, his
helmet, his musket, his wounds, his victory: fit for a husbandman, to be
talking of his oxen, his kine, his sheep, his grounds. Not unfitly then does
Amos our Prophet, sometimes a shepherd, one that kept his sheep in the waste
wilderness of Tekoa, where many a time he had heard the Lions roar, compare
the terrible and dreadful voice of the living God, to the roaring of Lions.

The Lord shall roare] By this hyperbolicall form of speech the holy Spirit
conuinceth us of stupidity, and dullness, as unable to entertain any
admonition from God, except he speak unto us after an extraordinary manner. For
this reason, even for our dulnes sake* is God herein my text compared to a Lion.

He shall roare] The meaning of this phrase is opened by the next words; He
shall utter his voice. It will be no lost labor to consider how God an
incorporeall, and spiritual essence, deuoid of such parts of nature, by which
we are enabled to speak, may himself be said to speak; and utter a voice.
That he spoke it is well known to them, to whom the Scriptures are not
unknown. He spoke with Adam, Eve, and the serpent: with Noah, with Abraham 8.
times, with Isaac, with Jacob, with Moses, and the Prophets; with Christ, and
the Apostles. But how he spoke, that is disputed of by the ancient and learned
Fathers.

S. In cap. 7. Esai.
Basil is of opinion that the Prophets did not at all with their outward ears
hear God speaking to them; but that the word of the Lord is said to have come
unto them, because their minds were illuminated, and their vnderst^nding
enlightened by the shining of the true light in great measure, readily to
conceive what God would have revealed, and faithfully to publish it according
to the will of God.

S. De Genesi ad literam lib. 11. cap. 33.
Austen enquiring how God spoke with Adam and Eve, writes to this purpose. It
may be, God talked with them as he talks with his Angels, by some
Jntrinsecus, and infabilibus modis.
internal and secret means, as by giving light to their minds and
understandings: or it may be, he talked with them by his creature; which God
uses to do, two manner of ways: either by some vision to men in a trance: so
he talked with Peter, Act. 10. or else by presenting some shape, and semblance
to bodily senses. So God by his Angels talked with Abraham, Genesis 18. and with
Lot, Genesis 19.

S. Expos. Moral. lib. 28. incap. ^8. ^^. Job cap. 2.
Gregory most accurately handles this question to this sense: God speaks two
manner of ways.

1. By himself, as when he speaks to the heart by the inward inspiration of
the holy Spirit. After which sense we must understand that which we read, Act.
8.29. The spirit said unto Philip; go near and join thy self to yonder
chariot: that is, Philip was inwardly moved, to draw near and join himself
to the chariot wherein the Ethiopian Eunuch sat, and read the Prophecy of
Esaias. The like words we find, Act. 10.19. The spirit said unto Peter, Behold
three men seek thee: the meaning is the same: Peter was inwardly moved by the
holy Spirit to depart from Ioppa, and to go to Caesarea, to preach unto the
Gentiles to Cornelius and his company. Where we may note thus much for our
comforts, that whenever we are inwardly moved, and do feel our hearts
touched with an earnest desire, either to make our private requests unto God,
or to come to the place of public prayer, or to hear a sermon, we may be
assured that the Holy Spirit, God by himself speaks unto us.

2 God speaks to us by his creatures Angelical, and other, and that in
diverse manners.

1 In word only, as when no form is seen, but a voice only is heard: as John
12.28. when Christ prayed, Father, glorify thy name; immediately there came a
voice from heaven; I both have glorified it, and will glorify it again.

1 In deed only: as when no voice is heard, but some semblance only is objected
to the senses. S. Gregory for illustration of this second way of Gods speaking
by his creatures, brings for example the vision of Ezechiel 1.4. He saw a
whirlewind come out of the North, with a great cloud, and fire wrapped about
it, and in the midst of the fire the likeness of Amber. All this he saw;
but you hear no mention of any voice. Here was res sine verbo; a deed, but no
voice.

3 Both in word and deed; as when there is both a voice heard, and also some
semblance objected to the senses: as happened unto Adam presently after his
fall: He heard the voice of the Lord walking in the Garden, Genesis 3.8.

4 By shapes presented to the inward eyes of our hearts. So Jacob in his dream
saw a ladder reach from earth to heaven, Genesis 28.12. So Peter in a trance saw a
vessel descend from heaven, Act. 10.11. So Paul in a vision saw a man of
Macedonia standing by him, Act. 16.9.

6 By shapes presented to our bodily eyes. So Abraham saw the three men that
stood by him in the plain of Mamre, Genesis 18.2. And Lot saw the two Angels that
came to Sodom, Genesis 19.1.

6 By Celestial substances. So at Christ's baptism a Matthew. 3.17.
voice was heard out of a cloud, as also at his Matthew. 17.5
transfiguration upon the mount, This is my beloved son, etc. By Celestial
substances I do here understand not only the Heavens with the works therein,
but also fire, the highest of the elements, and the Air next unto it, togeher
with the winds and Clouds.

7. By Terrestrial substances. So God to reprove the dullness of Balaam,
enabled Balaams own Ass to speak, Number. 22.28.

8 Both by Celestial and Terrestrial substances, as when God appeared unto
Moses in a flame of fire, out of the midst of a bush, Exodus 3.2.

You see now how God of old at sundry times, and in diverse manners did speak
to man: either by himself, or by his creatures: and by his creatures many
ways: sometimes in word, sometimes in deed, sometimes in both word and deed;
sometimes in sleepings, sometimes in watchings; sometimes by Celestial
substances, sometime by Terrestrial, sometimes by both, Celestial and
Terrestrial.

To make some use of this doctrine; let us consider, whether God does not now
speak unto us, as of old he did to our forefathers. We shall find that now also
he speaks unto us by himself, whenever by the inspiration of his holy
Spirit he moves our hearts to religious and pure thoughts; and also by his
creatures: sometime by fire, when he consumes our dwelling houses: sometime by
thunder, when he throws down our strong holds: sometime by heat, sometime by
drouth, sometime by noisome worms, Locusts, and Caterpillars, when he takes
from us the staff of bread; sometime by plagues, when in a few months he
takes from us many thousands of our brethren; and sometime by enemies, when he
impouerisheth us by war.

All these, and whatsoever other like these, are Gods voices, and do call us
to tepentance. But as when there came a voice from heaven to Christ, Ioh.
12.28. the people that stood by and heard, would not be persuaded that it was
Gods voice; some of them saying that it thundered, others that an Angel spoke:
so we, howsoever God lays his hand upon us, by fire, by thunder, by famine, by
pestilence, by war, or otherwise, we will not be persuaded that God speaks
unto us; we will rather attribute these things to nature, to the heavens, to
stars and planets, to the malice of enemies, to chance, and the like.

As perverse as we are, there is a voice of God, which we cannot but
acknowledge to be his, and at this time to be directed unto us. Mention of it
is made, Heb. 1.2. In these last days God has spoken to us by his son. The
Gospel of Christ is the voice of God. It is the voice of God, the rule of all
instruction, the first stone to be laid in the whole building: that cloud by
day, that pillar by night, whereby all our actions are to be guided. This
Gospel of Christ, and voice of God, calls us now to obedience.

O the crookedness of our vile natures! Our stiff necks will not bend. God
speaks unto us by his Ministers, to walk in the old way, the good way; but
we answer like them, Ier. 6.16. We will not walk therein. He speaks to us by
his watchmen, to take heed to the sound of the trumpet; but we answer like
them, Ier. 6.17. We will not take heed.

Turn us good Lord unto thee, and we shall be turned. Good Lord open thou
our ears, that if it be thy holy will, either to Roar unto us, or to speak
with a milder voice: either to come against in judgment, or to visit us in
mercy; we may readily hear thee, and yield obedience: and as obedient
children receive the promise of eternal inheritance. So when the time of our
separation shall be, that we must leave this world, a place of darkness, of
trouble, of vexation, of anguish, thou, Lord wilt translate us to a better
place, a place of light where darkness shall be no more; a place of rest,
where trouble shall be no more; a place of delight, where vexation shall be no
more; a place of endless and unspeakable joys, where anguish shall be no
more. There this corruptible shall put on incorruption, and our mortality shall
be swallowed up of life. Even so be it.

THE Fourth Lecture.
AMOS 1.2. And he said, the Lord shall roar from Sion, and utter his voice
from Jerusalem; and the dwelling places of the shepherds shall perish, and the
top of Carmel shall wither.


IN my last exercise I entreated of the Speaker. Now am I to entreat of the
places from whence he speaks; expressed in two names: Sion and Jerusalem.

The Lord shall roar from Sion, and utter his voice from Jerusalem, etc.

Sion] I read in holy Scripture of two Sions. The one is Deuteronomy. 4.48. a hill of
the Amorites, the same with Hermon. Moses there calls it (...).
Sion, by the figure Iunius in Deuteronomy. 3.9.
Syncope; the right name of it is (...).
Sirion; and so recorded, Deuteronomy. 3.9. The other (...).
Sion, is the Sion in my Text; mount Sion in Judah, upon the ^op whereof was
another mountain, Drusius obseru. 14.21. Not. and Iunius in Psalm. 48.3.
Moria, upon which stood the Temple of the Lord. Before it was called the 2 Samuel 5.7.
Tower or Fort of Sion. It was a fortress, a bulwark, a strong hold, and
place of defense for the Iebusites, the inhabitants of the land against their
enemies. Against these Iebusites King David came with a warlike power, speedily
surprised their fort, built round about it; dwelt in it; and called it his The
City of David.
own City, as appears, 2 Samuel 5.9.

This is the city of David, so much 2 Samuel 5.7. 1 King 8.1. 1 Chronicles. 11.5. 2 Chronicles. 5.2.
mentioned in the sacred books of Samuel, the Kings, and Chronicles. To this
his own City mount Sion, David accompanied with the Elders, and Captains of
Israel, 2 Samuel 6.15.
brought the Ark of the Lord with shouting, with cornets, with trumpets, with
cymbals, with viols, with harps; as is plain by the story, 1 Chronicles. cap. 15.
and 16. Now began the holy exercises of religion duly to be observed in this
city of David: mount Sion was now the place of the Name of the Lord of boasts.

Hitherto belongs that same excellent description, and commendation of mount
Sion, Psalm. 48.1, 2, 3. Mount Sion lying northward from Jerusalem, is fair in
situation. It is the city of the great King; the city of God; Gods holy
mountain; the joy of the whole earth. In the palaces thereof God is well
known for a sure refuge. In this city of David, the holy mount Sion, the Lord
of hoasts, whom the 1 King. 8.27. 2 Chronicles. 6.18.
Heavens, and the Heaven of Heavens are not able to contain, is said to Psalm.
74.2.
dwell, Psalm. 9.11. not that he is tied to any place; but because there were
the most manifest, and often testimonies of his residence; Thus is Sion taken
literally.

It is also taken spiritually, by a Synecdoche, for the Church, Spouse, and
Kingdom of Christ, as Psalm. 2.6. where God is said to have anointed his King
over Sion, the hill of his holiness. Sion there is not to be understood the
terrestrial Sion by Jerusalem, but another Sion; elect, and spiritual; not of
this world; holy Sion; so called for the grace of sanctification powered out
upon it, even the holy Church of Christ: whereto do appertain the holy
Patriarchs, the Prophets, the Apostles, the universal multitude of believers
throughout, not only Israel, but the whole world. Sion in this signification is
obuious in holy Scripture. To which sense by the daughters of Sion, in the
Psalm. 149.^.
Psalms of David, in Cantic 3.11.
Salomons song, in the prophecies of Esaias 3 16, 17. Psa^. 4.4.
Esaias, and Joel. 2.23.
Joel, you may understand the faithful members of the Church of Christ.

There is yet one other signification of Sion. Its put for Heaven, as learned
Drusius in his notes upon my text observes. The like observation is made by
Theophylact, and Oecumenius commenting upon Heb. 12.22.

Now the Sion in my text, from whence the Lord is said to roar, to speak
terribly, and dreadfully, is, either the Temple upon mount Sion by Jerusalem:
or the Church of Christ, whereof Sion is a type; Sion the holy one of Israel,
whose walls are salvation, and gates praise: or the Heaven of Heavens, the most
proper place of Gods residence.

Jerusalem.] Of old this city was called Salem, as Genesis 14.18. when
Melchisedeck, King thereof, brought forth bread and wine to refresh Abram, and
his followers. Afterward it was possessed by the Iebusites, and named Iebus,
Judge. 19.10. Peter Martyr in 2 Samuel 5.6. from both these names I^bus, and
Salem, supposes that by the change of a few letters, Jerusalem has had her
name; and not from the mountains called Solymi, as some do conjecture, but
err: for that the mountains Solymi were in Pisidia, not in Judea. Many were
the names of this city. Some of them Benedictus in his marginall note upon
Joshua, chap. 10. names in a distich, Solyma, Luza, Bethel, Ierosolyma, Iebus,
Helia.
Vrbs sacra, Jerusalem dicitur, atque Salem.


In this distich 9. names of this one city are couched together; Solyma,
Ierosolyma, Jerusalem, Iebus, Salem, Bethel, Helia, Luza, the holy City.
Drusius obseruat. sacr. lib. 14. cap. 21. notes that Jerusalem did consist of
two parts: the one was called, (...), the lower city; the other, (...), the
higher city. This higher city was Sion, or mount Sion, whereof you have already
heard, and was diversely termed, (...), the city of David, the fort, the fort
of Sion, the tower of Sion.

But I come not to preach names unto you. Will you hear of the honor of this
city? they that were alive when Jerusalem flourished to have Psalm. 48.12.
numbered her towers, to have considered her walls, to have marked her bulwarks,
and to have told their posterity of it, might have made a report scarcely to
have bin believed. This we know by Ps. 48.4, 5. When the Kings of the earth
were gathered together, and saw it; they marvelled, they were astonished, and
suddenly driven back. Thus is Jerusalem taken literally.

It is also taken spiritually for the Church; either militant here on earth, or
Triumphant in heaven. For the Church Militant, Psalm. 128.5. Thou shall see the
wealth of Jerusalem all thy life long. And for the Church Triumphant, Gal.
4.26. Jerusalem, which is above, is free. The Catholic Church, Militant, and
Triumphant, is called Jerusalem; because Jerusalem was a type thereof.

Jerusalem was a type of the Catholic Church in sundry respects.

1. God did choose Jerusalem, above all other places of the earth, to Psalm.
132.13. Psalm. 135.21.
dwell in. So the Catholic Church, the company of the predestinate, God has
chosen, to be a peculiar people unto himself.

2. Jerusalem is a City, Psalm. 122.3.
compact in it self, by reason of the bond of love, and order among the
Citizens. So the faithful, the members of the Catholic Church, are linked
together by the bond of one Spirit.

3 Jerusalem was the place of Gods sanctuary, the place of his presence, and
worship, where the promise of the seed of the woman was preserved till the
coming of the Messiah. Now the Catholic Church is in the room thereof. In
the Catholic Church we must seek the presence of God, and the word of life.

4 In Jerusalem was the Psalm. 122.5.
the throne of David. So in the Catholic Church is the throne, and scepter of
Christ; figured by the Kingdom of David.

5 The commendation of Jerusalem was the subjection, and obedience of her
citizens. The Catholic Church has her citizens too, Ephesians. 2.19. and they do
yield voluntary obedience and subjection to Christ their King.

6 In Jerusalem the names of the citizens were enrolled in a register. So the
names of all the members of the Catholic Church are enrolled in the book of
life, Revel. 20.15.

You see now what Jerusalem is literally, and what spiritually. Literally, it
is that much honored City in Iude^, the Psalm. 46.4.
City of God, even the sanctuary of the tabernacle of the most High.
Spiritually it is the holy Church of Christ: either his Church Militant on
earth, or his Church Triumphant in Heaven.

Now the Jerusalem in my text, from whence the Lord is said to utter his voice,
is either Jerusalem in the literal, or Jerusalem in the spiritual
understanding: it is either Jerusalem the mother City of Judea; or Jerusalem
the Church of Christ, Militant upon earth; or Jerusalem above, the most proper
place of Gods residence. So that Jerusalem here is the same with Sion, an
Exposition of Sion. The Lord shall roar from Sion, that is, in other words,
The Lord shall utter his voice from Jerusalem.

Mark I beseech you, (beloved in the Lord,) The Lord shall roar, not from
Dan, and Bethel, where Ieroboams calves were worshipped; but from Sion the
mountain of his holiness: and he shall utter his voice, not from Samaria,
drunken with Idolatry: but from Jerusalem, the Zach. 8.3.
city of truth, wherein the purity of Gods worship did gloriously shine. We may
take from hence this lesson: Sion and Jerusalem are to be frequented, that
thence hearing God speak unto us, we may learn what his holy will is.

To speak more plainly. This is the lesson which I commend unto you: The place
where God is served, and the exercises of his religion are practiced, must be
carefully frequented.

That I may the more easily persuade you to come unto, and to frequent this
place, this house of God, his holy Church, and Temple, I bring you a guide.
This guide is a King, and leads you the way, the blessed King David. I beseech
you mark his affection, Psalm. 84.1. O Lord of hosts, how amiable are thy
tabernacles? My soul longs, yea and faints for thy courts. Mark his love,
Psalm. 26.8. O Lord I have loved the habitation of thine house, and the place
where thine honor dwells. Mark the earnestness of his zeal, Psalm. 42.1,
2. As the Heart brayeth for the rivers of water, so pants my soul after thee
O God. My soul thirsts for God, even for the living God; when shall I come,
and appear before the presence of God? Let this holy King, King David, be the
pattern of your imitation.

Beloved, you must have an earnest love and desire to serve God in the assembly
of his Saints: you must much esteem of the public exercise of religion. It is
Gods effectual instrument and mean to nourish, and beget you to the hope of a
better life. In what case then are you, when you absent your selves from this,
and the like holy assemblies: when either you come hither carelessly, or else
do gracelesly contemn this place. Here is Sion, here is Jerusalem; here God
speaks to you in the language of Canaan: and here may you speak to him
again with your own mouths.

It is every man's duty, the duty of every one that loves God, to come unto Gods
house, his house of prayer. In this respect thus says the Lord, Esaias 56.7.
Mine house shall be called the house of prayer for all people. For all people:
there is no difference between the Galat. 3.28.
Jew and the Grecian, between the bond and the free, between the male and the
female; for our Lord, who is Lord over all, Romans 10.12.
is rich unto all that call upon him; Mine house shall be called an house of
prayer for all people.

To imprint this sentence in your hearts, it is repeated unto you, Mat. 23.13.
Where Jesus Christ to the mony-changers, and doue-sellers, whom he found in
the Temple, uses this speech, It is written, mine house shall be called an
house of prayer, but ye have made it a den of thieves. Iunius his note upon the
place is good: Qui domo Dei non vtitur ad orationis domum, is eo deuonit, vt
speluncam latronum efficiat eam: Whosoever uses not the house of God for a
house of prayer, he comes thither to make it a den of thieves. Let us take
heed (beloeed in the Lord) whenever we come unto the Church, the house of
God, that we be not partakers of this sharp censure.

Ecclesiastes chap. 4.17. gives a profitable caveat, Take heed to thy feet,
when thou ^nterest into the house of God: intima^ing thus much; that of duty we
are to enter into the house of God. Though the Temple in Jerusalem and all the
worship in ceremonies, that was annexed to it, are taken away; yet is Salomons
caveat good for us still, Take heed to thy feet when thou enterest into the
house of God. For we also have Gods house, where he is chiefly to be sought,
and worshipped; even in every place appointed by public authority for public
assemblies.

Wherefore, I pray you, has God given his Church 1 Cor. 12.27.
some Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors, some Teachers?
Is it not as we are taught, Ephesians. 4.12. for the gathering together of the
Saints, for the work of the ministry, and for the edifying of the Body of
Christ? See you not here a forcible argument, and evident proof, for this your
public meeting? There is, Matthew. 18.20. a special promise of a blessing to
light upon you, as often as you shall come to this place; and thereof the author
of all truth assures you: Where two or three are gathered together in my name,
there am I in the midst of them. O weigh, and consider this. If you love, and
would have the society, fellowship, and company of your sweet Savior, Jesus
Christ, you must frequent this place, hither must you come. Know this; you
cannot be right worshippers of God in private, if you refuse, or neglect to
frequent this public assembly, the Sion, the Jerusalem, from whence God is
pleased to speak unto you.

Much then, very much to blame you, whosoever do for none, or for small
occasions absent your selves from this pl^ce, this house of God, at appointed
times, where and when your public prayers should be as it were a public
renouncing of all sects, and society with idolatry, and profaneness; an
acknowledgement and confession of the true God, and a public sanctification of
Gods holy Name to the glory of God.

The time was, and I dare avouch it, Act. 21.5. when all the congregation of
Tire with their wives and children, bringing S. Paul out of the town to the
sea shore, kneeled down with him and prayed. Shall we in these days find
this zeal among Christians? I much doubt it; and am persuaded, men will be
ashamed, in imitation of those Tyrians, to kneel down in an open place, to
pray unto God publicly.

I will not rub this sore; I know somewhat, and you know more than I, how
backward many of you have been, from doing God due service in this place. Shall
I say, you have dishonored him, some by irreuerence, some by much absence,
some by wilful refusal to be made partakers of the blessed Communion of the
body and blood of our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ? I think, should any one
of you inuit your neighbor to sup with you, but once, and he refuse it, you
would take some displeasure at him: and shall God Almighty, the mighty creator
of Heaven, of Earth, and of all you, that hear me this day, inuit you many
times to come, and sup at the table of his blessed Son, and you refuse it?
Believe it? he cannot take it well.

It is no indifferent or arbitrary thing, to come, or not to come to the Lords
table. Come you must of duty; though of duty you are first to examine your
selves. Whosoever therefore wilfully refuses to come, he sins very
grievously, as a learned Butanus I^c. 48.
Divine well notes.

1 Because he contemns not any humane, but a divine edict, the express
commandment of the Lord of life: Do this in remembrance of me.

2 Because he little esteems the remembrance of Christ his death, by which we
are redeemed.

3 Because he neglects the communion of the body, and blood of Christ.

4 Because he shows himself to be none of the number of Christ's disciples.

I beseech you (dearly beloved) lay up these things in your hearts; let this
day be the beginning of your reformation; resolve from henceforth to perform
your due obedience to God in this place; to power forth your prayers before
him, to hear his holy word, and to frequent the Lords table; where by faith in
his death and passion, you may receive many a gracious blessing: forgiveness
of your sins, your reconciliation with God, the death of iniquity in you, and
the assured pledge of eternal life.

I have now by occasion of Sion and Jerusalem, the place, from whence God will
speak unto you, exhorted every one of you in particular to come to the Church.
I pray you note this to be but a part of your duty. It is not enough for you to
come your selves to the Church; you must solicit and exhort others to come
likewise. Fathers must bring their children, Masters must bring their Servants.
For old and young should come.

My warrant for what I say, I take out of Joel 2.15, 16. Call a solemn
assembly, gather the people, sanctify the congregation, gather the elders,
assemble the children, and those that suck the breasts. Mark I beseech you.
Children, and such as suck the breasts must be assembled. You must have the
spirit of resolution, to say with Joshua, chap. 24.15. I, and my house will
serve the Lord.

Your duty is yet further extended beyond your children, and servants; to your
neighbors, and also strangers, if they come in your way. This we may learn out
of the prophecies of Esaias, Micah, and Zachary. First, Esaias 2.3. The faithful
shall say, Come, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house
of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us his ways, and we will walk in his
paths: for the law shall go forth of Sion, and the word of the Lord from
Jerusalem. Again, Micah. 4.2. You shall find the very same exhortation made
by the faithful, and in the same words: Come, and let us go up to the
mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob, etc. The Prophet
Zacha^y, chap. 8.21. for sum, and substance speaks the same thing: They
that dwell in one town, shall go unto another, saying, up, let us go, and
pray before the Lord, and seek the Lord of hosts, I will go also.

Thus far of the place from whence the Lord speaks, expressed by two names,
Sion and Jerusalem.

THE Fifth Lecture.
AMOS 1.2. And he said, the Lord shall roar from Sion, and utter his voice
from Jerusalem; and the dwelling places of the shepherds shall perish, and the
top of Carmel shall wither.


OF the speaker, and place from whence he speaks, I have heretofore spoken.
Now proceed we to the sequels of the speech, which shall for this time be the
ground of my discourse.

The dwelling places of the shepherds shall perish.] So do the words sound for
their substance. Yet after the letter in the original, and Hebrew copy, we are
to read otherwise: the fruitful or pleasant places of the shepherds have
mourned. Let us briefly take a view of the words, as they lie in order.

The dwelling places.] So is the Hebrew (...) englished not unfitly. For though
properly it signifies fruitful and pleasant fields, and pastures; yet because
shepherds did use in the wilderness, near unto such fields and pastures to
erect themselves little cottages and cabins, that they might be at hand to
defend their harmless sheep, from savage and ravenous beasts, it may here well
be englished, the dwelling places.

The dwelling places of the shepherds.] In my first lecture upon this prophecy,
I told you there were two sorts of shepherds. In the first rank, I placed
sheepmasters; in the second, their servants. Among the first sort of shepherds
was Mesa King of Moab: who 2 King. 3.4. is called a shepherd, and there
registered to have rendered to the King of Israel an hundred thousand lambs, and
an hundred thousand rams, with the wool. The other sort of shepherds, is of
such, as are hired to keep sheep; to see to their seeding and safety. Such we
properly call shepherds, and such are the shepherds in my text. It follows.

Have mourned] The text is so; the meaning is; shall mourn. This enallage or
change of the time, of the time past for the time to come, has its reason from
a truth contained in a saying of the Schoolmen, Apud Deum non est tempus: God
is beyond times limits. He was when time was not; and shall be when time shall
be no more. Its common with the Prophets to speak of a future thing, as of a
thing past, or present. A learneda Grammarian does well express the reason;
Otho Gualt. perius.
quia Prophetia ipsorum tam certa est ac si spectatores rerum futurarum in
praesenti omnia fieri cernere^t. The prophesies in the old time, which came not
by the will of man, were of as great certainty as if the Prophets had been
present spectators of the things to come.

The sweet ^inger of Israel, to show Gods promise made for the encouragement of
the man, that loves to live a godly life, says Psalm. 1.3. He has been like
a tree planted by the rivers of waters. He has been, that is the text; the
sense is, he shall be like such a tree. Jacob in the 48. of Genesis ver. 22. thus
blesses Joseph: I have given thee one portion above thy brethren. I have given
thee, that is the text; the sense is, I do, or will give thee. In Hosea 10.5.
we read thus, The people of the Calfe of Bethauen have mourned over it. The
text is, have mourned; the sense is, shall mourn. So here my text is, The
dwelling places of the shepherds have mourned: the sense is, they shall mourn.

Shall mourne] Mourn? How can dwelling places mourn? Even as the earth can
mourn. The lamentations and mournings of the earth are eternized with holy
Prophets pens. With Esayes pen, chap. 24.4. For the sins of the people
the land lamenteth and fade^h away: and again, chap. 33.9. For the sins of
the people the earth mourns and faints. With Ieremies pen, first, chap.
4.28. For the sins of Judah the earth shall mourn; again, chap. 12.4. For
the wick^dnesse of the inhabitants shall the land mourn; a third time, chap.
23.10. because of oaths the land mourns. W th Ioels pen, chap. 1.10. for
si^ne the land mourns. With Hoseas pen, chap. 4 3. because there is no
truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of God in Israel, eu^ry one breaking out by
swe^ring, by lying, by killing, by steal^ng, by whoring blood touching blood,
therefore shall the land mourn.

Lamentation, and mourning, proper p^ssions of the reasonable creature, are by
a translation ascribed to the Earth; to note either that she is ill favored,
and out of fashion for lack of dressing; or that men for her desolation do
lament, and mourn, as D^usius lib. 1. quaest. Hebr. qu. 27. observes out of
S. Austine. Suitable to the mournings of the Earth, is the mourning in my text:
the dwelling places of the shepherds shall mourne] It is a translation from
living things to things without life; from shepherds to their dwelling houses:
The dwelling places of the shepherds shall mourn, that is, the shepherds
themselves shall mourn, when they shall behold the spoil, overthrow, and
desolation of their dwelling houses. Our English reading then for the sense is
good, The dwelling places of the shepherds shall perish.

You see now the desolation of the dwelling places of the shepherds. Will you
have the reason of it? Look back then to the but-now cited places of Esaias,
Jeremy, Hosea, Joel, for the reason, why the earth is said to mourn. The
reason is the same for the earths mourning, and the mourning of the shepherds
dwelling houses: even sin and iniquity. Whence you may learn this lesson:
Sin and iniquity are means to lay waste and make desolate [our dwelling
houses] yea the fairest, and goodliest buildings; all manner of buildings.

This point I might at large demonstrate and make plain unto you, by the
ruins of time: by the ruins of the old world of Sod^me, Gomorah, and their
sisters; of Babel; of the first, and second Temples; of the Eastern Churches;
of the Abbeyes, and Monasteries of this land. But for this present I will
content my self only to deliver unto you, and that briefly, a few brief notes
for your further instruction, and meditation.

Is it true? Are si^ne and iniquity means to lay waste, and make desolate all
manner of buildings? Why then (beloved) you must acknowledge and confess, that
the crying sins of your forefathers have been the cause why Gods own house,
and The Chapel at Marston Meisey ruined.
Chapel among you, is become waste, and desolate. This meditation concerns
some of you specially: you among whom God sometimes had his Sion, and
Jerusalem, his house of prayer, and sacred Chapel. O it is a fearful
judgment of God upon you, that he has removed his kingdom, and your
candlestick from among you. But you will lay this blame upon your forefathers.
I cannot excuse them. Yet must I tell you, that except ye amend your lives, a
worse thing may befall you.

And you (beloved) who have your dwelling near unto this House of God, the
place of assembly for his Saints, will you match your neighbors in sin, and
iniquity; and not fear their punishments? When first I beheld, and considered
the condition of this House, wherein we are now assembled, it seemed to me that
desolation had begun to set her foot here. What else could your selves think
of, or hope for, as often as you beheld her decayed estate?

Such Churches as this, if any be so bad as this, within this Realm, may give
some occasion to that same scandalous assertion, of one of our English Gul.
Reginald. Caluino turc. lib. 2. cap. 15. in argumento Libri. In Anglicano and
Turcico ministerio summa est conuenien^ia. Templa vtrinque sunt similia, sed
Turcis ornatiora and magnificentiora. page 313.
fugitives beyond the seas: that the Churches in Turkey are m^re sumptuous and
stately, then ours in England. Of ours he says, that they are Apud vest^os
Euangelices -- Ecclesiae pleru^que turpes, sordidae, and immundae tacent. At
hominum nobilium, mercatorum, iuridicorum, Baronum, Comitu^que d^^ibus, nih^l
ornatius, nihil op^rosius, and in his po^^endis h^min^s priuatiregias aliquando
gazas consumu^t. Ibid. page 318.
turpes, sordidae, immundae; foul, unclean, and sluttish. To persuade you to
repair her decayed places, I would it were within the compass of my
Rhetoric. Yet let me propound one question unto you, Hag. 1.4. Is it time for
your selves to dwell in your sciled houses, and this house to lie waste?
Consider your own ways in your own hearts, and give your answer unto God.

A second note for your further instruction, and meditation follows. Is it
true? Are sin and iniquity means to lay waste and make desolate all manner
of buildings? How then is it, that our dwelling houses do yet stand, and
flourish? Our sins, and iniquities, are exceeding impudent, and saucy; they
are ascended into the presence of God, and do stand like Satan among his
children before his face. Yet for all this impudency, and sauciness of our
sins and iniquities, God is pleased to suffer our dwelling houses to be in
safety. The consideration of this point may stir us up to a grateful
agnition, and acknowledgment of Gods singular bounty, and longanimitie. It is
out of the bounty of the Lord that the earth, since the time it first was
cursed for the fall of man, does to this day yield f^uit in abundance for the
use of man. That our possessions, habitations, dwelling houses, and Churches
are not laid waste, and made desolate, it is to be ascribed to Gods long
sufferance, and long animitie. Of which I shall (God willing) anon speak more
fully, when I shall have considered the words of the second sequel, or
consequent of Gods speech, which are: The top of Carmel shall wither.

The top of Carmel] There were two hills of this name, as St Hierome teaches;
both in Judea; the one in the southern climate of that country where on Nabal
the husband of Abigail did dwell, 1 Samuel 25.2. the other near unto Ptolemais,
toward the sea coast, upon which Elias prayed for rain, 1 Kings 8.42. St
Hierome seems to doubt; which of these two Carmels our prophet here
intends. But Ribera resolves for that Carmel, which was near unto
Ptolemais, because it did appertain to the lot of the ten tribes, against whom
Amos in this book prophecieth.

This Carmel was a hill of much fatness, and fertility: whereupon it may, as
proverbially, be taken for any such place. St Hierome writing upon Esaias. 16.
says, it is the Scriptures idiome, and proper form of speech evermore to
compare the rich hill Carmel, to fertility, and abundance. One of the Hebrew
R. D^uid apud Dra^u^^.
Doctors says, that Carmel is a general name for all fruitful arable fields,
and vineyards. A great Pagnin.
Hebrician says, that because the hill, Carmel, had by it a valley of
exceeding feracitie and fruitfulness, therefore Carmel is appellatiuely taken
for any place set with corn, trees, or vines; and specially withstanding
corn, with new and fat wheat while it is in ear: though another Marinus in
Arca Noe.
Hebrician of like note, affirms that because Carmel collectiuely signifies
standing corn, or new wheat yet in the ear, therefore a certain region in the
province of Canaan of extraordinary fertility (as also a hill, and city there)
was called after this name Carmel. Whatsoever Carmel be in this place, whether
a proper name, or an appellatiue, out of doubt it betokens a place of much
fruitfulnes. Following the stream of expositors, I am of opinion, that Carmel
in my text, is that same fruitful mountain of Judea by Ptolemais.

The top of Carmel] A place fit by reason of the woods there to lurk, and lie
hid in; as is plain by Amos, 9.3. Though they hide themselves in the top of
Carmel, I will search, and take them out thence.

The top of Carmel] In the Hebrew it is the head of Carmel. The head, or top of
Carmel, is the Scripture phrase, to express whatsoever is best in Carmel. By
the like phrase we say Caput vnguenti, the head or the top of the ointment, to
signify the best of the ointment.

The top of Carmel] Pagnine thus translateth it, vertex loci fertilis: the top
of the fruitful place. And Iunius thus: prostantissimum aruorum: the best of
the fields. Both Pagnine, and Iunius, do take Carmel here for an appellatiue,
and not for a propper name.

The top of Carmel shall wither] shall wax dry, or be dried up. That is, where
most fruitful fields, and pastures are, there shall be a defect, and want of
necessaries for man's life.

Thus have you the exposition of this last clause. Now be patient, I pray you,
while from hence I commend one lesson unto you. It is this: For the sins of a
people, God will make the top of their Carmel to wither. I speak it more
plainly.

For the sins of a people, God will make. their best grounds to yield them
little, or no profit. For proof of this point, you will be pleased to hear
the evidence of the holy Spirit, given in the word of life, Deuteronomy. 28.20. Thus
says the Lord: because of the wickedness of thy works, whereby thou have
forsaken me, the Lord shall smite thee with blasting, and with mildew: the
Heaven which is over thy head shall be brass, and the earth that is under
thee, shall be iron: in stead of rain, the Lord shall give thee dust and
ashes, even from heaven shall it come down upon thee until thou be destroyed.

In the 2 chapter of Hosea, and the 5 verse, because Israel had played the
harlot, and done shamefully, departing from the Lord, thus says the Lord: I
will take away from Israel my corn in the time thereof, and my wine in the
season thereof, and will recover my wool, and my flax, which I lent her, to
cover her shame. Mark I beseech you, the manner of the Lords speech, my corn,
my wine, my wool, my flax; they are none of ours, they are all the Lords. The
Lord has lent them us to serve our turns, and necessit^es: if we abuse them
to idolatry, or prophanes, he will take them from us, and recover them again
unto himself.

In the 4. Chapter of Hosea, and the 3. verse, because there is no truth, nor
mercy, nor knowledge of God in the land; but every on breaks out by swearing,
by lying, by killing, by stealing, by whoring, and blood touches blood, thus
says the Lord: the land shall mourn, and every one that dwells therein
shall be cut off, with the beasts of the field, and with the fowls of heaven,
and also the fishes of the sea shall be taken away. If so, what good then comes
to you from Carmel, from your best and most fruitful grounds?

In the 8. chapter of Hosea, and the 7. verse, because Israel transgressing the
covenant of the Lord, and trespassing against his law, had sown the wind, thus
says the Lord: they shall reap the whirlewind: it has no stalk; the bud
shall bring forth no meal; if so be it bring forth, the strangers shall devour
it. If so, what profit then can we, matching Israel in their most grievous
transgressions, and trespasses, expect from Carmel, our most fruitful, and
pleasant fields?

The wisest King that ever sacred writ made mention of, has this saying, Prou.
13.25. The belly of the wicked shall want. True great Solomon. The belly of the
wicked man shall be empty. His Carmel, the very best of his possessions, shall
yield him little profit.

To make an end of this discourse, I would I could write it in your hearts, what
the sweetest singer, Psa. 107.34. delivers unto you, touching this point: it
is worthy your best remembrance: A fruitful land God turns into barrennes,
for the wickedness of them that dwell therein. This one place (had I troubled
you with no more) would have been a pregnant, and sufficient proof of my
propounded doctrine. What fruit can you look for out of barrenness? And by
this one place you see, that God turns a fruitful land into barrenness, for
the w^ckednesse of them that dwell therein. You must then acknowledge the lesson
commended unto you to be good, and true; namely, that for the sins of a
people, God will make their Carmel to wither; that for the sins of a people,
God will make best grounds to yield them little, or no profit.

Now let us see, what use we may make of this doctrine for our further
instructions.

A first use, is to admonish such as do dwell in delectable, pleasant, well
watered, and fruitful places, that they boast not overmuch of their fertile,
and sweet possessions: since there is no land so d^lectable to the eye, or
fruitful to the purse, but it may be turned into a wilderness. If for our
sins God shall come against us in the fierceness of his wrath; we shall be
as Esaias 1.9.
Sodom, and like unto Gomorah: our land shall burn with brimstone, and Deuteronomy.
29.23.
salt; it shall not be sown, nor shall bring forth; neither shall any grass
grow therein. O Lord, deal not with us after our sins, neither reward us
according to our iniquities.

A second use, is to warn rich men, the richer sort among you, that weighing
rightly the power of Almighty God, by which he makes the top of Carmel to
wither, and turns your fruitful fields into barrenness; you will beware of
insolency, and contain your selves in modesty, and submission. Know this;
there is no man has a foot of ground, or never so small a possession to dwell
in, but he has it at Gods hand; and upon this condition; that he keep his
statutes, and commandments. Which if you disobey, contemn, and cast behind
you, assure your selves, your riches are none of yours, you are not the right
owners of them but mere usurpers. The Lord of hoasts will send an host of
enemies against you.

Art thou rich in money? thou art in danger of thieves art thou plentiful in
h^ush^ld stuff? thou are in danger of fire: have thou much gold? the rust does
venime it, and thee: is thine apparel gorgious? the moth will eat it: have
thou store of cattle? rottenness may consume them: is thy maintenance by
husbandry? blastings and mildewes will hinder thee, the ^^c^ 1.^.
palmer worm, will eat thy fruits, that which the palmer worm shall leave, the
grash^pper shall eat; that which the grasshopper shall leave, the canker worm
shall eat; and that which the canker worm shall leave, the caterpiller shall
eat. So many, and many more enemies can the Lord of hoasts send to fight
against you; if you hate to be reformed, and cast his commandments behind you.

A third and the last use of my propounded doctrine, is, to stir up my self,
and all you that hear me this day, gratefully, and thankfully to recount the
mercifulness, patience, and long sufferance of our God. Our sins have
deserved it at his hands, that he should make the top of our Carmel to wither;
that he should make our best grounds to yield us little or no profit; that he
should smite us with blasting, and mildew; that he should make the Heaven over
our head, brass; and the Earth under us, iron: that instead of rain, he
should give us aust and ashes; that he should take from us, his corn, his
wine, his wool, his flax, and whatsoever good thing else, he has lent us for
our use. All this, and much more have our sins deserved: and yet God
withholdeth from us his revenging hand. O the depth of the riches of the
mercifulness, patience, and long sufferance of our God.

Yet stay ye so^n^s of Belial, and imps of Hell; ye wicked ones, who serve
under Satan's Banner. Gods mercifulness, patience, and long sufferance, is to
you very small advantage. S. Basil treating upon the words of the covetous rich
man, Luke 12.18. those words: I will pull down my barnes, and build greater,
tells you that God his goodness, extended to you in your fields, or elsewhere,
brings upon you in the end the greater punishment.

True great Basil. God his justice goes on (...), slowly, and in order. Long
before thy time was this lesson learned in Natures school. Lib. 1. c. 1.
Valerius Maximus who lived under Tiberius Caesar, recounting some of the
sacrileges of Dionysius, clearly carried with frompes, and mockeries, says,
Lento gradu ad vindictam sui diuina procedit ira: the wrath of God proceeds
to the execution of vengeance, with a remiss and slow pace; but evermore, as
he well adds, tarditatem supplicij grauitate compensat: it recompenseth the
slacknesse of punishment, with the heaviness thereof.

I will not weary your religious ears with profane, though fit sentences for
this argument, out of Lib. 3. od. 2. Raro antecedentem scelestum Deseruit pede
poena claudo.
Horace, Lib. 1. cleg. 9. Ah miser, et si quis primo perjuria celat, Sera tamen
tacitis poena venit pedibus
Tibullus, Lib. 3. -- Quis enim laesos impune putaret Esse deos? --
Lucan, and Lib. deijs qui tarde a numine corripiuntur.
Plutarch; nor with those well known proverbs, Dij lenti, sed certi vindices,
Dij lane os pedes habent: Tacito pede, and Cunctabundus natura Deus. From
Natures school I recall my self to the God of Nature; who though in his word
of eternal truth he proclaims himself (...) a Exodus 34.6.
God slow to anger, and is for such acknowledged by the never failing
testifications, and reports of divinely inspired Nehem. 9.17. Psalm. 86.15.
Psalm. 103.8. and 145.8. Romans 2 4. 2. Pet. 3.9.
Prophets and Apostles: is notwithstanding in the same word noted to Exodus 20.6.
and 34.7. Deuteronomy. 5.9. Ierem. 32.18.
recompense the iniquity of the Fathers into the bosom of their children after
them.

It must stand ever good: Quo tardius, eo grauius, that the longer God is
before he punishes, he punishes so much the more grievously. Though for a
time he be pleased to hold his tongue, and to walk as with woollen feet; yet
at length shall we, or our posterity, find by woeful experience, that he has
a rod of iron to rule us, yea, and to break us in pieces, like potters vessels.

Wherefore (dearly beloved in the Lord) while God is pleased, to withhold from
us his own hand of Justice, and to stretch over us his other of Mercy, to the
blessing of us in our fields in our cattle, in our store, let us not be wedded
to the hardness of our own hearts; let us not dwell in our old sins, nor
heap new upon them, lest so we treasure up unto our selves wrath against the
day of wrath.

Let us rather even now, while it is now, cast away all works of darkness,
and put on the armor of light: let us take no further thought for our flesh to
fulfill the lusts of it. Let us walk no more, as formerly we have done, in
gluttony, in drunkenness, in chambering, in wantonness, in strife, in envying,
in deceit, in falsehood, in vanity; but let us walk honestly as in the day;
and put we on the Lord Jesus. Whatsoever things are true, and honest, and just,
and pure, and do pertain to love, and are of good report; if there be any
virtue, or praise, think we on these things. Think we on these things to do
them, and we shall not need to fear any de olation to our houses, or
barrenness to our grounds; our dwelling houses shall not mourn, or perish;
the top of our Carmel shall not wither; our fields shall bring forth increase
unto us. For God, even our own God, shall give us his blessing God will bless
us to pass the time of our pilgrimage here in peace, and plenty; and when the
day of our separation shall be, that we must leave the earth, a vale of tears,
and miseri^, he will translate us to Jerusalem above, the place of eternal
(...), and felicity, where this corrup^ible shall put on incorruption and our
mortality shall be swallowed up of life. So be it.

THE Sixth Lecture.
AMOS 1.3, 4, 5. Thus says the Lord: For three transgressions of Damascus, and
for four I will not turn to it, because they have threshed Gilead with
threshing instruments of iron.

Therefore will I send a fire into the house of Hazael, and it shall devour the
palaces of Benhadad.

I will break also the bars of Damascus, and cut off the inhabitant of
Bikeath-aven: and him that holds the scepter out of Beth-eden, and the people
of Aram shall go into captivity unto Kir, says the Lord.


THough in this prophecy there be mention made of Judah, yet was Amos by the
holy spirit deputed, and directed with his message peculiarly and properly to
the ten revolted Tribes, the kingdom of Israel. The mention that is made of
Judah, is made but incidently, and by the way. The scope of the prophecy is
Israel, as I showed in my Page 7.
first Lecture.

If Israel be the scope of this prophecy, how comes it to pass, that the
Prophet bestows the residue of this chapter, and a part of the next, in
making rehearsal of foraine nations, their transgressions, and punishments?
Why does he acquaint Israel with his burdensome prophecies against the Syrians,
the Philistines, the Tyrians, the Edomites, the Ammonites, the Moabites? why
does he not rather discharge his function, and duty laid upon him? and check
the Israelites, and terrify them, and reprove them for their evil deeds?

The reasons why Amos, sent of purpose with a message to the Israelites, does
first prophecy against the Syrians, and other foreign nations, are three.

1 That he might be the more patiently heard of his countrymen the Israelites.
The Israelites seeing their Prophet Amos so sharp against the Syrians, and
other their enemies, could not, but with more quiet hear him, when he should
prophecy against them also. Consolatio quaedam est, afflictio inimici: some
comfort it is to a distressed natural man, to see his enemy in distress
likewise.

2 That they might have no cause to wonder, if God should at any time come
against them in vengeance, seeing that God would not spare the Syrians, and
other their neighbor Countries, though they were destitute of the light of
Gods word, and ignorant of his will.

3 That they might the more fear at the words of this prophecy, when they
should see the Syrians, and other nations, afflicted, and tormented accordingly.

Here might they thus have argued? Will not God spare our neighbors, the
Syrians, and the rest? Then out of doubt he will not spare us. They silly people
never knew the holy will of God, and yet shall they be so severely punished? How
then shall we escape, who knowing Gods holy will have contemned it?

From the reasons why Amos first prophecieth against foreign nations, and then
against the Lords people Israel, I come now to treat particularly of his
prophecy against the Syrians, verse. 3, 4, 5.

Wherein I commend to your christian considerations three parts.

1 A preface, proeme, or entrance, verse. 3. Thus says the Lord. 2 A Prophecy,
in the 3, 4, and 5. verses For three transgressions of Damascus and for four,
etc. 3 A conclusion, in the end of the 5. verse, Says the Lord.
The preface, and the conclusion do make for the authority of the prophecy,
verse. 3. and 5.

In the prophecy these parts may be observed.

1 A general accusation of the Syrians, verse the 3. For three transgressions
of Damascus, and for four. 2 A protestation of almighty God against them, I
will not turn to it. 3 The great sin, by which they so offended God: their
extreme cruelty, verse 3. They have threshed Gilead with threshing instruments
of iron. 4 The punishments to be laid upon them for such cruelty.
These punishments are here set down generally, and specially.

Generally verse. ^he 4. I will send a fire into the house of Hazael, and it
shall devour the palaces of Ben-hadad. Specially verse. the 5. I will break also
the bars of Damascus, and cut off the inhabitant of Bikeath-auen: and him
that holds the sc^pter out of Beth-eden, and the people of Aram shall go
into captivity unto Kir.
Thus says the Lord] It is a very usual thing with the Prophets, so to begin
their special Prophecies, to let the world understand, that they feign nothing
out of their own brains, but that whatsoever they speak they have received
it from the spirit of the Lord. Thus says, not Amos, but in Amos the Lord. The
Lord, the powerful Jehovah of whom you heard at large out of my third lecture
upon this chapter.

Thus says the Lord] the powerful Jehovah, See Zect 3.
who made the heavens and Psalm. 104 2.
spread them out like a curtain, to cloth himself with light as with a
garment; and can again Esai. 50.3.
cloth the heavens with darkness, and make a sack their covering: who made
the sea, to Psalm. 1^ 4.3.
lay the beams of his chamber therein, and Jerem. 5.22.
placed the sands for bounds unto it, never to be passed over, howsoever the
waves thereof shall rage, and roar; and can with a word smite the pride
thereof: at his rebuke Esaias. 50.2.
the floods shall be turned into a wilderness; the sea shall be dried up; the
fish shall rot for want of water, and die for thirst: who mad the dry land, and
so Psalm. 10 4.5.
set it upon foundations, that it should never move; and can P^al. 104.6.
cover her again with the deep, as with a garment, and so Psalm 24.20.
rock her, that she shall reele to and fro, and stagger like a drunken man.

Thus says the Lord] This powerful Jehovah, whose throne is the heaven of
heavens, and the sea his floare to walk in, and the earth his footstool to
tread upon, who has a chair in the conscience, and sits in the heart of
man, and possesses his secretest reins, and divides betwixt the flesh and
the skin, and shakest his inmost powers, Psalm. 29.8.
as the thunder shakes the wilderness of Cades.

Thus says the Lord.] Has the Lord said, and shall he not do it? has he
spoken, and shall he not accomplish it? Balaam confesses as much unto Balak,
Number. 23.19. God is not as man, that he should lie, nor as the son of man,
that he should repent. Indeed says Samuel (1 Samuel 15.29.) The strength of
Israel will not lie nor repent: for he is not as man, that he should repent.
All his words, yea all the titles of his words are yea and Amen. Verily says
our Savior, Matthew. 5.18. Heaven and earth shall perish, before one jot, or
any one tittle of Gods law shall escape unfulfilled.

Thus says the Lord] Then out of doubt it must come to pass. Hereby you may
be persuaded of the authority of this Prophecy: and not of this only, but of
all other the Prophecies of holy Scripture; that neither this, nor any other
Prophecies of old, is destitute of divine authority. This point touching the
authority of holy Scripture I delivered unto you in my second lecture, and
therefore have now the less need to spend time therein. Yet a word or two
thereof.

God almighty spoke in old i am to our fathers by the mouth of Moses, Exodus
4.12. and not by the mouth of Moses only, but by the mouths of all his
Prophets, Heb. 1.1. and 2 Peter 1.20. Know this that no prophecy in the
Scripture is of any private motion. He gives the reason hereof ver. 21. for
the prophecy in old time came not by the will of man, but holy men of God spoke
as they were moved by the holy Ghost. Hence sprang those usual and familiar
speeches in the books of the Prophets; The word of the Lord came unto me; the
Lord God has spoken; and this in my text, Thus says the Lord. This Lord, who
thus spoke in old time by his Prophets, did in fullness of time, when he sent
to consummate, and perfect the work of man's redemption, speak by his blessed
Evangelists, and Apostles.

This appears by the faithful promise made unto them, Matthew. 10.19. Take no
thought how, or what ye shall speak; for it shall be given you, what ye shall
say. It is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your father, that speaks in
you. It must stand ever true what is recorded, 2 Timothy 3.16. the whole Scripture
(and every parcel thereof) is given by inspiration of God, and has inward
witness from that Spirit, which is the author of all truth.

Here may you note the harmony, consent, and agreement, of all the Prophets,
Evangelists, and Apostles, from the first unto the last: not one of them spoke
one word of a natural man in all their ministeries; the words which they
spoke, were the words of him that sent them: they spoke not of themselves, God
spoke in them. Whenever were the time, whatsoever were the means, whosoever
were the man; wheresoever were the place, whatsoever were the people, the words
were the Lords.

Thus says the Lord] How then dare we, potters cla^, lift up our hands against
him, that fashioned us? How dare we absent our selves from his house of prayer,
where God in and by his holy word speaks unto us? How dare we, when we are
come to this place, behave our selves carelessly, negligently, irreuerently?

But I will not at this time press you any further with this point, having
heretofore in my fourth lecture occasioned by the Lords roaring out of Sion,
and uttering his vow from Jerusalem, exhorted you in many words, to the due
performance of your dutiful service of God in this place. For this present, I
will only give you a taste of the sweetness of the word of the Lord, conveyed
unto us by the ministeries of his sanctified Prophets, Evangelists, and
Apostles. It is the Lords most royal and celestial testament, the oracles of
his heavenly sanctuary, the only key unto us of his revealed counsels; milk
from his sacred breasts; the earnest and pledge of his favor to his Church,
the light of our feet, joy of our hearts, breath of our nostrils, pillar of our
faith, anchor of our hope, ground of our love, evidences, and deeds of our
future blessedness.

Thus far the preface, proeme, or entrance, making for the authority of this
prophecy; Thus says the Lord.

Now follows the prophecy against the Syrians: wherein I commended to your
Christian considerations four things 1 The general accusation of the Syrians,
verse. 3. For three transgressions of Damascus, and for four. 2 The Lords
protestation against them, verse the 3. I will not turn to it. 3 The
particular sin, by which the Syrians had so offended God, verse the 3. They
have threshed Gilead with threshing instruments of iron. 4 The punishments
attending them for this sin; set down generally, and specially. Generally
verse 4. I will send a fire into the house of Hazael, and it shall devour the
palaces of Ben-hadad. Specially verse. the 5. I will break also the bars of
Damascus, and cut off the inhabitant of Bikeath-aven: and him that holds the
scepter out of Beth-eden, and the people of Aram shall go into captivity unto
Kir.



Order requires that I begin with the first part; the accusation of the
Syrians, verse 3.

For three transgressions of Damascus and for foure] This Damascus was a very
ancient city, built, as Arias Montan. In ^^t. lib. 36. Stephan. Adrichom.
H^er^n. H^^. qu ^^t in Genesis
some conjecture, by Eliez^r, the steward of Abraham's house, who was surnamed
Damascus, Genesis 15.2. The first mention of this city is Genesis 14.15. A^ud H c.
ibid and Io ephesians. a^^^q Iu^^^. Lib 1 ca^ 7. ^^ll^t in G^n. cap. 15.
Others holding the name of this city to have been more ancient than Abraham,
do attribute the building of this city to Huz, one of the sons of Aram, Genesis
10.23. Whereupon Dama^cus was called also Aram, as In Esaias 17.
S. Hierome witnesses. Whatsoever were the antiquity of this city, it is
plain by Esa. 7.8, that it was the Metropolitan, and chiefest city of Syria.

I need not tell you what Jews Vertomannus, a gentleman of Rome, saw in this
city about some hundred years since; as the place where Caine slew Abel; the
place where the body of the Prophet Zachary lay; the tower wherein S. Paul
was committed to prison; and the like: that would be beside my purpose. For the
present know ye, that Damascus was the Metropolitan, and chiefest city of
Syria; whence by a figure, the figure Synecdoche, it is here in my text, put
for the whole country of Syria. By this figure Synecdoche in the name Damascus,
our Prophet here threatens all inhabitants in the country about Damascus; he
cites all the Syrians to appear before the tribunal seat of Almighty God,
because they had unjustly troubled and vexed the city Gilead. But of this
hereafter. Now let us see, what is meant by the three transgressions, and
four, here mentioned in the general accusation of the Syrians.

For three transgressions, and for foure] The word Transgressions, signifies,
whatsoever detestable thoughts, words, or deeds may be conceived, uttered, or
acted against Gods law, our holy faith, and Christian duties. These three
transgressions of Damascus, are in the judgment of Arias Montanus, the same
with the three transgressions of Azzah, and of Tyrus, and of Edom, and of
Ammon, and of Moab, and of Judah, and of Israel, so often repeated in this and
the next chapters, namely, the vain worship of strange Gods, whoredoms, and
murders. The fourth, says he, is added in the text, even their barbarous
cruelty: They threshed Gilead with threshing instruments of iron.

For three transgressions of Damascus, and for four.] S. Hierom expounds
these words, as if the Syrians of Damascus had dealt cruelly against the people
of God, not once, or twice only, but also a third and fourth time, to this
sense: if the Syrians had persecuted my people, but once, or a second time, I
should have pardoned them; but now when they have not ceased a third, and
fourth time, to practice their cruelty upon my chosen people, even to thresh
them with threshing instruments of iron, shall I not visit for these things? is
it not time that I beat them with rods? is it not necessary that I turn from
them the countenance of my clemency?

For three transgressions of Damascus, and for four.] Apud Mercerum.
Some refer these three, and four transgressions, to three, and four
generations; thus: though God uses to forbear, and pardon men's sins to the
third and fourth generation, yet in the fourth he will undoubtedly execute his
vengeance. Ibid.
Some others do ma^e this sense of these words: God uses to remit, and to
forgive any man his sins for thrice; but f the fourth time he sin likewise,
there is no hope of remission. According to that which we read, Job 33.29. All
these things will God work twice or thrice with a man, that he may turn back
his soul from the pit, to be illuminated in the light of the living. Twice, or
thrice, will God chastise us for our sins; but if we sin the fourth time, woe
unto us, we are left unto our selves.

For three transgressions and for four.] Mercer. Winckleman.
Some do join these numbers to make seven; because the number of seven in
holy Scripture, is a number of plenitude and perfection, as Leu. 26.18. If you
will not obey me, I will punish you seven times for your sins. To which sense
here by three transgressions, and four, that is, by seu^n, they affirm the
multitude and greatness of the sins of Damascus to be designed, and pointed
at.

For three transgressions of Damascus, and for four.] The last exposition,
wherewith I will now hold you, is the most M rcer. Calvin. Drusius.
general, proper, and significant: to understand by three, and four, which
make a certain number, a number infinite and vncertain^. For as often as he
will, God forgiueth, though we sin a hundred times. It is but the custom of
the Scripture thus to speak. God waits for us twice and thrice, that is, a
good while, to have us return from our evil ways unto repentance; but the
fourth time, that is, at length, when he sees us persist in our impenitency,
he reproves us, casts us away, and leaves us in our sins.

You have hitherto the general accusation of the Syrians, whereby you know
they were defiled with three transgressions, and with four; with very many
sins. Now follows the protestation of Almighty God against them for their
sins.

I will not turn to it] to them; to the inhabitants of Damascus; to the
Syrians: that is, I will have no mercy on them. These words are diversely
rendered by expositors: by the author of the vulgar Latin, and by Gualter, Non
conuertam eum. I will not turn it: that is, I will not recall the Syrians of
Damascus to the right way, they shall run on to their own perdition. By
Calvin, Non propitius ero ei; I will not be favorable to the Syrians of
Damascus; I will not return unto mercy. By Mercer, Non parcam ei; I will not
spare the Syrians of Damascus: According to their deserts, so shall it be
measured to them. By Iunius, Non auertam istud: I will not turn away the
punishment, wherewith I have resolved to punish them. I am the Lord, and am not
changed; I will send a fire into the house of Hazael, and it shall devour the
Palaces of Benhadad, etc.

The sum of both, the Accusation and Protestation, is: if the Syrians had
offended but once, or a second time, I would have been favorable to them, and
would have recald them into the way, that so they might have been converted,
and escaped my punishments: but now whereas they do daily heap transgression
upon transgression, and find no end of sinning, I have hardened my face against
them, and will not suffer them to be converted, but indurate, and obstinate as
they are; I will utterly destroy them. For three transgressions of Damascus and
for four, I will not turn to it.

Having thus expounded these words, give me leave out of them to gather such
notes, as may make for our further instruction, and reformation.

My first note is, Three transgressions and four do pluck down from Heaven
the most certain wrath and vengeance of God upon the transgressors. The
doctrine.

Three transgressions, and four, that is, Many sins do pluck down from
heaven the most certain wrath and vengeance of God, upon the sinners. God is
of pure eyes, and beholds not iniquity; he has laid righteousness to the
rule, and weighed his justice in a balance. The sentence is passed forth, and
must stand uncontrollable, even as long as sun, and moon. Tribulation and
anguish upon every soul that does evil. The soul that sins it shall be
punished. God makes it good by an oath, Deuteronomy. 32.41. that he will whet his
glittering sword, and his hand shall take hold on judgment to execute
vengeance upon sinners. His soul hates and abhors sin; his law curses,
and condemns sin; his hand smites, and scourges sin. Sin was his motive
to cast down Angels into Hell, to thrust Adam out of Paradise, to turn cities
into ashes, to ruinate nations, to torment his own bowels in the similitude of
sinful flesh: because of sin he drowned the old world; and because of sin,
ere long will burn this. All this makes for the truth of my propounded
doctrine.

Three transgressions and four, that is, Many sins do pluck down from
heaven the most certain wrath and vengeance of God upon the sinners. A lesson
(dearly beloved) able to make us (if grace be in us) to be wary, and to take
heed, that we be not overtaken with three transgressions and with four. It is
a very dangerous thing to add sin to sin. This is done Perkins Cas. Consc.
three manner of ways.

1 By committing one sin in the neck of another. 2 By falling often into the
same sin. 3 By lying in sin without repentance.
Here we must remember, that we are not simply condemned for our particular
sins, but for our continuance and residence in them. Our sins committed do
make us worthy of damnation; but our living and abiding in them without
repentancei, s the thing that brings damnation.

Great is the D. King B. of London in Ion. Lect. 31.
strength that sin gathers, by growing, and going forwards. The growth of sin
In Amos 1.3. fol. 43, etc.
Albertus Magnus shadoweth in marshalling the order of sinning: first is
peccatum cogitationis, next loquutionis, thirdly operis, then desperationis.
The beginning of sin is inward, an evil thought; it hastes out into an
evil word; then follows the wicked work: what is the end of all?
Desperation, waited on by final impenitency.

Tom. 5 page 93. E.
This growth of sin, S. Hierome plainly expresses. The first step is, cogitare,
quae mala sunt; a wicked thought; the next, cogitationibus adquiescere
peru^rsis; to like well of wicked thoughts; the third, quod mente decreueris,
opere complere; to put that in action, which thou have wickedly imagined. What
is the end of all? Non agere poenitentiam, and in suo sibi c^mplacere delicto:
even impenitencie and a delight or pleasure to do naughtily.

Hugo the Cardinal in sins proceeding, notes, In Psalm 7.4, 5. Persequatur]
per suggestiones. Co^prehendat] p^r consensum. Conculcet] per actum. and
gloriam meam in pulu^rem deducet] per consuetudinem.
1 Suggestion. 2 Consent. 3 Action. 4 Custom, and pleasure therein.


Suggestion is from the Devil, who casts into our hearts impure and ungodly
thoughts: the rest are from our selves; (such is the corruption of our nature,)
we readily consent to the Devils motion; what he moves us to, we act
accordingly; we take pleasure in it, and make it our custom. This Custom is
not only a grave to bury our souls in, but a great stone also rolled to the
mouth of it, to keep them down for ever. I say no more to this point, but
beseech you for Gods sake, to be wary, and heedfull, that you be not overtaken
with three transgressions, and with four.

You have now my propounded doctrine; and the first use to be made of it. My
doctrine was.

Three transgressions and four, that is, Many sins do pluck down from
heaven the most certain wrath and vengeance of God upon the sinners. The first
use is, to make us wary and heedfull, that we be not overtaken with three
transgressions, and with four.

A second use, is to move us to a serious contemplation of the wonderful
patience of Almighty God: who did so graciously forbear to punish those
Syrians of Damascus, till they had provoked him to displeasure by three
transgressions, and by four. God is merciful, and gracious, long-suffering,
and of great goodness. He cries unto the fools, See Sermon. 5. upon Hebr. 10.
page 76. King upon Ion. Lect. 31. page 420.
(and are not we such fool^s?) Prou. 1.22. O ye foolish, how long will ye love
foolishness? He cries unto the faithless (and is our faith living?) Matt.
17.17. O generation faithless and crooked, how long now shall I suffer you? He
cries unto the Jews, (and are not we as bad as the Jews? Matthew 23 37.
) O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often? He dressed his vineyard with the best and
kindliest husbandry, that his heart could invent, Esai. 5.2. afterward he
looked for fruit; he requ red it not the first hour, but tarrying the full
time, he looked that it should bring forth grapes, in the autumn, and time of
vintage. He waits for the fruit of his L^k 13 6.
fig tree three years; and is contented to be entreated, that digging, and
dunging, and expectation a fourth year may be bestowed upon it.

Exodus 34.6.
Thus we see Gods patience is wonderful; He is merciful, gracious, long
suffering, and of great goodness. Yet may we not hereon presume. Our safest
way shall be to rise at the first call; if we defer our obedience to the second
call, we may be prevented. Then may God justly say to us, as he said unto the
Jews, Esai. 65.12. I called, and ye did not answer; I spoke, and ye heard
not. And albeit some fall seven times a day, and rise again; albeit to some
sinners it pleases the Lord to iterate his sufferance, yet may not we take
encouragement thereby, to iterate our misdoings. We know that God punished his
Angels in heaven for one breach; See Lect. 12. p. 135. King upon Ioh. Lect. 31.
page 421.
Adam for one morsel; Miriam for one slander; Moses for one angry word; Achan
for one sacrilege; Ezechias for once showing his treasures to the Ambassadors
of Babel; Josias for once going to war without asking counsel of the Lord;
and Ananias and Sapphira for once lying to the holy Ghost.

Esai. 59.1.
Is the Lords hand now shortened that he cannot be as speedy, and quick, in
auenging himself upon us for our offenses? Far be it from us so to think.
God is not slack in coming, as some count slacknesse: He makes the clouds
his Chariots, Psa. 18.11. Reu^l 22.12.
he rides upon the Cherubins, he flies with the wings of the wind; and so he
comes; and comes quickly, and his reward is with him to give to every one
according as his works shall be.

THE Seventh Lecture.
AMOS 1.3. Because they have threshed Gilead with threshing instruments of iron.


THis is the third part of this Prophecy: the description of that great sin by
which the Syrians so much offended. Let us first examine the words.

Gilead] Gilead, or Galaad, or Galeed, in holy Scripture is sometime a hill,
sometime a city, and sometime a Region, or country. A hill, Genesis 31. So named
as appears verse 47. of the heap of stones, which was made thereon, as a
witness of the league between Jacob and Laban: for Gilead is interpreted an
Aceruus testimonii.
heap of witness.

This mountain Gilead, is the Adrichom.
greatest of all beyond Jordan: it is in length 50. miles; and as it is
continued, and runs along, it receives diverse names. From Arnon to the city
Cedar, it is called Galaad; then to Bozra it is named Seir, afterward Hermon,
and so reaching to Damascus it is joined to Libanus: and therefore as S.
Comment. in hunc locum.
Hierom says, in the 22. of Ier. verse 6. Lebanon is called the head, or
beginning of Galeed.

Gilead, or Galaad, or Galeed is also a city built upon mount Gilead, as S.
Hierome witnesses. Here was borne and buried the valiant Captain and Judge of
Israel, Iephte, when he had judged Israel six years; as Judge. 12.7 Against
this city Hoseah prophesies, cap. 6.8. Gilead is a city of them that work
iniquity, and is polluted with blood.

Gilead, or Galaad, or Galeed, is also a region or country, called D^ut. 34 1.
The land of Gilead, possessed by the Reubenites. Gadites, and half the tribe
of Manasseh, as Number. 32.33.

If Gilead the city, be the Gilead in my text, it is a figure; the figure
Synecdoche: a part for the whole; one city, the Metropolitan city for the
whole country. If the land of Gilead be the Gilead in my text, it is a figure
too; the figure Metonymia; the land of Gilead, for the inhabitants thereof. The
inhabitants of the land of Gilead were Gods own people, his people Israel, of
the tribes of Reuben, Gad, and Manasseh: against whom the Syrians of Damascus
did so rage, as that they are noted in my text to have threshed them with
threshing instruments of iron.

These threshing instruments are not in use among us. Yet will I, as well as I
may, out of the ancient, and learned, describe them to you. One of the Hebrew
Doctors Mercer. Pagnin. i^ L^^^t^ (...)
R. David Kimchi makes them to be planks of wood, to the which on the nether
side are fastened little stones, to part the wheat from the husk, and chafe;
which cannot be the threshing instruments in this place, because these were of
iron.

Saint Hierome says, they were a kind of waines, or carts, with wheels of
iron, and toothed, to beat out corn from the husk, and to bray or bruise
straw, and stubble to be meat for cattle, when hay is scarce. Nicolaus de Lyra
joins with Saint Hierome in opinion.

Iunius.
Some do take these instruments to be Tribalis ferreis.
iron flailes, or carres, or corn carts, or some such like instrument, of old
time in use for the threshing out of corn. Of this opinion Iunius by his
translation seems to be, and Calvin disallowes it not.

Here some do ^^^er (...) ^y^^^rak^^ (...) Gualt^^ ^^^re Rastris ferreis
Trahis ferreis
dreyes or sleddes of iron, as Marinus in his Arca No^, ^^ure Rotis ferreis
wheels of iron, as Theodotio, and Symmachus; some Serris ferreis.
sawes of iron, as the Septuagint, and Calvin; some Auec herses de ser.
harrowes of iron, as the French translation. Whatsoever were the threshing
instruments in this place; whether waines, or carts, or carres, or dreys, or
sleds of iron, or wheels of iron, or flailes of iron, or rakes of iron, or
harrowes of iron, or sawes of iron: it is out of doubt, that the holy Spirit by
this kind of speech (they threshed Gilead with threshing instruments of iron)
notes the extreme cruelty practiced by the Syrians, against the people of God,
the Gileadites, the Israelites, of the tribes of Reuben, Gad, and Manasseh.

They threshed Gilead] Winckleman here notes a Metaphore, or translation, put
by the holy Spirit to design, or signify the notorious cruelty of the Syrian
Kings upon the Gileadites; but I take it to be a proper speech of a true thing,
indeed acted by Hazael, King of Syria, against the Gileadites; according to the
word of God which came to Elizeus the Prophet touching Hazael, 2 King. 8.12.
where Elizeus weeping thus speaks unto Hazael: I know the evil that thou
shall do unto the children of Israel: their strong cities shall thou set on
fire; their young men shall thou slay with the sword; thou shall dash their
infants against the stones; and rent in pieces their women with child.

But you will say, what is this to the Gileadites? I answer, very much; as you
may see, 2 King 10.33. where Hazael is said to smite the Israelites in all the
coasts of Israel, from Jordan Eastward, even all the land of Gilead, the
Gadite^, and the Reubenits, and them that were of Manasseh, from Aroer, (which
is by the river Arnon) and Gilead, and Bashan. All these regions did Kng Hazael
grievously torment, and bring to much woe, and misery; but specially the
Gileadites, who therefore are twice mentioned in the forecited conquest of
Hazael: The Gileadites did Hazaell, King of Aram, destroy, and make like dust
beaten to powder, 2 King. 13.7.

They threshed Gilead with threshing instruments of yron] The like torments
have been inflicted, with the good approbation of Almighty God, by King David
upon the Ammonites, 2. Sam. 12.31. where you shall find, that King David after
his victory over Rabbah, a city of the Ammonites, carried away the
Inhabitants that were therein, and put them under sawes, and under iron
harrowes, and under axes of iron, and cast them into the tile kilne.

Thus did David, guided by Gods own Spirit, deal with the Ammonites. His
course was warrantable, because he was guided by Gods good Spirit; whereof
Hazael being destitute, could not but grievously offend God, by threshing
Gilead with threshing instruments of iron. David, Gods friend, dealt so with
the Ammonites, a people without God: whereas Hazael, Gods enemy, dealt so with
the Gileadites, the people of God.

He threshed Gilead with threshing instruments of yron] A course that God can
be content shall be taken with Moab, Esai. 25.10. Moab shall be threshed, as
straw is threshed: but that his own people Israel, or any part of them, as the
Gileadites, be thus used, God likes it not. Witness my text, where the Lord
protests that he will not turn Damascus, that is, that he will not recall
the Syrians from their error into the right way, that he will not bring them
again into his favor, that he will leave them to themselves; because they have
threshed Gilead with threshing instruments of iron.

Now let us see what lessons may be taken from hence for our further
instruction, and meditation. Gods dislike with Damascus, for threshing Gilead
with threshing instruments of iron, yields us this lesson; God is never well
pleased with too much cruelty.

This truth will well appear unto us, if we do but consider how God has
evermore rewarded cruelty. The cruel tyrant Adonibezek did cut off the
thumbes, and great toes of seventy Kings, and caused them to gather the crumbs
under his table, Judge. 1.7. but what was his reward? As he had done to those
captive Kings, so did God do to him again. The Israelites under the leading
of their captain Judah, took Adonibezek prisoner, and cut off the thumbes of
his hands, and great toes of his feet, verse the 6.

Agag King of the Amalekites by his sword had made many a woman childlesse, 1 Samuel 15.33. but what was his reward? You may see in the same verse what Samuel
said, and did unto him. Samuel said, As thy sword has made women childlesse,
so shall thy mother be childlesse among other women; and Samuel hewed Agag in
pieces before the Lord in Gilgal.

The Babylonians were wonderful cruel and hard hearted against the
inhabitants of Jerusalem: they spared none of them, no not their young
children, but cruelly destroyed them, and all theirs. But what was their
reward? You may see it by the prophetical denuntiation of the ruin of Babel,
Psalm. 137.8, 9. O daughter of Babel, worthy to be destroyed: blessed shall he
be that rewards thee as thou have served us; blessed shall he be that takes
and dasheth thy children against the stones. This reward of Babel is enlarged,
Esaias 13.16. Their children shall be broken in pieces before their eyes: their
houses shall be spoiled; and their wives ravished.

Thus not to trouble you with many examples, we see by the reward of cruelty in
the examples of Adonibezek, Agag, and the Babylonians, that God abhors it.
God abhors cruelty, howsoever he does punish it with another cruelty. God
repaieth cruelty with cruelty, according to the well known proverb, Matthew.
7.2. With what measure you mete, with the same shall men measure to you again.

The use of the doctrine now confirmed, is to work in us the love of clemency
and mercifulness. When we are well assured, that the cruel themselves shall
taste of cruelty by way of punishment, we will be afraid to behave our selves
toward any cruelly. All cruelty is checked by the law of God, by the sixth
commandment, Thou shall do no murder; or Thou shall not kill.

The law that is written, Deuteronomy. 25 3. touching forty stripes, and not above, to
be given to an offender, should draw our cruel rage and fierce affections to
pity and compassion. The tenor of the law is: If a wicked man be condemned to
be beaten, the Judge shall cause him to lie down, and to be beaten before his
face according to his trespass unto a certain number: forty stripes shall he
cause him to have, and not past, lest if he should exceed, and beat him above
that with many stripes, thy brother should appear despised in thy fight.

We may be many ways guilty of cruelty.

First, if we exercise tyrannous cruelty, in inflicting punishments. This we
know by the above cited place out of Deuteronomy. 25.

Secondly, if we fight with, or beat our neighbor, or maime his body. This is
a cruelty and a breach of the sixth commandment: but specially checked, Leuit.
24.19, 20. If a man cause any blemish in his neighbor; as he has done, so
shall it be done to him. Breach for breach, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, such
a blemish as he has made in any, even such shall be repaied to him.

Thirdly, if we procure any way the death of our neighbor, whether it be by
the sword, by famine, by poison, by false accusation, or otherwise. This is a
cruelty, and a breach of the sixth commandment. The offender in this behalf
may be rankt with Cain, Genesis 4 8. where it is said: Cain rose against his
brother, and slew him.

Fourthly, if we use any of Gods creatures hardly. This is a cruelty, and a
breach of the sixth commandment: but specially controlled. Deuteronomy, 22.6. If thou
find a birds nest in the way, in any tree, or on the ground, whether they be
young, or eggs, and the damme sitting upon the young, or upon the eggs, thou
shall not take the damme with the young, but shall in any wise let the da^me
go, and take the young to thee, that thou may prosper, and prolong thy
days. This special cruelty is taxed, Prou. 12.10. where we are told, That the
righteous man regards the life of his beast.

Fifthly, if because of our neighbors infirmities, we use him discourteously,
and make him our laughing stock, or taunting recreation. This is a cruelty, and
a breach of the sixth commandment: but specially checked, Leuit. 19.14. Thou
shall not curse the deaf; nor put a stumbling block before the blind.

Sixthly, if we injury a stranger. This is a cruelty, and specially controlled,
Exodus 22.21. Thou shall not do injury to a stranger, neither oppress him.

Seventhly, if we molest any widow, or fatherless child. This is a cruelty,
and specially checked, Exodus 22.22. Ye shall not trouble any widow, or
fatherless child.

Eighthly, if we wrong the poor. This is a cruelty, and a breach of the sixth
commandment. This cruelty we are guilty of many ways.

First, if we lend money to the poor upon usury. This cruelty is taxed, Exodus
22.25. If thou lend money to the poor with thee, thou shall not be as an usurer
unto him, ye shall not oppress him with usury.

Secondly, if we pay not the poor labourer his hire. This cruelty is taxed,
Deuteronomy. 24.14. Thou shall not oppress a needy and poor hired servant: thou
shall give him his hire for his day: the Sun shall not go down upon it, for he
is poor, and therewith sustaineth his life; lest he cry against thee to the
Lord, and it be sin unto thee.

Thirdly, if we restore not the pledge of the poor. This cruelty is taxed,
Exodus 22.26. If thou take thy neighbors raiment to pledge, thou shall restore
it unto him before the Sun go down. For it is his only covering and garment
for his skin.

Fourthly, if we withdraw our corn from the poor. This cruelty is taxed,
Prou. 11.26. He that withdraws corn, the people will curse him. Whosoever he
be that withdraws his corn from the market, where it should be sold, keeping
it against a dear time, the people will curse him: they will speak, as they
have just occasion, all manner of evil of him, as that he is a covetous and
miserable wretch.

Now (dearly beloved) you have been taught out of the eternal word of truth,
that many ways you may be guilty of cruelty, and so break the sixth
commandment of Almighty God. If you fight with, or beat your neighbor, or
maime his body: if by any means you procure the death of your neighbor: if
you use your neighbor discourteously, or make him your laughing stock, or
tau^ting recreatio^? if you use any of Gods creatures hardly: if you injury
strangers: if you molest fatherless children, and widows: if you be too
severe in punishing your servants, or children: if you wrong the poor, either
by lending him your money upon usury: or by not paying him his hire: or by not
restoring him his pledge: or by withdrawing your corn from him; if you offend
but in the least of these, you are guilty of cruelty, and transgressors of Gods
most holy commandment. The consideration whereof if it work in you the love
of clemency, and mercifulness, happy are you: if not, I have discharged my
duty.

Thus far have I been carried by my first doctrine, grounded upon these
words, They have threshed Gilead with threshing instruments of iron. My
doctrine was: God is never well pleased with too much cruelty. Now be patient,
I beseech you, while upon the same words I ground a second doctrine.

They have threshed Gilead with threshing instruments of iron:] They] that is,
the Syrians, Gods enemies, have threshed Gilead] that is, some of the
Israelites, Gods own people, with threshing instruments of iron. The lesson we
learn from hence is; God often humbles his servants under his foes, and their
adversaries.

This point is notably verified, in Lot sore pressed upon by the Sodomites,
Genesis 19.9. in the Israelites, hardly dealt with by the Egyptians, Exodus 1.11.
etc. in the 70. brethren, sons of Ierubbaal, persecuted by Abimelech, most of
them to the death, Judge. 9.5. in Jeremy twice evil entreated; first beaten,
and put in the stocks by Pashure, Ier. 20.2. and a second time beaten and
imprisoned by Zedechias his nobles, Ier. 37.15. In the three children, cast
into the fiery furnace by Nabuchodonosor, Dan. 3.21.

Many more are the examples registered in the book of God, fit to prove this
point: which also may further appear unto you, in those bloody persecutions
after Christ his death by the Roman Emperors, in those strange torments which
they devised to keep down religion, and religious professors, men and women;
Ler Sermon. D. Laurent. Prudent. hymn. in S. Laurent.
they plucked off their skins quick; they bored out their eyes with wimbles;
they broiled them alive on gredirons; they scalded them in boiling liquors;
they enclosed them in barrels, and driving great nails through, tumbled them
down mountains, till their own blood so cruelly drawn out, stifled, and
choked them in the barrels: women's breasts were seared off with burning irons,
their bodies rent, and their ioints racked. Many more were the grievous
torments endured by the faithful in the time of the ten first persecutions in
the primitive Church. All, and every of which do strongly prove my doctrine;
God often humbles his servants under his foes, and their adversaries.

The reason why God humbles his servants, under his, and their enemies, is
their disobedience to his word. This is plain, Deuteronomy. 28.36, 37. If thou will
not obey the voice of the Lord thy God, to keep and to do all his
commandments, and his ordinances, the Lord shall bring thee, and thy king unto
a nation, which neither thou, nor thy fathers have known; and there shall thou
serve other Gods, wood and stone: and thou shall be a wonder, a proverb, and a
common talk among all the people, whither the Lord shall carry thee. Where you
see captivity, and banishment, denounced to Gods own people, if they disobey
his word.

You have now my doctrine, and the reason of it. My doctrine, God often
humbles his servants under his foes, and their adversaries.

The reason is, The disobedience of Gods servants to the word of God. The uses
of this doctrine.

1. To show unto us how great Gods anger is for sin, that does punish it so
severely, even in his dearest children. The consideration hereof should work
in us a loathing, hatred, and detestation of sin. Yet such is the peruersity of
our corrupt natures, that we daily fleet from sin to sin, like the fly that
shifteth from sore to sore: we tempt the Lord, we murmur, we lust, we commit
idolatry: we have our eyes full of adultery, our hearts exercised with
covetousness, our bodies weakened with drunkenness; by all means we serve the
flesh, sitting down to eat, and rising to play. Never more need than now, to
smite our breasts, and pray with the Publicane, Luke 18.13. O God be merciful
unto us sinners.

2. To teach us, not to measure the favor of God toward our selves, or
others, by the blessings, or adversities of this life, seeing the wicked do
often flourish when the godly are in great misery: and on the other side, the
godly do prosper, when the wicked are in distress.

In my text we see the Gileadites, a portion of Israel, threshed with
instruments of iron, by the hands of a wicked people, and Gods enemies, the
Syrians of Damascus. Behold the prosperity of the wicked. In Exodus 14. we see
the children of Israel passing through the red sea, as by dry land, whereas the
Egyptians assaying to do the like were drowned. Behold the prosperity of the
Godly.

Measure not therefore the favor of God, by the blessings or adversities of
this life. Whatsoever out estate be now, or hereafter shall be, let us
therewith be contented. If God be pleased to bless us with peace, plenty, and
prosperity, blessed be his holy Name: and if he shall not like so to bless us,
but shall rather chastise us with trouble, want, and adversity; yet still
blessed be his holy Name: and his will be done.

3 To make us power out our souls in thankfulness before Almighty God, for our
present estate and condit o^. We know that our sworn enemies, the Popish crew,
and faction, of long time envied, and maliced our happy peace. Had they had
power according to their will, how would they have used us? Would they not have
threshed us with threshing instruments of iron?

What mercy, or pity, could be expected from them, who with so inhumane,
barbarous, and cruel a plot, their plot of gunpowder, the like whereof was
never before heard of, would have blown up, and torn peecemeale, the King,
Queen, Prince, Lords, and Commons, the fifth of November This Sermon was
preached Sept. 21. 1606
last, as you well know? what shall we render unto the Lord, for this so great
a deliverance? Let us render the calves of our lips applying David's song of
degrees, Psalm 124. to our present purpose.

1 If the Lord had not been on our side, (may great Britain now say.)

2 If the Lord had not been on our side, when the Popish sect rose up against
us.

3 They had swallowed us up quick, when their wrath was kindled against us.

4 Then had their Seven sparks of the inkindled soul by R.B.P. Psalm. 2. page 33.
fury flien forth as thunder, the flame had Burst out beyond the furnace.

5 Then had we been like Ibid.
stubble in their way.

6 Praised be the Lord, who has not given us a pray unto their teeth.

7 Our soul is escaped, even as a bird out of the snare of the fowlers: the
snare is broken, and we are delivered.

8 Our help is in the name of the Lord, who has made heaven and earth.

To this thankfulness, I purpose further to incite you, if God give life, and
leave, upon the fifth of November next, the day appointed by Act of Parliament
for your public thanksgiving for that most happy deliverance. My text shall
be the Psalm now applied unto us, the 124. Mean time let us beseech Almighty
God to give his blessing to that which has been spoken, that it may
fructify, and bring forth fruit in us, in some thirty, in some sixty, in some
a hundred fold, to the glory of Gods holy name, and the salvation of our own
souls.

THE Eight Lecture.
AMOS 1.4. Therefore will I send a fire into the house of Hazael, and it shall
devour the palaces of Benhadad, etc.


THis is the fourth part of this prophecy against the Syrians, wherein are set
down the punishments to be inflicted upon the Syrians for their sins, as
first I noted, Generally, verse the 4. Specially, verse the 5.


In the fourth verse, wherein the punishments to be inflicted upon the Syrians,
are generally set down, I note, 1 Who punishes. 2 How he punishes. 3 Whom he
punishes.


The punisher is the Lord; he punishes by fire. The punished are the Syrians,
to be understood in the names of their Kings, Hazael and Benhadad. I will send
a fire into the house of Hazael, and it shall devour the palaces of Benhadad.

The punisher is the Lord; for thus says the Lord, I will send. The note
yields us this doctrine, It is proper to the Lord to execute vengeance upon
the wicked for their sins.

In speaking of the vengeance of God, our first care must be, not to derogate
any thing from his procliuitie, and propensnes unto mercy. We must break out
into the mention of his great goodness, and sing a loud of his mercies, as
David does, Ps. 145.7. The Lord is gracious, and merciful, slow to anger; and
of great kindness; he is loving, and good to all; his mercy is over all his
works. The Lord strong, and mighty, blessed above all, yea being blessedness
it self, and therefore having no need of any man, is loving, and good unto
every man.

Our sins have provoked his vengeance against us yet he, slow to anger, and
of great goodness; reserueth mercy for thousands, for all the elect, and
forgiueth all their iniquities, transgressions, and sins. His goodness here
rests not: it reaches also unto the reprobate, though they cannot feel the
sweet comfort of it. For he makes his Matthew 5.45.
sun to rise on the evil, and the good; and sends rain on the just, and
unjust; yea many times the sun, and rain and all outward, and temporary
blessings are wanting to the just, and good, when the unjust, and evil do
flourish, and are in great prosperity.

Thus is Gods graciousnesse, and great bounty extended unto every man, whether
he be a blessed Abel, or a cursed Cain; a loved Jacob, or a hated Esau; an
elected David, or a rejected Saul. God is loving and good unto every man: the
Psalmist adds; and his mercies are over all his works. There is not any one
of Gods works, but it shows unto others, and finds in it self very large
testimonies, of Gods mercy, and goodness; I except not the damnation of the
wicked, much less the chastisements of the Godly.

Gods mercies are over all his works. David knew it well, and sang
accordingly, Psalm. 145 8. The Lord is gracious, and merciful, long suffering,
and of great goodness. Jonah knew it well, and confessed accordingly, chap.
4.2. Thou art a gracious God and merciful, slow to anger, and of great
kindness, and repentest thee of evil. The Church knows it well, and prays
accordingly: O God whose nature and property is ever to have mercy, and to
forgive, receive our humble petitions. David, Jonah, and the Church, all have
learned it at Gods own mouth, who having descended in a cloud to mount Sinai,
passed before the face of Moses and cried, as is recorded, Exodus 34.6. The
Lord, the Lord, strong, merciful, and gracious, slow to anger, and abundant in
goodness, and truth, reserving mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity,
transgression, and sin. In which place of Scripture, although af^erward there
follows a little of his justice, which he may not forget, yet we see the
maine stream runs concerning mildness, and kindness, and compassion:
whereby we may perceive, what it is, wherein the Lord delights. His delight
is to be a savior, a deliverer, a preserver, a redeemer, and a pardoner. As
for the execution of his judgments, his vengeance, and his fury, he comes
unto it with heavy and leaden feet.

To which purpose Zanchius alleges that of the Prophet Esai. chap. 28.21. The
Lord shall stand (as once he did in mount Perazim, when David overcame the
Philistines) he shall be angry (as once he was in the valley of Gibeon, when
Joshua discomfited the five Kings of the Amorites) he shall stand, he shall be
angry, that he may do his work, his strange work, and bring to pass his
act, his strange act; out of which words of the Prophet he notes that Gods
works are of two sorts; either proper unto himself, and natural; as, to have
mercy, and to forgive: or else strange and somewhat diverse from his nature; as,
to be angry, and to punish.

I know some do expound these words otherwise, understanding by that strange
work, and strange act of God, there mentioned, Opus aliquod insolens, and
admirabile, some such work as God seldom works; some great wonder.
Notwithstanding this natural exposition of that place, the former may well be
admitted also. For it is not altogether unnatural, being grounded upon such
places of Scripture, as do make for the preeminence of mercy above justice.
It Is true: God has one skale of justice, but the other proves the heavier;
mercy does ouerweigh. He who is ever just, is merciful more then ever, if it
may be possible. He may forget our iniquities, but his tender mercies he will
never forge^.

This our Lord, good, merciful, gracious, and long suffering, is here in my
text the punisher, and sends fire into the house of Hazael: whereupon I built
this doctrine; It is proper to the Lord to execute vengeance upon the wicked
for their sins.

This office of executing vengeance upon the wicked for sins, God arrogateth
and assumeth to himself, Deuteronomy. 32 35. where he says, vengeance and recompense
are mine. This due is ascribed unto the Lord by S. Paul, Romans 12.19. It is
written, vengeance is mine, I will repay, says the Lord. By the author of the
Epistle to the Hebrews, chap. 10.30. Vengeance belongs unto me, I will
recompense, says the Lord. By the sweet singer, Psalm. 94.1. O Lord God, the
auenger, O God, the auenger.

You see by these now-cited places, that God alone is he who executes
vengeance upon the wicked for their sins. This doctrine is faithfully delivered
by the wise son of Syrach, chap. 39, where he says: Verse 28.
There be spirits that are created for vengeance, which in their rigor lay on
sure strokes; in the time of destruction they show forth their power, and
accomplish the wrath of him that made them: Fire, and hail, and famine, and
death, Verse 29.
all these are created for vengeance: The teeth of wild beasts, Verse 30.
and the scorpions, and the serpents, and the sword, execute vengeance for the
destruction of the wicked. Nay, says he, Verse. 26.
The principal things for the whole use of man's life: as water, and fire, and
iron, and salt, and meal, and wheat, and honey, and milk, and the blood of the
grape, and oil, and clothing. Verse 27.
All those things though they be for good unto the godly, yet to the sinners
they are turned unto evil. So my doctrine stands good; It is proper to the
Lord to execute vengeance upon the wicked for their sins.

And you see he has ways enough to do it. All things that may be for our
good, are glad to do him service against us.

The consideration hereof should move our hearts to wisdom. It should move us
Hereof I spoke in a Sermon upon Hebr. 10.30.
to beware of those crying sins usually committed against the first table,
that we provoke not Gods vengeance against us, by Idolatry, in worshipping the
creature above the creator, blessed for ever; by tempting God, in making trial
whether his word be true or not; by murmuring against God in laying injustice
to his charge, quod bonis male fit and malis been; for afflicting the godly,
when the wicked live at ease; by rebellion and contumacie, in taking counsel
together against the Lord, and against his Christ; by blasphemy, in doing
despite to the Spirit of grace.

It may move us also to beware of those other sins, crying sins too, usually
committed against the second table; that we provoke not Gods vengeance against
us by dishonouring our parents, and such as God has put in place of government
above us; by grieuing our children, and such as are by us to be governed; by
oppressing the fatherless, and the poor; by giving our selves over unto
filthy lusts.

Beloved in the Lord, let us not forget this: though God, be good, gracious,
merciful, and long suffering, yet is he also a just God; God the auenger, and
punisher. Here we see he resolves to send a fire into the house of Hazael;
which is, the second thing to be considered; How God punishes: By fire. I will
send a fire etc.

Albeit sometime God himself does by himself immediately execute his
vengeance upon the wicked; as when he smote all the first borne of Egypt, Exodus
12.29. and Nabal. 1. Sam. 25.38. and Vzzah, 2. Sam, 6.7. yet many times he does
it by his instruments: Wigand. Syntagm. Vet. Test.
Instrumenta sunt tota creatura Dei; All the creatures of God are ready at his
command to be the executioners of his vengeance. Among the rest, and in the
first rank, is fire.

God sent a fire to lay wast Sodom and Gomorah, and their sister cities, Genesis
19.24. to eat up Nadab, and Abihu, Leuit 10.2, to cut of the two hundred, and
fifty men, that were in the rebellion of Korah, Number. 16.35. to devour two
captains and twice fifty men, 2. King. 1.10. and 12. I will not load your
memories with multitude of examples for this point. My text tells you, that
fire, Gods creature, becomes Gods instrument, and executioner of his
vengeance: I will send a fire into the house of Hazael, and it shall devour
the palaces of Benhadad.

By fire in this place the learned Lyranus. Drusius. Ar. Montanus. Mercer.
Calvin. Gualter
expositors do understand not only natural fire, but also the sword, and
pestilence, and famine; quod libet genus consumptionis, every kind of
consumptio^, every scourge, wherewith God punishes the wicked, and
disobedient, be it hail, or thunder, or sickness, or any other of Gods
messengers. So far is the signification of fire, though not in the natural,
yet in the Metaphorical understanding extended. The doctrine which from hence I
gather is.

As is the fire, so are all other creatures at the Lords commandment to be
employed by him in the punishment of the wicked. This truth well appears by
that which I even now repeated out of Eccles. 39. whence you heard, that some
spirits are created for vengeance; as also are fire, and hail, and famine, and
death, and the teeth of wild beasts, and the scorpions, and the serpents, and
the sword; yea, that the principal things for the whole use of man's life, as
water, and fire, and iron, and salt, and meal, and wheat, and honey, and milk,
and the blood of the grape, and oil, and clothing, are all for evil unto the
wicked. If that proof, because the book, whence it is taken, is Apocryphal,
like you not: give care I pray you, while I prove it out of Canonical
Scripture. The doctrine to be proved is.

Fire, and all other creatures, are at the Lords commandment to be employed by
him in the punishment of the wicked. I prove it by the service of Angels, and
other creatures. 2 King. 19.35. we read of an hundred fourscore and five
thousand in the camp of Ashur slain by an Angel of the Lord. The thing is
related also, Esaias 37.36. This ministry of Gods Angels David acknowledges
Psalm. 35.5, 6. where his prayer against his enemies is, that the Angel of the
Lord might scatter and persecute them. 1. Sam. 7.10. we read that the Lord did
thunder a great thunder upon the Philistines. Ezech. 14. we read how the Lord
punishes a sinful land, with his Ezech. 14.21.
four sore judgments, the sword, pestilence, famine, and noisome beasts.

The story of Gods visitation upon Pharaoh, and the Egyptians in Exodus chap. 8,
9. and 10. is fit for my purpose, You shall there find, that frogs, lice,
flies, grasshoppers, thunder, hail, lightning, murraine, botches, and sores,
did instrumentally avenge God upon man and beast in Egypt. Add hereto what you
read, Psalm. 148.8. fire and hail, and snow, and vapors, and stormy winds do
execute Gods commandment. Thus is my doctrine proved, As is the fire, so are
all other creatures at the Lords commandment to be employed by him in the
punishment of the wicked.

The use of this doctrine is to teach us, how to behave our selves at such
times as God shall visit us with his rod of correction, how to carry our selves
in all our afflictions. We must not so much look to the instruments, as to the
Lord that smites by them.

Here set we before our eyes holy King David. His patience! be it the pattern
of our Christian imitation. When Shimei a man of the family of the house of
Saul, came out against him, cast stones at him, and railed upon him, calling
him to his face a man of blood, and a man of Belial, a murderer, and a wicked
man, the good King did not as he was wished to do: he took not away the
murderers life, but had respect to the primus motor, even Almighty God, the
first mouer of this his affliction; Shimei he knew was but the instrument. And
therefore thus says he to Abischai, 2. Sam. 16.10. He curses because the Lord
had bidden him curse David; and who dare then say, wherefore have thou done so?
Suffer him to curse, for the Lord has bidden him.

Here also set we before our eyes holy Job. His patience! be it the pattern of
our Christian imitation. The loss of all his substance, and his children, by
the Sabeans, Chaldeans, fire from heaven, and a great wind from beyond the
wilderness, could not turn away his eyes from the God of heaven to those
second causes. They he knew were but the instruments. And therefore possessing
his soul in patience he said, Job. 1.21. Naked came I out of my mothers womb,
and naked shall I return thither: the Lord has given, and the Lord has
taken: blessed be the name of the Lord.

To these instances of David, and Job, add one more; that of the blessed
Apostles, Peter, John, and the rest, Act. 4.27. Though Herod, Pontius Pilate,
the Gentiles, and the people of Israel, had crucified, and done to death the
Lord of life, our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Yet did not the Apostles
therefore grow into a rage, and bitter speeches against them. In that great
execution of the Lord Jesus, they had regard unto the hand of God. Herod,
Pontius Pilat, the Gentiles, and the Jews, they knew were but instruments. For
thus make they their confession before the Lord of heaven and earth, verse the
28. Doubtless both Herod, and Pontius Pilat, with the Gentiles, and the people
of Israel, gathered themselves together against thine holy Son Jesus, to do
whatsoever thine hand, and thy counsel had determined to be done.

To good purpose then is that question propounded by Amos, chap. 3.6. Shall
there be evil in a city, and the Lord has not done it? It may serve for an
anchor to keep us, that we be not carried away with the waves of tribulation,
and affliction. It assures us that God, who bad Shimei curse David, who sent
the Sabeans, Chaldeans, fire from heaven, and a great wind from beyond the
wilderness, to spoil, and make an end of Jobs substance and his children; who
determined that Herod, Pontius Pilat, with the Gentiles, and the Israelites,
should put to death the Lord of life: that the same God has his finger, yea,
and his whole hand too, in all our crosses and tribulations. Is there any evil
in the city, and the Lord has not done it?

Here (beloved in the Lord) must we be taxed for a vanity at least, (I had
almost said a blasphemy) deeply rooted, and too well settled among us. Upon the
access of any calamity we cry out, bad luck, bad fortue. If the strong man
come into our house, and take from us the flower of our riches, our silver and
gold, then we cry, What luck? What fortune? If our sheep and cattle fail
us, then also we cry, What luck? What fortune? Whatsoever cross befalls us,
luck and fortune is still in our mouths: Quasi Deus otium coloret in coelo,
and non curaret res humanas; as if we were to hold it for an article of our
belief, that God lives idly in heaven, and has no regard of man's affairs.
Whereas the holy Prophet Amos in propounding this question; shall there be any
evil in the city, and t^^ Lord has not done it? and the holy Apostles, in
acknowledging Gods hand in the death of Christ; and holy Job in blessing the
name of the Lord for all his losses; and holy David, in patiently taking
Shimeis curses, as an affliction sent him from the Lord, do all plainly show
this, that the empire of this world is administered by Almighty God, and that
nothing happens unto us, but by Gods hand, and appointment. Learn we then
more patience toward the instruments of our calamities, miseries, crosses, and
afflictions: let us not belike the dog, that snatcheth at a stone cast at
him, without regard unto the thrower. Here we learn a better property: even
to turn our eyes from the instruments to the hand that smites by them. Thus
far of my second circumstance; How God punishes.

My third was; whom he punisheth] Hazael and Benhadad; the house of Hazael, and
palaces of Benhadad. If you will know who this Hazael was, you must have
recourse to the sacret story, 2. Kings 8. There shall you find him sent by
Benhadad, King of Syria, with a present unto Elizeus to know concerning his
sickness, whether he should recover of it; and after his return from Elizeus,
with a thick wet cloth to have strangled, and murdered his Lord, and Master,
King Benhadad. This was he, whom Elizeus foretold of his hard usage of the
Israelites; that he should set on fire their strong cities; should slay their
young men with the sword; should dash their infants against the stones; and
should rent in pieces their women great with child. This was he, who 2. Kings.
13.7. so destroyed the children of Israel, that he made them like dust beaten
to powder. This was he of whose death we read verse the 24.

The house of Hazael] either the family, stock, and posterity of Hazael; as
Arias Montanus, Mercer, Drusius expound: or some material house, which Hazael
had proudly and stately built for himself, and his posterity. This later
exposition is added to the former by Mercer, and Drusius, because of that which
follows, the palaces of Benhadad.

Benhadad.] In writing this name, I find three errors. One of the Greeks who
write (...) as if it were in the Hebrew Benader. The second of the Latins, who
write it Benhadad. The third of Jonathan, the Chaldee paraphrast, who writes it
Barhadad: whereas the right name is Benhadad.

Benhadad (says Mercer upon this place) was a name peculiar to the Kings of
Syria; as was first Pharaoh, and afterward Ptolemee to the Kings of Egypt, and
Caesar to the Roman Emperors. From this opinion of Mercer, Drusius in
obseruat. sacr. 11.14. varieth, affirming that albeit diverse Kings of Syria
were called by this name Benhadad, yet does it not thereupon follow, that
Benhadad was a common name to all the Kings of Syriae.

In holy Scripture we read of three Benhadads. Of the first 1. Kings. 15.18.
who was King of Syria, at what time Asa reigned in Judah, and Baasha in Israel.
Of the second, 2 King. 8.7. who in his sickness sent Hazael to Elizeus the man
of God to counsel. Of the third 2 Kings. 13.3. who was Hazaels son, and his
successor in the throne.

Now the Benhadad in my text, is either Benhadad, Hazaels predecessor, slain
by Hazael, or Benhadad, Hazaels son, and successor.

The Palaces of Benhadad] to be devoured by fire from the Lord. These palaces
of Benhadad are the goodly, sumptuous, proud, and stately edifices made, or
enlarged, by either of the Benhadads, or by both: Hazaels predecessor, and
successor.

Thus have you the exposition of my third circumstance, which was concerning
the parties punished; no mean parties parties of no lower rank then Kings:
Hazael, and Benhadad The Lord punishes, he punishes by fire; he punishes
by fire Hazael, and Benhadad; I will send a fire into the house of Hazael, and
it shall devour the palaces of Benhadad. Many profitable doctrines may be hence
deduced. I can but point at them.

1 In that the Lord sends a fire into tho house of Hazael, against his
family, and posterity, we are put in mind of a truth expressed in the second
commandment; this: God will visit the sins of the fathers upon the children
unto the third and fourth generation.

Dearly beloved; sore is that anger, the flame of whose punishment casts out
smoke so far: yet the meaning thereof is, as Ezechiel shows, chap. 18. If
the children do follow the fathers wickedness, and not otherwise. To visit
then, is not to punish the children for the fathers offenses, but to take
notice, and apprehend them in the same faults, by reason they are given over to
commit their fathers transgressions, that for them they be punished.

The use is, to admonish you that are Parents, not only to live your selves
virtuously, and religiously, while you have your abode here, but also carefully
to see to the training up of your children, in virtue, and true religion, least
pertaking with your in your sins, they prove inheritours of your punishments
also.

2 In that the Lord sends a fire into the house, and palaces of Hazael, and
Benhadad, two Kings: we learn this lesson.

It is neither wealth, nor policy, nor power, nor preferment, that can stead
us, if Gods unappeasable anger break out against us for our sins. The reason
hereof we read, Ierem. 4.4. It Is this: Because of the wickedness of our
inventions, Gods wrath comes forth like fire, and burns that none can quench
it.

The use is to teach us, that we despise not Gods judgments, nor abuse his
mercies; but that we tremble at the one, and be drawn to well doing by the
other.

3 In that the Lord sends a fire into the palaces of Benhadad, to devour
them: we learn thus much.

God depriueth us of a great blessing, when he takes from us our dwelling
houses. The great commodity, or contentment, that comes to every one of us
by our dwelling houses, does experimentally make good unto us this truth.

The use is; to teach us, first, to be humbled before Almighty God, whenever
our dwelling houses are taken from us. Secondly, since we peaceably enjoy our
dwelling houses, to use them for the furtherance of Gods glory. Thirdly, to
praise God day by day for the comfortable use we have of our dwelling houses.
It would tire you to hear these doctrines, and their uses severally amplified,
and enlarged. In the sequel of this chapter, I shall have occasion to repeat
them to you.

THE Ninth Lecture.
AMOS 1.5. I will break also the bar of Damascus, and cut off the inhabitant
of Bikeath-Auen, and him that holds the scepter out of Beth-Eden, and the
people of Aram shall go into captivity unto Kir.


WE are now come to the second branch of the fourth part of this prophecy, in
the 5. verse, wherein are set down more specially the punishments to be
inflicted upon the Syrians for their sins. And this is done in four several
clauses. In each we may observe three circumstances.

1 The punisher: the Lord, either immediately by himself, or mediatly by his
instruments. 2 The punished: the Syrians not of any one city only; but of the
whole country; which we gather from these names, Damascus, Bikeath-Auen,
Beth-eden and Aram. 3 The punishment; the spoil of the country; and ruin of
the whole state. The bar of Damascus must be broken; the inhabitant of
Bikeath-Auen, and the King, keeping his court at Beth-Eden, must be cut off:
and the people of Aram must go into captivity.
Of the words as they lie in order.

I will also break the bar of Damascus] I, the Lord, Job. 9.5, 6, etc.
remove mountains, and they feel not when I overthrow them; I remove the
earth out of her place, and make her pillars to shake; I command the sun, and
it rises not; I close up the stars as under a signet: I my self alone spread
out the heavens and walk upon the height of the sea: I make Arcturus. Orion,
and Pleiades, and the climates of the South: I, the Lord, who do great things,
and unsearchable, maruailous things, without number, Amos 5.8. and 9.6.
Jehovah is my name. I, the Lord, Jehovah, who have resolved to send a fire
into the house of Hazael, and palaces of Benhadad; I will also break the bar
of Damascus.

You know what a bar is in its proper signification: an instrument wherewith
we make fast the gates of our cities, and doors of our houses, against the
violence of our enemies. If the bar be broken, the entrance into the city, or
house will be the easier. Kedar is discovered to be weak, for want of bars,
Ier. 49.31. And so are they against whom Gog, and Magog were to fight. Ezech.
38.11. they had neither bars, nor gates. Jerusalem had both; and God made them
strong, Psalm, 147.13. Therefore praise the Lord, O Jerusalem, praise thy God, O
Sion; for he has made the bars of thy gates strong; so strong, that no enemy
is able to break them, or to make any irruption into them.

A bar is also used to a figurative sense; Metaphorically, and
Synecdochically; and betokens munition, fortifications, the forts and strong
holds of a country, the strength of any thing. To which sense the sea has
bars. We read of them, Job 38.10. God has apppointed the sea her bars, and
doors, saying, hitherto shall thou come; here will I stay thy proud waves. And
the earth has bars. We read of them, Ion. 2.6. And, what are the bars of
the earth, but the D. King B. of London, in Ion. lect. 27.
strongest muniments, and senses it has; her promontories, and rocks, which
God has placed in her frontiers, to withstand the force of the waters? A^^
Moab has bars, Esai. 15.5. There the bars of Moab, a^^ put for the forts
in the borders of Moab. And Egypt has bars, Ez^ch. 30.18. Where Egypts
bars after the exposition of Illyricus in his Verbo, vectis.
key of Scriptures, are munitiones and robur, the fortifications, and strength
of Egypt.

So here: the bars of Damascus, are Mercer.
Damasci robur, munitiones, portae and claustra munitissima; the strength of
Damascus; the muni^ions of Damascus; the gates of Damascus; the most fenced
fortresses of Damascus. Yet Gualter.
Vniuersum regni robur, the whole streng^h of the kingdom of Syria, is to be
understood in these bars of Damascus.

Of Damascus] no base nor contemptible city. Jews Vert^man^i^, a gentl^man of
Rome, in his travel to those eastern parts of the world, a hundred years
ago, saw this city, and admiting the marvelous beauty thereof, has Nauigat.
cap. 5. left a record of it to posterity. It is (says he) in manner
incredible, and passes all belief, to think how fair the city of Damascus
is, and how fertile is the soil. This Damascus is a city of great antiquity
See my six h lecture upon this chapte^.
built as some coniectue by Eliezer, the steward of Abraham's house who was
surnamed Damascus, Genesis 15.2. So that this city was built more than 3444.
years ago; for In the ^^are of the w^rld 21^4. I un^^ in Ch onolog. And the
Sermon n was ^reached A. ^. 16^6 ^eb^. 8.
so long ago Abraham died. The first mention of this city is, Genesis 14.15.

Others holding the name of this city to have been more ancient than Abraham,
do attribute the building of this city to Huz one of the sons of Aram Genesis
10.23. whereupon Damascus was called also Aram, as S. Hierome upon Esai. 17.
witnesses. Whatsoever were the antiquity of this city, it is plain by Esai.
7.8. that it was the Metropolitaine, and chiefest city of Syria. The Prophet
Jeremy gives it a high commendation, chap. 49.25. where he calls it a glorious
city, and the city of his joy. Damascus in this place is not the bare city, but
^e^ c^^us.
tractus Damascus, sieve Decapolitanus; the whole country about Damascus, and
the coasts of Decapolis, whereof we read, Mark. 7.31.

I will also break the bars of Damascus] To break in the Hebrew phrase, and
by a Metaphor, is to consume, to destroy, to waste, to spoil. In the 24. of
Esai. verse. 19. where the Prophet says; confractione confringetur terra: the
earth shall with breaking be broken: the meaning is; the earth shall certainly
be wasted, and spoiled. So here; I will break the bar of Damascus, that is,
I will consume, and spoil, all the munitions, all the fortifications, all the
fenced fortresses, all the strength of Damascus.

This office of breaking bars, God elsewhere assumeth to himself, as Esai.
45.2. where thus says the Lord unto Cyrus, his anointed; I will break the
brazen doors, and burst the iron bars. The Psalmist also ascribes unto the
Lord this office of breaking bars, Psalm. 107.16. where exhorting us to
confess before the Lord his loving kindness, and to declare his wonderful
works, he brings this for a reason: For he has broken the gates of brass,
and has burst the bar of iron asunder. Now have you the meaning of these
words, I will break the bar of Damascus; I] the Lord, will breake] by my
mighty power, will lay waste, and consume, the barre] bar for bars, all
the strength of Damascus] of that part of Syria, which bordereth upon Damascus.

Now let us see what less^^s may be taken from hence for our further
instruction, and meditation. You will remember my three propounded
circumstances; The punisher, The punishment, The punished. The punisher, is the
Lord; the punishment, is breaking of bars; the punished, is the whole country
of Damascus. From the first circumstance of the punisher, the Lord himself
taking vengeance into his own hand, I gather this doctrine; It is proper to
the Lord to execute vengeance upon the wicked for their sins.

This doctrine was in my last Lecture commended unto you, and then at large
confirmed. I need not make any repetition of it. The consideration of it day
after day, cannot be either vain or unfruitful to us. It may cause us to be
wary and heedfull, that by our daily sinning we make not our selves John 8.34.
Romans 6.20.
servants unto sin, and 2 Pet. 2.19.
corruption. And whereas we cannot but sin daily, (for who can say, I have
Prou. 20.9.
purged my heart, I am clean from my sin?) it may draw us to repentance, and
to a godly sorrow for our sins; whereby we have transgressed the law of God,
offended his Majesty, and provoked his wrath. We must believe it: though God
be good, gracious, merciful, and long suffering, yet is he also a just God;
God the auenger, and punisher.

The consideration of this point, may further admonish us, to be wary in any
case that we breath not after reuengement. To revenge our wrongs, is Gods
office, we must not intrude our selves into it; we may not vsurp it. Why will
we herein be our own caruers? The wise son of Sirach, chap. 28.1. speaks it
confidently: He that seeks vengeance, shall find vengeance of the Lord, and
he will surely keep his sins. Mark his exhortation following, verse the 2.
Forgive thy neighbor the hurt that he has done to thee; so shall thy sins
be forgiven thee also.

Wise Siracides says no more, than does our Savior Jesus Christ, Matt. 6.14,
15. If ye do forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly father will also
forgive you. But if ye do not forgive men their trespasses, no more will your
father forgive you your trespasses. Dearly beloved, is this so? Will not God
forgive us, unless we forgive others? We must needs grant it to be so, praying
daily as we do, Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass
against us.

Much then (beloved) very much to blame are we, who lead our lives, as if Lex
talionis, that same old law of rendering like for like, first recorded, And
Leuit. 24.20. and Deuteronomy. 19 21. Matthew. 5.38.
Exodus 21.24. were this day in force. Even this day, we stick not to be of
mind with the godless worldling: Receive I wrong? I will repay it, Eye for
eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot, burning for burning, wound
for wound, stripe for stripe. As good as he brings, I will give him.

We are commanded, Matthew. 18.22. to forgive one another, even seventy times
seven times. How have we cast behind us this holy commandment? If thy
neighbor sin against thee, will thou not be meet with him seven years after,
if possible? Tell me; if by order of friends, or constraint, thou be moved to
forgive thy neighbor, will thou forgive him? Forgive him? Yea after a sort. We
will forsooth forgive the fault, but not forget the matter, nor affect the
party that wronged us. Is this to love our enemies? Is this not to resist
evil? Nothing less.

Learn therefore of Christ what it is, to love your enemies, Matthew. 5.44.
Bless them that curse you; do good to them that hate you; pray for them that
hurt you, and persecute you. And again learn of Christ, what it is, not to
resist evil, Matt. 5.39. Whosoever shall smite thee on the right cheek, turn
to him the other also: and if any man will sue thee at the law, and take away
thy coat, let him have thy cloak also: and whosoever will compel thee to go
with him one mile, go with him twain. This is it, whereto S. Peter exhorts
you, 1 Epist. chap. 3.8. Be ye all of one mind, one suffer with another; love
as brethren, be pitiful, be courteous, render not evil for evil, nor rebuke
for rebuke; but contrariwise bless, if ye will be heirs of blessing.

Let wise Solomon's counsel somewhat prevail with you; that counsel which he
gives you, Pro. 24.29. O say not I will do to him as he has done to me; I
will recompense every man according to his work. What shall I do then, when I
have received a wrong? What else, but follow the same wise man's counsel, given
me, Pro. 20.22. Expectabo Dominum, and liberabit me; I will wait upon the Lord,
and he will deliver me. I shut up this meditation with S. Paul's exhortation,
Romans 12.17. Recompense to no man evil for evil; if it be possible, as much as
in you is, have peace with all men. Dearly beloved, avenge not your selves,
but give place unto wrath; for it is written, vengeance is mine, I will repay,
says the Lord.

Hitherto (beloved in the Lord) I have labored to work in you a detestation
of all private reuengement. The occasion of my discourse, was from my
propounded doctrine, It is proper to the Lord to execute vengeance; proper to
the Lord, and therefore not any way to be meddled in by us. It is not for us by
our selves to avenge the wrongs done unto us; we must wait upon the Lord, who
in his good time will right all our injuries. For he has said, vengeance
belongs unto me, I will recompense.

Let us proceed, and see what doctrine may be gathered from the two next
circumstances; the circumstance of the punishment, and the circumstance of the
punished. The punishment I noted in the breaking of bars; and the punished,
in the word Damascus. You have already heard the meaning of these words: I will
breaks the bar of Damascus] I] the Lord, will] with my mighty power breake]
lay waste, and consume, the barre] bar, for bars, even all the munition,
and strength, of Damascus] of the chiefest city of Syria, and the country
adjoining.

Must Damascus, the strongest City of all Syria, have her bars broken? Must
she be laid waste, and spoiled? Here fixing the eyes of our minds upon the
power of the Lord, learn we this lesson; There is no thing, nor creatu^e, able
to withstand Gods power, or to let his purpose.

Nothing: not gates of brass, nor bars of iron, these he breaks asunder,
Psalm. 107.16. No creature. What creature more mighty than a King? Yet in the
day of his wrath God wounds Kings: witness the Psalmist, 110.5. Does he
wound Kings? yea he slays mighty Kings, Psalm. 135.10. and 136.18. My text
auoweth the same, in one of the next clauses, where God thre^^heth to the
mighty King of Syria, a cutting off: I cut off him that holds the scepter out
of Beth-eden.

These few now alleged instances do sufficiently (though briefly) confirm my
propounded doctrine; There is no thing, nor creature, able to withstand Gods
power, or to let his purpose.

The reason hereof is, because God only is omnipotent, and whatsoever else is
in the world, it is weak, and unable to resist. Of Gods omnipotency we make
our daily profession in the first article of our belief, professing him to be
God, the Father Almighty. In which profession we do not exclude, either the
Son, or Holy Ghost, from omnipotency. For God the Father, who imparteth his
Godhead unto the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, does communicate the proprieties
of his Godhead to them also. And therefore our belief is, that as the Father
is Almighty, Symbolo Atharas.
so the Son is Almighty, and the Holy Ghost is Almighty too.

Now God is said to be omnipotent, or Almighty, in two respects. First, because
he is able to do whatsoever he will. Secondly, because he is able to do more
than he will. For the first, that God is able to do whatsoever he will, who
but the man possessed with the spirit of Atheism, and infidelity dares deny?
This truth being expressly delivered twice in the book of Psalms; First, Psalm.
115.3. Our God in heaven, does whatsoever he will: again, Psalm. 135.6.
Whatsoever pleases the Lord, that does he in heaven, in earth, in the sea, in
all the depths.

For the second, that God is able to do more than he will do: every Christian
acquainted with the Evangelical story, does acknowledge it. It is plain by
John Baptists reproof of the Pharisees, and Sadduces, Matthew. 3.9. Think not
to say within your selves, we have Abraham to our Father; for I say unto you,
that God is able of these stones to raise up children unto Abraham. Able, but
will not. So likewise when Christ was betrayed, the story, Matthew. 26.53. is,
that God the Father could have given him more than twelve legions of Angels to
have delivered him. He could, but would not. The like may be said of many
other things. The Father was able to have created another world; yea a thousand
worlds. Was able, but would not.

You see for Gods omnipotency, that he is able to do whatsoever he will do;
yea that he is able to do more than he will do. God only is omnipotent:
whatsoever else is in the world, its weak, and unable to resist: which is the
very sum of my doctrine already propounded, and confirmed; There is no thing,
nor creature, able to withstand Gods power, or to let his purpose.

For as Job says, chap. 9.13. The most mighty helps do stoop under Gods
anger. This is it, which Nabuchodonosor, Dan. 4.34, 35. confesses: In
comparison of the most high, who lives for ever, whose power is an everlasting
power, whose kingdom is from generation to generation; all the inhabitants of
the earth are reputed as nothing; according to his will he works in the army
of heaven, and in the inhabitants of the earth; and none can stay his hand, nor
say unto him, what do thou? This is it whereat S. Paul aims in his
question demanded, Romans 9.19. Who has resisted the will of God? And this is it
which Job intends, chap. 9.4. demanding a like question: who has been
fierce against God, and has prospered?

I will not further amplify this point; it must stand good against all the
might and strength of this world, There is no thing, nor creature, able to
withstand Gods power, or to let his purpose.

Now let us consider some duties, whereunto we are moved by this doctrine of
Gods omnipotency.

1 Is there no thing, nor creature able to withstand Gods power, or to let his
purpose? Learn we from hence true humiliation; that same Christian virtue, to
which S. Peter 1 epist. 5.6. gives his exhortation: Humble your selves under
the mighty hand of God. What are we, (beloved) but by nature in our selves most
wretched; conceived, and borne in sin? hitherto running on in wickedness? and
daily rebelling against God? against Almighty God, against him, who alone is
able to do whatsoever he will; able to do more than he will; able to cast
both body and soul into hell fire?

Let the consideration of this our wretched estate, work in us the fruits of
true humiliation. This true humiliation stands in our practice of three
things. Perkins. Cas. Co^. ^. lib. 1. ca. 5.. 2. page 57.
1. The sorrow of our heart, whereby we are displeased with our selves, and
ashamed in respect of our sins. 2 Our confession to God, in which we must also
do three things. 1 We must acknowledge all our maine sins; original, and
actual. 2 We must acknowledge our guiltiness before God. 3 We must
acknowledge our just damnation for sin. The third thing in our humiliation, is
our supplication to be made to God for mercy, which must be with all possible
earnestness, as in a matter of life and death.

A pattern whereof I present unto you, Dan. 9.17, 18, 19. O our God, hear the
prayers of us thy servants, and our supplications, and cause thy face to shine
upon us. O our God, incline thine ear to us, and hear us; open thine eyes,
and behold our miseries; we do not present our supplications before thee for
our own righteousness, but for thy great tender mercies. O Lord hear us, O
Lord forgive us, O Lord consider, and do it, defer not thy mercies for thine
own sake, O our God. Thus (beloved) if we humble our selves under the hand of
Almighty God, God will lift us up. James 4.10. 1 Pet. 5.6.


2 Is there no thing, nor creature, able to withstand Gods power, or to let his
purpose? Learn we from hence to tremble at Gods judgments, to fear them, to
stand in awe of them, to quake, and quiver at them. For as God is, so are his
judgments: God is terrible, and his judgments are terrible. God is terrible
in the assembly of his Saints, Psalm. 89.8. terrible in his works, Psalm. 66.3.
terrible in his doings toward the sons of men, Psalm. 66.5. terrible to the
Kings of the earth, Psalm. 76.13. To pass over with silence many places of holy
Scripture, in which God is termed a terrible God; let us confess with the
Psalmist, Psalm. 76.7. Thou, O God of Jacob, thou art to be feared; who shall
stand in thy sight, when thou art angry?

Here are they worthily to be taxed, and censured, who are so far from fearing
Gods iugdements, as that they plainly scoff, and jest at them. Such a one was
he of Cambridge-shire, who This Sermon was preached Febr. 8. 1606.
some 14. years since, in the year 1592. made a mock of the Lords glorious
voice, the Thunder. The story is delivered by Perkins, in his Printed at
Cambrid^e in 4o. 1596. p. 36. Alsted. Theolog. Catechet. Sect. 2. page 180.
exposition of the Creed, in these words: One being with his companion in a
house drinking on the Lords day, when he was ready to depart thence, there was
great lightning and thunder: whereupon his fellow requested him to stay; but
the man mocking, and jesting at the thunder and lightning, said (as report was)
it was nothing but a knave cooper knocking on his tubs; come what would, he
would go, and so went on his journey: but before he came half a mile from the
house, the same hand of the Lord, which before he had mocked, in a crack of
thunder struck him about the girdle steed, that he fell down stark dead.

A memorable example, brought home as it were to our doors, to put us in mind
of Gods heavy wrath against those, which scorn his judgments. Let us
(beloved) be wise upon it, and at every judgment of God tremble, and fear,
and confess, as before out of Psalm. 76.7. Thou, O God of Jacob, thou art to be
feared; who shall stand in thy sight; when thou art angry?

3 Is there no thing, nor creature able to withstand Gods power, or to let his
purpose? Here is matter enough to uphold, and stablish our faith in Gods
promises, to the abolishing of all wavering, and doubting touching our
salvation. Thus; No thing, nor creature, is able to withstand Gods power, or to
let his purpose. God is able to do whatsoever he will do; he will do
whatsoever he has promised to do; he has promised to give eternal life to
all that believe in Jesus Christ. How then can I, who do believe, or any
other, who does believe in Jesus Christ, doubt of mine, or their salvation?

Upon this rock of Gods omnipotency Abraham's faith stood unshaken, as
appears Romans 4. Abraham he doubted not of the promise of God through
unbelief, but was strengthened in the faith. And how? Because he was fully
assured, that the same God who had promised, was able also to do it. This
ableness of God, Abraham opposed to his own weakness. And so, above hope
believed under hope, that he should be the father of many nations, according to
that which was spoken to him, so shall thy seed be. This promise Abraham laid
hold of, not considering his own body, even now dead, being almost a hundred
years old, neither the deadness of Sarahs womb: he had laid hold of the
promise. How? By faith. Which was increased, and confirmed to him, by the
consideration of the power of God.

And why is all this written of Abraham? S. Paul says why, ver. 23. Now it is
not written for him only, that it was imputed to him for righteousness; but
also for us, to whom it shall be imputed for righteousness, if we believe in
him, that raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead, who was delivered to death
for our sins, and is risen again for our justification. Wherefore to all our
sins, infirmities, and impotencies, from whence may arise diffidence,
infidelity, or unbelief, we must ever oppose Gods omnipotency; and thereby
support our faith in his promises.

I shut up this point, and my whole lecture, with S. Austines discourse, Sermon.
123. de tempore: Nemo dicat, non potest mihi dimittere peccata: Let no man say
unto me, God cannot forgive me my sins. Quomodo non potest omnipotens? How is
it possible that the Almighty should not be able to forgive thee thy sins?
But thou will say, I am a great sinner; and I say, Sedille omnipotens est; But
God is Almighty. Thou reply and say; My sins are such, as from which I
cannot be delivered and cleansed; and I answer, Sed ille omnipotens est; But
God is Almighty. Almighty; able to do all things, greater or lesser,
celestial or terrestrial, immortal or mortal, spiritual or corporal,
invisible or visible. Magnus in magnis, neque paruus in minimis: great in great
businesses, and not little in the least. No thing or creature is able to
withstand Gods power, or to let his purpose.

THE Tenth Lecture.
AMOS 1.5. I will break also the bar of Damascus, and cut off the inhabitant
of Bikeath-Auen, and him that holds the scepter out of Beth-Eden, and the
people of Aram shall go into captivity unto Kir.


NOw proceed we to the other clauses of the last part of this prophecy,
against the Syrians. The second clause is, I will cut off the inhabitant of
Bikeath-Auen: The third is, and him that holds the scepter out of Beth-eden:
The fourth is, and the people of Aram, etc. In each of these I do observe (as
before I did) three circumstances.

1 The punisher the Lord, either immediately by himself or mediately by his
instruments. 2 The punishment, to be understood in those phrases of cutting
off, and going into captivity. 3 The punished, the Syrians, noted in these
names, Bikeath-Auen, Beth-eden, Aram.
Let us examine the words of the text, as they lie in order.

I will cut off the inhabitant of Bikeath-Auen] I, the Lord, Jehovah, See lect.
9.
who remove mountains, and they feel not when I overthrow them; who remove
the earth out of her place, and make her pillars to shake; who my self alone
spread out the heavens, and walk upon the height of the sea: I, the Lord,
Jehovah, who do great things, and unsearchable, marvelous things, and without
number: I, the Lord, Jehovah, who have resolved to send a fire into the house
of Hazael, which shall devour the palaces of Benhadad, and have resolved to
break the bars of Damascus; I will also cut off the inhabitant of
Bikeath-Auen, and him that holds the scepter out of Beth-eden, etc.

I will cut off] To cut off, is in sundry places of holy Scripture a Metaphor,
drawn ab excisione arborum, from the cutting down, or rooting up of trees:
and signifies utterly to consume, to waste, to dissipate, to destroy, to
extinguish. So it is used, Psalm. 101.8. where David purposing not to be
negligent or slothful, in the execution of justice against all malefactors in
Jerusalem, resolves to cut off all the workers of iniquity from the city of
the Lord: Betimes will I destroy all the wicked of the land, that I may cut off
all the workers of iniquity from the city of the Lord. So its used, Ps. 109.15.
where David's prayer against the wicked is, that their iniquity and sin be
always before the Lord, that he may cut off their memorial from the earth.
So its used, Ezech. 14.13. Son of man when a land sins against me by
committing a trespass, then will I stretch out mine hand upon it, and will
break the staff of bread thereof; and will send famine upon it, and will cut
off man and beast from it: I will cut off] that is, I will destroy both man and
beast from a sinful land.

I omit many like places of holy writ; and commend unto you, but one more,
parallel to this in my text. It is in the 3. ver. of the 2. chap. of this
prophecy. There thus says the Lord; I will cut off the Judge out of the midst
of Moab; as here in my text, I will cut off the inhabitant of Bikeath-Auen; and
verse. the 8. I will cut off the inhabitant from Ashdod. I will cut off, whether
the Judge out of the midst of Moab; or the inhabitant from Ashdod; or the
inhabitant of Bikeath-Auen, the meaning is one, and the same: I will cut off,
that is, I will utterly destroy, or extinguish.

Which to be the meaning of the word, the author of the Vulgar Latin
acknowledges, translating the word in the original, not exeindam (as indeed
it signifies) I will cut off, but disperdam, I will destroy. So do the
Seventy Interpreters in their Greek edition of the Bible, here translating the
Hebrew word not (...), (as indeed it signifies) I will cut off; but (...), I
will utterly, or altogether d^stroy, overthrow, and extinguish.

I will cut off the inhabitant] the inhabitant? what? but one? yes, all, and
every one of the inhabitants. The Holy Spirit in the sacred Scripture uses so
to speak; by a word of the singular number to understand more than one; yea
all of that kind: which kind of speech is analogically reduced to the figure
Synecdoche.

Let us see the truth of this in a few instances. In Exodus 8.6. it is said;
when Aaron stretched out his hand upon the waters of Egypt, that then the
frogge came up, and covered the land. The frogge! It were senseless to think
that one frogge could cover the land of Egypt; and therefore by the frogge, we
are to understand many frogs. In Number. 21.7. the Israelites desired Moses to
pray to the Lord, that he would take away from them the Serpent. The Serpent!
what? but one? It is out of doubt that the people meant all the fiery serpents
sent among them by the Lord, to sting them to death: of which we read, verse
the 6. Jeremy in chap. 8.7. says that the storke, the turtle, the crane, and
the swallow do know, and observe their appointed times. The storke, the
turtle, the crane, the swallow! We may not think the Prophet singleth out one
storke, one turtle, one crane, one swallow, from the rest; but his meaning is
of all storkes, turtles, cranes, swallows, that they know, and observe their
appointed times. As in the now cited places, so here in my text, the holy Ghost
uses one number, for another; the singular for the plural, understanding by
one inhabitant, all the inhabitants of Bikeath-Auen.

Of Bikeath-Auen] the Greek Translators taking the words partly appellatiuely,
and partly properly, do render them the field of On. In like sort Gualter, the
valley of Auen. The author of the Vulgar Latin, understanding them wholly
appellatiuely, renders them, the field of the Idol: and so they may signify,
the plain of Auen, the plain of grief, the plain of sorrow, as Calvin
observes. Iunius and Tremellius do render it, as before Gualter, e conualle
Auenis, the valley of Auen: understanding thereby the whole coast of Chamatha,
which way Syria bordereth upon Arabia, surnamed the Desert.

Calvin says it is uncertain, whether Bikeath-Auen be a proper name of a
place, or no; yet says he, it is probable. Drusius following the Hebrew
Doctors, affirms, that it is the proper name of a city in Syria. Mercer the
learned professor of Paris, joins with him. And our English Geneua
Translation draws us to be of the same mind, that Bikeath-Auen is a proper
name of a city in Syria.

The same opinion must we hold of Beth-Eden, in the next clause; that it is a
proper name of a city in Syria: of which opinion I find Mercer, and Drusius,
and our English Translators at Geneua to have been. And Calvin holds it to be
credible, though he translates it the house of Eden, so Gualter does; so does
Tremellius, who by the house of Eden, understands the whole country of
Coelesyria, wherein stood the city Eden.

The author of the Vulgar Latin takes Beth-Eden for an appellatiue, and
translates it, the house of pleasure. Such indeed is the signification of the
word; and it is by Arias Montanus, and Ribera, applied to signify the city of
Damascus: as if Damascus were there called not only Bikeath-Auen, that is, the
field of the Idol, because of the Idolatry there used, but also Beth-Eden,
that is, the house of pleasure, because of the pleasant situation thereof. But
I retain the proper name Beth-Eden, and take it for a city in Syria, wherein
the King of Syria had a palace, and mansion house. Which I take to be plain in
my text, where the Lord threatens, to cut off him, that holds the scepter
out of Beth-Eden.

Him that holds the scepter] that is, the King keeping his court at
Beth-Eden. For I see not any absurdity in it, if I say that the King of Syria
had a mansion house, as well at Beth-Eden, as at Damascus; and that at this
time the court lay at Beth-Eden.

Him that holds the scepter] This is a periphrasis, or circumlocution of a
King. A scepter is Regium gestamen, and insigne potestatis Regiae, a Kingly
mace, the proper ensign, or token of Kingly power. Whence in the best of
Greek Poets, Homer, Kings are called (...). 3.86. (...).
(...), scepter-bearers. Hereby we understand, what we read in the story of
Hester, chap. 8.4. King Assuerus held out his golden scepter toward Hester. And
that Genesis 49.10. The scepter shall not depart from Judah. In the former place
Assuerus makes show of his Kingly favor unto Hester, by holding out his mace
unto her: in the later Jacob prophesies of the stability and continuance of
the Kingdom in the tribe of Judah, till the coming of the Messiah. Here then
he that holds the scepter in Beth-Eden, is the King abiding in Beth-Eden.

Hitherto (beloved) have I labored to unfold the words of my text: I will cut
off the inhabitant of Bikeath-Auen, and him that holds the scepter out of
Beth-eden] I] the Lord, with my mighty power, will cut off] will utterly
consume, and destroy, the inhabitant] not one only, but every one that dwells
in Bikeath-Auen] the so named city of Syria. There will I not stay my hand, but
I will also with my mighty power cut off, utterly consume and destroy, him that
holds the scepter] not only the vnder-magistrate, but the King himself, out
of Beth-eden] another so named city of Syria. Bikeath-Auen shall not be able to
defend her inhabitants, nor Beth-eden her King. I will cut off, etc.] Thus
far the exposition. Now some notes of instruction.

You will be pleased to remember with me, my three propounded circumstances.

1 The punisher, the Lord. 2 The punishment, a cutting off. 3 The punished, the
inhabitant of Bikeath-Auen, and the King of Beth-eden.
From the first circumstance; The Lord himself taking vengeance into his own
hands, arises this doctrine, It is proper to the Lord to execute vengeance
upon the wicked for their sins.

Which truth having been often commended to your Christian considerations, in
former lectures, I now let pass.

From all three circumstances of the punisher, the punishment, and the
punished, jointly considered, arise other profitable doctrines.

First we see, that the cutting off, of the inhabitant of Bikeath-Auen, and of
him that holds the scepter out of Beth-eden, is the Lords proper work. The
lesson which we may take from hence is this; No calamity, or misery, be
falls any one of whatsoever estate, or degree, by chance, or at adventure.

It was an error of the Paynims to hold fortune in so high account; Iuuen.
Sat. 10.
Te facimus, Fortuna, Deam, coeloque locamus. They esteemed her as a goddess,
and assigned her a place in Heaven. They presented her by the image of a woman,
sitting sometimes upon a ball, sometimes upon a wheel, having with her a
rasour, Pierius Hieroglyph. lib. 29.
bearing in her right hand the stern of a ship, in her left, the horn of
abundance: by the rasour, they would give us to understand, that she can at her
pleasure cut off, and end our happiness; by the ball, or wheel, that she is
very prone to volubility and change; by the stern in her right hand, that the
whole course of our life is under her government; by the horn of abundance in
her left hand, that all out plenty is from her.

This palpable Idolatry of the Gentiles, giving the glory of the most high, to
their ba^e and inglorious abominations, we Christians must utterly renounce.
We honor the Lord of hosts alone, and to him alone do we ascribe the
soueraingty, dominion, and rule of the whole world. Such is the extent of Gods
wonderful and eternal providence. The whole world with all things therein, is
wholly and alone subject to the sovereignty, dominion, and rule of Almighty
God; by his providence all things are preserved, all things are ruled, all
things are ordered.

These are the three degrees by which you may discern, and take notice of the
Act of divine providence. The first is Gradus conseruationis. Trelcat. Instit.
l b. 2 page 46.
The second, Gradus gubernationis. The third, Gradus ordinationis. The first
degree is of maintenance, or preservation; the second is of rule, and
government; the third is of ordination, and direction.

The first degree, which I termed gradum conseruationis, the degree of
maintenance, and preservation, implies thus much; that all things in general,
and every thing in particular, are by Almighty God sustained ordinarily, in the
same state of nature, and natural proprieties, wherein they were created.

This truth is excellently explained, Psalm. 104. and 145. and 147. In which the
Psalmist joyfully sings out, of the wonderful Providence of God in the
maintenance and preservation of man, and every other creature; the beasts of
the field, the fowls of the air, the fishes of the sea. Psalm. 104.10, 11.
He sends the springs into the valleys, that all the beasts of the field may
drink, and the wild asses quench their thirst. Psalm. 147.8. and Psalm. 104.13.
He covers the heaven with clouds, prepares rain for the earth, and makes
grass to grow even upon mountains, that cattle may have food; he has made
the mountains Psalm. 104.18.
to be a refuge for goats, and rocks for conies: the Lions, Verse. 21.
roaring after their prey, seek their meat at him.

You see Gods care and providence for the preservation of the beasts of the
field; see the like for the fowls of the air. He has planted the Psalm. 104
16.
Cedars of Lebanon, for birds to make their nests there, and the fur trees
for the storkes to dwell in: the young Psalm. 147.9.
ravens that cry unto him, he feeds. Our Savior Jesus Christ, Matthew. 6.26.
calls you to this consideration: Behold (says he) the fowls of heaven; they
sow not, nor reap, nor carry into barns, yet your heavenly father feeds them.

Gods care and providence for the preservation of his creatures, here rests
not: it reaches even to the bottom of the sea. There is great Psalm. 104.26.
Leuiathan; there are creeping things innumerable, small, and great; all which
wait upon the Lord, that he may give them food in due season. In due season he
gives them food, Psalm. 104.24.
and they gather it, he opens his hand and they are filled with good. O Lord
how manifold are thy works? In wisdom have thou made them all; the whole
world is full of thy riches.

The providence, I termed gradum gubernationis, the degree of rule, and
government. It implies thus much; that Almighty God for his unlimited power,
governs all things in the world, and rules them pro liberate voluntatis
suae, even as he lists.

This point is delivered not obscurely in many places of holy Scripture, as in
those general, and universal sayings, which do prove God Almighty, even this
day to work in the world, and to do all in all. In Esa. 43.13. thus says the
Lord; Yea, before the day was, I am, and there is none that can deliver out of
mine hand, I will do it, and who shall let it? Agreeable to this are the words
of our Savior, Ioh. 5.17. My father works hitherto, and I work. From both
these places we may truly infer that God works in the government of this
world day after day, even until the end thereof: which Saint Paul, Ephesians 1.11.
auoweth; He works all things after the counsel of his own will.

To the consideration hereof Elihu stirs up afflicted Job, Chap. 37. wishing
him to consider the wondrous works of God, the Clouds, and his light shining
out of them; the thunder, Gods marvelous and glorious voice; the snow, the
frost, the whirlewind, the rain; all these God rules, and governs after his
good pleasure.

And who I pray you rules man, and man's affairs, but the Lord? O Lord, says
Ierem. chap. 10.23. I know that the way of man is not in himself, neither is
it in man to walk, and to direct his steps. King Solomon confesses as much,
Prou. 20.24. The steps of man are ruled by the Lord.

From this ruling providence of God, King David, Psalm. 23.1. drew unto himself
a very comfortable argument: The Lord feeds me, therefore I shall not want.
Let us as comfortably reason with our selves; The Lord feeds us, therefore we
shall not want. It is spoken to our never ending comfort by our blessed
Savior, Matthew. 10.29. Are not two sparrowes sold for a farthing, and one of
them falls not on the ground without your father? Fear ye not therefore, ye
are of more value than many sparrowes. In the same place he further assures,
that all the hairs of our head are numbered. Does Gods care reach to the
falling of the hairs of our head, and can we doubt of his perpetual rule and
government in the world? It must stand true: Almighty God for his unlimited
power governs all things in the world, and rules them pro liberate
voluntatis suae, even as he lists.

The third degree, by which we may discern the act of divine providence, I
called gradum ordinationis, the degree of ordination, or direction. It implies
thus much: that God of his admirable wisdom ordains, and sets in order,
whatsoever things in the world seem to be most out of order; he brings them
all to his chiefly intended end; all must make for his glory.

In this divine ordination three things do concur: Constitutio finis;
mediorum ad finem dispositio; and Dispositorum directio. First, God appoints
an end to every thing; secondly, he disposes means unto the end; thirdly, he
directs the means so disposed.

To discourse of these particulars severally, would carry me beyond my time,
and your patience: I will but only touch the general, which was, God of his
admirable wisdom ordains, or sets in order; whatsoever things in the
world seem to be most out of order: he brings them all to his chiefly
intended end; they all make for his glory.

Hereupon depends the truth of my propounded doctrine inviolable; No
calamity or misery be falls any one, of whatsoever estate or degree, by
chance, or at adventure.

For if it be true, (as true it is, and the gates of Hell shall neur be able to
prevail against it) that God by his wonderful providence, maintains, and
preserves, rules, and governs, orders, disposes, and directs all
things in this world, even to the very hairs of our heads, it cannot be, that
any calamity, or misery should befall any one of us by adventure, by
hap-hazard, by chance, by fortune.

The Epicure in the book of Job, 22.13. was in a foul error to think, that
God walking in the circle of heaven, cannot through the dark clouds see our
misdoings, and judge us for them. Dearly beloved, we may not think our God to
be a See Lect. 1. page 10.
God to halfes, and in part only: a God above, and not beneath the moon: a God
upon the mountains, and not in the valleys; a God in the greater, and not in
the lesser employments. We may not thus think.

We have lived long enough, to have learned better things out of Amos 9. Ierem
23. Psalm. 139. that God is every where present, and that there is no evasion
from him. Sermon 4. in James 4.10. and infra Lect. 14. page 159.
No corner in Hell, no mansion in heaven, no cave in the top of Carmel, no
fishes belly in the bottom of the sea, no dark dungeon in the land of
captivity, no place of any secrecy any where, is able to hide us from the
presence of God.

We have learned, Zach. 4.10. that God has seven eyes, which go through the
whole world. You may interpret them with me, many millions of eyes. He is
Hieronymus in illud Psalm. 94.9. Qui plantauit aurem, non audiet? aut qui finxit
oculum non considerat? Ego autem dico, quod Deus totus Oculus est, totus Manus
est, totus Pes est. Totus Oculus est, quia omnia videt. Totus Manus est, quia
omnia operatur. Totus Pes est, quia vbique est.
totus OCVLVS, altogether eye, for he sees all things. We have learned, Esai.
40.12. that God has hands to measure the waters, and to span the heavens. You
may interpret it with me, that he has many millions of hands: He is totus
Manus, altogether hand; for he works all things. We have learned, Matthew.
5.35. that God has feet to set upon his footstool. You may interpret it with
me, that he has many milions of feet: He is totus Pes, altogether foot, for he
is every where.

We shall then be very injurious to God, if we deny him the oversight of the
smallest matters. The holy Scriptures do evidently show, that he examineth the
least moments, and tittles in the world that we can imagine, Supra page 10.
to a handful of meal, to a cruse of oil in a poor widows house, to the
falling of sparrowes to the ground, to the clothing of the grass in the field,
to the feeding of the birds of the air, to the caluing of hindes, to the
numbering of the hairs of our heads.

Wherefore (dearly beloved in the Lord) whatsoever calamity or misery has
already seized upon us, or shall hereafter overtake us, let us not lay it upon
blind Fortune, but look we to the hand that strikes us. He, who is noted in
my text to cut off the inhabitant of Bikeath-Auen, and him that holds the
scepter out of Beth-eden, even He it is, that for our sins brings upon us
calamities, and miseries.

The late fearful flood, raging upon this land to the utter destruction of
great store of cattle, and much people; and the late rot of sheep in this,
and other places of this land, are Gods visitations upon us for our sins, and
admonishments for us to amend our lives.

Shall there be evil in a city, and the Lord has not done it? says Amos,
chap. 3.6. Its out of question; there is no evil in the city, no, not in the
world, but the Lords finger is in it; and that justly, for our sins sake.

What remains, but that we rent our hearts, and turn unto the Lord our God?
He is gracious, merciful, slow to anger, of great kindness, and repents him
of evil. How know we, whether he will return, and repent, and leave a
blessing behind him for us? Let us therefore go boldly unto the throne of
grace, that we may receive mercy, and find grace to help in time of need.

THE Eleventh Lecture.
AMOS 1.5. The people of Aram shall go into captivity unto Kir, says the Lord.


We go on with that which yet remains vnexpounded in this 5. verse.

The people of Aram] Aram registered Genesis 10.22. to be one of the sons of Sem,
was the father, author, or founder of the Aramites, or Syrians, Tremellius and
Willet. in Genes. 10.22.
whereof it is, that the Scythians, after their return out of Asia and Syria,
were called Aramei, Aramites, Plin. lib. 6. cap. 17. This country of Aram, or
Syria, was divided into sundry regions.

2 Samuel 10.8. You may read of Aram Soba, Aram Rehob, Aram Ishtob, and Aram
Maacah; from which provinces there went a multitude of Aramites to aid the
Ammonites, in their war against King David. The success of their expedition
is recorded verse. the 18. David destroyed seven hundred chariots of the
Aramites, and forty thousand horsemen. So let them all perish, who make head,
and band themselves together against the Lords anointed.

2 Samuel 8.6. You may read of Aram of Damascus; out of which part there went a
great multitude to succor Hadadezar, King of Soba, against David. Their
success is recorded in the same place, David slew of the Aramites two and
twenty thousand men. (...), let them all likewise perish, who make head and
band themselves together against the Lords anointed.

1 Chronicles. 19.6. You may read of Aram Naharaim, which is by interpretation Aram
of the rivers, that is, Aram lying between the two great rivers, Euphrates and
Tigris, commonly known by the name of B^rtr^m. Comparat. Gram. Hebr. and Aram.
in Praesat.
Mesopotamia. And these Syrians gave aid unto the Ammonites against David, and
were partakers in their overthrow.

Genesis 28.5. You may read of Padan Aram, whither the Patriarch Jacob was by his
father Isaac sent, to make choice of his wife of the daughters of Laban.
Tremellius and Iunius in their note upon Genesis 25.20. do make this Padan-Aram
to be a part of Mesopotamia, that part which is called by Ptolomee Ancobaritis.

Thus does the holy spirit in the sacred Scriptures describe unto us the
country of Aram in its parts; Aram Soba, Aram Rehob, Aram Ishtob, Aram Maacah,
Aram of Damascus, Aram Naharaim, and Padan Aram.

H^re Aram, put without any adiunct to limit it to any one region, may betoken
all Syria, divided by our Prophet Amos in this one verse into three parts,
under the three names of Damascus, Bikeath-Auen, and Beth-eden, as Tremellius
and Iunius have noted; understanding by Damascus, the country adjoining, the
whole coast of Decapolis; by Bikeath-Auen, the country called Chamatha, which
way Syria bordereth upon Arabia, surnamed the Desert; by Beth-eden, the whole
country of Coelesyria, wherein stood the city Eden.

The people] that is, persons of all sorts; not only the ruder multitude, but
the noble also: the word is general, and contains all.

Shall go into captiuity] They shall be carried away from their native country
into a strange land in slavery and bondage.

Unto Kir] not unto Cyrene, Ribera.
a noble city in that part of Africa, which is called Pentapolis (the native
country of Arias Montanus.
Callimachus the poet, and Eratosthenes the historian,) as Apud Drusium.
Jonathan, and Symmachus, and S. Hierome do seem to understand, and Eusebius,
and the author of the ordinary gloss, and Winckleman do expressly affirm; but
unto Kir, a city in the seigniories, or dominions of the king of Assyria, as
the Hebrews, and best approved expositors, do avouch. Tremellius and Iunius
upon the 2 Kings 16.9. do understand by this Kir, that part of Media, which
from this captivity was called Syromedia; It was named Kir, that is, by
interpretation a wall; because it was round about compassed with the hill
Zagrus, as with a wall.

This deportation, and captivity of the Syrians, was foretold by our Prophet
Anno regni Oziae. 23.
almost fifty years before it was fulfilled. It was fulfilled in the days of
Ahaz, King of Judah, who sent messengers to Tiglath Pileser, King of Assyria,
for help. Tiglath Pileser consented unto him, went up against Damascus, took
it, slew Rezin King of Aram, and curried away captive the people of Aram into
Kir. Thus is the story expressly delivered, 2 King. 16.

Thus far the exposition of the words. The people] not only the ruder
multitude; but the nobles also, of Aram] not of Damascus only, but of all
Syria, shall go into captiuity] shall be carried away captive by
Tiglath-Pileser, King of Assyria, unto Kir] a part of Media.

This accordingly came to pass. For it could no otherwise be; the Lord, true
in all his promises, and threatenings, whose words are yea, and Amen, he has
said it. The people of Aram shall go into captivity unto Kir, says the Lord.
Now to the notes of instruction.

Here must I commend unto you (as I have done out of the precedent clauses)
three circumstances: the punisher, the punished, the punishment.

1 The punisher; the Lord by his instrument, Tiglath-Pileser, King of Assyria.

2 The punished, the Aramites, or Syrians, of all sorts, the ruder, and the
noble.

3 The punishment, a deportation, or carrying into captivity.

This third circumstance is amplified by the place. Their captivity, bondage,
and slavery, was to be in an unknown, strange, and far country; Kir in Media.

From the first circumstance of the punisher, the Lord of hosts employing in
his service the King of Assyria, for the carrying away of the Aramites, or
Syrians, into captivity, we are put in mind of a well known truth in
divinity: Almighty God in his government of the world, works ordinarily by
means or second causes.

I say ordinarily: because extraordinarily, he works sometime without means,
sometime against means. Ordinarily he works by means. And they are of two
sorts.

Definite; such as of their natural, and internal principles, do of
necessity produce some certain effects. So the fire burns, the water
drowneth.

Indefinite; such as are free, and accidental agents, having in themselves
freedom of will to do, or not to do.

In this rank you may place Joseph's brethren, at what time they sold him to
the Ismaelites, Genesis 37.28. they sold him not of necessity, they might have
done otherwise. In this rank you may place Shimei, for his carriage toward
King David, 2 Samuel 16.6. His throwing of stones at the King, and railing upon
him, was not of necessity; he might have done otherwise. And the King of
Assyria carried into captivity this people of Aram, not of necessity; he
might have left unto them their native country, lands, and possessions.

All these; fire, water, Joseph's brethren, railing Shimei, the King of Assyria,
and whatsoever else like these, means, or second causes; definite, or
indefinite; necessary, or contingent; are but instruments, by which Almighty
God in his government of the world works ordinarily.

God laid waste Sodom, Gomorrah, and their sister Cities: he did it by fire,
Genesis 19.24. God destroyed every thing that was upon the earth from man to
beast, to the creeping thing, and to the foul of the heaven (only was Noah
saved, and they that were with him in the Arc) the rest he destroyed by water,
Genesis 7.23. God sent Joseph into Egypt, to preserve his fathers posterity, and
to save them alive by a great deliverance, as Joseph himself confesses, Genesis
45.7. This was Gods doing, but he did it by Joseph's own brethren, who (you
know) sold him to the Ismaelites. God sent an affliction upon David for his
good, by cursed speaking, and throwing of stones; wherein David acknowledges
Gods special finger, 2 Samuel 16.11. The thing was Gods doing. He did it by
Shimei, the son of Iemini. God spoke the word concerning the people of Aram,
that they should go into captivity, as appears in my text: God spoke the
word, and it was done. God therefore sent the people of Aram into captivity,
but he did it by Tiglath-Pileser, King of Assyria.

All these; (though I said it before, I say it again) All these; fire, water,
Joseph's brethren, railing Shimei, the King of Assyria, and whatsoever else like
these, means, or second causes; definite, or indefinite; necessary, or
contingent; are but instruments, by which Almighty God in his government of
the world ordinarily works.

This doctrine of Almighty God, working ordinarily by means, may serve to our
use sundry ways.

1 It may move us to a due consideration of that absolute right, and power,
which God holds over all his creatures. This truth I have heretofore
delivered unto you in my eighth Lecture upon this Prophecy, in this
proposition: At is the fire, so are all other creatures at the Lords
commandment, to be employed by him in the punishment of the wicked.

2 It may teach us, that God has a loving regard, and respect to our
infirmities, as well knowing, (for he knows all things) that in doubtful
matters we use often to look back, and to have recourse to means, or second
causes.

3 It may move us to obedience, and thankfulness: that we contemn not the
means, or second causes, by which God works; for this were to tempt God; but
that we thankfully embrace them, and commit their issue, event, and success to
God, that works by them.

4 It meets with a perverse opinion of such, as do hold that all second
causes are needless, and unprofitable, because God by his particular
providence directs, and brings to pass all things in the world.

Thus will these men reason: If it be determined by Gods providence, that I
shall recover my health, there is no need that I use Physic: and if it be
otherwise determined, that I shall not recover, in vain also shall I use the
help of Physic. Again, if it be determined that thieves shall have no power
over me, I shall escape from out the midst of many: but if it be otherwise
determined, that I shall be spoiled by them, I shall not escape them, no,
though I be in mine own house. Great is the injury which these disputers do
offer unto God.

For answer to them, I must grant, that God has a very special care over us,
to defend us; and that we are no time safe, but by his providence; but mean
while, to make us well assured of his good will toward us, he has ordained
second causes, and means for us, at all opportunities, and times convenient to
use, in which, and by which, it pleases his heavenly Majesty to work
effectually.

The rule in divinity is good, Posit a prouidentia particulari, non tolluntur
de medio omnes causae secundae: It is not necessary, that the first and
principal cause being put, the second and isntrumental cause should be
removed, and taken away. The Sun does not in vain daily rise, and set, though
God creates light, and darkness; the fields are not in vain sowed, and
watered with rain, though God brings forth the corn out of the earth; our
bodies are not in vain with food refreshed, though God be the life, and length
of our days. Neither are we in vain taught to believe in Christ, to hear the
preaching of the Gospel, to detest sin, to love righteousness, to conform
our lives unto sound doctrine, though our salvation, and life eternal be the
free gift of God. For God has from everlasting decreed, as the ends, so the
means also, which he has prescribed unto us, by them to bring us to the ends.

This the great Father of this age, Page 480.
Zanchius de attributis Dei, lib. 5. cap. 2. qu. 5. expressly auoweth. His
Thesis is concerning life eternal: Whosoever are predestined to the end,
they are also predestined to the means, without which the end cannot
possibly be obtained. For example; whosoever are predestined to eternal
life, (as all we, this day assembled, hope we are) they are also predestined
to the means, by which life eternal may be obtained.

These means unto eternal life are of two sorts: 1. Some are necessary unto
all, of whatsoever age, or sex: and they are, Christ, (as our Mediator, and
high Priest) his obedience, and righteousness; our effectual vocation unto
Christ by the holy Ghost; our justification; our glorification. These are so
necessary unto all, that without them none can be saved. And therefore all
elect infants are inwardly, and after a secret manner by the holy Ghost called,
and justified, that they may be glorified. 2. Some annexed unto these are
necessary too, but not to all. Not to Infants, because they are not capable of
them; yet to all that are grown to years of understanding; and these are
Actual faith, the hearing of the Word, a hatred of sin, the love of
righteousness, patience in adversity, a desire of doing good works. All
these means, we, that are grown to years of understanding, must embrace, and
take hold of, every one according to our capacities, or else we shall never
enter into everlasting life; but our portion shall be in that lake, which is
provided for the D^uill and his Angels; from which God Almighty keep us all.

Thus far occasioned by my first circumstance, the circumstance of the
punisher; God by the King of Assyria sent into captivity the people of Aram.
My doctrine was, Almighty God in his government of the world works
ordinarily by means, or second causes.

The second circumstance is of the punished: the Aramites of all sorts, the
ruder, and the noble. The people of Aram. To ground some doctrine hereon, you
must note with me the quality, and condition of these Aramites. They were
professed enemies to the people of God. This appears before in the third
verse, where they are noted, to have exercised most barbarous cruelty against
the Gileadites, a parcel of Israel, to have threshed them with threshing
instruments of Iron. These Aramites, or Syrians, for so highly offending, God
sends into captivity. The doctrine is, Though the Lord do use his enemies,
as instruments, to correct his own servants, and children; yet will he in his
due time, overthrow those his enemies, with a large measure of his judgments.

Gods holy practice in this kind, specially registered in sundry places of his
eternal Word, most evidently declares this truth. The Israelites were kept in
thraldom, and bondage, many years by the Egyptians. The Egyptians, they
were but the weapons of Gods wrath, wherewith he afflicted his people; they
were Gods weapons: were they therefore to escape unpunished? No. Witness those
ten great plagues, which at length God wrought upon them, and their fearful
overthrow in the red sea, at large set down in the book of Exodus, from the
seventh Chapter to the end of the fourteenth. This was it, which God said unto
Abraham, Genesis 15.13, 14. Know for a surety, that thy seed shall be a stranger
in a Land, that is not theirs, four hundred years, and shall serve them, and
they shall entreat them evil; notwithstanding the Nation, whom they shall
serve, will I judge.

Ahab, the most wicked of the Kings of Israel, who sold himself to work
wickedness in the sight of the Lord, and his accursed wife, Iezebel, were Gods
instruments to afflict Naboth with the loss of his life, and Vineyard. Ahab,
and Iezebel, were Gods instruments. Were they therefore to escape unpunished?
No. Witness both their ends: the end of Ahab, recorded, 1 King. 22 38. In the
place, where dogs licked the blood of Naboth, did dogs lick the blood of
Ahab also; and the end of Iezabel, registered the 2 Kings 9.35. She was eaten
up with dogs, all, saving her skull, her feet, and the palms of her hands.

It was a part of Daniel his afflictions to be cast into the den of Lions. His
accusers unto Darius were the instruments of his affliction. These his accusers
were the Lords instruments for this business. Were they therefore to escape
unpunished? No. Their fearful end is set down, Dan. 6.24. By the
Commandment of King Darius they, with their wives, and children, were cast
into the den of Lions, the Lions had the mastery of them, and brake all their
bones in pieces, ere ever they came to the ground of the den.

The time will not suffer me to recall to your remembrances all the judgments
of God of this quality, written down in the Register of Gods works, his holy
Word; how, and what he rendered to Ester 7.10.
Haman, to 2 Kings 19.35, 37.
Sennacherib, to Ierem. 36.29.
Ioachim, to the Ierem. 49.2.
Ammonites, to the Ierem. 49.9. and 51.20.
Chaldeans, to the Ezech. 35.2.
Idumeans, and other wicked worldlings, for their hard measure offered to his
children, though they were therein his own instruments. The aforementioned
instances of the Egyptians, of Ahab, and his wife Iezebel, and of Daniel his
accusers, may serve for the declaration of my propounded doctrine, Though the
Lord do use his enemies, as instruments, to correct his own servants, and
children; yet will he in his due time, overthrow those his enemies, with a
large measure of his judgments.

The reason hereof is; because Gods justice cannot let them escape unpunished.
Saint Paul expresses it, 2 Thessalonians. 1.6. It is a righteous thing with God to
recompense tribulation to them that trouble you. Let this be our comfort,
whenever the wicked shall rage against us. For hereby are we assured, when
the Lord shall show himself from heaven with his mighty Angels in flaming
fire, that then to the wicked, whose behavior toward the godly is proud, and
despiteous, he will render vengeance, and punish them with everlasting
perdition.

Saint Peter to make us steadfast in this comfort, disputes this point, Ep. 1.
chap. 4.17. The point he proves by an argument drawn a minori, inferring from
a truth to carnal men's understanding less probable, a truth of greater
probability. Judgment (says he) begins at the house of God; If it first
begin at us, what shall be the end of them, which obey not the Gospel of God?
And if the righteous scarsly be saved, where shall the ungodly, and the sinner
appear? Our Saviors words, Luke 23.31. do contain a like argument: If they
do these things to a green tree, what shall he done to the dry? To like
purpose in Ierem. 25.29. says the Lord of Hoasts: Lo I begin to plague the
city where my name is called upon, and shall you go free? Ye shall not go
free.

Hitherto I refer also one other text, Esai. 10.12. where it is said, that
God, when he has done, and dispatched all his work upon Mount Sion, will
visit the fruit of the proud heart of the King of Assyria; the meaning of the
place is, that God, when he has sufficiently chastised and corrected those of
his own house, his beloved children, will turn his sword against the scorners
of his Majesty. When God has served his own turn by the wicked, then comes
their turn also; howsoever for a while they flourish, in hope to escape Gods
hand, and to abide unpunished, yet will God in due time well enough find them
out, to pay them double.

The uses of this doctrine I can but point at. One is, to admonish us, that we
spite not any of the wicked, who now do live in rest, because their turn to
be punished must come, and fail not. The further it is put off from them, the
heavier in the end it will fall upon them.

A second use is, to teach us patience in afflictions; for as much as God will
shortly cause the cup to pass from us to our adversaries. But say, he will
not. Yet nevertheless are we to possess our souls in patience; rejoicing and
giving thanks to God, who has made us worthy, not only to believe in him, but
also to suffer for his sake. For we have learned, Act. 14.22. That through many
afflictions we must enter into the kingdom of God. etc.

The Prophets, and Apostles, and Martyrs, which were not only reviled and
scourged, but also beheaded, cut in pieces, drowned in water, consumed in fire,
by other tyrannical devices cruelly put to death, they all by this way
received the manifest token of their happy and blessed estate, and entered into
the kingdom of God. And we undoubtedly know, 2 Cor. 5.1. That if our earthly
house of this tabernacle be destroyed we have a building of God, an house not
made with hands, but eternal in the heavens.

Thus far of my second circumstance; the circumstance of the punished, the
Aramites, professed enemies unto God, yet by him employed in the correction of
his own children, the Israelites, are here themselves punished. My doctrine
was, Though the Lord do use his enemies, as instruments, to correct his own
servants, and children: yet will be in due time overthrow those his enemies,
with a large measure of his judgments.

The third circumstance is, the punishment, a going into captivity: amplified
by the place. This captivity, bondage, and slavery, was to be in an unknown,
strange, and a far country; Kir in Media. The people of Aram shall go into
captivity unto Kir. The doctrine is, For the sin of a Land, God oftentimes
sends away the inhabitants into captivity.

Captivity to be an effect, or punishment of sin, King Solomon in his prayer
made to the Lord at his consecration, or dedication of the Temple, 1 King.
8.46. acknowledges. It is expressly delivered, 1 Chronicles. 9.1. of the Israelites;
that for their transgressions they were carried away captive unto Babel. In
Deuteronomy. 28.41. among the curses threatened to all such as are rebellious, and
disobedient to Gods holy Commandments, Captivity is ranked, and reckoned.

I let pass the multitude of Scripture-places serving to this point; my Text
is plain for it. The Aramites for their three transgressions, and for four,
for their many sins, for their sin of cruelty, for threshing Gilead with
threshing instruments of Iron, were to go into Captivity. My doctrine stands
firm; For the sin of a Land, God oftentimes sends away the inhabitants
into captivity.

Into Captivity? Into what kind of captivity? For there is a spiritual
captivity, and a corporal captivity; a captivity of the mind, and a
captivity of the body. Both are very grievous, but the first more.

The first, which I call the spiritual captivity, and a captivity of the
mind, is a captivity under the Devil, under the power of Hell, under, death,
under sin, under the eternal malediction or curse of the Law, propounded to
every one, that does not in all points, and absolutely, obey the Law. This
Captivity is a heavy yoke to all mankind, considered without Christ. Every
one, male, and female, that has no part in Christ, every unbelieving and
reprobate person, is in this construction, even to this day a captive. And such
also were we, by the corruption of our nature upon our first Father Adams
default: but now are we by the sacrifice of the immaculate Lamb, the Lord
Jesus, ransomed, and freed. For to this purpose was he sent into the world: as
it is evident, Esai. 61.1. and Luke 4.18.

In both places he professes himself to be sent into the world for this
end, even to publish liberty, and freedom to captives, and the imprisoned;
which his office he has graciously performed. By his Word of grace he has so
freed our consciences, formerly oppressed with, and captive under sin, that now
there is no condemnation to us; to us, I say, who are in Christ, and do walk
after the spirit, as Saint Paul speaks, Romans 8.1.

This is it which our Savior foretold the Jews, John. 8.36. If the Son
shall make you free, you shall be free indeed. Be it repeated again to our
eternal comforts: If the Son shall make us free, we shall be free indeed.
But he has made us free: for therefore was he sent, to publish liberty, and
freedom to captives; he has paid our ransom, his innocent, and most precious
blood: by it are we thoroughly washed, and cleansed from our sins. Now there
is no condemnation to us. Thus freed from our spiritual captivity, bondage,
and slavery under Hell, death, and sin, let us with boldness looking up to the
throne of Grace, whereon sits the Author, and Finisher of our faith, say
with the blessed Apostle, 1 Cor. 15.55. O Death, where is thy sting? O Hell,
where is thy victory? the sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is
the Law. But thanks be to God, who has given us victory, through Jesus Christ
our Lord.

The Captivity in my text, is of the other kind, a corporal captivity, a
captivity of the body, which usually is accompanied with two great miseries,
pointed at, Psalm. 107.10. The first, they dwell in darkness and in the shadow
of death; the second, they are bound in anguish, and Iron. First, they dwell in
darkness, and in the shadow of death, that is, they are put into deep
dungeons, void of light, whereby they are as it were at deaths door. Secondly,
they are bound in anguish, and iron, that is, day and night they are laden
with fetters, gyues, or shackles of iron; so laden, that they find no rest
unto their bones. Thus must it be with them, who by sinful living provoke the
Lord to high displeasure. Thus is my doctrine confirmed; For the sin of a land,
God oftentimes sends away the inhabitants into captivity.

Is it true, beloved? Does God oftentimes for the sin of a land send away the
inhabitants into captivity? Let us make this Christian use of it: even to power
out our selves in thankfulness before Almighty God for his wonderful patience
toward us. The sins of such Nations, as have been punished with captivity,
were they more grievous in Gods eyes, than ours are? It is not be imagined.

Our sins are as crimson-like, and as scarlet-like, as ever were theirs; the
sins of our land, crying sins; Atheism, Irreligion, Oppression, Extortion,
Covetousness, Usury, Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanness, Drunkenness, and
many like abominations of the old man in us, all our works of darkness, they
have made head together, and have impudently and shamelesly pressed into the
presence of Almighty God, to urge him to power forth the vials of his wrath and
indignation upon us. Yet our God, good, gracious, merciful, long suffering,
and of great kindness, withholdeth, and stays his reuengefull hand, from
laying upon us his great punishment of Captivity: and suffers us to possess
our habitations in peace, and to eat the good things of the earth: O, let us
therefore confess before the Lord his loving kindness, and declare before the
sons of men the good things that he has done for us.

Here (dearly beloved) let us not presume upon God his patience, to lead our
lives as we list. We cannot but see, that God is highly offended with us
already, though yet he be not pleased to execute his sorest judgments upon us.
Gods high displeasure against us, appears in those many visitations, by which
he has come near unto us, within our memories. I may not stand to amplify,
the Spanish sword shaken over us, and the great famine brought upon us in our
late Queens days. Our now gracious Sovereign has not long sat at the
stern of this kingdom. But few years are passed; and yet those few have
afforded manifest tokens of Gods sore displeasure at us.

Have not many thousands of our brethren (happily not so grievous sinners as we)
been taken away by the destroying Angel, and yet the plague is not ceased?
Unless we repent, and amend our lives, we may likewise perish. Have not many
of our brethren (too many, if it might have seemed otherwise to Almighty God)
have they not partly perished themselves, partly lost their cattle, and
substance, in An. Dom. 1607
this years waters, such waters, as our forefathers have scarcely observed
the like? If we will not wash our selves from our evil doings; we see, God is
able to wash us extraordinarily. The unseasonable weather given us from Heaven
to the rotting of our sheep, is but Gods warning to us of a greater misery to
befall us, unless we will return from our evil ways.

Wherefore (beloved) let us with one heart, and mind, resolve for hereafter to
cast away all works of darkness, and to put on the armor of light: take we
no further thought for our flesh, to fulfill the lusts of it. Walk we from
henceforth honestly, as in the day.

Whatsoever things are true, and honest, and just, and pure, and do pertain
to love, and are of good report, if there be any virtue, or praise, think we
on these things. Think we on these things to do them, and we shall not need
to fear any going into captivity; yea the destroying Angel shall have no
power over us; the raging waters shall not hurt us; our cattle, and whatsoever
else we enjoy, shall prosper under us. For God, even our own God, shall give
us his blessing.

THE Twelfth Lecture.
AMOS 1.6, 7, 8. Thus says the Lord; For three transgressions of Azzah, and
for four, I will not turn to it, because they carried away prisoners the
whole captivity, to shut them up in Edom.

Therefore will I send a fire upon the walls of Azzah, and it shall devour the
Palaces thereof.

And I will cut off the inhabitant from Ashdod, and him that holds the
scepter from Ashkelon, and turn mine hand to Ekron, and the remnant of the
Philistines shall perish, says the Lord God.


THese words do contain a burdensome prophecy against the Philistines. I
divide them into three parts:

1 A preface to a prophecy, verse. 6. Thus says the Lord.

2 The prophecy, verse. 6, 7, 8. For three transgressions, etc.

3 The conclusion, in the end of the eighth verse, Says the Lord God.

In the prophecy I observe four parts.

1 An Accusation of the Philistines, verse. the 6. For three transgressions of
Azzah, and for four.

2 The Lords protestation against them, verse. the 6. I will not turn to it.

3 The declaration of that grievous sin, by which the Philistines so highly
displeased God, verse. the 6. They carried away prisoners the whole captivity to
shut them up in Edom.

4 The description of the punishments to be inflicted upon them; in five
branches. One in the seventh verse, and four in the eighth verse. The great
Cities Azzah, and Ashdod, and A hkelon, and Ekron, and all the rest of the
Philistines, are partners in this punishment.

This prophecy for the tenor and current of the words, is much like the former
against the Syrians, the exposition whereof, in sundry sermons heretofore
delivered, may serve for the exposition of this prophecy also. The preface is
first.

Thus says the Lord] Not Amos, but in Amos, the Lord. The Lord, Jehovah, who
made the heavens, and spread them out like a curtain, to cloth himself with
light, as with a garment; and can again cloth the heavens with darkness, and
make a sack their covering: the Lord, Jehovah, who made the sea to lay the
beams of his chamber therein, and placed the sands for bounds unto it by a
perpetual decree, never to be passed over, howsoever the waves thereof shall
rage, and roar; and can with a word smite the pride thereof: at his rebuke the
floods shall be turned into a wilderness, the sea shall be dried up; the fish
shall rot for want of water, and die for thirst: the Lord, Jehovah, who made
the dry land, and so set it upon foundations, that it should never move, and
can cover her again with the deep, as with a garment; and so rock her, that
she shall reele to and fro, and stagger like a drunken man.

Thus says the Lord] The Lord, Jehovah, whose throne is the heaven of heavens,
and the sea his flower to walk in, and the earth his footstool to tread upon;
who has a chair in the conscience, and sits in the heart of man, and
possesses his most secret reins, and divides betwixt the flesh and the
skin; and shakes his inmost powers, as the thunder shakes the wilderness
of Cades.

Thus says the Lord] Has he said it, and shall he not do it? has he spoken
it, and shall he not accomplish it? The Lord, Jehovah, the strength of Israel,
is not as man, that he should lie; nor as the son of man, that he should
repent. All his words, yea all the titles of his words are yea, and Amen.
Heaven and earth shall perish, before one jot, or any one tittle of his word
shall escape unfulfilled.

Thus says the Lod] Out of doubt then must it come to pass: Here see the
authority of this prophecy; and not of this only, but also of all other the
prophecies of holy Scripture; that neither this nor any other prophecy of old,
is destitute of divine authority.

This point of the authority of holy Scripture I delivered unto you in my
second and sixth Lectures upon this Prophecy: and then noted unto you the
harmony, consent, and agreement of all the Prophets, Evangelists, and Apostles,
from the first unto the last; not one of them spoke one word of a natural man
in all their ministeries: the words which they spoke, were the words of him
that sent them: they spoke not of themselves, God spoke in them. Whenever
were the time; whatsoever were the means; whosoever were the man; wheresoever
were the place; whatsoever were the people; the words were the Lords.

Thus says the Lord] Then must we give ear unto him with reverence. But what
says he? Even the words of this Prophecy.

For three transgressions of Azzah, and four, I will not turn it] Azzah]
Palestina, the country of the Philistines, was divided into five Provinces, or
Dutchies, mentioned Josh. 13.3. the Dutchies of Azzah, of Ashdod, of Askelon,
of Gath, of Ekron. These five chief, and the most famous Cities of Palestina,
are recorded also, 1 Samuel 6.17. where the Philistines are said to have given
for a sin offering to the Lord five golden Emerods, one for Azzah, one for
Ashdod, one for Askelon, one for Gath, and one for Ekron. Against four of
these Cities, all save Gath, and against Gath too in the general name of the
Philistines, this prophecy was given by the ministry of Amos. In the offense
or blame Azzah is alone nominated; but in the punishment are Ashdod, and
Askelon, and Ekron, and the residue of the Philistines remembered as well as
Azzah.

Azzah] It Is first named, Genesis 10.19. In the vulgar Latin, and in the Greek,
it is commonly called Gaza; it has no other name in the new Testament, but
Gaza. It Is so called, Act. 8.26. And you may call it by which name you will,
Azzah, or Gaza, it is not material.

Now by this Azzah, or Gaza, you are to understand the inhabitants of the City,
and not them only, but also the borderers; all the inhabitants of the country
adjacent: to all which our Prophet here denounces Gods judgments for their
sins.

For three transgressions of Azzah, and for foure] These words containing an
accusation of the Philistines for their sins, and the protestation of Almighty
God against them for the same, I have heretofore in my sixth Lecture at large
expounded, occasioned thereto by the beginning of the third verse: and
therefore I shall not need at this time to make any long iteration thereof. Yet
let me relate unto you the sum and substance of them.

For three transgressions of Azzah, etc.] It is as if the Lord had thus said:
If the Philistines had offended but once, or a second time, I should have been
favorable unto them, and should have recalled them into the right way, that so
they might be converted, and escape my punishments: but now, whereas they do
daily heap transgression upon transgression, and find no end of sinning, I
have hardened my face against them, and will not suffer them to be converted;
but indurate, and obstinate as they are, I will utterly destroy them. For three
transgressions of Azzah, and for foure] The doctrine is: Many sins do pluck
down from heaven, the most certain wrath and vengeance of God upon the
sinners.

See my sixth Sermon. on Hos. 10.
God is of pure eyes, and beholds not iniquity; he has laid righteousness to
the rule, and weighed his justice in a balance. The sentence is passed forth,
and must stand uncontrollable, even as long as Sun and Moon. Tribulation, and
anguish upon every soul that does evil; the soul that sins, it shall be
punished. God makes it good by an oath, Deuteronomy. 32.41. that he will what his
glittering sword, and his hand shall take hold on judgment, to execute
vengeance upon sinners. His soul hates and abhors sin; his Law curses and
condemns sin; his hand smites and scourges sin. Sin was his motive to cast
down Angels into Hell; to thrust Adam out of Paradise; to turn Cities into
ashes; to ruinate nations; to torment his own bowels in the similitude of
sinful flesh. Because of sin he drowned the old world, and because of sin
ere long will burn this. Thus do many sins pluck down from heaven the more
certain wrath and vengeance of God upon the sinners.

One use of this doctrine is, to teach us heedfulnesse in all our ways, that
we do not by our many sins provoke Almighty God to high displeasure.

A second use it, to move us to a serious contemplation of the wonderful
patience of Almighty God, who did so graciously forbear these Philistines of
Azzah, till by three and four transgressions, by their many sins, they had
provoked him to indignation. It Is true: our God is a good God, a gracious God,
a merciful God, a God of wonderful patience: yet may not we thereby take
encouragement to go on in our evil doings. See my sixth Lecture page 70.


The Lord who punished his Angels in Heaven for one breach, Adam for one
morsel, Miriam for one slander, Moses for one angry word, Achan for one
sacrilege, Ezechias for once showing his treasures to the Ambassadors of Babel,
Josias for once going to war without asking counsel of the Lord, and Ananias
with his wife, Sapphira, for once lying to the holy Ghost; out of doubt will
not spare us, if we shall persist to make a trade of sinning, day after day
heaping iniquity upon iniquity, to the fulfilling of our sins. If so we do,
it shall be with us, as the Apostle speaks, 1 These. 2.16. The wrath of God
must come on us to the utmost.

Now therefore as the Elect of God, holy, and beloved, let us walk in love,
even as Christ has loved us. As for the works of the flesh, cast we them far
from us; adultery, fornication, uncleanness, wantonness, hatred, debate,
emulation, wrath, contentions, envy, drunkenness, gluttony, and such like, for
which the wrath of God comes upon the children of disobedience, let them not
once be named among us, as it becomes Saints. But the fruits of the Spirit,
let us wholly delight in them; having laid up in the treasury of our memories
this lesson: Three transgressions and sour; Many sins do pluck down from
heaven, the most certain wrath and vengeance of God upon the sinners. It
follows,

Because they carried away prisoners the whole captivity to shut them up in
Edom] These words are the third part of this Prophecy, and do contain that
same grievous sin by which God was provoked to come against the men of Azzah,
and the rest of the Philistines in judgment; the sin of cruelty, rigor,
unmercifulness, hardness of heart. They carried away prisoners the whole
captivity to shut them up in Edom] Here the abstract is put for the concrete;
captivity for captives, or persons in captivity; as Psalm. 68.18 Thou have led
captivity captive.

The whole captiuity] It Is well translated for the sense: the word in the
original signifies, absolute, perfect, and complete. By this whole captivity,
the holy Spirit means an absolute, perfect, and complete captivity: meram
captiuitatem, apertam, atque manifestam, says Arias Montanus: a captivity
indeed, open and manifest: such a captivity, says Calvin, as wherein they
spared not either women, or children, or the aged: they took no pity, no
compassion, upon either sex or age; but all of all sorts, male and female,
young and old, they carried away prisoners. What was their end and purpose in
so doing? Even to shut them up in Edom: that is, to sell them for bondslaues
unto the Idumaeans.

In Edom] Esau, Jacobs brother, and Isaacks son by his wife Genesis 25.21.
Reb^kah, for selling his birthright for a mess of Verse. 30.
red broth, was surnamed Edom, and of him lineally descended the Edomites, or
Idumaeans, Genesis 36.43. Of this posterity of Esau, or Edom, the land, which they
inhabited, was called the land of Edom, or Idumaea; and it was a southern
province of the land of promise, divided, as Theatr. Terra Sancta.
Adriehom, and Obseruat. lib. 14. cap. 13.
Drusius have observed out of Josephus his fifth book of the Jewish
antiquities, into two parts; Idumaeam Superiorem, and Inferiorem; the higher
and the lower Idumaea. The higher, wherein were two of the cities mentioned in
my Text, Gaza, and Askelon, in the division of the land of Canaan fell to the
lot of the Tribe of Judah. The lower Idumaea, commonly known by the name of
Idumaea, fell to the lot of the Tribe of Simeon: and this lower Idumaea, I take
to be the Idumaea in my Text. Esau pursued Jacob with a deadly hate, so did the
posterity of Esau the posterity of Jacob; the Edomites were evermore most
maliciously bent against the Israelites. Here then appears the hainousnes of
that sin, wherewith the Philistines are charged. It was the sin of cruelty in a
very high degree.

It is a cruel deed to carry away any one from his native Country; but him
that is so carried away, to sell to his mortal enemy, this is a cruelty, than
which there cannot be a greater. Such was the sin of those Philistines, the
inhabitants of Azzah. They sold, whether the Jews, or the Israelites, the
posterity of Jacob, and servants of the living God, to their professed enemies
the Edomites, with this policy, that being carried far from their own
country, they should live in eternal slavery and bondage, without hope ever to
return home again.

This very crime of cruelty, is in the Prophecy of Joel also, Chapter 3.6. laid to
the charge of these Philistines: The children of Judah, and the children of
Jerusalem have ye sold to the Grecians, that ye might send them far from their
border: that is, Gods inheritance, his own seed and servants, the children of
Judah and Jerusalem, the cruel and hard hearted Philistines did mancipate, and
sell away for bondslaues to the Grecians dwelling far off, that with them
they might live in perpetual servitude and slavery, without all hope of
liberty or redemption.

Now in this that the Lord calls the Philistines to a reckoning, because they
had sold away his people, though they were their captives, unto Infidels, we
may learn this lesson; It is not lawful to commit the children of believers
into the hands of Infidels.

The unlawfulness hereof appears by the charge which Moses gives the
Israelites, Deuteronomy. 7.3. His charge is concerning the Hittites, the Gergasites,
the Amorites, the Canaanites, the Perizzites, the Hiuits, and the Iebusites,
that they should not at all make any covenant with them, nor give them their
children in marriage. And why so? Because by such covenants and marriages they
might be withdrawn from the true service of God, to the profane worship of
Idols. For so it is said, verse the 4. They will cause thy son to turn away
from me, and to serve other gods.

The danger of such covenants and marriages, S. Paul knew to be very great, and
therefore from such he dehorteth the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 6.14. Be ye not
unequally yoked with the infidels. He uses the similitude of Oxen coupled
together. The yoke holds them so together, that look which way the one
draws, the other must needs follow.

In like case it is with men. They that fall into familiarity with the wicked,
do couple themselves with them, and so are led out of the way, and made to
work wickedness before the Lord. From this (...), this unequal yoke with
Infidels, from conuersing with the wicked, the Apostle disswadeth the
Corinthians, and in them us, by sundry arguments drawn ab absurdo. In each
argument there is an Antithesis: two things opposed the one to the other. In
the first, righteousness and unrighteousness; in the second, light and
darkness; in the third, Christ and Belial; in the fourth, the Believer and the
Infidel; in the fifth, Gods Temple and Idols. Every argument is set down by
way of question.

The first, what fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness? The
answer is negative: none. The answer may be illustrated by a similitude, Eccl.
13.18. How can the wolf agree with the lamb? no more can the ungodly with the
righteous.

The second, what communion has light with darkness? The answer is negative:
none. No more than truth has with a lie, as Drusius well expounds the place,
Prou. Class. 1. lib. 3.78. Light has no communion with darkness; therefore the
believer ought not to converse with an unbeliever. This consequence is made
good by Ephesians. 5.8. where the Apostle tells the Ephesians, that they were once
darkness, but now are light in the Lord. Tenebras vocat infideles, says
Musculus upon the Text; S. Paul calls unbelievers, darkness, for their
ignorance of God, and the blindness of their hearts: but he calls the
believers, light, for their knowledge of God, by which their hearts are through
the holy Ghost illuminated. Light has no communion with darkness, therefore
believers are not to have familiarity with unbelievers.

The third, what concord has Christ with Belial? The answer is negative: none.
The opposition between these two, Christ and Belial, is most hostile. Christ
is the Author of our salvation; Belial of our perdition: Christ is the restorer
of all things; Belial the destroier: Christ is the Prince of light; Belial the
prince of darkness. In such hostile opposition there can be no concord: no
concord between the Author of our salvation, and the author of our perdition;
no concord between the restorer of all things, and the destroyer of all things;
no concord between the Prince of light, and the prince of darkness: therefore
they that believe in Christ, are not to have familiarity with unbelievers.

The fourth, what part has the believer with the infidel? The answer is
negative: none. The believer has no portion with the unbeliever; and therefore
he is not to have any familiarity with him.

The fifth; what agreement has the Temple of God with Idols? The answer is
negative: none. There is none indeed. Sacrilega est profanatio, says Comment.
in 2 Cor. 16.6.
Calvin, it is a sacrilegious profaning of Gods Temple, to place in it an
Idol, or to use any idolatrous worship therein. We are the Temple of God;
wherefore to infect our selves with any contagion of Idols, in us it must be
sacrilegious. There is no agreement between the Temple of God and Idols;
therefore we are not to have any familiarity with the Idolatrous.

Remember I beseech you: righteousness has no fellowship with
unrighteousness; light has no communion with darkness; Christ is not at
concord with Belial; the believer has no part with the infidel; there is no
agreement between the Temple of God and Idols; therefore may we not enter into
familiarity with the wicked, profane, and idolatrous; we may not make any
covenant with them; we may not give them our children in marriage. Thus is my
doctrine confirmed: It is n t lawful to commit the children of believers into
the hands of Infidels. Now to the uses.

The first serves for our instruction; and teaches us so to love the souls
of the righteous seed, that we leave them not resident among Infidels, or
Atheists, or Papists, or any profane wretches: but rather, that to our labor
and cost, we redeem them out of the D^uils tyranny. We must have a singular
care for the children which are borne among us, that they be godly and
virtuously brought up, and so provided for, that they may do Christ some
service in the Church and Commonwealth.

Our Savior his words, Mat. 18.6. are true without exception; Whosoever shall
offend one of these little ones which believe in me it were better for him that
a millstone were changed about his neck, and that he were drowned in the depth
of the Sea. What measure then are we to look for, if we bequeath our children
to the service of men of corrupt consciences and wicked affections, such as
will compass Heaven and Earth to make any one the child of damnation?

A second use may be, for the reproof of such as do bind and put their
children, the fruit of their bodies, (which they ought to consecrate unto the
Lord) into the education of open enemies to the Gospel of Christ, most
blasphemous and abominable Atheists, or most blind and superstitious Papists.
Are not these as much to be complained of, as those whom the Lord here
condemns for selling of Isreal's seed into the hands of the Edomites? Yes, and
much more. For those sold their enemies, but our men sell their children; those
did it by the law of war, but our men do it contrary to the law of God; those
in doing as they did, did not sin against their knowledge; but our men in doing
as they do, do sin against their conscience.

Unhappy Parents, which destroy your children in Popish and Atheistical
houses! What are you inferior to them that sacrificed their children unto
Devils? If your selves be righteous and Christians, cast not away your seed,
your children, the price of the precious blood of Christ. You have made them in
their Baptism, when they were young, to confess Christ: will you make them
now, grown to years, to deny Christ? O, let the words of wise Ecclesiasticus,
chap. 13.1. be precious in your memories: He that touches pitch shall be
defiled therewith: and doubtless your children placed in Atheistical, or
Popish houses, will themselves become Atheistical or Popish.

Suffer, I beseech you, a word of exhortation in your childrens behalf. Bind
them to none, but to Christ; put them to none but to Christians; sell them to
nothing but to the Gospel: commit not your young ones into the hands and
custody of Gods enemies.

A third use. Is it not lawful to commit the children of believers into the
hands of infidels, for the reason above specified, that they be not withdrawn
from the true service of God? Then neither is it lawful for you of your
selves, to keep away your servants from the service of God. It is reputed for
a tyranny in Pharaoh, Exodus 5.3, 4. That he would not suffer the children of
Israel to go three days iourny into the desert, to sacrifice to the Lord
their God: and how can you free your selves from the impeachment of tyranny, if
you deny your servants to go but one hours journey to this place, to serve
their God?

Think it not enough, that your selves come hither to perform some duty to
Christ your Lord and Master; how can you perform your duty to him, if you deny
him your servants? You know what charge is given you in the fourth
commandment; not your selves only, but also your sons, and your daughters,
and your servants, men, and maidens, and the stranger that soiourneth with you,
are to hallow, and Sanctify the Sabbath day with the Lords service.

In this holy work and service of God upon the Sabbath day, regard not what
the multitude and greater sort of men do. Suppose all the world besides your
selves, would be careless to perform this duty; yet let your holy resolution
be the same with Joshua's, chap. 24.15. I and my house will serve the Lord.
Thus far of my first doctrine grounded upon Gods dislike with the
Philistines, for selling away the Israelites, his faithful people, into the
hands of the Edomites, an vnbeeleeuing nation.

To ground a second doctrine hereon; we are to note, that the Philistines sold
away the Israelites to the Idumaeans, at such time as they were their captives:
and so did add affliction to the afflicted. The doctrine is, It is a very
grievous thing to add affliction to the afflicted.

Witness the complaint made by the captive Jews against the insolency of the
Chaldeans, Psalm. 137.3. They that led us away captive required of us songs, and
mirth in our heaviness, saying, Sing us one of the songs of Sion. They] the
Chaldeans, the Babylonians, and Assyrians, in whose country we were prisoners,
required of vs] scornfully, and disdainfully, thereby to add to our griefs:
they required of us songs] such songs, as we were wont to sing in Sion,
Jerusalem, and our own country before the destruction of the Temple, and our
captivity. They required of us, not songs only, but mirth also] they scoffingly
desired us to be merry, when they saw us so heavy hearted, as nothing could
make us glad. They required of us songs and mirth in our heaviness, saying,
Sing us one of the songs of Sion] sing for us, or in our hearing, some one or
other of those Songs which you were wont to sing in Sion, when you were at home
in your own country.

Intolerable is the hard heartedness, cruelty, and scoffing nature of the
wicked, when they have gotten Gods children into their nets. God cannot away
with such unmercifulness, and want of pity. He reproves it in the
Babylonians, Esa. 47.6. where thus says the Lord, I was wroth with my people,
I have polluted mine inheritance, and given them into thine hand: thou did
show them no mercy; but thou did lay thy very heavy yoke upon the ancient:
therefore now hear, destruction shall come upon thee. Magna abominatio eoram
Deo est, afflicto addere afflictionem; clamatque in coelum vox sanguinis. The
words are the observation of Oecolampadius upon the now cited place of Esaias: It
is a great abomination before God, to add affliction to the afflicted; the
voice of blood cries up to Heaven for vengeance. Yea, we are assured by Psalm.
102.19. that the Lord looks down from the height of his sanctuary, and out
of heaven beholds the earth, that he may hear, and so take pity of the
sighings, groanings, and lamentable cries of such his people as are in
affliction.

The time will not suffer me now to trouble you with more Texts of Scripture;
let the now alleged be sufficient to confirm my propounded doctrine, that it
is a grievous thing to add affliction to the afflicted.

The uses of this doctrine, I can but point at. One is, to reprove the Nimrods,
and tyrants of this world, which have no pity, no compassion upon the poor and
distressed. Such in the end shall know by their own lamentable experience,
that to be true which Solomon has uttered, Prou. 21.13. He that stops his
ear at the crying of the poor, shall cry himself and not be heard.

A second use is to stir us up to the performance of this our Christian duty,
even to take pity upon all that are in any kind of misery: if our neighbors be
destitute of aid and help, we may not like wild beasts, lift up our selves
against them, and so tread them under foot. No. How dare we molest and trouble
them, whom by Gods appointment we are to relieve and succor? We are commanded,
Deuteronomy. 15.11. to open our hands to the needy and poor that are in our land: to
open our hands to them for their help and succor.

It is not enough for us to abstain from all injury and harme-doing, but
withal must we endeavor to relieve the oppressed.

This service of ours will be acceptable unto God? God for it will give us his
blessing: God will bless us for the time of our being here; and when the day
of our dissolution shall be, that we must leave this earthly tabernacle, then
will the Son of man, sitting upon the throne of his glory, welcome us with a
Venite benedicti; Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit ye the Kingdom
prepared for you from the foundations of the world. For I was an hungered, and
ye gave me meat; I thirsted, and ye gave me drink; I was a stranger, and ye
lodged me; I was naked, and ye clothed me; I was sick, and ye visited me; I
was in prison, and ye came unto me; in as much as you have done these things to
the needy and distressed, ye have done them unto me. Come ye blessed of my
Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundations of the world.

THE Thirteenth Lecture.
AMOS 1.7, 8. Therefore will I send a fire upon the walls of Azzah, and it shall
devour the palaces thereof.

And I will cut off the inhabitant from Ashdod.


WE are come to the last part of this Prophecy, the description of the
punishments to be inflicted upon the Philistines. The seventh verse does not
much differ from the fourth. The same punishment, which is there threatened to
the Syrians, under the names of Hazael, and Benhadad, is in this seventh verse
denounced to the Philistines, under the name of Azzah. And therefore, as there
I did, so must I here commend unto you three circumstances: 1 The punisher: the
Lord, I. 2 The punishment: by fire, I will send a fire. 3 The punished: the
Azzites, the inhabitants of that City: the Philistines upon the walls and
palaces of Azzah.


The punisher is the Lord, for thus says the Lord, I will send. The note
yields us this doctrine: It is proper to the Lord to execute vengeance upon
the wicked for their sins.

This doctrine I proved at large in my eighth Lecture upon this prophecy. Yet
for their sakes, who then heard me not, or have forgotten what then they heard,
I will by a few texts of Scripture again confirm it unto you: It is proper to
the Lord to execute vengeance upon the wicked for their sins.

This office of executing vengeance upon the wicked for their sins, God
arrogateth and assumeth to himself, Deuteronomy. 32.35. where he says, Vengeance and
recompense are mine. This due is ascribed unto the Lord by S. Paul, Romans 12.19.
It is written, vengeance is mine, I will repay says the Lord. By the Author of
the Epistle to the Hebrews, chap. 10.30. Vengeance belongs unto me, I will
ecompence, says the Lord. By the sweet Singer, Psalm. 94.1. O Lord God the
auenger, O God the auenger. The Prophet Nahum trebleth the phrase, Chap. 1.2.
The Lord reuengeth, the Lord reuengeth, the Lord will take vengeance on his
adversaries. These few texts of holy Writ do firmly prove my doctrine: It is
proper to the Lord to execute vengeance upon the wicked for their sins.

One use of this doctrine is, to teach us heedfulnesse in all our ways; that
we do not work wickedness before the Lord, and so provoke him to execute his
vengeance on us. Beloved, let us not forget it: though God be good, gracious,
merciful, and long-suffering, yet is he also a just God, God the auenger, and
punisher. It is proper unto him to execute vengeance upon the wicked for their
sins.

A second use is, to admonish us not to intermeddle in the Lords office. It is
his office to execute vengeance; we therefore may not do it. If a brother, or
neighbor, or stranger do wrong us, it is our part to forgive him, and leave
reuengement to God, to whom it appertains. To this Christian and charitable
course, our Savior works us by a strong argument, Mat. 6.15. If ye do not
forgive men their trespasses, no more will your Father forgive you your
trespasses. Forgive, and you shall be forgiven; forgive not, and ye shall
never be forgiven.

Wherefore (dearly beloved) suffer your selves to be exhorted, as the Romans
were by S. Paul, chap. 12.19. Dearly beloved, if it be possible, as much as in
you is, have peace with all men; recompense to no man evil for evil: avenge
not your selves, but give place unto wrath, for it is written: vengeance is
mine, I will repay, says the Lord. It is p^oper to the Lord to execute
vengeance upon the wicked for their sins. Here we see, that for the sins of
the Philistines, God resolves to send a fire to devour their walls and palaces.
This was my second circumstance; the circumstance of the punishment; I will
send a fire.]

Many desolations has God wrought by fire. By fire he laid waste Sodom,
Gomorrah, and their sister cities, Genesis 19.24. By fire he did eat up Nadab and
Abihu, Leuit. 10.2. By fire he cut off the two hundred and fifty men, that were
in the rebellion of Korah, Numb. 16.35. By fire he devoured two Captains, and
twice fifty men, 2 King. 1.10. and 12. Why do I load your memories with
multitude of examples for this point? My text tells you that fire, Gods
creature, becomes Gods instrument, and executioner of his vengeance for the
sins of Azzah, to consume her walls and devour her palaces.

I will send a fire] See Lect. 8.
By fire in this place, as verse. 4. the learned Expositors do understand, not
only natural fire, but also the sword, and pestil^nce, and famine: quod libet
genus consumptionis, every kind of consumption, every scourge, wherewith God
punishes the wicked, be it hail, or thunder, or sickness, or any other of
Gods messengers. So large is the signification of fire in the metaphorical
understanding. The doctrine is, The fire, ( whether Natural, or Metaphorical)
that is, The fire, and all other creatures, are at the Lords commandment, to
be employed by him in the punishment of the wicked.

A truth heretofore proved unto you, as out of other places of holy Writ, so
out of the story of Gods visitation upon Pharaoh, and the Egyptians, Exodus 8,
9, and 10. Chapters, whereby you know, that Frogs, Lice, Flies, Grasshoppers,
Thunder, Hail, Lightning, Murraine, Botches and Sores, did instrumentally
avenge God upon man and beasts in Egypt. I stand not now to enlarge this
proof.

The use of this doctrine is, to teach us how to behave our selves at such
times as God shall visit us with his rod of correction: how to carry our selves
in all our afflictions. We must not so much look to the instruments, as to the
Lord that smites by them. If the fire, or water, or any other of Gods
creatures, shall at any time rage and prevail against us, we must remember
that it is God that sends them, to work his holy will upon us. Here he sent
a fire upon Azzah, to consume her walls, and devour her palaces.

Here you have my third circumstance, the circumstance of the punished, in
these words; the walls of Azzah, and the palaces thereof] Azzah, one of the
five Provinces, or Dutchies of Palaestina, and a City of the same name, as I
showed you in my last Lecture. The walls and palaces here mentioned, do
signify thus much; that the City Azzah was well fortified, and beautified
with sumptuous buildings; Yet must Azzah, notwithstanding the beauty of her
buildings, and strength of her strong holds, be devoured with fire: I will send
a fire upon the wall of Azzah, and it shall devour the palaces thereof.]

The great City Azzah, for all her strong walls, must she be spoiled? The
doctrine to be learned from hence, is: No munition can save that city, which
God well have destroyed.

The reason is; because there is no strength but of God, and from God. For what
are all the munitions in the world to the great God of Heaven and Earth? Psalm.
68.2.
As the smoke vanishes, so do they vanish; and as the wax melts before the
fire, so melt they at the breath of the Lord. The munitions of Edom they fail
before him. Edom, the kingdom of Edom, upon which God stretched the line of
vanity, and the stones of emptiness, as witnesses the Prophet Esaias, Chap.
34.11. it is no more a kingdom; it brings forth thorns in her Palaces;
nettles and thistles in her strong holds. The munitions of Edom are vanished as
smoke.

The munitions of Moab, they fail before him. Moab, the kingdom of Moab, had
a strong staff and beautiful rod, as speaks Ierem. Chap. 48.17. but they
are broken. Moab is destroyed, his Cities are burnt up, his strong holds are
gone. The munitions of Moab are vanished as smoke.

The munitions of Israel fail before him. Israel, the kingdom of Israel, was
Gods peculiar, and shadowed under the wings of his protection: yet at length
infected with the leprosy of sin, they were spoiled of their strong holds;
so says Hoseah, Chap. 10.14. A tumult shall arise among the people, and all
thy munitions shall be destroyed. The munitions of Israel are vanished as
smoke.

The munitions of Judah fail before him. Judah, the kingdom of Judah, great
among the Nations, and a Princess among the Provinces, she is now become
tributary, as complains the Prophet, Lament. 1.1. The Lord has destroyed
Lament. 2.2.
all the habitations of Iaacob, and has not spared, he has thrown down in
his wrath the strong holds of the daughter of Judah; he has cast them down to
the ground. The munitions of Judah are van^shed as smoke. Let these few
instances in the states of Edom, Moab, Israel and Judah, serve for proof of my
doctrine, No munition can save that city which God will have destroyed.

You will remember the reason of it; because there is no strength, but of God,
and from God.

The use of this doctrine is, to teach us, never to trust in any worldly help,
but so to use all good means of our defense, that still we rely upon the Lord
for strength and success thereby. See Sermon. 4 upon James 4.10. page 116.
Beloved in the Lord, we have learned, that a horse his help is vain, Psalm.
33.17. that man's help is vain, Psalm. 60.11. that the help of Princes is
vain, Psalm. 146.3. that much strength is vain, 2 Chronicles. 25.7. that much
wealth is vain, Psalm. 49.6. that all worldly helps are vain, Esai. 31.1. All
under God is vanity. Wherefore now, and all othertimes, let our trust be only
in the name o^ the Lord, who has made heaven and earth. Thus much of my first
doctrine grounded upon the third circumstance of this seventh verse, the
circumstance of the punished, No munition can save that city which God will
have destroyed.

Again, this overthrow of the walls of Azzah in Gods anger, teaches us thus
much, It is the good blessing of God upon a kingdom, to have walls, strong
holds, munitions, fortresses and bulwarks, for a defe se against enemies.

The reason is, because these be the means which God usually blesses, to
procure outward safety.

The use is to teach us carefully to prepare such against time of trouble: yet
with this caution, that we rest not in them, but depend wholly upon Gods
blessing.

And here we are to power out our souls in thankfulness before Almighty God,
for blessing this our Country with the strength of walls; of walls by sea, and
walls by land; by sea with ships, and at land with strong holds, castles and
fortresses; by sea and land, with men of wisdom and valor, to bid battle to
the proudest enemy that dare advance himself against us. Confess we with
David, Psalm. 18.2. The Lord is our rock, our fortress, he that delivers
us, our God, our strength, our shield, the horn of our salvation, and our
refuge. In him we trust, and Psalm. 56.11.
fear not what man can do unto us.

Yet further. The fire in Gods anger devouring the palaces of Azzah, teaches
us, that God depriueth us of a great blessing, when he takes from us our
dwelling houses.

This doctrine I commended to you in my Eight Lecture upon this prophecy. The
truth is experimentally made good unto us by that great commodity or
contentment, that comes to every one of us by our dwelling houses.

The use of this doctrine is threefold. It teaches us, 1. To be humbled
before Almighty God, whenever our dwelling-houses are taken from us: 2. Since
we peaceably enjoy our dwelling-houses, to use them for the furtherance of
Gods glory: 3. To praise God continually for the comfortable use we have of our
dwelling-houses. Thus far of the seventh verse. The eighth follows.

And I will cut off the inhabitant from Ashdod, and him that hol^^th the
scepter, from Ashkelon] Ashdod and Ashkelon were two chief Cities of
Palaestina. One of them, as here it appears, was the place of residence for
the chief Ruler over that State. To both Ashdod and Ashkelon, to the
inhabitants of Ashdod, and the Scepter-bearer in Ashkelon, to King and subject,
Gods sore judgment, even a cutting off, is here threatened,

I will cut off the inhabitant of Ashdod] Of the like judgment in the same
words you have heard before in verse. 5. threatened to the Syrians, I will cut
off the inhabitant of Bikeath-Auen, and him that holds the Scepter out of
Beth-eden. The words I then expounded at large: the brief or sum whereof, is:

I] the Lord, Jehovah, will cut off] will utterly destroy, and root out the
inhabitant] not one alone, but all, and every one of the inhabitants, of
Ashdod] one of the five chief Cities of the Philistines: And I will utterly
destroy, or root out, him that holds the Scepter] the Philistines their
chief Ruler; their King, making his residence at Ashkelon] another of the five
Cities of Palaestina. I will cut off the inhabitant of Ashdod, and him that
holds the Scepter from Ashkelon.]

In the words I observe, as before, three circumstances.

1 The punisher, the Lord; I. 2 The punishment, a cutting off; I will cut off.
3 The punished, the inhabitants of Ashdod, and the Scepter-bearer of Ashkelon.
By the first circumstance, (the Lord himself taking vengeance into his own
hands,) you may be remembered of a doctrine often commended to you in this and
other Lectures; It is proper to the Lord to execute vengeance upon the wicked
for their sins.

From all three circumstances, of the punisher, the punishment, and the
punished jointly considered, we may take a profitable lesson. We see that the
cutting off of the inhabitants of Ashdod, and of him that holds the Scepter
from Ashkelon, is the Lords proper work. The lesson which we learn from hence
is, No calamity or misery befalls any one, or whatsoever estate or degree, by
chance, or at adventure.

This doctrine I handled at large in my tenth Lecture. The truth of it
depends upon this proposition; The whole world, with all things therein, is
wholly and alone subject to the sovereignty, dominion and rule of Almighty
God; by whose providence all things are preserved, all things are ruled, and
things are ordered.

These were the three degrees, by which I told you, you might discern and take
notice of the act of divine providence. The first was gradus conseruationis;
the second gradus gubernationis; the third was gradus ordinationis; the first
degree was the degree of maintenance or preservation; the second degree was the
degree of rule or government; the third degree was the degree of ordination or
direction.

The first implies thus much, that All things in general, and every thing in
particular, are by Almighty God sustained ordinarily in the same state of
nature and natural proprieties, wherein they were created.

The second thus much, that Almighty God for his unlimited power governs all
things in the world, and rules them, pro liberate voluntatis suae, even as he
lists.

The third thus much, that God of his admirable wisdom ordains, and sets
in order, whatsoever things in the world seem to be most out of order: he
brings all to his chiefly intended end; all do make for his glory.

In this divine ordination, three things do concur: Constitutio finis,
mediorum ad finem dispositio, and dispositorum directio. First, God appoints
an end to every thing. Secondly, he disposes the means unto the end. Thirdly,
he directs the means so disposed. From these points thus summarily
rehearsed, I infer my propounded doctrine: No calamity or misery befalls
any one, of whatsoever estate or degree, by chance, or at adventure.

For if it be true (as true it is, and the gates of Hell shall never be able to
prevail against it,) that God by his wonderful providence maintains, and
preserves; rules, and governs; orders, disposes, and directs all
things in this world, even to the very hairs of our heads; it cannot be, that
any calamity or misery should befall any one of us by adventure, by
hap-hazzard, by chance, by fortune.

The Epicure in Job, Chap. 22.13. was in a gross and soul error, to think
that God walking in the circle of heaven, cannot through the dark clouds see
our misdoings, and judge us for them. Far be it from us, (beloved) so to be
conceited. We may not think our God, to be a God to halfes, and in part only;
a God above, and not beneath the Moon; a God upon the Mountains, and not in
the Valleys; a God in the greater, and no^ in the lesser employments. We may
not thus think, beloved. We have learned better things out of Amos 9. Ier. 23.
Psalm. 139. that God is every where present, and that there is no evasion from
him. No corner in Hell, no mansion in Heaven, no cave in the top of Carmel, no
fishes belly in the bottom of the sea, no dark dungeon in the land of
captivity, no place of any secrecy any where, is able to hide us from the
presence of God.

The least moments and tittles in the world, that you can imagine, God his care
and providence reaches unto: to a handful of meal; to a cruse of oil in a
poor widows house; to the ^^ing of sparrowes to the ground; to the clothing
of the grass of the field; to the feeding of the birds of the air; to the
caluing of ^indes; to the numbering of the hairs of our heads, and of the
tears that trickle down our cheeks.

Wherefore (dearly beloved in the Lord) whatsoever calamity or misery has
already seized upon us, or shall hereafter overtake us, let us not lay it upon
blind fortune, but look we rather to the hand that strikes us. He who is
noted in my text to cut off the inhabitant of Ashdod, and him that holds the
scepter from Ashkelon, he it is, that for our sins brings upon us calamiti
s and miseries. Whatsoever calamities or miseries do molest or trouble us, be
we assured that they are Gods visitatio: upon us for our sins, and
admonishments for us to amend our lives.

What remains then, but that in time of misery and heaviness, we lovingly
embrace Gods hand, and kiss the rod, wherewith he smites us? If he smite us
with any kind of cross or tribulation, our best way is, to turn unto him, as
with a spirit of contentment and gladness, because so loving a Father does
chastise us; so with a sorrowful and contrite heart, because we have offended
so gracious a Father: and thus shall we find comfort to our souls.

THE Fourteenth Lecture.
AMOS 1.8. And turn mine hand to Ekron, and the remnant of the Philistines
shall perish, says the Lord God.


THe last time I began to expound the 8. verse, then I passed over two branches
thereof; And I will cut off the inhabitant from Ashdod, and him that holds
the scepter from Ashkelon; whence considering the cutting off, of king and
subject, from Ashdod, and Ashkelon, to be the proper work of the Lord, I took
this lesson; No calamity or misery befalls any one of whatsoever estate or
degree, by chance, or at adventure.

Now let us proceed to the remainder of that verse; And turn my hand to Ekron,
and the remnant of the Philistines shall perish, says the Lord.

Is not God a spirit? How then has he hands? The letter kills, but the
spirit gives life, says S. Paul. 2 Cor. 3.6. An ancient Augustine. de Doctrina
Christiana, lib. 3. cap. 5.
Father upon those words advises us to beware, that we take not a figurative
speech according to the letter; for, says he, Anshel. in 2 Cor. 3. Echard.
Compend Theol patrum. (...) 1 ap 6. page 157.
when we take that which is spoken in a figure, as if it were spoken properly,
it is a carnal sense, Neque vlla mors anima congruentius ^ppe^^atur; neither
is there any thing more rightly called the death of the soul. If a figurative
speech be properly taken, or if the letter be urged against the spiritual
meaning, that, which was spoken to give life to the inward man, may subvert the
faith, and endanger the soul. A trope, upon good reason to be admitted, not
admitted, is a cause of error. It caused the Jews to err. They took it
literally, which Christ spoke in a figure, touching his own body, Job. 2.19.
Destroy this Temple, and in three days I will raise it up again. It caused
Nicodemus to err. He took it literally, which Christ spoke in a figure,
touching man's regeneration, Job. 3.3. Except a man be borne again^, he cannot
see the Kingdom of God. It caused the Dis ples of Christ to err. They took
it literally, which Christ spoke in a figure, touching the execution of his
Fathers will, Ioh. 4.32. I have meat to eat, that ye know not of.

I hold it to be an error of Nicephorus, and others, to take it after the
letter, as if Paul had indeed fought upon a theater with Lions at Ephesius,
because he says, 1 Cor. 15.32. that he fought with b asts at Ephesus. For in
the judgment of Theophyla^^ of old, of Beza, Baronius, and some ^ainold. Idol.
2.6.6.
other very learned of this age, he spoke it figuratively, to design and note
the disordered assembly gathered together against him at Ephesus, upon the
complaint of the siluer-smith Demetrius, for defense of great Diana.

I am assured it is an error of all the Papists, to take it after the letter
which Christ spoke, Matthew. 26.26. This is my body. There is a figure in the
speech. For in all sacraments, there is a great difference between the signs
and the things signified. The signs are visible, the things invisible: the
signs earthly, the things heavenly: the signs corruptible, the things
immortal: the signs corporal, the things spiritual: and as a reverend D.
Basin, B. of Winchester, of Chr^stian Subjection, par. 4. page 577. edit. Land.
in 8. 1586.
Father speaks in the person of Theophilus the signs are one thing, the
truth is not the same, but another thing; and even by plain Arithmeticke, they
be two things, and not one. This is my body. There is a figure in the speech.
He calls the bread his body, by way of signification, by way of similitude, by
way of representation, after the manner of Sacraments, in a sign, not
according to the letter, but in a spiritual and mystical understanding, and
if you respect the precise speech, improperly, and figuratively. I will not
hold you with other like instances. These few already spoken of, may serve to
make it plain, that the not admitting of a Trope or Figure there, where in
great reason it ought to be admitted, is a cause of error.

I have given this note in this place (beloved) because the phrase here used in
the person of the everliving God, ( I will turn my hand to Ekron) being spirit
and life, has been by some mistaken, and applied to a carnal sense. From
hence as from other places of holy Scripture, in which other the members of
man's body are ascribed unto God; as the Psalm 27.8.
face, the Deuteronomy. 8.3.
mouth, the 2 King. 19.16.
ears, Jbid. and Zach 4.10.
eyes, 1 King 8.42.
arms, Matthew. 5.35. and 22.44.
feet, and some other; Tertullian living near unto the Apostles time, was bold
to conclude, that God is a body. This his erroneous and false opinion died not
with him. It was on foot many a year after him in the time of Arius,
patronized by those Heretics, which by Epiphanius are called Audiani, and by
Augustine Augustine. de haeres. cap. 50.
Vadiani: after whom also it was eagerly maintained by certain Monks of
Egypt, who were thereupon called Anthropomorphitae. But all these are dead and
gone; their monstrous error lies buried with them. There is no man of any
knowledge now a days so blinded, as to fall into error with them.

It is an axiom in divinity: Quaecunque de Deo corporaliter dicuntur, dicta
sunt symbolice: whatsoever is spoken of God bodily, that same must be
understood figuratively. Bellarmine says as much, li. 2. de imag. sanct. c. 8.
Membra, quae tribuantur Deo in Scriptura, metaphorice esse accipienda, that
those members which the Scripture assigns unto God, are to be taken in a
Metaphor. Thus far we are yours, Bellarmine. We maintain with you, that the
members attributed unto God in holy Scripture, are to be taken figuratively.
But you build hereupon chafe and stubble. Should we do the like, it could
never abide the trial of the fire.

To prove a non licet to be your licet: Licere pingere imaginem Dei patris in
forma hominis senis, to prove it to be lawful to represent God the Father by
the image of an old man, you draw an argument from those places of Scripture,
which do attribute unto God bodily members. Your conclusion is by way of
question; The Scripture in words attributes unto God all man's members, while
it says, that he stands, he fits, he walks; and names his head, his feet,
his arms; and gives to him a seat, a throne, a footstool: therefore why
cannot a picture be made to represent God? Why not an image in the shape of
man? Why? It is easily answered.

Because every such picture, or image, or stock (call it as you will) is
censured by Jeremy to be a doctrine of vanity, chap. 10.8. by Zachary to be a
speaker of vanity. chapter 10.2. by Habakkuk, to be a teacher of lies, chap. 2.18.
and Gods express commandment is against it, Deuteronomy. 4.16. You shall not make
you a graven image, or representation of any figure. A reason of this
prohibition is adjoined, verse 12. and 15. by which it is manifest, that God
simply and absolutely forbids any image at all to be made of himself: For
ye saw no similitude in the day that the Lord spoke unto you in Horeb out of
the midst of the fire; ye saw no similitude, only ye heard a voice.

The Prophet Esai is plentiful in this demonstration, to show how unseemly,
and absurd it is, to Romans 1.25.
turn the truth of God into a lie, as they do, who forsake the blessed
Creator, to worship the creature: to turn the Majesty of God invisible, into
a picture of visible man: to V^rse 23.
turn the glory of the incorruptible God, to the similitude of the image of a
corruptible man. His vehement expostulation with idolaters to this purpose is
in the 40. chap. of his Prophecy, and the 18. verse. To whom will ye liken
God? or what similitude will ye set up unto him? the workman melts an image;
the goldsmith beats it out in gold, or silver plates: the poor (see now the
rage, fury, and madness of idolaters, though they have not wherewith to
suffice their own necessities, they will defraud themselves to serve their
idols) the poor chooses out a tree, that will not rot, for an oblation, and
puts it to a cunning workman to prepare an image, that cannot be moved.

The like expostulation the same Prophet ascribes to God himself, chap. 46.5.
To whom will ye make me like, or make me equal, or compare me, that I should
be like him? they draw gold out of the bag; and weigh silver in the balance,
and hire a goldsmith to make a God of it: and they bow down, and worship it:
they bear it upon their shoulders, they carry him, and set him in his place;
so does he stand, and cannot remove from his place.

Remember this, and be ashamed, O ye Idolaters. Esai. 40.21.
Know ye nothing? have ye not heard it? has it not been told you from the
beginning? have ye not understood it by the foundation of the earth? God
sits upon the circle of the earth, and beholds the inhabiters thereof, as
grasshoppers, he stretches out the heavens as a curtain, and spreads them out,
as a tent to dwell in. He Esai. 40.12.
measures the waters in his fist, counts heaven with his span, comprehends the
dust of the earth in a measure, weighes the mountains in a weight, and the
hills in a balance. God! incorporeall, invisible, spiritual, passing all
measure; there is nothing Esai. 46.9.
like unto him. No thing. And therefore (O Idolaters) not your old man's image.

For the truth of your antecedent, we stand on your side. Its very true: the
Scripture in express words attributes unto God many the members and offices
of man's body. It says of him, that he stands, he sits, he walks: it names
his head, his feet, his arms: it gives him a seat, a throne, a footstool: but
all these, and other like bodily offices, parts, and members, being spoken of,
as belonging unto God, must be understood figuratively.

It has pleased the spirit of wisdom to deal with us (...), to fit the holy
Scriptures to our weak capacities: to use known, familiar, and sensible
terms, thereby to raise up our conceits to some knowledge of the everliving
God. In this regard by the wisdom of the same spirit, among many other
members, H^nds are also ascribed unto God, and that in many places; yet not in
every place to one and the same sense, and understanding.

Its noted by the Cont. 13. cap. 4.
Magdeburgenses out of Innocentius, that the hand of God does bear diverse
offices among us: officia creatoris, largientis, protegentis, minantis: the
offices of a Creator, liberal giver, protector, and threatner. Hands are
ascribed v^^ God, sometime to show that he is the Creator of all things, (...)
Psalm. 119.73. Thy hands have made me and fashioned me: sometime to show his
liberality to all living things, as Psalm. 145.16. Thou openest thy hand, and
fillest all things living of thy good pleasure: sometime to show the care he
has to protect and defend the faithful, as Esai. 49.2. Under the shadow of
his hand has he hid me: and sometime to show his readiness to be avenged
upon the wicked, as Esai. 10.4. His hand is stretched out still. But these and
all other the significations of the hand of God, I reduce to two heads: to the
love of God, and his displeasure: under them comprehending all their
consequents and effects.

That the hand of God betokens sometime his love, and the benefits redounding
thence to man, man's being, and his well-being, may easily be proved. In the
second chapter of the book of Judges, ver. 15. we read that the Lords hand was
against the Israelites for evil: the collection thence may be, that the Lords
hand is sometime toward some for good. It is made plain out of Neh. 2.8. where
the Prophet, to show how ready Artaxerxes was to do him pleasure, says; The
King gave me according to the good hand of my God upon me. I might by many like
instances out of holy Scripture give strength to this position; but it may
seem to be a needless labor. Therefore I proceed.

Now that the hand of God should betoken his displeasure, and the effects
thereof, may be proved as easily. When the Israelites forsaking God betook
themselves to serve Baalim, the hand of the Lord was sore against them, Judge.
2.15. the Lords hand, that is, his judgment, punishment, and reuengement was
sore upon them: the wrath of the Lord was hot against them: he delivered them
into the hands of the spoilers: they were spoiled, sold to the enemies, and
sore punished.

When the Philistines had brought the ark of God into the house of Dagon, the
hand of the Lord was heavy upon them, 1 Samuel 5.6. the Lords hand, that is, his
judgment, punishment, and reuengement was heavy upon them. Psalm. 78.64, ^^.
The Lord awaked as one out of sleep, and like a Giant refreshed with wine,
he smote his enemies with Emerods, and put them to a perpetual shame. Of like
signification is the phrase in my text: I will turn my hand to Ekron: my hand
shall be sore against Ekron; I will come against Ekron in judgment; I will
punish Ekron, I will take vengeance on Ekron.

I will turn my hand] Sometime this phrase betokens the good grace and
favor of God, as Zach. 13.7. I will turn my hand upon my little ones. My
little ones, (when the shepherd shall be smitten, and the sheep scattered) I
will recover with my hand, and preserve them for ever: I will gather them
together, I will comfort them, I will defend them: rursus ad pastorem, and
praeceptorem suum reducam, says Ribera: though they be scattered, I will bring
them back again to their own shepherd, and master. There you see Gods
turning of his hand upon his little ones, is for good.

Here its otherwise. God turns his hand to Ekron for evil. This is auerred
and justified by the infallible predictions of other Prophets. Zachary, chap.
9.5. foretells, that much sorrow shall betide Ekron. Zephany, chap. 2.4.
says that Ekron shall be rooted up. Jeremy, chap. 25.20. takes the cup of the
wine of Gods indignation, and gives it Ekron to drink, to make Ekron like her
neighbor countries, even desolation and astonishment, a hissing, and a curse.
So great is Ekrons calamity, threatened in these words of my text; I will turn
my hand to Ekron.

Ekron] Will you know what this Ekron was? You shall find in the book of
Joshua, chap. 13.3. that it was a dukedom in the land of the Philistines, and
1 Samuel 6.16. that there was in this dukedom a city of the same name; no base
city, but a Princes seat; able at one time to give entertainment to five
Princes. Against both city and dukedom Gods hand was stretched out. I wi l
turn my hand to Ekron. Will God smite Ekron, both city and dukedom? We may
take from hence this lesson; There is no safe being in city or country from the
hand of God, when he is disposed to punish.

The reason is, because there is no place to fly unto from his presence: None.
No corner in Hell, no mansion in Heaven, no cave in the top of Carmel, no
fishes belly in the bottom of the sea, no dark dungeon in the land of
captivity, no place of any secrecy any where can hide us from the presence of
God. Witness two holy Prophets, David, and Amos. The one, Psalm. 139. the
other, chap. 9. You have the reason of my Doctrine: the uses follow.

Is it true? Is there no safe being in City, or Country, from the hand of God,
when he is disposed to punish? One use hereof is, to teach us to take patiently
whatsoever afflictions shall befall us. Afflictions I call, whatsoever is any
way opposite to humane nature; such as are the temptations of the flesh, the
world, and the Devil: the diseases of the body, an unfortunate husband, or
wife, rebellious children, unthankful friends, loss of goods, reproaches,
slanders, war, pestilence, famine, imprisonment, death, every cross and
passion, bodily, or ghostly, proper to our selves, or appertaining to such as
are of our blood, private or public, secret or manifest, either by our own
deserts gotten, or otherwise imposed upon us.

All, and every of these, true Christians will patiently undergo. For they
with their sharp-sighted eye of faith, do clearly see the Hand of God in
every of their molestations: and in great contentment they take up the words of
patient Job, Chap. 2.10. Shall we receive good at the hand of God, and not
receive evil?

Here let every afflicted soul examine it self, how it is affected with the
affliction under which it groaneth. If you esteem of your afflictions, as of
God his fatherly chastisements, and so endure them, blessed are ye. Of this
blessedness Saint James, Chap. 1.12. does assure you: Blessed is the man that
endures tentation: for when he is tried he shall receive the crown of life,
which the Lord has promised to them that love him.

Again, is it true? Is there no safe being in City or Country, from the hand
of God, when he is disposed to punish? A second use of this doctrine is, to
admonish us, that we labor above all things to obtain Gods favor, and to
abide in it: so shall we be safe from the fear of evil.

Now for the obtaining of Gods favor, we must do four things. We must 1.
Humble our selves before God: 2. Believe in Christ: 3. Repent of our sins: 4.
Perform new obedience unto God.

The time will not suffer me to enlarge these points. Humiliation, faith in
Christ, repentance, and a new life; these four will be unto you, as Jacobs
ladder was unto the Angels. Of that ladder you may read, Genesis 28.12. that it
stood upon the earth; the top of it did reach to heaven, and the Angels of God
went up it. So may you by these four, Humiliation, Faith, Repentance, and
Newness of life, as it were by so many steps, and rounds of a ladder, climb
up to heaven.

Here you have no continuing City; you are but strangers, and pilgrims on the
earth; your country is above, the Celestial Jerusalem: there let your hearts
be. As for the afflictions, vexations, tribulation, miseries and crosses,
wherewith this mortal life of yours is seasoned, let them be your joy. They
are sure pledges of Gods love unto you. Even so says the Spirit, Hebr. 12.6.
Whom the Lord loves he chastneth, and he scourges every son that he
receives.

Thirdly, is it true? Is there no safe being in city or country from the hand
of God, when he is disposed to punish? A third use of this doctrine is, for the
terror of such as lie wallowing in the filthiness of their sins. Many there
are, wicked wretches, who, if God shall for a time defer the punishments due
unto their sins, are ready to think that God takes no notice of their
sins. These say in their heart there is no God.

Against these is made that challenge, Psalm. 50.21. I hold my tongue, and thou
thoughtest me like thy self. I] the Lord, who see the secrets of all hearts, I
hold my tongue] I did not by my judgments punish thee for the wickedness of
thy steps; I hold my tongue, and thou thoughtest me like thy selfe] thou
thoughtest I took pleasure in wickedness, as thou do; but thou shall
find, and feel the contrary.

Strange are the effects wrought in the wicked by the mercies, and long
suffering of God; thereby they grow worse and worse, obdurate, and hardened in
their sins. Yet let them be advised: for they day will come, and it comes
apace, wherein they shall feel the heaviness of that hand, which here was
turned against Ekron: I will turn my hand to Ekron. It follows, And the
remnant of the Philistines shall perish.

The Philistines had their beginning from Casluchim, a grandchild of Chane,
the accursed issue of Noah, as appears, Genesis 10.14. They were seated in a
part of the Land of Canaan; the west part, that which bordereth upon the great
Sea, the Sea commonly called the Mediterranean. Their Country was called by
Ptolemee and others, Palaestina, and by the Greeks, Phoenicia. It was a part of
that country, which once was called Terra promissionis, the Land of promise;
but now Terra Sancta, the Holy Land.

The inhabitants in our Prophets time, were professed enemies to Almighty God,
and his beloved Israel. They thought themselves safe from ruin through the
strength of their five Dukedomes; Azzah, Ashdod, Ashkelon, Gath and Ekron. But
vain and foolish are the thoughts which possess the wicked. When the God of
all truth shall give his word for a matter, shall man presume to doubt of the
event? Here God sets his word upon it, that there shall be an utter overthrow,
not only of Azzah, Ashdod, Ashkelon and Ekron, but of Gath also, and all the
villages belonging thereunto: for the remnant of the Philistines shall perish,
says the Lord God.

Ait Dominus Iehouth] says the Lord God. This is the conclusion of this
prophecy, and it redoubleth its authority and credit. Authority and credit
sufficient it has from its very front, verse 6. Thus says the Lord: it is
here redoubled; says the Lord God.

Says the Lord God] has the Lord God said it, and (...) 23 19.
shall he not do it? has he spoken it, and shall he not accomplish it: The
Lord, Iehou^h, the strength of Israel, is not as man, that he should lie, not
as the son of man, that he should repent. All his words, yea all the titles
of his words, are Yea, and Amen. Matthew. 5.18.
Heaven and earth shall perish, before one jot or one tittle of his word shall
escape unfulfilled, Dominus Iehouth, the Lord, has said it, that the remnant
of the Philistines shall perish. Out of doubt then must it come to pass. And
so is it.

The first blow, which the Philistines received toward their overthrow after
this prophecy, was given them above threescore years after by Ezechius, that
good King of Judah, of whom the Prophet Esaias, Chap. 14.29. foretells the
Philistines, that he should be unto them as a Cockatrice, and a fiery ^^ring
Serpent. This Ezechius smote the Philistines unto Azzah, and the coasts
thereof, from the watchtower unto the defensed City. This is plain, 2 King.
18.8.

A second blow was given by Tartan, one of the Captains of Sennacherib, or
Sargon, King of Assyria, who came up against Ashdod, and took it. This is
plain, Esaias 20.1.

A third blow was given them by Pharaoh Neco: and he smote Azzah, Ashkelon,
and other places. This is it which the Prophet Jeremy says, Chap. 47.5.
Baldness is come upon Azzah, Ashkelon is cut up with the rest of their
valleys. In a word; God has from time to time raised up his men of war, in due
time to extirpate and raze out the Philistines from the face of the earth, that
according to the tenor of this Prophecy, there might be no remnant of them.

The remnant of the Philistines shall perish] Here may we observe a difference
in Gods punishments; he punishes the reprobate, and he punishes his elect;
but differently: the reprobate to their utter excision, and extirpation; not so
the elect. For of them, there is upon the earth evermore a remnant that shall
be saved: as it is intimated by the Prophet Esaias, Chap. 1.9. Except the Lord of
hosts had reserved unto us even a small remnant, we should have been as Sodom,
and like unto Gomorah. You see a remnant reserved, though a small one. Yea
sometimes there is a reservation of so small a remnant as is scarcely visible.
As in the days of Eliah, who knew of none but himself. I only am left, says
he, 1 King. 19.14. Yet God tells him in the 18. verse of seven thousand in
Israel which never bowed their knees to Baal. Hitherto belongs that, Joel
2.32. In mount Sion, and in Jerusalem, shall be deliverance, as the Lord has
said, and in the remnant, whom the Lord shall call.

Ierem. 25.34
Howl ye wicked, and cry, and wallow your selves in the ashes, for your days
of dispersion and slaughter are accomplished, and ye shall fall like the
Philistines, every mothers child of you: the Ierem. 46.10.
sword shall devour you: it shall be satiate, and made drunk with your blood,
there shall not be a remnant of you left.

But you, the elect and chosen children of God your Father, take unto you Esaias
61.3.
beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the garment of gladness for
the spirit of heaviness; rejoice ye, and be glad together. Let the prince of
darkness, and all the powers of hell, assisted with the innumerable company of
his wicked vassals upon the earth, join together to work your overthrow, they
shall not effect it. For God, even your God, will reserve unto himself a
remnant.

This remnant is the chaste Spouse of Christ, the Holy Catholic Church,
enriched from above with all manner of benedictions. Extra eam nulla est salus;
whosoever has not her for his Mother, shall never have God for his Father. Of
this remnant and Catholic Church, notwithstanding the challenge of Romish
Idolaters, we (beloved) are sound and lively members. Happy are the eyes which
see that we see, and enjoy the presence of him, whom we adore: happy are the
ears that hear what we hear, and the hearts which are partakers of our
instructions. No Nation under Heaven has a God so potent, so loving, so near
to them, which worship him, as we of this Island have.

The many and bloody practices of that great Antichrist of Rome, so often set
on foot against us, and still defeated, are so many evidences, that our souls
are most precious in the sight of God. He, he alone has delivered us out of
the Lions iaw, to be a holy remnant unto himself. Now what shall we render
unto the Lord for so great a blessing? We will take up the cup of salvation,
and call upon his Name.

THE Fifteenth Lecture.
AMOS 1.9, 10. Thus says the Lord, For three transgressions of Tyrus, and for
four, I will not turn to it, because they shut the whole captivity in Edom,
and have not remembered the brotherly covenant.

Therefore will I send a fire upon the walls of Tyrus, and it shall devour the
palaces thereof.


THis blessed Prophet Amos, sent from God in Embassage to the ten revolted
Tribes, does first thunder out Gods judgments against neighbor countries; the
Syrians, the Philistines, the Tyrians, the Edomites, the Ammonites, the
Moabites. Which he does for certain reasons, given in my Sixth Lecture: that he
might be the more patiently heard of his countrymen, the Israelites: that they
might have no cause to think much, if God should at any time lay his rod upon
them; and that they might the more stand in awe of the words of this prophecy.

When they should hear of such heavy judgments to light upon their
neighbors, they could not but enter into a consideration of their own estate;
and thus reason within themselves: Is it true, which this Amos says? Will the
Lord bring such heavy judgments upon the Syrians, Philistines, Tyrians, and
other of our neighbors? In what a fearful estate are we then? They seely
people never knew the will of God; and yet must they be so severely punished?
How then shall we escape, who knowing Gods holy will, have contemned it?

Of the judgments denounced against the Syrians and Philistines, you have
heard at large in former Lectures. Now in the third place do follow the
Tyrians, verse 9, and 10.

For three transgressions of Tyrus, etc. These words containing a burdensome
prophecy against Tyrus, I divide into two parts.

1 A preface, Thus says the Lord. 2 A prophecies, For three transgressions of
Tyrus, etc.
In the prophecy I observe four parts.

1 A general accusation of the Tyrians: For three transgressions of Tyrus, and
for four. 2 The Lords protestation against them: I will not turn to it. 3 The
declaration of that grievous sin, by which they so highly offended. This
sin was the sin of unmercifulness and cruelty, expressed in two branches. 1
They shut the whole captivity in Edom. 2 They remembered not the brotherly
covenant.
4 The description of the punishment to befall them for their sin, in the
tenth verse, Therefore will I send a fire upon the walls of Tyrus, and it shall
devour the palaces thereof.
The preface gives credit unto the prophecy, and is a warrant for the truth of
it. Thus says the Lord] The Lord, Jehovah, whose Throne is the Heaven of
heavens; and the Sea his floor to walk in; and the Earth his footstool to
tread upon; who has a chair in the conscience, and sits in the heart of
man, and possesses his most secret reins, and divides betwixt the flesh and
the skin, and shakes his inmost powers, as the thunder shakes the wilderness
of Cades. This Lord, Jehovah, so mighty, so powerful, shall he say a thing,
and shall he not do it? Shall he speak it, and shall he not accomplish it?
The Lord, Jehovah, the strength of Israel, is not as man, that he should lie,
nor as the son of man, that he should repent. All his words, yea all the
tittles of all his words, are Yea, and Amen. Heaven and earth shall perish,
before one jot or one tittle of his Word shall escape unfulfilled.

Thus says the Lord] Out of doubt then must it come to pass. And because it
is the Lord that speaks, it is required of us, that we hearken to him with
reverence. Thus briefly of the Preface; whereof I have more largely spoken in
two former Lectures, my sixth and twelfth Lectures, upon the third and sixth
verses of this Chapter. In which, these very words are prefixed for a Preface
to two prophecies; the one against the Syrians, the other against the
Philistines. I proceed to the present prophecy against the Tyrians. It is much
like the two former, both for words and matter. In regard whereof I shall be
short in many of my notes.

For three transgressions of Tyrus, and for foure] Here is nothing new, but the
name of Tyrus. This Tyrus is called in the Hebrew text (...)
Tzor: whence came the name Sar, and Sarra in Eunius, Poenos Sarra oriundos; he
notes the Carthaginians to have their beginning from Sarra, which is Tyrus.
Tyrus was a very ancient City; it was says, Drusius, Vetustissimarum vrbrum
parcus. as it were, the mother of very old Cities. Pliny N^^. (...) lib. 5. ^
p. 19. says, that out of Tyrus came the founders and first inhabiters, not
only of Carthage, but also of Leptis, Vtica, and Gades, the City well known
to our modern N^uigators by the name of Calis Malis, and of late years
conquered by some worthies of our English Nation.

The ancient glory of this City Tyrus, is blazed abroad to the whole world, by
Ezechiel Chap. 27. Glorious was Tyrus: 1. For her situation: 2. For her riches:
3. For the frame, and beauty of her building: 4. For her shipping: 5. For her
power in martial affairs: 6. For her merchandising: 7. For her great esteem
and report with foreign nations. The Prophet Esaias in like sort blazeth out her
glory, Chap. 23.7, 8. He says of her, that her antiquity is of ancient days;
that she is the crown of the Sea; that her merchants are Princes, and her
chapmen the Nobles of the world. So glorious a City was this Tyrus.

Here she is accused of disloyalty to the God of heaven, in the very same
words, wherein Damascus and Azzah are formerly accused: Damascus. verse. 3. and
Azzah, verse. 6. For three tran gressions of Tyrus, and for foure] And the Lords
protestation upon this accusation is the same, I will not turn to it] It is
a^^f the Lord had thus said: If the inhabitants of Tyrus had offended but once,
or a second time, I should have been favorable to them, and would have
recalled them into the right way, that so they might be converted, and escape
my punishments: but now, for as much as they do daily heap transgression upon
transgression, and make no end of sinning, I have hardened my face against them,
and will not suffer them to be converted, but indurate and obstinate, as they
are, I will utterly destroy them.

Albertus Magnus understands by these three transgressions, three sorts of
sins; peccatum in voluntate, peccatum in consensu, peccatum in opere: sin
in will, sin in consent, and sin in action: and by the fourth transgression
he understands, cordis indurationem, induration and hardness of heart; which
he defines to be pertinaciam permanendi in peccato, a pertinacie, or stubborn
resolution to persevere in sin, wherein the sinner lies wallowing, void of
shame, and all liking of goodness.

I do rather approve Wincklemans judgment, who by these three, and four
transgressions of Tyrus, understands pride, disdain, luxuriousness of meats
and drinks, costlinesse of garments, wanton lusts, and other like sins,
incident to Mart Towns, and Towns of great trade. That such were the sins
of Tyrus, witness that her sharp and grievous reprehension, Ezech. 28.

For these three and four, many transgressions and sins, the Lord protests
against Tyrus, I will not turn to it: I will take no pity on them; but will
do unto them according to their works. For three transgressions of Tyrus and
four, etc.] Here are you to be remembered of a doctrine more than once,
heretofore commended to your Christian considerations.

Many sins do pluck down from heaven the most certain wrath and vengeance
of God upon the sinners. God is pure of eyes, and beholds not iniquity: He
has laid righteousness to the rule, and weighed his justice in a balance.
The sentence is passed forth, and must stand uncontrollable, even as long as Sun
and Moon: Tribulation and anguish upon every soul that does evil. The soul
that sins it shall be punished. God makes it good by an oath, Deuteronomy. 32.41.
That he will whet his glittering sword, and his hand shall take hold on
iugdement to execute vengeance for sin. His soul hates and abhors sin;
his law curses and condemns sin; his hand smites and scourges sin. Sin
was his motive to cast down Angels into Hell; to thrust Adam out of Paradise;
to turn Cities into ashes; to ruinate nations; to torment his own bowels in
the similitude of sinful flesh. Because of sin he drowned the old world, and
because of sin ere long will burn this. Thus do many sin pluck down
from Heaven the most certain wrath and vengeance of God upon the sinners.

One use of this doctrine was; to teach us heedfulnesse in all our ways, that
we do not by our many sins provoke Almighty God to high displeasure.

A second use was; to move us to a serious contemplation of the wonderful
patience of Almighty God, who did so graciously forbear these Tyrians, till by
three and four transgressions, by their many sins they had provoked him to
indignaon. These things I have heretofore labored to lay unto your hearts.

Now follows the third part of this prophecy, wherein you have the
declaration of that grievous sin, by which the Tyrians so highly offended:
the sin of unmercifulness and cruelty; expressed in two branches.

1 They shut up the whole captivity in Edom. 2 They remembered not the
brotherly covenant.
1 They shut up the whole captivity in Edom] The exposition of these words I
have formerly delivered unto you in my twelfth Lecture, and my meditations upon
the 6. verse. There the Philistines are condemned for carrying away prisoners
the whole captivity, to shut them up in Edom: and here are the Tyrians
condemned for shutting the whole captivity in Edom. The sin seems to be the
same in both; the Philistines, and the Tyrians. Both did shut up the whole
captivity in Edom; that is, as Joel chap. 3.6. speaks; they both did sell
away the children of Judah, and the children of Jerusalem unto the Grecians,
that they might send them far from their borders. God his peculiar
inheritance, his own seed, and servants, the children of Judah, and Jerusalem,
were by the cruel and hard-hearted Philistines and Tyrians, mancipated, and
sold away forbond slaves to the Grecians, dwelling far off, that with them
they might live in perpetual servitude and slavery, without all hope of
liberty or redemption.

Arias Montanus notes a difference betwixt that sin of the Philistines, and
this of the Tyrians. The Philistines carried away prisoners the whole
captivity, to shut them up in Edom. They did, as they thought, but what they
might do lawfully, by the law of nations. The Jews were their captives and
prisoners, conquered by a strong hand in open hostility, and for this respect
they shut them up in Edom; they sold them to the Grecians, to be by them
transported to the Idumaeans. But these Tyrians had no such pretense of excuse.
They did not with a strong hand, in open hostility conquer the Jews, and so
take them prisoners, but did surprise them by deceit, and treachery, as they
lay at Tyrus for traffic and intercourse of merchandise; and thus surprised
they shut them up in Edom; they sold them to the Grecians, to be by them
transported to the Idumaeans, far from their own country, even to Italy. For
it is a constant tradition in all Hebrew histories, that a great part of the
Italian nation, specially those that dwelt at Rome, had their beginning from
the Idumaeans. But I will not prosecute this opinion.

They shut the whole captivity in Edom] They spared not, either women, or
children, or the aged; they took no pity, no compassion, upon either sex, or
age; but all of all sorts, male and female, young and old, a whole and perfect
captivity, they delivered up into the hands of the Edomites. The Edomites were
the posterity of Esau, who was named Edom, as the Israelites were the posterity
of Jacob, who was named Israel. Esau pursued Jacob with a deadly hate: so did
the posterity of Esau, the posterity of Jacob. The Edomites were evermore most
maliciously bent against the Israelites.

Now behold the foulness of this sin wherewith the Tyrians are here charged.
It was the sin of cruelty in a very high degree. It is a cruel deed to detain
any one unlawfully from returning into his native country: but him that is so
detained, to sell away for a bondslaue to his mortallest enemy, this a
cruelty, than which there cannot be a greater. Such was the sin of these
Tyrians; They sold the Jews, Jacobs posterity, and God his servants, to their
professed enemies, the Edomites, with this policy, that being carried far
from their own country, they might live in eternal slavery and bondage,
without hope ever to return home again.

They shut the whole captivity in Edom] The Tyrians are here disproued, for
delivering up Gods inheritance, a believing nation, into the hands of profane
Edomites. And it may remember you of a lesson heretofore commended to your
Christian considerations; It is not lawful to commit the children of believers
into the hands of infidels.

The reason is, that they be not withdrawn from their holy faith, religious
worship, and service of God.

1 This doctrine serves for our instruction. It teaches us so to love the
souls of the righteous seed, that we leave them not resident among Infidels,
Atheists, Papists, or other profane wretches, but rather that to our own cost
and labor, we redeem them out of the Devils tyranny.

2 It serves for the reproof of such as do bind and put their children (the
fruit of their bodies, which they ought to consecrate unto the Lord) into the
education of open enemies to the Gospel of Christ; most blasphemous and
abominable Atheists, or most blind and superstitious Papists.

3 Since it is not lawful to commit the children of believers into the hands of
Infidels, for the reason above specified, that they be not withdrawn from
their holy faith, religious worship, and true service of God: then neither is
it lawful for us to keep away, or send away our servants from the service of
God.

Let no man say unto me, such a man's servant, and such a man's, are employed in
temporal affairs at the time of divine service, and why should not mine be
likewise? (Dearly beloved) a good Christians part is, to be of like
resolution with Ioshuah, chap. 24.15. Howsoever all the world besides shall be
affected in this business, yet to resolve for himself and his family, as
Ioshuah did for his; I and my house will serve the Lord. I do but touch these
points, because I have heretofore in this place more at large insisted upon
them.

Now follows the second branch expressing the sin of the Tyrians, their sin
of unmercifulness and cruelty.

They have not remembered the covenant of brethren For this time I note that men
may be called brethren six manner of ways. 1. By nature, as Jacob and Esau.
By kindred, affinity, or alliance, as Abraham and Lot. 3. By nation or country,
as all Jews. 4. By religion, as all Christians. 5. By friendship, as Solomon,
and Hiram King of Tire. 6. By calamity, or misery, as many poor distressed
people, who have not wherewith to support their weak natures.

The covenant of brethren here mentioned, some do refer to that league of
amity which was concluded between King Solomon, and Hiram, King of Tire,
recorded 1 King. 5.12. Some do properly understand these words, to signify
that natural league which should have been between Jacob and Esau, natural
brethren, and their posterity in lineall descent, the Jews, Israelites, and
Edomites. Understand it which way you will: the Tyrians were both ways
blameable. First they remembered not the covenant made between their King, King
Hiram, and King Solomon. Secondly, they remembered not the covenant made by
nature between the Jews, Israelites, and Edomites, brethren lineally
descended from two natural brethren, Jacob and Esau. From both expositions
arises profitable doctrine.

First, is Almighty God here displeased with the Tyrians, because they did ill
entreat the Jews, and Israelites, not remembering the ancient covenant between
Hiram their King, and Solomon King of Israel? Hence we may take this lesson,
Ancient leagues are not rashly to be violated.

(...), breakers of leagues, truces, and covenants, are Romans 1.31. ranked among
such, whom God in his secret judgment has given up (...), to a reprobate
sense. Foederum tutor, and vindex Deus est; God is, as it were a tutor, or
protector of leagues, and severely reuengeth himself upon the breakers of them.

The Gentiles of old by the light of nature did acknowledge as much; and
fearful examples in all ages do prove as much. I will instance, but in few.
Ioshuah made a league with the Gibeonites, and swear that he would suffer them
to live, Josh. 9.15. long after Saul, and his bloody house slew some of them.
Hereat was the wrath of the Lord kindled, and for this cause he punished the
people with three years famine, and was not appeased with the land, till seven
of Saul's sons were delivered up into the hands of the Gibeonites, to be
hanged up in Gibeah, 2 Samuel 21.1.

Zedechiah King of Judah, made a covenant with Nabuchodonosor King of Babel,
and swear 2 King. 24.17. and 2 Chr. 36.13 and Ierem. 52.2.
subjection to him. But Zedechiah notwithstanding his oath, took part with the
Kings of the Egyptians, Idumaeans, Moabites, Ammonites, and Tyrus, against
Nabuchodonosor, what follows this breach of his oath and covenant? Even utter
ruin to himself, his kingdom, the city of Jerusalem, and the glorious Temple
there, 2 Chr. 36.17 etc.

Vladislaus King of Poland, and Hungary, concluded a peace for ten years with
Sultan Amurath, the sixth King of the Turks. Vlidislaus took his oath upon
the holy Evangelists, and Amurath his, (by his Ambassadors) upon their Turkish
Alcoran. Knolles Hist. Tunc page 289.
This was the most honorable peace, that ever Christian Prince had before that
time made with any of the Turkish Kings, and most profitable also, had it been
with like sincerity kept, as it was with solemnity confirmed. Vladislaus Page
292.
absolved from his oath by Cardinal Iulianus the Popes Legate, and Agent in
Hungary, breaks the concluded peace, and d inuadeth a fresh the Turks
dominions. The Turk ioynes battle with him at Page 297.
Varna in Bulgaria; and beholding the picture of the crucifix in the displaied
ensigns of the Christians, pluckes out of his bosom that writing, wherein the
late league between him and Vladislaus was comprised; and holding it up in his
hand with his eyes cast up to heaven, says; Behold, thou crucified Christ;
this is the league thy Christians in thy name made with me, which they have
without cause violated. Now if thou be a God as they say thou art, and as we
dream, revenge the wrong now done unto thy name, and me; and show thy power
upon thy periurious people, who in their deeds deny thee, their God. What
followed hereupon? The victory was the Turks. Vladislaus lost his life there,
and eleven thousand Christians besides. The success of this great and bloody
battle of Varna, fought the 10. of November, 1444. does it not plainly show,
that God cannot away with league-breakers?

These few instances of Saul, Zedechiah, and Vladislaus, may suffice for the
clearing of my propounded doctrine; Ancient leagues are not rashly to be
violated.

The use of this doctrine is, to admonish all subjects to be very respective
and mindful of that league and covenant which they have by their solemn oaths
made and confirmed to their Kings, Princes, and other Governors: according to
that exhortation made by S. Paul, Romans 13.1. Let every soul be subject to the
higher powers. It is not a bare or naked exhortation; it is backed with a good
reason, For there is no power but of God; and the powers that are, are ordained
of God: It follows in the second verse; Whosoever therefore resists the
power, resists the ordinance of God. Whosoever they are that resist power,
men in authority, Princes, Rulers, and Governors, they resist God, and God
will confound them; their infamy shall remain upon perpetual record for a
spectacle to all posterity. What else means the Apostle in the same place,
where he says, They that resist, shall receive to themselves judgment?

And here (dearly beloved) I beseech you to beware of Romish Locusts, I mean
Jesuits, and Seminary Priests, who are sent from beyond the seas to inueigle
you, and to make you unmindful, or at least careless of your covenant,
confirmed by your sacred oaths, with your redoubted Sovereign. They will tell
you that your King is an Heretic, because he maintains not their Romish,
new, and vpstart religion: and will thereupon go about to persuade you, that
you are not to keep your faith with him. It is a Deuillish doctrine. They have
learned it from Martin the fifth, one of their holy Popes, Cochlaeus Hist.
Hussit. lib. 5. Rainold. These.. 42. page 188. Margin.
who in his Epistle to Alexander, Duke of Lituania, says; Scito te peccare
mortaliter, fi seruabis fidem datam hareticis: Know, says he, that thou
sinnest mortally, if thou keep thy oath made with heretics.

If upon this persuasion you will not be drawn to break your oath, which you
make a conscience of; then will they further tell you, that the Pope has
already given you absolution, and a dispensation for your oath. Pope Cause. 15.
qu. 6. c. Nos Sanctorum. Nosces, qui excommunicatis fidelitate and sacramento
constrictisunt, Apostolica autoritate sacramento abs^luimus.
Gregory the seventh of that name, says; We by Apostolical authority do
absolve all from their oaths, which they have given to persons excommunicate.
The words are in Gratians decree, cause. 15. qu. 6. c. 4 We by Apostolical
authority do absolve all from their oaths, etc.

But who are excommunicate by Romish exposition? I will tell you out of the
great lawyer Panormitan, not they only against whom the sentence of
excommunication is pronounced. For says Extra de Judicits C^p. Cum in homine.
Cum est crimen notorium, nulla est opus declaratione sententiae
excommunicationis.
Panormitan, when the Heresy is publicly known, there needs no
pro^uatiation of the sentence of excommunication. And who are such heretics as
against whom there needs no pronuntiation of the sentence of excommunication?
Lib. 1. de iusta punit. Haeretic.
Alfonsus de Castro, and Justruct. Sacerd. lib. 1. cap. 19. Qui intelligens
aliquam sententiom express ab Ecclesia damnatam, eam retin^crit, Haereticus
pertinax est censendus.
Tolet the Jesuit, will tell us, that whosoever maintains any doctrine
condemned in the Church of Rome, he is to be accounted an obstinate Heretic.

Well then; all Protestants, Princes, and subjects, maintaining true Christian
doctrine, such as is condemned in the Church of Rome, are in Popish account
obstinate Heretics, and therefore ipso facto, already excommunicate: there
needs no pronuntiation of the sentence of excommunication against them.
Whereupon it follows, that in every kingdom where the King is a professed
Protestant, the subjects are already absolved from their eath of allegiance.

I will not in this auditorie further enlarge this point. A point, I grant,
fitter for the Convent of the profound and learned, then for this place.
Wherefore I shut up this point, beseeching you to suffer a word of exhortation.

Howsoever Pope Apud G^^tian Cause 15 q. 6.
Gregory the seventh, that same Ma^nat^^y Ne^rama^ (...) praestigtis Diabolicis
Papatum in^asit. Szeged. spec. Pontis. and Vrsin. spec. Jesuit.
sorcerer, and Cum Mathilde comitissa occultum habuit commercium. Vrsin. Spec.
Jesuit. p. 265.
adulterer, and Lib. 5. Decret. tit. 7 cap. 6. glossa. Nos excommunicamus
vniuersos haereticos, vt absolutosse nouerint omni fidelitatis debito, qui iis
iuramento terebantur astricti.
Gregory the ninth, and In B^lla. Absoluimus subditos vincul^iuramenti, quo
Reginae Elizabethe constricti tenchantur.
Pius the fifth, and all succeeding Popes shall absolve you from your oath of
allegiance, yet (dearly beloved) believe them not. 'Peter, and the Apostles,
Act. 5.29. do put you in mind, that it is better to obey God, than men. And
God in his holy word commands you to be subject to the higher powers, as you
have already heard, Romans 13.1. to honor the King, 1 Pet. 2.17. to submit your
selves to all manner ordinance of man for his sake, whether it be unto the King
as unto the superior, or unto other governors, verse. 13. you have taken your
oath of allegiance, and sworn obedience to your King; break not your covenant
with him, that Gods wrath break not forth in fire against you, as it did
against these Tyrians, for not remembering the covenant of brethren.

Thus far by occasion of the first exposition of these words, They remembered
not the covenant of brethren, that is, they remembered not the covenant made
between their King, King Hiram, and the King of Jsrael, King Solomon.

Now somewhat of the other exposition. They remembered not the covenant of
brethren; that is, they remembered not the covenant made by nature between the
Jews, Israelites, and Edomites, brethren lineally descended from two natural
brethren, Jacob and Esau. They knew full well, that the Jews and Israelites
were the issue of Jacob, and the Edomites of Esau; they knew likewise, that the
Edomites bore a mortal hatred toward the Jews and Israelites; yet fold they
the Jews and Israelites, unto the Edomites; and are therefore here said not to
remember the brotherly covenant.

The man that conspireth mischief and destruction to his brother, is a monster
in nature, worthy to be pursued with eternal detestation: and whosoever
abhors not from consenting to such a wickedness, but gives furtherance, or
countenance thereto, he is holden in the same impiety. The Edomites sought the
destruction of the Jews and Israelites, and the Tyrians did further them in
their bloody designs; the Tyrians therefore are partakers with the Edomites in
the sin of unmercifulness. Which sin is here laid unto their charge in these
words, They remembered not the brotherly covenant. Hence we may take this
lesson; It is a thing very distasteful and unpleasing unto God, either for
brethren to be at variance among themselves, or for others to countenance them
in their quarrels.

Our assent to this truth, the light of nature within us does extort from us.
Of the first part of my proposition, wherein I auow it to be a very distasteful
thing unto God for brethren to be at variance among themselves, I shall have
fit opportunity to entreat, when I shall come to the eleventh verse of this
Chapter, where Edom is reproved for pursuing his brother with the sword.

Of the other part, wherein I do affirm it to be an unpleasing thing to God
for any to countenance brethren in their quarrels, I will by Gods assistance
speak at this time very briefly.

It is a thing very distasteful and unpleasing unto God, for any to countenance
brethren in their quarrels. The advice is good which Saint Paul gives, Ephesians.
5.11. Have ye no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but even
reprove them rather. What are the works of darkness, but the works of the
flesh? Now in Galat. 5.20. in the Catalogue of the works of the flesh, we
find hatred, debate, wrath, contention. With these therefore we must have no
fellowship, we must reprove them rather.

Must we have no fellowship with them? Must we reprove them rather? What says
old Adam? What says flesh and blood to this? Our Gallants of this age can
entertain no such advice: that it may be fulfilled which our Savior Christ
foretold of the end of the world, Luke 21.10. and 16. Nation shall rise against
nation, kingdom against kingdom, a father against his son, a brother against
his brother, a kinsman against his kinsman, and a friend against his friend.

A fitter remedy for this malady I find none, than to imitate blessed Abraham.
There grew a debate between his servants, and the servants of Lot; their
heardmen could not agree. What does Abraham in this case? As the manner of
Masters is now adays? No, he breaks not out into choler; he says not, My
servants are abused; my cousin Lot his servants do seek to crow over them, and
to rule the roast as they list. This is an injury to me their Master, and a
shame to suffer it. So a man may be made a fool indeed, and accounted a
wretch, and a dastard of no reputation. Never will any man care to serve me, if
I stick not better to my men than so. Such language, as the world now goes,
is very rife among us.

But Abraham spoke not so. Grace was in his face, and mildness in his words:
For thus spoke he unto his Nephew Lot, Genesis 13.8. I pray thee, let there be no
strife between thee and me; neither between thy heardmen and my heardmen; for
we are brethren. We are brethren; I pray let there be no strife between us.
Let us be mindful of the covenant wherein nature has united our affections;
we are brethren: the bond of brotherhood and consanguinity, let it moderate our
passions; why shall we jar and be at odds between our selves? Are we not
brethren?

An excellent pattern of imitation for all estates, high and low, rich and
poor, one with another. Noblemen, Gentlemen, Yeomen; all, whosoever may say
they are brethren, either in nature, or in Christ and religion, have in Abraham
a pattern for their imitation. We must abstain, not only from raising strife
and debate our selves, but also from fostering and cherishing it in others.
Such was Abraham's choice. He would not maintain his servants against Lots
servants: he took it to be far more credit for him to have unity and good
love, than the bitter effects of the contrary.

Among the beatitudes, Mat. 5. the seventh is; Blessed are the peacemakers.
Blessed are they who love concord, regard peace, seek it, and ensue after it.
Blessed are they who bestirre themselves to cherish and maintain peace and
concord between others. Blessed are they who do their best to reunite in
love, such as are fallen out, to make an end of quarrels and dissentions.
Blessed are the peacemakers: the reason is annexed; for they shall be called
the children of God, that is, they will by their love of unity and concord,
make it appear unto the world that they are the sons of God.

From whence it follows by an argument from the place of contraries: Accursed
are makebates, for they shall be called the children of the Devil. Cursed are
they who are of themselves quarrelsome and contentious. Cursed are they who
bestir themselves to cherish and maintain strife and debate in others. Cursed
are they who do their best to set at variance such as have long lived in peace
and unity. Cursed are make-bates; I annex the reason; for they shall be called
the sons of the Devil, that is, They will by their love of strife and
debate, make it appear to the world that they are the sons of the Devil.

Now (dearly beloved in the Lord) I beseech you to remove far from you all
cogitation and thought of strife, variance, and debate; and to remember your
brotherly covenant. Know ye, that the bond of one body, one spirit, one hope,
one God, one faith, one baptism, is as far above the bond of one father, one
mother, one village, one house, and the like, as the spirit is above the flesh,
spiritual things above carnal, and God above man.

I will shut up this point with the exhortation of S. Peter, 1 Epist. Chap.
3.8. Be ye all of one mind; one suffer with another; love as brethren; be
pitiful; be courteous; render not evil for evil, nor rebuke for rebuke: but
contrariwise bless ye; bless I say, and know that you are thereunto called,
that ye should be heirs of blessing. Thus far of the third part of this
Prophecy. Now follows the fourth.

Verse. 10. Therefore will I send a fire upon the walls of Tyrus, and it shall
devour the palaces thereof. This is a particular denunciation of a conquest
and desolation against the City Tyrus for her sins. According to this
prediction it came to pass, says Drusius, either in the war of Salmanassar
against the Tyrians, or in the war of Nabuchodonosor. Yet this he affirms
not. Nabuchodonosor besieged Tyrus three years and three months, and then
took its so says Winckleman out of Josephus, lib. 1. contra Appionem: the
Latin Copies of Josephus, which I have seen, make mention of the continuance
of this siege for thirteen years.

The Greek Copy has nothing of the continuance of it. For therein I read
only, that when Thobalus was King, Nabuchodonosor besieged Tyrus. This was
about the year of the world 3345. Tyrus after this was reedified and did
flourish. But she was in her pride again besieged, and taken by Alexander the
Great in the year of the world 3632. And long since, A. C. 1290. she was
sacked and leuelled with the ground by Alphix then Sultan of Egypt. Thus has
Gods hand been strong and prevailing against Tyrus, according to the tenor of
this Prophecy. The very words whereof you have heard before expounded in the
fourth and seventh verses of this Chapter.

Now I pray you only recount with me such heads of Doctrine as heretofore have
been observed out of these words: Therefore will I send a fire, etc. Wherein
three circumstances are to be observed: 1 The punisher. 2 The punishment. 3 The
punished.

The first circumstance is the punisher, the Lord: For thus says the Lord, I
will send] The Doctrine is: It is proper to the Lord to execute vengeance upon
the wicked for their sins.

The second circumstance is the punishment, and that is by fire: I will send a
fire] The Doctrine is: The fire, and all other creatures, are at the Lords
commandment, to be employed by him in the punishment of the wicked.

The third circumstance is the punished, the walls and palaces of Tyrus: I will
send a fire upon the walls of Tyrus, and it shall devour the palaces thereof.

First, must the glorious City Tyrus be destroyed? The Doctrine is:

No munition can save that City which God will have destroyed.

Secondly, must the Walls of Tyrus be devoured with the fire of Gods
displeasure? The doctrine is, It is the good blessing of God upon a Kingdom,
to have walls, strong holds, munitions, fortresses, and bulwarks for a defense
against enemies.

Thirdly, must the palaces of Tyrus be consumed with the fire of Gods anger?
The doctrine is; God depriueth us of a great blessing when he takes from us
our dwelling houses.

Of these doctrines and their several uses, I have heretofore in this place at
large entreated. Wherefore let this which has been now spoken, suffice for my
present exposition of this prophecy against Tyrus.

THE Sixteenth Lecture.
AMOS 1.11, 12. Thus says the Lord, For three transgressions of Edom, and for
four, I will not turn to it: because he did pursue his brother with the
sword, and did cast off all pity, and his anger spoiled him evermore, and his
wrath watched him always.

Therefore will I send a fire upon Teman, and it shall devour the palaces of
Bozrah.


IN this burdensome Prophecy against Edom I observe two parts: 1 A Preface:
Thus says the Lord. 2 A Prophecy: For three transgressions of Edom, etc.


In the Prophecy I observe four parts: 1 A general accusation of the
Edomites: For three transgressions of Edom, and for four. 2 The Lords
protestation against them: I will not turn to it. 3 The description of the sin
by which they offended; in four branches: 1 He pursued his brother with the
sword. 2 He cast off all pity. 3 His anger spoiled him evermore. 4 His wrath
watched him always.
4 The declaration of the punishments to be inflicted upon Edom, verse. 12.
Therefore will I send a fire upon Teman, and it shall devour the palaces of
Bozrah.


The Preface, Thus says the Lord, challenges your attention. The two first
parts of the Prophecy, the accusation of the Edomites, and Gods protestation
against them in these words: For three transgressions of Edom and for four, I
will not turn to it, may give you occasion to recount and remember a Doctrine
already the third time recommended to your religious considerations; Many
sins do pluck down from heaven the most certain wrath and vengeance of
God upon the sinners.

Mel satietatem gignit; It is an old saying, A man may eat too much honey. What?
One lesson so often? No variety? I could answer with a Greek Proverb; (...):
that good and wholesome lessons may well be commended to you twice and thrice,
many times, and yet should you not dislike it.

But for the present I proceed to the third part of this prophecy, wherein is
described Edoms sin. Of this part are four branches: 1 He did pursue his
brother with the sword] wherein observe 1 A purfuer: Edom. 2 The pursued: His
brother. 3 The manner of pursuit; With the sword. Edom did pursue his brother
with the sword.



Edom] Esau, Jacobs brother, and Isaacks son by his wise Genesis 25.21,
Rebekah, for selling his birthright for a mess of red broth, was surnamed
Edom, Genesis 25.30. and of him lineally descended the Edomites, or Idumaeans,
Genesis 36.43. Esau pursued Jacob with a deadly hate; so did the posterity of Esau
the posterity of Jacob: the Edomites were evermore most maliciously bent
against the Israelites. Edom is the pursuer in his own person, and in his
posterity.

The pursued is Edoms brother, Jacob, surnamed Israel, and his posterity the
Jews and Israelites.

Edom pursued his brother with the sword] Bello, and armat a manu, by war,
and bands of soldiers, says Drusius. Esau hated his brother Jacob because of
the blessing wherewith his father blessed him, and thereupon in heart vowed his
death. For thus thought Esau in his mind, Genesis 27.41. The days of mourning
for my father will come shortly, then will I slay my brother Jacob. Jacob to
assuage his brother Esaus fierceness, fled Genesis 27.44.
to his Uncle Laban in Mesopotamia, with whom he lived Genesis 31.38.
twenty years: which time expired, Jacob upon God his admonishment returned
into the Genesis 31.3.
land of his fathers. A man would have thought twenty years time sufficient
for any one to have forgotten, or at least to have disgested a displeasure.
Twenty years were not enough for Esau; so immortal was his hatred. After
twenty years, as Jacob returned from Mesopotamia, Esau went against him with
four hundred men, Genesis 33.1.

This inexpiable rancour and hatred ended not in Esau. His malicious posterity
retained it. Witness the churlish answer given to Moses his Ambassadors, Numb.
20.20. Moses being to conduct the Israelites from Egypt to the promised land,
desirous to bring them the nearest way, sent to the King of Edom for leave to
pass through his country: I pray thee let us pass through thy country: we will
not go through the fields, nor through the vineyards: we will not drink of the
water of thy wels; we will go by the Kings high way: we will not turn to the
right hand nor to the left, until we be past thy borders: we will go the high
way. If I and my cattle drink of thy water, I will then pay for it: I will
only without any harm go through on my feet. Moses the meekest man upon the
earth, thus meekly besought the King of Edom for passage through his country.
Could he obtain it, think you? No. The inueterate hatred wherewith Esau was
possessed, residing in his posterity, caused a denial to so honest a petition.
The King of Edom with much poople, and with a mighty power, rose up against
Moses and the Israelites.

Long after this, in the days of Ahaz King of Judah, were the Edomites better
minded toward Jacobs posterity? The sacred story, 2 Chronicles. 28.17. tells us,
that then also the Edomites were up in arms against the Jews; some of them
they slew, and some they carried away captives. He therefore, the Psalm. 89.14.
stablishment of whose throne are righteousness and equity, Almighty God, does
here justly challenge Edom for pursuing his brother with the sword. The lesson
which hence I would commend to you is: It is a thing very distasteful and
unpleasing unto God for brethren to be at variance among themselves.

Our assent to this truth, the light of nature within us does extort from us.
By natures light the very Heathen have acknowledged one God, and him the author
of unity and friendship; as Plato in his Lysis. From the same parents, one
father, and one mother, as from one seed, one root, one beginning, by natures
ordinance do spring Plutarch. de amore fraterno.
two, three, or more brethren, not for discord, or contrariety; but that being
many, they might the better one help another.

That brother that warreth with his brother, in Plutarch his judgment, does
voluntarily Ibid.
cut off a member of his own flesh. All Xenophon. lib. 2. de dictis and fact.
Socr.
enmity breeds within our souls a thousand tormenting passions; but
especially that enmity which a man bears toward his own brother, as that
which is most prodigious and unnatural.

When Socrates saw Chaerephon, and Chaerecrates, two brethren iarring and
warring each with other, he said unto them: You do now, as if the hands which
were created to help one the other, should hinder and hurt one the other; or
as the feet, which were framed to bear one another burden, should supplant
one the other: or as the ears, which are coauditors of mutual good, should
wax deaf to hear good one for the other: or as the eyes, which like Caleb and
Joshua are fellow spies in this Microcosme, this little world and land of men,
for the good each of other, should look a squint at the good each of other.
You will grant it to be very unnatural, either for the hands, or for the feet,
or for the ears, or for the eyes, one to strive against the other. Much more
monstrous will the strife between brethren be; because the aid which one of
them may and should give unto the other, does far exceed the cooperation of
the hands, the supportance of the feet, the coaudience of the ears, the
providence of the eyes.

Thus far have I led you in Natures school. May it now please you to hear
the same things out of the school of Grace? There Solomon has this lesson:
Two are better than one; for if one of them fall, the other will lift him up;
But woe unto him that is alone, for he falls, and there is not a second to
lift him up. The words are Eccles. 4.9, 10. The Hebrews refer those words to
married couples: but Solomon speaks it generally: and thus you may expound it;
Two are better than one, two brethren are better than one: for if one of them
fall, the other will help him up. If he fall into sickness, into want, into
any kind of distress, eriget, and allcuabit cum frater, his brother will be a
succor to him. But woe to him that is alone. (...), is an old saying, one man
is no man; woe to such a man; woe to him that is alone; for he falls, and
there is not a brother to lift him up.

Indeed one brother helping another is like a defenced City (as Septuagint.
Vulgat. Hieron. Gloss. Lyran. Hugo. Card.
some read it) and their counsels are like the bar of a palace which is
impregnable, Prou. 18.19. and if one overcome him, two shall stand against him,
Eccles. 4.12. So natural is their unity, and strong their coadinuance, which
nature has framed double for mutual assistance.

The place cited out of the Prou. 18.19. Mercer. Lauater. Bibl. Augl.
some read otherwise; A brother offended is harder to win than a strong City,
and their contentions are like the bars of a palace. And then the meaning is:
The angers of brethren one of them toward another, are so sharp and vehement,
that they can no more easily be subdued, than strong defenced towns conquered;
nor more easily be broken, than most strong bars. Which exposition teaches us,
that there is no strife matchable to the strife among brethren. According to
the Proverb, Fratrum contentiones acerbissimae; most bitter are the
contentions of brethren.

Examples Poetical, Historical, and Divine, do speak as much. The
implacable hatred of Atreus against Thyestes, Eteocles against Polynices,
Romulus against Remus, Bassianus against Geta, Cain against Abel, and Esau
against Jacob, are they not as trumpets to sound out this truth? To this
purpose might I allege the King of Argiers, the Kingdom of Tunes, and
Ottomans family, many a brothers hand embrued and washed in his brothers blood;
but seeing it is grown into a Proverb, Irae fratrum acerbissimae, most bitter
are the contentions of brethren, it needs no further proof.

Against such monstrous and prodigious contentions, the Holy Ghost would have
all Christians well armed; and for this end gives us in holy writ many
wholesome Lessons. Let a few serve this time. In the first Epistle of S. John,
Cap. 2.11. we are taught that whosoever hates his brother, he is in darkness,
he walks in darkness, he knows not whither he goes; darkness has
blinded his eyes: and Chap. 3.15. that whosoever hates his brother is a
manslayer: and Chap. 4.20. that whoseeuer hates his brother is a liar, if he
says he loves God. The reason is annexed; For how can he that loves not his
brother, whom he has seen, love God whom he has not seen? And this
commandment we have of Christ, that he that loves God should love his
brother also.

In the book of Proverbs, Chap. 16.19. we read of six things which the Lord
hates, and of a seventh which his soul abhors: that seventh is, verse. 19.
The man that raises up contentions among brethren. Now if God do abhor with
his soul the man that raises up contentions among brethren, how does he like
of the contentions themselves? My propounded doctrine stands good.

It is a thing very distasteful and unpleasing unto God, for brethren to be at
variance among themselves. Now let us see what uses do offer themselves to our
considerations out of this Doctrine.

First, it may serve for a just reproof of these our last and worst days,
wherein by experience we find true that same Dr. King B. of London upon
Jonas, Lect. 15.
paradox, in common reason hardly to be proved; namely, that not friends only,
or kinsmen, but brethren also when they fall to enmity, their hatred is greater
than that betwixt mortal foes. It is come to pass according to Christ his
prophecy, Matthew. 10.36. A man's enemies shall be they of his own house: A man's
enemies indeed, and his enemies to purpose, to work him most harm, shall be
they of his own house.

May not many now adays complain, yea cry out with David, Psalm. 55.12. If
mine enemy had done me this dishonor, I could have borne it: If mine adversary
had exalted himself against me, I would have hid my self from him; but it was
thou, O man, my companion, my guide, my familiar: we took sweet counsel
together; we walked in the house of God as friends. Yet have thou done me this
dishonor; yea, thou have exalted thy self against me.

Of all the Vials of the wrath of God powered down upon sinners, it is one of
the sorest, when a man is fed with his own flesh, and made drunk with his own
blood, as with sweet wine. So the Prophet Esaias speaks, Chap. 49.26. The
meaning is, as a chief B. King. Ibid.
pillar of our Church expounds it; when a man takes pleasure in nothing
more, than in the overthrow and extirpation of his own seed: when he thirsts
not for any blood, but that which is drawn from the sides of his brethren and
kinsmen. Never was there more eager and bitter contention between Turk and
Christian, than now adays there is between Christian and Christian, a brother
and a brother.

All we, who have given our names to Jesus Christ, and vowed him service in our
baptism, we are all brethren, we are fratres vterini, brethren from the womb,
(...), we have one father, and one mother; one father in heaven, and one
mother, the holy Catholic Church, militant upon the earth. But it fares with
us as it did with Simeon and Leui, Gen 49.5. We are brethren in evil; the
instruments of cruelty are in our habitations. They in their wrath slew a man:
and what do we? If our wrath be kindled against our brother, we will not
stick Edomlike, to pursue him with the sword; we will make our sword to be fed
with his flesh, and drunk with his blood.

Think not (dearly beloved, you of the other sex) think not your selves
exempt from this reproof, because in it I have not made any mention of
sisters; for under the name of brethren I meant you also. My speech was unto
Christians; and in Christianisme diversity of sex makes no difference. So
says the Apostle, Gal. 3.28. Male and female, all are one in Christ. To you
therefore this reprofe of brethren at variance does also appertain. If you lay
violent hands upon any, your husbands, your children, or other; or if with your
tongue (which the holy Spirit, Psalm. 57.4. calls a sharp sword) you are
given to vex them of your own house; or shall back-bite or slander any; know,
that Edom-like, you do pursue your brother with the sword. And take, I beseech
you, my propounded doctrine, as belonging unto you also; It is a thing very
distasteful and unpleasing unto God, for brethren to be at variance among
themselves.

A second use is, to work in us brotherly kindness: that virtue, whereby
every good Christian embraces the Church of God and the members thereof with
the bowels of love. This brotherly kindness, S. Peter, 2 Epist. 1.7.
commends unto us, as whereto we ought to give all diligence.

David, Psalm. 133.1. styles it with the sweet name of Unity; Behold how good
and comely a thing it is for brethren to live in unity. And therefore
commends it by two similitudes: in the one showing the sweetness and
pleasantness of it; in the other, the fruit and profit which comes by it.

First, it is like that precious ointment, which was powered on the head of the
high Priest, and ran down upon his heard, and so to the borders of his
garments. Behold the sweetness and pleasantness of unity. That sweet perfume
and ointment, that holy o le powered out upon the high Priest and his garment,
was not only pleasant and delightful to himself, but did also yield a sweet
smelling savor to all that were about him. So is it with unity. It is not
only pleasant to them, who do religiously esteem and keep it, but to others
also which are about them.

Secondly, it is like the dew of Hermon, which fell upon the mountains of
Sion; where the Lord appointed the blessing, and life foreuermore. Behold the
fruit and profit which comes by Unity. The dew, and wet that fell down from
heaven upon H rmon and Sion, made those hills, and the plain countries near
them, fertile: so does Unity bring with it great fruit and profit. If makes
them among whom it is sincerely observed, it makes them through Gods blessing
fruitful and plentiful in good works toward God, and in him and for him
toward men, and one of them toward another. This unity, concord, brotherly
love, mutual consent and agreement, if it be unfeigned, has the promises
both of this life and of that to come: of peace and quietness in this life,
and of eternal joys in the life to come.

One of the notes by which we may be assured of God his special love and
favor, is the love of our brethren. Now that we deceive not our selves in this
love, S. John, Epist. 1. gives us three rules to direct us.

1 Christian brotherly love must not be for any worldly respects or
considerations, but principally for and in God. We must love our brethren
principally because they are the sons of God and members of Christ. This rule
he intimates, Chap. 5.1. Every one that loves him which begat, loves him
also which is begotten of him: that is, whosoever loves God the Father, he
loves also the sons of God; his natural son Christ Jesus, and his sons by
grace and adoption, all Christians.

2 Christian brotherly love must not be outward in show only, but inward in the
heart. This rule he gives us, Chap. 3.18. Let us not love in word, nor in
tongue only, but in deed and in truth.

3 Christian brotherly love must be not only in time of prosperity, but when
most need is. This rule he gives verse. the 17. Whosoever has this worlds
good, and sees his brother has need, and shuts up his compassion from him,
how dwells the love of God in him?

Let these rules (beloved) be your direction. Love ye every one that is called
a Christian, not because he is rich or in authority, but because he is a
Christian, the son of God by grace and adoption. Love ye him, not outwardly in
show only, but inwardly in heart, in deed, in truth. Love him not only in his
prosperous and flourishing estate, but in his greatest need; and be ye assured
that the special love and favor of God will be your shield and protection.

Three things there are that do rejoice God, says Ecclesiasticus, Chap. 25.1.
The unity of brethren, the love of neighbors, a man and his wife agreeing
together. The first, which is the unity of brethren, according to my former
construction, compriseth the other two. All Christians are brethren in Christ,
a neighbor to a neighbor, a husband to his wife, a wife to her husband. For,
as I said, in Christ there is no difference of sex; there is neither male nor
female; all are brethren in Christ; and therefore that neighbor that loves
not his neighbor, the husband that is at ods with his wife, the wife that
agrees not with her husband, they are guilty of the breach of brotherly love.

That exhortation made by S. Paul to the Romans, Chap. 12.10. concerns all of
you, all, of both sexes, without any difference: Be ye affectioned to love one
another with brotherly love. I conclude this point with the same Apostles
words, 1 Cor. 1.10. and 2 Cor. 13.11. Now I beseech you brethren, by the name
of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye speak all one thing, and that there be no
dissentions among you: Be of one mind; live in peace, and the God of peace
shall be with you.

Thus far of the first branch in the description of Edoms sin, and of the
doctrine grounded thereupon: The doctrine was, It is a thing very distastefull,
and unpleasing unto God, for brethren to be at variance among themselves.

It was grounded upon these words, He did pursue his brother with the sword. It
follows:

And did cast off all pity] or after the Hebrew text, did corrupt his
compassions, which reading is expressed in the margin of our Church Bible, and
the Geneua translation. The English translation set out by Tyndall reads it
otherwise: He destroyed his mothers womb: and Winckleman reads it, Et
violauerit vteru^, and violated or abused the mothers womb: both do allude to
the Greek edition of the Septuagent, (...), he did violate the mothers womb;
which reading may have reference to the nativity of Jacob and Esau, borne at
one birth of their mother Rebekah. And then the meaning is, that the Edomites
Esau's posterity, neglecting that bond and knot of brotherhood and
consanguinity, did exercise rigor and cruelty against the Israelites, Jacobs
posterity: or it may have reference to a savage and outrageous cruelty, as if
the Edomites were here noted for ripping up mothers wombes, or women with
child in Israel. That such cruelty was used by the Ammonites, it is plain by
the 13. verse of this Chapter. But this Text in the original does not fasten
this blame upon the Edomites, and I love not, to force my Text. I will not
trouble you with other expositions.

The original is: He did corrupt his compassions] The sense and meaning is
well rendered and delivered in our received English Bibles; He did east off all
pity. Is Edom here condemned for corrupting his compassions? for casting off
all pity? The lesson hence to be commended to your Christian considerations
is this, Unmercifulness is a sin hateful unto God.

I could bring you many places out of holy Writ for the confirmation of this
doctrine. But two only, or three, and they but touched, shall serve for this
present. In Job 6.14. the unmerciful are noted to have forsaken the fear of
the Almighty. In Romans 1.31. among such as God has given up to a reprobate
mind to commit things worthy of death, the unmerciful are named. In James
2.13. a punishment is denounced to the unmerciful; There shall be judgment
merciless to him that shows no mercy. These few Texts of Scripture do
plentifully establish my doctrine: Unmercifulness is a sin hateful unto God.

If any will ask me, What is this unmercifulness whereof I now speak; my
answer shall be out of the learned. Out of Apud A shia. 22. qu. 118.8.3.
Isidore, that it is one of the nine daughters of covetousness. Out of 22. qu.
159.1.2.2.
Aquinas, that it is the withholding of a deed of charity, and an 22. qu.
118.8.3.
obduration or the hardening of the heart against mercy: Out of Comment. in hunc
locum.
Mercer, that it is a breach of natures law, and an abolishing of all
kindness. And so I come to make some use of this doctrine.

The use is to stir us up to the exercises of humanity and mercy. I will not
now make any long declamation against inhumanity and unmercifulness; yet my
Text requires that I speak somewhat to it. There was a time when
righteousness seemed to be taken up into the clouds, and the earth to be void
of it. It was in the days of the Prophet Esaias. He then cried out, Chap. 45.8.
O ye heavens, send the dew from above, and let the clouds drop down
righteousness. The time is now, when love seems to be taken up into the
clouds, and the earth to be void of it. Now may we cry out, O ye Heavens, send
the dew from above, and let the clouds drop down love; that the discourteous
and churlish Nabals of this present generation may now at length know, that
they are not borne for themselves only, but for their poor neighbors also.
Your poor neighbors, who stand in need of you, by very prerogative of
mankind, have an interest in your succor and service.

But it may be that some are so far from all humanity, that this prerogative
of mankind will not move them to do any work of charity. Such hard hearts let
them hear what the Law is, Deuteronomy. 15.7. If one of thy brethren with thee be
poor, within any of thy gates in thy land which the Lord thy God gives thee,
thou shall not harden thine heart, nor shut thine hand from thy poor brother:
But thou shall open thy hand unto him, and shall lend him sufficient for his
need.

I know flesh and blood will oblect: Shall I lend my neighbor sufficient for
his need? So may I soon exhaust my substance and live in want my self. I
reply: O thou of little says, why fear thou? Look back upon the blessing
of God; rely upon it: he through his benediction will make thee large
recompense.

Of this thou may be assured, if thou will have recourse to the forecited
Chapter, Deuteronomy. 15.10. There art thou infallibly promised for thy alms deeds
done to the needy, that the Lord thy God shall bless thee in all thy works,
and in all that thou putiest thine hand to.

My exhortation is no other than that of the Prophet Esaias, Chap. 58 7. Deal
thy bread to the hungry: bring the poor wanderer to thine house: If thou see
him naked, cover him; he is thine own flesh; hide not thy self from him. Thy
liberality will bring thee great advantage: whereof thou will not doubt if thou
consider the next verse, Thy light shall break forth as the morning; thy
health shall grow speedily: thy righteousness shall go before thee; the glory
of the Lord shall embrace thee. See thou not an heap of blessings one upon
another?

Look into the book of Psalms. In the beginning of the 41. Psalm many a
sweet promise is made thee conditionally, that thou tender the poor man's case:
The Lord shall deliver thee in the time of trouble, he shall keep thee and
preserve thee alive; he shall bless thee upon the earth; he will not deliver
thee to the will of thine enemies: he will strengthen thee upon thy bed of
sorrow, and will make thy bed all the time of thy sickness.

I might weary you and my self in the pursuit of this point. Here I stop my
course, with recommendation of one only place, and that a very remarkable one,
Prou. 19.17. He that has mercy upon the poor, lends to the Lord; and the
Lord will recompense him that which he has given.

Behold and see how gracious and good the Lord is. If you show pity and
compassion upon the poor, God will recompense you to the full: yea, in the
largeness of his mercies he will reward you plentifully.

It was a grave exhortation of a Tobit to his son Tobias. cap. 4.7.
father to his son: Give alms of thy substance, and when thou give alms,
let not thine eye be ennious, neither turn thy face from any poor, lest that
God turn his face from thee. Give alms according to thy substance: if thou
have but a little, be not afraid to give a little: So shall thou lay up a good
store for thy self against the day of necessity. Alms will deliver thee from
death; and will not suffer thee to come into the place of darkness. Alms is a
good gift before the most high to all them which use it.

Use it, I beseech you in the bowels of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Be
ye not like Edom in my Text, Corrupt not your compassions; cast not off all
pity; suffer ye one with another; love as brethren; be pitiful, be courteous:
do ye good to all men, and faint not: great shall be your reward in Heaven.

This your service will be acceptable unto God. God for it will give you his
blessing. God will bless you for the time of your being here; and when the day
of your dissolution shall be that you must leave your earthly Tabernacles, then
will the Son of man, sitting upon the throne of his glory, welcome you with a
Venite Benedicti, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared
for you from the foundations of the world. For I was hungry, and ye gave me
meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink; I was a stranger, and ye lodged me;
I was naked, and ye clothed me; I was sick, and ye visited me; I was in
prison, and ye came unto me. In as much as ye have done these things to the
needy and distressed, ye have done them unto me. Come ye blessed of my Father;
inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundations of the world.

THE Seventeenth Lecture
AMOS 1.11, 12. And his anger spoiled him evermore, and his wrath watched him
always.

Therefore will I send a fire upon Teman, and it shall devour the palaces of
Bozrah.


IN my last Lecture I began the exposition of the third part of this Prophecy,
which is a declaration of Edoms sins in four branches: The two first I passed
over the last time. The first branch was, He did pursue his brother with the
sword. Thereon I grounded this doctrine; It is a thing very distasteful and
unpleasing unto God, for brethren to be at variance among themselves.

One use of this doctrine was, a just reproof of the want of brotherly love in
these our days.

A second use was an exhortation to brotherly kindness.

The second branch was; He did cast off all pity. Thereon I grounded this
doctrine; Unmercifulness is a sin hateful unto God.

The use I made of it was to stir us up to the exercises of humanity and
mercy. Which meditation ended, I ended that Lecture. Now come I to the third
branch in the declaration of Edoms sins.

His anger spoiled him euermore] or, In his anger he spoiled him continually.
The preposition is not expressed in the original, but is well understood, and
supplied by some Expositors to this sense: Edom, furious and angry Edom, does
evermore vi aperta, with open violence attempt the spoil of Israel: and if
open violence prevail not, i^tus simultatem alit; within him he fostereth and
cherishes privy and secret malice, such as of old was harbored and settled in
old Genesis 27 41.
Esaus heart. Edom in his anger spoiled him continually.

Spoiled him] The word in the original is from the root (...) which, says
Mercer, ferarum proprium est, is proper and peculiar to wild beasts: and it
signifies Rapere, discerpere, to spoil rauenously, to rent, or tear in
pieces. Thus is Edom compared to some truculent or savage beast; some devouring
Lion, some ravenous Wolf, some fierce Bear, or the like, that hunteth
greedily after their prey. The comparison is; As a Lion, a Wolf, a Bear, or
some other cruel beast, hunteth greedily after his prey, and when he has
gotten it, teareth it in pieces, and so deuoureth it: so does Edom; he hunteth
for his brother as with a snare or net; and having once enclosed him, he
throws him headlong into utter desolation: and this he does in the bitterness
of his anger; In his anger he spoiled him evermore.

This clause is otherwise rendered by the old Latin Interpreter, Et tenuerit
vltra furorem suum; He possessed his fury beyond measure longer than was meet
he should. An exposition followed by many of the learned, and of late Writers,
by Brentius and Mercer. In Matthews Bible it is well expressed; He bore hatred
very long: the meaning is, He constantly, eagerly, obstinately persisted in
his anger, and held it fast; as a savage beast holds fast his prey.

Both readings, this, and the former; this, He bore hatred very long: and the
former, In his anger he spoiled his brother evermore; both do appeach and
accuse Edom of rash unadvised evil, and sinful anger. The doctrine which
hence I would commend to your Christian considerations is this; Every child of
God ought to keep himself unspotted of anger; of rash, unadvised, evil, and
sinful anger.

I say, of rash, unadvised, evil, and sinful anger. For there is a good kind
of anger; an anger praise worthy; an anger to be embraced of every one of you.
Whereto the Prophet David exhorted the faithful of his time, Psalm. 4.4. Be
angry, and sin not. And S. Paul his Ephesians, Chap. 4.26. Be angry, but sin
not. You may be angry, and not sin. Christian religion does not make men to be
(...). It makes them not void of passion, and senseless. You may be angry. But
your anger must lie down by and wait upon reason and virtue, as a shepherds dog
lies by and waits upon his master: the comparison is Great Sermon. de Ira
Basils. As the dog does, so must your anger do: your anger commanded by
virtue and reason, must accuse, bark at, and bite vice, and all vicious wolves
in man's shape. Well said the heathen Philosopher in his fourth Academicke, that
Anger is the whetstone of fortitude, if it be tempered and ruled by reason.

To this purpose speaks mellifluous Bernard Ad Guidonem Abbatem de tribus
sentibus.
Ep. 69. Not to be angry when there is a just cause of anger, is to be
unwilling to mend or correct sin. This good anger whereof I now speak, you may
call Indignation, or zeal, which is nothing else but a just commotion of anger
for the breach of some of Gods commandments: as when God his holy Name is
reproached, or our harmless neighbors are unjustly wronged: when some
grievous injury is done either against God, or against our innocent neighbors.

To justify you in this anger, there are many examples in holy Writ: I will
make bold to commend a few unto you. Moses, a very meek man Numb. 12.3.
above all that were upon the earth, was possessed with this indignation and
zeal. The Exodus 32.9.
stiffenecked Israelites upon Moses his long absence from them (for he was
absent Exodus 24.18.
forty days and forty nights) they made themselves a molten calfe for their
God. This Idol they worshipped; they offered sacrifice unto it. Hereat Moses
his wrath waxed hot. In this his wrath the two tables of the testimony, which
were Exodus 32.16.
Gods work, and Gods own writing, were broken in pieces, and he caused to be
slain of the people in one day about three thousand men, Exodus 32.28. Elias
was possessed with this indignation and zeal, when he slew of Baals Prophets
to the number 1 King. 18.19.
of four hundred and fifty, 1 King. 18.40. Elizeus was possessed with this
indignation and zeal, when he cursed the two and forty children torn in
pieces by Bears, 2 King. 2.24. Paul was possessed with this indignation and
zeal, when he struck Elimas the Sorcerer with blindness, Act. 13.11. In a
word, Christ himself was possessed with this indignation and zeal, when with
a scourge of small cords he drove out of the Temple buyers, and sellers, with
their sheep and oxen, and the mony-changers, Ioh. 2.13. You have seen Moses,
Elias, Elizeus, Paul, and Christ himself angry: their anger was a good anger.
I thus describe it.

A good anger is a godly and reasonable desire of just revenge, stirred up in
us by a true zeal of justice, whereby being displeased as well with our own
sins as with other men's, we covet after a lawful revenge, that the persons
may be saved, that Gods wrath may be appeased, that the Kingdom of Christ and
his glory may be promoted. My description I thus explicate.

A good anger is a godly and reasonable desire of just revenge, stirred up in
us by a true zeal of justice:] I say, a true zeal; because there is also a
false zeal; when some men do pretend Gods glory, and indeed intend nothing
less. This true zeal directs our anger against men's vices, not their
persons: we must love the man, but be angry at his sin: not at his sin
only, but at our own also: we must detest our own sins as well as other
men's: and lawfully vindicate as well other men's sins as our own: and all
this that our selves and others may be saved; that Gods wrath may be pacified;
that the Kingdom of Christ and his glory may be advanced.

I will not now examine whether this good anger has at any time affected your
hearts to the beating down of sin. Whether you have with conniuency, patience,
and silence endured Gods Commandments to be violated, his holy Name by vain
and fearful oaths to be blasphemed, the Sabbath to be profaned, parents to
be dishonored, murders, adulteries, or thefts to be committed, your neighbors
to be wronged, and other like sins to be acted: whether you have with
conniuency, patience, and silence, endured such foul demeanours which you
should in indignation, anger, and zeal have reproved and taxed; I leave to the
private examination of your own hearts. Only let me tell you, there is a Judge
in Heaven that will one day call you to account for these things. My Text now
admonishes me to speak somewhat of evil anger: whereof Edom is here accused
by the suffrage of Almighty God: In his anger he spoiled his brother evermore.
My doctrine was; Every child of God ought to keep himself unspotted of anger.

My proposition is to be understood of rash, unadvised, evil, and sinful
anger. Which the Austen of our time, learned Comment. in Ephesians. 4,
Zanchites thus describes;

Evil anger is an unjust and unreasonable desire of revenge, stirred up in us
by a sense of some injury done us, or through the vice of impatience in us,
whereby being displeased at men, rather than at their vices, we wish vengeance
to betide them, respecting our own wilful lusts only, and not at all either
the safety of our neighbors, or any public good, or the glory of God.

These species, or kinds of this anger, according to Orthodox. fid. l^b. 2. c.
16.
Damascene, are three. The first he calls (...), or (...); you may call it
choler, it is a hasty anger and of short continuance. The second he calls
(...); you may call it angrinesse; it is a more permanent anger of more
continuance. The third he calls (...); you may call it wrath; it is a settled
anger, watching opportunity to work revenge.

These three kinds of anger S. Paul condemns for evil, under the names of
(...), and (...), Anger, bitterness, and wrath, Ephesians. 4.31. Let all
bitterness, anger; and wrath be put away from you. Our Savior Christ, Mat.
5.22. admonishes his Disciples, if not of three kinds, yet of three degrees of
anger. 1 Whosoever is angry with his brother without cause, unadvisedly, he
shall be culpable of judgment. 2 Whosoever says unto his brother, Raca, he
shall be worthy to be punished by the Council. 3 Whosoever shall say fool, he
shall be worthy to be punished with Hell fire.

The first condenmeth the anger in the heart, when a man is inwardly moved, and
concealeth it. The second condemns the anger in the countenance, when a man
by his face, and gesture, is discovered to be angry. The third condemns the
anger in speech, when a man by foul and bitter speaking, manifests himself
to be angry. You see diverse kinds of anger.

Gregory the Great, Moral. lib. 5. cap. 30 applies them to men's persons. He
reckons up four sorts of men subject to these evil angers. 1. Some are
soon angry, and soon pacified. 2. Some are slowly angry, and slowly pacified.
3. Some are soon angry, and slowly pacified. 4. Some are slowly angry, and
soon pacified. All these do sin in their angers, but not all equally. Some
more, some less grievously, yet all do sin. And therefore that the glory of
God may be propagated, and the good of our neighbors furthered, I beseech you,
receive into your devout hearts my propounded doctrine, Every child of God
ought to keep himself unspotted of anger.

If you demand a reason hereof, I must repeat unto you God his holy
Commandment: Thou shall do no murder. In the name of murder, are inhibited
all the kinds of anger above specified; the anger that lurketh in the heart,
the anger that shines in the countenance, the anger that is manifested in
words; whereto I add that anger that breaks into action. If you wound, or
but strike your neighbor; if you speak bitterly against him; if you look
frowningly at him; if you hate him in heart, or be unadvisedly angry with him,
you are before Almighty God guilty of murder. And for this cause, every child
of God ought to keep himself unspotted of anger.

Another reason of this doctrine may be drawn from the foul effects of anger.
The Peter de La Primadaye.
Author of the French Academie par. 2. Chap. 55 thus discourses of them: Anger
is a vice that has wonderful effects in the body, and such as are very
unbeseeming a man. For, first of all, when the heart is offended, the blood
boileth round about it, and the heart is swollen, and puffed up, whereupon
follows a continual panting and trembling of the heart, and breast. And when
these burning flames and kindled spirits are ascended up from the heart unto
the brain, then is anger come to his perfection: from hence comes change of
countenance, shaking of the lips, and of the whole visage, stopping of speech,
and terrible looks, more mere for a beast, than for a man.

Lactantius has the like discourse in his book De Ira Dei, cap. 5. Ira, cum
in animum cutusquam incidit, velut saena tempestas tantos excitat fluctus, vt
statum mantis immutet, ardesrant oculi, os tremat, lingua titubet, dentes
concrepent, alterna vultum ma ulet, nunc saffasus r^bor, nunc pall^r albescens.
When anger (says he) is fallen into the mind of man, like a sore tempest,
it raises such waves, that it changes the very state of the mind; the eyes
wax fiery, the mouth trembles, the tongue faltereth, the teeth gnash, and the
whole countenance is by course stained, sometimes with redness, sometimes with
palenesse.

Basil in two Sermons of his, one preached before the Lacizians, the other De
ira, hom. 38.
elsewhere, is plentiful in this point. The man that is indeed and thoroughly
angry, differs nothing either in the manner of his look, or in the affection
of his mind, from him that is possessed with Devils. His blood boileth about
his heart; the whole proportion of his visage is altered; you will not take it
to be the same face: his eyes look not as they were wont, but are fiery and
staring; he whets and grindes his teeth, like the foaming Boar; his
countenance is wan, of color black, and blew, stained, and dyed as with
blood: his body swells; his veins wax big; his voice is unpleasant; his
speech marticulate: you will have much a do to understand him.

A servant of Mich. de Monta^gue Ess. lib. 2 cap. 31. ex A. Gelli^.
Plutarchs, a loud and vicious fellow, for some faults by him committed, was
stripped naked to be whipped. Being under the whip, he vpbraided his master,
and objected to him, how he had often heard him say, that it was an unseemly
thing for a man to be angry; and that thereof he had written a book; and that
yet now contrary to his own sayings and writings, all plunged in rage, and
engulfed in choler, he caused him so cruelly to be beaten. To whom Plutarch
with an unaltered and mild settled countenance, said thus: What? Whereby do
thou judge I am now angry? Does my countenance, does my voice, does my color,
or does my speech give thee any testimony, that I am either moved or
choleric? Me thinks mine eyes are not staringly wild, nor my face troubled,
nor my voice frightfull or distempered. Do I wax red? Do I foame at the
mouth? Does any word escape me, whereof I may repent hereafter? Do I startle
and quake? Do I rage and ruffle with anger? For to tell thee true, these are
the right signs of choler; these are the tokens of anger.

You may say (beloved) that they are the effects of anger. The forecited
Father Basil may be your warrant, who further tells you, that unbridled
tongues, vngnarded mouths, unstayed hands, contumelies, foul language,
railing words, unjust blows, and the like enormities, are the sons, are the
fruits, are the effects of evil anger. And in this respect also, every child
of God ought to keep himself unspotted of anger.

Now to make some use of this doctrine. Shall I say, that this evil anger is a
reigning evil among you? Your consciences must needs bear me witness, it is
so. Now may I charge some of you, as Ezechiel charged the house of Israel,
chap. 11.6. Many have you murdered in this place, and you have filled the
streets with the slain. For as often as you have been angry unadvisedly one
with another, so often have ye murdered one another. O! what an account are
ye one day to make before Christ's Tribunal, even for this one sin; unless
in this your day you wash it away with tears of penitencie. Tremble therefore,
stand in awe, and sin no more so. Examine your own hearts, not now only
while you hear me, but also when you are gone from hence, even upon your beds
of rest.

Solomon exhorts you, Eccles. 7.10. Be thou not of an hasty spirit to be
angry. His reason is, For anger rests in the bosom of fools. Saint Paul
exhorts you, Romans 12.19. Dearly beloved, avenge not your selves, but give
place unto wrath. His reason is, For it is written, vengeance is mine, I will
repay says the Lord. Saint James exhorts you, Chap 1.19. My dear brethren be
slow to wrath. His reason is, For the wrath of man does not accomplish the
righteousness of God.

You know the Law; and it is fulfilled in one word, this: Thou shall love thy
neighbor as thy self. This is taught you, Gal. 5.14. Suffer your selves to be
exhorted in the words following, verse. 15. If ye bite and devour one another,
take heed lest ye be consumed one of another. In the twentieth verse we read
of hatred, debate, emulations, wrath, contentions, seditions; and are assured
by the 21. verse, that if we do such things, we shall not inherit the kingdom
of God.

Wherefore (to shut up this point with Saint Paul's words, 1 Cor. 1.10. and 2
Cor. 13.11.) I beseech you, by the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, that ye
speak all one thing, and that there be no dissentions among you. Be of one
mind; live in peace, and the God of peace shall be with you.

Thus far of the third branch in the description of Edoms sin, and of the
doctrine grounded thereupon. The doctrine was, Every child of God ought to
keep himself unspotted of anger. It was grounded upon these words, His anger
spoiled him evermore.

And his wrath watched him alway] This is the Geneua translation. His fury
watches him evermore, so Tremelius. The meaning is, Edoms wrath, or fury, was
so implacable, so far from being abated or assuaged, as that it evermore
watched Israel, to do him a mischief. In the Church Bible you have a
different reading; His indignation he kept always; and in Matthewes Bible, he
kept indignation always by him. The reading is agreeable with the Vulgar
Latin; and is admitted by Oec^lampadius, by Calvin, by Drusius. By Brentius
also; but that for indignation, he has fury: He kept his fury always. The
meaning is, the indignation or fury which Edom had conceived against his
brother, was permanent, it would not be remitted, there was no end of it. The
word in the H^brew rendered by wrath, or indignation, or fury, signifies iram
vehementiorem, and exestuantem, omnemque modum praetereuntem, a very vehement,
a boiling anger, exceeding all measure; or according unto others, it signifies
furorem infl^mmantem, and peruadentem ignis more: a rage like fire, burning
whatsoever it meets with.

We now see what it is, for which the Lord, in this last branch, reproves
Edom, or the Idumaeans. It is their implacable, unmeasurable, and endless
anger; wherein they practiced nothing but wiles, how they might entrap and
subvert the Israelites. The lesson which from hence we are to take for our
further instruction, is this, Whosoever once provoked unto anger, does for ever
hold it fast, and cherish it, he is not at any hand approved by God.

I will not spend many words in the proof of this proposition, since it
stands good by my former discourse. You have already heard, that every
child of God ought to keep himself unspotted of anger; and that, either in
respect of its foul effects, or in respect of Gods holy commandment against
it. Now is there any of you so deuoid of Christian understanding, as to think
or imagine, that God will at any hand approve that, against which he gives his
commandment? I assure my self there is none. Well then, I thus infer;
Whosoever is spotted with evil anger, he is not at any hand approved by God:
therefore, whosoever once provoked unto evil anger, does for ever hold it fast
and cherish it, he is not at any hand approved by God.

For further corroboration of this doctrine, give ear, I beseech you, to the
blessed Apostles words, Ephesians. 4.26. Let not the Sun go down upon your
wrath. Some do thus paraphrase these words, Guerricus sermon. in die Purificat.
August. enarrat. in Psalm. 25.
Christus qui est Sol iustitiae, mentem vestram irascentem non deserat, qui cum
ira nunquam habitat: Christ the Sun of righteousness, who loves not to make
his habit^tion there, where anger has its residence, let him not forsake your
angry minds. Christ may not dwell where anger is. If therefore you are
desirous that Christ should dwell in you, you must cast away all anger from
within you.

Let not the Sun go down upon your wrath] There is another Exposition
usually given of these words, to this sense: Since such is our estate in this
our warfare; such our weakness, infirmity and frailty, that anger may
quickly take hold of us, and possess us; we must carefully take heed that we
give it not too much respite, or entertainment. Our anger must not be ira
pridiana, a yesterdaies anger. We must cast it from us speedily, antequam
occidat lux ista visibilis, before this visible Sun, the Sun that makes our
day, be set; ne nos d^serat lux illa inuisibilis, that the invisible Sun, the
Sun of righteousness, and true light of our hearts, forsake us not. It is
the holy Spirit that speaks out of the Apostles mouth. Let not the Sun go
down upon your wrath.

There is nothing more adverse, or opposite to our bounden duty of charity,
and our own salvation, than perseverance in wrath. It lets us from doing
good to those with whom we are angry: it hinders our devotion in prayer, and
makes the wrath of God to light upon us. So true is my propounded doctrine,
Whosoever once provoked unto anger, does for ever hold it fast, and cherish it,
he is not at any hand approved by God.

This doctrine thus delivered against perseverance in anger, may serve for a
just reproof of such as do bear perpetual ill will to any nation. To hate a
Spaniard, a Frenchman, or any other countryman, because he is of such a
country, or of such a nation, this is here reproueable.

Again, it may serve to restrain such, as do think it lawful perpetually
to hate them of whom they have received an injury. Such men, would they but
recount with themselves, and recall into their minds how many, and how
grievous in iuries they have done unto God, in transgressing his holy
Commandments; and how, yet notwithstanding, God is still propitious, gracious,
and bountiful unto them: surely, were they true Christians, sealed by God his
holy Spirit to the day of redemption, they would remit of their hatred; yea
they would wholly abandon it, and cast it far from them: according to the
exhortation of S. Paul to the Ephesians, Chap. 4.31. in whose words (beloved)
suffer your selves to be exhorted: Let all bitterness, and anger, and wrath,
crying, and evil speaking be put away from you, with all malitiousnesse. Be
ye courteous one to another, and tender hearted, forgiving one another, even
as God for Christ's sake for gave you.

Sweet Bernard in his book of the manner of living well ( Sermon. 36. concerning
hatred) thus sweetly speaks unto his sister: Soror in Christo amantissima
mihi, etc. My most loving sister in Christ, hear what I speak unto thee: If
in any thing thou have grieved thy sister, or caused her to be sorrowful,
satisfy her: if thou have sinned against thy sister, repout before her: if
thou have scandalized, or offended any one of Gods handmaids, ask her
forgiveness. Go on with speed to reconcilement: sleep not till thou have
made satisfaction; rest not till thou return in peace. Thus did devout Bernard
exhort his virgin-sister.

The good Father (no doubt) had regard to the words of his and our Savior
Jesus Christ, written, Matthew. 5.23, 24. If thou bring thy gift to the Altar,
and there remembrest that thy brother has ought against thee, leave there
thine offering before the Altar, and go thy way, first be reconciled to thy
brother, and then come and offer thy gift. First be reconciled to thy brother:
Be reconciled. What is that? Reconciliatio (says Gillebert. super Cantica,
ser. 32.
one) est iterata animorum dissidentium conciliatio; Reconciliation is a renewed
agreement of dissenting minds.

This is it, into the commendation whereof the sweet Singer of Israel breaks
out, Psalm. 133.1. Behold how good and comely a thing it is, for brethren to
dwell even together? If either profit or pleasure can allure you; then behold]
consider well, and weigh seriously how good] how profitable and necessary; and
how comely] how pleasant and excellent a thing it is, for brethren] not only
natural brethren, but brethren in Christ, all the sons of God, the members
of his Church, and partakers of the selfsame doctrine, and life in Christ, to
dwell even together] not only in one house, but specially to be of one
affection and consent: to maintain between themselves brotherly love and
mutual consent. Behold how good, how comely a thing it is, for brethren to
dwell together in unity. It is as the sweet perfume and ointment, that holy
oil, which was powered upon the head of the high Priest, and ran down upon his
beard, and so to the skirts of his garment: it is as the dew of Hermon, which
fell upon the mountains of Sion. Both these resemblances recommending unto us
the pleasure and profit of unity, brotherly love and concord, I commended unto
you in my Sixteenth Lecture upon the first Chapter of this prophecy: and
therefore now I say no more of them.

S. Paul, 1 Cor. 12. treating of spiritual gifts, and their diversity, there
reckons up the word of wisdom, the word of knowledge; faith; the gift of
healing; the doing of miracles; prophesying; kinds of tongues; the
interpretation of tongues: and shows how all these are wrought by the same
Spirit, who distributeth to every man severally, as he will. Then urging this
several distribution by way of interrogation, (Are all Apostles? Are all
Proph^ts? Are all Teachers? Are all doers of miracles? Have all the gifts of
healing? Do all speak with tongues? Do all interpret?) He exhorts the
Corinthians to covet after the best things; and concludes his Chapter thus: I
will yet show you a more excellent way.

This more excellent way, is the way which now I show you, beloved. This way is
love. O strive ye to walk in it. Let the remainder of your days be spent
therein. Know ye, that whatsoever good parts ye have, or whatsoever good
works ye do, it avails you nothing, if you have not love. Look but to the
beginning of the thirteenth Chapter of the first Epistle to the Corinthians.
There shall you find it verified, what I have said unto you: Though you speak
with the tongue of men and Angels, and have not love, yet are you as sounding
Brass, or a tinkling Cimball. Though you have the gift of prophecy, and know
all secrets, and all knowledge, yea, if you have all faith, so that you can
remove mountains, and have not love: yet are you nothing, Though you feed the
poor with all your goods, though you give your bodies to be burned, and have
not love, yet it profits you nothing.

My exhortation must be unto you in the same blessed Apostles words, Chap.
14.1. of the same Epistle; Follow after love. And I shut up this exercise with
a sweet Fathers sweet meditation; Bernard. sermon. 9. in Coena Dom.
Charitas te domum Domini facit, and Dominum domum tibi. Love, it makes thee a
house for God, and God a house for thee: according to that, 1 Ioh. 4.16. God is
love, and he that dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in him. A happy
Artificer thou art, sweet love, that art able to frame for thy self such a
house, as God is. This house is not built of mortar, and brick, nor of stone,
nor of wood, nor of silver, nor of gold, nor of precious stones. It exceeds
and far surpasses silver and gold; in comparison of it precious stones are
vile, and of no reputation.

This house is an everlasting house, before all ages, before all times; it
contains all things, it comprehends all things, it creates all things, it
gives life to all things. In this house the blind receive light, the lame
strength to walk, the crooked straightness, the weak health, the dead their
resurrection: there is none wretched in it, all therein are blessed: for they
are entered into their Masters joy. Into which joy, that we may in due time
enter, let us follow after love, we know that God is love, and that whosoever
dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in him; Now God grant, that we may
all dwell in him.

THE Eighteenth Lecture.
AMOS 1.12. Therefore will I send a fire upon Teman, and it shall devour the
palaces of Bozrah.


I Am now come to the last part of this prophecy against Edom: which is the
denuntiation of God judgments against Edom for his sins, expressed in this
twelfth verse.

This twelfth verse does not much differ from some precedent verses in this
Chap. 4, 7, and 10. The same punishment which in the fourth verse is threatened
to the Syrians, under the names of Hazael, and Benhadad; and in the seventh
verse to the Philistines, under the name of Azzah; and in the tenth verse to
the Tyrians, under the name of Tyrus, is here in this twelfth verse denounced
to the Edomites, under the names of Teman and Bezzah. And therefore, as in the
forenamed verses I have done, so do I in this recommend unto you three
circumstances.

1 The punisher: the Lord, I will send. 2 The punishment: by fire, I will send
a fire. 3 The punished: the Temanites, and Bozrites, the inhabitants of both
cities: I will send a fire upon Teman, and it shall devour the palaces of
Bozrah.
The punisher, is the Lord; for, Thus says the Lord; I will send. The doctrine
naturally arising hence is this; It is proper to the Lord to execute vengeance
upon the wicked for their sins.

This truth has heretofore once, and again, been confirmed unto you. The
less need have I now to insist upon it. Yet may I not pass it over unsaluted.
It is proper to the Lord to execute vengeance, etc.]

This office of executing vengeance upon the wicked for their sins, God
takes upon himself, Deuteronomy. 32.35. Where he says, Vengeance and recompense
are mine. This is confessed to be God his due by S. Paul, Romans 12.19. It is
written, vengeance is mine, I will repay, says the Lord; and by the Author of
the Epistle to the Hebrews, Chap. 10.30. Vengeance belongs unto me, I will
recompense, says the Lord; and by the sweet Singer of Israel, Psalm. 94.1. O
Lord God the auenger, O God the auenger. The Prophet Nahum, Chap. 1.2. to the
terror of the wicked, proclaims it: God is jealous, and the Lord reuengeth:
the Lord reuengeth: even the Lord of anger; the Lord will take vengeance on his
adversaries, and reserueth wrath for his enemies.

These places are so many pregnant proofs to make good my propounded doctrine,
namely, that It is proper to the Lord to execute vengeance upon the wicked for
their sins. Many are the uses of this doctrine.

The first. It may lesson us to look heedfully unto out feet, that we walk
not in the way of sinners, to partake with them in their sins. Sins are not
tongue tied; they cry unto the Lord for vengeance. We read in holy writ of
four sorts of sins, which above other, do cry unto God, and do call for
his great and quick vengeance.

The first is Homicide, murder, or man slaughter; whereof Almighty God, Genes
4 10. thus speaks unto Caine; The voice of thy brothers blood cries unto me
from the earth.

The second is Sodomie, the sin of Sodom, the sin against nature, a sin
not once to be named among Christians. Whereof thus says the Lord unto
Abraham, Genesis 18.20. Because the cry of Sodom and Gomorrah is great, and
because their sin is exceeding grievous, I will go down now, and see
whether they have done altogether according to the cry which is come unto me.

The third is oppression of the poor, Widows, fatherless, and strangers.
Oppression of the poor cries, Psalm. 12.5. Now for the oppression of the
needy, and deep sighs of the poor, I will up says the Lord, and will set at
liberty him whom the wicked has snared. Oppression of the widows and the
fatherless cries, Exodus 22.22. Ye shall not trouble any widow, nor
fatherless child: if you vex or trouble such, and so he call and cry unto me,
I will surely hear his cry. Then shall my wrath be kindled, and I will kill
you with the sword, and your wives shall be widows, and your children
fatherless. Oppression of strangers cries, Exodus 3.7. The Lord said unto
Moses, I have surely seen the trouble of my people which are in Egypt, and
have heard their cry, because of their taske-masters; and verse the ninth, Now
lo the cry of the children of Israel^is come unto me, and I have also seen
the oppression, wherewith the Egyptians o press them. Thus is oppression,
whether it be of the poor, or of the widows, or of fatherless children, or
of strangers, a crying sin: and this was the third.

The fourth is, the keeping back of the labourors hire. Whereof S. James,
Chap. 5.4. thus witnesses: Behold the hire of the laborers, which have reaped
your fields, (which is of you kept back by fraud) cries; and the cries of
them which have reaped, are entered into the ears of the Lord of hoasts.

You see (dearly beloved) four crying sins; murder, Sodomie, oppression,
and the detaining, or keeping back of the poor laborers wages. These are
crying sins, and they cry aloud to the ears of Almighty God, and do call
for vengeance, to light upon the doers of them.

But what of other sins? Do not they cry also? Are they dumb? No, says
Gregory, Moral. 5. cap. 8. Omnis namque iniquitas, apud secreta Dei indicia,
habet voces suas. Every iniquity has a voice to discover it self before God
his secret judgments. Not a voice only, but feet also, yea and the wings too,
to make way into Heaven for vengeance.

Every sin is of a high elevation; Dr. King Bishop of London upon Jonas
Lecture 2.
it ascends above the top of Carmel, it aspireth, and presses before the
Majesty of Gods own Throne. God complains of Nineveh, Ion. 1.2. Their
wickedness is come up before me. He tells Sennacherib, 2 King. 19.28. and
Esaias 37.29. Thy tumult is come up into mine ears. The Prophet Oded, 2 Chronicles.
28.9. says to the Israelites of their rage, that it reaches up to heauer.

You see as well a sublimity and reach of sin, as a loudness and vocality of
it. As it has a voice, so has it feet, so has it wings; as it cries, so it
runs, so it flies into heaven; and all to fetch down vengeance against us,
the miserable and wretched actors of it.

Our wickedness what it is, and in what elevation of height, whether it be
modest or impudent; private or public; whether it speaks or cries, stands
or goes; lies like an Aspe in her hole, or flies like a fiery serpent into
the presence of God; your selves be Judges. Recall to your remembrances the
judgments of the Lord.

The anger of the clouds has been powered down upon our he^ds, both with
abundance, and with violence: Psalm. 93 3.
The floods have lifted up; the floods have lifted up their voic; the floods
have lifted up their waves; the waves of the Sea have been marvelous. Her
surges have broken down her walls, yea have gone over her walls; to the loss
of the precious lives of many of our brethren. The arrows of a woeful
pestilence have been cast abroad at large, in all the quarters of our Realm,
even to the emp ying, and dispeopling of some part thereof. Treasons against
our King and Country, mighty, monstrous, and prodigious, have been plotted by
a number of Lions whelps, lurking in their dens, and watching their hour to
undo us.

All these things, and other like visitations, have been accomplished amongst
us for our sins, and yet we amend not. Yea we grow worse and worse. We fleet
from sin to sin, as a fly shifteth from sore to sore. We tempt the Lord,
we murmur, we, lust, we commit idolatry, we serve the flesh, we sit down to
eat, and rise to play: of bloodshed, of blasphemy, and rage against God, of
oppression, of extortion, of fraud against poor laborers, of anger, of
bitterness, of wrath, of strife, of malice, public, infamous and enormous
sins, we make no conscience; we commit them with greediness; we draw them on
as with cart-ropes, we glory in them, as if we had even sold our selves to
work wickedness before the Lord.

Lord! whither will we? Are we frozen in our sins, and grown senseless?
Quot vitia homo committit, tot facit passus ad infernum, says P^t ^e P^lu de
These. N. par. astiu^l. ena^r. 2. in Dom. 16. Tri.
one: Look how many sins a man commits, so many steps he goes toward
Hell. Yea, say I, for every sin we commit, we deserve to be thrown headlong
into Hell fire.

What shall we do, men and brethren? what shall we do? Our Lord God tells
us what is best, Ezech. 18.30. Return, and cause others to turn away from all
our transgressions: so shall not iniquity be your destruction: and verse. 31.
Cast away from you all your transgressions, whereby you have transgressed, and
make you a new heart, and a new spirit; for why should you die? and 32. I
desire not the death of him that dies, says the Lord God; return you
therefore and live. Can there be a sweeter inuitation?

Come therefore, join we heart and hand together: and Ezech. 18.27.
turn we away from the wickedness that we have committed; and do we that
which is lawful and right, that we may save our s^ules alive. Come let us
Verse. 28.
turn away from all the transgressions that we have committed: so shall we
surely live, we shall not die. And this we will the sooner endeavor to do, if
we imprint in our hearts my propounded doctrine; It is proper to the Lord to
execute vengeance upon the wicked for their sins.

Thus much of the first use; which was to lesson us to look heedfully to our
feet, that we walk not in the way of sinners, to partake with them in their
sins. I proceed.

Is it true? Is it proper to God to execute vengeance upon the wicked for their
sins? Here then in the second place we are admonished, not to intermeddle in
the Lords office. It is his office to execute vengeance. We therefore may not
interpose our selves. If a brother, a neighbor, or a stranger has done us any
wrong, we must forgive him, and must leave reuengement to God, to whom it
appertains. We must leave reuengement to God, to whom it appertains, and
forgive our enemies. What? Forgive our enemies? How can flesh and blood endure
it? Well, it should be endured: and many reasons there are to induce us to so
Christian an office.

The first is; The forgiveness of our own sins. Whereof thus says our
Savior, Luke 6.37. Forgive, and you shall be forgiven. Pet. de Palu. sermon.
aestiu. en. nr. in Dom. 22. Trin.
Ideo libenter debemus dimittere paruum, vt Deus dimittat nobis magnum; we
ought willingly to forgive unto our neighbor a small matter, that God may
forgive us our great offenses. Look what grace and indulgence we show unto our
neighbors, the like will God show unto us. What else is said, Luke 6.38? With
what measure you mete, with the same shall it be measured to you again.
Whereof I cannot give a plainer exposition than in our Saviors words, Matthew.
6.14, 15. If ye do forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will
also forgive you. But if ye do not forgive men their trespasses, no more will
your Father forgive you your trespasses.

A second reason why we should forgive our enemies, is, that when we make our
prayers unto God, we our selves may be heard. For God hears not the prayers
of such as do abide in rancour, and will not forgive their enemies. It is well
said of an Augustine.
Ancient: Qui non vult dimittere fratri suo, non speret orationis effectum.
Whosoever he be that will not forgive his brother, let him not hope for any
good success in his prayer. Ambros.
Another says: Si iniuriam non dimittis, quae tibi facta est; orationem pro te
non facis, sed maledictionem super te inducis. If thou forgive not the injury
which thy neighbor has done thee, when thou prayest, thou make not any
prayer for thy self, but do bring a malediction, or curse, upon thy self.

The most absolute and excellent platform of prayer, that ever was made, and
is by the maker thereof, our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, commended unto us
for our daily use, confirms this point unto us. The fifth petition therein,
is, that God would be pleased to forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them
that trespass against us. Wherefore, as in all sincerity we desire our selves
to be looked upon with the eyes of grace and mercy, from heaven, without any
fraud, or hollownesse, or dissimulation in the Lord: so are we taught by that
clause, our selves to deal with others; so truly, so honestly, so heartily, so
sincerely, and unfeignedly forgiving ever, as we may boldly say, So Lord, do
thou to me, as I to others. Now if these hearts of ours be so sturdy and
strong in their corruption, as that they will not relent, and yield to forgive
such as have trespassed against us, how can we look that our prayers should
take effect?

A third reason, why we should forgive our enemies, is, that our good works
may be acceptable unto God. Let a man every day do as many good works, as
there are Stars in Heaven; yet as long as in heart he bears hatred to his
enemy, God will not accept any one of them. Munus non acceptatur, nisi ante
discordia ab animo pellatur, says Gregory; thy gift is no ways acceptable
unto God, unless thy heart be first freed from discord. Let no man circumuent
himself, seduce himself, deceive himself. August sermon. 5. de S. Stephino.
Whosoever hates but one man in the whole world, wha^soeuer he offers to God
in Good works, all will be lost. Witness S. Paul, 1 Cor. 13.3. Though I feed
the poor with all my goods, and though I give my body, that I be burned, and
have not love, it profits me nothing. If then we would have our good works
pleasing unto God, we must be reconciled to our neighbors. Our blessed
Savior Jesus Christ so advises us, Matthew. 5.24. Go thy way, first be
reconciled to thy brother, then come and offer thy gift.

A fourth reason, why we should forgive our enemies, is, that our souls may
live: for by hatred and rancour, we slay our souls. Saint John Epist. 1.
Chap. 3. verse. 15. auoweth it; that he whosoever hates his brother, is a
manslayer. Homicida est, scilicet propriae animae, says Pet. de Pal. vbi
supra.
one, he is a murderer of his own soul. An exposition not absolutely to be
disallowed, for as much as it follows in the same verse; Ye know that no
manslayer has eternal life abiding in him. The life of the soul is love;
therefore he that loves not, is dead. So says the same blessed Apostle, Ep.
1. Chap. 3. verse. 14. He that loves not his brother, abides in death. And
greater is the damage by the loss of one soul, than of a thousand bodies.
The whole world in respect of one soul, is not to be esteemed. This is proved
by our Saviors question, Mark. 8.36. What shall it profit a man, though he
should win the whole world, if he lose his own soul?

A fifth reason why we should love our enemies, is the rejoicing of Saints and
Angels. To love our enemies is an infallible sign of our conversion. Now we
know by Luke 15.7. that there shall be joy in Heaven for one sinner that
conuerteth: and verse. the 10. That there is joy in the presence of the Angels
of God for one sinner that conuerteth.

Thus whether we respect the rejoicing of Saints and Angels; or the life of our
souls; or the acceptance of our good works; or the fruit of our prayers; or
the forgiveness of our sins; we must love our enemies: after S. Stephen his
example, Act. 7.60. Lord lay not this sin to their charge: after S. Paul his
example, 1 Cor. 4.12, 13. We are reviled, and yet we bless: we are persecuted,
and suffer it: we are evil spoken of, and we pray: after Christ's example, Luke
23.34. Father forgive them, for they know not what they do. Add hereto
Christ's Commandment, Mat. 5.44. Love your enemies; bless them that curse you;
do good to them that hate you; and pray for them that hurt you and persecute
you. Leave ye vengeance to the God of vengeance; so shall ye be the undoubted
children of your heavenly Father. And thus far of the second use, which was
to admonish us, not to intermeddle in the Lords office of executing
reuengement. A third follows.

Is it true? Is it proper to the Lord to execute vengeance upon the wicked for
their sins? Here then in the third place is a treasury of comfort and of
terror: of comfort to the godly, of terror to the wicked. For though the Lord
do use the wicked to correct the godly; yet will he in due time overthrow the
wicked with a large measure of his judgments, and free the godly. Gods holy
practice in this kind, must be hereof a warrant unto us.

The Israelites were kept in thraldom and bondage many years by the
Egyptians. The Egyptians, they were but the weapons of Gods wrath, wherewith
he afflicted his people. They were Gods weapons. Were they therefore to escape
unpunished? No. Witness those ten great plagues which at length God wrought
upon them, and their fearful overthrow in the red Sea, at large set down in
the book of Exodus, from the seventh Chapter to the fourteenth. This was it
which God said to Abraham, Genesis 15. verse. 13, 14. Know for a surety, that thy
seed shall be a stranger in a land that is not theirs, four hundred years,
and shall serve them; notwithstanding the Nation whom they shall serve will I
judge.

Ahab, the most wicked of the Kings of Israel, who sold himself to work
wickedness in the sight of the Lord, and his accursed wise Iezebel, were Gods
instruments to afflict Naboth with the loss of his life and vineyard. Ahab and
Iezebel were Gods instruments: were they therefore to escape unpunished? No.
Witness both their ends. The end of Ahab, recorded 1 King. 22.38. In the place
where dogs licked the blood of Naboth, did dogs lick the blood of Ahab also.
And the end of Iezebel registered 2 King. 9.35. She was eaten with dogs, all
saving her skull, her feet, and the palms of her hands.

It w s a part of Daniel his afflictions, to be cast into the den of Lions; his
accusers unto Darius were the instruments of this his affliction. These his
accusers were the Lords instruments for this business. Were they therefore to
escape unpunished? No. Their fearful end is set down, Dan. 6.24. By the
commandment of King Darius, they with their wives and children were cast into
the den of Lions; the Lions had the mastery of them, and brake all their bones
in pieces, ere ever they came to the ground of the den.

Here might I recall to your remembrances, other judgments of God of this
quality, written down in the register of Gods works, his holy word. How and
what he rendered to Haman, to Se^nacherib, to Ioachim, to the Ammonites, to the
Chaldeans, and other wicked worldings for their hard measure offered to the
godly: though they were therein Gods instruments. But I must hasten; and the
aforementioned instances of the Egyptians, of Ahab, and his wife Iezebel, and
of Daniels accusers, are sufficient to work terror to the wicked, and to the
godly comfort: and to assure us, when the Lord shall show himself from Heaven
with his holy Angels in flaming fire, that then to the wicked, whose behavior
to the godly has been proud and dispiteous, he will render vengeance and
punish them with everlasting perdition. Thus far of the first circumstance
and doctrine thereupon.

The second circumstance is the punishment, I will send a fire] By fire in this
place, as verse. 4, 7, 10. learned Expositors do understand, not so much a
natural fire, as a figurative fire. For in the name of fire, they understand
the sword, pestilence and famine, quodlibet genus consumptionis, every kind of
consumption; quamlibet speciem excidij, every kind of destruction; be it hail,
or thunder, or sickness, or any other of Gods messengers. So large is the
signification of fire taken figuratively. The Doctrine arising hence is this;
The fire ( whether natural, or figurative) that is, the fire and all other
creatures are at the Lords commandment, to be employed by him in the
punishment of the wicked.

This Doctrine has heretofore been commended and confirmed unto you.

The use of it is, to teach us how to behave our selves at such times as God
shall visit us with his rod of corrections: how to carry our selves in all our
afflictions. We must not so much look to the instruments, as to the Lord that
smites by them. If the fire, or water, or any other of Gods creatures shall at
any time rage, and prevail against us, we must remember that it is God that
sends them to work his holy will upon us. Here he sent a fire upon Teman and
upon Bozrah to devour her palaces. For thus says the Lord: I will send a fire
upon Teman, and it shall devour the palaces of Bozrah.

Here have you the third circumstance; the circumstance of the punished: Teman
and the palaces of Bozrah. Teman was the Metropolitan, the chief City of
Idumaea, so named from Teman, who was son of Eliphaz, the son of Esau, Genesis 36.
10, 11. Renowned and famous was Teman for her wisdom; witness the Prophecy
of Obadiah, verse. 8.9. and Ierem. 49.7. whereby it is credible, she omitted no
opportunity, no means to make her self strong by bulwarks and fortresses,
against whatsoever incursion or siege of enemies. Yet could she not hereby be
secured against the day of Gods visitation; when for the complement of her
sins, God should lay his heavy rod upon her. What the wit of man could invent
for safety, no doubt but Teman had it. But what can man's wit do against the
Almighty? Behold here in my Text, thus says the Almighty: I will send a fire
upon Teman. And can all the water of the huge Ocean quench the fire of the
Almighty?

This resolution of the Lord for the overthrow of Teman, is excellently set
down by the Prophet Obadiah, verse. 8, 9, 10. Shall not I in that day, says
the Lord, even destroy the wise men out of Edom, and understanding from the
mount of Esau? And thy strong men, O Teman, shall be afraid, because every one
of the mount of Esau shall be cut off by slaughter. For thy cruelty against
thy brother Jacob, shame shall cover thee, and thou shall be cut off for ever.
The Prophet Jeremy to this purpose, Chap. 49.7. brings in the Lord of hosts
thus questioning with Edom: Is wisdom no more in Teman? Is counsel perished
from their children? Is their wisdom vanished? As if he had said, the wisdom
of Teman is become foolishness; their counsel is nothing worth. And why? But
because, as my Text says, God will send a fire upon Teman. The doctrine hence
arising is: No wisdom, no counsel, no humane invention can save that City
which God will have destroyed.

The reason hereof is; because there is no strength, but of God and from God.
The use is, to teach us never to trust in any worldly help, but so to use all
good means of our desense, that still we rely upon the Lord for strength and
success thereby.

Again, this fire of the Lord is sent to devour the palaces of Bozrah. This
Bozrah was also a Metropolitan and chief City, seated in the confines of the
lands of Edom and Moab: and therefore in holy writ it is sometime attributed to
Edom, sometime to Moab, here to Edom. Prodigious was the fear, and great the
pride of Bozrahs heart. She dwelt in the clefts of the rock, and kept the
height of the his^. But was she thereby safe? No. For thus says the Lord unto
her, Ierem. 49.16. Though thou should make thy nest as high as the Eagle, I
will bring thee down from thence. This judgment of the Lord against Bozrah,
is denounced with an Ecce of admiration, verse. 22. Behold, he (the Lord) shall
come up, and fly as the Eagle, and spread his wings over Bozrah, and at that
day shall the heart of the strong men of Edom be as the heart of a woman in
travel. Will you have it confirmed by an oath? Then look back to the 13.
verse, I swear by my self, says the Lord, that Bozrah shall be waste, and
for a r^proach, and a desolation, and a curse; and all the Cities thereof shall
be a perpetual desolation. Thus elegantly is Gods fearful judgment against
Bozrah described by the Prophet Jeremy; which our Prophet Amos thus delivers,
A fire shall devour the palaces of Bozrah.

Bozrah, great Bozrah, she who dwelt in the clefts of the rock, and kept the
height of the hill, must she be devoured by fire from the Lord? Must she
become a reproach, a desolation, a curse, a vastity? We may hence take this
Doctrine: It is not the situation of a City upon rock, or hill, that can be a
safeguard to it, if Gods unappeasable anger break out against it for her sins.

The use of this doctrine is the same with the former; even to teach us now,
and at all other times, to put our trust only in the Name of the Lord, who has
made Heaven and Earth. Its neither wit, nor wisdom, nor strength, nor height
of Teman, or of Bozrah, or of all the best defensed Cities in the world, that
can save us in the day of visitation. Wherefore ^et our song be as David's was,
Psalm. 18.2. The Lord is our rock, and our fortress; he that delivers us;
our God, and our strength; in him will we trust: our shield; the horn also of
our salvation, and our refuge.

Thirdly, in that the Lord sends his fire into the palaces of Bozrah to
devour them, we may learn this Doctrine: God depriueth us of a great
blessing, when he takes from us our dwelling houses.

A truth experimentally made good unto us by the great commodity or contentment
that comes to every one of us, by our dwelling houses. The use is, to teach
us, 1. To be humbled before Almighty God, whenever our dwelling houses are
taken from us. 2. Since we peaceably enjoy our dwelling houses, to use them for
the furtherance of Gods glory. 3. To praise God day by day for the comfortable
use we have of our dwelling houses. Thus is my Exposition of the Prophecy
against Edom ended.

THE Nineteenth Lecture.
AMOS 1.13, 14, 15. Thus says the Lord, For three transgressions of the
children of Ammon, and for four, I will not turn to it, because they have
ripped up the women with child of Gilead, that they might enlarge their border.

Therefore will I kindle a fire in the wall of Rabbah, and it shall deu^ure the
palaces thereof, with shouting in the day of battle, and with a tempest in the
day of the while wind.

And their King shall go into captivity, he and his Princes together, says
the Lord.


THis blessed Prophet of Almighty God, in this his prophecy against the
Ammonites, observes the same order, as he has done in two precedent
predictions, the one against the Syrians, verse the third, fourth, and fifth,
the other against the Philistines, verse the sixth, seventh, and eighth. As in
those, so in this are three parts: 1 A preface, Thus says the Lord. 2 A
prophecy, For three transgressions, etc. 3 A conclusion, verse the fifteenth,
Says the Lord.


The Prophecy consists of four parts: 1 A general accusation of the
Ammonites; who are here noted as reproueable for many sins: For three
transgressions of the children of Ammon, and for four. 2 God his protestation
against them for their sins; I will not turn to it. 3 A particular
declaration of one sin, which with others procured this Prophecy. This sin
was the sin of cruelty, expressed in these words: Because they have ripped up
the women with child of Gilead: and amplified by the end of so foul a fact:
That they might enlarge their borders. 4 A denuntiation of judgment, which was
to come upon them deservedly for their sins, verse. 14. and 15. This judgment
is set down,


First in a generality, verse. 14. Therefore will I kindle a fire in the wall of
Rabbah, and it shall devour the palaces thereof.

Secondly with some circumstances: as, that it should be full of terror, and
speedy. Full of terror in these words; With shouting in the day of battle.
Speedy in the words following: With a tempest in the day of the whirlewind.

This judgment is further amplified by the extent of it. It was to fall upon,
not only the meaner sort of the people, but upon the Nobility also; yea, and
upon the King himself. Which is plain by the 15. verse; Their King shall go
into captivity, be and his Princes together.

These are the branches and parts of this Prophecy. I return to the Preface.

Thus says the Lord] Jehovah. This great and most honorable name of God we
have many times met with. We have heard what the Cabalists and Rabbines, out
of their too much curiosity have thought of it. With them it is nomen (...), a
name not to be pronounced, not to be taken within our polluted lips. They
call it Tetragrammaton, a name in Hebrew of four letters; of four letters
(...), by an excellence; because the name of God Alsted. Lex. Theol. cap. 2.
page 76. Mi^um certe est, q^odomnes gentes tacito cons^nsu praecipuum Dei nomen
quat^or medo lit^is en^ne^ent. Fluxiff^autem id existimatur e nomine Jehovah,
quod ipsum est (...). Latini dicunt Deus, Graeci (...), Germani GOT, Aegyptu
(...), vel (...), Persae (...), Magi Orsi, Habraei (...), Arabes (...), G^lli
Dieu, Jtali Idio, Hispani Dios Dalmati^ sieve Illyricis est Bogi, Boiemi^ Bohu,
Mabum tanis Abgd, Gentibus in nou^ mundo repe^tis Zimi, Chaldaeu and Syris
(...). Certe hoc fine s^^ g^lari Dei O. M. prouident^a factum n^n est. Ego
existimo illo significari, nomen Dei in quatuor mundi plagis decantandum esse.
in all tongues and languages generally consists of four letters. More they
speak of it. You have heard it before.

Iehouah] Deuteronomy. 10 17.
God of Gods, and Lord of Lords, a God Eccles. 43.29.
most wonderful; very Deuteronomy. 10.17.
great, mighty, and terrible: a God that Eccles. 43.31.
cannot either be conceived in thought, or expressed by word: Aug. Soliloq.
cap. 24.
of whom all the Angels in heaven do stand in fear; whom all dominations and
Revel. 5.11.
thrones do adore; at whose presence all powers do shake. A God in greatness
infinite; in August. meditat. c. 21.
goodness sovereign; in wis^ome wonderful; in power Almighty; in coursailes
terrible; in judgments righteous; in cogitations secret; in works holy; in
mercy rich; in promise true; always the same; eternal, everlasting, immortal,
unchangeable. Such is the Lord, from whom our Prophet Amos here deriueth
authority to his Prophecy; Thus says the Lord.

Has the Lord said, and shall he not do accordingly? has he spoken it, and
shall he not accomplish it? Balaam confesses unto Balak, Number. 23.19. God is
not as man, that he should lie; nor as the son of man that he should repent.
Indeed says Samuel, 1 Samuel 15.29. The strength of Israel will not lie, nor
repent; for he is not as man that he should repent. All his words, yea all the
tittl^s of his words, are Yea, and Amen. Verily says our Savior, Matthew. 5 18.
Heaven and earth shall perish, before one jot or one tittle of Gods word shall
^scape unfulfilled.

Thus says the Lord] Amos is here a pattern to us, that are Preachers of the
word of salvation. We must ever come unto you, with Thus says the Lord, in
our mouths; we may not speak either the imaginations of our own brains, or
the vain persuasions of our own hearts. We must sincerely preach unto you
Gods gracious word, without all corruption, or deprauing of the same. This is
it whereto S. Peter exhorts us, 1 Epist. cha. 4.11. If any man speak, let
him speak as the word of God. For if we, yea if an Angel from heaven, shall
preach otherwise unto you, than from the Lords own mouth, speaking in his holy
Word, (...): Let him be acccursed; let him be had in execration.

This note, beloved, does also concern you, that are the auditors and hearers
of Gods word. For if we, the Preachers thereof, must always come unto you,
with Thus says the Lord, then are you to hear us with reverence and
attention. And this for the authority of him that speaks. It is not you that
speak, says our Savior Jesus Christ, to his blessed Apostles, Matthew. 10.20.
but the Spirit of your Father which speaks in you. And again, Luke 10.16. He
that hears you, hears me. S. Paul commends the Thessalonians, 1 Epist.
chap. 2.13. for that when they received of the Apostles of Christ, the word of
the preaching of God, they received it not as the word of men, but as it was
indeed, as the word of God. Well therefore did S. James chap. 1.21. thus to
exhort the Jews; Receive with meekness the word that is grafted in you,
which is able to save your souls.

God spoke unto Israel in a vision by night, Genesis 46.2. and said, Jacob, Jacob.
Jacob answered, I am here. He was pressed and ready with all reverent attention
to hear what his God should say unto him, and to follow the same with all
faithful obedience. Such readiness well becomes every child of God, even
at this day in the Church where God speaks. Thus must he think within
himself: It is thine ordinance, O Lord, by thy word preached, to instruct me
concerning thy holy will: I am here Lord, in all humble fear, to hear thy
blessed pleasure, what this day it shall please thee to put in the mouth of the
Preacher to deliver unto me: I am here, speak on Lord, thy servant hears.

If a Prince, or some great man of this world, shall speak unto you, you will
attend and give ear unto him with your best diligence: how much more then
ought ye so to do, when the King of Heaven, and Lord of the earth, calls
upon you by his ministers? Thus far by occasion of the preface, Thus says
the Lord.

For three transgressions of the children of Ammon, and for foure] Whether
these children of Ammon were distinguished from the Ammonites, as Drusius would
prove, 2 Chronicles. 20.1. and as R. David anoweth, filii Ammon unsquam vocantur
Ammonitae, the children of Ammon are no where called Ammonites, I hold it
needless to dispute in this place. It is out of doubt, that these children of
Ammon, or Ammonites, did lincally descend from Ben-ammi, who was Lots son,
begotten in incest upon his younger daughter, Genesis 19.38. Lot was Abraham's
brothers son, Genesis 14.12. Whereby it is evident, that the posterity of them
both, the children of Israel, and the children of Ammon, the Israelites, and
the Ammonites, were linked together by affinity, and alliance. The more to
blame were those Ammonites, without all respect of kindred, to exercise such
cruelty as they did against the Israelites; for which cause Almighty God here
sent his blessed Prophet, to thunder out his threats against them.

For three transgressions of the children of Ammon, and for foure] In the front
of this Prophecy you have the general accusation of these children of Ammon:
For three transgressions, and for foure] Three of these transgressions, if you
will believe Albertus Magnus, are Cruelty, Anarice, and persecution; the fourth
is, an obstinate pertinacie, a constant stubbornness, ever to dwell in those
sins. Again, three of these transgressions, are a coveting of other men's
goods, an unlawful seeking for those things that are not our own, and a
hardness of heart to retain them so sought for: the fourth is, the insatiable
desire of a covetous man.

Many are the expositions of the learned upon these words, three and four
transgressions. The most natural, proper, and significant, I take to be, if by
three and four, a finite and certain number, you understand a number infinite
and uncertain. God as often as he will forgiueth, though we sin ten thousand
times. It is but a custom of the Scripture thus to speak. God waits for us
twice and thrice, that is, a long time, to see if we will return from our
evil ways unto repentance: but the fourth time, that is, at length, when he
sees us persist in our impenitency, he reproves us, casts us away, and
leaves us in our sins. Thus have you the general accusation of the children
of Ammon, for their many sins, for which the Lords protestation against them
follows.

I will not turn to it] These words are diversely rendered by expositors: by the
author of the vulgar Latin, and by Gualter, Non conuertam eum, I will not
turn the Ammonite; that is, I will not recall the children of Ammon to the
right way; they shall run on to their own perdition. By Calvin, Non ero ei
propitius, I will not be favorable to the Ammonites. By Mercer, Non parcam et,
I will not spare the Ammonites. According to their deserts so shall it be unto
them. By Iunius, Non auertam istud, I will not turn away the punishment
wherewith I have resolved to punish them. I am the Lord, I am not changed.

The sum is; if the Ammonites had offended but once, or a second time, I
would have been favorable to them, and would have recald them into the right
way, that so they might be converted, and esc^pe my punishments: but now
whereas they do daily heap transgression upon transgr^ssion, and make no end
of sinning, I have hardened my face against them, and will not suffer them to be
converted; but indurate and obstinate as they are, I will utterly destroy them.
For three transgressions of the children of Ammon, and for four, I will not
turn to it] Here are you to be remembered of a doctrine, sundry times
heretofore commended to your Christian considerations; Many sins do pluck
down from heaven the most certain wrath and vengeance of God upon the sinners.

God is of pure eyes, and beholds not iniquity. He has laid righteousness
to the rule, and weighed his justice in a balance. The sentence is passed
forth, and must stand uncontrollable, even as long as the Sun and Moon:
Tribulation and anguish upon every soul that does evil. The soul that
sins it shall be punished. God makes it good by an oath, Deuteronomy. 3.2.41. That
he will whet his glittering sword, and his hand shall take hold on judgment,
to execute vengeance for sin. His soul hates and abhors sin; his law
curses and condemns sin; his hand smites and scourges sin. Sin was his
motive to cast down Angels into Hell; to thrust Adam out of Paradise; to turn
cities into ashes; to ruinate nations; to torment his own bowels in the
similitude of sinful flesh. Because of sin he drowned the old world; and
because of sin ere long will burn this. Thus do many sins pluck, etc.

One use of this doctrine is, to teach us heedfulnesse in all our ways; that
we do not by our many sins provoke Almighty God to high displeasure.

A second use is, to move us to a serious contemplation of the wonderful
patience of Almighty God, who did so graciously forbear these children of
Ammon, till by three and four transgressions, by their many sins they provoked
him to indignation. These things I have heretofore labored to lay unto your
hearts.

Now therefore I proceed to the third part of this Prophecy; wherein you have
the declaration of that grievous sin, by which the children of Ammon so
highly offended. This their sin was the sin of cruelty; expressed in these
words; Because they have ripped up the women with child of Gilead; and amplified
by the end of so foul a fact; That they might enlarge their border.

They have ripped up women with child of Gilead; that, etc.] Women with child;
the word in the original is (...) and is Pagnin. in (...). Mercer Calvin.
rendered by some, mountains; by some, cities fortified, and high as
mountains: as if the meaning were, either that the Ammonites had made for
themselves a passage into the territories of the Gileadites, through the
mountains that lay between them; (a thing not impossible: for we read of
Annibal, that Liuius lib. 21.
he with fire and vinegar made way through a great rock upon the Alps, for
his army, and carriage,) or that the Ammonites had vanquished and subdued the
fortified cities of the Gilead^^^, to the enlarging of their borders. But I
retain our English translation; women with child; as very agreeable to the
Hebrew (...).

They have ripped up women with childe] Immane facinus: surely this was an
outrageous cruelty: yet such as has its parallel: we read of the like in 2
King. 8.12. Elizaus telling Hazael King of Syria, of the evil that he should
do the children of Israel, says; Their young men thou shall slay with the
sword, and shall dash their infants against the stones, and rent in pieces
their women with child. The like cruelty did Menahem King of Israel exercise
against the inhabitants of the city Tiphsah, and her borderers, even unto
Thirtz^, as appears, 2 King. 15.16. He ripped up all their women with child.
Hoseah also, chap. 14.1. thus prophesies against Samaria; Samaria shall be
desolate, for she has rebelled against her God: they shall fall by the sword;
their infants shall be dashed in pieces, and their women with child shall be
ripped. You see (dearly beloved) that this outrageous cruelty of ripping up
women with child, mentioned in my text, was not altogether unusual. The women
upon whom this cruelty was practiced, are here said to have been of Gilead.

Of this land of Gilead I have heretofore largely spoken in my seventh Lecture
upon this prophecy, occasioned by the 3. ver. of this chapter, where it is
objected to the Syrians of Damascus, that they threshed Gilead with threshing
instruments of iron. Then I showed, that the land of Gilead was possessed by
the Reubenites, Gadites, and half tribe of Manasseh, Number. 32.33. Whereby it is
plain, that the Gileadites were Israelites. Here then these women, with whom
the Ammonites dealt so barbarously, as to rip them up, when they were great
with child, were of Jacobs posterity: they were Jsraelites, the lot and
portion of Gods own inheritance. For so prodigious a cruelty, we see Almighty
God is here resolved to be avenged on the children of Ammon. The doctrine
arising hence is this; Cruelty is a sin very hateful unto God.

This doctrine I have heretofore out of this place confirmed unto you: it is
also plainly grounded upon my text, and therefore I pass it over.

The use of it is to work in us the love of clemency and mercifulness. You
may be many ways guilty of cruelty. If you fight with, or beat your neighbor,
or maime his body, Leuit. 24.19, 20. If by any means you procure the death of
your neighbor, Genesis 4.8. If you use your neighbor discourteously, or make him
your laughing stock, or taunting recreation, Leuit. 19.14. If you use any of
Gods creatures hardly, Deuteronomy. 22.6. If you do wrong to strangers, Exodus 22.21.
If you molest fatherless children, and widows, Exodus 22.22. If you be too
severe in punishing your servants, or children, Deuteronomy. 25.3. If you wrong the
poor, either by lending him your money upon Usury, Exodus 22.25. or by not
paying him his hire, Deuteronomy. 24.14. or by not restoring his pledge, Exodus 22.26.
or by withdrawing your corn from him, Pro. 11.26. If you offend but in the
least of these, your are guilty of cruelty, and do transgress Gods holy
commandments, the sixth commandment, wherein you are forbidden to do murder.

Wherefore (beloved in the Lord) put you on the tender bowels of mercy and
compassion: let cruelty be far from you. My exhortation unto you, and
conclusion of this point, shall be in the words of S. Paul, Coloss. 3.12, 13.
Now as the elect of God, holy and beloved, put on tender mercy, kindness,
humbleness of mind, meekness, long suffering; forbearing one another, and
forgiving one another, if any man have a quarrel to another: as Christ forgave
you, even so do ye.

These words of my text; They have ripped up women with child of Gilead, do
yield us another profitable doctrine. They, that is, the children of Ammon,
professed enemies to God and godliness, have raged against the Gileadites,
Jacobs posterity, the lot and portion of Gods inheritance, even to the ripping
up of their women with child. The doctrine is; God often humbles his chosen
children under the rod of the wicked.

This truth appears in Lot, sore pressed upon by the Sodomites, Genesis 19.9. in
the Israelites, hardly dealt with by the Egyptians, Exodus 1.11. in the seventy
brethren, sons of Ierubbaal, persecuted by Abimelech, most of them to the
death, Judge. 9.5. in Jeremy twice evil entreated, first beaten and put in the
stocks by Pashure, Ierem. 20.2. and a second time beaten and imprisoned by
Zedechias his Nobles, chap. 37.15. in the three children, cast into the fiery
furnace by Nabuchodonosor, Dan. 3.21.

Many like examples might be extracted out of Gods holy reg ster for proof of
this point: which also may be made further to appear unto you, in those bloody
persecutions after Christ his death, by the Roman Emperors, who devised
strange torments to keep down religion, and religious professors, men and
women. They plucked off their skins quick: they beared out their eyes with
wimbles: they broyled them alive on gredirons: they scalded them in boiling
liquors: they enclosed them in barrels, through which great nails were driven,
and therein they tumbled them down mountains, till their own blood so
cruelly drawn out, had stifled and choked them in the barrels: women's breasts
were seared off with burning irons, their bodies were rent, and their joints
racked.

Sundry other, and as strange kinds of torments were endured by the faithful
in the time of the ten first persecutions in the primitive Church. This is it
which S. Peter has Epist. 1. chap. 4. verse. 17. The time is come that
judgment must begin at the house of God. Yet let not the faithful hereat be
discouraged. It is for their good. Job, an upright and a just man, one that
feared God, and eschewed evil, upon his experience of the afflictions which he
endured under the rod of Gods correction, chap. 5.17. says, Behold, blessed is
the man whom God corrects: therefore refuse not thou the chastening of the
Almighty. For he makes the wound, and binds it up; he smites, and his hands
make whole. And thus from my doctrine, I proceed to the uses. I will but point
at them.

Is it true (beloved?) Does God often humble his chosen children under the rod
of the wicked? It may first show us, how great Gods anger is for sin, that he
punishes it so severely even in his dearest children, and thereby may work in
us a loathing, hatred, and detestation of sin. Never more need than now, to
smite our breasts, and pray with the Publicane, O God, be merciful unto us
sinners.

Secondly, it may teach us not to measure the favor of God toward our selves
or others, by the adversities or crosses of this life. Here we see that the
women of Gilead of the race of Israel Gods own lot and inheritance, were most
barbarously and cruelly ripped up by the Ammonites. Yet are we not to doubt, but
that Gods favor was great toward them, even in this severe punishment.

Thirdly, it may make us power out our souls in thankfulness before Almighty
God for our present estate and condition. It is not with us as in the days of
Gilead, we are not threshed with threshing instruments of iron; our women with
child are not ripped up. Our days are the days of peace; our King is a King of
peace. Peace is in our ports, peace in all our borders, and peace within our
walls. Psalm. 144.12.
Our sons do grow up as y^ung plants; our daughters are as the polished
corners of the temple. Our garners are full and plenteous with all manner of
store. Our sheep bring forth thousands and ten thousands. Our oxen are strong
to labor. Here is no invasion, no leading into captivity, no complaining in
our streets.

Are not the people happy that are in such a case? Yes says the Psalmist,
Psalm. 144.15. Happy are the people that are in such a case. The case you see is
ours. The God of peace, which makes an Psalm. 46.10.
end of war in all the world, and breaks the bow, and knappeth the spears
asunder, and burns the chariots with fire, he does now protect us from war,
and slaughter. Quid rependemus? What shall we render unto the Lord, for all his
benefits toward us? We will take the cup of salvation, and praise his holy
name. O our souls, praise the Lord; for he only makes us to dwell in
safety. Thus far of the cruel fact of the Ammonites, in ripping up the
women with child of Gilead. This their fact is amplified by the end, wherefore
they did it; They have ripped up the women with child of Gilead, that they might
enlarge their border.

That they might enlarge their border? What could such cruelty against
innocent and harmless women, further them to the attaining of such an end?
Very much. For hereby it might come to pass, that there should not be any
offspring of the Gileadites to inherit and poss^sse the land; so might the
land without any resistance become the possession of the Ammonites.

This is by a prophetical contestation touched, Ier. 49.1. Unto the children
of Ammon thus says the Lord; Has Israel no sons? or has he no heirs? Why
then h^th their King possessed Gad; and his people dwelt in his Cities? So
might this our Prophet Amos here contest, and make complaint: Has Gilead no
sons? Has Gilead no heirs? Why then have the Ammonites possessed Gilead?
Why have they dwelt in the cities of Gilead? The answer is plain out of my
Text; The Ammonites have ripped up the wom^n with child of Gilead, they have
left them no sons, no heirs. And so they possessed the land of Gilead; so
have they enlarged their borders. We see now the meaning of our Prophet: He
obiecteth to the Ammonites, not only that they did cruelly rip up the women
with child in Gilead, but also, that they did it for this end, that they might
enlarge their borders. The Doctrine is, That nation, which is not content with
her own borders, but inuadeth her neighbor countries, sins grievously.

The Ethnickes of old, taught but in Natures school, did hold it for a wicked
act, detestable, and inexpiable, to remove a neighbors land-marke^. In which
respect the old Romans worshipped Terminus for a God. Terminus which signifies
a bound, limit, mere, buttle, or land-marke, was in their account a God, God
of their bounds, limits, or marks of their several fields, meddowes, and
pastures; and such a God, as should not give place to Jupiter himself. To this
Terminus they held a feast in February, and called it Terminalia, as Austine
witnesses in his books De Ciuitate Dei, Lib. 5. c. 21. and lib. 7. c. 7. Now
if the heathenish, blind, and superstitious Romans, trained up in Natures
school, did so highly esteem of the preservation and maintenance of bounds and
limits: how are we trained up in the school of Grace, to esteem thereof? In
the school of Grace a law is given, Deuteronomy. 19.14. Thou shall not remove thy
neighbors mark. To obey this law we are charged upon a curse, Deuteronomy. 27.17.
Cursed be he that remoueth his neighbors mark. It is Gods own ordinance,
that bounds, and limits, and marks are appointed to every man's possessions.
This may be gathered out of Deuteronomy. 32.8. The most high [God,] divided to the
nations their inheritances: he separated the sons of men: he did set the
bounds of nations. The meaning is, the Lord pitched the bounds o^ Kingdoms, at
such time as it pleased him, that the nations should be divided asunder. Yet
we see how the covetous ambition, and insatiable desire of some Princes in the
world, have put all out of order, how there is nothing so holy, that can stay
them from incroaching upon the bounds of their neighbors and next borderers.

Sennacherib King of Assyria was a stout offended in this kind. He boasted of
his invasions and victories upon his neighbor countries. But that other
Princes may take example by him, he was made a peculiar example of divine
judgment. For as he trangressed the bounds of his neighbor Princes to their
overthrow, so did his own sons transgress the bounds of nature, to the loss
of his their fathers life. As it appears by Esai. 37.38. As Sennacherib was
in the temple worshipping Nisroch his God, Adramelech and Sharezer, his sons,
slew him with the sword. And by my Text you see, what judgments God threatens
to the Ammonites, for their unlawful practices to enlarge their borders. So my
doctrine is established.

The nation that is not content with her own borders, but inuadeth her
neighbor countries, sins grievously. The use of this Doctrine may concern
us here assembled. As Princes ought to hold themselves contented with their
own bounds, so ought every private man also. God has also separated their
possessions one from another, to the end that all might live and communicate
one with another, and that there might be no confused disorder.

But (beloved in the Lord) how do we stand to this order, set by Almighty God?
Do we not seek daily to pervert it? God would have it kept most holy; but we
care not for it. Our covetousness carries us away; we would still be greater.
We join house to house, and field to field, as it is in Esai. 5 8 that we may
be placed by our selves in the midst of the earth. Were our Fathers so
ambitious? They were content with such bounds, as their ancestors left them;
but we must have them altered, if not enlarged. The diuinely-inspired David
tells us, Psalm. 37.3. that if we dwell in the land, where God has placed us, we
shall verily be fed. We should learn of S. Paul, Philip. 4 11. in whatsoever
state we are, therewith to be content. Knowing it to be true, which the same
Apostle auoweth unto Timothy, Ep. 1. chap. 6. verse. 6. that Godliness is great
gain, if we will be content with that we have. Thus much of the 13. verse.

THE Twentieth Lecture.
AMOS 1.14, 15. Therefore will I kindle a fire in the wall of Rabbah, and it
shall devour the palaces thereof, with shouting in the day of battle, and
with a tempest in the day of the whirlewinde.

And their King shall go into captivity, he and his Princes together, says
the Lord.


HEre we have the denunciation of the judgments of God against the children
of Ammon for their sins. This judgment is in the 14. verse set down, 1. In
a generality. 2. With some circumstances.

First, in a generality; Therefore will I kindle a fire in the wall of Rabbah,
and it shall devour the palaces thereof.

Secondly, with some circumstances, as that it should be full of terror, and
speedy, and of l^rge extent.

Full of terror: with shouting in the day of battle.

Speedy: with a tempest in the day of the whirlewinde.

Of large extent. For it was to fall upon, not only the meaner sort of the
people, but upon the Nobility also, yea and upon the King himself, which is
plain by the 15. verse. Their King shall go into captivity, he and his
Princes together.

First, let us weigh this judgment of God, as it is set down in a
generality, I will kindle a fire in the wall of Rabbah, and it shall devour
the palaces thereof. This judgment for substance is no other, than that which
you have heretofore heard out of this Chapter, to have been denounced from
Almighty God against the Syrians, Philistines, Tyrians, and Edomites. Against
the Syrians, verse. 4. I will send a fire into the house of Hazael, and it shall
devour the palaces of Ben-hadad. Against the Philistines, verse. 7. I will send
a fire upon the walls of Azzah, and it shall devour the palaces thereof.
Against the Tyrians, verse. 10. I will send a fire upon the walls of Tyrus, and
it shall devour the palaces thereof. Against the Edomites, verse. 12. I will
send a fire upon Teman, and it shall devour the palaces of Bozrah.

Between those denunciations, and this, you see no great difference. In those,
Thus says the Lord, I will send a fire: in this, thus; I will kindle a fire, I
will send a fire, and I will kindle a fire: the substance in both is the same.
And therefore as in those I have done, so do I in this; I commend to your
Christian and religious considerations certain circumstances.

1 Of the punisher; the Lord, I will kindle. 2 Of the punishment; by fire, A
fire. 3 Of the punished; The walls of Rabbah, and the palaces thereof.
These circumstances are in this judgment of God, as it is set down in a
generality: The first circumstance concerns the punisher, the Lord; for thus
says the Lord; I will kindle a fire. The note yields this doctrine, It is
proper to the Lord to execute vengeance upon the wicked for their sins.

This truth has been often confirmed unto you. Diverse ^e the uses of it.

1 It may lesson us to look heedfully unto our feet, that we walk not in the
way of sinners, to partake with them in their sins. Sins are not
tongue-tied, they cry aloud unto the Lord for vengeance.

2 It may admonish us not to intermeddle in the Lords office. It is his office
to execute vengeance. We therefore may not interpose our selves.

3 It may serve for a comfort to the Godly, against whom the wicked have
behaved themselves proudly and dispiteously. God in due time, for such their
behavior, will render vengeance unto them, and punish them with everlasting
perdition.

The second circumstance concerns the punishment, which is by fire: I will
kindle a fire] By fire here we are to understand, not so much a true and
natural fire, as a figurative and metaphorical fire. The sword, pestilence,
and famine; quodlibet genus consumptionis, every kind of consumption,
quaelibet species excidij, every kind of destruction, hail, water, thunder
sickness, or any other of the executioners of God his wrath for the sins of
men, may be signified by this name Fire. The Doctrine, The fire (whether
natural, or figuartiue) that is, the fire, and all other creatures, are at the
Lords Commandment, to be employed by him in the punishment of the wicked.

Of this Doctrine heretofore. The use of it is, to teach us, how to behave our
selves at such times, as God shall visit us with his rod of correction: how to
carry our selves in all our afflictions. We must not so much look to the
means, as to the Lord, that works by them. If the fire, or water, or any
other of Gods creatures shall at any time rage and prevail against us, we must
know, that God by them works his holy will upon us. Here we see, he
resolves to kindle a fire upon the wall of Rabbah, for thus says the Lord; I
will kindle a fire in the wall of Rabbah, and it shall devour the palaces
thereof.

There was a City of this name (Rabbah) in the Country of Moab called
Rabbath-Moab. So says Drusius. But the Rabbah in my Text, was a City in the
Country of the Ammonites, called, 2 Samuel 12.26. Rabbah of the children of
Ammon: where it is named the city of the kingdom. For it was their
metropolitical and chief city. In the verse following it is called the city
of waters, because it was situate near unto the river Ieboc.

The destruction here threatened to this city, is likewise denounced by two
other Prophets, Jeremy and Ezechiel. In Jeremy, chap. 49.2. Thus says the
Lord; I will cause a noise of war to be heard in Rabbah of the Ammonites, and
it shall be a desolate heap, and her daughters shall be burnt with fire.
Cry, ye daughters of Rabbah, gird you with sacke-cloth; mourn, and run to and
fro by the hedges: for their King shall go into captivity, and his Priests
and his Princes likewise. And Ezechiel, Chap. 25.5. I will make Rabbah a
dwelling place for Camels, and the Ammonites a sheep coat.

By which two places of Jeremie and Ezechiel, the meaning of my Prophet is
opened. Here in the person of God he says: I will kindle a fire in the wall of
Rabbah, and it shall devour the palaces thereof. It is, as if he had said. The
Ierem. 7.34.
voice of mirth, and the voice of gladness shall cease to be heard in Rabbah,
the noise of war shall be heard there; and I will make it a dwelling place
for Camels, a sheepe-coat, an heap of desolation.

Must Rabbah, the chief City of the Kingdom, be measured with the line of
desolation? It yields us this Doctrine, It is not the greatness of a City
that can be a safeguard unto it, if God his unappeasable wrath break out
against it, for its sins.

For confirmation of this Doctrine, I need not send you to the old world, to
behold the ruins of cities there. There may you see the city which Caine
built, ( Genesis 4.17.) and whatsoever other cities were erected between that time
and the flood, you may see them all swept away with the flood. After the flood,
you may see Sodom and Gomorrah, with other cities of that plain, overthrown
with brimstone and fire from the Lord out of Heaven, Genesis 19.24. I need not
present you with other like desolations of cities, towns, or villages, wrought
by Almighty God in the days of old.

This one chapter, and first chapter of this prophecy of Amos, yields unto us
plentiful proof for this point. Here have we seen desolation upon
desolation, not the shaking only, but the overthrow of four states, namely of
the Syrians, of the Philistines, of the Tyrians, and of the Edomites. In the
state of the Syrians, we have seen the ruins of the house of Hazael, and of
the palaces of Ben-hadad, and of Damascus, and of Bikeath-Auen, and of
Beth-eden, and of Aram, verse. 4, 5. In the state of the Philistines we have
viewed the rubbish of Azzah, and the palaces thereof, of Ashdod also, of
Ashkelon, and of Ekron, verse. 7, 8. In the state of the Tyrians, we have beheld
the waste done upon the proud City Tyrus, and her palaces; verse. 10. In the
state of the Edomites, we have considered the destruction of Teman and Bozrah,
verse. 12. All which do evidently and strongly proclaim unto us the truth of
my propounded Doctrine: namely, that, It is not the greatness of a City, that
can be a safeguard unto it, if God his unappeasable wrath break out against
it, for its sins.

One use of this Doctrine is, to lesson us, that we put not any confidence in
any worldly help: but that so we use all good means of our defense, that
still we rely upon the Lord, for strength and success thereby.

A second use is, to put us in mind of the fearful punishments which God
lays upon men for sin. He deuoureth their Cities, throws down their
strong holds, and spares them not. Has God dealt thus with strong Cities, and
shall poor villages escape?

If the secure worldling shall here object, that our days are the days of
peace, that our King is a King of peace, that peace is in all our ports, in all
our quarters, in all our dwelling places; and that therefore there is no need
to fear the subversion either of our cities, or of our villages: to such I
must answer in the Prophet Esayes words, Chap. 48.22. There is Esa. 57.21.
no peace to the wicked, says the Lord. No peace to the wicked. For though
God, the Romans 15.33.
God of peace, which Psalm. 46.9.
makes an end of war in all the world, and breaks the bow, and knappeth
the spear asunder, and burns the chariots with fire, does now protect us
from foreign invasion and hostility, yet being Amos 3.13.
Deus exercituum, a God of hosts, he has armies of another kind at command,
to work the sudden subversion and overthrow of all our dwellings.

Hereof has God made good proof in these our days. To say nothing of his
arrow of pestilence, which is grandis terror mortalium, the great terror of
men, as being Deaths chief Pursuiuant and Sumner, who in Job 18.14. is called
Rex Terrorum, the King of fears; to say nothing of this arrow, how it has for
these This Sermon was preached Ann. Dom. 1610. Ian. 13.
seven years roued up and down, to marks far and near, from city to
village, and from village to city, to the killing of many thousands of our
brethren and sisters, and yet is not put up into the quiver: to say nothing now
of this arrow, because it strikes men's persons, and spares their houses: will
you be pleased to look back upon those swellings of waters, which of late,
Ann. Chr. 1607.
within these four years, brake out into the bosom of the firm land in
diverse parts of this Realm? Then must you acknowledge with me, that God has
an army of waters, whereby at his pleasure he can overthrow our dwelling
houses.

Beloved, I could here make report unto you from beyond the seas out of
Germany, of strange and marvelous inundations, deluges, and ouerflowings of
waters; how about Ann. Chr. 1595. Ianson. Gallobelg. Tom. 3. lib. 12. p. 173.
this time fifteen years in the plains near unto Colen, Mentz, and
Franckford, by a sudden flood, non modo horrea, and stabula, nullo firmo nixa
fundamento, sed firmissima etiam aedificia, not only barnes and stables, which
had no firm foundation, but the surest and strongest edifices and buildings
were violently c^rried away.

I could tell you of much more hame of that years flood; how in Ianson. ibid.
page 180.
Berenburg, a town upon the river Sala, in the Principality of Anhalt, Ibid.
p. 183.
Centum sexaginta aedes funditu^ euersae fuerunt; One hundred and threescore
houses were utterly overthrown.

But what need we go so far for ex^mples of this kind, wh^reof Almighty
God has sent home unto us such plenty? Reflect we our eyes upon our own
harms; upon the harms done to many of our neighbors in the late
forementioned fl^ud to the overthrowing and breaking down See the Report of
floods in England, Ann. Chr. 1607.
of whole towns and villages yea of See, Woeful news of floods, C. 1. a.
26. parishes in one Monmouth-shire.
Shire, and we cannot but grant it for a truth, tha^ God has his armies of
waters, whereby at his pleasure he can overthrow our dwelling houses.

But what is this to some of us, who are seated upon an hill, far enough from
any dangers by inundations, or ouerfl^wings of waters? Beloved in the Lord, of
such mind were they of the old world, who did eat, and drink, and married
wives, and gave in marriage, unto the day that Noah went into the Arc. But what
became of them? Our Savior Christ will tell you, Luke 17.27. The flood came,
and destroyed them.

But God has made a covenant with man, and will remember it; That there shall
be no more waters of a flood, to destroy all flesh, Genes. 9.15. It is true:
there shall be no more waters of a flood to destroy all flesh; that is, there
shall be no more an universal flood, to cover the face of the whole earth:
there shall be no more generale diluuium inundans, and obruens vniuersam
terram. But here is no exemption for particular cities, no not for particular
provinces, or countries.

Almighty God, who once did break up the fountains of the great deep, and
did open the windows of Heaven, Genesis 7.11. he is the same God still, Almighty
still, his arm is stretched out still. He can at his pleasure command the
clouds, and they shall pour forth abundance of waters, to the washing away of
our dwelling houses.

But say, he will not come against us with his army of waters: yet being Deus
exercituum, a God of hosts, he has armies of another kind at command, to
work the sudden subversion, and overthrow of all our dwellings.

I yet present you not with lightning, with thunder, with winds, with
earthquakes, wherewith the Lord of Hosts, the mighty one of Israel, has laid
waste, and made desolate many the habitations of sinful men; my Text presents
you with fire; and let it suffice for this time.

Say, I beseech you, is it not a fearful thing, that in stead of the fatness
of the clouds, of the greater and smaller rain, of the sweet dewes of Heaven,
of comfortable showers which God has engendered in the air, and divided by
pipes to fall upon the earth in their seasons, our grounds should be withered,
our fruits consumed, our Temples and our buildings resolved into cinders? Yea,
and sometimes our skins and bones too, molten from our backs? Yet (Beloved)
this sometimes comes to pass, when fire, one of the executioners of Gods
vengeance, is sent upon us for our sins.

What became of Sodom and Gomorrah, and other Cities of that Plain? Were they
not turned into ashes by fire from the Lord? The story is known, Genesis 19.24.

But what need old stories to confirm so plain a matter; whereof we have
daily and lamentable experience? Do not the grievous complaints of many of our
neighbors undone by fire, seeking from our charitable devotions some small
relief, make good proof hereof? Dearly Beloved, learn we by their example
to cast away from us all our transgressions, whereby we have transgressed, and
to turn unto the Lord our God, lest delighting and treading in the wickedness
of their ways, we be made partakers also of their punishments. It is neither
care, nor policy, that can stay Gods reuengefull hand, when he brings fire
in it.

To this purpose memorable is the example of a countryman of ours, who in King
Edwards days was a Professor of the true religion; that religion, which by
Gods goodness we do this day profess. This man in the Fox, Martyrolog. p.
1893.
Acts and Monuments of our Church is named A Smith dwelling at Well in
Cambridge-shire.
Richard Denton, and is there noted to have been an Instructor of one Of
Wisbich in the I Will of Elie, sometime Constable of Well, and dwelling there.
William Wolsey in the same his holy religion. Not long after in Queen Mary's
days, when fire and faggot were the portion of true Professors, Wolsey was
apprehended and imprisoned. In time of his durance, he sent commendations to
Denton his Instructor, withal demanding by his messenger, why he tarried so
long after him, seeing he had been his first Instructor in the Scriptures.
Dentons answer was, I cannot burn.

Cannot burn? You see his policy: he halted between God and man, he
dissembled the profession of his Christian faith, because forsooth he could not
burn. Well. Q. Mary's days were soon at an end; and God caused the light of
the Gospel to shine again under the peaceable government of Queen Elizabeth.
Then did our dissembler think himself safe enough from any flame of fire. But
behold the hand of God. His house was on fire; and he with two others,
venturing to save some of his goods, perished in the flame. Thus you see
policy preuailes not, when Gods reuengefull hand brings fire with it.

And think you that ca^e will help? What? Care against the Lord? Far be it
from us (beloved) so to think. Let us rather make our humble con^ession, with
King Nabuchodonosor, Dan. 4.34, 35. that the Most High lives for ever: that
his power is an everlasting power, and his Kingdom from generation to
generation: that all the inhabitants of the earth are reputed as nothing to
him: that according to his will he works in the army of Heaven, and in the
inhabitants of the earth: and none can stay his hand, nor say unto him; what
do thou? None can stay his hand.

This is it which before I noted: namely, that, It is neither care nor policy,
that can stay Gods reuengefull hand, when he brings fire in it: as here it
is threatened unto Rabbah: I will kindle a fire in the wall of Rabbah. Thus
far by occasion of my first Doctrine, which was, It is not the greatness of a
city, that can be a safeguard unto it, if Gods unappeasable wrath break out
against it for its sins.

And it was grounded upon these words: I will kindle a fire in the wall of
Rabbah.

It is further added of this fire, that it shall devour the palaces of R^bbah.
Which branch repeated in each of the precedent prophecies (as verse. 4, 7, 10,
12.) has formerly yielded us this Doctrine; God depriueth us of a great
blessing, when he takes from us our dwelling houses.

This truth is experimentally made good unto us, by the great commodity, or
contentment, that comes to every one of us by our dwelling houses. The use
whereof is, to teach us, 1. To be humbled before Almighty God, whenever it
shall please him by water, by fire, by wind, by lightning, by thunder; by
earthquakes, or otherwise, to overthrow our dwelling houses. 2. Since we
peaceably enjoy our dwelling houses, to use them for the furtherance of Gods
glory. 3. To render all hearty thanks unto Almighty God, for the comfortable
use we have of our dwelling-houses. Thus far of the commination, or
denuntiation of judgment, as it is set down in general.

The special circumstances, whereby it is further notified or illustrated, do
concern, partly the punishment, and partly the punished. Concerning the
punishment; it is full of terror, and speedy. First, full of terror, in these
words; With shouting in the day of battle.

With shouting] in classico, says Brentius: cum clangore, says Drusius; that
is, with the sound or noise of Trumpets. The Septuagint do read (...); the
vulgar Latin, in vlulatu: Mercer, cum vociferatione; Gualter, cum clamore;
Calvin, cum clamore, vel Iubilo: that is, with a cry, with a great cry, with a
vociferation, with a shout, such as soldiers do make, when on a sudden they
surprise a City.

In the day of battell] in die belli. The like phrase we have Psalm. 78.9. where
it is said of the children of Ephraim, that being armed and shooting with the
bow, they turned back, in die belli, in the day of battle. David confesses,
Psalm. 140.7. O Lord God the strength of my salvation, thou have covered my
head, in die belli, in the day of battle. Solomon says, Prou. 21.31. The
horse is prepared, in diem belli, against the day of battle. So here the Lord
threatens against Rabbah, a shouting m^^ie belli, in the day of battle.

This day of battle, is that day of war, and time of trouble, mentioned by
Job, chap. 38.23. We see now the purpose of our Prophet in using these words,
With shouting in the day of battle. It is to proclaim war against Rabbah,
the chief city of the Ammonites, and cons^quently against their whole
kingdom. This proclamation is more plainly delivered, Ierem. 49.2. Behold the
days come, says the Lord, that I will cause a noise of war to be heard in
Rabbah of the Ammonites: and it shall be a desolate heap, and her daughters
shall be burnt with fire. From this proclamation of war made by our Prophet
Amos, as in the Lords own words, saying; I will kindle a fire in the wall of
Rabbah, and it shall devour the palaces thereof, with shouting in the day of
battle, we may take this lesson, God sends war upon a Land for the sins
of a people.

For proof of this truth, let us look into the word of truth. In the 26. of
Leuit. verse. 25. thus says the Lord unto Israel: If ye walk stubbornly
against me, and will not obey me, then I will send a sword upon you, that shall
avenge the quarrel of my covenant. And Ierem. 5.15. unto the house of Israel,
thus says the Lord; Lo, I will bring a Nation upon you from far. You hear
the Lord speaking in his own person, I will send, I will bring, as here, I
will kindle. Will you any other witness?

Then hear what Moses tells the Israelites, Deuteronomy. 28.49. The Lord shall
bring a nation upon you from far, from the end of the world, flying as an
Eagle: a nation, whose tongue thou shall not understand, a nation of a fierce
countenance, which will not regard the person of the old, nor have compassion
on the young: the same shall eat the fruit of thy cattle, and the fruit of thy
land, until thou be destroyed: and he shall leave thee neither wheat, nor
wine, nor oil, nor the increase of thy kine, nor the flocks of thy sheep,
until he have brought thee to naught. By this speech of Moses, we plainly see
that war, and all the evils of war, are from the Lord: that war is
Cominaeus Hist. lib. 1. cap. 3.
one of the accomplishments of Gods judgments, and that it is sent by God upon
a Land for the sins of the people, as my doctrine goes. Let us now make some
use of it.

Is it true, beloved? Does God send war upon a Land, for the sins of a
people? How then can we look that the happy peace, which we now enjoy, should
be continued among us, since by our daily sinning we provoke Almighty God unto
displeasure?

Let the consideration hereof lead us to repentance. Repentance, the gift of
God, the joy of Angels, the salve of sins, the haven of sinners, let us
possess it in our hearts. The Angels of heaven need it not, because they sin
not: the Devils in Hell care not for it; for their judgment is sealed. It
only appertains to the sons of men; and therefore let us, the sons of men,
possess it in our hearts: that is, let us truly and unfeignedly forsake our old
sins, and turn unto the Lord our God, so shall this blessed peace, and all
other good things be continued among us.

But if we will persist in our evil ways, not regarding what the Lord shall
speak unto us, either in his holy Word, or by his faithful Ministers, we may
expect the portion of these Ammonites, that God should kindle a fire in our
Rabbahs; our best fenced cities, which shall devour the palaces thereof, with
shouting in the d^y of battle. Thus much of the terror of this judgment. Now
follows the speed in the next circumstance.

With a tempest in the day of the whirle-wind] Suiting hereto is the reading of
Mercer, cum tempestate in die turbinis: and that of Tremelius: cum procella in
die turbinis, with a storm or tempest in the day of the whirlwind. Calvin
has, in turbine in die tempestatis: in a whirlwind in a day of tempest:
Brentius, in turbine, and in die tempestatis; in a whirlwind, and in a day of
tempest: Gualter, cum turbine in die tempestatis, with a whirlwind in a day
of tempest. And this reading Drusius rather approves, than the former.

Take which you will; the meaning is one and the same: namely, that the war
here denounced to the Ammonites in the former clause, should come upon them,
tanquam turbo in die tempestatis, like unto a whirlwind in a tempestuous and
stormy day. Turbine nihil celerius; a whirlwind comes suddenly and with
speed; so was this war to come upon the children of Ammon. Thus have we the
meaning of our Prophet: let us now take a view of such doctrines, as may from
hence be taken for our further instruction.

First, whereas the punishment here threatened to the Ammonites, is to come upon
them with a whirlwind in a day of tempest, in a tempestuous and stormy day,
we may learn, that, Storms, Tempests, Whirle-winds, and the like, are the
Lords creatures, ready at his command to be employed by him in the auenging of
his quarrel against sinners.

(...), the primarie and principal efficient cause of storms, tempests,
whirle-winds, and the like, is God. God as he is the sole maker totius
vniuersitatis rerum, of this world, and all that is in it; so is he also a most
free and omnipotent ruler of the same. He alone is able to raise tempests, and
at his pleasure to allay them again. Who raised the storm, that endangered
the ship wherein Jonah was? was it not the Lord? Yes. For so it is written,
Ion. 1.4. The Lord sent out a great wind into the sea, and there was a mighty
tempest in the sea, so that the ship was like to be broken. Neither was this
tempest calmed, till rebellious Jonah was cast out of the ship into the sea, as
it appears, verse. 15.

Well therefore is it said of the Psalmist, Psalm. 148.8. of fire, and hail,
and snow, and vapors, and stormy winds, that they execute Gods word; they are
all ready at his commandment, to execute what he will have them to do. Winds
and tempests, they depend not upon chance, or blind fortune; but on the
sovereign power of the Almighty Creator. So true is my doctrine; Storms,
Tempests, Whirle-winds, and the like, are the Lords creatures, ready at his
command, to be employed by him in the auenging of his quarrel against sinners.

One use of it, is for our instruction: Whosoever he be, that walks by land,
or passes by sea, if winds, storms or tempests do hinder his purpose, or
disquiet him in his enterprise, he must assign it to the providence of
Almighty God.

A second use serves for reproof of such, as are of opinion, that Witches,
Sorcerers, Coniurers, and the Devil can Grynaeus in Ion. cap. 1. 4. Lect. 13.
pro libidine sua, at their pleasures, raise up tempests. It is nothing so.

Nothing so? Why then does Saint Paul, Ephesians. 2.2. call the Devil, the Prince
that rules in the air? I answer, S. Paul calls the Devil the Prince that
rules in the air, not because he can at his pleasure raise tempests, but
because he then does it, when God gives him license. I easily grant, that
Witches, Sorcerers and Coniurers by the help of the Devil, can raise storms
and tempests in the air, though King James, Daemonolog. lib. ^. cap 5 page 46.
not universally, yet in such a particular place and prescribed bounds, as God
will permit them so to trouble.

Archbishop Ab^ot in Ion. Lect. 3. page 51.
The Devil and his factors work their exploits only by limitation and by
leave; for they depend upon the Lord; and as if they were tied in a chain^,
they cannot exceed one hairs breadth of that which is granted unto them.
Witness the story of Job. The Devil could not raise a wind to overthrow the
house wherein Jobs children were, but by leave from the Lord, as it appears,
Job 12.

And this may be our comfort, that Satan, the Devil, that 1 Pet. 5.8.
roaring Lion, who walks about, seeking whom he may devour, has Esaias 37.29.
a hook put into his nostrils, and a bridle in his lips, and is bound Iud. 6.
with everlasting chains, so that he cannot hurt us, no not so much as by
raising of a tempest, unless Almighty God for our sins do let him loose.
Wherefore, let us commend our selves wholly to the protection of the Almighty,
and he will Esaias 49 2.
hide us under the shadow of his hand. For it is he only, that makes us to
dwell in safety. Thus much of my first doctrine.

Again, whereas the punishment here threatened to the Ammonites, was to come
upon them as a whirlwind in a tempestuous, or stormy day, that is, speedily,
we may from hence take this lesson.

The d^struction of the wicked comes suddenly upon them. This truth is auowed
by David, Psalm. 37.2. Where to persuade the godly not to fret, or be grieved at
the prosperity of the wicked, he brings this reason: They shall soon be cut
down like grass, and shall wither as the green herb, which in other words,
verse. 20. of the same Psalm, he thus delivers: They shall perish, and shall
be consumed, as the fat of lambs; even with the smoke shall they consume
away. They shall be consumed as the fat of lambs;] there is utter destruction
for them; they shall be consumed as smoake] there is the suddenness of their
destruction.

The state of the wicked is very ticklish and uncertain. For as it is, Psalm.
73.18. God has set them in slippery places, and casts them down into
desolation. Their end is there described to be wonderful, sudden and
fearful; Quomodo vastabuntur? Subito deficient, consumentur terroribus. How
shall they be destroyed? They shall quickly perish, they shall be consumed with
terrors.

Solomon speaks to this purpose, as plainly as may be Prou. 6.15. The
destruction of the wicked shall come speedily: he shall be destroyed suddenly
without recovery. He shall be destroyed suddenly without recouery] that is, to
speak in my Prophets phrase, He shall be destroyed, as if he were carried away
with a whirlewind in a tempestuous and stormy day: or in Solomon's phrase, Prou.
1.27. Their destruction shall come like a whirlewind.

The holy Scriptures are very plentiful in this point. But this which has
been spoken, may serve for the establishment of my propounded doctrine, that,
The destruction of the wicked comes suddenly upon them.

One use of this doctrine is, to admonish us, that we give all diligence to
walk in the Lords way, the sanctified and holy way, the way of perfection,
that we be not reputed among the wicked and so partake with them in the
suddenness of their downfalls.

A second use is to minister a word of comfort. Do the wicked prosper and
increase in riches? Is pride a chain unto them? Is cruelty their garment? Do
their eyes stand out for fatness? Have they more than heart can wish? Art thou
mean while in trouble? Art thou in want? Do they oppress thee? Do they wrong
thee? Yet be of good comfort. Say not, I have cleansed my heart in vain; in
vain have I washed my hands in innoc ncie: but commit thy way unto the Lord;
trust in him; wait patiently upon him: yet a little while, and the wicked shall
not appear: thou shall look after his place, and shall not find him. For
sudden destru tion shall befall him, he shall be carried away as with a
whirlewind in a tempestuous and stormy day. Thus much of the fourteenth verse.

THE XXI. Lecture.
AMOS 1.15. And their King shall go into captivity, he, and his Princes
together, says the Lord.


IN my last Lecture, I began the Exposition of the fourth part: the
commination, or denunciation of judgment: and then I noted, that this
judgment was set down, first in a generality: Therefore will I kindle a fire,
etc. verse. 14. and secondly with some circumstances, as that it should be full
of terror, and speedy, and of large extent.

Full of terror: With shouting in the day of battle.

Speedy: With a tempest in the day of the whirlewind.

Of large extent. For it was to reach unto, not only the meaner sort of people,
but to the Nobles also, yea unto the King himself, verse. 15. Their King shall
go into captivity, he and his Princes together. Of this judgment, as it is
delivered in a generality, as also of the terror and speediness of it, I
discoursed in my last exercise. The extent was left untouched; whereof at this
time.

Their King shall go into captivity; he, and his Princes together] King and
Princes, both must into captivity. What shall become of the Priests? They
shall be carried away too. The Septuagint in their translation do expressly
affirm it, (...); the Kings of Ammon shall go into captivity, and (...),
their Priests, and (...), their Princes. Their King shall go into captivity,
their Priests, and Princes likewise. And this the Prophet Jeremy precisely
avouches, Chapter 49 3. where thundering out the threats of Gods judgments
against the children of Ammon, he says: Their King shall go into captivity,
and his Priests, and his Princes likewise.

The vulgar Latin and S. Hierome, for their King, do read Melchom. Melchom
shall go into captivity. And what is Melchom? It is the same with Milchom,
with Molech, with Moloch. Diverse words of one signification; though differing
in sound, and termination.

Be it Melchom, or Milchom, or Molech, or Moloch; al is one. It is but an
Idol. So it is called by the Author of the vulgar Latin, Leuit. 18.21. De
semine tuo non dabis, vt consecretur Idolo Moloch. Thou shall not give thy
children to consecrate them, to offer them to the Idol Moloch. It is the
abomination of the Ammonites. So it is called, 1 King. 11.5. where it is said
of old Solomon, perverted by his wives, that he followed Milchom, the
abomination of the Ammonites; and verse. 7. that he built an high place unto
Molech, the abomination of the children of Ammon. It is the God of the children
of Ammon. So it is called, verse. 33. where it is given for a reason, why the
Lord would rent from Solomon the kingdom of Israel, because he forsook the
Lord, and worshipped Milchom, the god of the Ammonites.

You see what Melchom is. It is the god of the Ammonites; not the true God; for
he is the God of all the world; but the God of the Ammonites; an abomination,
an Idol.

Yet did they worship it. But how? Moses tells you, Deuteronomy. 12.31. They burnt
their sons and daughters with fire, and offered them to their gods. This
abomination of the Painyme Nations, hateful to the living God, spread it
self, even to the corrupting of the Lords people. For to the children of
Israel, and to the children of Judah, it is objected, Ier. 32.35. That they
built the high places of Baal, which are in the valley of Ben-hinnom, to cause
their sons, and their daughters to pass through the fire of Molech. And the
expostulation of God with the house of Israel, Ezech. 20.30. lays this home
unto them: Are ye not polluted after the manner of your fathers? Commit ye
not whoredom after their abominations? For when you offer your gifts, and make
your sons to pass through the fire, you pollute your selves with your Idols.

It is registered among the praises of good King Josiah, 2 King. 23.10. that he
defiled (or put down, and destroyed) Topheth, which was in the valley of the
children of Hinnom, that no man should make his son, or his daughter pass
through the fire of Molech.

By this which has been spoken, you see what Melchom is, and how it was
worshipped. An Idoll-god worshipped with the effusion of the blood of
innocents; men's sons and daughters were consecrated unto it through fire.

So have you two readings of my text: one, Their King shall go into
captivity, he, and his Princes together: the other, Melchom shall go into
captivity, etc. Let us now see, what profitable doctrines may be taken from
either, for our further instruction, and the reformation of our lives.

The first reading is according to the Hebrew, Their King shall go into
captivity, he, and his Princes together: according to the Septuagint, Their
King shall go into captivity, their Priests, and Princes likewise. The
doctrine arising hence, is, When God punishes a nation with captivity for
their sins, he spares neither Priests, nor Prince, nor King.

Tha^ captivity is an effect, or punishment of sin, I have heretofore made
plain unto you, in my 11. Lecture upon this first Chapter of Amos. Solomon
says it, 1 King. 8.46. When a people sins against the Lord, and the Lord is
angry with them, the Lord delivers them up to be carried away prisoners into
the land of their enemies. It is affirmed, 1 Chronicles. 9.1. That the Israelites
were carried away to Babylon for their transgressions. And Deuteronomy. 28.41. among
the curses threatened to such, as will not obey the voice of the Lord their God,
Captivity is reckoned. Thou shall beget sons and daughters, but shall not
have them; for they shall go into captivity. Look back but to the fifth
verse of this Chapter: there shall you find it denounced against the people of
Aram, that they shall go into captivity. And why? But for their three and
four transgressions, for their many sins, and specially for threshing Gilead
with threshing instruments of iron? As you have heard out of the third verse.
Thus you see again that captivity is an effect or punishment of sin.

This punishment rests not upon the meaner sort of the people, it reaches to
the highest: to the Priests, to the Princes, to the King himself. Of Priests
and Princes carried away into captivity, you will make no doubt, when you see
the same proved of Kings. Yet may you know by 2 King. 17.27. that the King of
Assyria, when he had vanquished Hoseah, King of Israel, did carry into
captivity the Priests of Israel.

You understand of Priests carried into captivity: see now the like of Kings
and Princes. See 2 King. 24.14. It is a very eminent place. There it is
affirmed of Nabuchodonosor King of Babel, that he carried away all Jerusalem,
and all the Princes, and all the strong men of war, even ten thousand, into
captivity; and in the verse following, that he carried away King Iehoiachim (
King of Judah) into Babel, and the Kings mother, and the Kings wives, and the
Eunuchs, and the mighty of the Land carried he away into captivity, from
Jerusalem to Babel. And all the men of war, even seven thousand, and carpenters
and lock-smiths a thousand, all that were strong and apt for war, did the King
of Babel bring to Babel captives.

I could tell you of the like misery befallen other Kings of Judah; of King
Manasseh, 2 Chronicles. 33.11. how he was taken by the host of the King Ashur, was
put in fetters, was bound in chains, and was carried to Babel. And of King
Zedekiah, 2 King. 25.5. how he was taken in the deserts of Jericho by the army
of the Chaldees, had his eyes put out, was bound in chains, and carried unto
Babel.

But what need I amplify this point? By the places already brought, you see my
doctrine established: namely, When God punishes a nation with captivity for
their sins, he spares neither Priest, nor Prince, nor King.

Is it true, Beloved? Does God punish a nation with captivity for their sins?
Let us make this Christian use of it, even to power out our souls in
thankfulness before Almighty God for his wonderful patience toward us. The
sins of such Nations as have been punished with captivity, were they more
heinous in Gods eyes than ours are? Dearly beloved, far be it from us to
justify our selves. Let the example of the proud Pharisee be a warning to us.
He for all his smooth prayer, registered Luke 18.11. [O God I thank thee, that
I am not as other men; extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even as the
Publican: I fast twice in the week, I give tithe of all that ever I possess:]
For all this his smooth prayer, he found no favor with God. No marvel. For
his heart was swollen with pride: with pride toward God, toward his neighbor,
and in himself.

Gracias ago, O God I thank thee] there was his pride toward God: Non sum
sicut caeteri, I am not as other men] There was his pride toward his
neighbor: Ieiuno bis in sabbato, I fast twice in the weeke] There was his
pride in himself. O God I thank thee] He is not reprehended for giving thanks
to God, but for his proud and presumptuous boasting of himself.

The great Patriarch Abraham prays leave to speak unto the Lord, and gives a
reason of his request, Genesis 18.27. I am but dust and ashes: so lowly was
Abraham conceited of himself when he was to speak to God. But this Pharisee
puffed up and swollen with pride, boasts as though he were not made of the
same mould with other men: O God I thank thee I am not as other men, etc. But
leave we the Pharisee in his pride: he is not to be a pattern of imitation for
us.

The Publican is he whom we must follow. Gerit typum omnium poenitentium: all
that will truly repent, must take him for an ensample. He stood afar off, would
not lift up so much as his eyes to Heaven, smote his breast, and said, O God be
merciful to me a sinner. He stood afar off] B. King in Ion. Lect. 38. page
514.
not daring to approach to God, that God might approach to him. He would not
lift up his eyes to Heauen] for he knew heaven to be the seat of that Majesty,
which by sinning he had provoked unto displeasure. He smote his breast] as the
arc of all iniquity, as it were punishing himself with stripes, that the Lord
might forbear to punish him. And after all this, with a fearful heart and
trembling tongue; he called upon his Savior, and said, O God be merciful to
me a sinner.

Pet. de Palude Dom. 2. post Trin. enar. p. 364.
Oration breuis and valde fructuosa. It is a short prayer, but full of fruit. O
God be merciful to me a sinner; be merciful, I say, not to me thy creature,
thy servant, or thy child, but be merciful to me a sinner. My whole
composition is sin: whatsoever I am in body or soul, so far as my manhood
and humanity goes, a Sinner: and not only by mine office and calling, because
I am a Publican, but even by nature and kind it self a Sinner. O God be
merciful to me a sinner.

This Publican is set for a pattern unto us. We must with him confess our
sins unto the Lord. Let no man boast himself of his own innocence, integrity,
or uprightness. Quando mare sine procellis, tunc nos sine peccatis, says Apud
Pet. de Palude Dom. 11. Trinit. p. 356.
Chrysostom: when the sea is without storms, then are we without sins. But
the sea is never free from storms, nor we from sins.

In vain then is it, O sinful man, that thou exaltest thy self, as if thou
were just. Remember what Christ says at his closing up of this parable of the
Publican and Pharisee, Omnis, qui se exaltat, humiliabitur; every one that
exalts himself shall be brought low. Adam exalted himself, and death was his
recompense, Genesis 3 19. Pharaoh exalted himself, and he was drowned in the red
Sea, Exodus 14.28. Dathan and Abiram exalted themselves, and the earth opened
her mouth, and swallowed them up, Number. 16.32. Saul exalted himself, and an
evil spirit was sent to vex him, 1 Samuel 16.15. Absolon exalted himself, and he
was hanged in an oak, 2 Samuel 18 9. Nabuchodonosor exalted himself, and he was
driven to seek his dwelling with the beasts of the field, Dan. 4.29. Antiochus
exalted himself, and he died a miserable death, consumed of worms, 2 Match.
9.9. Herod Agrippa exalted himself, and the Angel of the Lord smote him, so
was he also eaten of worms, and gave up the ghost, Act. 12.23. It is out of
all controversy; Omnis, qui se exaltat, humiliabitur: every one that exalts
himself shall be brought low.

Let the consideration hereof (beloved) work in us a vigilance to keep the
proud Devil under, that we swell not up through a vain persuasion of fleshly
righteousness, that we lift not up our Peacocks feathers, nor extol our eye
lids through a conceit of our own deserts, but in all humility pray we ever
with the Publican; O God be merciful unto us sinners; and ascribe we unto him
all laud and praise for suffering us (notwithstanding our manifold sins) every
man to dwell 1 King. 4.25.
under his vine, and under his fig tree, to live in our own land in peace,
free from all fear of being led into captivity. Thus much of my first use.

A second follows. My Doctrine was, When God punishes a nation with
captivity for their sins, he spares neither Priest, nor Prince, nor King.

Will you have a reason hereof? Hear then what Elihu says, Job 34.19. God
accepts not the persons of Princes, he regards not the rich more than the
poor: He accepts no man's person, says S. Paul, Gal. 2.6. No man's person?
Then neither the person of the Priest, nor of the King. If these sin like
others of the people, these shall be punished as well as others; and if others
be carried into captivity, these must into captivity also.

The use of this Doctrine is to admonish the great and mighty ones of this
world, that they presume not to sin against the Lord, as if they were
privileged by their greatness and might. No privilege can serve their
turns, when they must Job 21.20.
drink of the wrath of the Almighty. Then shall they be as Job 21.18.
stubble before the wind, and as the chafe that the storm carries away.

Consider this all ye who take your selves to be mighty among your
neighbors; ye whom God has blessed with this worlds good above your
neighbors. Think not your wealth or authority can protect you, when Gods sore
displeasure shall break out against you for your sins: but rather let it
ever be written in your hearts, what is written, Wisd. 6.6. The mighty shall be
mightily tormented. And remember what is added in that place: He that is Lord
over all will spare no person, neither shall he fear any greatness: for he
has made the small and the great, and cares for all alike. But for the mighty
abides the sorer trial. And hence arises a third use.

It is to minister a word of comfort to the inferior and poorer sort of
people. If the mighty shall Amos 2.6.
sell the righteous among you for silver, and the poor for shoes; if they
Amos 2.7.
gape over your heads in the dust of the earth; if they Esa. 3.15.
grind your faces; if by violence and oppression they Habak. 1.4.
compass you about; yet be ye of good comfort: God, the Judge of all,
accepts no persons. He in his good time will avenge your causes, be your
oppressors never so mighty; for when he punishes a land for the sins of a
people, he spares neither Priest, nor Prince, nor King.

There is a fourth use of this Doctrine. It is to warn us not to set our
hearts upon the outward things of this world, for as much as God will not
respect us for them. Neither Priest, nor Prince, nor King can stand before the
displeasure of Almighty God. And shall a mighty man, shall a rich man stand?
No. Psalm. 68.2.
As the smoke vanishes, so shall he be driven away; and as the wax melts
before the fire; so shall he perish at the presence of God.

Wherefore (dearly beloved in the Lord) let us only and earnestly seek after
such things, as may make us accepted with God, as righteousness, peace, and
joy in the holy Ghost. For whosoever in these things serves Christ, he is
acceptable to God, says Saint Paul, Romans 14.18. Thus far by occasion of my
first doctrine: which was, When God punishes a nation with captivity for their
sins, he spares neither, priest, nor prince, nor king.

And it was grounded upon the first reading of the words of my text; after the
Hebrew thus, Their King shall go into captivity, he, and his princes together:
after the Septuagint thus, Their King shall go into captivity, their priests,
and Princes likewise.

I commended unto you another reading out of the Vulgar Latin: Melchom shall
go into captivity, he, and his Princes together: and I told you in the
beginning of this exercise what Melchom was. I said it was the same with
Milchom, or Molech, or Moloch; an abomination of the Ammonites, their Idol,
their God, to whom they yielded divine worship, and consecrated their children
through fire. All this I made plain unto you out of the sacred Scriptures. The
Doctrine, Neither Melchom of the Ammonites, nor any other Idol of any other
people, can save themselves in the day of captivity, much less can they save
the people that do trust in them and worship them.

First, they cannot save themselves.

Secondly, nor them that put their trust in them.

They cannot save themselves. For what is become of Succothbenoth, the God of
Babel? of Nergal, the God of Cuth? of Ashima, the God of Hamath? of Nibhaz and
Tartack, the God of the Auins? of Adrammelech, and Anammelech, the God of
Sepharvaim? Their names indeed remain upon record, 2 King. 17.30, 31. but
themselves are vanished, they are come to naught. Hezekiah King of Judah, he
who brake in pieces the brazen Serpent which Moses made, because his people
offered incense to it, he put down those Idol Gods; he took away their high
places, he brake their images, he cut down their groves, 2 King. 18.4.

What is become of Ashtoreth, the Idol of the Zidonians? of Chemosh, the Idol
of the Moabites? of Milchom the abomination of the children of Ammon? Their
names indeed remain upon record, 2 King. 23.13. but themselves are vanished,
they are come to naught. Josiah King of Judah, that good King, he put down
those Idol Gods, he brake their images in pieces, he cut down their groves,
and filled their places with the bones of men, 2 King. 23.14.

I could here repeat unto you many other Idols and Idol Gods, whose names are
particularly recorded in the register of Gods holy Word, which also are
vanished and come to naught. But the time will not suffer me. Let it suffice
what is spoken in a generality of the Kings of Assyria, 2 King. 19.18. that
they did set on fire the Gods of the Nations.

Gods? And yet set on fire? True. But they were but Idol Gods; and therefore
could not help themselves. Not help themselves? Why not? The reason is given
in the same place: For they were no Gods, (an Idol God is no God) they were no
Gods, but the work of man's hands, even wood and stone: therefore the Kings of
Assyria destroyed them. The very same reason is delivered in the very same
words by the Prophet Esaias, Chap. 37.19. They were no Gods, but the work of
men's hands, even wood and stone, therefore the Kings of Assyria destroyed them.

The holy Prophets are very zealous in Gods cause against those Idols. Esaias
Chap. 41.29. says, They are all vanity, their work is of nothing, they are
wind, they are confusion. Ier. Chap. 10.15. says, They are vanity, they are
the work of errors: in the time of their visitation they shall perish. I
should weary my self, and your attention, would I produce whatsoever the
Prophets of the Lord have spoken to the vilifying and debasing of Idols. This
which I have already delivered out of Esaias, and Jeremy, and from out the second
book of Kings, does make good the former part of my propounded Doctrine,
namely, that neither Melchom of the Ammonites, nor any other Idol of any other
people can save themselves in the day of captivity.

Can they not save themselves in the day of captivity? Much less can they save
the people that do trust in them and worship them; which was the second part
of my Doctrine.

And it is pregnantly confirmed out of the 46. Chapter of the Prophecy of Esaias,
verse. 7. where the Prophet, out of his zeal for the Lord of Hosts against
Idols and Images, assures all people, that though they cry unto Idols and
Images, yet can they not answer them, nor deliver them out of their
tribulations. Jeremy likewise, Chap. 11.12. lets the Cities of Judah, and the
inhabitants of Jerusalem to understand, that though they cry unto their Idols
and Images, yet they shall not be able to help them in time of their trouble.

Add hereto what S. Austine says in his soliloquies, or heavenly meditations,
Chap. 5. An Idol (or an Image) its 1 Cor. 8.4.
nothing; it has Psalm. 135.16, 17. and Psalm. 115.5, 6, 7.
ears, and hears not; a nose, and smells not; eyes, and sees not; a
mouth, and speaks not; hands, and feels not; feet, and walks not; and all
the proportion of members, and yet lives not; and what help can be expected
from such an Idol? such a Nothing? My Doctrine stands firm, Neither Melchom
of the Ammonites, nor any other Idol of any other people can save themselves
in the day of captivity, much less can they save the people that do trust in
them and worship them.

Now let us see what use we may make hereof for our further instruction and
benefit.

First, this doctrine serves to reprove all Papists, for their blind
superstition in worshipping their Idols and Images. For what do they make of
their Images but mere Idols, while they fall down before them, and do them
reverence with capping, with kneeling, with knocking, with creeping, with
crossing, with kissing, with lighting of candles, and with other like beggarly
trash and trumpery, as is yet this day in use in the Church of Rome with great
observation?

The time was, when this Church of England subjected it self to that of Rome,
and was drunken with the wine of her fornication. Then were the people of this
land defiled with Idols. No Parish Church but was polluted with Images. Then
was Gods providence and due honor neglected. For the cure of diseases, not
God, but Saints, were inuocated and sought unto. For the plague, Rainold. Idol.
1. 6. 7.
S. Sebastian; for the Pox, Homilies Tom. 2. Sermon. 3. against peril of
Idolatry. F. 8. b.
S. Roch; for the falling evil, S. Cornelius; for sore eyes, S. Raphael; for
the toothach, S. Apolonia; for other crosses and afflictions, S. Hippolitus, S.
Christopher, S. Catherine. Every artificer and profession had a special Saint
as a peculiar God. Scholars had S. Nicholas, yea and S. Gregory; Painters, S.
Luke; Shipmen, S. Mary; Soldiers wanted not their Mars, nor Lovers their
Venus, even among us Christians. Yea our beasts and cattle had their Gods too.
S. Loy was the horseleech, and S. Anthony the swineheard. If sometimes we
remembered God, yet as if we doubted of his ability and will to help, we used
to join to him another helper. The young Scholar was wont to begin his
learning with, God and S. Nicholas be my speed. For such as neezed, the prayer
was, God help, and S. John. And for the stumbling horse, God, and S. Loy save
thee.

May not now a godly man justly for zealous indignation cry out: O heaven, O
earth, O seas; what madness and wickedness against God were our forefathers
fallen into? They took delight in the service of stocks and stones, the works
of their own hands, they worshipped and served the creature above the Creator,
which is blessed for ever.

But what profit had they of such their worship? Found they any help in the
day of visitation? No: Those Images themselves could not help themselves; and
how then could they help their worshippers? Themselves were broken down and
removed from out our Churches; and their worshippers are removed with them. In
their stead the light of the glorious Gospel of God now shines in our
Churches; now is superstition exiled, and the true service of God is come in
place: and Christ for his mercies sake touch us, and give us feeling, and make
us thankful for this so great a blessing. Thus have you the first use. A
second follows.

It serves for a reproof to us also. For though we have cast off the yoke of
Romish superstition, and have kept our selves unspotted of the adoration and
worship of Images, yet are we not free from Idolatry; but are many ways
stained therewith. Whatsoever this world has, visible or invisible, outward or
inward, if it displace God of his right, by carrying our heart and hope after
it, it is our Idol.

Thus is gold, silver, or our money an Idol; if we make it our hope, or say to
the wedge, thou art my confidence, Job 31.24. In this sense S. Paul. Coloss.
3.5. calls covetousness, Idolatry, and Ephesians. 5.5. he calls the covetous
person an Idolater.

Thus is our substance an Idol: if as Job speaks, Chap. 31.25. We rejoice,
because it is great, or because our hand has gotten much. Like those Habak.
1.16. Who did sacrifice to their nets, and burn Incense to their flues: where
all they are taxed for Idolaters, who because their portion is increased, and
their meal plenteous by such instruments and helps, as they use in their
trades of life, do forget the right author of their wealth, and arrogate all
to themselves and their serviceable means.

Thus is our wit and understanding an Idol, when we ascribe unto them our
getting of riches, of gold, and silver into our treasures, like the Prince of
Tyrus, Ezech. 28.2. who with this conceit exalted in heart, brake out into that
most blasphemous challenge: I am a God, and I sit in the seat of God in the
midst of the Sea. Such is the Idol of the Politicians (shall I call them? or
Atheists) of this age: who take themselves to be wiser than Daniel, as the
Prince of Tyrus did: and are persuaded that Moses and the Prophets are not so
able to instruct them, as they themselves.

Thus is our strength an Idol, if we boast of it, as Sennacherib did, Esaias
37.24. who bragged what great matters he had done by the multitude of his
chariots; but touching the true Lord of Hosts, as if he were less than
nothing, he vaunteth to Hezekiah King of Judah, verse. 10. Let not thy God
deceive thee.

Thus is our belly our God, when walking after the lusts of our flesh, we serve
not the Lord Jesus Christ, but our own bellies: as S. Paul speaks, Romans
16.18. Of such speaks the same Apostle, Phil. 3.19. Many do walk as enemies
to the cross of Christ, whose end is damnation, whose God is their belly,
whose glory is their shame, who mind earthly things. Whose God is their belly.

Thus (beloved) you see what Idols are yet remaining among us, and how we are
defiled with them. What remains, but that we suffer our selves to be exhorted
in the words of Barnabas and Paul, to the men of Lystra, Act. 14.15. that we
would turn (...), from those vain Idols, to serve the living God.

Thus far of my second Doctrine, which was, Neither Melchom of the Ammonites,
nor any other Idol of any other people can save themselves in the day of
captivity, much less can they save the people that do trust in them, and
worship them.

Which doctrine I grounded upon the second reading of my Text: Melchom shall
go into captivity, he, and his Princes together.

Now follows the third general part of this prophecy against the children of
Amm^n (...) Says the Lord.

This is the conclusion of this Prophecy; and it redoubleth its authority and
credit. Authority and credit sufficient it has from its very front, and
preface, verse. 13. Thus says the Lord. It is here redoubled: Says the Lord.

Has the Lord said it, and shall he not do it? Has he spoken it, and shall
he not accomplish it? The Lord, Jehovah, the strength of Israel is not as man,
that he should lie; nor as the son of man, that he should repent. All his
words, yea all the tittles of all his words, are Yea and Amen. Heaven and earth
shall pass, before one jot, or one tittle of Gods Word shall escape unfulfilled.
Jehovah, the Lord says, whatsoever our Prophet Amos has here denounced
against the Ammonites. It is the Lord that says it: Amos is but the Lords
Minister; the Words are the Lords. Whence we may take this Doctrine; The Author
of holy Scripture is neither man, nor Angel, nor any otber creature, how
excellent soever, but only the living and immortal God.

This truth may likewise be grounded upon the Preface to the ensuing Prophecy:
And therefore (since my hour is almost spent, and your attention well nigh
tired) I put off the handling of this doctrine, till God give me opportunity to
speak again unto you. Mean time, let this which has been delivered unto
you, Non meis viribus, sed Christi misericordia, not by any strength of mine,
but by the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ, serve for the exposition of this
first Chapter.

1 Timothy 1.17. Unto the King eternal, immortal, invisible, the only wise God,
three persons, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, be honor and glory for ever, and
ever. Amen.

FINIS.
A COMMENTARY, OR EXPOSITION UPON THE SECOND Chapter of the Prophecy of AMOS.

Delivered In XXI. Sermons in the Parish Church of MEYSEY-HAMPTON in the
Diocese of GLOUCESTER.

BY Sebastian Benefield Doctor of Divinity, and Professor for the Lady
MARGARET in the University of OXFORD.

JAMES 4.8. Draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh to you.

LONDON, Printed by EDWARD GRIFFIN for JOHN PARKER, and are to be sold in
Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the three Pigeons. 1629.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER in God, and my very good Lord, JOHN by the divine
providence, L. Bishop of London.
Right Reverend and Honorable,
ONce more I make bold to present unto your HONOR a testimony of my most
humble observance. It is an Exposition of the second Chapter of the Prophecy
of Amos. My labors upon the first it pleased your Lordship heretofore
favorably to accept and patronize. If these upon the second may find the like
entertainment, they have their end. The beams of that splendor of goodness
in you, which long since have shined upon many in this University, and me
among the rest, methinkes J still behold. How can J then but in memory
thereof, offer up to your Honorable Name some Sacrifice of thanksgiving? This
is the best I have at this time. Receive it, my good Lord, such as it is, the
sincere token of a thankful heart. God Almighty, who has made you an
eminent, and an honorable pillar here in his Church militant, for the comfort
of his people, give you herein many days full of honor and comfort, and
reward you with a Crown of neuer-fading glory in his Church triumphant. From
my study in Christ Church in Oxford. February 14. 1619.

Your Lordships in all duty and service, SEBASTIAN BENEFIELD.

A COMMENTARY UPON THE SECOND Chapter of AMOS, delivered in XXI. Lectures. THE
FIRST LECTVRE.
AMOS 2.1, 2, 3. 1. Thus says the Lord; for three transgressions of Moab, and
for four, I will not turn to it, because it burnt the bones of the King of
Edom into lime.

2. Therefore will I send a fire upon Moab, and it shall devour the palaces
of Kirioth, and Moab shall dye with tumult, with shouting, and with the sound
of a trumpet.

3. And I will cut off the Judge out of the midst thereof; and will slay all
the Princes thereof with him; says the Lord.


HOw grievous a burden sin is, you may well perceive, by the heavy
punishments, which God lays upon the committers of sin. Good store of
examples the first chapter of this prophecy has yielded unto you. The
Syrians, the Philistines, the Tyrians, the Edomites, and the Ammonites have for
their sins bin severally repayed with vengeance from Heaven; the fire of the
wrath of God has seized upon them, and devoured them; their Cities are become
desolate; their memory is perished from off the earth. As it is befallen them,
so it befalls the Moabites also: against whom Amos in the beginning of this
second chapter directs his prophecy: and to the same purpose, whereto the
prophecies of the former Chapter were directed.

The Sea my sixth Lecture upon Amos 1.
reasons why Amos, sent of purpose with a message to the Israelites, does first
prophecy against the Syrians, the Philistines, the Tyrians, the Edomites, the
Ammonites, and the Moabites, all foreign nations, are three.

1. That he might be the more patiently heard of his countrymen, the
Israelites. The Israelites seeing their Prophet Amos so sharp against the
Syrians, and other their enemies, could not but with more quiet hear him, when
he should prophecy against them also. Consolatio quaedam est afflictio
inimici: Some comfort it is to a distressed natural man, to see his enemy in
distress likewise.

2. That they might have no cause to wonder, if God should at any time come
against them in vengeance, seeing that he would not spare the Syrians, and
other their neighbor countries, though they were destitute of the light of Gods
word, and ignorant of his will.

3. That they might the more tremble at the words of this prophecy, when they
should see the Syrians and other Nations affl^cted, and tormented according to
the heinousnes of their iniq^ities.

Here might the Israelites thus have argued: Will not God spare the Syrians,
the Philistines, the Tyrians, the Edomites, the Ammonites, the Moabites? Then
out of doubt he will not spare us. They silly people never knew the holy will
of God, and yet shall they be so severely punished? How then shall we escape;
who knowing Gods holy will, have contemned it?

You see now, why Amos sent with a message to the Ten Tribes of Israel, does
first prophecy against foreine Nations. In the last place are the Moabites.
This prophecy against the Moabites, Tremellius and Iunius in their translation
of the Bible, do add to the first Chapter, as a part of it. But since the Hebrew
text so diuides it not, I will not follow them: but will expound it, as
belonging to the second Chapter.

The words then which I have read unto you, are the burden of Moab; a heavy
prophecy against Moab. And do contain three general parts.

1. A preface, verse. the 1. Thus says the Lord. 2. A prophecy, verse. the 1.
For three transgressions of Moab etc. 3. A conclusion, verse. the 5. Says the
Lord.
The preface, and conclusion, do give authority to the prophecy; whereby we
learn that the words here spoken by Amos, are not the words of Amos, but the
words of the everliving GOD.

The prophecy consists of four parts.

1. The general accusation of Moab. For three transgressions of Moab, and for
four. 2. The Lords protestation against them: I will not turn to it. 3. The
declaration of that grievous sin, whereby they so highly offended God:
Because they burnt the bones of the King of Edom into lime. verse. 1. 4. A
commination, or denuntiation of such punishment, as should be laid upon them
for their sins. verse. 2. and 3.
This punishment is set down, 1. In a generality: Therefore will I send a
fire upon Moab, and it shall devour the palaces of Kirioth. 2. More
especially: Where I observe, 1. The manner of the punishment, as that it should
come upon them with fear, trouble, and astonishment: And Moab shall dye with
tumult, with shouting, and with the sound of a trumpet. 2. The extent of it.
None might escape it: neither Prince, nor King. For thus says the Lord, verse.
the 3. I will cut off the Judge, (the King) out of the midst thereof, and
will slay all the Princes thereof with him.



Thus have you the Analysis, resolution, or division of my Text. Return we now
to the Preface: Thus says the Lord; whose name in my Text is Jehovah.

Sundry are the Names of God in holy Scripture; by which albeit the substance
of God cannot aptly, and clearly be defined, yet they serve us thus far; to
bring us to some further knowledge of God, then otherwise we should have. These
Names of God are observed by ancient Divines to be of two sorts, Negative, and
Affirmative.

The negative Names of God, are Uncreated, Incorporeall, Invisible,
Incorruptible, Infinite, and such like: and these describe not, what God is;
but what he is not; and do evidently declare unto us, that he is bonum quoddam
excellentissimum, some most excellent Good, free from all imperfection of any
creature.

The affirmative Names of God, are ascribed unto him either essentially, or by
way of relation, or by a Metaphor. The Names of God ascribed unto him
essentially, are either proper to him alone, or common to others also. Among
the essential Names of God, proper to him alone, is Jehovah, the Name of God
in my Text. His other essential Names communicable unto others, as to men, do
yet belong unto God, either modo excellentiae, by an excellency: or modo causa
independentis; as he is the primarie cause of all things. By an excellency,
God is said to be Good, Just, Wise, Mighty, Holy, Merciful: and as he is the
primarie cause of all things, so is he called a Creator, a Redeemer, and has
other like appellations.

Now the affirmative Names of God, ascribed unto him by way of relation, are
the Names of the Trinity, in which there is no (...), no co^meation, no union;
each person has his proper name. Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. The other
affirmative Names of God ascribed unto him by a metaphor, are affirmed of him
either per (...), that every man may understand what they mean: as when God is
said to be Angry; or per (...), by analogy or similitude, as when God is
called a Lion, a Stone, a River.

Of these many Names of God, now repeated unto you, his most proper Name is his
Name in my Text: his Name Jehovah, a Name that cannot be attributed to any
creature in the world, no not by an analogy, or similitude. It is the
honourablest Name belonging to the great God of Heaven. I might spend much time
about it, would I apply my self to the curiosity of the Sea my third Lecture
upon Amos 1.
Cabalists, and Rabbis.

They say it is nomen (...), a name not to be pronounced, not to be taken
within polluted lips: they call it nomen tetragrammaton, a name of four
letters (...), by an excellency: for as much as the Name of God Abrah. Brovius
in festo Circumc. Dom. Conc. 3 Dei nomen significat quaternarius, ea ratione,
quia fere omnibus, nomen Dei Quadriliteru^ Latinis Deus, Graecis (...), Italis
Idio, Germanis Goth, Polonis and Illyrijs Bogh, Gallis Dieu, Hispanis Dios,
Hebraeis (...) Joh. Garhard lor. Theol. Tom. 1. de Natura Dei. 26. Obseruant
nonnulli appellationem Dei esse omnibus fere populis quadriliterum. Sic
Hebraeis (...) Assyrijs Adad, Aethiopibus (...) Persis (...): Aegyptis (...):
Magis (...): Arabibus Alla: Illyricis Bogi: Graecis (...): Turcis (...):
Hetruscis (...): Latinis Deus: Hispanis Dios: Italis Idio: Gallis Dieu:
Germanis Got: Polulis novi orbis Zimi: Vide P. Gregor. lib. 6. Synt. art.
mirab. c. 2.
in all tongues, and languages generally consists of four letters: and they
observe these four letters in Hebrew to be letters of rest, to signify unto
us, that the rest, repose, and tranquillity of all the Creatures in the world,
is in God alone: they teach, that it is a powerful name for the working of
miracles, and that by it Christ, and Moses have done great wonders. But these
their braine-sicke, superstitious, and blasphemous inventions, my tongue shall
not enlarge. Yet thus much I say of this Name, that there is a secret in it. It
is plain Exodus 6.3. There thus says the Lord unto Moses: I appeared unto
Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, by the name of a strong, omnipotent, and
all-sufficient God, but by my name JEHOVAH was I not known to them. This
secret I have heretofore unfolded unto you after this manner.

This great name of God, this name Jehovah; first it imports the eternity of
Gods essence in himself, that he is yesterday, and to day, and the same for
ever; which was, which is, and which is to come.

Secondly, it notes the existence and perfection of all things in God, as from
whom all creatures in the world have their life, motion, and being. God is the
being of all his creatures; not that they are the same, that he is, but because
of him, and in him, and by him are all things.

Thirdly, it is the Memorial of God unto all ages, as himself calls it. Exodus
3.15. The Memorial of his faithfulness, his truth, and his constancy in the
performance of his promises. And therefore whenever in any of the Prophets
God promises, or threatens, any great matter, to assure us of the most
certain event of such his promise, or threatening, he adds unto it his name
Jehovah: as here in my text: Thus says Jehovah.

Jehovah.] The strength of Israel: who is not as man, that he should lie, nor
as the son of man that he should repent. Wicked Balaam is driven to confess
as much, Number. 23.19. and there proceeds by way of question: Has the Lord
said, and shall he not do it? Has he spoken and shall he not accomplish it?
Samuel with boldness tells Saul, 1. Sam. 15.29. that the Lord, who is the
strength of Israel will not lie nor repent; and he gives this reason of it: For
he is not a man that he should repent. All his words, yea all the titles of all
his words are Yea, and Amen, so firmly ratified, that they cannot be altered;
so standing immutable, that they cannot be changed. Our Savior Christ gives
record hereunto. Matthew. 24.35. Coelum and terra praeteribunt. Heaven and Earth
shall pass away; but Gods words, they shall not pass away. The grass
withers, says the Prophet Esaias cap. 40.8. The grass withers, and the
flower fades, but the word of our God shall stand for ever.

Thus are we by this name Jehovah led to the consideration of the truth of God.
Gods truth is his essential propriety, whereby he is most free from all show
or shadow of falsehood. This his truth is eminent in himself, in his works,
and in his words. In himself, two manner of ways. 1. In respect of his
essence, whereby he truly is. 2. Forasmuch as he is the Idea, type, and
pattern of all the truth that is in any creature.

Now concerning the works of God, they all are Truth? whether they be
Internal, or External. His Internal works are either personal, or
essential: and both nothing but truth. For his personal works: the Father
does truly beget the Son, the Son is truly begotten of the Father: and the
holy Ghost does truly proceed from the Father and the Son: the like must we
say of his essential works; Whatsoever God has decreed, he has truly
decreed it, and does truly execute it.

Besides these Internal works of God, some works of his are called in the
Schools External. Such are the creation of the world, the conservation of the
same, the government of the Church, the covenant with the faithful, and the
like, in all which, most constant is the truth of God.

As the truth of God is eminent in himself, and in his works, so also is it
eminent in his words. This has but now, bin proved unto you by the confession
of Balaam, by the asseueration of Samuel, by the record of the Prophet Esaias,
and of our Savior Jesus Christ. I shut up this doctrine of the truth of God,
with the words of the blessed Apostle S. Paul, Romans 3.3. Let God be true, and
every man a liar.

Now let us see what uses may be made of this doctrine.

Is it true?

Is God truth in himself, in his works and in his words?

Hereby may every child of God among us be well assured, that our faith in God
the Father, in Christ his Son, and in the holy Ghost, proceeding from the
Father, and the Son, is most true and most certain: and cannot by any means
be deceived it self, or deceive us? For it is grounded, and supported, upon,
and by the words of him, who only is the true God, yea truth it self: who
has truly said concerning us, and all other, who believe in Christ, that he
has Romans 8.37.
loved us Ephesians. 1.4.
before the foundation of the world, has chosen us to eternal life; for our
better atteining whereof, he has Romans 8.3.
sent into the world his own Son in the similitude of sinful flesh; Galat.
4.4.
made of a woman, and made under the Law, that by his 1. John 1.7.
blood we might be cleansed from all sin, and Romans 5.9.
justified in the sight of God: that by his holy spirit we might be 1. Pet. 1.3.
regenerated, governed, defended from our enemies; and at that great day, the
day of the resurrection of all flesh, we may both body and soul be brought
into the full possession of eternal life.

Which being so, what remains on our parts, but that we abide constantly in
our holy faith, and persevere therein, even unto the end? Without perseverance
our faith will not avail us. For not every one, but such only as are marked
in their foreheads with the letter Tau, with the note of perfection, and
perseverance, shall enter the inheritance of the blessed. Ezech. 9 4. And not
every one, but he only, that endures to the end shall be saved. Matthew. 10.22.
And not every one, but he only which is faithful unto death, shall receive
the crown of life. Revel. 2.10.

Let the dog return to his vomit, and the washed sow to her wallowing in the
mire, as the Proverbs are. 2. Pet. 2.22. But let us hold fast our holy faith,
till it shall please God to call us to make our final account, how we have
spent the days of our Pilgrimage in this present world. So shall he, that is
holy, and true; who has Revel. 3.7.
the key of David, which opens and no man shuts; which shuts, and no
man opens; open unto us the gates of Jerusalem, which is above, and give us
full fruition of everlasting happiness.

Thus have you the first use of my first doctrine, touching the truth of God.
My doctrine was: God is truth in himself, in his works, and in his words.

The first use concerns our faith in Christ, and our perseverance therein. A
second follows.

It appertains to thanksgiving. For if our salvation, and eternal life do
depend upon the knowledge of the heavenly truth; and God brings none to the
knowledge of this truth but his elect, and chosen people; how great thanks
ought we to give unto God, not only for choosing us, but also for making it
known unto us by the revelation of his truth, that we are his chosen people.
For he has not only imprinted in the us image of that truth, which is
eternal in himself; but also daily brings us to such a measure of knowledge
of that his heavenly truth wherein consists our salvation, that we may be
saved.

What greater benefit can there be unto us, then this? What more ample
testimony of his eternal good will to us? For this benefit, that is, for the
knowledge of Gods heavenly truth, the blessed Apostle St Paul never ceased to
give thanks unto God. I thank God (says he 1. Tim. 1.12.) I thank him, who
has made me strong, that is, Christ Jesus our Lord: for he counted me
faithful, and put me in his service; When before I was a blasphemer, and a
persecutor, and an oppressor, but I was received to mercy. From this his
thankful heart proceeded those his words, Phil. 3.8. Doubtless, I think all
things but loss, for the excellent knowledge sake of Christ Jesus my Lord, for
whom I have counted all things loss, and do judge them to be but (...), even
dung, that I might win Christ.

St Paul's charity was not confined within the Temple of his own body; others
had a taste thereof. As the Corinthians; to whom in his first Epistle, cap. 1.
ver. 4. he thus manifests his affection: I thank my God always on your
behalf, for the grace of God which is given you in Jesus Christ, that in all
things ye are made rich in him, in all kind of speech. And in all knowledge. I
thank my God always on your behalf, not for your riches, for your honors,
for your large possessions, for your flourishing city, but for the grace of
God, which is given you in Jesus Christ for your free vocation, for your faith,
for your reconciliation, for your justification, for your regeneration, for
your hope of eternal salvation, for the preaching of the word of God among
you, and for your knowledge of the truth thereof.

The knowledge of this truth of God, far surpasses all the treasures of this
corruptible world. Shall not we then pour out our souls in thankfulness before
almighty God, for bestowing upon us so gracious a blessing, as is this
knowledge of the truth of God? Let us with the spirit of blessed Paul, account
all things which have been, or are gainefull to us in this present world, to
be but loss and dung in respect of this knowledge of Gods holy truth,
forasmuch as hereby we may win Christ. Thus have you the second use of my
doctrine. My doctrine was: God is truth in himself, in his works, and in his
words.

The second use concerns our thanksgiving for the knowledge of Gods truth.
The third tends to our imitation.

Is it true? Is God truth in himself, in his works, and in his words? Why
strive we not with all the faculties, and powers of our souls to represent our
God in truth? He in the beginning, in the first man, in our forefather Adam,
created and made us in his own image, after his own likeness. Genesis 1.26.
Then was man invested with glorious roabes, with immortality, with
understanding, with freedom of will; then was he perfectly good, and chaste,
and pure, and just, and true: Whatsoever might appertain to happiness, or
holiness, he then had it. For God created him so like unto himself in perfect
happiness, and holiness; that he might in some sort bear about with him the
image of the great and glorious God of Heaven.

But alas, our first Parent continued not long in that his first estate, of
purity, innocence, and integrity; by his fall he lost us, that his precious
Jewel, which, (had he stood fast) would have been unto us a chain of gold
about our necks; yea, as it is called Psalm. 8.5. A crown of honor, and
glory. But by his fall we are become miserable, and unholy, and wicked, and
unclean, and false; as unlike to God, as darkness is to light, and Hell is
to Heaven.

In this estate of sin, and death, we all lay wallowing, till God of his own
unspeakable mercy, and goodness raised us up by his grace to a better state;
a state of regeneration, and salvation; wherein all we whose names are written
in the Register of the elect, and chosen children of God, must spend the
remainder and residue of the days of our pilgrimage in this world. In this
state we must not stand at one stay, but must always be growing upward. We
must day by day endeavor to increase our spiritual strength, and change our
Christian infancy with a ripe and constant age; and add grace to grace, till
we become perfect men in Christ.

To us, now in the state of regeneration belongs the exhortation of God unto
the children of Israel. Leuit. 11.44. Be ye holy, for I am holy: And that of
Christ to his auditors upon the Mount. Matthew. 5.48. Be ye perfect, as your
Father which is in heaven is perfect: or as it is in St Luke. Chap. 6.36. Be ye
merciful, as your Father also is merciful. By which places we are not exhorted
to a perfection of supererogation, as Monks would have it, nor to a perfect
and absolute fulfilling of the Law; for that is impossible, so long as we
carry about us these vessels of corruption: witness St Paul Romans 8.3. But all
that we are exhorted to, is, that we would do our best endeavors to resemble
our God, and to be like unto him, in holiness, in perfection, in
mercifulness. Be holy, as God is holy: be perfect, as God is perfect; be
merciful, as God is merciful; non absoluta aequalitate, sed similitudine: not
absolutely, and equally, holy, perfect, and merciful, as God is, but by a
similitude. God is our Father: and will not we his children, like good
children, strive to be accomodated and fitted to our Fathers virtues?

Beloved, let us apply our selves to this imitation of our heavenly Father, to
be holy, as he is holy; to be perfect, as he is perfect; to be merciful, as he
is merciful; and for my present purpose, to be true, as he is true.

To this last we may thus be led. God is our Creator; and he is the God of
truth. Psalm. 31.5. Christ is our Redeemer, and he is Truth. Ioh. 14.6. We are
renewed by the holy Ghost, and he is the spirit of Truth. Ioh. 16.13. We live in
the bosom of the Church; and she is the pillar and ground of Truth 1. Tim.
3.15. Thus living, we are taught by the word of truth. Colos. 1.5. And are
brought to the knowledge of the Truth. 1. Tim. 2.4. And are sanctified by
Truth. Ioh. 17.17. Add hereto, that we are commanded every one to speak the
Truth, Ephesians. 4.25. And shall we do our best to resemble God in Truth? To be
true as he is true? Dearly beloved, since we are the children of Truth (for God
is Truth, and his children we are) let us walk, as it becomes the children of
Truth: let Truth be in our thoughts, in our words, in our works: in all our
ways.

What shall I more say to this point, but exhort you in St Paul's words, Ephesians.
4.25. That ye would cast off lying, and speak every man the truth to his
neighbor. For as much as the Lord will destroy all such as speak lies. This
you know by the fifth Psalm, ver. the 6. But how will he destroy them? It is
answered. Revel. 21.8. All liars shall have their part in the lake, which
burns with fire and brimstone. Thus have you the third use of my doctrine. My
doctrine was: God is truth in himself, in his works, and in his words.

The third use is, our holy imitation of God in truth.

There is yet a fourth use of this doctrine of the truth of God. It serves for
a redargution, or reproof of such as deny God, and his truth. Deny God, and
his truth? Can there be any, endued with a reasonable soul, so void of
understanding? Yes. There is a generation of men monstrously misshapen in the
powers of the soul, who spare not to break the cords of Religion asunder, and
to cast her yoke from them. They dare avouch with those in Tullie, Totam de
Dijs immortalibus opinionem fictam esse ab hominibus sapientibus reipub. causa,
vt quos ratio non posset, eos ad officium religio duceret: judging the service
of God to be a mere devise of man, for the better government of the
Commonwealth; wherein inferiors, since they will not be ruled by reason, must
be ordered by religion.

Tell such of the Scriptures, you may as well urge them with Lucians
narrations: tell them of repentance, they cast it behind them: tell them of
faith, they regard it not. Speak to them of baptism, they hold it of no
greater price, then the washing of their hands. Let them hear of the
Resurrection, this feeds them with many a merry conceit. They think pleasantly
with themselves, what manner of bodies they shall have at that day, of what
proportion and stature their bodies shall be; whether their nails, and hair
shall rise again. Impious wretches, thus they make a scoff at God and
religion: whom, were they used according to their deserts, the Preachers should
pronounce, and the Prince proclaim the foulest leapers, that ever yet sore
ran upon; very worthy to be excluded the host, and to have their habitation
alone: yea to be exiled the land, and to be expelled from nature it self,
which so unnaturally they strive to bring to naught. I say no more against
them; but leave them to the God of truth, whom they have denied, that he in due
time may repay them home with vengeance.

Thus far am I guided by my first doctrine, grounded upon this essential
name of God, his name Jehovah: importing his truth in himself, in his works,
and in his words: Thus says Jehovah.

Thus says the Lord] Is not this the prophecy of Amos? Are not all the words
of this prophecy, chap. 1.1. called the words of Amos the heardsman? What then
means this phrase, Thus says the Lord? As Almighty God in old time spoke to
our Fathers by the mouth of Moses, Exodus 4.12. So did he in succeeding ages
speak unto them by the mouth of other his Prophets, Luke 1.70. Heereto S.
Peter bears record, 2. Epist. 1.20. Know this, says he, that no prophecy in
the Scripture is of any private motion; and he gives the reason hereof, verse
21. For, the prophecy in old time, came not by the will of man, but holy men
of God spoke, as they were moved by the holy Ghost. Hence sprang those usual
and familia^ speeches in the books of the Prophets: The word of the Lord came
unto me; The Lord God has spoken, and this in my Text: Thus says the Lord.

This Lord, who thus spoke in old time by his Prophets, did in fullness of
time, when he sent to consummate, and perfect the work of man's redemption,
speak by his blessed Evangelists and Apostles. This appears by the faithful
promise made unto them, Matthew. 10.19. Take no thought how, or what ye shall
speak: It is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your Father, that speaks
in you. It must stand ever true, what is recorded 2 Timothy 3.16. The whole
Scripture is given by inspiration of God. The whole Scripture, and every
parcel of it, ha^h inward witness from the Spirit, which is the author of all
truth. Sweet then is the harmony, consent and agreement of all the Prophets,
Evangelists, and Apostles, from the first unto the last. Not one of them spoke
one word of a natural man, in all their ministeries: the words which they
spoke, were the words of him that sent them: they spoke not of themselves; God
spoke in them. Whenever were the time, whatsoever were the means, whosoever
were the man, wheresoever were the place, whatsoever were the people, the words
were the Lords. Hence arises this doctrine:

The Author of holy Scripture is neither man nor Angel, nor any other
creature, how excellent soever, but only the living and immortal God.

This truth is evident, by this which I have but now delired. For if God in old
time spoke to our Fathers, by the mouth of Moses, if God spoke by other his
Prophets, if God spoke by the Evangelists and Apostles, if all Scripture be
inspired of God; then it well follows; that God is the author of Scripture:
and therefore not man, nor Angel, nor any other creature, how excellent
soever. I can but point at the uses of this doctrine.

The first use is redargution. Is the living and immortal God the author of
holy Scripture? Here are all they to be reproved, who do vilify and debase
the sacred Scriptures, and esteem not of them, as of the word of God. Such are
they, who bearing in their foreheads, the stamp of Christians, have
notwithstanding given their names to that Antichrist of Rome, and the now-false
Church there. They shame not to affirm, that, setting aside the authority of
that Church, and her head the Pope, the Scripture is no better, then a Coll^q
W^rm^t.
doubtful, uncertain and leaden rule, then a Colloq. R^t^bon.
matter of debate, then Ludouic. Matoranus.
dead ink, then Eskins.
inken divinity, then a Pighius.
nose of wax, then a Colloq. Worm.
book of discord, then a Pighius.
dumb Judge, then Hosius. Gretser. Hereof see my second Lecture upon Amos 1.
Aesops fables.

Impious wretches; had they not wiped all shame from their faces, they would
never have laid such load of disgraces upon Gods holy word. Their Cardinal
Hosius stays not here, he proceeds a degree further. He coins a distinction
of Scripture, as its used by themselves, whom he calls Catholics, and as by
us, whom he calls Heretics. His words are in the end of his third book
against Brentius his Prolegomena. The Scripture, quomodo profertur a Catholicis
verbu^ est Dei, quomodo profertur ab Haereticis verbum est Diaboli, as it is
alleged by us, so must it be, forsooth, the word of the Devil, but as by
them, so only shall it be the word of God. Blasphemous Cardinal, he marches
not alone. Syntagm. Disput. Sedan. loc. 2. De origin sacrae Scripturae. 32.
page 17.
Telenus tells me of a champion of that side, as far forward as he, who
says; Melius consultum fuisse Ecclesiae, si nulla vnquam extitisset Scriptura,
that, had there never been any Scripture, the Church had been better provided
for, then now it is. Sedens in coelis ridet: there is a God in heaven, that has
these wicked impes in derision: upon whom, for their taunts, contumelies, and
reprcches against his sacred word, he will one day pour out his full viols of
wrath: then will he crush them with his scep^er of iron, and break them in
pieces like potters vess^ls. You have the first use. A second follows.

Is the living and immortal God the author of holy Scripture? Here then is a
lesson for us, whom God hat set a part to be Preachers, and Expounders of his
will. We must handle his sacred Scripture, as his holy word: we must ever come
unto you, as my Prophet here did to the Israelites, with Thus says the Lord,
in our mouths. We may not speak either the imagination of our own brains,
or the vain persuasions of our own hearts. We must sincerely preach unto you,
Gods gracious word without all corruption, or deprauing of the same. To this S
Peter well exhorts us in his 1. Epist. and chap. 4.11. If any man speak, let
him speak as the word of God. For if we, yea if an Angel from Heaven shall
preach otherwise unto you, then from the Lords own mouth, speaking in his holy
word, (...); let him be accursed; let him be had in execration.

The third use of this doctrine, is peculiar unto you (Beloved) who are
auditors and hearers of the word. Is the living and immortal God the author of
holy Scripture? Then (Beloved) it is your part to hear us with attention, and
reverence, whenever we stand before you, to expound Gods holy Scripture. S.
Paul commends the Thessalonians, Epist. 1. chap. 2.13. For that whenever
they received of the Apostles of Christ, the word of the preaching of God, they
received it not as the word of men, but as it was indeed, the word of God. In
like sort, if you receive it, it will save your souls. It is able so to do.
S. James shall be your pledge, chap. 1.21. Receive it therefore with
meekness, that by it your souls may live.

God spoke unto Israel in a vision by night, and said Genesis 46.2. Iaacob,
Iaacob. Iaacob answered, I am here. He was pressed and ready with all reverent
attention, to hear what his God would say unto him, and to follow the same
with all faithful obedience. Such readiness well becomes every child of
God at this day in the Church, where God speaks. Thus must he think within
himself. It is thine ordinance, o Lord, by thy word preached to instruct me,
concerning thy holy will. I am here, Lord, in all humble fear, to hear thy
blessed pleasure, what this day thou will put into the mouth of the Preacher to
deliver unto me, I am here, speak on, Lord, thy servant hears. If a Prince
of this world, or some great man shall speak unto you, you will attend, and
give ear unto him with all diligence; how much more then ought ye so to do,
when the King of Heaven, and Lord of the Earth, the living and immortal God,
calls upon you by his Ministers?

What remains but that you suffer a word of Exhortation. It shall be short:
in S. Paul's words, Coloss. 3.16. Holy and beloved, as the elect of God, let the
word of God dwell plenteously in you in all wisdom. This word of God, it is
his most royal and celestial Testament, it is the oracle of his heavenly
Sanctuary, it is the only key unto us of his revealed counsels; it is milk
from his sacred breasts, the earnest and pledge of his favor to his Church, the
light of our feet, the joy of our hearts, the breath of our nostrils, the
pillar of our faith, the anchor of our hope, the ground of our love, the
evidence of our future blessedness.

Let this word of God dwell plenteously in you in all wisdom. So shall your
ways by it be cleansed, and your selves made clean. Yet a very little while,
and he that shall come, will come, and will not tarry, even our Lord Jesus
Christ, who finding your ways cleansed, and your selves made clean by his
sacred word, will in his due time translate you from this valley of tears,
into Jerusalem which is above, the most glorious City of God. There shall this
corruptible put on incorruption, and our mortality shall be swallowed up of
life. Even so be it.

THE II. LECTVRE.
AMOS 2.1, 2, 3. Thus says the Lord; for three transgressions of Moab, and for
four, I will not turn to it, because it burnt the bones of the King of Edom
into lime.

Therefore will I send a fire upon Moab, and it shall devour the palaces of
Kirioth, and Moab shall dye with tumult, with shouting, and with the sound of a
trumpet.

And I will cut off the Judge out of the midst thereof; and will slay all the
Princes thereof with him; says the Lord.


IN the former Sermon I handled the Preface. The Prophecy is now to be spoken
unto. The first part therein is: The accusation of Moab; in these words; For
three transgressions of Moab, and for four.] Where we are to consider, 1. Who
are accused. 2. For what they are accused.


The accused are the Moabites; and they are accused of many breaches of the Law
of God. First of the accused.

Moab was one of the sons of Lot, begotten in incest upon his eldest
daughter. Genesis 19.37. From him by lineall descent came these Moabites, a people
inhabiting that part of the East, which is commonly known by the name of
Coelesyria, but was formerly the possession of the Amorites. These Moabites,
like their brethren the Ammonites, were professed enemies to the people of God,
and did evermore very grievously afflict, and vex them. In which respect, they
were for ever by God his singular commandment excluded from the Church. Gods
commandment is expressed Deuteronomy. 23.3. The Ammonites, and the Moabites shall not
enter into the Congregation of the Lord. And its repeated Nehem. 13.1. The
Ammonites, and the Moabites shall not enter into the Congregation of God. Thus
have you the accused; even the Moabites; the posterity of Moab, who was Lots
son; inhabitants of Coelesyria, and borderers upon the Holy Land, the
possession of the Israelites.

Now what are they accused of? Of many breaches of Gods law: in these words,
For three, and four transgressions] This phrase we met with five times in the
former chapter, and have heard it diversely expounded. The most natural, proper
and significant exposition commended to you was; by three, and four, a finite,
and certain number, to understand many; a number infinite, and uncertain. For
three transgressions of Moab, and for four, that is, for many transgressions
of the Moabites.

Among the many transgressions of the Moabites, their inhumanitie, and pride
are specially noted. Their inhumane, spightfull, and cruel dealing against the
Israelites, though a people of their own kindred, appears diverse ways.
First, because when the Israelites came out of Egypt, they met them not with
provision. Deuteronomy. 23.4. Secondly, because at that time they hired Deuteronomy. 23.4.
Balaam, the son of Beor, to curse them. Number. 22.5. Thirdly, because they
kept them in servitude under King Eglon eighteen years. Iudic. 3.12.
Fourthly, because without respect of their allegiance to the Kings of Israel,
due unto them upon King David's 2. Sam. 8.2.
conquest, they rebelled against Israel after the death of Ahab. 2. King. 1.1.
Fifthly, because they waged war against Iehosaphat King of Judah. 2 Chro^.
20.1. Sixthly, because they derided the Israelites, vpbraided them, and made a
jest at them. Ier. 48.27. Zephan. 2.8. You see the inhumanitie of the Moabites.
Concerning their pride, hear the words of Jeremy chap. 48.29. We have heard
the pride of Moab: (he is exceeding proud) we have heard his pride, his
stoutnesse, his arrogancy, his disdain, and the hautinesse of his heart. Of
this pride of Moab you may see more Esai. 16.6.

Of the many sins of Moab, you see two specially noted: their inhumanitie,
and their pride: for which, and others, the Lord protests against them, that
he will not turn to them. I will not turn to it] That is, as heretofore has
bin expounded, I will not be favorable to the Moabites; I will not spare them;
according to their deserts, so shall it be unto them: I will not recall them to
the right way; they shall run on to their own perdition: I will not turn
away the punishment, wherewith I have resolved to punish them: I am the Lord, I
am not changed. I will not turn to it] It is in effect, as if the Lord had
thus said: If the Moabites had offended but once, or twice, I would have bin
favorable to them, and would have recald them into the right way, that so they
might have bin converted, and have escaped my punishments: But now, since they
daily heap transgression upon transgression, and make no end of sinning, I
have hardened my face against them, and will not suffer them to be converted;
but indurate, and obstinate as they are, I will utterly destroy them. For three
transgressions of Moab, and for four I will not turn to it.

Here may you recall to your remembrances a doctrine sundry times recommended
to your religious considerations.

Many sins do pluck down from Heaven the most certain wrath and vengeance
of God upon the sinners.

God is of pure eyes and beholds not iniquity. He has laid righteousness to
the rule, and weighed his justice in a balance. His sentence is passed forth
from him, and stands unalterable: Tribulation and anguish upon every soul that
does evil. The soul that sins, it shall be punished. God makes it good by
an oath Deuteronomy. 23.41. That he will whet his glittring sword, and his hand shall
take hold on judgment to execute vengeance for sin. His soul hates, and
abhors sin; his law curses, and condemns sin* his hand smites, and
scourges sin. Sin was his motive to cast down Angels into Hell, to thrust
Adam out of Paradise, to turn Cities into ashes, to ruinate Nations, to
torment his own bowels in the similitude of sinful flesh. Because of sin he
once drowned the old world, and because of sin ere long will burn this. Thus
do many sins pluck down etc.

One use of this doctrine, is; to teach us heedfulnesse in all our ways, that
we do not by our many sins provoke Almighty God to high displeasure.

A second Use, is; to move us to a serious contemplation of the wonderful
patience of Almighty God, who did so graciously forbear these Moabites, till
by their three, and four transgressions, by their many sins they had
provoked him to indignation. These things I have heretofore labored to lay
unto your hearts.

Now therefore I proceed to the third part of this prophecy: wherein you have
the declaration of that grievous sin, by which the Moabites so highly
offended. This their sin was a sin of cruelty; expressed in these words:
Because it burnt the bones of the King of Ed m into lime.

When this was done, or by which of the Kings of Moab, or against which of the
Kings of Edom, it is not expressed in holy Scripture. Some would hither refer
that History, 2 Kings 3. Where it is recorded of the King of Israel, that he
assisted with two other Kings, the King of Judah, and the King of Edom, made war
upon the King of Moab. The King of Moab, when he saw the battle was to sore for
him, took with him seven hundred stout warriors, and would have broken throw
to the King of Edom, but could not. Through indignation whereof Piscat. Analys
in 2 Reg. 3.
some think that he took the King of Edoms eldest son, and offered him for
a burnt offering upon the wall: for so some will have the last verse of that
chapter understood of the King of Edoms son. But I take it more agreeable to
that story, there to understand the King of Moabs own son: that the King of
Moab should offer up for a burnt offering upon the wall his own eldest son,
thereby to obtain help of his God against his enemies. And so that story
appertains not to this my Text. No; though we receive the former
interpretation. For it is not here said, that he burnt the bones of the King of
Edoms son into lime, but the bones of the King of Edom himself.

It is a tradition of the Hebrews, that after the burial of the King of Edom
(that King, who went up with 2. Reg. 3.1.
Iehoram, King of Israel, and verse. 7.
Iehoshaphat King of Judah, to war against verse 4.
Mesha, King of Moab;) the Moabites, in vltionem doloris, to be revenged upon
him for the sorrow, which he wrought them; did dig up his bones, and burn
them. Of this tradition S. Jerome makes mention: They did dig up the King of
Edoms bones, and burn them. Great was their rage, great their cruelty. Death
appeased them not. The King of Edoms bones were not suffered to rest in his
sepulcher, but were taken thence, and burnt into ashes. These ashes some think
were used with lime, or mortar for the plaistering, pargetting, or
rough-casting of their houses: for as much as my Prophet here says, they burnt
the bones of the King of Edom into lime. If so; it was done Vindictae maioris,
and contumeliae causa; that they might take full vengeance upon the King of
Edom.

I may not pass it over with silence, that this cruelty of the Moabites, was
against the Edomites, without all respect of blood, and consanguinity. Edom,
the Edomites, or Idumaeans were descended from Abraham. Thus: Genesis 25.25.
Edom, the first Father of the Edomites, or Idumaeans, was otherwise called
Esau, and was son of Izhac, who was Gen 21 3.
son of Abraham. And Genesis 19.^7.
Moab, from whom the nation of the Moabites took their name, was son unto
Lot, and Lot was Abraham's brothers son, the son of Genesis 11.27.
Haran. There was then between the Moabites, and Edomites neerenesse of blood,
and full kindred.

Now we see what is the particular sin of the Moabite^^ for which this
prophecy is directed against them. Their sin is Cruelty, and a special kind
of Cruelty; even their denying of rest to the bones of the dead: and the more
odious and intolerable is their Cruelty, because it is against their own
kindred.

The lesson, which we are to take from hence, is this.

All kind of cruelty committed against a man, highly displeases God; but that
specially, which violateth, and extinguisheth the rites of consanguinity, and
natural affection.

In my page 74.
seventh Lecture upon the first chapter of this prophecy, I commended unto you
this doctrine: God is never well pleased with too much cruelty. In my page 230.
19. Lecture I recommended it unto you; varying my proposition, thus: Cruelty
is a sin hateful unto God. Now it comes unto you in another form, though
the matter be the same: All kind of cruelty, etc. My proposition has two
parts.

The first, All kind of cruelty committed against a man, highly displeases
God. The second; There is a kind of cruelty, that violateth, and extinguisheth
the rightes of consanguinity, and natural affection, and that specially
displeases God. First, to the first.

All kind of cruelty committed against a man highly displeases God.

No marvel. For all kind of cruelty is sin; and every sin must taste of Gods
high displeasure. All kind of cruelty is sin: For it is (...), a want of
conformity to the Law of God, a transgression of the law, a breach of the law.
Will you know against which commandment it is? It is against the sixth
commandment. The commandment is: Thou shall do no murder; or, Thou shall
not kill. Where to kill, or to do murder, by a Synechdoche, signifies any
kind of endamaging the person of our neighbors. We may not so much as hurt,
or hinder them. We are forbidden to sin against our neighbor, either in heart,
or in word, or in countenance, or in deed. And in this last branch is cruelty
forbidden us. So is the first part of my proposition confirmed; All kind of
cruelty committed against a man highly displeases God. The reason is; because
it is a sin, against the sixth commandment.

The use of this doctrine is to reprove such as delight in cruelty. Man of
all living creatures, ought to be the most courteous. His name in Latin is
homo, and that Boskier. Orat. Terrae sancta. Philip. 4. loc. 1. page 87.
one deriueth from the Greek (...), a word that signifies unanimity, and
concord: And from the Latin homo, is derived Humanitas, a word that signifies
courtesy, or gentleness. So that the very name of man, Homo, shows that
Hominem natura ad pacem composuit.
man is even framed by nature of unanimity, concord, courtesy, gentleness, and
peace.

Other Animantia cae^era ad ^^llum.
creatures are by nature even armed for war. Some have their horns, as
Unicorns, Hearts, and Bulls: some their teeth; as Boares and Dogs: some their
nails, as Griffins and Lions: some their poison, either in their tongues, as
Serpents, or in their tails, as Scorpions, or in their breath, as Dragons, or
in their eyes, as the Basiliske: Some have their hard skins for their coats
or couerings, as on land, the Armadillo; in the sea, the Tortoyse, the Crab,
and all shell fish. All these, and other beasts are armed by nature, partly to
defend themselves, partly to offend others. Only Man; he is borne in ermis,
tenellus, edentulus; he comes into the world naked, tender, toothles; and has
not wherewith, either to offend another, or to defend himself; to teach us,
that man should spend the days of his pilgrimage here in unanimity, concord,
courtesy, gentleness, and peace.

The more are they to be reproved, who living among men, have, as it were, put
off the nature of Man, by their delight in cruel dealing. Such is the racking
Landlord, who takes advantage against his poor tenant for every trifle. Such
is the greedy Usurer, who ears up his brothers substance with interest. Such
is the stony-hearted Physician, or Surgeon, that prolongeth his patients
disease, or sore, to wring the more money from him. Such is the troublesome
man, who unjustly vexes his neighbor in the law to his undoing. Such are a l
they, who are any way injurious to them, with whom they live.

I trust, there is none that hears me this day fit to be reproved for any
cruel deed against the dead, as the Moabites here are for their burning the
bones of the King of Edom into lime. And that you never may deserve with them
to be reproved, let it please you to hear a while, how this kind of cruelty
has in former ages been accounted of.

It is Virgil. Aeneid. 1.
written to the disprayse of Achilles, that he dragged the dead body of Hector
thrice about the walls of Troy. It is Live. Dec. 1. l. 1.
written to the dispraise of Tullia, proud Tarquins wife, that she drove her
wagon over the dead body of her Father Seru^^s Tullius the sixth King of Rome.
It is Plutarch in Cicerone, and in Antonio.
written to the dispraise of Antonie, the Triumvir, one of the three, who bore
the sway at the beginning of the Roman Empire, that he caused the right hand,
and the head of dead Cicero, that great Orator, to be cut off, and brought
before him, that beholding them, he might solace, and sport himself. And was
it not a note of too much cruelty in Antonies wife, whether it were Hieronym
Apol: aduersus R^ffinum.
Fuluia, or that proud Egyptian Queen Cleopatra, that she thrust her needle
through the tongue of that dead Orator? Thus have profane Authors Virgil,
Livie, Plutarch, and others, conducted only by natures light, noted, and
censured cruelty against the dead. And shall not the light of Gods holy word
conduct us Christians to alike measure of understanding, even to detest all
cruelty against the dead?

To this purpose the holy Evangelists, S. Matthew, and S. Mark; St Matthew chap.
the 14. and St Mark chap. the 6. have recorded it for a memorial to all
ensuing ages; that to the solemnizing of Herod's birth day, the head of John
Baptist was brought in a platter to Herodias. Cruel Herodias! could not the
untimely, and unjust death of that holy man satisfy thy greedy, and blood
thirsty heart, but that thou must have his head brought before thee in a
platter? and that at such a time, so solemn a time, the birth day of thy Lord,
thy King, thy supposed husband, Herod, even then, when he feasted his Princes,
and captains, and chief estates of Galilee? A dead man's head, besmered with
blood, was very unseasonable, and unfit sauce for such a banquet. Yet then was
John Baptists head brought before Herodias in a platter. What did she to it?
Doubtless, all the disgrace she could. One thing St Hierome in his second
book of his Apollogie against Ruffinus, specifieth, that Veriloquam linquam
discriminal^ acu confodit.
she thrust his tongue through with a needle.

In the 19. of John ver. 34. it is recorded to the memorial of all ensuing
ages, that when Jesus had by his sufferings upon the Cross, and payment of the
price of our redemption given up the ghost; then a Jew, a soldier of the
Jews, with a speere pierced his side, whereout forthwith issued blood, and
water. Upon that cruel soldiers fact Salmeron comment. in Euangel. Tom. 10.
Tract. 48.
one asks this question: Quid est, quod filius Dei tormentis in vitae
toleratis, non contentus, voluit etiam post mortem vulnera accipere? What is
it, that the son of God not content with such torments, as in his life time
he endured, would also after his death be wounded? Among many, and they great
causes, he gives this for one Vt innotesceret nostra immanitas, and saeuitia,
qui etiam in mortuum saeuimus; that notice may be taken of our immanitie, and
cruelty, for as much as we spare not the dead. It is the property of a Lion,
to spare a man, not only, that is dead, but also that lies prostrate, and
flat upon the ground: What favor a man receives from a Lion, Christ Jesus, the
Lion of the tribe of Judah, the sweet Savior of mankind, could not receive
from man. A soldier with a spear pierces his side, though he be dead. To
exaggerate this St Chrysostom homil. 48. upon John, says; Illudere mortuo,
quam ipsum crucis supplicium, long peius est: It is far worse to offer any
contumely or disgrace to one that is dead. then is the punishment of the cross.

In the 79. Psalm ver. 2. the Prophet in Isreal's behalf complains unto God,
against the surprisers of Jerusalem, that they gave the dead bodies of Gods
servants to be meat unto the fowls of heaven, and the flesh of his Saints to
the beasts of the Earth. So he aggrauateth their cruelty, and inhumanitie.
Monstrous was their cruelty, barbarous their inhumanitie, to cast the dead
bodies, and flesh of Gods servants, and Saints here, and there, to the end they
might be a prey to dogs, to wolves, to ravens, to vultures, or other beasts, or
birds, that live by carrion.

You see partly by profane examples, partly by instances out of the sacred
Scriptures, how cruelty against the dead has usually been censured. But what
is this to you, who use toward the dead all civility? All civility? I grant
you give the dead religious, and solemn burial; And so doing you do well.
You do well not to suffer Lanctantius Jnstitut. lib. 6.
figuram and figmentum Dei, the workmanship of God, Gods image, to be exposed,
and cast out for a prey to wild beasts, and birds. To bury the dead, it is
Ambros ^ib. de Tobia.
quotidianum opus, and magnum, it is every days work, and a great work; and
you do well so to account of it. For if the law commands you to cover the
naked while they are living, how much more ought ye to cover them, when they
are dead? If your friend undertake any long journey, you will take the pains
to bring him part of his way; how much more ought ye to afford him your
company, when he is going in illam aeternam domum, to his long, and everlasting
home, whence he shall return no more unto you?

You will say Cadaueribus nullus sensus; dead bodies have no sense; What need
then is there of such care of committing them to the earth? I reply in St Lib
1. de Ciu^tate Dei. cap. 13.
Austins words, Deo placent etiam talia pietatis officia: such offices of
piety, humanity, and civility do please God. The bodies of the dead belong
to Gods providence. He has appointed the burial of the dead, to confirm our
faith in the Resurrection of the dead.

Thus far by occasion of the first part of my proposition: which was, All
kind of cruelty, committed against a man, highly displeases God. You remember
the reason of it: the reason is; Because it is against the sixth Commandment.
The use of it, was a reproof of such as delight in cruelty, whether against
the living, or the dead. Now follows the other part of my proposition: this:

That cruelty which violateth, or extinguisheth the rites of consanguinitie,
and natural affection, specially displeases God.

For God, the God of nature, cannot in any wise like, that natures laws be
violated. By natures laws, its enacted, that there should be, that same (...),
much spoken of in the Schools; a peculiar affection of love from the parent to
the child, and from the child to the parent; from a brother to a brother,
from a kinsman to a kinsman. Now if cruelty shall be exercised from a parent
toward his child, or from a child toward his parent, or from a brother
toward his brother, or from a kinsman toward his kinsman, that same (...), I
spak of, is laid aside; the rites of consanguinity, and natural affection are
violated, are extinguished.

This doctrine may teach us, to carry our selves peaceably, and lovingly
toward our parents, our children, our brethren, our kinsmen, all that are of
our blood. There cannot be a greater bond between man and man, as men; then is
this bond of blood. I say precisely between man and man, as men, there cannot
be a greater bond, then is this bond of blood. For between man and man, as
Christians, there is a greater bond; the bond of one Lord, one faith, one
baptism, one God, and Father of all, which is above all, and through all, and
in you all, as St Paul speaks, Ephesians. 4.5.6.

The strength of the former bond of blood, shows it self in the Patriarch
Abraham, when there was a debate between his servants, and the servants of
Lot. All the tales his men could tell him, could not work in him any dislike
of Lot. To end that debate, Abraham goes to Lot* Abraham, Lots elder, and
uncle, his better in every respect, yet he stands not upon that; he looks not
when Lot should come, and stoop to him; but as in years, so in wisdom, in
mildness, in humility, in temperance of affections he^ passes him. Ouer-ruled
by such sweet virtues, he goes to Lot, tells him of their kindred, and mooues
him there by as by a strong reason, or a mighty bond, that love and pe^^^ might
remain betwixt them and theirs. His words, ar^^^ the words whereof Solomon
speaks, Prou. 25.11. they are like apples of gold with pictures of silver,
they are spoken (...) their place; and are recorded Genesis 13.8. where Abraham
thus speaks unto Lot: Let there be no strife, I pray thee, between thee and
me, neither between thy heard-men and my heard-men; for we be brethren.

We be brethren:] He might have said we be cosens, or thou art my nephew, my
brothers son, but he uses rather apellation of equality, and calls him
brother, to manifest his desire of peace and concord.

You see the strength of the bond of blood, how forcible it is between man and
man, as men. I told you of a stronger bond between man and man, as Christians,
and that was the bond of one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father
of all, which is above all, and through all, and in us all.

So there is a twofold kindred, or brotherhood. The one, by nature* the other
by grace: the one, by generation, the other, by regeneration. In respect of
both, we are tied with bonds of love. First, in respect of the former. After
Noah's flood, there was a division of countries made to the remainder of Adams
posterity: some dwelt here, some there; some in one place, some in another, as
they best liked; yet one blood remained amongst them, as a knot ever to join
them in amity and love, what distance of place soever severed them. Is it not
so still, though longer time, and larger increase have spread it further? Yes
(Beloved) it is so. And therefore this bond of blood, stock, house, lineage,
and kindred in the root, should continue among us, regard one of another, and
make us love one another, more then we do.

But this kindred, by nature and generation, so many degrees removed from the
root, our great grandfather Adam, the first of men, little moves us; we
disdain to take notice of it. Let then the other kindred, that of grace, and
regeneration, by its stronger bonds of love, tie and join us together. The
just and wise man knows (says Divine. Jnstit. lib. 5. c. 23.
Lactantius) cunctos ab eodem Deo, and eadem condition generatos, iure
fraternitatis esse coniunctos, that all who are borne of one God, and upon the
same condition, are joined together by the right of brotherhood. To which
purpose a great Calvin. Comment. in Genes. 13.8.
Divine says; Hac lege adoptati sumus omnes in Dei s^lios, vt alij alijs mutuo
fratres simus, We are all adopted or chosen to be the sons of God upon this
condition, that we mutually be brethren, one unto another.

Dearly Beloved, since we are become the sons of God upon a condition, let
us fulfill the condition; let us be brethren, one to another. That is, let us
not be cruel, one toward another; let us do no injury, one to another, let
us be merciful one to another, let us love one another. Let good Abraham be
the pattern of our imitation. If there be any variance, or iarring among us,
let us go one to another, and kindly entreat one another; I pray thee, let
there be no variance, no iarring, between me and thee, nor between my men
and thy men, for we are brethren.

But proud and rebellious flesh and blood will not suffer us to become
Abraham's; so wise, so meek, such lovers of concord and unity. Not suffer us?
Then is our condition fearful, and we may well expect, that the God of
Abraham at his great day of visitation, shall reject us, and cast us from out
his sight into the euer-burning lake. There is no entrance into the Heavenly
Canaan, for the cruel, injurious, malicious and despitefull man.

Its only Love that opens the gates of Heaven; without Love whatsoever you
do, its no advantage to you. S. Paul tells you, 1 Cor. 13. that though you
speak with the tongues of men and Angels, and have not Love, you are but as
sounding brass, or a tinckling cymball: and though you have the gift of
prophecy, and know all secrets, yea, if you have all faith, so that ye can
remove mountains, and have not Love, you are nothing and though you feed the
poor with all your goods, and give your bodies to be burnt, and have not
Love, it profits you nothing.

To be short, alms without Love, prophecy without Love, knowledge without
Love, miracles without (...), martyrdom without Love, prayer without Love, and
(...) like very commendable and good works, all are nothing. Love is the fire
that purifieth, it is the incense that perfumeth, it is the ointment, or box of
Spikenard, that sweetneth, it is the salt, that seasoneth all our good
thoughts, words, and deeds. I conclude with S. John's words in his 1 Epist.
cap. 4. verse. 7. Beloved, let us love one another, for Love comes of God, and
every one that loves, is borne of God, and knows God. For God is Love; if
therefore we dwell in Love, we dwell in God, and God dwells in us.

Now, O Lamb of God, that take away the sins of the world, take from us
all bitterness, and anger, and wrath, and crying, and evil speaking, with all
maliciousness. Raise up in us a desire of brotherly Love, that we may every
one have a care to help another, that our Love be not fained, false,
hypocritical, wayward, tedious, disdainefull, nor hunting after profit; but
that it be unfeigned and perfect, even toward our enemies. Grant, good Lord,
that thus retaining the study of concord, and loving one another, we may all
meet together in the unity of faith, and knowledge of thee, the Son of God,
till we become perfect in thee, our only Savior and Redeemer. To thee, O
Christ, with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, be ascribed all praise and power,
might and Majesty, dignity and dominion for evermore. Amen.

THE III. LECTVRE.
AMOS. 2.2, 3. Therefore will I send a fire upon Moab, and it shall devour the
palaces of Kerioth, and Moab shall dye with tumult, with shouting, and with the
sound of a trumpet.

And I will cut off the Judge out of the midst thereof, and will slay all the
Princes thereof with him.


WE are now to consider the fourth part of this burden of the Moabites; namely,
the commination, or denuntiation of such punishments, as God would bring upon
the Moabites for their sins. The punishments are described, first generally,
and then more specially. The general description is; Therefore will I send a
fire upon Moab, and it shall devour the palaces of Kerioth.

In the former chapter we met with this form of commination Verse
4.7.10.12.14.
five times. We now find nothing new, but new names, Moab and Kerioth.

Of Moab you heard somewhat in my last Sermon; that Moab was Lots son, and
that from him lineally descended the Moabites, a people inhabiting that part of
the East, which is commonly known by the name of Caelesyria, and was in former
times the possession of the Amorites. I now add, that from the same Moab, the
son of Lot, a city in Arabia, afterward called Areopolis, was named Moab, and
thence the whole province, region, country, or kingdom was likewise named
Moab. So says De locis.
Eusebius. Moab in this branch of my text, may signify either: either the
Metropolis, the chief and mother-city of the Kingdom of Moab, or the Kingdom
it self. S. Hierome here understands both.

The other new name is in the Hebrew, (...), in the vulgar Latin, Carioth; in
the English- Geneua translation, Kerioth; in Vatablus, Cerijoth; in Tremellius
and Iunius, Kerijoth; the Septuagint in their Greek translation, take the word
for an appellatiue; they translaate it (...), her cities. According to them,
these words should thus be read: I will send a fire upon Moab, and it shall
devour the foundations of her cities. But with S. Hierome, and sundry others
of the best Expositors, we retain the proper name Kerioth or Carioth.

We read in holy writ of two cities thus named. One was belonging to the Tribe
of Judah, and lay toward the coasts of Edom southward, mentioned Josh. 15.25.
The other was in the land of Moab; so says Eusebius in his Hebrew places:
Carioth in regione Moabitarum, sicut Ieremias scribit; Carioth is in the
country of the Moabites, as Jeremy writes. And where does Jeremy write so? In
his fortieth chapter, which is wholly spent in denouncing destruction to the
Moabites, verse. 24. it is said, that judgment is come upon Kerioth. And verse
41. that Kerioth is taken. The same judgment is here and there denounced; but
here more briefly, there more fully. Here we may observe, 1. The punisher: the
Lord; I will send. 2. The punishment: by fire; A fire. 3. The punished: the
Moabites; Moab, and Kerioth.


The first circumstance concerns the punisher: the Lord: for thus says the
Lord, I will send a fire.

The Doctrine.

See my Lectures upon the first of Amos.
It is proper to the Lord to execute vengeance upon the wicked for their sins.

This truth has sundry times been recommended unto you. Diverse were the uses
of it.

The first was, to lesson us to look heedefully unto our feet; that we walk
not in the way of sinners, to partake with them in their sins. Sins are not
tongue-tyed; they cry aloud unto the Lord for vengeance.

The second was, to admonish us, not to intermeddle in the Lords office; Its
his office to execute vengeance. We therefore may not interpose our selves.

The third was, to minister a word of comfort to the godly, against whom the
wicked, do behave themselves proudly and despiteously. God in due time, for
such their behauior will render vengeance unto them, and will punish them with
everlasting perdition.

The second circumstance concerns the punishment, which is by fire: I will
send a fire.

By fire here we are to understand, not so much a true and natural fire, as
a figurative and metaphorical fire. The sword, pestilence, and famine,
quodlibet gen^^s consumptionis, every kind of consumption, quaelibet species
excilij, every kind of destruction; hayle, water, thunder, sickness, or any
other of the executioners of Gods wrath, for the sins of men, may be
signified by this word, Fire. Fire in this place is put for the sword, for
war, as its plain by the sequel of this text. The Doctrine arising hence is
this:

The fire (whether natural or figurative) that is, the fire and all other
creatures are at the Lords commandment, to be employed by him in the
punishment of the wicked.

Of this doctrine heretofore.

The use of it is, to teach us how to carry our selves at such times, as God
shall visit us with his rod of correction; how to behave our selves in all our
afflictions. We are not so much to look to the means, as to the Lord, that
works by them. If the fire, or water, or any other of Gods creatures, shall
at any time rage, and prevail against us, we must know, that God by them
works his holy will upon us.

Here we see; God resolves to send a fire upon Moab, which should devour
the palaces of Kerioth: which was the third circumstance.

Must Moab and Kerioth, two chief cities of the Kingdom of Moab, through the
fire of Gods wrath be brought to ruin? it yields this doctrine:

No munition, no fortification, no strength can save that city, which God will
have destroyed.

One use of this Doctrine is to lesson us; that we put not any confidence in
any worldly help; but that so we use all good means of our defense, that
still we rely upon the Lord, for strength and success thereby.

A second Use is, to put us in mind of the fearful punishments, which God
lays upon men for sin. He deuoureth their cities, throws down their
strong holds, and spares them not.

A third Use is, to stir us up to thankfulness, for that it pleases God in
mercy to spare, not only our Cities, and strong holds, but also our country
villages and poor cottages.

It is not to be passed over without observation, that the palaces of Kerioth
are here threatened, to be devoured with this fire, sent from the Lord. Were I
now to speak before Princes, or great Estates, I could from hence give them an
Item, that they set not their hearts overmuch upon their castles, towers,
mansion houses, fair palaces, or other goodly buildings, for as much as, if
their sins deserve it, the fire of Gods wrath will devour all those. But my
auditorie is of another rank. Yet may you take a lesson hence. Must the
palaces of Carioth, for the sins of the inhabitants be devoured with fire
from the wrath of God? Your lesson is:

God depriueth us of a great blessing, when he takes from us our dwelling
houses.

The great commodity or contentment, that comes to every one of us by our
dwelling houses, has experimentally made good unto us this truth. The Uses of
it are diverse.

One is, to teach us to be humble before Almighty God, whenever it shall
please him to take from us our dwelling houses.

A second is, to admonish us, since we peaceably enjoy our dwelling houses, that
we use them to the furtherance of Gods glory.

A third is, to stir us up to bless and praise God day by day for the
comfortable use we have of our dwelling houses.

These things I have heretofore labored to lay unto your hearts, occasioned by
the like general commination or denuntiation of judgment (five times
repeated) in the former chapter, against the Syrians, the Philistines, the
Tyrians, the Edomites, and the Ammonites. Now we are to consider what is more
specially prophesied against these Moabites. For the easier explication
whereof, I observed two points: 1. The manner of the punishment. 2. The extent
of it.


Order requires that first I speak to the manner of their punishment,
expressed in these words: And Moab shall dye with tumult, with shouting, and
with the sound of a trumpet.

Moab shall dye] Moab is here put for the Moabites, the people of Moab, the
inhabitants of the Kingdom of Moab. Moab shall dye] There is a civil death,
there is a corporal death, there is a spiritual death, and there is an
eternal death. Which of these deaths were the Moabites to dye? The letter of
my text is for the corporal death. This corporal death is a separation of the
soul from the body: it is called corporal, in respect of the spiritual: it
is also called a temporary death, in respect of the eternal. This death
corporal, or temporary, is twofold* either natural, or accidental; if
accidental, it is subdivided into a violent, or a voluntary death: and is
common as well to the godly, as to the wicked; inflicted upon them, by Gods
just judgment for the sin of Adam. This is the wages of sin, and this is the
way of all sinful flesh. All must once dye.

We may a long time wrestle with the dangers of this world both by Land and
Sea: thousands may fall on our right hand, and ten thousands on our left, while
we stand we may have so good store of friends, that we may well say with the
Shunamite, 2. King. 4.13. I need no speaking for me, either to the King, or to
the Captain of the Host; I dwell among mine own people, where I can command:
we may walk in the light of the sun, that is, our prosperity may be waxen
so great, that we want nothing: we may have sails and oars at pleasure, as
Antiochus seemed to have, who thought in his pride to make men sail upon the
dry land, and to walk upon the Sea: 2. Mac. 5.21. we may think our selves to
be in league with death, and in covenant with the grave, and so promise to our
selves, many a prosperous, and pleasant day, as many as are the sands of the
Ocean: yet a time shall come, when all these things shall prove but vanity:
and Moab shall dye. All must once dye.

A great Dr. King B. of London. Lect. 20 upon Jonas, page 264.
Prelate of this Land, for this point, has well fitted this comparison. As one
that shoots at a mark, sometimes is gone, and sometimes is short, sometimes
lights on the right hand, sometimes on the left, at length hitteth the mark:
so Death shootes at Noble men beyond us, at mean men short of us, at our
friends on the right hand, at our enemies on the left; at length hitteth our
selves. The longer her hand is in practice, the more certainly she strikes.

Look into the fifth of Genesis; there shall you find, that Death was aiming
at verse. 11.
Enosh 905. years, and at last smote him: at verse. 14.
Kenan 910. years, at verse. 5.
Adam 930. years, at verse. 20.
Iered 962. years, at verse. 27.
Methushelah 969. years, but in the end overthrew them all. Now she strikes
sooner; within the compass of fewer years, within 60. years, or 70. she
seldom stays 80. years: And sometimes she strikes us in our youthful
days; yea, in the day of our nativity. All must once dye.

Moab shall dye] All must once dye. Death! It is of all miseries the last, and
the most terrible. A holy Apud Lud. Granatensem Exercit de Orat. and Medit.
Father has made against it this exclamation. O Death how bitter is the
remembance of thee? How quickly and suddenly stealest thou upon us? How
secret are thy paths and ways? How doubtful is thy hour? How universal is
thy signiorie and deminion? The mighty cannot escape thee; the wise cannot hide
themselves from thee; the strong loose their strength before thee; the rich
with their money shall not corrupt thee. Thou art the hammer, that always
strikes: Thou art the sword, that never blunteth: thou art the snare, wherein
all must be taken: thou art the prison, wherein all must lie: thou art the Sea,
wherein all must perish: thou art the pain, that all must suffer: thou art the
tribute, that all must pay. In a word; thou art such a one, as Almighty God
washes his hands of thee, and clears himself in plain words, by the mouth
of the Wiseman, saying, ( Wisd. 1.13.) that he never made thee. Surely thou
have thine entry into the world by the very envy, and craft of the Devil.

This exclamation against Death is very just in some sense: for Death may be
considered in a double respect; one way, as it is in its own nature; another
way, as it is changed, and qualified by the death of Christ. Death in its own
nature is a punishment of sin, a plague, a curse, or forerunner of
condemnation, the very gates, and suburbs of Hell it self: and in this respect
the forecited exclamation has due place. But on the other side, death being
changed, and qualified by Christ his death, it is no more such; it is no more a
punishment of sin; it is no more a plague; it is no more a curse. For it is
become a blessing; it brings an end to all our miseries; it gives full
deliverance to all our miseries; it gives full deliverance from all dangers; it
is made unto us a passage, a way, an entrance into everlasting life; it is like
a portall, or little gate, by which we pass from out this little prison of our
bodies into the kingdom of Heaven. The grave mean while is, but a resting
chamber, sweetly perfumed by the Death of Christ for our bodies; from whence at
the sound of the last trumpet, our bodies shall awake, and rise, and be
received into the paradise of heaven, to enjoy the most comfortable presence of
Almighty God there.

If death now changed and qualified by Christ his death, be a blessing: if it
be but a passage from this wretched life to that happiest estate in heaven, why
should death be feared?

This is a Case of Conscience, and may be resolved. There are two sorts of men
in the world: the one of them, who live in their sins, and dye without
repentance: the other of them, who with unfeigned repentance and faith in
Christ, do leave this world. The first have great reason to fear Death: Death
being unto them the very gate, and introduction into the Hell of the damned: of
whom we may well say, as Christ said of Judas, Math. 26.24. (...), it had bin
good for them, had they never bin borne. The second have no reason to fear
Death; Death being unto them, as the gate of Heaven. To such, Optimum est
nasci, its best that they are borne; and the next best for them is, mature
mori, to dye in a good hour. Their birth is to them a preparation to eternal
happiness, whereof their Death gives them full possession.

The consideration whereof made King Solomon the wisest of Kings, or men,
[praferre diem mortis, diei ortus;] it made him prefer the day of death,
before the day of birth; his words are Eccles. 7.3. Better is the day of death,
then the day that one is borne. Hence is it, that most righteous Job, chap.
17.14. calls Corruption his father; for as chilren have fathers for their
comfort, so had Job death, and rottenness: Corruption it self, as a father,
made Job fit for his grave and death; which of him was more wished then life:
as Origin, and Olympiodor have well observed. And hence it is that blessed
Paul, living in this world, and using it, as if he used it not, (for he had his
conversation in heaven, and had a true, and lively taste of the joys of the
world to come) desired to be dissolved, and to be with Christ: and this (he
was well assured) was best of all for him, Phil. 1.23.

Thus far (beloved) have I led you by occasion of these words, Moab shall
dye: upon which I grounded this general doctrine.

All must once dye.

In the illustration whereof, I signified that of evils, death was the most
terrible. To arm your Christian souls against the terror or fear of death,
I told you, that death is to be considered in a double respect; either as it is
in its own nature, or as it is changed, and qualified by the death of Christ:
in the first respect, it is very fearful to the natural man: in the latter,
it is very welcome to the resolved Christian. I further added, that there are
two sorts of men obnoxious unto death: the one sort do live in sin, and dye
without repentance: the other with unfeigned repentance, and true faith in
Christ do leave this world; to the first sort death is very terrible: to the
latter it is a very welcome guest. Now proceed we to examine the manner of
Moabs death.

Moab shall dye with tumult, with shouting, and with the sound of a trumpet.]
In tumultu, with a tumult, so some do read, Vatablus, Calvin, Mercer, Gualter;
in strepitu, with a noise, so Iunius, and Drusius; in sonitu, with a sound, so
Brentius, and the author of the vulgar Latin. The 70. have (...), Moab shall
dye through imbecility, or weakness. The word in the original is (...), and
it signifies a sound, a tumult, an inundation, or multitude of waters, which
ouerrunne their banks with violence and roaring. The meaning of the world is,
that Moab should die a death strange and extraordinary: which is more specified
in the next word.

(...) With shouting.] This very word we met with within the 14. verse of the
first Chapter, where it is brought to set forth the terror of that judgment,
which God would bring upon the Ammonites. The word I expounded in my 20. Sermon
on the first Chapter, and showed out of diverse Authorss that it signifies a
sound, a cry, a great cry, a vociferation, a shoute, such as Soldiers do
make, when on a sudden they surprise a City. To make good this exposition it
is added.

With the sound of a trumpet.] The use of trumpets in war has been very
ancient. The use of them is commanded to the children of Israel, Number. 10.9.
When ye go to war against the enemy, ye shall blow a larme with the
trumpets. After, they were used in the battle against Jericho, Josh. 6.5.
Joshua says to the people: When ye hear the sound of the trumpet, ye shall
all shout with a great shout, and the wall of Jericho shall fall down flat. To
this use Ezechiel alludeth Chap. 7.14. They have blown the trumpet, and
prepared all, but none goes to the battle. And S. Paul speaks of it, 1. Corinthians. 14.8. If the trumpet give an uncertain sound, who shall prepare
himself to battle? The Prophet Zephanie also has respect unto it, Chap. 2.16.
where he calls the great day of the Lord, a day of the trumpet, and a larme
against the strong Cities, and against the high towers.

From this ancient use of trumpets, we may gather the meaning of our Prophet in
this place. Moab shall dye, with a tumult, with a shouting, and with the sound
of a trumpet] Moab] that is, the Moabites, the people of Moab, shall dye] shall
depart this life, and leave this world, not quietly, and peaceably, in their
beds, but with a tumult, with a shouting, and with the sound of a trumpet] even
in war, or as the phrase is in the 14. verse of the 1. chapter, in the day of
battle. The doctrine arising hence is this:

War, one of the executioners of Gods vengeance, is evermore sent upon a
Land, for the sins of the people.

That war is one of the executioners of Gods vengeance, its plain in Ezech.
14.21. There God himself makes it one of his four sore judgments. The four
are; the sword, famine, the noisome beast, and the pestilence; the first is the
sword, an instrument for war, for war it self. These four are likewise
couched together in Ezech. 5.17. where thus says the Lord against Jerusalem: I
will send upon you famine, and evil beasts, and they shall spoil thee, and
pestilence and blood shall through thee, and I will bring thee sword upon thee;
I the Lord have spoken it. I will bring the sword upon thee: the sword, that
is, war; an instrument of war, for war it self: as in the former place.

These two places of Ezechiel, (to omit many other, as pregnant, here and there
dispersed throughout the sacred Volumes of Gods eternal word) these two do
speak plainly, that war is one of the executioners of Gods vengeance. That
it is sent upon a Land for the sins of the people, I made it plain unto you
by like evidence of holy Writ in my 20. Sermon upon the former chapter. My
proofs were taken from Levit. 26.25. Deuteronomy. 28.49. Ierem. 5.15. Whence I
inferred, that war, and all the evils of war are from the Lord; that war
is one of the accomplishments of Gods judgments; that war is sent by God
upon a Land for the sins of a people. So goes my doctrine.

War, one of the executioners of Gods vengeance, is evermore sent upon a Land
for the sins of the people.

The Use of this Doctrine is, to raise us up to the admiration of the
wonderful patience of Almighty God. We grieve the Holy Spirit of that sacred
Majesty with our manifold and daily sins: our sins of omission, our sins
of infirmity, and our sins of presumption; our sins of ignorance, and our
sins of wilfulness; our strife, variance, and debate; our usury,
oppression, and cruelty; our uncleanness, wantonness, and drunkenness; our sins
multiply as the sands of the Sea, they have pressed into Gods presence to fetch
down his vengeance upon us. Behold, look about you, and admire his exceeding
great patience. The loud crying of our sins has not yet urged the Lord so
far, as to make him come against us with his sorest judgment of war.

He has out of his fatherly love over us mildely chastized us. Not long since
he brake the staff of our bread, and sent among us a dearth and scarcity;
yet have we not returned unto him. Not long since he commanded his armies of
waters to issue from out their channel, and to over run man and beast for
many miles within this land; yet have we not returned unto him. Not long since
he let fly his arrows of pestilence, and yet they fly abroad to the killing
of many round about us; yet have we not returned unto him.

Not returned unto him? What? Can no medicine, that God applies, mollify our
hard hearts? Can none of his corrections amend us? Will we needs try whether he
will send a sword upon us? He shaked his sword over us, (many of us may well
remember it) when the great Spanish Armada floated on our Seas: but then as S.
James speaks, chap. 2.13. Super exaltauit misericordia iudicio, mercy exalted
it self above judgment, and we were spared.

Were we spared? What shall we render to the Lord for so great mercy? We will
with David, Ps. 116.13. We will take the cup of salvation, we will call upon the
name of the Lord, and will offer unto him the sacrifice of praise. Which
sacrifice of ours, that it may be acceptable to the Lord, let us cast away from
us all our transgressions, whereby we have transgressed; and with a new heart,
and a new spirit, return we to the Lord our God. But if we will persist with
delight, and go on in our old ways; our crooked, perverse, and froward ways;
our ways of wickedness; and will not be turned out of them by any of God his
milder chastisements and corrections, what can we expect, but the portion of
these Moabites, even fire and a sword from the Lord, and with them to die with
a tumult, with a shouting, and with the sound of a Trumpet?

Thus far de modo poenae, of the manner of this punishment to be inflicted
upon the Moabites. The extent follows.

I will cut the judge out of the midst thereof, and will slay all the Princes
thereof with him.]

I] the Lord, the Lord Jehovah, yesterday, and to day, and the same for ever; I
am not changed; all my words, yea, all the titles of all my words are Yea, and
Amen; Exscindam] I will cut off, I will root out, and destroy, Iudicem] the
Judge, the chiefest governor and ruler in Moab, the King. Nam Reges quoque
populum iudicabant, For Kings also did judge the people, and it is evident by
sundry places of holy Scripture, that the state of the Moabites was swayed by
Kings. I will cut off, root out, and utterly destroy, the judge, the King, out
of the midst thereof] Out of the midst of what? Of Moab? of Kerioth? Both are
mentioned verse. 2. David, Camius, and some other, say of Kerioth, which was
Seeds Regum, the city of the Kings habitation. The meaning is: there was no
city in the Kingdom of Moab so strong, but that from out the midst of it,
God would fetch the King, and cut him off.

I will cut off, root out, or destroy, the judge, the King, out of the midst
of the strongest city of the Kingdom of Moab, be it Moab, Kerioth, or any
other; I will slay all the Princes thereof with him; together with the King I
will root out all the Princes of the land. None shall escape my judgments,
neither Prince, nor King. You see the extent of this judgment here denounced
against Moab. Not only the meaner sort of people, but the Princes also; yea
and King himself, were to have their portion in it: and that as certainly, as
if they had already had it. For Jehovah, the Lord has spoken it. For its
added for a conclusion to this Prophecy, (...) says the Lord. The Lord has
said it, that neither Prince nor King shall be exempt from his judgments; but
shall as well as the lowest of the people be cut off, and come to naught.

The doctrine to be observed from hence is this:

God exercises his judgments, not only upon men of low and base estate, but
also upon the great ones of this world; upon princes and Kings.

This truth I have heretofore confirmed unto you, in my 21. Lecture, on the
former Chapter, handling those words Chap. 1. verse. 15. Their King shall go
into captivity he, and his Princes together, I proved unto you this doctrine,
When God punishes a nation with captivity for their sins, he spares
neither Priest, nor Prince, nor King. My now-doctrine for substance is the
same, but more general; God exercises his judgments not only upon men of
low and base estate, but also upon the great ones of this world; upon Princes
and Kings. The uses.

One is to admonish the great and mighty ones of this world, that they presume
not to sin against the Lord, as if they were privileged by their greatness,
and might. There is no such privilege. He that is Lord over all, will spare no
person. Princes, and Kings must feel the smart of his judgments.

A second use is, to minister comfort to such as are of low and base estate. If
the mighty by violence, and oppression grind your faces, and compass you
about, yet be not ye discouraged; God the judge of all accepts no persons.
He in his good time will avenge your causes, be your oppressors never so
mighty. For Princes and Kings must feel the smart of his judgments.

A third use is, a warning for our selves; that we set not our hearts upon the
outward things of this world, for as much as God, the Creator of all, will not
respect us for them. Do thou glory in this that thou art a mighty man, or a
rich man? For both, might and riches, Princes, and Kings are far beyond thee:
yet must Princes and Kings feel the smart of Gods judgments.

Let us make a fourth use of this doctrine, even to pour out our souls in
thankfulness before almighty God, for his wonderful patience toward us.
Our sins are as impudent, as ever were the sins of the Moabites, Our three
and four transgressions, our many sins do cry aloud to Heaven against us,
as the sins of the Moabites cried against them. For their sins God sent a
sword upon them, and did cut them off from being a nation; Gods wrath against
our sins, has not yet proceeded so far. We yet enjoy our happy peace.
Every man dwells under his own vine, and under his own figtree; and lives in
the habitations of his forefathers in peace, free from all fear of the enemies
sword. Such is our condition, through the neuer-too-much admired patience of
Almighty God. O let us not despise the riches of the bountifulness, patience,
and long sufferance of our God. St Paul tells us. Romans 2.4. That these do lead
us to Repentance.

These do lead us; shall we not follow? Beloved, while we have time, let us
betake our selves to Repentance. It was good counsel which Judith gave to
Ozias, Chabris, and Charmis the ancients of the city Be^hulia. (Judith 8.12.)
Quia patiens Dominus est, in hoc ipso paeniteamus, and indulgentiam eius fusis
lachrymis postulemus. The counsel is as good for us. Beloved, because the
Lord is patient, therefore let us repent, and with shedding of tears beg of
him indulgence, and pardon for our sins past. Its no wisdom for us, any
longer to presume upon his patience. It is true Dominus patiens, the Lord is
slow to anger; but the Prophet Nahum. Chap. 1.3. adds also, that he is great
in power, and surely will not clear the wicked.

This long for bearance of God toward us, patientia est, non negligentia: you
must call it patience, it is not negligence. Non ille potentiam perdidit, sed
nos ad poenitentiam reseruauit. says St Austine sermon. 102. de Tempore: God
has not lost his power, but has reserved us for repentance: and quanto
diu^ius Deus expectat, tanto grauius vindicat: How much the longer God expects
and waits for our conversion, so much the more grievously will he be avenged
upon us if we repent not. I shut up all with that exhortation of
Ecclesiasticus. chap. 5.7. Make no tarrying to turn unto the Lord, and put not
off from day to day. To move us to this speedy conversion, he adds this
reason: for suddenly shall the wrath of the Lord break forth, and in thy
security thou shall be destroyed, and thou shall perish in time of vengeance.
What remains but that we pray with Jeremy? Chap. 31.18. Convert thou us O
Lord, and we shall be converted* for, thou art the Lord our God.

THE IIII. LECTVRE.
AMOS 2.4, 5. Thus says the Lord; For three trangressions of Judah, and for
four, I will not turn away the punishment thereof; because they have despised
the Law of the Lord, and have not kept his commandments, and their lies
caused them to err, after the which their Fathers have walked.

But I will send a fire upon Judah, and it shall devour the palaces of
Jerusalem.


Our Prophet Amos has hitherto dealt with foreign Nations, with the Syrians,
with the Philistines, with the Tyrians, with the Edomites, with the Ammonites,
and with the Moabites. Six in number. All borderers upon, and professed enemies
unto the people of the Lord, the type of the Church. To each of these you have
heard the judgments of God menaced, his punishments threatened: all which are
accordingly fallen out.

Was not Amos his message from the Lord to the Israelites? Why then does he
first foretell foreign nations their judgments? The reasons are three;

First, that he might be the more patiently heard of his Countrymen, friend,
and allies, the Israelites. The Israelites seeing their Prophet Amos so sharp
against the Syrians, and other their enemies, could not but the more quietly
hear him, when he should prophecy against them also Consolatio quaedam est,
afflictio inimici, It is some comfort to a natural distressed man to see his
enemy in distress also.

Secondly, that they might have no cause to wonder, if God should at any time
come against them in vengeance, since he would not spare the Syrians, and other
Nations, though destitute of the light of Gods word, and ignorant of his will.

Thirdly, that they might the more stand in awe at the words of this prophecy,
when they should behold the Syrians, and other their neighbors, afflicted and
tormented, according to the haynousnesse of their iniquities.

Scitum est, ex alijs periculum facere, tibi quod ex vsu fiet. It is a
principle in Natures School, that we take example from other men's harms, how
to order our ways. From this natures principle, the people of Israel might
thus have argued. Will not the Lord spare the Syrians, the Philistines, the
Tyrians, the Edomites, the Ammonites, the Moabites? How then can we presume
that he will spare us? They silly people never knew the holy will of God; yet
shall they drink of the cup of Gods wrath? How then shall we escape, who
knowing Gods holy will, have contemned it?

You see now, good reason our Prophet had, (though sent with a message to the
ten tribes of Israel) first to let foreign Nations understand Gods pleasure
toward them in respect of their sins. From them he comes to Gods own
peculiar people; divided after the death of King Solomon, into two families, or
kingdoms; Judah, and Israel. First, he prophecieth against Judah, in the 4.
and 5. verses. Thus says the Lord, For three transgressions of Judah, and for
four, etc.

Wherein I observe two parts.

1. A Preface, Thus says the Lord. 2. A Prophecy, For three transgressions of
Judah, etc.
In the Prophecy, we may observe four parts.

1. A general accusation of Judah; For three transgressions of Judah, and for
four. 2. The Lords protestation against them: I will not turn away the
punishment thereof. 3. An enumeration of some particular sins by which the
Jews provoked God unto displeasure: Because they have despised the Law of the
Lord, etc. 4. A commination or denuntiation of judgment against them, verse.
the 5. But I will send a fire upon Judah, and it shall devour the palaces of
Jerusalem.
First of the Preface: Thus says the Lord] It is like that gate of the Temple
in Act. 3.11. And 5.12.
Salomons poarch, which for the goodly structure thereof, was called
beautiful, Act. 3.2. So is this entrance to my text very beautiful. We have
already beheld it six several times: five times as we passed through the
former Chapter, and once, at our first footing in this. There is engraven in
it, that same Tetragrammaton, that great and ineffable name of God; Jehovah.

Iohovah] Curious have the Sea Lect. 1.
Cabalists and Rabbis bin, in their inventions about this name. They will not
have it to be pronounced, nor taken within polluted lips. They note, that it is
nomen tetragrammaton, a name of four letters; of four letters (...), because
the name of God in all tongues, and languages, for the most part, consists of
four letters: and they add that these four letters in the Hebrew tongue are
literae quiescentes, letters of rest: whence they pick this mystery; that the
rest, repose, and tranquillity of all the creatures in the world is in God
alone. They further say, that this name is powerful for the working of
miracles, and that by it Moses, and Christ have done great wonders. These their
inventions are partly superstitious, partly blasphemus; but all brain sick,
and idle. Yet must we needs acknowledge some secret in this name. We are driven
to it by Exodus 6.3. There the Lord thus speaks unto Moses: I appeared unto
Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, by the name of a strong, omnipotent, and
all-sufficient God, but by my name Jehovah, was I not known unto them. The
secret is thus unfolded.

Jehovah, this great name Jehovah, imports, the eternity of Gods essence in
himself, that he is Heb. 13.8.
yesterday, and to day, and the same for ever, Apoc. 1.8.
which was, which is, and which is to come. Again, it notes the existence and
perfection of all things in God, as from whom all creatures in the world have
their Act. 17.28.
life, their motion, and their being. God is the being of all his creatures,
not that they are the same that he is, but because Romans 11.36.
of him, and in him, and by him are all things. Thirdly, it is the memorial of
God unto all ages: so God himself calls it. Exodus 3.15. the memorial of his
faithfulness, his truth, and his constancy in the performance of his
promises. And therefore whenever in any of the Prophets, God promises, or
threatens any great matter, to assure us of the most certain event thereof,
he adds unto it his name Jehovah. So here in my text: Thus says Jehovah.

Thus says the Lord] not, Thus says Amos: but Thus says the Lord. The Lord
then is the author of this Scripture; and not of this only, but also of the
whole body of Scripture. The doctrine,

The author of holy Scripture is neither man, nor Angel, nor any other
creature, how eminent, or excellent soever, but only the living, and immortal
God.

This doctrine I have heretofore commended unto you in my first lecture upon
this Chapter. The uses of it were three.

The first concerned us, whom God has set apart to be the Preachers, and
expounders of the Scriptures. We must handle them as the holy word of God. As
my Prophet here comes to Judah, so must we to you, with, thus says the Lord,
we may not speak, either the imagination of our own brains, or the vain
persuasions of our own hearts; we must sincerely preach unto you Gods gracious
word, without corrupting, or deprauing it.

A second use concerns you, who are auditors, and hearers of the word
preached. It is your parts to give ear unto it with attetion and reverence;
and like the Thessalonians] commended by St Paul. 1 Thessalonians. 2.13.] to receive
it, not as the word of us men: but, as it is indeed, the word of God.

A third use concerned the adversaries of the truth; the Papists who do
vilify, and debase the sacred Scriptures, and esteem not of them, as of the
word of God. How shamfully they have loaded this holy word of God with
disgraceful terms, calling it, a doubtful uncertain, and a leaden rule, a
poor kind of element, a book of discord, a matter of debate, dead ink,
inken divinity, a dumb judge, a nose of wax, Aesops fables, I have Lect. 2.
in Amos 1. page 18. etc.
heretofore delivered unto you.

But who are they, out of whose mouths, and pens, such bitterness against Gods
holy word has been vented? Are they our Countrymen? Are they not rather
strangers to us, Papists of other Nations? Pighius, Hosius, Gretser, Canon
Lewis of Lateran, the collocutors at Worms, and Ratisbon? What are these to
us? It may be our English Papists do esteem of the Scriptures more
reverently. More reverently! Let one speak for all. Dr. Fox Martyrel. vol. 2.
l. 7. An. 1513. page 735.
Bennet, a Lawyer, Chancellor, and Vicar general to Richard Fitz-Iames,
Bishop of London, called before him one Richard Butler, for being of that
Religion, which we this day, through Gods goodness do maintain, and
profess. This Butler used much to read the Bible; for which an article was
thus framed against him: We object to you, that diverse times, and especially
upon a certain night you erroniously and damnably read in a great Book of
heresy, certain Chapters of the Evangelists in English, containing in them
diverse erroneous, and damnable opinions, and conclusions of heresy. What
Christian ear can endure such blasphemy? that the Book of God should be
called, a great book of heresy; that some Chapters of the Evangelists should
be said to contain in them diverse erroneous and damnable opinions, and
conclusions of heresy, What Christian care can endure this?

Must that Book, to which we are so often sent, by Deuteronomy. 17.11.
Moses, by the Esa. 8.20. M^lac. 2.7. Psalm. 1.1. and 119.2.
Prophets, by Joh. 5.39.
Christ himself* by his holy Luke 16.29.
Evangelists, and Act 17.^1. 2. Tim. 3.1^.
Apostles, must that Book be noted for erroneous, and damnable opinions, and
conclusions of heresies?

St Paul thought much otherwise. He in the 2. Tim. 3.15. speaking of the holy
Scriptures, says; that they are able to make men wise unto salvation. He
adds further, ver. 16. that the whole Scripture is given by inspiration of
God, and is profitable to teach, to improve, to correct, and to instruct in
righteousness, that the man of God may be absolute, being made perfect unto
all good works.

Magnificum testimonium: A most sufficient testimony, for the authority,
dignity, and worth of holy Scripture. First, it is (...), divinely inspired of
God; given immediately from God to men. Secondly, it is (...) profitable.
Profitable many ways; for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for
instruction. Doctrine is of things to be believed; Reproof of things to be
refuted; Correction concerns vices; Instruction virtues. Every way the whole
Scripture is profitable, and is able to make men wise unto salvation. And yet
must this holy Scripture, be noted for a great Book of Heresy: for containing
erroneous and damnable opinions, and conclusions of heresy?

2. Pet. 1.19.
St Peter thought much otherwise. He in his 2. Epist. and 1. Chapter, having
proved the certainty of Evangelical doctrine, by two arguments, one drawn
from his own experience, the other from the testimony of Almighty God in a
voice from Heaven, verse. 16, 17, 18. adds verse. 19. a third argument, drawn
from the consent of the Prophets: We have also a most sure word of the
Prophets, to the which ye do well that ye take heed, as unto a light that
shines in a dark place, until the day dawne, and the day star arise in your
hearts. So that ye first know this, that no prophecy in the Scripture is of
any private motion. For the prophecy came not in old time by the will of man:
but holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost.

Where first, the blessed Apostle calls the writings of the Prophets (...), a
most sure word. Secondly, he advises us to be diligently conversant in those
writings: ye shall do well to take heed unto them. Thirdly, he shows the
necessity, and use of them, by a comparison: they are as a light, that shines
in a dark place. Fourthly, he prescribes the time of our diligence: we must
take heed unto them, until the day dawne, and the day star arise in our
hearts. Fifthly, he notes their difficulty. Difficultas stimulus debet esse
diligentiae; the more hard they are to be understood, the greater must our
diligence be: No prophecy in the Scripture is of any private motion. It is not
in man's power rightly to understand the Prophets. The Treasurer to the Queen
of Ethiopia confesses as much. Act. 8.31. Sixthly, he poynteth at the author of
Holy Scripture, not man's will, but the Holy Ghost; For, the prophecy in old
time came not by the will of man, but holy men of God spoke, as they were
moved by the Holy Ghost.

What St Peter in this place affirms of the Prophetical Books, is true also
of the Evangelical, and Apostolical; what he affirms of the old testament,
is true also of the new. The new and the old differ not in substance. In veteri
Testamento est occultatio novi, and in novo Testamento est manifestatio
veteris. So says St Austin lib. de Catechizandis rudibus. cap. 4. In the old
Testament the new is trid, and in the new the old is manifested. The like the
same good Father has. Qu. 37. super Exodum: In vetere novum latet, and in novo
vetus patet: in the old the new is covered, and in the new the old is opened.
Old and new, both do agree in substance. Now make we our collection.

The whole Scripture containing both Testaments, old and new, is (...) a most
sure word: to it we must take heed, as to a light that shines in a dark
place, till the day dawne, and the day star arise in your hearts: and this we
must know, that no Scripture in either of the Testaments, old or new, is of any
private motion: and that neither old nor new Testament came to us, by the will
of man, but that holy men of God, have conveyed them unto us, as they were
moved by the holy Ghost. And yet must this holy Scripture, be noted for a
great Book of Heresy? for containing erroneous, and damnable opinions, and
conclusions of Heresy?

The first pillars of the Primitive Church, the ancient Fathers thought much
otherwise. Because I cannot stand long upon this point, one shall serve for
all. Sweet Saint Chrysostom in his ninth Sermon upon the Epistle to the
Colossians, thus speaks to his hearers: (...); ye, my secular and lay
auditors, hear me, I beseech you: Get you Bibles, your souls physic: if you
be unwilling, to be at charge for the whole, yet at least buy the new
Testament: the Evangelists, and Apostles will be your daily and diligent
teachers. If any grief befall you, make your repair hither, as to an
Apothecaries shop, here shall you have variety of medicines, fit to cure you.
If any damage, if loss of friends, if death come, here may you find comfort.
In a word, the cause of all evil is, not to know the Scripture.

You see how far this good Father is, from calling the Bible, a Book of
heresies, as some late Papists have done: He holds it to be the greatest
treasure this world has, and thinks it for you very expedient, to have one of
them in your houses, that at every opportunity, you may be reading in it.

If any shall here object, I am toward the Law, I am employed about public
affairs, I am a tradesman, I am a married man, I have children to maintain, I
have a Family to care for, I have worldly businesses to look unto, it is not
my part to read the Scriptures; this office belongs to them rather, who have
bidden the world farewell: to such St Chrysostom shall answer Homil. 3. de
Lazaro. Quid a^ homo? What say thou man? Is it not a part of thy business to
turn over the Scriptures, because thou art distracted with many cares? Immo,
tuum est magis, quam ill^rum. Yea the reading of the Scripture belongs to
thee, rather then to them, who have bidden the world farewell, because they
need not so much the help of Scripture, as you do, who are as it were tossed
in the waves of troubles.

To conclude this point. Let Papists set light by the Sacred Scriptures; let
them debase, vilify, and disgrace them to their own utter confusion and
perdition: we, through Gods goodness, have learned a better lesson: that the
word of God, which we call Scripture, is Chrysostom. hom. 7. de poenitentia.
a haven free from raging surges, a well fortified bulwark, a to^re not
staggering; an advancement not to be taken from us by violence, no not any way
to be diminished; a stable blissefulnesse at no time languishing; a
neuer-failing pleasure: whatsoever good a man can speak of, Sacra comperiet in
Scriptura, he shall find it in the Holy Scripture. So says sweet Chrysostom,
Homil. 7. De poenitentia. In my first Sermon before you upon this chapter, I
delivered unto you the same effect, thus.

The word of God (which we call Scripture) it is his most royal and Celestial
Testament, it is the Oracle of his heavenly Sanctuary, it is the only Key,
unto us, of his revealed counsels, it is Milk from his sacred breasts, the
Earnest and Pledge of his favor to the Church, the Light of our feet, the Joy
of our hearts, the Breath of our nostrils, the Pillar of our faith, the Anchor
of our hope, the ground of our love, the Evidence of our future blessedness.

Now therefore, as the Elect of God, holy and beloved, let this word of God
dwell plenteously in you, in all wisdom: frequent this place to hear it read
and expounded unto you* and at home teach and admonish your own selves in
Psalms, and hymns, and spiritual songs. My exhortation is the same, that S.
Paul made unto the Colossians, Chap. 3.16. Thus much of the preface. The
prophecy follows.

The first part thereof is a general accusation of Judah: For three
transgressions of Judah, and for four. Wherein we are first to consider who
are the accused, in the name, Judah. Secondly, whereof they are accused; For
three trasgressions, and for four. First of the accused.

The accused are the inhabitants of the Kingdom of Judah. The Kingdom of
Judah is taken sometimes late, sometimes stricte: sometimes in a large,
sometimes in a strict sense. In the large, it betokens all the twelve tribes
of Israel: in the strict sense, it betokens only two tribes; Judah and
Benjamin.

Judah, and Israel at first were but one kingdom, which afteward was divided
into two; the Kingdom of Judah, and the kingdom of Israel. When, and how this
was done, it is expressly delivered in 1 Kings 12. and in 2 Chro. 10. It was
after the death of King Solomon, and thus.

Rehoboam, King Salomons son, censured by Ecclesiasticus, chap. 47, 23. to be
(...), the foolishness of the people, and one that had no understanding,
succeeding in his fathers throne, did, upon advise given him by his young
counselors, promise sharp usage and hard measure unto his people: My least
part, my little finger shall be bigger then my fathers loins: whereas my
father did burden you with a grievous yoke, I will make it heavier: my father
has chastized you with rods, but I will correct you with scourges.

This his unkind and evil entreating of a people, which of late, in King
Salomons time, saw good and peaceable days, did cause a rebellion and revolt.
Ten of the twelve tribes much discontented, brake forth into speeches of
impatiency. What portion have we in David? We have no inheritance in the son
of Ischai: to your tents, O Israel: now see to thine own house, David. So they
forsook Rehoboam their rightful Lord, and set up unto themselves a wew King,
Jeroboam son of Nebat: yet were these children of Israel, who dwelt in the
cities of Judah, subject to Rehoboam still.

Thus you see, Israel divided from Israel: ten tribes from the other two. Two
tribes; the tribes of Judah and Benjamin continued in their obedience to the
house of David: the other ten tribes forsook it, and fell away.

The ten revolted tribes have diverse appellations in the sanctified writings
of the holy Prophets: Bethel, Bethauen, Samaria, Iezreel, Joseph, Ephraim,
Jacob, Israel: these names are appropriate, to signify the Kingdom of Israel.

The other two tribes, Judah, and Benjamin, called but one tribe in the 1 King.
11.13. because of the mixture of their possessions, these two tribes settled in
their faithfulness and obedience to the seed of David, have likewise in the
sacred Scriptures their diverse appellations. Sometimes Judah, sometimes
Benjamin, sometimes Jerusalem, sometimes Sion, sometimes the house of David,
are peculiarly designed to signify the Kingdom of Judah.

Judah is one of these appellations, and that is the Judah in my text,
properly, verse. 5. I will send a fire upon Judah, that is, upon the Kingdom of
Judah. And by a figure, in this first branch of this prophecy, where Judah is
put for the inhabitants of the kingdom of Judah. Thus have you the parties
accused, the inhabitants of the kingdom of Judah. But whereof are they accused?
Of sinning against the Lord. So goes the letter of my text; For three
transgressions of Judah, and for four.

What are these three and four transgressions? Arias Montanus makes three of
them to be, manslaughter, incest, and idolatry: The first is manslaughter.
Esaias points at it, chap. 1.15. Your hands are full of blood. The second is
incest. Jeremy points at it, chap. 23.10. The land is full of adulterers. The
third is idolatry. Hoseah points at it, chap. 1.2. The land has committed
great whoredom, departing from the Lord. The fourth, which of all, is the most
flagicious and heinous, is expressed in this text; and it is their rejecting,
abolishing, or disanulling of Gods laws and commandments.

For three transgressions of Judah, and for four.] Albertus the Great, B. of
Ratisbon, will have three of these transgressions to be expressed in this text.
The first of them is, Legis abiectio, the abiection, or contempt of Gods Law:
They have despised the law of the Lord. The second is, praeceptorum non
obseruatio, the not observing of Gods commandments: They have not kept his
commandments. The third is, ad Idola conuersio: their conversion to Idols:
Their lies caused them to err, after which their fathers have walked. These
three you see expressed in the text. But what is the fourth? It is Sacrati loci
prophanatio, the profanation of the hallowed place.

For three transgressions of Judah, and for foure] Paulus de Palatio does
otherwise descant upon these three and four transgressions. The first he will
have to be committed by Iehoram, son of Iehosaphat, King of Judah, who to make
himself strong in his Kingdom, slew with the sword six of his brethren, and
some of the Princes of Israel, 2 Chro. 21.4. The second by Ioash, son of
Ahaziah, who allured by the flattery of some of his Princes, slew Zacharias,
the son of Iehoiada: or Barachias, between the temple and the altar, 2 Chronicles. 24.21. Matthew. 23.35. The third, by King Amaziah, who, lifted up with
pride for his victory obtained against the Edomites, did provoke the King of
Israel to fight, 2 Chronicles. 25.17. Thus have you three of these transgressions.
The fourth, says this Paulus de Palatio, needs no enquiry. And why so? Amos
in this text declares it. The Kingdom of Judah from Rehoboams time was most
propense unto idolatry: from that time, they cast away the law of the Lord,
they kept not his commandments, they served Idols, after which their fathers
walked.

For three transgressions of Judah, and for foure] This phrase we met with five
times in the former chapter, and once in this. The most natural, proper, and
significant exposition, heretofore commended unto you, is this: to understand
by three and four, many. A number finite and certain, is put for a number
infinite and uncertain. For three transgressions of Judah, and for four; that
is, for many transgressions. As often, as he will, God forgiueth, though we
sin many a time. It is but the custom of the Scripture thus to speak: God
waits for us twice and thrice, that is, a good while, to have us return from
our evil ways unto repentance: but the fourth time, that is, at length, when
he sees us persist in our impenitency, he protests against us, as here
against Judah, I will not turn to you, I will not turn away your punishment.

I will not turn away the punishment thereof] These words are diversely
rendered: by Gualter, non conuertam eum, I will not turn Judah, I will not
recall him into the right way; he shall run to his own perdition. By Mercer:
non parcam ei, I will not spare Judah: according as his desert shall be, so
shall he have. In our English- Geneua translation, I will not turn to it. In
our late Church-Bible, I will not spare him. In our newest translation, I will
not turn away the punishment thereof. So read Iunius and Tremellius, according
to the Hebrew, Non auertam istud, I will not turn away this punishment, which
I have resolved to lay upon Judah. The sum of both accusation and
protestation is this. If Judah had sinned but once, or a second time, I would
have been favorable to them, and would have recalled him into the right way,
that so they might have been converted, and might have escaped my punishments,
but now whereas they do daily heap transgression upon transgression, and make
no end of sinning, I have hardened my face against them, I will not turn them
unto me, I will not turn to them, I will not spare them, I will not turn away
the punishment, which I have resolved to bring upon them; but indurate and
obstinate, as they are, I will utterly destroy them. For three transgressions
of Judah, and for four, I will not turn away the punishment thereof.

Thus have you the exposition of the two first parts of this prophecy; of the
accusation of Judah, and the Lords protestation against them. Now let us see
what doctrine may be taken hence for our further instruction, and the
reformation of our lives. Does God resolve to punish Judah, for three and four
tra^sgressions? The doctrine arising hence is this.

Three transgressions, and four, that is, many sins, do provoke Almighty
God to lay his punishments upon us.

God is of pure eyes, and beholds no iniquity. He has laid righteousness
to the rule, and weighed his justice in a balance. His sentence is passed
forth, and stands, like the law of the Medes and Persians, irreuocable:
Tribulation and anguish, upon every soul that does evil. The soul that
sins, it self must bear the punishment. God makes it good with an oath,
Deuteronomy. 32.41. that he will whet his glittering sword, and his hand shall take
hold on judgment, to execute vengeance for sin. His soul hates, and
abhors sin; his law curses and condemns sin; his hand smites and
scourges sin. Sin was his motive to cast Angels out of Heaven, to thrust
Adam out of Paradise, to turn Cities into ashes, to ruinate Nations, to
torment his own bowels in the similitude of sinful flesh. Sin made him
heretofore to drown the old world; and sin will make him hereafter to burn
this. So true is my doctrine.

Many sins do provoke Almighty God to lay his punishments upon us.

Let us now make some use of this doctrine.

Do many sins cause Almighty God to punish us? First, we are hence taught,
at what time soever God shall lay his rod upon us, to seek the true cause
thereof in our selves. Malorum omnium nostrorum causa, peccatum est, says S.
Austin, Sermon. 139. de Tempore. The cause of all evil is within us: it is sin
within us. It is impiety to imagine, that God will punish us without a cause.
Non pateremur, nisi mereremur, says that good Father; We should not undergo
any cross or disturbance, unless we deserved it. Wherefore let us, every one
of us in particular, when God comes near to us in judgment, to touch,
either our estates with want, or our callings with disgrace, or our bodies with
sickness, or our souls with heaviness; let us have recourse to the sins within
us, which have deserved this, and turn we to the Lord our God. Water, tears,
sorrow, repentance, will better satisfy him, pacify him, move him, alter
him, then whatsoever vengeance, or plagues, or blood, or death.

Let us enter into a due consideration of our corruptions, our transgressions,
our sins, wherewith, as with a heavy burden, we are laden: and return we
to the Lord our God: adulterers, murderers, idolaters, the sacrilegious, the
ambitious, the covetous, drunkards, railers, liars, the blasphemous, swearers,
forswearers, all, who by any their evil ways provoke God to the execution of
his justice, must take part in this conversion. Let no man draw back; let not
the heinousness of our fore-passed sins deter us or keep us, from so holy
a course. I dare affirm with S. Austin Sermon. 181. de Tempore. Non nocent
peccata praeterita, si non placent praesentia. Sins past hurt not, if sins
present please not. Let us even now at this present in detestation of sin
resolve to sin willingly no more, and our sins past shall never hurt us. O
let not this use slip out of our minds. When God his heavy hand is upon us in
any cross or tribulation, seek we out the cause of it in our selves, in our
sins.

A second use follows: and it is to stir us up to a serious contemplation
of the wonderful patience of Almighty God, who did so graciously forbear
those inhabitants of Judah, till by their three transgressions, and by their
four, they had provoked God unto displeasure. The holy Scriptures are frequent
in proclaiming God to be merciful, and gracious, and long-suffering, and of
great goodness. He cries to the foolish, Prou. 1.22. O ye foolish, how long
will ye love foolishness? He cries to the faithless, Math. 17.17. O
generation, faithless and crooked, how long now shall I suffer you? He cries
to Jerusalem, Matthew. 23.37. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often? What could the
Lord have done more unto his vineyard, then he had done unto it? He dressed it
with the best and kindliest husbandry that his heart could invent, as
appears, Esa. 5.2. Such careful dressing could not but deserve fruit. This
fruit he required not at the first hour, but tarried for it the full time,
even till the autumn and time of vintage; if then it failed, did it not
deserve to be eaten up? Look into the 13. of Luke verse. 6. There shall you see
the Lord waiting three years for the fruit of his fig tree, yea and content,
that digging, and dunging, and expectation a fourth year may be bestowed upon
it. Doubtless God is merciful, and gracious, and long suffering, and of great
goodness.

Hereof (Beloved) we have great experience. We have our three transgressions,
and our four too, as Judah had. Our manifold sins, our sins of omission, and
our sins of commission, our sins of ignorance, and our sins of
wilfulness, our sins of infirmity, and our sins of presumption, do they
not day by day, impudently and sawcily press into the presence of Gods
Majesty, to procure his vengeance against us? And yet we must needs confess
it, God is good, and patient toward us.

Beloved, let us not abuse so great goodness and patience of our God. Though
some fall seven times a day, and rise again; though to some sinners it
pleases God to iterate his sufferance, as upon us hither to he has done; yet
should not we hereupon presume to iterate our misdoings. For we well know, that
Almighty God punished his Ioh. 8.44. I^d. 6. 2 Pet. 2.4.
Angels in heaven for one breach, Genesis 3.17.
Adam for one morsel, Number. 12.10.
Miriam for one slander, Deuteronomy. 32.52.
Moses for one angry word, Josh 7.24, 25.
Achan for one sacrilege, Esai. 35.2.
Ezechias for once showing his treasures to the Ambassadors of Babel, 2. Chro^.
35.22.
Josias for once going to war without asking counsel of the Lord, and Act.
5.5. etc.
Ananias, and Saphira for once lying to the Holy Ghost. God is now as able, as
ever he was, even for one transgression to cut us of; but if he patiently
forbear us, till by three and four transgressions, by our many sins, we
grieve the Holy Spirit of that Sacred Majesty, shall we think (as some
impiously do) that God takes no notice of the sins, which we commit, or
cares not for them? Far let all such conceit be from any Christian heart.

Let us rather confess the truth: that God by such his forbearance does lead
us to repentance: for as much as it is impossible, that God should be, and not
see; should see, and not regard; should regard, and not punish; should punish,
and not proportion his punishments to our sins. I grant that the justice of
God goes on (...), slowly, and in order: but for the most part it recompenseth
the slacknes of judgment with the heaviness thereof. It keeps the rule full
well; to render for ripe sins, ripe plagues; for great sins, great plagues;
for grievous sins, grievous plagues.

The rule in the Schools is thus delivered. Culpam poena sequitur, every sin
has a due punishment attending it. God is without exception just: and
therefore Grauitas supplicij, grauitatem peccati denotat; grievous punishments
wheresoever God shall lay them, do argue grievous sins of those places, and
persons. Let no man then, that groaneth under any cross, affliction, or
tribulation, complain of his hard hap, or ill fortune; all such visitations
are from God, and for our sins. And if we will stay Gods hand from correcting
us, we must stay our selves from sinning, and offending him. I conclude with S.
Paul's exhortation to the Romans, chap. 6.12. Let not sin reign therefore in
your mortal bodies; obey it not in the lusts thereof; give not your members,
as weapons of unrighteousness unto sin; but, as men alive from the dead, give
your selves unto God, that being freed from sin, and made Gods servants
through Jesus Christ, you may have your fruit in holiness, and the end
everlasting life.

THE V. LECTVRE.
AMOS 2.4. Because they have despised the law of the Lord, and have not kept
his commandments.


THe third part of this prophecy against Judah is now to be examined: namely
the enumeration of some particular sins, whereby the inhabitants of Judah
provoked their God unto displeasure. The first passage in this part is: They
have despised the law of the Lord. Where we have, the sin of Judah, and the
object thereof; the sin, contempt; the object, the law of the Lord.

They have despised: there is the sin. The law of the Lord: there is the
object. First of the sin, of the contempt.

They have despised] Zanch. de oper. redemp. lib. 1. cap. 18. These. 2.
Contempt is an action of the mind, by which we nothing at all, or very lighty
esteem of a thing, and therefore do reject it. This action, which I call
contempt, is partly from the understanding, partly from the will. First the
understanding esteems a thing to be nothing or little worth; then does the will
reject it, and casts it away.

A thing may be contemned two manner of ways; either simply, or in respect of
some other thing.

First simply. So we may contemn a vile fellow, one that has no virtue, no
goodness in him; one that is altogether vicious, given up Romans 1.28.
to a reprobate sense, to drunkenness, to wantonness, to work all kind of
wickedness, even with greediness. Such a fellow, is simply unworthy to be had
in any the least estimation. Such we may, we must contemn. In like sort, if a
tyrant command, that which is unjust, any thing that is derogatorie to the
glory of God, and threatens grievous punishments, unless he be obeyed: in
this case a good Christian, must be of a stout courage; he must despise the
unjust command, and the proud threats of the tyrant; his zeal must be only for
the glory of the Lord.

The story of the three children, Dan. 3. is not unknown to you. The King of
Babylon, Nabuchodonezor Dan. 3.1.
set up a golden image, and commanded it to be worshipped. His decree was, that
verse. 10.
every one, that should hear the sound of the cornet, trumpet, harp, shawme,
psalterie, dulcimer, and other instruments of music, should fall down, and
worship the golden image: who so fell not down, and worshipped, he should be
cast into the midst of a hot fiery furnace.

This unjust decree of the King, the three children, Sidrach, Misach, and
Abednego, regarded not: they could not be brought to worship this golden image;
they feared not his hot fiery furnace; they knew, God was verse. 17.
able to deliver them from thence; if God would not, yet were they resolved in
no wise to worship that image: they would not so much as outwardly consent to
idolatry; so zealous were they for the glory of God. A worthy example for my
present purpose, to show, that the unjust commands of Tyrants, are very justly
contemned and rejected. So are the commands of Magistrates, Parents, and other
superiors in authority, if they deprive God of his glory. If they diminish,
remit, or abate any thing of the glory of God, they are simply to be contemned.

You see now; a thing may be contemned simpliciter, simply. It may also be
contemned secundum quid, in respect of some other thing: as when a man esteems
more of his pleasure, or profit, then of the law of the Lord. Such an one may
be said secundum quid, in respect of his own pleasure, or profit, to contemn
the law of the Lord. And this contempt is a sin. The forementioned contempts,
were not sins. A contempt may be a sin, or not a sin. You may discern it
by its object, or the thing contemned. If the object, if the thing contemned be
evil, then is the contempt good; it is a virtue, its no sin. It is no sin
to contemn a vicious fellow, in whom there is no spark of piety: its no
sin to contemn the impious and unjust commands of men placed in authority
above us, as you have already heard. But if the object, if the thing contemned
be good, then is the contempt evil, it is a vice, its a sin. Such was this
contempt of Judah, for they despised the law of the Lord. You see their sin,
Contempt. Now see the Object.

The law of the Lord.] The LXX. have (...), the natural law of the Lord. But
the law of the Lord, as usually it is divided in the schools, is either
Danae^^ Isag. Ch^. par. 3. lib. 3. cap. 14.
(...), or (...), or (...); its either moral, or ceremonial, or judicial.
The word in my text is (...) a word repeated in one Psalm, Psalm. 119 four and
twenty times: it signifies not only the Moral law of God, expressed in the
Decalogue, or ten Commandments, but the Ceremonial law also, yea and the
Judicial too: and generally Moller in Ps. 1.2.
totam Doctrinam a Deo patefactam, and Ecclesiae traditam: whatsoever doctrine
is revealed from God, and delivered to the Church. Such was the contempt of
these inhabitants of Judah; whatsoever they were taught from God, by his holy
Prophets, or by the reading of the Law, or by the light of nature, they
despised it.

They have despised the law of the Lord.] Though this word (...) generally
signify, whatsoever God any way teaches; yet may it specially be taken for
the Moral law, contained in the Decalogue, or ten Commandments; which for the
excellency thereof is called the law of the Lord: and surpasses all others
for many reasons.

1. This Law was made by God himself, written by God himself, first in the
hearts of men; afterward in two Deuteronomy. 4.13. and 5.22. and 10.2. Bellarm.
Christ. Doctr.
tables of stone.

2. This is the most ancient of all others: it is as the fountain of all the
rest.

3. This is the most universal Law, that is, It binds not only Christians,
but Jews also and Gentiles, men and women, rich and poor, Princes and private
men, the learned and ignorant.

4. This Law is immutable, it cannot be taken away, it cannot be dispensed with.

5. The promulgation of this Law was more solemn, then of any other. It was
promulgated with the greatest solemnity, that could be in Mount Sinai, Exodus
20.18.
with sound of angelical trumpets, with great thunder, with lightning from
heaven, in the presence of all the people of God.

6. This Law is, of all laws, most neccssarie. Necessary, for the preserving
and maintayning of discipline both in and without the Church. Necessary, to
convict man of sin, and to disrobe him of that pride, which makes him to
presume of his own natural strength. Necessary, to repress and keep under
the obstinate and selfe-willed sinner, with fear of punishments. Necessary,
to inform and instruct the regenerate in the true service and worship of God.

This law of the Lord so far surpassing all other laws for the excellency
thereof, these inhabitants of Judah did despise; they contemned it. You see the
sin here laid unto their charge; Contempt of the law of the Lord. They have
despised the law of the Lord. The doctrine arising hence is: The contempt of
the law of the Lord is a very grievous sin.

This truth will be plain, if you will consider, what punishments God in his
holy word threatens and lays upon the despisers, or contemners of his Sacred
Majesty, of his ceremonies, of his commandments, of his holy word.

Such despisers, or contemners, are an abomination to the Lord, Prove. 3.32. The
Lord will despise them, 1. Sam. 2.30. The Lord will scorn them, Prove. 3.34.
The Lord will bring upon them terrors, consumptions, burning agues, and sorrow
of heart, Levit. 26.15. The Lord will send a fire upon them to devour them,
Amos 2.5. and having so done, He will laugh at their destruction, Prove. 1.26.
For this contempt, Pharaohs chariots, his chosen Captains, and his host were
covered in the deep; they sanke to the bottom of the Sea, as a stone: they
were all drowned, Exodus 15.4, 5. For this contempt, Saul was rejected from
being King over Israel: he became his own executioner; he fell upon his own
sword; 1. Sam. 31.4. For this contempt, Salomons kingdom was 1. King. 11.11,
12.
to be rent from him, and to be given to his servant: it was accomplished in
his sons days, in the days of Rehoboa^: the Israelites made unto themselves
a new King, even Jeroboam, son of Nebat, 1. Kings 12.20. What was it, but
this contempt, that brought 2. Chr. 28.13.
ruin to the state of Ahaz? What but this contempt, has brought to naught
many ancient and flourishing kingdoms, and nations? What else, has laid their
honor in the dust? Infinite should I be, would I produce all, that is delivered
in the Sacred Scriptures concerning this contempt of the Lord, and his holy
laws. The little which I have already brought out of that invaluable treasury,
may serve for the establishment, of my propounded doctrine; namely that The
contempt of the law of the Lord is a very grievous sin.

You see the doctrine. Let us now make some use of it to our selves.

Is it true beloved? Is it a grievous sin to despise the law of the Lord? Let
this be a motive to us to gage the very depth and bottom of our hearts, there
to see, whether we have sinned this sin: whether we have carried our selves
contemptuously toward the law of the Lord.

Can we say concerning this law of the Lord, as that sweet singer of Israel,
that holy man of God, King David once said; that we have not Psalm. 119.61.
forgotten it; that, we have not verse. 51.
declined from it; that, we have verse. 55.
kept it; that, we verse 113.
love it; we verse. 70 and 174
delight in it; our verse. 97.
meditation is in it all the day; that its better unto us, then verse. 72.
thousands of gold and silver? Can we thus truly say? Then doubtless are we
free from this sin of Contempt of the law of the Lord.

But if we wilfully break the law of the Lord: if we have no fear, nor
feeling of the judgments threatened in that his holy law: if we run on
securely in our ungodly courses: if we prostitute our selves to all
uncleanness: if we be filled with Romans 1.29.
unrighteousness, fornication, wickedness, covetousness, maliciousnes: if we
be puffed up with error, murder, debate, deceit, malignitie: if we walk
according to the Ephesians. 2* 2.
course of the world, in the lusts of our flesh, fulfilling the desires of our
flesh, taking delight in doing the Galat. 5.19.
works of the flesh; then are we out of doubt guilty of this sin, of
despising the law of the Lord.

Wherefore let us, let every one of us, enter into the closet of our own
hearts: examine we our selves, how we have heretofore stood, and how we do now
stand, affected to the law of the Lord. Judge we our selves, that we be not
judged of the Lord; condemn we our selves, that we be not condemned of the
Lord. If we find our selves hitherto to have bin 2. Tim. 2.26.
entangled in the snares of Satan, to have fashioned our selves to the manners
of this sinful world, to have spent our days in vanities, and our nights upon
the beds of wantonness, without any due regard of Gods holy laws enacted in
the high Court of Heaven to the contrary: our best way will be to betake our
selves to the throne of mercy, there to beg of Him that sits upon the
throne, the grace of unfeigned repentance: that sorrowing with a godly sorrow
for our sins past, for our rebellion and disobedience to the law of the Lord,
expressed in the wicked conversation of our fore-passed lives, we may now at
length become new creatures, creatures of new hearts, and new spirits,
resolving for the time to come to yield all obedience to the Law of the Lord,
to frequent his Sanctuary, where this law is usually read and expounded to us,
that God thereby may be glorified, and our souls saved.

Thus far of the sin of Judah, as it is expressed in the first branch of
this third part of my text: They have despised the law of the Lord. The
doctrine grounded thereupon, was this: The contempt of the law of the Lord is a
very grievous sin.

The use made thereof unto our selves, was to stir up in us a desire of
conforming our obedience to this law of the Lord.

The sin of Judah, is further expressed in the next clause: They have not
kept his Commandments.

Commandements] The word in the original, and Hebrew fountain is, (...); a
word repeated, Psalm. 119. two and twenty times. The Septuagint translate it
(...): the vulgar Latin, and S. Hierome, mandata, just as we do, mandates or
commandments. Tremellius and Iunius have statuta, statutes: some have
Ceremonias, Ceremonies; which soever of these translations we receive, it will
be consonant to the analogy of faith, and the precedent clause. For whosoever
despises the law of the Lord, he observes not his ceremonies, he keeps not
his statutes, he keeps not (...), his mandats or commandments. So, this
clause is but an exposition of the former. The same thing is twice said: 1.
They have despised the law of the Lord. 2. They have not kept his commandments.

Is the same thing twice said? Let it be true, that by the laws of the Lord,
and the commandments of the Lord, one and the same thing be understood: is it
likewise all one, to despise, and not to keep? or does not our Prophet say
less against the people of Judah, where he says, They have not kept the
commandments of the Lord, then when he says, They have despised the law of
the Lord?

He may seem to say less. But if we consider the force of the Hebrew phrase,
we shall find it to be otherwise. It is a rule, Drus^us.
Hebraei per negationem contrarij vehementius affirmant: the Hebrews by
denying the contrary do the more vehemently affirm. It may thus appear.
Solomon in his Proverbs, chap. 17.21. says, Non gaudet stulti pater, the
father of a fool rejoices not. This may seem to be but coldly and slenderly
spoken, not sufficiently to express that grief, which fathers do conceive at
the disobedience of their sons, which the Wiseman there calls foolishnes.
But the phrase is very forcible; Non gaudet stulti pater; the father of a fool
rejoices not. Nemo quisquam vnqua^ ita dolet, quin idem aliqua^do gaudeat,
says Drus. obseruat. lib. 1. c. 22.
a learned writer. There is scarce any man ever so grieved, but that at some
one time, or other, he rejoices: but if a man at all times, and every moment
of time be grieved, of him we may truly say, Non gaudet, he rejoices not. Non
gaudet stulti pater: It is very fitly englished in our new translation: The
father of a fool has no joy.

Here you, you who live under the rule of your parents, be ye sons, or
daughters, living under father, or mother, if you behave your selves
disobediently toward your Parents, in Salomons account you are fools; and
your Parents can have no joy in you. And, tell me, of whom should your Parents
have joy, if not of you their children? S. Paul's exhortation is not lightly to
be esteemed by you. Hear therefore what he says unto you, Ephesians. 6.1.
Children, obey your parents in the Lord. and verse. 2. Honor thy father, and
mother. To the first he persuades you by a reason drawn from the schole of
nature, It is right so to do. To the second he allureth you, by an argument
drawn from your own good, v. 3. So shall it be well with you, and you shall
live long upon the earth. and ever remember this same, Non gaudet of Solomon:
Non gaudet stulti pater; The father of a fool, of a disobedient child, has
no joy.

A like phrase the same Solomon has, Prou. 10.2. Non prosunt thesauri
improbitatis: The treasures of wickedness profit not. This may seem to be
spoken but jeiunely, and slightly, not sufficiently to express the hurt and
mischief, that shall befall a man, for his goods unlawfully, and dishonestly
gotten. But the phrase is very forcible, Non prosunt thesauri improbitatis, the
treasures of wickedness profit not. Quod in omni tempori nocet says Drusius,
vbi supra.
one, de eo verissime enuntiatur, non prodest. Name any thing, that at all
times is hurtful, and of it we may truly say, Non prodest, it does not
profit. Solomon has named it: Thesauri improbitatis, the treasures of
wickedness. Non prosunt thesauri improbitatis: It is very fitly englished in
our new translation, The treasures of wickedness profit nothing, It is worth
the marking: they profit nothing.

Hear you, you who heap unto your selves, Thesauros improbitatis, these same
treasures of wickedness, by your avarice, extortion, oppression, usury,
false-dealing with your neighbors, or otherwise unlawfully. You may know, that
these your treasures of wickedness can profit nothing. They may be unto you
obstacles, and impediments, to keep you for ever without the gates of Heaven.
What means else our blessed Lord, and Savior Jesus Christ, in that his
constant asseueration to his Disciples, Mat. 19.23. Verily, verily, I say unto
you, that a rich man shall hardly enter into the kingdom of Heaven? And
again, where he says, ver. 24. It is easier for a Camel to go through the
eye of a needle, then for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God? And who
is this rich man? Qui diuitijs, cor apponit; he that sets his heart upon his
riches, and trusts in them: and not only he, but he also that gets his
goods unjustly, he that gets thesauros improbitatis, those same treasures of
iniquity: whereof for the present I say no more, then what our Savior says
to his Disciples, Mat. 16.26. What is a man profited, if he shall gain the
whole world, and loose his own soul? Only I wish from my heart, that in your
hearts were written this same; Non prosunt: Non prosunt thesauri improbitatis,
the treasures of wickedness do profit nothing.

Will you now look back to my text, for the explication whereof I have
expounded to you a Non gaudet, and a Non prosunt. The first, Non gaudet,
concerns the Father of a disobedient child, and imports (...) gaudij, the
privation of joy: the Father of a disobedient son has no joy at all. The
other, Non prosunt, is spoken of goods ill gotten, and imports (...)
vtilitatis, the privation of profit: Non prosunt, goods ill gotten profit
nothing at all. My text has answerable to those two, a Non obseruarunt. Non
obseruarunt mandata eius, They have not kept the commandments of the Lord.
This may seem to be but coldly and slightly spoken, not sufficient to
express the disobedience of the people of Judah, toward the commandments of
the Lord. For there is no man living upon earth, that can keep his
commandments. And if the people of Judah in this, sinned, but as other men
ordinarily sinned, what great matter is it, that our Prophet here obiecteth to
them? But the phrase here is very forcible. Non obseruarunt mandata eius: They
have not kept his commandments. Here is implied (...) observantiae: a
privation of observance. They have not kept the commandments of the Lord in any
one point. Couenant-breakers and apostates, as they were, they refused to be
under the Lords commandments, and audaciously framed to themselves a new kind
of worship, (...), a will worship, a worship of their own invention; cultum
plenum sacrilegijs, a worship full of sacrilege.

We see now, what it is, that our Prophet in this branch of my text, reprooueth
in the people of Judah; It is a Non obseruarunt a non observance, an universal
neglect of the commandments of the Lord. They took license to themselves, to
innouate, to frame unto themselves a new kind of divine worship; such as the
Lord never approved, yea, such as was contrary to the express will of the
Lord, and was forbidden by him. From this reproof of Judah, we may take this
lesson:

Obedience to the commandments of the Lord, is a duty which the Lord
requires to be performed by every child of his. This truth is made as plain,
as the light at noone day, by the words of blessed Samuel to king Saul. 1. Sam.
15.22. Has the Lord as great delight in burnt offerings, and sacrifices, as in
obeying the voice of the Lord? Behold, to obey is better then sacrifice: and to
hearken then the fat of Rams. For rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, and
stubbornness is as iniquity, and idolatry. In which words of Samuel, we have
the nature of two contraries, obedience, and disobedience, excellently
disciphered. The one to be better then sacrifice: the other to be as witchcraft
and idolatry.

Obedience is better then sacrifice. For Per victimas aliena caro, per obedien
^am vero voluntas propria mactatur. Greg. Mor. lib. 35. cap. 10.
he that offers a sacrifice, offers the flesh of a beast: but he that
obeys, offers his own will, as a quick and reasonable sacrifice, which is
all in all. Disobedience is as witchcraft and idolatry. For what else is
disobedience, but when the Lord has imposed some duty upon us, we then
confer with our own hearts, as Saul consulted with the woman of 1. Sam. 28.7.
Endor; or as Ahaziah King of Samaria, with 2. King. 1.2.
Baalzebub, the God of Ekron, whether the word of the Lord, shall be harkened
to, yea, or no. Thus we set up an Idol, within our own breasts against the God
of Heaven, and despising, forsaking, not keeping his commandments, we follow
the voice, and persuasion of our own devises.

To this place of Samuel (though of it self it be sufficient for the
establishment of my propounded doctrine: Namely, that Obedience to the
commandments of the Lord, is a duty which the Lord requires to be performed
by every child of his) let us add some other passages of holy Scripture,
wherein the Lord to draw us to this duty of obedience, promises us blessings.

Memorable is that protestation of Moses to the children of Israel. Deuteronomy.
11.26. Behold, I set before you this day a blessing, and a curse. A blessing if
ye obey the commandments of the Lord your God; a curse, if ye obey them not.
As if he had thus said. Bethink your selves, O ye children of Israel. Seeing
God has commanded me to publish his law unto you, it is not for you to fall
asleep. He shows you, how you may prosper all your life long, namely, if you
will obey him. Obey him, and prosper all your life long. Is not this a great
blessing? But if you obey him not, the curse will overtake.

This does Moses more particularly deliver, Deuteronomy. 28.1. If, says he, thou
shall hearken diligently to the voice of the Lord thy God, to observe and keep
all his commandments: that is, if ye hearken to the Lords voice, to obey his
commandments, and be careful to keep them, then shall you be blessed all
manner of ways; you shall be environed through Gods favor, with all manner of
welfare, and prosperity.

Will you a Catalogue of such blessings, as shall be conferred upon you for
your obedience to the commandments of the Lord? It is ready gathered to your
hands, Deuteronomy. 28. Obey ye the Commandments of the Lord, so blessed shall ye
be Ver. 3.
in the city, and blessed in the field: Ver. 4.
Blessed in the fruit of your bodies, and in the fruit of your grounds, and in
the fruit of your cattle, and in the increase of your kine, and in the flocks
of your sheep: Ver. 5.
Blessed in your baskets, and in your kneading troughs: Ver. 6.
Blessed at your coming in, and blessed at your going out: Ver. 8.
Blessed in your barnes, and in all that you set your hands to. These and many
other blessings recited in that Chapter, are plainly promised, and shall as
faithfully be performed, if you obey the commandments of the Lord your God.

But if you be stubborn, perverse, and disobedient to the Commandments of
the Lord, then shall cursings as fast follow you: Then Cursed shall ye be in
the city, and Deuteronomy. 28.16.
Cursed in the field: Ver. 18.
Cursed in the fruit of your bodies, in the fruit of your ground, in the fruit
of your cattle, in the increase of your kine, and in the flocks of your
sheep: Ver. 17.
Cursed in your baskets, and in your kneading troughs: Ver. 19.
Cursed at your coming in, and cursed at your going out: Ver. 20.
Cursed in your barnes, and in all that you set your hands to. These, and many
other curses, recited in that Chapter, are plainly threatened, and shall as
faithfully be performed, if you obey not the commandments of the Lord your God.

I will not too far presume upon your patience. You have heard of
maledictions, or cursings against such as disobey the Commandments of the
Lord. You have heard also of benedictions, or blessings to such as obey the
commandments of the Lord. May it please you then to acknowledge this for an
irrefragable truth; that,

Obedience to the commandments of the Lord, is a duty which the Lord
requires to be performed of every child of his.

What use shall we now make of this Doctrine? This needs no great consultation.
The use is plain: Is obedience, a duty, which God requires to be performed
by all, who will be accounted in the number of his children? Then it is a duty
required to be performed by us. For who is there among us, that desires not to
be in the number of Gods children? Wherefore (dearly beloved in the Lord) let
us betake our selves to the School of obedience: And strive we every one to
go beyond his neighbor, in the offices of this Christian duty.

Obedience! It has praise with God and man. Obedience? It is the offspring of
the righteous! Obedience! It is, says In scala paradisi. gradu de obedientia.
Climacus, animae propriae perfecta abnegatio, spontanea mors, securum
periculum, tuta nauigatio, iter dormiendo confectum, sepulchrum voluntatis,
excitatio humilitatis. It is, says he, an absolute denial of our selves; it
is a voluntary death, it is a security from danger, it is a safe navigations,
it is a journey performed as it were in a sleep, it is a sepulcher of our
will, it is the stirrer up of humility. The obedient man, he absolutely
denies himself; but, that he may Mat. 16.24.
follow Christ: he dies voluntary, but 1. Pet. 2.24.
unto sin, that he may live unto righteousness: though he be on every side
environed with perils, yet is he secure, and fears nothing: though he sail
in the sea of this world, yet is his sailing safe: though he iourneyeth in
this valley of peregrination toward the Heavenly Jerusalem, yet he does it, as
it were in a sleep, without molestation: he burieth the unruly affections of
his will; and spends the remainder of his abode here in the exercises of
sweet humility. Thus shall the man be blessed that is obedient to the
Commandments of the Lord his God.

It is said of the just. Psalm. 112.6. In memoria aeterna erit iustus; The just
shall be in everlasting memory. It may be likewise said of the obedient; In
memoria aeterna erit obediens. The obedient shall be in everlasting memory.
The Rechabites shall never want a testimony of their obedience, unless the
book of Jeremy the Prophet, be again cut with a penknife, and burnt, as in
the days of Ierem. 36.23.
Zedechias. Ionadab their Father commanded them to drink no Wine, and for
that commandments sake, they would drink none: they, nor their wives, nor
their sons, nor their daughters, Iere. 35.8. A worthy pattern of obedience.
God himself commends it, and objects it for a reproof of the disobedience of
his own people, the inhabitants of Judah. For verse. 13. Thus says the Lord of
hosts, the God of Israel; Go and tell the men of Judah, and inhabitants of
Jerusalem: The words of Ionadab, the son of Rechab, that he commanded his
sons not to drink wine, are performed; for unto this day they drink none,
but obey their fathers commandment: Notwithstanding I have spoken unto you,
rising early, and speaking, but ye hearkened not unto me. This complaint of
the Lord is redoubled, verse. 16. The sons of Ionadab, the son of Rechab,
have performed the commandment of their Father, which he commanded: but this
people has not hearkened unto me. May not the Lord now as justly twit us, and
hit us in the teeth, with this example of the Rechabites? He may without doubt.
The Rechabites kept the commandment of their Father Ionadab, a mortal man,
and now dead: but we keep not the commandments of our Father, our heavenly
Father Jehovah, the immortal, and the everliving God.

Beloved, let us remember it. Disobedience has never yet escaped the hands of
Almighty God. It cast Genesis 3.22.
Adam and Eve out of Paradise; Genesis 19.26.
Lots wife out of her life, and nature too, Number. 16.32.
Dathan, and Abiram into the mouth of the earth; 1. Sam. 15.23.
Saul out of his kingdom; Ion. 1.15.
Jonas out of the ship: the children of Israel out of their native soil, yea,
and from the natural root which bare them: whereof there is no other reason
given, but their disobedience, Iere. 35.17. I have spoken unto them, but they
have not heard; I have called unto them, but they have not answered.

Is not the case just ours? God has spoken unto us, but we have not heard him:
he has called us, but we have not answered him. He has called us per
beneficia, by his benefits, but we have not answered him per Hugo Card. in
Ierem. 35.
gratitudinem, by our thankfulness: he has called us per flagella, by his
chastisements and scourges, but we have not answered him, per patientiam, and
correctionem, by our patience, and amendment: he has called us, per exempla,
by examples, but we have not answered him, per imitationem, by our imitation:
he has called us per praedicatores, by his Preachers; but we have not answered
him, per obedientiam, by our obedience to his word preached. He has spoken to
us, but we have not heard him, he has called us, but we have not answered him.

Men and brethren, what shall we do? When a multitude of Jews pricked in the
heart at the preaching of Peter, thus bespake Peter, and his fellow Apostles,
Men and brethren, what shall we do? Peter's answer for himself, and the rest,
was, Repent, Act. 2.38. This same, Repent; is the best lesson that we can
learn. We have not kept the commandments of the Lord our God, we daily
transgress them: and hereby are Heaven gates fast shut against us. The only
way for us to have them again opened, is to Repent. Repentance is the most
sovereign medicine, that we can apply to the bitter wounds made in our souls
through the sting of sin. Oh! Let us not defer, and put off this necessary
cure. One has said very well: Diez. Loco de poenitentia.
Qui veniam per poenitentiam repromisit, diem crastinam ad poenitentiam non
promisit. He that has promised pardon to us, if we Repent, has not promised
us, that to morrow we shall repent.

Wherefore let us, laying aside all excuses: delays, and prolonging of the
time, let us even this day, while it is called to day, with touched hearts and
consciences resolve upon Repentance. Let us even now have settled purposes, and
willing minds to forsake all sin, and to turn to the Lord our God: this will
be a good beginning of true conversion, and Repentance. Let us follow it with
perseverance. Let not any idle sports, let not any houses of misrule, or
disorder keep us from the Church, and this place of sound instruction. Here
shall we all be taught of God, and by the mighty opperation of his holy
Spirit, shall be enabled to love his holy Laws, and in some measure to keep
his commandments: that passing the remainder of our days in this land of our
soiournings in all possible obedience, to his holy Laws and Commandments, we
may at length be translated into that better Country, that Heavenly one, that
city of God, wherein our eldest brother and sole Savior, Jesus Christ has
provided places for us, that where he is there may we be also.

THE VI. LECTVRE.
AMOS. 2.4. And their lies caused them to err, after the which their fathers
have walked.


IN my last Sermon I began the exposition of the third part of this prophecy
against Judah, and passed over the two first branches. You then heard the
people of Judah reproved, for contempt, and rebellion: Contempt of the law of
the Lord, and rebellion against his commandments. They have despised the law
of the Lord, they have not kept his commandments.

What! Judah! Judah, Lament. 2.1.
the daughter of Sion; she that was great among the Nations, and Lam. 1.1.
a Princess among the Provinces: Judah! That was the Lords Esai. 19.25.
inheritance, the Lords Exodus 19.5.
peculiar, the Lords Psalm. 114.2.
Sanctuary, the Esai. 61.9.
blessed seed of the Lord, the Esai. 5.7.
plant of the Lords pleasure: Judah, to whom the Romans 3.2.
oracles of God were committed; is Judah become rebellious? Has Judah despised
the law of the Lord? Has not Judah kept his commandments? What may be the
reason of it? The reason follows in my Text:

Their lies caused them to err, after the which their fathers have walked.] In
steed of lies, the vulgar Latin has Idola, Idols. So has S. Hierome:
Deceperunt eos Idola eorum; their Idols have deceived them. What Idols? Even
such as their fathers followed, while they lived in Egypt. They fashioned unto
themselves, the semblance and counterfeit of the Egyptian Ox; they adored
Beelphegor, they worshipped Astaroth and Baalim. Beelphegor, Astaroth, Baalim;
these were the Idols, as S. Hierome commenteth, by which the inhabitants of
Judah were deceived: Deceperunt eos idola eorum; their Idols deceived them.

For Idols, our English translation reads Lies. the Hebrew fountain is our
warrant: the word there signifies Lies. Their Lies caused them to err.

Lies are of two sorts: some are in commercijs; some in cultu divino: some in
commerce with me; some in the service or worship of God. Lies in commerce with
men, are committed 3. manner of ways, in words, in manners, in things. A Lie
in words is, when we speak one thing, and think another: and this is either
iocosum, or officiosum, or perniciosum; it is either a lie in jest, or an
officious lie, or a pernicious lie; not one of these can be excused: no, not
the lie in jest, though S. Austin call it otiosum, an idle lie; and exempteth
it from blame: as also some do officiosum, the officious lie.

A Lie in manners you may call simulation, dissimulation, counterfeiting,
dissembling. This is seen in false-Christs, false-Prophets, false-Apostles,
false-Teachers, such as make a fair show of honesty, or for a Luc. 23.14.
pretense make long prayer, or Math. 7.15.
wear sheeps clothing, but are hypocrites, deuourers, wolves. These lie in
their manners: of these it is said, frons, oculi, vultus persaepe mentiuntur:
the forehead, the eyes, the countenance, do often lie.

The lie in things is, when one thing is substituted or put in the place of
another; a counterfeit for a true thing: as when a cosener sells opium for
apium, or broom twigs for balmewood, or alchimie for silver, or copper for
gold. But these lies obuious and frequent in commerce with man, I must pass
over. They are not intended in my text. The lies intended in my text, are lies
in cultu divino, lies in the service and worship of God.

Their lies caused them to err.] These lies in the service and worship of God,
what are they? Lyranus will tell you. Quaecunque fiunt, aut cogitantur sine Dei
verbo; Whatsoever things in divine worship are done or devised without the
warrant of Gods word, they are lies. So says, that learned Professor of Paris,
Mercer; Omnia humana figmenta, qua contra Dei verbum, in Dei cultu
excogitantur; All humane inventions in divine worship devised contrary to the
word of God, they are lies. Summarily thus I say: By lies in this place we are
to understand, fictitios cultus, whatsoever worship of God is forged or
counterfeited; Coloss. 2.23.
(...), all will worship, all superstitious and blind worship. These are the
lies, that caused Judah to err.

Their lies caused them to err.] First, they betook themselves to the
Idolatry of the Gentiles, they made their sons to pass through the fire,
according to the abominations of the Heathen, 2. Kings 16.3. Secondly, they
forsook the service of the Lords house, his holy Temple at Jerusalem, and
sacrificed, and burnt incense, in high places, on hills, under every green
tree, 2. King. 16.4. Thirdly, they Hos. 10.1. and 8.11.
increased their Altars, multiplied their sacrifices, and augmented their
ceremonies, supposing thereby ex opere operato, even for such their
superstition sake, to deme^it unto themselves the favor of God, though they
were utterly void of faith, and repentance. These were the lies that deceived
Judah; these their lies caused them to err. Commenta falsi cultus: their
new-deuised, feigned, and forged worships of God, were the lies, that caused
them to err.

This appellation of lies is also given to false worship, Romans 1.25. where S.
Paul charge the Gentiles, with changing the truth of God into a lie. They
changed the truth of God into a lie, that is, the true worship of God they
perverted, and changed into false worship. The reason why false worship there
is called a lie, is, because its opposed to truth. Drusius.
Quicquid veritati contrarium est, mendacium est; Whatsoever is contrary to
truth, that is a lie. And therefore our Prophet here in this text opposes
lies, to the law of God; because Lex Dei veritas, Psalm. 119 142. the law of God
is truth. This antithesis between the law of God, and a Lie, we find, Psalm.
119.163. Mendacium od^, immo detestatus sum; legem tuam diligo. I hate a Lie;
yea I abhor it, but thy Law do I love.

We see now, what these lies were, which caused Judah to err: they were humane
devises, and inventions in the worship of God, defiling and infecting the
sincerity of that worship, which God only approves. And yet is the Holy
Spirit here pleased further to notify unto us these Lies of Judah, in these
words: After the which their fathers walked.

Their Lies caused them to err; after the which their fathers have walked.]
What fathers means he? Those, which Psalm. 106.19.
made them a calfe in Horeb, and worshipped the molten image, and turned their
glory, even their God, into the similitude of an Ox that eats grass? of
whom we read, Exodus 32.4. Or means he those which served strange Gods in Vr
of the Chaldees? of whom we read, Iosuah 24.2. Whatsoever the Fathers were,
here meant by our Prophet; they were to these inhabitants of Judah their
ancestors; they were their forefathers: such as took delight in the service of
false Gods.

Their Lies caused them to err after the which their fathers walked.] It is no
new thing, no strange thing, for children to strive to imitate their fathers,
that they may be like unto them. This does S. Stephen, Act. 7.51. object to the
successors of these Jews: Ye stiff-necked and uncircumcised in heart and
ears, ye do always resist the Holy Ghost; as your fathers did, so do ye.
Your Fathers were a stiff-necked people; so are ye. Your Fathers were of
uncircumcised hearts and ears; so are ye. Your Fathers resisted the Holy
Ghost; so do ye. Ye stiff-necked and uncircumcised in heart and ears, ye do
always resist the Holy Ghost; as your Fathers did, so do ye. By Fathers in
this place the Protomartyr S. Stephen means maiores, their predecessors,
their ancestors, their forefathers.

What? Are these words of S. Stephen extended to all the ancestors of the
Jews? Were they all a stiff-necked people? Were they all of uncircumcised
hearts and ears? Did they all resist the Holy Ghost? This may not be imagined.
The many and glorious titles, and appellations bestowed upon that people in
Sacred Writ do evidently make good the contrary. We must therefore distinguish
of those ancestors, and forefathers. Some of them were excellent men, and
sincere worshippers of the true God: such were Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and all
the faithful, that issued out of their loins: these are not the Fathers, whom
S. Stephen means. Other some there were notoriously infamous for their
impiety, for their bloody tyranny toward the Lords Prophets, for their
idolatrous service of false Gods. And these S. Stephen in his speech intends.

These are they who in the 78. Psalm. verse. 8. are called, a stubborn and
rebellious generation; a generation that set not their heart aright; a
generation, whose spirit was not steadfast with God. These are they, who S. John
the Baptist means, Matthew. 3.7. where he calls the Pharisees, a Generation
of Vipers.

These are they, whom our blessed Savior also intends, Matthew. 12.33. and
23.33. where he styles the Pharisees, as John Baptist did; a Generation of
Vipers. And what is this generation of vipers, but as Comment. in Act. 7.51.
Lorinus says, pessimorum parentum pessimi filij, wicked sons of as wicked
parents.

Such were these Fathers in my text: of whom it is further said, that they
walked after Lies.]

They walked after Lies.] To walk, in the Scripture phrase is metaphorically
taken, and has diverse significations. For the understanding of the phrase in
my text, you may know; there is a walking after truth, and a walking after
Lies; or which is all one, there is a walking after God, and a walking after
Idols. We walk after truth, or God, when from the bottom of our hearts, we
think upon, and do those things, which God has prescribed unto us in the word
of truth; when we live a godly life, in this present world. On the other side,
we walk after lies, or after Idols, when we worship that which is not God; or
when we worship the true God, but upon a false foundation, polluting and
defiling his sacred worship, with the foolish imaginations and inventions of
our own brains. Thus did the ancient Jews walk after Lies; which is here
laid unto their charge: Their Lies cause them to err, after which their
Fathers walked.

Hitherto have you heard the exposition of the text. Give ear now I beseech
you to such lessons as may from hence be taken for our further instruction, and
the reformation of our lives. The first lesson I take from these words, Their
Lies caused them to err; their lies, that is, their idolatrous and false
worship of God, has caused them to err, has deceived them. The doctrine is:

When men decline or swerue from the prescript of Gods word, they are forthwith
enwrapped and involued in deceit; and cannot but err.

I thus explicate it. If we embrace not the truth of God, if we despise his
holy Laws, if we keep not his commandments, we must of necessity fall into
supine and gross lies. For so God permits. Whosoever believe not the truth,
but have pleasure in unrighteousness; whosoever receive not the love of the
truth, that they may be saved, to such shall God send strong delusion that they
shall believe lies, 2 Thessalonians. 2.11. Now Almighty God to keep his elect and
beloved ones from such efficacy of error, from such strong delusions; how often
does he admonish them, that in no wise they depart from his holy word. Deuteronomy.
12.32. Prove 30.6. Revel. 22.18, 19.
Add not to my word, neither diminish ought from it, Deuteronomy. 4.2. Deuteronomy. 5.32.
and 28.14. Josh. 23.6. Esai. 30.21.
Turn not from my word, to the right hand or to the left, Josh. 1.7. Lay up my
words in your heart and in your soul; bind them for a sign upon your hand,
let them be as frontlets between your eyes, Deuteronomy. 11.18. What more obvious in
holy Scripture then those Mementoes from the Lord? Deuteronomy. 4.1, 6.
Hearken unto my statutes, and unto my judgments, keep them, do them:
Remember Number. 15.39.
my commandments, Deuteronomy. 6.17.
keep them diligently, Prove. 3.1.
lay them up Prove. 3.1.
in thy heart: forget not my law, Prove. 3.1.
Prove. 4.2.
forsake it not: Prove. 4.^0.
attend to my words, Prove. 7.1.
keep my words, Prove. 4.20.
incline thine ear unto my sayings.

And why I pray is the Lord so earnest to have his statutes, his judgments,
his commandments, his laws, his words, his sayings to be kept by us? Is it
not, because he well knows, that if we ever so little decline or swerue from
these, or from any one of these, we are forthwith inwrapped, and involued in
deceit, and cannot choose, but err? Statutes, judgments, commandments, laws,
words, sayings. Here are multa verba, many words, but res vna, they all
signify one thing, and that is expressable in one word, even the word; the
w^rd of God mentioned in my doctrine, from whose prescript if we decline or
swerue, we are forthwith enwrapped and involued in deceit; we cannot choose
but err.

A reason hereof I may give you, out of Psalm. 119.105. where the word of God is
compared to a lamp, or a light: Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light
unto my path. You know the use of a lamp, or light. It is to direct us in the
dark, that we err not. Now what is this world, but a place of darkness? Here
the natural man sits in darkness, Luke 1.79. he walks in darkness, Psalm.
82.5. his eyes are blinded with darkness, 1. Ioh. 2.11. his understanding is
darkened, Ephesians. 4.18. he is subject to the power of darkness, Coloss. 1.13. he
has fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, Ephesians. 5.11. he is even
darkness it self, Ephesians. 5.8. How then can he choose but err, if he have not
this lamp, or light of God, the word of God, to direct him?

It was not unusual, with the Jews, to seek to them, who had Esai. 8.19.
familiar spirits, and to peeping and muttering wizard^. To reclaim them from
this error, the Prophet Esaias cap. 8.20. calls them ad legem, and ad
testimonium, to the law and to the testimony, that is, to the word of God. And
why does he so? He tells you why, in the words following: If (says he) they
speak not according to this word, it is, because there is no light in them:
What can be more plain? Where the word of God is not, or directs not, there
is no light, there is nothing but darkness* nothing but error.

You have enough for the confirmation and illustration of my doctrine, which
was,

When men decline, or swerue from the prescript of Gods word, they are
forthwith enwrapped and involued in deceit, and cannot but err.

Is it so beloved? If we leave the word of God, are we forthwith in error?
Let this be a strong motive to us, to give more diligence to the word of God,
then hitherto we have done. Let us as we are exhorted by S. Peter in his 2.
Epist. cap. 1. verse. 18. Let us take heed unto it, as unto a light, that
shines in a dark place, till the day dawne, and the daystarre arise in our
hearts. Let us not think any time misspent, that we bestow upon this word of
God, either to hear it, or to read it, or to keep it. Young men, wherewithal
will you cleanse your ways, but by taking heed unto your ways according to the
word of God, as you are advised, Ps. 119.9. All men I know would be blessed;
but then must they delight in the word of God, and make it their meditation day
and night, as it is Psalm. 1.2. If we leave the word of God, which is the lamp
and light of God, then are we forthwith in darkness; we are in error.

Is it so, beloved? Then secondly let us bring and offer to our gracious God,
the calves of our lips, the sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving, for that it
pleases him for our direction in this valley of darkness and shadow of death,
to give us the light of his most precious word. He has not dealt so with many
nations of the earth. Many there are, that have not the light of his word. And
where this light is not, there can be nothing but darkness.

Is it so, beloved? Then thirdly is the Church of Rome very injurious to the
people of God, to withold and keep from them this light of the word of God.
Is it not plain, they do so, when they forbid the Scriptures to be translated
into any Vulgar tongue, and so seal them up from the understanding of the
ignorant and unlearned? They willingly send the Scriptures abroad in the
Hebrew, Greek, and Latin tongues: but what are the common people of any
Nation hereby benefited? Do they understand the Hebrew, Greek, or Latin?

A Papist will answer; there is no necessity that the vulgar sort should
understand those ancient and sacred tongues. The Ra^ford. Directorie cap. 56.
Church has appointed learned men always to instruct the simple out of the
book of God, with such histories and lessons, as may be most fit to edify and
help them, in the way to Heaven.

I grant, there is no necessity, yea it cannot be, that the common people
should understand, the Hebrew, Greek, and Latin tongues: but I add; it is
therefore necessary that the Holy Scripture should be translated into vulgar
and known tongues, even for the understanding of the common people: as this
day (through Gods goodness) we have them in our English tongue, nor dismembered,
and very much corrupted, as Radford would bear the world in hand; but more
perfectly rendered, then ever was that old vulgar Latin edition, obtruded to the
Christian world for Authentical by the Sess 3 cap. 2.
Trent Fathers.

The exception taken against the translation of the Scriptures into vulgar, and
known tongues, is vain and ridiculous. They say, that great, and marvelous
inconveniences and discommodities have fallen out through such translations.
How prove they this? They will seem to prove it by sundry instances.

1. They tell us of a Staphylus de Biblioru^ tra^slatione page 492.
Painter of Prussia, who, because he had in Luthers German Bible read of Lot
his incest, adventured to abuse his own daughter.

2. They tell us of a Idem ex Joh. Gastio Brisac. lib. de Catab^p^^siu.
woman of Monastrij.
in Westphalia, who, having diligently perused the history of Judith and
Holofernes, attempted by the example of Judith, secretly to kill the Bishop of
Munster.

3. They tell us of I^hannes ^ugdunensis, Sarcinater B^tavus.
John of Leiden, who would be as a King, because Staphylus vbi supra. p. 494.
ex Sleidan. lib. 10.
Iosuah was such: and would have the toleration of many wives, because the
Patriarchs had many.

4. They tell us of Idem ex Aenea Sylvio in historia ^^emorum.
Grubenheimer, who, because he had read in Genesis, Increase and multiply,
approved that in their night conuenticles, their lights extinguished, they
might commit filthiness not to be spoken. These four instances are brought by
Frid. Staphylus in his treatise of the translation of the Bible into vulgar
idomes.

5. They tell us of David George, a Batauian, who by reading the Scriptures in
his mother tongue, was persuaded of himself, that he was the son of God, and
the Messiah.

6. They tell us of an English woman, who hearing the Minister of the Parish
where she lived, read out of Eccles. 25. somewhat against wicked women, which
pleased her not, rose up from her seat, and said, Is this the word of God?
Nay, rather it is the word of the Devil. These two latter instances are
brought by Cardinal Bellarmine lib. 2. de verbo Dei cap. 15.

To these, and the former, urged by Bellarmine, and Staphylus, to show the
inconveniences, and discommodities of having the Bible in vulgar, and known
languages, I thus briefly reply. Shall sober men be forbidden the use of meats
and drinks, because many surfeit of them? This you will grant to be very absurd
and unreasonable. So absurd is it, and unreasonable, that the people of God
should be forbidden the use of the book of God in their vulgar and known
languages, because a few, unstable persons, such as were the aforenamed, the
Painter of Prussia, the Cobbler of Leyden, Grubenheimer, David George, and two
silly women, the one of Westphaelia, the other of England, abused so rich a
treasure to their own overthrows.

This my reply agrees with that answer, which Animaduers. in Bellarm.
Controu. 1. lib. 2. cap. 15.. 63.
Iunius gives unto Bellarmine: Non conuenit, vt propter eos qui abutuntur
male, praecludatur, aut eripiatur Scriptura eis, qui sunt vsuri been. Its not
convenient, that for their sakes who do to ill purpose abuse the Scriptures,
the Scriptures should be sealed up, and barred from such, as would use them
well.

The reason, which Dr Bucknham, sometimes Prior of the Blackfriars in
Cambridge, for this very purpose brought against Mr Latimer, is altogether as
vain, and frivolous. The danger of having the Bible in our English tongue he
proved after this manner. The plowman hearing that in the Gospel by St Luke,
Chap. 9.62. No man that lays his hand on the plow, and looks back, is
meet for the kingdom of God, may peradventure cease from his plow: likewise
the baker hearing that, Galat. 5.9. A little leaven corrupts a whole lump of
dow, may per-case leave our bread unleavened, and so our bodies shall be
unseasoned. Also the simple man, hearing that, Math. 5.29. If thy right eye
offend thee, pluck it out, and cast it from thee, may make himself blind, and
so fill the world full of beggars.

This friarly and bald reason of Dr Bucknham, is not worthy any other answer,
then the wish of Latimer. Fox Martyrol. page 1904. Edit. Land. An. 1570.
Latimers wish was, that the Scripture may be so long in our English tongue,
till English men be so mad; the plowman, not to look back; the baker, not to
leaven his bread; the simple man, to pluck out his own eye.

See you not (Beloved) how injurious the Papists would be toward you, were
they Lords over you? The light of Gods word, the incomparable and heavenly
treasure, they would seal up from you in an unknown tongue.

This was not the practice of old. Of old time, in the primitive times of the
Church, the Holy Scriptures had their free passage. All sorts of people might
read them, might search into them, might judge of them. The unlearned, as the
learned; the laity, as the clergy; women, as men; base, as noble; young, as
old; all had their shares in reading, in hearing, in meditating, in practicing
the sacred doctrines contained in the Holy Scriptures. There can be no just
reason to the contrary.

For as S. Chrysostom in his first Homily upon S. Matthew says: The
Scriptures are easy to the slave, and to the husbandman, to the widow, and to
the slave, and to him, that may seem to be very simple of understanding.

To which purpose S. Austine Epi. 3. ad volusian: affirms, that Almighty God
in the Scriptures speaks, as a familiar friend without dissimulation, unto
the hearts both of the learned, and also of the unlearned.

The like S. Basil avoucheth upon the 1. Psalm. The Scripture of God is like an
Apothecaries shop, full of medicines of sundry sorts, that every man may there
choose a convenient remedy for his disease.

Upon this ground S. Chrysostom Hom. 2. in Johan, would persuade his auditors,
not only in the Church to be attentive to the word of God, but that at home
also, the husband with the wife, and the father with the child, would talk
together thereof; and would to and fro inquire, and give their judgments: and
would to God, says he, they would once begin this most approved, and most
excellent custom.

Theodoret in his fifth Book de curatione Graecarum affectionum, seems much
to rejoice at the knowledge which the Christians generally had in the sacred
Scriptures. Our doctrine, (says he) is known not only of them, who are the
doctors of the Church, and Masters of the people, but also even of Taylers, and
Smiths, and Weauers* and all Artificers: of women too, not such only as were
learned, but also of laboring women, and Sewsters, and servants, and
hand-maides. Neither only Citizens, but Country folks also do very well
understand the same: Ditchers, deluers, Cowheards, Gardiners, can dispute of
the Trinity, and the creation of all things.

Thus was it of old, and why should it not be so now in our days? The Holy
Scriptures are the same now, that then they were. Now, as in the days of
Sermon. de Confessorib. sive Dispensat. p. 610.
Fulgentius, In Sacris Scripturis abundat, and quod rebustus comedat, and quod
parvulus sugat, There is in the Scriptures plenty, whereof the strong may
eat, and the little ones may suck. Now, as in the days of Epist. ad leandrum.
Gregory, Scripturae flumen sunt, in quo agnus ambulet, and Elephas natet, the
Scriptures are as a great River, wherein a Lamb may walk, and an Elephant may
swim. Now, as in the days of De Lazar^.
Theophylact, Scripturae sunt, Lucerna quo fur deprehenditur. The Scriptures
are as a lantern, whereby you may descry, and discover that great thief, the
Devil, who is ever ready to steal away your hearts from God.

Let us (dea^ely beloved) follow this lantern. Let this Lamp of Gods word
direct your footsteps. So shall we be safe from error. But if we will not
follow it; if we will decline, if we will swerue from it, we shall be suddenly
involued, and inwrapped in deceit, and cannot choose but err: This was my
first doctrine. I can but touch the second.

Their lies caused them to err, after which their Fathers walked.] You have
understood by my precedent exposition of these words, that the Inhabitants of
Judah are here blamed, for adhering to the blind superstitions of their
forfathers. The doctrine arising hence is this;

In matters of Religion we are not tied to follow our forefathers.

This truth is plainly derived from my text, for if we will make it our rule
in Religion, to follow our forefathers; their lies, that is, their blind
superstitions, and idolatrous worship of God, may deceive us, and cause us to
err. Were not the elders of Israel, thus deceived, and brought into error?
The twenty Chapter of the prophecy of Ezechiel makes it plain, that they
were so: there shall you find it objected to them; that they were polluted
after the manner of their fathers, and committed whoredom after the
abomination of their fathers, ver. 30. And to draw them from adhering to the
ill courses of their fathers, the Lord himself is pleased ver. 18. 19. thus to
speak unto them: Walk ye not in the statutes of your fathers, neither
observe their judgments, nor defile yourselues with their Idols, I am the
Lord your God: Walk in my statutes, keep my judgments, and do them. What
will you more for the confirmation of my propounded doctrine? You have already
the warrant of Almighty God from heaven for it, that in matters of Religion we
are not tied to follow our forefathers.

It is backed with another text, Zach. 1.4. Be not as your Fathers: your
Fathers they heard me not, they hearkened not unto me, says the Lord. Be not
you therefore as your fathers. Your fathers tempted me in the desert, Psalm.
95.9. Will you also tempt me? Be not as your Fathers. Your Fathers were a
stubborn and rebellious generation, Psalm. 78.8. Will you also be stubborn,
and rebellious? Be not as your Fathers. It is out of doubt; Our fathers must
not be followed in evil. Yea, in matters of Religion we are not bound to
follow our Fathers. If our fathers in their religion were blinded with
superstition, and worshipped God otherwise, then they were directed by Gods
holy word, we are not to follow them: yea, we are plainly charged, not to be
as they were: Thus briefly of my Doctrine: In matters of religion we are not
tied to follow our forefathers.

This truth serves for a reproof of Jesuits, Priests, Recusants, and all
other popishly affected within this our country, who are so strangely devoted
to the Religion whereof their fathers were, that they purposely shut their eyes
against the light of Gods word, and will not suffer it to shine upon them. To
whom shall I liken them? They are like to certain Jews, that dwell in Pathros
in the land of Egypt: who when Jeremy, in the name of the Lord, dehorted them
from their Idolatry, did as it were, defying the Prophet, thus protest, Ierem.
44 17. We will not hearken unto thee; We will do what seems good to us, as
we have done, we, and our Fathers, our Kings, and our Princes, so will we do.
We will burn incense to the Queen of Heaven, we will power out drink
offerings unto her. For so long had we plenty of victuals, we were well, we
saw no evil.

Do not our popelings in England now sing the same song? Call them Esa. 8.20.
ad l^gem, and ad testimonium: call them to the word of God. Their answer is
ready at their tongues end: we will not hearken to it: we will do, what
seems good to us: as we have done, we, and our Fathers, our Kings, and
Princes before us, s^ will we do. We will persevere in the Religion professed
by our Fathers, and reviued in Queen Mary's days. For so long, as that
religion was on foot, we had plenty of victuals, we were well, we saw no
evil.

W^etched men and women, as many of you, as are thus wilfully addicted to the
superstition of popery, take you heed, that the words of the Lord, Esa. 6.10
given in charge to the Prophet, to be conveyed to the Jews, be not in every
point appliable unto you: Make the heart of this people fat, make their ears
heavy, shut their eyes; lest they see with their eyes, and hear with their
ears, and understand with their heart, and convert, and be healed.

Will the Ierem. 13.23.
Ethiopian change his skin, or the Leopard his spots? Then will our countrymen
of the popish sect change from the religion of their forefathers. Their firm
resolution to live and dye in the religion of their fathers, is made apparent
by their An. D. 1603.
supplication, to the most puissant Prince, and orient Monarch, our gracious
Lord, King JAMES; one branch whereof, is this: We request no more favor at
your Graces hands, then that we may securely profess that Catholic religion,
which all your happy predecessors professed, from Donaldus the first converted,
unto your Majesty's peerless mother.

To this purpose does Preface to the King, before his Survey.
Dr Kellison recite unto the KING a long catalogue of his noble Predecessors,
to move him, if possible, to embrace their Religion. But (God his holy name be
blessed for it) all in vain.

When Fridericke the IV. Elector of the Sacred Roman Empire, and Count
Palatine of the Rhene, was by a certain Prince advised, for his religion to
follow the example of his Father Lewis; his Polan. com. in Ezech. 20.
answer was: In religions non parentum, non maiorum exempla sequenda, sed
tantum voluntas Dei: In religion we are to follow, not the examples of our
Parents, or our ancestors, but only the will of God. And for this resolution
he alleged the forecited testimony of the Lord out of the 20. of Ezechiel:
Walk ye not in the statutes of your fathers, neither observe their
judgments, nor defile your selves with their Idols. I am the Lord your God;
walk ye in my statutes. I doubt not, but that our gracious Sovereign, King
JAMES, has ever had, and will have a like answer in readiness, to stop the
mouths of Kellison, and all others, who have dared, or shall attempt, to move
his royal Majesty for his religion to be like his predecessors.

God give our King the heart of Josh. 24.15.
Joshua; a heart steadfast and immovable in the true service of the Lord our
God. Though some of his Predecessors have bin deceived to fall down before the
beast in the Apocalypse, and to worship his image, yet good God, so guide our
King, and bless him with a religious people, that He and we, and his people,
may now and evermore fear thee, and serve thee, in sincerity and truth, to
the glory of thy great name, and the salvation of our own souls, through
Jesus Christ our Lord.

THE VII. LECTVRE.
AMOS 2.5. But I will send a fire upon Judah, and it shall devour the palaces
of Jerusalem.


THree former Sermons have carried me past the preface, and the three first
parts of this prophecy against Judah: the fourth, which is the Commination, or
Denuntiation of the judgments of the Lord against Judah and Jerusalem,
remains to be the subject of this my present discourse.

But I will send a fire etc.

These words are no strangers to you. You have met with them five times in the
first Chapter, and once before in this. Their exposition, their division, the
Doctrines issuing from them, the Uses and applications of the Doctrines, have
diverse times from out this place sounded in your ears. Yet now, (the order,
observed by the Holy Spirit in delivering this prophecy, so requiring it) they
are once more to be commended to your religious attentions.

May it please you therefore to observe with me three circumstances. Quis,
Quomodo, and Qui.

1. Quis comminatur: Who it is, that threatens to punish. It is the Lord. For,
Thus says the Lord, I will send.

2. Quomodo puniet: How, and by what means he will punish. The letter of my
text is for fire. I will send a fire.

3. Qui puniendi: Who are to be punished: And they are the inhabitants of the
Kingdom of Judah, and the chief City thereof, Jerusalem. I will send a fire
upon Judah, and it shall devour the palaces of Jerusalem.

In the precedent prophecies the comminations were against the Syrians, the
Philistines, the Tyrians the Edomites, the Ammonites, and the Moabites, all
Gentiles and strangers to God; but this commination against the Jews, Gods
own friends, and children. I will send a fire upon Judah.]

I] Who Amos 4.13.
form the mountains, and create the wind, and declare to man what is his
thought, and make the morning darkness, and tread upon the high places of the
earth; I will send. I, who Job 12.14.
break down, and it cannot be built again; who shuts up a man, and there can
be no opening; I will send. I, who Psalm. 33.9.
speaks, and it is done, who commands, and it stands fast. I will send a
fire upon Judah, and it shall devour the palaces of Jerusalem.

This fire, which the Lord sends upon Judah, is not so much a fire properly
taken, as a fire in a figurative understanding. It betokens that desolation,
which was to betide the kingdom of Judah, and the chiefest City thereof,
Jerusalem, from hostile invasion. I will send a fire.

This commination began to be fulfilled in the days of Zedechias, King of
Judah. The history is very memorable; and is briefly yet diligently described
in the 2. Chron. 36. and in the 2. Kings 25. and Ierem. 39. and 52. In those
places you may read, how 2. King. 25.1.
Nabuchadnezzar King of Babylon, came against Jerusalem, pitched against it,
besieged it, took it. You may read how he verse. 6.
took King Zedechiah prisoner, slew his sons before his face, put out the
Kings own eyes, bound him with brazen fetters, and carried him away to
Babylon: you may read, how verse. 8.
Nebuzaradan, Captain of the guard, and chief Marshall to the King of Babylon
dealt with Jerusalem. He 2. Chro. 36.19. 2. Reg. 25.9.
brake down the wall thereof, and burnt with fire the house of the Lord, the
Kings house, every great man's house, all the houses, and palaces there. Say
now; did it not fall out to Judah and Jerusalem, according to this commination?
I will send a fire upon Judah and it shall devour the palaces of Jerusalem.

This desolation being thus wrought upon Judah, and Jerusalem, by the Chaldees;
the Jews, such as escaped from the sword, were carried away to Babylon, where
they lived in servitude and bondage, to the Kings of Babylon forh threescore,
2. C^ro. 36.21.
and ten years. This was that famous deportation, commonly styled the
Captivity of Babylon, from which unto CHRIST are numbered, ( Matthew. 1.)
fourteen generations. When the years of this captivity were expired, and the
Monarchy of Persia was settled upon King Cyrus, King Cyrus stirred up by the
Lord, made a proclamation, whereby he permitted the Jews to return into their
country, and to ^^ra 1.3.
reedifie the Temple of the Lord at Jerusalem.

The Jews now returned from their captivity, wherein they lived threescore
and ten years, without a King, without a Prince, without a sacrifice, without
an Image, without an Ephod, without Teraphim, (as it is witnessed, Hos. 3.4.)
could not but with much joy, and great alacrity, under the government of their
new Prince, Ezra 3.2.
Zerubbabel, son of Shealtiel, and their new High Priest, Iesbuah, son of
Iozadak, betake themselves to the building again of the Lords house in
Jerusalem.

The building was begun; it proceeded; but was soon hindered, by the decree of
Ezra 4.23, 24. and 1. ^sar. 2.30.
Artaxerxes, King of Persia. So the work of the house of God at Jerusalem,
Ezra 4.24. and 1. Esar. 2.30.
ceased for some ten years, till the second year of the reign of Darius
[sonne of Hista^pes] King of Persia: by whose gracious Ezra 6.8.
decree for the advancement of the building, the building was again set on
foot, and so diligently attended, that in the verse. 15.
sixth year of the reign of the same King* King Darius, it was finished; as
it is delivered, Ezra 6.15. Thus was the house of God, the Temple of the Lord
in Jerusalem, after Johan. 2.20.
46. years consummate, and dedicated.

Now once again was the Lord of hosts jealous of Jerusalem, and for Sion,
Zach. 1.14. and 8.2.
with a great jealousy: now again were Zach. 8.4, 5.
old men, and old women, to dwell in Jerusalem, and boys, and girls to play
in the streets thereof: now again was Jerusalem to be called Zach. 8.3.
a City of truth, the mountain of the Lord of Hosts, the holy mountain; and
the Jews, which in former times were Zach. 8.13.
a curse among the heathen, now became a blessing: now again were they Zach
8.8.
the people of the Lord, and the Lord was their God, in truth, and in
righteousness. Thus were the people of Judah, through God his special
goodness, blessed with joy and enlargment: for so much we find registered, Zach.
8.

What did the people of Judah, for so many streams of Gods bounty derived upon
them, render unto the Lord their God? Did they (as meet was) Ps. 116.13, 14.
take up the cup of salvation? did they call upon the name of the Lord? did
they pay their vows unto the Lord? Did they, as they were commanded, Zach.
8.16? did they speak the truth every man to his neighbor? did they execute
the judgment of truth and peace within their gates? did they imagine no evil
in their hearts, one against another? did they love no false oaths? What says
the Prophet Malachie to this? He confesses chap. 2.10, 11. that the people of
Judah dealt treacherously every one against his brother; that they violated the
covenant of their fathers; that they committed abomination in Jerusalem; that
they profaned the holiness of the Lord; that they married the daughters of a
strange God: and chap. 3.5. that they were sorcerers, adulterers, false
swearers, oppressors: and verse. 7. that even from the days of their fathers
they departed from the ordinances of the Lord, and kept them not. Is not enough
said against them? Then add yet further; they corrupted the Law, they
contemned the Gospel, they beheaded John Baptist, they crucified Christ, they
persecuted the Apostles. Impiety of such an height and elevation could not but
presage a fearful downfall.

This their downfall is in a figure foretold by the Prophet Zachary, chap.
11.1, 2. Open thy doors, O Lebanon, that the fire may devour thy Cedars. Howl
Fur tree, for the Cedar is fallen, howl ye Oaks of Bashan, for the forest
of the vintage is come down. What Zachary does in a figure, that does Christ
foretell in words proper and significant, Luke 19.42. where beholding the City
of Jerusalem, and weeping over it he says: The days shall come upon thee,
that thine enemies shall cast a trench about thee, and compass thee round, and
keep thee in on every side: and shall lay thee even with the ground, and thy
children with thee, and they shall not leave in thee one stone upon another.

This (...), this utter desolation of the City Jerusalem, foretold by
Zachary, and by Christ; by the one in a figure, by the other in plain terms,
was brought upon that stately City by Titus, son of Vespasian, after the
incarnation of Christ, threescore and eleven years, as Genebrard, threescore
and twelve, as Funccius, threescore and thirteen as Pedro Mexia in vitis
Imperat. in Vespasiano page 126.
others, in the second year of the Emperor Vespasian. It was besieged for the
space of five months: in which time there passed many assaults, many
skirmishes, much slaughter, with wonderful obstinacy and resolution. The
famine mean while afflicting the City was such, as no history can parallel.

When their ordinary sustenance was spent, the flesh of Pedro Mexia ibid.
horses, asses, dogs, cats, rats, snakes, adders, seemed good unto their tastes.
When this food failed, they were driven to eat even those things, which
unreasonable creatures will not eat. Fam^ impellebantur vt vel equ^rum lora,
and suos baltheos, and calceos, and coria c^mederent, Po^tan. Bibliothec. Conc.
Tom. 4. ad Domin. 10. Trinit.
Of their lether; lether bridles, lether girdles, lether shoes, and the like,
they made for themselves meat. Fame impellebantur vt comederent stercora beum,
and quodcunque stereus reperiebatur, illiu^ partum p^ndus quat^or nummis
ve^debatur. Po^t. ibid.
Ox dunge was a precious dish unto them. Purgamenta olerum, the shreddings of
pot-hearbs cast out, trodden under foot, and withered, were taken up again
for nourishment. Egesippus de exci^io Hieroslym. lib. 5. c. 21.
Miserabilis cibus, esca lachrymabilis: Here was miserable meat, lamentable
food, yet would the child Rapiebant parentibus filij, parents filijs, and de
ipsis fan^^bus c^b^s proferebatur. Egesip. ibid.
snatch it from his parent, and the parent from his child, even from out his
jaws. Plerisque etiam vomitus esca fuit, says Egesippus; some to prolong
their lives would eat up that, which others had vomited.

Among many other accidents in this famine at Jerusalem, one is so memorable,
that I cannot well pass it over. De bello Iudaico lib. 7. cap. 18.
Josephus, an eye-witnes of this their misery, tells us of a woman, a mother,
Marie, Eleazars daughter, who took from her own breasts, her own child, a
harmless suckling, a silly infant, did kill it, and did eat thereof. My
author says; that this unnatural mother took her tender babe, as it was
sucking, from her breast, and thus spoke unto it. Miseru^ te, infans in bello,
and fame, and seditione, cui te seruauero?
Little infant, poor wretch, in war, in famine, in sedition, for whom shall I
preserve thee? for whom shall I save thee alive? If thou live, thou must be a
slave to the Romans: but famine preuents thy servitude; yea and the mutinous
Jews are more cruel, than either the Romans, or the famine Be thou therefore
mihi cibus, seditiosis furia, humanae vitae fabula: Be thou meat to me, a
fury to the mutinous, and even a mock of the life of man. When she had thus
spoken, she embrued her hands in the blood of her own son; she boiled the
dead body, and eat the one half: the remainder she reserved for another
repaste.

The mutinous Jews drawn by the Contaminatissimi nidoris odore capti.
sent and savor of this meat, brake into this woman's house: they threatened to
kill her, unless she would show them, where her meat was laid. She told
them, she had meat indeed, and had reserved it for her-selfe; notwithstanding,
since they so urged her, she would show it to them. So she brought them to the
relics of her son. At the sight thereof, they shrunk back with fear,
horror, and astonishment. Then the mother, merciless mother, with great
boldness said thus unto them: This meat, which you see, is indeed part of my
own son: it was my Facinus meum.
deed to kill it: eat ye of it: for I have eaten. Will you be more tender
than a woman? more pitiful than a mother? eat ye of it: I have eaten. If you
will not eat it, it shall remain for me his mother. A mother! No mother, but
a monster she was, that could act such a prodigy.

Well: What with the extremity of this famine, what with the fury of the
sword, what with sickness during the time of this war against Jerusalem,
there See Pedro Mexi ^ in the life ^f Ve^pa^ian.
perished in Jerusalem, and the Province adjoining, as In Chr^nic^^ An. Do. 73.
Eusebius, Lib. 7. cap. 9. Page 594.
Orosius, and C^rne^^us and Suetonias apud O^^siam loco citato.
other Authors affirm, six hundred thousand men able to bear Arms. But if we
will believe De bello Iudaic lib. 7. cap. 17. Vndecies centum millia. and
Eusebius. Histor. Ec^l^s. lib. 3. cap. 7.
Josephus, a Jew, and present at that war, there died eleven hundred
thousand, or a million, and one hundred thousand. And Josephus his report is
subscribed unto by Apud Lipsium n^^u ad Tacitum lib. 5. page 539.
Zonaras and Iornardes.

Besides these now dead fame, morbo, ferro, partly by famine, partly by
sickness, partly by the sword, there were taken captive to the number of
Ios^ph. vbi sup^a. Cassiodor chronic. Tit^s filius Vesp^siani Judea cap ta
centum mil^ia caphit^r^m public v^^n^ndedit. Abbas V^sperg. Chr^nic. ad An 29.
Chr. 73.
97. thousand, or as q some one hundred thousand, sold, and dispersed in the
wide world.

The Jews thus dead, and scattered, what became of their glorious city
Jerusalem? The holy Temple there was burnt, their strong and high walls were
thrown down; all the city became wast and desolate, and so it remains to
this day. Certainly it is befallen Judah and Jerusalem, according to this
commination in my text: I will send a fire upon Judah, and it shall devour the
palaces of Jerusalem. Thus far have you the words of my text expounded. Now
to the doctrine.

You have heard Gods judgments against the kingdom of Judah, and the glorious
City Jerusalem denounced in the same words, as his judgments were against the
Syrians, the Philistines, the Tyrians, the Edomites, the Ammonites, and the
Moabites. The Syrians, the Philistines, the Tyrians, the Edomites, the
Ammonites, and the Moabites, were aliens from the Common wealth of Israel,
they were strangers from the covenant of promise; they had no hope, they were
without God in the world. But these Jews, these Inhabitants of Judah and
Jerusalem, were of the Common wealth of Israel: God made his covenant with
them; they were not without hope; they were the people of the Lord, and the
Lord was their God: yet because they sinned against the Lord, as the forenamed
Gentiles did, the Lord was pleased to deal with them, as with the Gentiles;
even to send a fire upon Judah, which has long since devoured the palaces of
Jerusalem. The doctrine which from hence I commend unto you, is; Whosoever do
imitate the Heathen in their impieties, they are in the Lords account no better
then the Heathen, and shall be punished as the Heathen.

God is absolutely impartial both in mercy, and judgment, (...), without
respect of persons, he judges according to every man's work, 1. Pet. 1.17.
Jew or Gentile, its not material; if they be obedient, they shall live and
flourish; if they be rebellious, they shall die and perish. Sundry other Deuteronomy.
10.17. 2. Chro. 19.7. Job 34.19. Esai. 11.3. Mat. 22.16. Mar. 12.14. Luc.
20.21. Act. 10.34. Romans 2.11. Galat. 2.6. Eqhes. 6.9. Coloss. 3.25.
places there are in both Testaments, old and new, which I might allege to
show, that with God there is no respect of persons.

By Persons I mean, not the substance of man, or man himself, but his outward
quality or condition; as Country, sex, parentage, wealth, poverty,
nobility, wisdom, learning, and the like. According to these, God in
judgment respects no man. Whosoever he be, Jew, or Gentile, male, or female,
poor and rich, bond or free, learned, or unlearned, that fears God, and
works righteousness, he is accepted with God, Act. 10.35. but let Jew, or
Gentile, male, or female, poor or rich, bond or free, the learned or
unlearned, work wickedness before the Lord, and he shall be without partiality
punished, Job 34.19.

Such has ever been the practice of the Lord. Lazarus his poverty did not
hinder him from salvation, neither did the rich man's abundance free him from
damnation. It was no impeachment to Cornelius, that he was a Gentile, nor
immunitie to Judas, that he was a Jew; Saules throne could not shield him from
the wrath of God, neither did David's sheepfolds avert from him the blessings of
God; Esau was the elder brother, yet God hated him, Jacob was the younger, yet
God loved him. Never did any perish in obedience, never did any prosper in
rebellion. Certainly God has no respect of any man's person, for his outward
estate, quality, or condition. God spared not the Angels for their
excellency, nor the old world for their multitude; nor Saul for his personage,
nor Absolon for his beauty, nor the Jews for their prerogative, nor Jerusalem
for her goodly buildings. From this vnpartialitie of God in his works of
justice, my proposition stands good, Whosoever do imitate the Heathen in their
impieties, are in the Lords account no better, then the Heathen, and shall be
punished as the Heathen.

Will you a reason hereof? It is because the Lord takes impiety for impiety
wheresoever he finds it, and for such does punish it. And he finds it every
where. For the eyes of the Lord 2. Chr^n. 16.9.
run to and fro throughout the whole earth, and are in Pr^u. 15.3.
every place to behold as well the evil, as the good. His eyes are Iere. 16.17.
upon all our ways; he sees Job 34.21.
all our goings, he Job 31.4.
counts all our steps, no iniquity is Iere. 16.17.
hid from him. This does the Prophet Jeremy, Chap. 32.19. wall express; Thine
eyes, O Lord, are open upon all the ways of the sons of men, to give every
one acccording to his ways, and according to the fruit of his doings.

This the very Ethnickes, guided only by Natures light; have acknowledged.
Sybilla in her Oracles could say, (...), The Almighty and invisible God, he
only sees all things. Hesiod could say, (...), God has an All-seeing eye.
Plautus could say, Capte ivi.
Est profecto Deus, qui, quae nos gerimus, auditque and videt; Doubtless,
there is a God, who both hears and sees whatsoever we do. And Metamorph.
lib. 13.
Ovid could say, Aspiciunt oculis superi mortalia iust^s: There is a God above,
who has just eyes, beholds all the doings of mortal men. Thales
interregatus an furta ^^m^^um Deos fallerent: Nec cogi^ata, ^nq^it. Valor. Mar.
lib. 7 cap. 2. and Dioge. Laert. lib. 1. in Thal s.
Thales of Miletum, the wisest of the seven, being asked, whether men's evil
deeds could be kept close from God! No, said he, nor their evil thoughts. The
Hieroglyphicke, the mystical, or aenigmaticall letter whereby the Egyptians
would have God to be understood, was an eye. And why so? But as Hier^glyph.
lib. 33.
Pierius says, because Deus ille optimus maximus, the great God of Heaven, is
mundi oculus, the eye of the world.

It may be such was the conceit of that ancient Augustine.
Father, who said of God, that he was totus oculus; wholly an eye? He gives his
reason, quia omnia videt; because he sees all things. All things are to the
eyes of God (...) naked and opened [seene as well within as without.] So says
the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, chap. 4.13. All the impieties of man,
in deed, word, or thought, are manifest unto the Lord: he sees them all, and
for impieties will punish them.

Well says De constantia lib. 2. cap. 16.
Lypsius: Culpae comes, iustissime poena semper est; Pain is always the
companion of a fault. And Jbid. cap. 14.
again, Cognatum immo innatum omni sceleri, sceleris supplicium; Every
wickedness brings a punishment with it. As the work is, so is the pay; if the
one be ready, the other is present. Lipsius de constant. lib. 2, c. 13.
Never did any man foster within his breast a crime, but vengeance was upon his
back for it. If there be impiety, there cannot be impunitie. Witness the
blessed Apostle S. James, chap. 1.15. Sin, when it is finished, brings
forth death. And S. Paul, Romans 6.23. The wages of sin is death. Many are the
texts of holy Scripture, which I might allege to this purpose. I will for this
present trouble you but with one. It is, Psalm. 34.16. The face of the Lord is
against them that do evil, to cut off the remembrance of them from the earth.

From these now-touched considerations (first that Almighty God in judgment
accepts no persons; then, that his Al-seeing eye beholds whatsoever
impiety is done, not only in our works and words, but also in our most
retired thoughts; thirdly, that in justice every impiety is to receive a due
punishment) from these considerations my position stands firm and immovable.

Whosoever do imitate the Heathen in their impieties, they are in the Lords
account no better then the Heathen, and shall be punished as the Heathen. Here
let all good Christians be admonished, with their greatest carfulness to
look unto their ways, that they walk not in the by-pathes of sin, to
imitate the Heathen in their impieties Qui attrahit ad se culpam, non potest
effugere poenam, says Comment. in Hebr. 12.
Hugo Cardinalis. Think not that thy prerogative of being a Christian can be a
shield unto thee. Christianus August enchir. ad Laurent. ca. 5.
nomine, non opere, A Christian in name not in deed, may be called a Christian,
but is no Christian. Bernard Sentent.
Christianus as he is haeres nominis Christi, so must he be imitator
sanctitatis: A Christian is heir to the name of Christ, and therefore must be
a follower of Christ in holiness. A Christian (says S. Austine, if he be the
Author of the Book Lib. 1. cap. 6.
de vita Christiana) A Christian is a name of justice, of goodness, of
integrity, of patience, of chastity, of prudence, of humility, of courtesy,
of innocence, of piety. A Christian is he, who is a follower of Christ, who
is holy, innocent, undefiled, unspotted, in whose breast there is no
wickedness; who hurts no man, but helps all. He that can truly say: I hate
not mine enemies, I do good to them that hurt me, I pray for them that
persecute me, I do wrong to no body, I live justly with all men, hic
Christianus est, he is a Christian.

But, if in the profession of Christianity, a man lives the life of a Heathen,
the name of a Christian shall do him no pleasure: If he take delight in the
Galat. 5.19.
works of the flesh, in adultery, fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness,
drunkenness, hatred, variance, wrath, strife, or any like sin, God will
forsake him, the holy Angels will fly him, the blessed Saints will detest him:
the Reprobate shall be his company, the Devils his fellows, hell his
inheritance, his soul a nest of scorpions, his body a dungeon of foul
spirits; and at last both body and soul shall eternally burn in fire
unquenchable.

Wherefore (dearly beloved) suffer a word of exhortation. Ecclus. 21.1.2.3
Have you sinned? Do so no more. Flee from sin as from the face of a
Serpent. For if you come too near it, it will bite you: the teeth thereof are
as the teeth of a Lion, slaying the souls of men. So says Ecclus chap. 21.2.
Flee from sin as from the face of a Serpent. Sin? Its like a leaven that
will leaven the whole lump: Its like a scab, that will infect the whole
flock: Its like a flaming fire, that will burn the whole house: its like a
wild Horse, that will cast his rider into hell; its like a wild gourd, that
will poison the whole pott; its like a plague, that will destroy the whole
city; its like a Ecclus. 21.3.
two edged sword, the wounds thereof cannot be healed. Fly therefore from
sin, as from the face of a Serpent. And ever remember what befell Judah and
Jerusalem for their sins. They despised the Law of the Lord, they kept not
his commandments, their lies caused them to err, after which their fathers
walked; therefore has the Lord sent a fire upon Judah, which has devoured the
palaces of Jerusalem.

Thus far of my first doctrine. A second follows.

I take it from the condition of Jerusalem. She had fair appellations. She was
called the Virgin, and the daughter of Judah. Lament. 1.15. The daughter of
Sion. ver. 6. the city, that was great among the nations, and a Princes among
the Provinces. ver. 1. The holy City. Mat. 4.5. The City of the great King.
Mat. 5.35. The Lord he chose it, he desired it for his habitation, he said of
it: This is my rest for ever, here will I dwell, for I have a delight therein,
Psalm. 132.14. And yet notwithstanding, Jerusalem is rased from the foundation,
she is utterly destroyed. It is befallen her according to this commination in
my text, I will send a fire upon Judah, which shall devour the palaces of
Jerusalem. My doctrine is; God will severely punish sin, even in his dearest
children.

This S. Peter avoweth, 1. Epistle 4.17. saying: Judgment must begin at the
house of God, Hi^ meaning is, that the punishment and chastisement of sins
begins with the Saints and servants of God, in whom as it were in a house,
or Temple God dwells. If they who are most familiar with us, do sin against
us, we fret and grow discontented. The most familiar with God are his faithful
ones, who fill the house of God, which is his Church. If these sin against
God, can God take it well? He cannot. He will punish even his faithful ones.
So says St Austine, Epist. 122. Ad victorianum; Propter peccata sua etiam
sancti flagellantur, the very Saints of God are scourged for their sins. You
see my doctrine confirmed; God will severely punish sin even in his dearest
children.

The reason is given by S. Austine in his Book of fifty Homilies, Homil. 21.
because Iustitia est, vt puniat peccatum, it is a part of Gods justice to
punish sin, a part of his Active justice; So do the Schools call the
Justice of God, by which he judges and punishes offenders. Of this Justice of
God it is said in our English Liturgy: It belongs to God justly to punish
sins. Yea, so does it belong to God, that God is not just, unless he punish
sin.

The use of this doctrine is urged to us by S. Pet. 1. Epist. Chap. 4. verse.
17.18. If God will severely punish his own children for their sins; If
judgment must begin at the house of God; what shall become of strange
children, children of Belial? What shall be the end of them, that obey not the
Gospel of God? And if the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly
and sinner appear?

To this purpose is that of our blessed Savior Jesus Christ Luke 23.31. If
they do these things to a green tree, what shall be done to the dry? It is,
as if he had said more plainly thus; If God, my Father, suffer me, who am
innocent and without sin, who am like a green and a fruitful tree, so
grievously to be afflicted, and to be hewn down, as if I were a dry tree, how
much more will he suffer you, who are sinful, and rightly compared to dry and
barren trees, to be afflicted, and to be hewn down? The like argument does
the Lord bring against Edom. Ierem. 49.12. Behold they whose judgment, was not
to drink of the cup, have assuredly drunken, and shall thou altogether go
unpunished? Thou shall go unpunished, but thou shall surely drink of it.

What shall I more say? Let us diligently weigh, what has already been said.
Lay we it to our souls and consciences. We have seen, that the infinite
Justice of God repayeth vengeance for sin, even upon the heads of his dearest
children. The inhabitants of Judah, Gods inheritance, great Jerusalem, the
city of God, the glorious temple there, the house of God, for sins
pollution have been brought to destruction.

Christ himself, the only begotten son of God, the well-beloued son of
God, he in whom alone God is well pleased, because he 2. Cor. 5.21.
served with our sins, and was Esai. 53.5.
made sin for us, he was wounded for our transgressions; he was broken for
our iniquities; his back was laden with stripes, his head with thorns, his
body with crossing, his soul with cursing.

Thus sweet Savior have thou suffered for our rebellions, for our
transgressions, for our iniquities: the chastisement of our peace was upon
thee, and with thy stripes we are healed. It fell out happily for us (beloved)
that Christ, who knew no sin, should be made sin for us, that we, who bore
about with us, a Romans 6.6.
body of sin, might be made the righteousness of God in him. Being thus by
Christ reconciled to God, and washed, and cleansed from our sins through his
precious blood, take we heed, that it happen not to us 2. Pet. 2.22.
according to the true Proverb: The dog is turned to his own vomit again,
and the sow that was washed, to her wallowing in the mire. Let us not
henceforth be Romans 6.6.
servants unto sin; let us not yield our members as Ver. 13.
instruments of unrighteousness unto sin. Why should we Heb. 6.6.
crucify to our selves the son of God afresh, and put him to an open shame?
Let us rather yield our selves, our souls, and our bodies, servants unto God;
for so, shall our Romans 6.22.
fruit be in holiness, and our end everlasting life. So be it.

THE VIII. LECTVRE.
AMOS. 2.6, 7, 8. Thus says the Lord, For three transgressions of Israel, and
for four, I will not turn away the punishment thereof; because they sold the
righteous for silver, and the poor for a pair of shoes.

That pant after the dust of the earth on the head of the poor; and turn
aside the way of the meek, and a man and his father will go in unto the same
maid, to profane my holy Name.

And they lay themselves down upon clothes laid to pledge, by every altar, and
they drink the wine of the condemned in the house of their God.


FOr Isreal's sake, Amos the peculiar Prophet of Israel, has hitherto made
known unto Israel, what God his pleasure was, concerning their
neighbour-Nations. The judgments of God against the Syrians, the Philistines,
the Tyrians, the Edomites, the Ammonites, and the Moabites were first
manifested: then followed his judgments against Judah. These might have served
Israel in stead of so many mirrours, or looking glasses, wherein they might
have beheld the judgments, that hung over their heads also.

From the judgments of God denounced to foreign nations, the people of Israel
might thus within themselves have reasoned: Our God! All his Deuteronomy. 32.4.
ways are judgment; he is a God of truth, without iniquity; just and right
is he. The Syrians, the Philistines, the Tyrians, the Edomites, the Ammonites,
and the Moabites, must they, for their misdoings, be punished? How then shall
we escape? They silly people, never knew the holy will of God; and yet, must
they be measured with the line of desolation? What then shall be the portion of
our cup, who knowing Gods holy will, have not regarded it.

Again, from the judgments of God pronounced against Judah, the people of
Israel might thus within themselves have argued: God Psalm. 9.7.
ministers his judgments in uprightness. He threatens destruction to our
brethren, the people of Judah: that people, whom all that saw them,
acknowledged to be the Esa. 61.9.
blessed seed of the Lord; that people, that was the Esa. 5.7.
plant of the Lords pleasures; that people, with whom God placed his Psalm.
114.2.
sanctuary; upon that people will the Lord send a fire, to devour them? What
then shall be the end of us? They our brethren of Judah, have preserved among
them Religion, the worship and fear of the Lord, in greater purity then we
have done; and yet will the Lord send a fire upon them, to devour them?
Certainly, our judgment cannot be far off.

Amos having thus prepared his auditors the Israelites, to attention, makes no
longer delay; but begins to deliver his message to them, in the words, which
I have now read unto you: For three transgressions of Israel and for four, I
will not turn away the punishment thereof, etc. Herein, for our more direct
proceeding, may it please you to observe with me, 1. Autoritatem sermonis; The
authority of this Prophecy: Thus says the Lord. 2. Sermonem ipsum; The
Prophecy it self: For three transgressions of Israel, etc.


In the Prophecy, as far as this Chapter leads us, we have, 1.
Reprehensionem; A reproof of Israel for sin, verse. 6, 7, 8. 2.
Enumerationem; A recital of the Benefits, which God had heaped upon Israel,
verse. 9.10.11. 3. Exprobrationem; A twitting of Israel with their
unthankfulness, verse. 12. 4. Comminationem; A threatening of punishment to
befall Israel for their sins, ver. 13. to the end of the Chapter.


The Reprehension is first; and first by us to be considered. In it we may
note, 1. A general accusation of Israel: For three transgressions of Israel,
and for four. 2. A protestation of Almighty God against them: I will not
turn away the punishment thereof. 3. A rehearsal of some grievous sins,
which made a separation between God and Israel: Because they sold the
righteous for silver, and the poor for a pair of shoes; and so forward to the
end of the eyghth verse.


You have the division of my Text. Now follows the exposition. The first
thing we meet with, is, Autoritas sermonis, the authority of this prophecy.

Thus says the Lord] Jehovah. Now the thirteenth time is this great Name of
God, Jehovah, offered to our deuoutest meditations. We met with it in the first
chapter of this book nine times; and thrice before in this: and yet, by this
name Jehovah, is not God known to us. We know him by the name of a strong,
omnipotent, and All-sufficient God, but by his Name, Jehovah, we know him not.
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, by this Name knew him not: it is so recorded, Exodus
6.3. Nor can we by this Name know him. For this Name is a Name of Essence. It
designeth God unto us, not by any effect of his, but by his Essence: and who
ever knew the Essence of God? who was ever able to define it?

The Pet. Galatinus de arcanis Cathol. verit. lib. 2. cap. 1.
schoolmen say, there are three things whereof they can give no definition:
One is, that first matter, out of which all things were produced: The second
is, Sin, that has destroyed all: The third is, God, who preserves all. The
first, which is the Philosophers Materia prima, they define not obsummam
informitatem, because it is without all form: The second, which is man's bane,
Sin, they define not ob summam deformitatem, for its exceeding deformity:
The third, even God, the prime cause of all his creatures, they define not ob
summam formositatem, for his transcende^t beauty. It pleases the Schoolmen
sometimes thus to play with words. For the matter they are in the right.

It is true: Aquin. par. 1. qu: 1. art. 7. ad ^^.
De deo non possumus scire, Quid est: We cannot attain to so great a measure
of the knowledge of God, as to define what he is. When the Poet Cic. de Not.
Deorum. lib. 1.
Simonides was asked of K. Hiero, what God is? He wisely for answer desired
one days respite, after that two, then four; still he doubled his number: at
last; of his delay he gave this for a reason: Quanto diutius considero, tanto
mihi res videtur obscurior; the more I consider of this matter, the more
obscure it seems unto me. Cotta in Ibid.
Tullie said not amiss, Quid non sit Deus, citius quam quid sit, dixerim; I
can with more ease tell, what God is not, then what he is. This goes for a
truth in the schools. Aquin. par. 1. qu: 3. in principio
De Deo scire non possumus quid sit, sed quid non sit: we cannot know of God
what he is; but what he is not. So says Saint In psalm. 85.
Augustine; Facilius dicimus quid non sit, quam quid sit Deus; We can more
easily say, what God is not, then what he is.

And what is he not? The same father in his 23. Tract upon the Gospel of S.
John will tell you: Non est Deus corpus, non terra, non coelum, non luna, non
Sol, non Stellae, non corporalia ista. God is not a body, he is not the earth,
he is not the Heaven, he is not the Moon, he is not the Sun, he is not the
Stars, he is not any of these corporal things.

From hence sprang those Negative attributes of God, which we meet with,
either in the sacred volumes of the New Testament, or in the writings of the
ancient Fathers: from hence is God said to be 1. Tim. 1.17.
immortal, invisible, Romans 1.23.
incorruptible, Bernard sermon. 6. Supra Cantica.
incorporeall, Aug. de verb. Apostoli. Sermon. 1.
ineffable, inestimable, incomprehensible, infinite, Bernard paruorum sermonum
sermon. 51.
immense, undivided, unvariable, unchangeable. All these show unto us, not what
God is, but what he is not. And whosoever thus thinks of God, as he is set
forth in these his Negative appellations, though hereby he cannot altogether
find out what God is, pie tamen cauet, quantum potest, aliquid de eo sentire,
quod non sit, says S. Austine de Trin lib. 3. cap. 1. yet his religious care
is, to conceive somewhat of God, that he is not.

You see, it is easier for us to say, what God is not, then what he is: easier
for us to conceive of him by his Negative attributes, then by his affirmative.
Yet by his affirmative attributes are we brought to some knowledge of God. For
hereby we know, that he is the Genesis 21.33.
everlasting God, the Psalm. 83.18.
most high God, the Rom 16.27.
only wise God; that he is Genesis 17.1.
omnipotent, and Apoc. 15.4.
holy, and Deuteronomy. 32.4.
just, and Exodus 34.6.
merciful, and gracious, and long-suffering, and good, and true.

Whatsoever is verified of God in either sort of his Attributes; Affirmative or
Negative, it is all comprised in this one name of God in my text; his name
Jehovah. For this name Jehovah, is the name of the Essence of God: and
whatsoever is in God, it is his Essence.

It was one of De Deo Not. ad Disp. 3. p. 209
Vorstius his foul errors to deny the truth of that vulgarly received Axiom:
Nullum omnino in Deo accidens esse. It is simply and every way true: There is
no accident at all in God. God he is primum ens, his being is from all
eternity; he is forma simplex, a pure form, no subject; there is nothing in
God, which is not God; there is nothing in God really diverse from the essence
of God; there is nothing in God obnoxious to imperfection, separation, or
change; therefore it follows against Vorstius, there is no accident at all in
God. God he i^ Jehovah: he is absolutely and totally essence.

Thus says Iehouah] By this name Jehovah, we are taught three things.

First, that God of himself, and through himself, has always been, now is
and ever shall be. So is this name by a Periphrasis expounded, Revel. 1.4.
Grace be unto you, and peace from him, which is, which was, and which is to
come. And, Revel. 16.5. Thou art righteous, O Lord, which art, and wast, and
shall be. This exposition of this name Iehou^^h, is given by Str^mat. lib. 5.
Clemens Alexandrinus, and In Exodus qu. 15 and Epist. Diuinorum dogmatum.
Theodoretus Cyra^sis, that Jehovah, for its signification is, (...), He that
is.

Secondly, we are taught by this name Jehovah, that the essence, or being of
all things created is from God; according to that, Acts 17.28. In him we live,
and move, and have our being; and that, Romans 11.36. Of him, and through him,
and to him are all things.

Thirdly, we are taught by this name Jehovah, that God does give Esse reale, a
real being to his promises and threatenings: that he is veracissimus and
constantissimus, most true and most constant, in doing whatsoever he has
promised or threatened.

This consideration of this great Name, Jehovah, may yield much comfort to all
the Elect of God, and his faithful ones. Though they seem to Esa. 51.17.
drink the dregs of the cup of trembling, Romans 8.35, 36
and to be even swallowed up of c tribulation, of distress, of persecution, of
famine, of nakedness, of peril, of the sword; though they be as killed all
the day long, and accounted as sheep for the slaughter; yet hereby, they may
be well assured, that all the good things promised to them in the holy word of
God shall in their due time be accomplished. For God who has promised, he is
the Lord, he is Jehovah.

Again this consideration of this great name Jehovah, may strike a terror into
the hearts of the reprobate and unbelievers. They Psalm. 73.12.
prosper in this world, they increase inriches, they have more then heart can
wish, their eyes stand out with fatness, they are clothed with violence, as
with a garment, they are compassed with pride, as with a chain, they are not
in trouble, they are not plagued like other men: yet may they hereby be
assured, that all the evil threatened to them in the holy word of God, shall in
due time overtake them. For God, who has threatened he is the Lord, he is
Jehovah.

Thus says the Lord] Jehovah. Sundry other observations upon these very words
in so many syllables delivered five times in the first chapter of this book,
and twice before in this second chapter, have heretofore been commended to
your Christian considerations. They are in part published to your view:
therefore I need not spend time in repetition of them. By this which has this
time been spoken, you see whence this prophecy against Israel has its
authority. The authority of it, is from the Lord, Jehovah: whom once to name
unto you, should be enough to procure your most religious attentions. Proceed
we therefore to the prophecy it self.

The first thing therein is the Accusation of Israel in a generality, For three
transgressions of Israel, and for four.]

By Israel here we are to understand those ten tribes of Israel, who after
King Salomons death, forsook the Kings son R^hoboam, and subjected
themselves to the rule of Iereboam, son of Nebat. Those ten tribes, from the
time of that rent, were commonly called the Kingdom of Israel. These in Holy
Scripture are called sometime Hos. 10.15.
Bethel, sometime H^s. 10.5.
Bethauen, sometime Amos 3.9.
Samaria, sometime Hos 2.22.
Iesreel, sometime Amos 5.6.
Joseph, sometime Hos. 10.11.
Ephraim, sometime Hos. 12 2.
Jacob, sometime Hos. 10.1.
Israel. Israel is, their most common name, and their name in my text.

For three transgressions of Israel, and for foure] Diverse are the opinions
concerning these four transgressions of Israel. Nicolaus de Lyra says, their
first transgression was, their Genesis 37.26.
selling of Joseph; the second, their Exodus 32.4.
worshipping of the Calfe; the third, their 1 King. 12.16.
forsaking of David; the fourth, their selling of Christ. Paulus de Palatio
says, the first transgression was, their defection from the house of David,
and the King of Judah; the second, their defection from the worship of God, to
the worship of Idols; the third, their defection from the law of Moses, which
was Gods law; the fourth, their defection from the law of nature, which is the
light of Gods countenance sealed in our hearts. Domini. 8. post Trin. Con. 1.
Abraham Bronius says, the first of these transgressions was their idolatry;
the second, the slaughter of the Prophets; the third, the murder of Christ;
the fourth, their contempt. They made a trade of transgressing. These
expositions seem to be far fetched. Albertus Magnus finds them nearer
hand, in the letter of my text. The first transgression he will have to be, the
selling of the just; the second, the oppression of the poor; the third, their
perverting the way of the meek; the fourth, the violation of matrimony. These
are but so many descants upon the words of my text, For three transgressions of
Israel, and for four.

Three and four make seven. It seems then, that Israel transgressed against
God seven times. Seven times! It is plain by Scripture, that they transgressed
Saepius ac saepius, as Mercerus speaks, many a time and often: yea, from the
division of their Kingdom under Jeroboam, son of Nebat, their first King,
unto Hoshea, son of Elah, their last King, they did nothing but transgress
against the Lord their God, what by Idolatry, and what by other wickednesses.
Here then, by three and four, which make seven, we are to understand many.

The rule holds true in Divinity: A finite number is oftentimes put for an
infinite. S. Austin has observed it, lib. 3. de doctrina Christi, cap. 35. I
thus explicate it. In Leuit. 26.18. to the rebellious and disobedient, thus
says the Lord: If ye will not yet, for all this, hearken unto me, then I will
punish you seven times more for your sins. Seven times more, that is, many
times more, will I punish you. Hannah in her song, 1 Samuel 2.5. has this
strain; The barren has borne seven children. By seven there, you are to
understand many: She that was barren, has borne many children. David in Psalm.
119.164. says; Seven times a day do I praise thee. Seven times, that is, many
times; as if had said, Semper laus eius in ore meo, All the day long am I in
the praises of my God. Solomon in Prou. 26, 25. advises us not to believe the
gracious words of an enemy, because, says he, there are in his heart seven
abominations. Seven abominations, that is, many abominations, many sly purposes
lie hidden in the heart of an enemy. What need more examples? By these few the
phrase in my text is plain. The seven transgressions of Israel (for three and
four are seven) the seven transgressions of Israel, are the many
transgressions of Israel. In this phrase then does the Lord object unto Israel
innumera peccata, the multitude of their sins. For which he is unwilling any
longer to forbear them: whereupon follows his protestation against them, I
will not turn away the punishment thereof.

For three tran^gressions of Israel, and for four, I will not turn away the
punishment thereof] The meaning is; if once, if twice, yea, if a third time
only the Israelites had offended me with the greeuousnesse of their
transgressions, I could have tolerated them, and would not have cast them from
out my sight: but now; whereas a fourth time, s^pius and sapius, again and
again, they relapse and fall back to their impieties, and with a shameless
forehead, make no end of sinning; certa stat sententia, I am resolved, no more
to recall them to my favor, but to leave them to themselves: that obstinate
and indurate, as they are, in the multitude of their abominations, wherein they
have so deeply plunged themselves, they may suddenly be cast into the pit of
destruction.

Now from these two first parts of this prophecy, the general accusation of
Israel for sin, and the Lords protestation against them for the same, arises
this lesson, God is ever in open hostility with sinners.

A sinner ouer-valuing the vanities wherein his delight is placed, first
neglects God, then hates him. Thus affected, he would, if possible, disarme
God of his authority, pull his power from him, and cast him out of his state.
He could wish, there were no immortality of the Soul, no account to be made
of our actions, no reward, no revenge, no Judge to punish. So willing is he to
bathe himself in the imaginary contentment and pleasures of sin. I can put
no great difference between this sinner and an Atheist. The Atheist thinks,
there is no God; this sinner wishes, there were no God.

Now God, who feels the pulse of this sinners heart, and searches his inmost
thoughts, and sees his traytorous affection, can he be at peace with him? King
Ioram said to Iehu, 2 King. 9.22. Is it peace Iehu? Iehu answered, what peace,
so long as the whoredoms of thy mother Iezabel, and her witch-crafts are so
many? This sinner happily will look to be at peace with God: but he is soon
answered, What have thou to do with peace? What peace with God do thou
look for, so long as thou castest away his fear, and lie wallowing in thy
sins?

I must grant it: God is the God of peace; the Scripture says it more then
once, Romans 15.33, and chap. 16.20. and in 2 Cor. 13.11. Phil. 4.9. 1 Thessalonians.
5.23. 2 Thessalonians. 3.16. Hebr. 13.20.
other places. But what is this to the sinner? Nothing at all. For the same
Scripture will assure him, there is no peace to him; Esai 48.22. and 57.12. To
the sinner the Lord will show himself, quasi bellator fortis, as he is
called, Ierem. 20.11. he will show himself as a stout warrior. And for such
he is described, Deuteronomy. 32.41. There thus says the Lord concerning sinners: If
I whet my glittering sword, and mine hand take hold on judgment, I will render
vengeance to mine enemies, and will reward them that hate me. I will make mine
arrows drunk with their blood, and my sword shall devour their flesh? To like
purpose is that, which we read of Gods dealing with sinners, Psalm. 7.12. He
whets his sword, he bends his bow, and makes it ready, he prepares for them
the instruments of death, he ordains his arrows against them. So have you my
doctrine established, God is ever in open hostility with sinners.

Is God ever in open hostility with sinners? Consider this all ye that fear
God; remember it all ye, that bear the image of the Almighty. The sinner, that
is overtaken with three transgressions, and with four, that lies in his
sins, and walloweth in his iniquities, his case is fearful, his estate
lamentable. God proclaims against him open war, most certain destruction,
and will not turn away his punishments from him. Let it (Beloved) rouse us up
from that sleep of sin, wherein we have too long rested. All the good gifts,
and benefits of God, which God has bestowed upon us for our good, we have
abused to sin. God has given us understanding to meditate upon his holy
laws, but our understanding we have perverted to the transgression of his holy
Laws. God has given us the will to love him above all things, and our
neighbors, as our selves; but we have diuerted our will to the contempt of
God, and the hate of our neighbors. God has given us the tongue to power
forth his praises, but our tongues we have defiled with impure oaths, and
ougly blasphemies. God has given us hands for instruments to feed the poor,
and to defend them, but the strength of our hands we have wasted in cruelty
and rapine. In a word, God has given us our souls, and our bodies, all the
faculties of the one, all the members of the other, all, to do him service;
but we have employed all to his dishonor.

Dearly beloved, what shall we do? The best advise I can give, is that, which
Christ gives his Spouse in the Canticles, chap. 6.13. Return, return, O
Shulamite; return, return, that we may behold thee. I thus paraphrase it:
Return, O my Spouse, daughter of Jerusalem return, return to me, return to
thy self, return to thy former feeling of my Grace, return, that both my
self and all the company of Angels, may see thee, and rejoice in thee.

This Spouse of Christ is the mother of us all, the holy Catholic Church, in
whose bosom we are nourished, Take we then the advice given unto her, for an
advise unto our selves. Return we from our evil ways, return we from our
three and four transgressions, return we from all our sins, return we to
the Lord our God, that both he and all the company of Angels may see us, and
rejoice in us. Mutet vitam, qui vult accipere vitam, says S. Augustine Sermon.
1. de tempore: if we will enjoy the blessed life of Heaven, we must change our
wicked life on earth. If we will not change it, but will still bear about us
whorish looks, theeuish faces, proud hearts, covetous thoughts, malicious
minds, lustful eyes, slandering tongues, bloody hands, and drunken desires
(from which God Almighty defend us all) our portion must be the accursed
death of Hell. God will not turn away his punishments from us

Thus far of the general accusation of Israel, and the Lords protestation
against them; in those words, For three transgressions of Israel, and for
four, I will not turn away the punishment thereof. It follows, Because they
sold the righteous for silver, and the poor for a pair of shoes.

Here begins the rehersall of those grievous sins, which made a separation
between God and Israel. In these words two sins are specified; Cruelty, and
Covetousness. Their Cruelty I note in selling of the righteous, and the poor:
their Covetousness, in as much as they did it for silver, and for a pair of
shoes. I take the words in their order.

They sold the righteous for siluer] A man may be said to be righteous, either
by imputation, or by virtue, or by comparison, or by course of law. The
righteous man by imputation is he, whom Habakkuk speaks of, chap. 2.4. The
just shall live by his faith. There the just or righteous man is he, to whom
the Lord imputes not his sins, which he has committed. The righteous man by
virtue is he, whom David- speaks of, Psalm. 11.3. If the foundations be
destroyed, what can the righteous do? There the righteous man is he, whom we
call virum bonum, a good man. The righteous man by comparison is he, whom
Habakkuk speaks of, chap. 1.13. Wherefore hold thou thy tongue, when the
wicked deuoureth the man, that is more righteous, then he. There the righteous
man is he, that is the less wicked: the Jews, though wicked, are yet called
righteous in comparison of the Chaldaeans, who were more wicked. The righteous
man by course of law is he, whom Esaias speaks of, chap. 5.23. Woe unto them
which justify the wicked for reward, and take away the righteousness of the
righteous from him. There the righteous is he, that has a righteous cause: and
this is the righteous man in my text; whom the Israelites are said to have sold
for silver.

They sold the righteous for siluer] For silver, that is, for money. The like
phrase we have in Micah, chap. 3.11. where it is said of the Prophets of
Israel, they divine for silver, that is, they divine only for monyes sake. For
monyes sake to condemn the righteous, it is ingens piaculum; it is a very
heinous offense, not to be purged without deep satisfaction. And therefore in
the forecited place of Esai, chap. 5.23. a woe is denounced to such offenders.
Solomon says they are an abomination to the Lord, Prou. 17.15. He that
justifies the wicked, and he that condemns the just: even they both are
abomination to the Lord. I may not now enlarge my notes.

You understand, what it is, to sell the righteous for silver It is, to to take
away the righteousness of the righteous from him; and that is, to be hired by
money, bribes, or rewards, to give sentence against the man, whose cause is
just, and righteous.

They sold the righteous for silver, and the poor for a pair of shoes] By the
poor here we may understand the cause of the poor: as in Amos 5.12. They
afflict the just, they take a bribe, and they turn aside the poor in the
gate. They turn aside the poor in the gate] that is, they turn the poor man
out of his right: they overthrow the poor man's cause in judgment.

Again, by the poor here, we may understand the man, that is in misery; the
man, that is unworthily afflicted; the man, that is tossed, turmoiled,
grievously disquieted by some mighty wicked man.

This poor man, the Israelites did sell, (...), say the Septuagint; pro
calciamentis, says the Vulgar Latin: they sold him for shoes. The word in the
original is (...) of the duall number. It signifies, two shoes. Our new
English translation well rendereth it, A pair of shoes.

They sold the poor for a pair of shoes] If they sold, some bought. Such
buyers we find, Amos 6.8. They took order to buy the needy for silver, and
the poor for a pair of shoes. There they are bought, here they are sold: and
all for a pair of shoes.

For a pair of shoes] It is a prouerbiall speech; a speech fit to be used, if
we would signify a thing to be little or nothing worth, of small estimation, of
vile price. The like prouerbiall speech we have, Prou. 28.21. There it is said
of the man, that respects persons, that he will transgress for a piece of
bread. For a piece of bread, that is, for the vilest gift, for the basest
commodity. In which sense Cato said once to Coelius: frusto panis conduci
potest, vel vt taceat, vel vt loquatur: A man may hire him with a piece of
bread, either to speak, or to hold his peace.

We now understand what our Prophet means in these words; They sold the
righteous for silver, and the poor for a pair of shoes. They] The Israelites,
the Micah 3.11.
heads of Israel, the Judges of Israel; they sold] they circumvented, they
beguiled, they betrayed the righteous] him, whose cause was righteous, and
just: they sold the righteous for siluer] for money, for a bribe, for a reward:
and they sold the poore] the needy man, the man afflicted, or his honest cause,
for a pair of shoes] for a morsel of bread, for any base commodity, for a
trifle.

They sold the righteous for silver, and the poor for a pair of shoes] Here
the Judges of Israel are taxed for Cruelty, and Covetousness: for Cruelty,
because they sold the righteous, and the poor: for Covetousness, because they
sold them for silver, and for a pair of shoes. The lesson which we may take
from hence, is this, Cruelty and Covetousness in Judges and Magistrates, are two
of the sins, for which God brings States to ruin.

You see it plain in my text. God would not turn away his punishments from
Israel, because of the Cruelty and Covetousness in the Judges of Israel. These
sins are most eminent in Judges and Magistrates, but are reproveable in all
sorts of men. The Cruel and the Covetous, be they of whatsoever rank in a
Common wealth, they are very burdensome to God himself. God himself in this
chapter verse. 13. cries out against them: Behold I am pressed under you as a
cart is pressed, that is full of sheaues.

The time will not suffer me to enlarge my meditations upon the discovery of
these two sins; Cruelty and Covetousness. I shall have occasion to meet with
them again in the beginning of the next verse; where they are amplified, and
may hope for the benefit of your new attention.

For the present, let us be admonished, that we suffer not our selves to be
overcome of these or any other sins.

Sin! It produces very sad and doleful effects. It blinds our
understanding, while it takes from us the supernatural light of divine grace;
it staineth and defiles our consciences, with its filthiness; it accuses us
before the Lord of grievous injuries done against his Majesty: it
impouerisheth us, when it spoils us of all spiritual good; it dishonoreth us,
when it diffameth us in the sight of the Angels, and the whole Court of Heaven;
it holds us captive, and depriueth us of all liberty of well-doing; it
binds us with the chains of evil custom; and brings us within the danger
of falling daily from bad to worse; vulnerat nos in bonis naturalibus, occidit
in gratuitis, says Cornelius Mussus B. of Bitonto: it wounds us in all the
good faculties of our nature, and slays us in the free graces, wherewith God
has beautified our souls.

You see (dearly beloved in the Lord) you see what a tyrant Sin is. It
stops up the fountains of Grace, and hinders the streams of heavenly
comfort from coming to us. Yet; yet our life is nothing, but a trade of
sinning. In us, in our flesh, there dwells no good. Day by day, yea many
times a day, we transgress Gods holy Commandments, we heap sin upon sin,
and repent not.

What remains, but that we power forth our prayers to Almighty God, that he
will be pleased to give us true repentance for the wickedness of our fore-passed
lives, and in his good time to loose us from this body of sin, and to couple
us to himself in Heaven: where we may with the whole multitude of Saints, sing
unto him an Halleluiah: Blessing, salvation, honor, glory, and power be unto
him that sits on the throne, and to the Lamb for ever and ever. Even so be
it.

THE IX. LECTVRE.
AMOS 2.7. That pant after the dust of the earth on the head of the poor, and
turn aside the way of the meek: and a man and his father will go in to the
same maid, to profane my holy Name.

And they lay themselves down upon clothes laid to pledge, by every Altar, and
they drink the wine of the condemned in the house of their God.


OF those grievous sins, with which the people of Israel are in this Chapter
charged, two were touched in the former verse: their Cruelty, and their
Covetousness. They sold the righteous and the poor, this was Cruelty: they
sold them for silver, and for a pair of shoes; this was Covetousness. Now in
the beginning of this 7. verse are those two sins amplified: Their
Covetousness thus: They were never satisfied, till they had cast down the
righteous and the poor to the dust of the earth: Their Cruelty thus: They
were not content thus to have exhausted and spoiled them, but did also conspire
against, and gape after, their lives; for They panted after the dust of the
earth on the head of the poor. Before we take a further view of these sins,
Cruelty and Covetousness; let us for a while examine the words themselves.
They may seem to be very intricate and perplexed, by the diversity of the
readings.

The word in the original is (...) The Septuagint do render it, (...), that
tread under foot upon the dust of the earth the heads of the poor. The Vulgar
Latin has Qui conterunt, that break, or bruise upon the dust of the earth,
the heads of the poor. The Chaldee Paraphrast has, Qui contemnunt, who
despise, as it were the dust of the earth, the heads of the poor. But these
express the sense, they render not the word. For (...) properly signifies to
fetch wind, to draw breath, and by a metaphor, to swallow down, to sup up, to
devour; or earnestly, fervently, and with pleasure to desire to do any thing.

By this phrase then our Prophet gives us to understand, that the Israelites,
the rich and the mighty among them, did with delight behold the dust of the
earth upon the heads of the poor; that to them it was a pleasure, to see the
poor by unjust exactors oppressed, thrown to the ground, trodden under foot.

Which sense our English Bibles seem to point at. The Geneva Bible has, They
gape over the head of the poor in the dust of the earth. The late Church
Bible, They gape for breath over the head of the poor in the dust of the
earth; or They press upon the head, or, They tread upon the head of the poor
in the dust of the earth. The new translation, That pant after the dust of the
earth on the head of the poor.

This variety varieth not the sense. Howsoever for the the first word we read,
They gape, or gape for breath, or press, or tread, or pant, over, on, or upon
the head of the poor, yet is not the sense varied. The mention of the dust of
the earth, keeps that entire.

The dust of the earth] Old Drusius Obseruat. lib. 15. cap. 5.
Samaeus in Cap. 44.
Joseph Ben-Gorion, tells us of an ancient custom among the Hebrews
concerning such as were impleaded or arraigned before their Judges: They were
to stand at the bar in mourning attire, with dust upon their heads. If ^^
that custom our Prophet here alludeth, as Drusius thinks, then are the
Magis^^ates of Israel here nipped, and checked for selling the cause of the
poor to their rich adversaries, thereby making to themselves unlawful, and
excessive gain, and lucre.

The dust of the earth on the head of the poore] The casting of dust or earth
upon the head, was of old and long time a ceremony, whereby men in sad and
doleful plight were wont to express their grief. Mention is made of it,
Josh. 7.6. There it is said, that Joshua, and the elders of Israel, to testify
their grief for the overthrow given them by the men of Ai, rent their clothes,
fell to the earth upon their faces, and put dust upon their heads. They put
dust upon their heads. So 1. Sam. 4.12. the Beniamite that brought the heavy
news of the Ark of the Lord taken by the Philistines, and of the death of
Hophni and Phinehas the two sons of Eli, in toke^ of his grief came to Shiloh,
with his clothes rent, and with earth upon his head. He came with earth upon
his head. The like we read, 2. Sam. 13.19. Tamar, the sister of Absolon,
because she was hated of Amnon, by whom she had bin ravished, to signify her
grief, she rent her garment, and put ashes upon her head. She put ashes on
her head.

Other like Job 2.12. Ezech. 27.30. Apoc. 18.19.
places of holy writ I might produce, yet further to show, that the aspersion
or sprinkling of earth, dust, or ashes upon the head was a ceremony in use
with such, as had in themselves just cause of grief, heaviness, mourning, or
lamentation. But this is by the places already alleged, sufficiently declared
unto you. If to this ceremony of besmering the head with earth, dust, or
ashes, our Prophet here alludeth, then are the rulers of Israel, and the rich
among them here taxed for their hard-heartednesse toward the poor, for their
covetousness and cruelty, whereby they oppressed the poor; to this sense: They
pant after the dust of the earth, on the head of the poore]

They] the rulers of Israel, and the rich men there, They pant after the dust
of the earth] they greedily desire to see the dust of the earth sprinkled, on
the head of the poore] they make it their pleasure, to give the honest poor
man, just cause of grief, and mourning.

They pant after the dust of the earth] The dust; sometime it betokens a low
and base estate, 1. Sam. 2.8. Hannah in her song of thankfulness, praising the
Lord for his beneficence toward the humble and despised, says, He raises the
poor out of the dust, and lifts up the beggar from the dunghill. So, in so
many words says the Psalmist, Ps. 113.7. He raises up the poor out of the
dust, and lifts up the beggar from the dunghill. In both places the latter
phrase is a repetition, or exposition of the former. The Lord raises up the
poor out of the dust, that is, the Lord lifts up the beggar from the
dunghill. The meaning is: The Lord through his Almighty power, and of his
goodness, exalts the poor and abject amongst men from their vile and
contemptible estate to some degree of honor. Hitherto may we add that of
David, Psalm. 7.5. Let him lay mine honor in the dust. Let him lay mine honor in
the dust! What Is that? If (says David, I have rewarded evil to him, that was
at peace with me, let the enemy lay mine honor in the dust; that is, let mine
honor be so put out, that there may be no more remembrance of it in the
posterity to come; let me ever be held for a base, vile, and contemptible
wretch. If to this signification of Dust, our Prophet here alludeth; then are
the rulers of Israel and the rich among them, here censured, for their cruel
and insatiable desire to grind the faces of the poor. Thus, They pant after
the dust of the earth on the head of the poore]

That is, though the poor do already sit upon the dust of the earth, and are
thereby in the eyes of the world, base, vile, and contemptible, yet do the
rulers of Israel, and the rich among them, still pant after the dust of the
earth upon their heads, their delight is to behold them ever wallowing in the
dust of the earth, to see them yet more base, more vile, more contemptible.
Yea, they can be contented that the dust, whereof David speaks, Psalm. 22.15.
The dust of death be upon their heads, that the Psalm. 49.15.
grave have power over them, that the Psalm. 69.15.
pit shut her mouth upon them.

Hitherto (dearly beloved) you have had variety of interpretations. Which will
you admit? You cannot choose amiss. They are all agreeable to the analogy of
faith. They all check Israel, the heads of Israel, the Magistrates, Rulers,
and Governors of Israel, the rich of Israel, for their cruelty, their
covetousness, and their oppression of the poor of Israel, and they yield unto
us this lesson.

God pleads the cause of the poor against the cruel, the covetous, and
oppressors. By the poor in this proposition, I understand all, that be in any
need, necessity or want; widows also and fatherless children, that have
lost their head; strangers likewise and exiles out of their country for
religion, and good causes. All these if they behave themselves meekly, and
seek to live peaceably with all men, and put themselves wholly into the hands
of God, God receives into his protection, and pleads their cause.

Concerning strangers the commandment is, Exodus 2^.21. Thou shall neither vex
a stranger, nor oppress him. It is repeated, Levit. 19.33. If a stranger
s^iourne with thee, ye shall not vex him; he shall be as one borne amongst
you, and thou shall love him as thy self. Such is the commandment. Do men
regard it? Do they not rather with their churlish and unkind words and deeds
torment the a king heart of the stranger? If they do so, the Lord is ready to
avenge the strangers cause, and to execute vengeance upon his oppressors. For
so much the Lord undertakes, Exodus 22.23. If thou afflict [the stranger] in
any wise, and he cry at all unto me, I will surely hear his cry, and my wrath
shall wax hot, and I will kill you with the sword. You see God pleads the
strangers cause.

Again, God pleads the cause of the widows and fatherl^sse children. The
commandment concerning them is, Exodus 22.22. Ye shall not afflict any widow
or fatherless child. It is repeated, Zach. 7.10. Oppress not the widow, nor
the fatherless. Such is the commandment. Do men regard it? Do they not rather
add affliction to the afflicted fatherl^sse, and widow? Do they not oppress,
wrong, vex, and grieve them? If they do so, God is ready to right their
cause, and to lay vengeance upon their oppressors. For so much God undertakes,
Exodus 22.23. If you afflict the widow, or fatherless child, in any wise, and
they cry at all unto me, I will surely hear their cry, my wrath shall wax
hot, and I will kill you with the sword, and your wives shall be widows, and
your children fatherless. This protection over the fatherless and widows is
also ascribed unto the Lord, Deuteronomy. 10 18. The Lord does execute the judgment
of the fatherless and widow. It is very comfortably delivered, Psalm. 68.5. God
in his holy habitation is a father of the fatherless, and a judge of the
widows. You see God pleads the cause of the widows and the fatherless.

So also he pleads the cause of the poor, whatsoever he be. The commandment
concerning him is, Levit. 25.35. If thy brother be waxen poor, and fallen into
decay with thee, then thou shall relieve him, yea, though he be a stranger, or
a soiourner. It is repeated, Deuteronomy. 15.7. If there be among you a poor man,
thou shall not harden thine heart, nor shut thine hand from him; But Deuteronomy.
15.11. Matthew. 5.42. Luc. 6.34.
thou shall open thine hand wide unto him, and shall lend him verse. 8.
sufficient for his need. Such is the commandment. Do men regard it? Do
they not rather harden their hearts, and shut their hands against the poor? Do
they not Prou. 22.22.
rob them, Ezech. 22.29.
vex them, Amos 4.1.
oppress them, crush them? Do they not even now as bad as the Israeli^es in
my text did? Do they not sell the poor, for silver, for shoes, for a trifle?
Do they not even now pant after the dust of the earth on the head of the
poor? If they do so, the Lord is ready to do them right, and to punish such
as oppress them. For so much God undertakes, Amos 4.2. where, to such as
oppress the poor and crush the needy, the Lord God has sworn by his
holiness, that lo, the days shall come upon them, wherein he will take them
away with hooks, and their posterity with fish-hookes. This Solomon by the
spirit full well knew, and therefore Prou. 22.22. aduising us not to rob the
poor, brings this for a motive, verse. 23. The Lord will plead the cause of the
poor, and will spoil the soul of those, that spoil them. And chap. 23.11.
dissuading us from wronging of the poor, he brings the like motive, Their
redeemer is mighty, he shall plead their cause with you. You see now God
pleads the cause of the poor, whatsoever he be. But against whom does he
plead it? My doctrine says, the Cruel, the Covetous, and Oppressors.

These are they, whom the holy Spirit in this place taxes. Their cruelty and
covetousness, were touched verse. the 6. They sold the righteous, and the poor.
This was Cruelty. They sold them for silver, and for shoes; this was
Covetousness. Those two; Cruelty and Covetousness, joined together, make
Oppression, which is the sin reproved in the beginning of this 7. verse. They
pant after the dust of the earth on the head of the poor. With these, (the
Cruel, the Covetous, and Oppressors) the Lord has a Hos 4.1.
controversy, against these he Micah 6.2.
pleads.

First: He pleads against the Cruel. Against the Chaldeans, Esai. 47.5, 6.
Sit thou silent, and get thee into darkness, O daughter of the Chaldeans, thou
shall be no more called the Lady of kingdoms. For thou did show my people no
mercy, thou have very heavily laid the yoke upon them.

Secondly: He pleads against the Covetous. Against the men of Judah, Esai.
3.14, 15. Ye have eaten up the vineyard; the spoil of the poor is in your
houses. What mean ye, that ye beat my people to pieces, and grind the faces
of the poor.

Thirdly: He pleads against the Oppressors. Against the heads of Israel,
Micah 3.3. Ye eat the flesh of my people, and flay their skin from off them;
ye break their bones, and chop them in pieces as for the pot, and as flesh
within the cauldron. Thus far of the doctrine.

God pleads the cause of the poor, against the cruel, the covetous, and
oppressors. Now let us see what benefit we may make hereof unto our selves for
our further instruction, and the amendment of our lives.

First: Does God plead the cause of the poor against the cruel, the covetous,
and oppressors? This may serve to reprove ye cruel, the covetous, and the
oppressors of this age. With us now it is, as once it was with the state of
Israel. Cruelty, and Covetousness, much worse then nettles and brambles, have
ouer-run our land. These two, Cruelty and Covetousness, that boundless, this
insatiable, like the two daughters of the horsleech, Prove. 30.15. have bin so
long used to cry, Give, Give; that they will never be brought to say, It is
enough. The first borne of these two, Cruelty, and Covetousness, is Oppression,
that loud-crying sin, under which this our land in every corner almost
groneth: and she has her mates too; Usury, and Extortion. All these,
Cruelty, Covetousness, Oppression, Usury, and Extortion, walk hand in hand,
and seek about, (like that 1. Pet. 5.8.
roaring Lion, the Devil, of whom they are begotten) whom they may devour.
Many God knows, they have devoured already, but that contents them not.

Dearly beloved, how shall I work in you a loathing and a detestation of
these foul sins. Can I do it better, then by setting before your eyes the
deformity and vglines of the men, in whom they reign? And who are they? will
you have their character, and picture? It is drawn by Solomon, Prou. 30.14.
There is, says he, a generation, a generation of men, whose teeth are as
swords, and their Job 29.17.
jaws as knives, to devour the poor from off the earth, and the needy from
among men. They are as David's Lions, Psalm. 57.4. Their teeth are spears and
arrows, and their tongue a sharp sword. They are as the kine of Bashan, Amos
4.1. Oppressors of the poor, crushers of the needy. See you not in the shape
of men, Monsters, Kine, Lions, with teeth like spears and arrows, with jaws
like knives, with tongues like swords? Will you yet converse with them? will
you have any further fellowship, any further acquaintance with them?

You will say; How shall we shun them, unless we more particularly know who
they are? Behold therefore a Catalogue of them, out of a R^inold upon Obadiah
page 84.
learned and judicious Divine. They are such, as eat and devour us up with
Usury; such as spoil us by monopolies, by engrossing, by false wares, by
subtle bargain^s; such as wrong us, by enclosing of Commons; such as wring us,
by enhaunsing of rents; such as rob the Church, in pulling away the maintenance
of the Ministers thereof, in possessing their right, in appropriating or
deteining their tithes; such as thrust husbandmen out of their livings, and in
their steed place a shepherd with his dog; such as join Esa. 5.8.
house to house, land to land, living to living, as though they meant alo^e to
live upon the earth.

These are they whose character and picture I but now showed unto you; (men!
will you call them men? nay) monsters of men, kine of Bashan, Lions, whose
teeth, jaws, and tongues are as spears, and arrows, and knives, and swords,
to eat and devour the needy and the poor. These are they whom you commonly
call devouring Caterpillars, greedy Corm^rants, cruel Cambals, and not
amiss: So insatiable are they, and such merci-lesse man-eaters; hated of all
good people, and Psalm. 5.6.
abhorred of God.

What can be the end of these men? Shall not the day come, wherein dogs shall
lick their blood, as once they did, the blood of Ahab, 1. Kin. 22.38. or the
fowls of heaven shall feed on their carcasses, as they once did, on the
carcasses of those of Ahabs house, that died in the field, 1. King. 21.24. Or
the ground shall cleave asunder, and swallow them up alive, as once it did
Dathan, and Abiram, and the rest, that perished in the Iud. ver. 11.
gaine-saying of Corah, Number. 16.32. But say they are visited Number. 16.29.
after the visitation of other men; say they dye the common death of all men;
say, they seem to dye the Number. 23.10.
death of the righteous, Genesis 35.29.
full of days, and in peace to go down into their graves: yet behold; there
is a day to come, and come it shall upon them: 2. Pet. 3.20.
the day of the Lord; that day, wherein the heavens shall pass away with a
great noise, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat, the earth also and
the works that are therein shall be burnt up. At that day shall these men, men
of (...) Ps^^ 5.7.
blood, bloud-thirstie and cruel men, standing among the Goats before the
tribunal of the great Judge, receive that sentence of damnation; Depart from
me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil, and his Angels.

There is no evasion for them. For if by that sentence they are damned, who
have not done the works of Mercy, Rainold upon Obadiah. p. 85.
much more shall they be damned, who have acted the works of Cruelty: if by
that sentence they are damned, who have not succored and releiued the poor,
much more shall they be damned, who have oppressed, and crushed the poor: That
sentence thus proceeds: Mat. 25.41.
Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and
his Angels. For I was an hungered, and ye gave me no meat: I was thirsty, and
ye gave me no drink: I was a stranger, and ye took me not in: naked, and
ye clothed me not, sick, and in prison, and ye visited me not. O then! how
fearful, how lamentable shall their case be, against whom the Judge may thus
proceed in sentence! Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared
for the Devil, and his Angels. For I had meat, and by force you took it from
me: I had drink, and you spoiled me of it: I had a house, and you thrust me
out of it: I had clothes, and you pulled them from my back: I was in health,
and ye drove me into sickness: I was at liberty, and you imprisoned me? O
that we were wise to consider this, while it is time. Mathes. in Mat. 25.42.
Nam si isti paenas luent, qui proximo suppetias non tulerunt; quid fiet de
istis, qui miserum insuper expiliarunt, and despoliarunt? If they who help not
their poor and needy neighbors, shall eternally be burnt in Hell fire, much
more shall they be there burnt, who rob and spoil their poor and needy
neighbors, who like the Israelites in my text, do sell the righteous for
silver, and the poor for a pair of shoes, and do pant after the dust of the
earah on the head of their poor brethren, What shall I say more to such? I can
only wish that some remorse and penitencie, may be wrought in their hearts
through the remembrance of my present doctrine, God pleads the cause of the
poor against the cruel, the covetous, and oppressors.

Is it so? Then in the second place, may this doctrine serve for the
consolation, or comfort of the poor and needy, who now lie groaning under the
tyranny of the cruel and covetous oppressors of this age. God Prou. 22.23.
pleads their cause, God is their Prou. 23.11.
Redeemer, God righteth their wrongs, God spoyleth their spoylers, God takes
the care, God takes the tuition of them. May they not well be comforted?

Hear ye then, ye that are poor and needy ^sa. 35.3.
Let your weak hands be strengthened, let your feeble knees be confirmed; Ver.
4.
Be ye strong, fear not. Behold, your God will come with vengeance, your God
will come with recompense; he will come in due time, and will deliver you from
out the paws of the bloud-thirstie, and cruel man. Though ye be scorned of
the world, and pointed at with the finger, and triumphed over by such, as tread
you underfoot; yet comfort your selves in this your affliction, God pleads your
cause.

I speak not this to give encouragement or comfort to such of the poor, as
are profane and wicked. They can make no claim to Gods protection. The
stranger, that behaueth himself more proudly, then he would at home in his
own Country, and among his friends, he is out of Gods protection. The widow,
that plaieth (as S^rm. 73. upon Deutron. page 450.
Calvin speaks) the she-Deuill, that troubles and vexes her neighbors,
with whom there is more to do, then with many a man, she is out of Gods
protection. The fatherlesse-childe, that gives himself to naughtiness, shakes
of the yoke of piety, becomes an unthrift in spite of God, and the world, he
is out of Gods protection. The poor, whosoever they be, that Psalm. 54.3.
have not the fear of God before their eyes, that are given over to work
wickedness, and that greedily; that lie wallowing in sensuality, in
wantonness, in drunkenness, in any filthiness, they are all out of Gods
protection.

I speak only to comfort the stranger, the widow, the fatherless child,
every poor soul, that is religious, and godly: such as ^om. 12.18.
live peaceably with all men, such as are truly dist^essed before the Lord,
such as James 4.10. 1. P^t. 5.6.
humble themselves under the mighty hand of God, such as 1 Pet. 5.7.
cast all their cares and sowrowes upon the Lord. Such are the poor, that may
receive true comfort from my propounded doctrine; God pleads the cause of the
poor against the cruel, the covetous, and oppressors.

We have not yet done with oppressors, the holy Ghost will not so let them
go. They are further described unto us in the next clause.

They turn aside the way of the meek.] For the meek, the word in the
original is (...) The same word, Psalm. 10.17. is rendered in our new
translation, the humble. So it is translated by the (...).
Seauentie, and the vulgar Humilium.
Interpreter. Some translate it, the poor, some, the miserable; some, the
afflicted. The original word well bears every of these significations: the
meek, the humble, the poor, the miserable, the afflicted.

The way of these men may here be taken properly, or figuratively. If it be
taken properly; then we are here to understand, that the richer sort of the
Israelites, did make the poor to turn aside out of their way to give them
place, or, did make the poor even for fear of them, to keep out of their
sight. But if the way here be figuratively taken, as well it may by a metaphor,
for their cause, their right, their business, their trade or course of life;
then are we here to understand, that the richer sort of the Israelites did
pervert the right of the poor, did hinder their purposes, did disturb their
courses, and did so confound them, that they were not able to make any
provision for themselves.

This metaphorical signification of a way we meet with, Exodus 18.20. There
Moses is counseled by Iethro, to show his people the way wherein they were to
walk. We meet with it also in the Book of Job, Chap. 17.9. There Job says,
the righteous shall hold on his way. We meet with it in many other places of
holy writ, which I must now let pass; in all which, as in this place, the way
betokens, the cause of a man, his right, his business, his trade, or course of
life. After this figurative signification some do thus expound these words:
They turn aside the way of the meek; or, They pervert the way of the poor:
that is, the Israelites their rulers, and governors, the rich among them, do
take in ill part what so ever the poor say, or do. All their words, all their
deeds are found fault with. Some malicious invention, or surmise, is ever at
hand to lay the blame upon them. This I take to be the fittest exposition for
this place.

Here then we have the fourth sin wherewith the Israelites are here charged.
It is Caluninia; their false accusing of the poor, a sin that evermore
attends upon Oppression. For the cruel, and covetous wretch, who is
persuaded that his greatness chiefly consists in the oppression of the
poor, will be sure so to provide, to keep the poor under, that they shall
never be able to revenge the wrongs done unto them. Let the poor man slip but
unadvisedly or ignorantly, the laws must by and by take hold on him: whereas
the Rich man, the laws are but as Cobwebs: he breaks throw them all. Hence is
that common saying: the poor man does nothing well; the rich man nothing ill.
Yea let the poor man do all things well, yet will some rich calumniator ever
be ready, to give an ill construction of his best ways; or, as the phrase in
my text is, to turn aside the way of the meek, or, to pervert the way of the
poor. The lesson which we are to take from hence for our instruction is this;
The poor man, which uses any honest trade or course of life, is not to be
turned out of his way: his words and actions are not to be mis-interpreted.

The reason of this doctrine is plain in the sixth verse of this Chapter: The
Lord will not turn away his punishments from the offenders in this kind; from
such, as turn aside or pervert, the way of the meek, and the poor.

The use of this doctrine concerns all those, whom God has blessed with the
wealth of this world. It is their duty not to be careless of the poor, not
to grieve them, not to hinder them in their honest courses, not to turn them
aside out of their lawful ways. You that have wherewith to maintain your
selves abundantly, you may not exempt your selves from doing service unto God
with your abundance. Yea you must strain yourselues to the uttermost of your
powers to relieve and succor such as are in scarcity, and in want. This is a
sacrifice that God requires at your hands. Offer it willingly, and you shall
have a reward. Your reward it shall not be a corruptible Crown. It shall be a
Crown of eternity. It shall be the possession of Heaven it self. The poor
shall carry you thither.

There is to this purpose a sweet meditation of S. Austin. Sermon. 245. de
Tempore. There he b^ingeth in God thus speaking to the rich man: Te diuitem
feci; tibi, quod dares, dedi, laturarios tibi pauperes feci: I have made thee
rich: I have given to thee, that thou might give to others; I have made the
poor to be thy porters; to be the Cariers of thine alms, and thee, into
Heaven. To this sense does the same S. Austine Sermon. 25. de verbis Domini, call
the poor man, viam Coeli, the way to Heaven. Via Coeli est pauper, per quam
venitur ad Patrem. The poor man is the way to heaven, by which we come unto
the Father. Incipe ergo erogare, si non vis errare: Begin therefore to
errogate, to distribute, to lay out upon the poor, if thou will not wander or
stray from the way to Heaven. Loose thou the fetters of thy patrimony in this
life, that hereafter thou may have free access into Heaven.

Cast away the burden of thy riches, cast away thy voluntary bonds; cast away
thy anxieties, thy irkesomnesse, wherewith for many years thou have been
disquieted; Da p^tenti, vt possis ipse accipere: Give to him that asks of
thee an alms, that thou may thy self receive mercy. Tribue pauperi* si non
vis flammis exuri, Give unto the poor, if thou will not be burnt in the flames
of Hell fire. Da in terra Christo, quae tibi reddat, in Coelo; Give to Christ
on earth, and Christ will repay thee in Heaven. The like has the same good
father, Sermon. 227. de Tempore: Si aperueris pauperibus manus tuas, Christus
tibi aperiet januas suas, vt Paradisi possessor introeas: If thou will open thy
hand unto the poor, Christ will open his gates unto thee, that thou may
enter the possession of Paradise; the Paradise of Heaven. It is a Paradise for
pleasure, but a City for beauty, and a Kingdom for state. There is God in
his fullness of glory, and reigns in justice. The company there are all
triumphant; they are all invested with glory, crowned in majesty, clothed in
sincerity. Their faces shine with beauty, their hearts are filled with
piety, their tongues extol the Lord with spiritual alacrity; in their hands
they bear palms in token of victory. No tongue can utter, no heart can
conceive the boundless and endless happiness that shall be enjoyed there. This
we know that our corruption shall there put on incorruption, and our mortality
shall be swallowed up of life. Even so be it.

THE X. LECTVRE.
AMOS 2.7. And a man and his father will go in unto the same maid to profane
my holy name.


THey who have begun to go beyond the lines, and the limits prefined unto them
in the word of God, do by little and little proceed from evil to worse, from
one wickedness to another. This you have seen verified in these Israelites.
You have seen their cruelty, their covetousness, their oppressions, their
calumnies. They were cruel; they sold the righteous, they sold the poor, ver.
6. They were covetous; they sold the righteous for silver: they sold the poor
for a pair of shoes, in the same verse. They were oppressors; they panted
after the dust of the earth on the head of the poor, verse. 7. They were
calumniators; false accusers of their needy brethren; they turned aside, they
perverted the way of the meek, in the same verse. Now are the bars and
bounds of all shame broken; now are the raines of all modesty let loose; given
up to their vile affections, they fear not to commit detestable Inc^st. For A
man and his father, will go in unto the same maid, to profane my holy name.

Before we enter into a particular discourse of that abominable sin,
wherewith the people of Israel are in this text charged, it will not be amiss
to take a brief view of the words as here they lie.

A man and his Father] that is, A son and his Father; The original word
(...) signifies a man; for it the Septuagint read (...), and the vulgar Latin,
Filius; A son. A son and his Father -- will go in.] The vulgar Interpreter
has Ierunt, have gone; the Septuagint (...), did go in. The Hebrew is (...)
will go. It is very familiar with the Hebrews to put one tense for another;
the future for the present; the time to come, for the time that is instant. An
instance hereof we have, Psalm. 1.2. There its spoken of the blessed man; He
(...)
shall meditate in the law of the Lord day and night. He shall meditate, so
goes the text: the meaning is; he does meditate: Blessed is the man that does
meditate in the Law of the Lord day and night. In Psalm. 2.1. it is spoken of
Christ's enemies; they (...)
shall imagine a vain thing. They shall imagine; so goes the text: the
meaning is; they do imagine. Why do the Heathen rage, and the people imagine
a vain thing? In Psalm. 5.3. The Prophet David earnest and vehement in Prayer,
thus speaks of himself; In the morning will I pray unto thee. (...)
I will pray unto thee; so goes the text: the meaning is; I do pray unto
thee. My voice shall thou hear in the morning, O Lord; in the morning do I
direct my prayer unto thee. It is the very Hebraisme, that we have in my text;
A man and his father (...)
will go in unto a maid, to profane my holy name. They will go in; it is the
letter of my text: the meaning is, that resolutely without shame, without
fear; They go in, or they use to go in. Do they use to go in? Then may each
reading be admitted: they have gone in, they did go in, they do go in, they
will go in.

A man and his father will go in (...) unto a maide] What maid? any maid? No.
But a known maid, a certain maid. So much is employed by the Hebrew Article
(...), which here is connotatiue, or discretiue. The Greeks say distinctly
(...), to the same maid. Our now English so reads it; and well. For so the
sense of this place requires.

A man and his Father will go in unto the same maid.] By this maid S.
Hierome understands the sons wife, or the fathers wife; so do others also,
as Ribera observes. Mercer, of late the Kings professor of the Hebrew tongue,
in the University of Paris; by this maid understands, one, that is
affianced, or betrothed to either, the son, or the father. Of like mind is
Arias Montanus. By this maid (says he) we understand non meretricem, not a
common strumpet, one that makes gain by the prostitution and abuse of her
body; sed viro sponsam, but one that is betrothed to a man, aut certe nubilem,
or at lest, one that is marriageable and is in her fathers house appointed for
wedlock. Some are of opinion, that by this maid, you may understand, any
maid; the daughter of any other man, to whom yet this man and his father use
to resort to satisfy their lusts.

Now, if we will collect, as Montanus does, the Father knew his own daughter,
his son knew the same, though she were to him, his sister: or the father knew
his sons wife, his daughter in law: or the son knew his fathers wife, his
mother in law: or both, the father and the son were naught with some other
man's daughter: or all these wickednesses were in that corrupt state of Israel
usually acted. Of that state we may say with Brentius: Qualis pater, talis
filius: pater fornicatur, filius scortatur, pater adulterium committit, filius
incestum; pater libidinem exercet prohibitam, filius turpem sequitur luxum. It
is a fathers part, by his example of chaste living, to invite his son to
chastity. With these Israelites there was no rule, so good observed. Here was
like father, like son: the father a fornicator, the son a drabber: the
father an adulterer, the son incestuous: the father delighting in unlawful
lust, the son wallowing in sensuality: yea the father and the son did
oftentimes fasten their impure and unchaste love upon the same maid: which is
the very thing avowed in my text: A man and his father will go in unto the
same maid. It follows,

To profane my holy Name.] What? Did this man and his father go in unto the
same maid, with a mind to profane Gods holy Name? was this their end? No
doubtless, it was not their end. Their end was to enjoy their carnal
pleasures. And yet its here expressly said; they did it, to profane Gods holy
Name.

For the remoouing of this scruple, that old Canon of an ancient Chrysostom.
Father, will serve. It is proper to the Scripture, to put that for a cause,
which indeed belongs to the event. Ribera thus explicats it: It is the manner
of the Scripture sometime so to speak as if it considered only, what a man
does, and not at all, with what mind he does it: as if it only considered what
men do vulgarly and usually collect and judge of any action by the event
thereof. For the Scripture many times speaks as the custom of the common
people is.

This rule the Jesuit Tom. 4. p. 654.
Pererius in his Comment upon Genes. chap. 43.6. thus plainly delivers. When
upon the deed of any one, any thing falls out besides the purpose and will of
the doer, it is commonly believed, and said to be done, as if the doer had of
purpose willed it. Will you have this rule made plain by examples? Then thus.
A man sins. His sin draws upon him the loss and destruction of his own
soul. Now he that sins does not intend any such matter; he intends not the
loss, or destruction of his own soul. Yet because he does that, from whence
follows, the loss and destruction of his soul, he is said to will and seek
the perdition of his own soul.

This Canon rightly understood, much helps for the explanation of diverse
Scripture places. In Hebr. Psalm. 11.
Psalm. 10.6. according to the vulgar Latin, we read, Qui diligit iniquitatem,
odit animam suam; he that loves iniquity, hates his own soul. Did ever man
hate his own soul? We may not imagine it. Yet because he that loves
iniquity, lives for the most part as if he little cared for his souls
health, it is there absolutely said: He that loves iniquity, hates his own
soul.

In Genes. 43.6. the vulgar Interpreter makes Israel thus to speak to Judah,
and other his sons, In meam hoc fecistis miseriam, vt indicaretis ei, and
alium vos habere fratrem; you have done it to my misery, that ye told the man,
that you had another brother. Its true: Jacobs ten sons, when they were in
Egypt to buy corn, told Joseph (whom then they knew not to be Joseph) that
their youngest brother was living. But did they do it with a mind to bring
misery upon their aged father Jacob: Jacob himself could not think so, and
the story cleares them from that imputation. Yet because by that their deed,
misery might have fallen upon their father Jacob, Jacob says unto them after
a vulgar custom of speech, In meam hoc fecistis miseriam, you have done this
to make me miserable.

In 2. King. 4.16. the good woman of Shunem, that was by Elisha promised a
son, notwithstanding her self was by nature barren, and her husband also
old, said unto Elisha: Nay my Lord, thou man of God, do not lie unto thine
handmaide. Do not lie! What! Elisha a Prophet, a man of God, could he, or
would he lie? No; it beseemed him not. Yet because he promised, what was not in
man's power to perform, (a son to a woman that was naturally barren, and her
husband also old) some might think, that he went about to deceive the woman.
The woman therefore after the common kind of speech, says unto him; Nay my
Lord, thou man of God, do not lie unto thine handmaide.

Other like instances I might allege for the further explanation of the Canon
or rule which even now I proposed, But I need not. The kind of speech is
familiar in our English tongue. If you see a sick man intemperate, or refusing
to follow the advice of his learned Physician, you will straight way say, this
man seeks his own death; he will kill himself; When your meaning is, not
that he has a purpose to seek his own death, or to kill himself; but, that
if he continue intemperate, and will not follow his Physicians wholesome
counsel, death will soon lay him in the pit.

Now let this rule be laid unto my text, and the scruple, whereof I but now
spoke, is gone. A man and his father will go in unto the same maid to profane
my holy name: they are the words of my text; and the Lord in the mouth of his
Prophet Amos has spoken them. But he speaks after our manner; as we use to
speak: His meaning is, that with the Israelites it was an ordinary matter for
a man and his father, to commit filthiness with the same maid, and that by
their so doing, (though themselves had no such purpose in so doing) the holy
name of God was profaned. This profanation of Gods holy name was not the
final cause, it was not the end, why such filthiness was committed in
Israel. It was rather the event, or consequent of it. Filthiness was acted in
Israel, and thereof followed the profanation of the holy name of God. A man
and his father, etc.

To profane my holy name] My holy name. The Hebrew has, the name of my
holiness: where the substantive is put for the adjective, the Abstract for the
Concrete: which in that holy tongue is very usual. In the 3. of Exodus ver. 5.
The Lord says to Moses: Put of thy shoes from of thy feet for the place,
whereon thou stand, is ground of Holiness. Its ground of Holiness, that
is, its holy ground. In the 12. of Exodus verse. 16. Moses and Aaron are charged
to say unto the people of Israel: In the seventh day there shall be a
convocation of holiness unto you. A convocation of holiness, that is, a holy
convocation. In the 22. of Exodus ver. 31. The Lord says unto the same people
of Israel: Ye shall be men of Holiness unto me. Men of Holiness, that is,
Holy men.

Were it needful I could show unto you, that the Esai 63 11.
Spirit of Gods holiness, the Esai. 52.10.
arm of his holiness, the Psalm. 3.5.
mountain of his holiness, the Psalm. 11.4.
temple of his holiness, the Deuteronomy 26.15.
habitation of his holiness, are put for his holy Spirit; his holy arm, his
holy mountain, his holy temple, his holy habitation. I could yet show unto
you; that Exodus 24.4.
garments of holiness, Number. 3.51.
vessels of holiness, Lamen. 4.1.
stones of holiness, 1. Sam. 21.4.
bread of holiness, Ierem. 11.15.
flesh of holiness, and Number. 35.25.
oil of holiness, are in the holy Bible, put for holy garments, holy vessels,
holy stones, holy bread, holy flesh, holy oil. But I have said enough, to show
what I intended, namely, that usually in the Holy tongue, the Abstract is put
for the Concrete, as holiness, for holy: as in this my text. A man and his
father will go in to the same maid, to profane the name of my holiness; that
is, to profane my holy name.

Can Gods holy name be profaned by men? Why not, since it may be sanctified by
men? That the name of God may be sanctified by men, its out of doubt, Caput
votorum, the very first petition, which we are taught to pour forth unto God,
is, that his name may be sanctified, Hallowed be thy name: The name of God is
holy in it self, it needs not to be hallowed by us; its impossible for us to
add unto it any purity or holiness, which it had not before. Yet Scala coeli,
Sermon. 9.
Caput votorum, the first petition of our prayer is, Hallowed be thy name. Our
desire therein is, that Gods name which is holy of it self, may be so
accounted off by us, may be holily used by us, and may, by our holy usage of
it, be manifested to the world, that it is holy.

Now then, as the name of God is Hallowed, when for our holy and unstained
lives, men bless the name of God, and praise him: so when for our impure and
spotted lives, men blaspheme the name of God, and dishonor him, the name of
God is profaned. Well then, does our Prophet Amos here charge the people of
Israel with profanation of Gods holy name, for as much as their lives were very
impure and much spotted. It was with them no strange matter, for a man and his
father to commit filthiness with the same Maid.

Thus have you the words of my text expounded.

A man and his father] A son and his father, will go in unto the same mayde]
do ordinarily, without fear or shame, commit filthiness with the same young
woman, and so doing, do profane my holy name] they cause my name to be
blasphemed, and ill spoken of.

Two things are herein remarkable. One is, the sin here objected to the
Israelites: the other is, the consequent of this sin. The sin is poynted at
in these words, A man and his father will go in unto the same maid: the
consequent in these, to profane my holy name. The sin is unlawful pleasure,
taken either in incest, or in adultery, or in fornication, or in any other
uncleanness: the consequent is, the profaning of the holy name of God.

The doctrine arising from both, I deliver in this one position.

Incestuous persons, adulterers, fornicators, and otherwise shameless sinners,
are oftentimes the cause of profaning the holy name of God. Incestuous
persons, adulterers and fornicators, all are stark naught: but the first are
the worst. Incest, adultery and fornication, each of them is a sin, that
throws the sinner into the euer-burning lake; yet the most grievous of them
is incest. Incest! It is one of the grossest vices of lust. Every mixture of
man and woman of the same kindred, within the degrees forbidden by the law of
God, is Incest. It is forbidden in the seventh Commandment, wherein, although
adultery be only mentioned, yet under that kind of uncleanness, are
comprehended and noted, Sodomitrie, incest, rape, simple fornication, all the
rest, together with their causes, occasions, effects, antecedents, and
consequents.

But more precisely is incest forbidden, in the eighteenth of Leuiticus, from
the sixth verse to the eighteenth. In the sixth verse, the inhibition is
general: None of you shall approach to any that is near of kin to him, to
uncover their nakedness: I am the Lord. It is then the Lord that speaks to
you: None of you shall come near to any of your kin, to uncover their shame.
But what kindred means he? There is a kindred by society of blood; it is
called consanguinity: there is also a kindred by marriage; it is called
Affinity. And to both these kinreds will the Lord have his inhibition to
extend: You shall not approach to any that is near of kin to you, to uncover
their nakedness, that is, you may not marry with, or otherwise lustfully abuse
any of your kindred, be they of your kindred, either by Consanguinity, or by
Affinity.

Now to treat of all these degrees, that are in the eighteenth of Leuiticus
forbidden, were needless at this time. One above the rest will fit my text.
Its that in the eighth verse. The nakedness of thy fathers wife thou shall not
uncover. Thy fathers wife, that is, thy stepmother, not thine own mother. Her
nakedness, though she be but thy moth^r in law, thou shall not uncover. This
might have been the sin of these Israelites in my text. Here you see, A son
and his father went in unto the same maid. If this maid were wife unto the
father, then was she stepmother to the son, and the son was incestuous.

This uncleanness the very Heathen have detested. S. Paul acknowledges as
much, 1. Cor. 5.1. It is reported commonly, that there is fornication among
you, and such fornication, as is not so much as named amongst the Gentiles,
that one should have his fathers wife. Not so much as named amongst the
Gentiles? What? do not Heathen histories yield examples of this uncleanness?
They do.

They give us to understand of Plutarch. in Demetrio.
Antiochus son of Seleucus; how he burning with the incestuous love of his
mother in law Stratonice, got her by his Fathers assent to be his wife: They
tell us of Plutarch. in Artaxerxes.
Darius, son of Artaxerxes, how he obtained of his father by request, that he
might take to wife, his mother in law, Aspasia. They relate unto us, how Aelius
Spartianus in Antonino Caracalla. Peretius in Mellificio historico part 2.
page 202.
Antoninus Caracalla Emperor took to wife his mother in law Iulia. Antoninus
bewitched with her beauty, and desiring to marry her, with sighs said unto
her, Vellem, si liceret, Mother, if it were lawful I would make you my wife.
She; monster as she was, shamefully replied: Si libet, licet; An nescis te
Imperatorem esse, and leges dare, non accipere. Son, you have called me
mother; if you list to make me your wife, you may. Know you not that you are
Emperor? you give laws, you take none: With this her answer Antoninus
inflamed, matrem duxit vxorem, he married his mother.

Other examples of this uncleanness Heathen histories have affoorded us. How
then is it, that S. Paul in the but now-alledged place, says; that this
uncleanness, is such as is not so much as named among the Gentiles?

We need not fly to an Hyperbole to excuse the Apostles assertion. His meaning
is, that though such uncleanness were sometime practiced among the Gentiles,
yet that among the very Gentiles laws were made against it: and that the
better sort of the Gentiles did detest it, as a filthy, strange, and monstrous
villainy.

Was this uncleanness held in such detestation by the Gentiles, who were
guided only by natures light? No marvel then is it, if the Lord, here in my
text, do so sharply reprove Israel for this uncleanness among them. Israel!
They were the people of the Lord, they were his inheritance, they had the lamp
of the word of God to be their guide. Yet Israel, rebellious and disobedient
Israel, has played the harlot: A man and his father went in unto the same
maid. Under this one kind of incest are comprehended all the rest; And not
incest only, but adultery also, yea, and fornication too. So that indeed the
Israelites are here reproved in general for their filthy lusts. They were so
inordinately vicious, and so disolute, that they blushed not once, to pollute
themselves with fornication, with adultery, with incest, with all manner of
filthiness: and hereby was the holy name of God profaned.

It is true. Peccatorum turpitudine violatur nomen Dei sanctum: such is the
filthiness of sin, that through it, the holy name of God is often violated.
It was violated by David's sin. David the man after Gods own heart, yet
convicted of murder, and adultery. Of murder, for 2. Sam. 12.9.
killing Vriah the Hittite with the sword; and of adultery, for taking to wife
the wife of Vriah, is by the Prophet Nathan reproved for profaning the name
of the Lord. In 2. Sam. 12.14 they are the express words of Nathan unto David,
By this deed thou have given great occasion to the enemies of the Lord to
blaspheme. David (you see) was the sinner; others thereby took occasion to
blaspheme the name of God.

The name of God was likewise blasphemed for the sins of the Israelites. The
Israelites Ezech. 37.23.
defiling themselves with the Idols of the Heathen, with their abominations,
with their iniquities, are in the Books of the Prophets reproved for
profaning the name of the Lord. It is the complaint of the Lord himself, Esai
52.5. My name continually every day is blasphemed: and Ezech. 36.20.22.23. The
Israelites living among the Heathen have profaned my Holy name. The Heathen
there could say: Hi; populus Iehovae these are the people of the Lord; these
are come out of the land of the Lord. A holy people sure. The Israelites, you
see, sinned: the Heathen thereby took occasion to blaspheme the name of the
Lord.

The name of the Lord was likewise blasphemed through the sins of the Jews
in S. Paul's time. The then-Iewes, notwithstanding they made their Romans 2.17.
boast of God, and Verse. 18.
knew his will, and were Verse. 19.
confident, that they were guides of the blind, the light of them which were in
darkness, Verse. 20.
instructors of the foolish, teachers of babes, that they had the form of
knowledge, and of the truth in the law; yet forasmuch as they were spotted with
theft, with adultery, with sacrilege, with other enormities; they are by S.
Paul reproved, for profaning the name of the Lord.

The reproof is, Romans 2.21. etc. Thou which teach another, teach thou
not thy self? Thou that preachest, a man should not steal, do thou steal?
Thou that say, a man should not commit adultery, do thou commit
adultery? Thou that abhorrest Idols, do thou commit sacrilege? Thou that
make thy boast of the law, through breaking of the law dishonourest thou God?
It follows, verse. 24. For the name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles
through you. The Jews, you see, were the sinners: The Gentiles thereby took
occasion to blaspheme the name of God.

Thus is my doctrine confirmed unto you: Incestuous persons, adulterers,
fornicators, and other unclean sinners, are oftentimes the cause of profaning
the holy Name of God.

Let us now a while consider, what Use we may make hereof unto our selves.

Is it true? Incestuous persons, adulterers, fornicators, and other unclean
sinners, are they oftentimes the cause of profaning the holy name of God? Then
(dearly beloved) let us from hence be admonished, so to spend the remainder of
our pilgrimage in this present world, in all holy conversation, that no
boiling, inordinate or unruly motions, no vicious or unchaste affections, no act
of uncleanness, may so far have dominion over us, as to cause the holy name of
GOD through us to be profaned. S. Austine Enarrat. in Psalm. 146. speaks
plainly: Cum blasphematur Deus de malo opere tuo, opere tuo blasphemas Deum:
that is, When God for any evil work is blasphemed, thou by thine evil work
blasphemest God. To the same purpose says the same Father, Tract. 27. in
Johan. Raro iam inuenivntur, qui lingua blasphemant Deum; sed multi, qui vita:
Seldom now adays do we find any that with their tongue blaspheme God, but
many that blaspheme him with their life. Such were they in S. Paul's time, of
whom the blessed Apostle, Tit. 1.16. says: They profess that they know God,
but in works they deny him. And will we be such? Far be it from us.

We profess that we know God, we profess our selves his servants; walk we
therefore worthy of our profession, as it becomes the servants of God. And
how shall we so walk? We so walk if we walk in holiness. For (as St Paul
speaks) this is the will of God, even your sanctification, that ye should
abstain from fornication, that every one of you should know how to possess
his vessel in sanctification and honor, not in the lust of concupiscence, even
as the Gentiles which know not God. For God has not called us unto
uncleanness, but unto holiness. And therefore as the same Apostle advises
the Ephesians, Chap. 5.3. so advise I you: Fornication and uncleanness let
them not be once named amongst you, as it becomes Saints. Not once named! How
then is it that the Apostle names them? How is it, that in this exercise I
have named unto you incest, adultery, fornication, and other sins of
uncleanness? Yes beloved; you may name them; but it must be out of detestation
to shun them; and not out of delight to nourish them.

From hence may you make this Collection: If I may not once name fornication,
but with detestation, then may I not commit it. If I may not commit
fornication, much less may I commit adultery; much less incest; much less
some other sins of uncleanness; sins against nature; monstrous and
prodigious sins. Now that we may not commit fornication, it is evident by
these reasons.

First, it is unlawful by the law of Nature. The very Heathen, who hold no
other light for their guide, but the glimmering light of Nature, have so
accounted of it. Memorable is the saying of Demosthenes, concerning the
Dimidium talentum vnius pretium noctis.
great price that was set him, by the notorious strumpet Lais: Macr^b.
Saturnal. lib. 2. c. 2.
(...), I like not to buy Repentance so dear. Does he not thereby intimate,
that dishonest pleasure, and the unbridled desires of the flesh, have evermore
for their companion, Repentance? Diogenes, the Cynicke, resembled Laertius lib.
6. in vita Diogenis.
beautiful harlots to sweet wine, tempered with deadly poison. What else does
he thereby intimate, but that unchaste lusts, howsoever to a carnal man, they
may at first seem sweet, they are notwithstanding full of bitterness, and
are attended with perpetual sorrow? Crates, the Philosopher, beholding at
Delphi, the golden image of the harlot Phryne brake forth into this
exclamation, Plutarch. de fortuna Alexandri lib. 2. The like Laertius reports
of Diogenes lib. 6. vit. Diog.
(...): this is the trophie, the monument of the loose lives of the Greeks.
Does he not thereby intimate, that incontinencie is even by Natures law
unlawful? I might here produce many goodly sentences, many notable examples of
Ethnickes, and Pagans, to show unto you the just punishment, which for the most
part follows this detestable vice hard at the heels; which might also stir
us up to hate it, and to fly from it with all our might. But its time that I
return to the Book of God.

Therein also do we find, that this filthy sin, the sin of fornication,
is reputed unlawful by the very law of Nature. In Romans 1.29. it is expressly
named among the sins of the Gentiles, who were merely natural men. And Leuit.
18.24. it is laid to the charge of the Cananites, Gentiles too, that with such
uncleanness themselves were defiled, and the land, wherein they lived was
defiled: and therefore are they in that place threatened, that the land should
spew them out. You have now the first reason, why we may not commit
fornication. The reason is, because it is unlawful by the law of Nature.

Secondly, it is forbidden in holy Scripture. In Ephesians. 5 3. And in 1. These.
4.3. In the latter place we are commanded to abstain from 1. Cor. 6.18.
fornication, and in the former, not once to name it.

Thirdly, it is malum lubricum, a sin full of great danger: So means
Solomon, Prou. 23.27. where he says, A whore is a deep ditch, and a strange
woman is a narrow Prou. 22.14.
pit. The comparison is plain; A Harlot to a deep ditch, and to a narrow
pit. The meaning of the holy Ghost is: As a man that falls into a deep
ditch, or, into a narrow pit, breaks either an arm, or a leg, and with
much ado gets out again: so is it with them, that are overtaken with this
vile sin of fornication: the woman Eccles. 26.7.
whose heart is as snares and nets, and her hands as bands, will be to them
more bitter then death; with much ado shall they escape from her.

Fourthly, it stops the passage into Heaven. S. Paul affirms it, 1. Cor.
6.9. Fornicators shall not inherit the kingdom of God; and again, Ephesians.
5.5. No whoremonger has any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ. S. John,
Revel. 21.18. says as plainly: Whoremongers shall have their part in that
lake, which burns with fire and brimstone.

Thus have you, of many, four reasons, why we may not commit fornication.

1. It is unlawful by the law of Nature. 2. It is forbidden by the law of God.
3. It is full of great danger. 4. It stops the passage into Heaven.
Now see the validity of my former inference. We may not commit fornication,
for the reasons now specified; much less may we commit adultery; much less
incest; much less other sins of uncleanness, sins against Nature,
monstrous and prodigious sins. All these S. Paul, 1. Cor. 6. has even
chayned together, to cast them into Hell. And that you may take notice of it,
he has a (...) for you verse. 9. (...), Be not deceived. Neither fornicators,
nor adulterers, nor the effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with mankind,
shall inherit the kingdom of God. Thus far has the first use of my doctrine
led me. The second follows.

My doctrine was, Incestuous persons, adulterers, fornicators, and other
unclean sinners, are oftentimes the cause of profaning the holy name of God.
This in the second place serves for the reproof of such as suffer themselves
to be kindled with the burning fire of luxuriousnes, or carnal lusts. And
hereby are all incestuous marriages condemned. Caietan. in Aquin. 2. 2. qu. 154
Art. 9.. Respondeo.
Emanuell King of Portugal married his wives sister: Caietan. ibid.
Ferdinand the younger King of Sicilie married his fathers Joannam.
sister: Philip the second King of Spain married his sisters Annam.
daughter: Henry the eight King of England married his brothers Catharinam.
wife. All these were incestuous marriages, and are by this doctrine condemned.

But some may say; these marriages were not concluded, but by the Popes
dispensation. Why then say I, they are condemned? I say so; because they are
precisely against the law of God written, Levit. 18. But may not the Pope
dispense against that law? What! Dispense against the law of God!

We are not ignorant, that the chief patrons of the Pontificiall law,
howsoever they grant In cap. Menna^. 2. q. 5. Annotat. marg.
Papam quandoque nimium papaliter dispensare, that the Pope sometimes
dispenses too much Pope-like; do notwithstanding expressly affirm, Gloss. in
Cap. Post translationem Extra, de Renuntiatione. and 25. qu. 1. Cap. Sunt
quidam.
Papam been dispensare contra Apostolum; that the Pope well dispenses against
the Apostle. Rainold. These. 5. page 141.
Neither do they grant unto the Pope this power of dispensing, only in causes
perteining to the positive law of man, (with which color they now paint over
that same flagitious gloss of dispensing against the Apostle) but also in
matters ratified by the law of God.

I could here tell you of many wicked dispensations, that have bin granted by
the Pope; as that Cap. ad Apostolicae in Sexto de Sentent. and re iudicat.
Bulla Pij 5. contra Reginam Angliae.
subjects may be discharged of their oath and fealty, and may be licenced to
withdraw their allegiance from their Prince, yea, to take arms against him,
yea to lay violent hands on him; that Council. Constans. Sess 19. Cap. Quod non
obstantibus C^luis conductibus.
promise may be broken, with God and man; that most horrible Rainold. These. 5.
41. page 188.
abominations, may be committed; that all things, divine and humane, may be
perverted; right and wrong, Heaven and earth, lawful and unlawful may be
confounded together. But I may not so far digress from my present purpose. Let
it suffice for this time, that you see the impiety of the Popes dispensations,
(or rather dissipations, as De Consid. ad ^ug^n. lib. 3. c. 4.
S. Bernard calls them) in his allowing of incestuous marriages, that a man
may marry his wives sister, or his fathers sister, or his sisters daughter, or
his brothers wife: all precisely against the law of God.

Here might we stand amassed and wonder, that such irregular and shameless
dispensations, should pass with the approbation of the Pope, who bears a
face, as if he were most holy, yea Holiness it self. Speak we to him, or
write to him, our compellation must be Pater Sanctissime, most holy Father; and
Sanctitas Tua, your Holiness. But knowing him to be that 2 Thessalonians. 2 3.
man of sin, that son of perdition, that grand Antichrist, who according to
the prophecies of the Holy Ghost in the Scriptures, was to be revealed in these
latter times, we need not wonder though he dispenses with all the most
horrible and abominable impieties, that may be. Can we Matthew. 7.16.
gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? can a corrupt tree bring forth
good fruit? Can we expect that the Pope, who 2 Thessalonians. 2.4.
opposes himself against God, and exalts himself above all that is called
God, should either himself live, or cause others to live, according to the
holy law of God?

For the Popes themselves (would the time and your patience permit) I could rip
up their lives, and show unto you how they have bin stained and defiled with
all manner of fearful, notorious, and abominable sins. But my text will
not suffer me so far ^o range. The sins of uncleanness, wherein those
holy fathers have, to the astonishment of the world, wallowed, are the sins
in my present text and doctrine smitten at.

What shall I tell ^ou of the incest committed by many of them? by John the 13.
with Stephana, his fathers concubine? by John the Alias the 24.
23. with his brothers wife? by Paul the 3. with two of his Nieces? by Pius the
5. with his own sister, by Joan. Iovian. Pontan.
Alexander the 6. with his own daughter.

I could make true report unto you of many of them very infamous for their
beastly Sodomie, for their filthy adultery, for other their unclean lust. So
holy were those holy Fathers. Neither were they themselves alone given over to
such filthiness, but they also took order to have others like unto them. They
could not alone be wicked. SZeged. Spec. Pontif.
Alexander the sixth gave leave to Cardinal Mendoza to abuse his own bastard
son in incestuous Sodomie. Downam de Antich. lib. 1. cap. 6. Orm^rod. Pict.
Pap. SZ^ged. spec. Pont. Vescel Kroning Tractat. de Indulgentijs.
Sixtus the fourth gave license to the Cardinal of S. Lucie, and to all his
family, that they might in the three hot months of the year freely use
Sodomie. Johannes a Casa a Florentine, Archbishop of Beneventum, Legate for
Julius 3. at Venice, set forth a book in Italian Meter in commendation of this
Diana of the Papists, this abominable sin of Sodomie. Will you hear more of
Sixtus the fourth? He to incite and encourage others to be as filthy as
himself, built in Rome a famous stews, not only of women, but also of males.
The femall stews, how aduantagious it has bin to the Pope, and gainefull to
his coffers, may from hence appear, that the Pope has received from them a
yearly pension, amounting sometimes to three thousand, sometimes to four
thousand Ducates. It is said of Paulus the third, that in his tables he had the
names of 45000 Curtizans, which paid unto him a monthly tribute.

Now that the Pope need not to loose so great a reuenew; some have bestirred
themselves to patronize his stews by argument and by authority. Their chief
reason is: that common Curtizans in hot countries are a necessary evil.

Harding Confut. Apol. Iewelli par. 4. cap. 1. thus speaks of it, It is
common in all great Cities in hot countries, not to banish from among them, the
filthy generation of harlots for the avoiding of a greater mischief.

Dr Bishop in his second part of the Reformation of a Catholic deformed, in
the treatise of repentance, says, The stews in some hot Countries, are
tolerated to avoid a greater mischief.

The chief authority they bring is S. Austines, out of his second book de
ordine cap. 4. Aufer meretrices de rebus humanis, turbaveris omnia libidinibus:
Take harlots from among men, ye shall disturb all things with leacherous
lusts.

To their reason, that Curtezans in hot Countries are a necessary evil: we
say, that the heat of a country is no sufficient warrant for the popish
stews. The land of Israel is a hotter climate, then that of Italy, yet says
God unto the Jews, Deuteronomy. 23.17. There shall be no whore of the daughters of
Israel, neither shall there be a whore-keeper of the sons of Israel.

For S. Austines authority, we acknowledge it to be great and reverend. But
withal we say, that S. Austine, when he wrote those words, was not S. Austine.
When he wrote that tract of Order, himself then lived in disorder; a young
gallant, a novice in the faith, not well instructed, not yet baptized in the
name of Christ; himself then kept a concubine, and lived in whoredom.

But the same Saint Austine, afterward fully instructed and baptized, said
thus: Istam, in vsu scortatorum, terrena civi^as licitam fecit turpitudinem.
The words are De Ciuit. Dei lib. 14 cap. 18. The city of the world, not the
Church of God has made this filthiness of harlots to be lawful. So does not
Saint Austines authority hold up the stews. Saint Paul beats them down flat,
Romans 3.8. they who say, Let us do evil that good may come thereof; their
damnation is just. In a word, the toleration of the stews, is an occasion of
uncleanness to many a young man and woman, that otherwise would abstain from
all such kind of filthiness.

What an abomination is it, for a brother and his brother, a father and his
son, a nephew and his uncle, to come to one and the same harlot, one before
or after the other? Is it not the very abomination, which the Lord reproves in
my text: A man and his father will go in to the same maid, to profane my holy
name? I have held you too long. May it please you to remember my doctrine. It
was, Incestuous persons, adulterers, fornicators, and other unclean sinners,
are oftentimes the cause of profaning the holy name of God.

A twofold Use I made of it. One was; to stir up our selves to a holy
conversation. The other, to reprove such as are given over to uncleanness. I
conclude with that exhortation of Saint Peter, 1. Epist. chap. 2.11. Dearly
beloved, I beseech you, as strangers and pilgrims, abstain from fleshly lusts.
They may seem unto you a Paradise to your desires; but they will prove a
Purgatory to your purses, and a Hell to your souls. Do you love your bodies?
Abstain from fleshly lusts; for they are rottenness to your bones. Do you
love your souls? Abstain from fleshly lusts; for they war against your
souls. Do you love your credits? Abstain from fleshly lusts; for they are
dishonorable. The heat of carnal lusts, what is it but an infernal fire,
whose fuel is fulness of bread, and abundance of idleness; whose sparks
are evil communication, whose smoke is infamy, whose ashes are pollution,
whose end is Hell.

Dearly beloved, I beseech you, as strangers and pilgrims, abstain from
fleshly lusts; have your conversation honest among all men, that they beholding
your good works, may glorify God in the day of visitation.

Now gracious Father, so work in us, thou and thy power, thou and thy mercy,
so bring it to pass, that we may so spend the remainder of our days here in
all holy conversation, that after this life ended, we may have our inheritance
in thy kingdom. Grant this for thy son Christ Jesus sake. To whom with thee
etc.

THE XI. LECTVRE.
AMOS 2.8. And they lay themselves down upon clothes laid to pledge by every
Altar, and they drink the wine of the condemned, in the house of their God.


IT is a great height of impiety, whereto men are grown, when by unlawful
means, or pretenses, or allurements, they add sin to sin. A man may sin
once and a second time; and may do it through infirmity: but if he go on with
a third transgression, and with a fourth; if he be obstinate in heaping sin
upon sin, lamentable is his estate. A woe must be his portion. Its denounced
by the Prophet Esaias, cap. 5.18. Woe unto them, that draw iniquity with cords
of vanity, and sin, as it were with a cart-rope.

Was there ever a people, so far given over to work impiety? Behold, such
were the people of Israel, they to whom this prophecy of Amos was directed.
Their cruelty, their covetousness, their oppressions, their calumnies, their
filthy lusts reproved in the two precedent verses, do proclaim as much. And yet
they have not done sinning. They would, I grant, make fair weather; they would
make a fair show, as if their desire were to serve God. For that purpose they
came unto the house of their God, his temple; they drew near unto his Altars:
but even then did their hearts work iniquity. My text conuinceth them.

They lay themselves down [or they lie, or they sit downe] upon clothes laid
to pledge by every Altar: and they drink the wine of the condemned [or of such
as they have fined, or mulcted] in the house of their Gods. The words import
thus much. The people of Israel to cloak and cover their manifold sins, make
a show of religion: they go unto their temples, the temples of their Idols;
there they offer their sacrifices, there they feast it sumptuously. They are at
great charges. But whence do they defray them? Is it out of their own
substance, which either is descended to them by inheritance, or is gotten by
their just and honest labor? No such matter. The fines, the mulcts of the
poor, their pawnes, their pledges, their pewter, their garments, their
bedding, their goods pay for all.

The words do specially concern the Peers, the Nobles, the Judges, the
Magistrates, the Rulers of Israel. They may also concern the rich among them:
but cannot be understood of the poor, the base, and vulgar sort. The words are
not many; yet many are the sins they smite at. The taking of pawnes, the
deteyning of them, vnrigheous judgment, superstition, idolatry, riot and
excess are the sins, they smite at; as may in part appear in the now-ensuing
explication.

They lay themselves downe] (...) word for word, They bow down themselves,
they stretch out themselves. St Hierome renders it by the verb Accumbere,
intimating their sitting down, as at a feast or banquet.

They lay themselves down; they lie down, or they sit down upon clothes]
This manner of sitting or lying down at meat was very ancient. The old Romans
used it; so did the Greeks. Non sedebant, sed accubabant. They sat not as we
do now a-dayes, but they lay down. In some parlor, chamber-garret, or other
convenient room, a low round table was placed. This table for the common sort
of people was made of ordinary wood, and stood upon three feet. For men of
better fashion, it was made of better wood, of the Limon tree, or of the Maple
tree, and was sometimes inlaid with silver, it stood upon one whole entire
foot made of Ivorie, in the form of a Leopard or a Lion. Lipsius antiq. lect.
l 3. c. 1. Hieronym. Mercurialis artis Gymnast: lib. 1. cap. 11. Rosin. antiq.
Ro^. lib. 5. cap. 28.
About this round table were placed three beds, covered with tapestrie, with
purple, or with some other kind of carpet, according to the wealth and
ability of the feast-maker. Each bed contained three guests, sometimes four,
seldom more. And thus the guests were placed. The first and uppermost lying at
the beds head, rested the upper part of his body at his left elbow, and
disposed his feet behind the seconds back: the second rested his head in the
others bosom upon a cushion, and disposed his feet behind the thirds back.
The rest did likewise. Such was the custom of sitting or lying down at meat
among the old Greeks and Romans.

This very custom of sitting or lying at meat was also among the Jews. We
gather it from the Scripture phrase in the New Testament. Mark. 2.14. Luke
9.27, 29.
Levi, called also Matthew. 9.9.
Matthew, that blessed Evangelist, made in his own house a great feast for
Jesus, whereat were many publicans, and others. At that feast Jesus lay down.
So says S. Matthew, chap. 9.10. (...), as he lay down. S. Mark says, chap.
2.15. (...), as he lay down. Jesus lay down at meat. So did his disciples: so
did publicans and sinners too. S. Matthew and S. Mark in the now-alleaged
places do affirm it: (...), they lay down with Itsus. Publicans and sinners
lay down with Jesus. S. Luke chap. 5.29. thus expresses it; (...), a great
company of Publicans, and others, lay down at meat with Jesus and his
disciples.

The time was when Jesus fed with Matthew. 14.17.
five loaves, and two fishes, about verse. 21.
five thousand men, besides women and children; then he commanded the
multitude (...), to lie down on the grass, Matthew. 14.19. Another time he fed
with Math. 15.36.
seven loaves, and a few little fishes verse. 38.
four thousand men beside women and children: then he commanded the
multitude, (...), to fall down on the ground, Mat. 15.35. At both times, Jesus
his words had reference to that ancient manner of sitting, or lying down at
meat.

Which manner of sitting, or lying down at meat, Jesus himself seems to
have observed at his celebration of his last Paschall supper. For we find,
Ioh. 13.23. that at that supper one of the Disciples of Jesus, the Disciple
whom Jesus loved, even John the Evangelist, leaned on the bosom of Jesus.
Jesus lay down. John did likewise; and leaned on Jesus his bosom. You see,
that in the time of the new Testament, even among the Jews, it was a custom
to lie down at meat.

Even among the Jews, it was a custom long before. Eight hundred years before
the incarnation of the Messiah, the posterity of Jacob used it. My text
affirms it. The Israelites, the offspring of Jacob, laid themselves down
upon clothes.

Did they lay themselves down upon clothes? And why might they not do so? Was
not the common custom of so doing, a warrant for them so to do? Out of doubt
it was. It was no fault of theirs to lie down at meat, and upon clothes. But
herein were they blame worthy; first, that the clothes whereon they lay, were
not their own, secondly, that they lay upon them unseasonably.

First, they were not their own; they were the pawnes, they were the pledges
of the poor: they were clothes laid to pledge.

Secondly, they lay upon them vnseasonablie; even before their Altars. The
first argues their cruelty toward the poor: The second their Idolatry in
respect of God. First of the first.

They lay themselves down upon clothes laid to pledge] We shall the better
understand what that sin is, which our Prophet here reprooueth in the
Israelites, if we will have recourse to the Law concerning pledges. That Law is
written, Exodus 22.26. If thou at all take thy neighbors raiment to pledge,
thou shall deliver it unto him by that the Sun goes down: The Law is
repeated, Deuteronomy. 24.10, 11, 12, 13. When thou lendest any thing to thy
neighbor, thou shall not enter into his house to take his pledge. But thou
shall abide without, and the man to whom thou lendest, shall bring the pledge
out of the doors unto thee. And if the man be poor thou shall not sleep with
his pledge. But shall restore him the pledge when the Sun goes down. The
ground of this Law is mercy: the Lawgiver, is the God of mercy: its given, to
stir us up to mercy.

If at all thou take thy neighbors raiment to pledge, thou must deliver it
unto him by the going down of the Sun. That is the Law. Thereof, Exodus
22.27. have you two reasons: One is taken from common humanity. The poor man's
raiment! It is his only covering; It is his raiment for his skin. Take that
from him, and wherein shall he sleep? Restore therefore his pledge before the
Sun goes down. The other reason is taken from the judgment of God. If the
poor man cry, God will hear him, for he is gracious. Restore thou therefore
his pledge before the Sun goes down.

In the 24. of Deuteronomy. ver. 13. three reasons are brought to the same purpose.
The poor man's pledge; See that in any case thou deliver it, when the Sun
goes down.

First, that he may sleep in his own raiment.

Secondly, that he may bless thee, may pray for thee, may testify unto God
the sense and feeling he has of thy humanity, and kind dealing.

Thirdly, that it may be righteousness unto thee, even before the Lord thy God.

See therefore, that in any case thou restore the poor man's pledge, when the
Sun goes down. You have the law, and the reasons of the Law.

This Law these Israelites violated. They took to pledge poor men's clothes,
they detained them, they used them, they lay upon them, as if they had been
their own. The sin then here laid unto their charge, is Detentio pignoris
pauperum, the keeping back of the poor man's pledge. The doctrine which we may
take from hence, is this, The pledge of a poor man, such as is necessary for
his use, is not to be withholden from him.

I say, such as is necessary for his use. Moses, in the alleged places of
Exodus and Deuteronomie, makes mention of his raiment. The raiment of the poor
man! it is operimentum, his covering; it is vestimentum, his clothing: he has
nothing else, wherewith to hide his nakedness: nothing else, wherewith to save
himself from cold. Such a pledge, as is the poor man's raiment, his coat, his
dublet, his bed, his covering, or any other thing, that is necessary for the
preserving of his life, God will have it restored. Yet it will please him well,
if such a pledge be never taken.

The Law runs thus in the 22. of Exodus. If at all thou take thy neighbors
raiment to pledge, thou must deliver it unto him by the going down of the
Sun. It is as if the Lord had thus said: I shall like it well, if thou lend
unto thy poor neighbor without taking any pledge of him; but if thou be so
cruel, and hard hearted, as that thou will not be induced to lend without
taking of a pawn, yet see in any case, that thou restore unto him his pawn
before the Sun goes down.

The Lords desire to have no pawn at all taken of the poor man, is more
plainly manifested, Deuteronomy. 24.6. The Law there is: No man shall take the two
mil-stones, or the upper mil-stone to pledge. Mention is made first of two
milstones, and then of the uppermost. It is all one as if the Lord had said:
You shall not take to pledge both milstones, no nor one of them. As good take
both, as one. There is no grinding without both. If thou take one and leave the
other, how shall the poor man grind? Milstones are named: under them by a
Synecdoche you may comprehend all kind of vtensils, or instruments, with which
a poor man gets his living. In this rank I place the Husbandmans plow, the
Smithes anvill, the Tailors sheares, and every other handy-crafts man's tool,
which is necessary for the exercise of his trade or occupation. None such may
you take to pawn. Moses add the reason: For, he that takes such a pawn of a
poor man, takes the poor man's life to pawn.

May not such a pawn be taken by the Deuteronomy. 24.6.
Law of the milstones, and for the reason specified? Then out of doubt
whosoever is so cruel and hard of heart, to take such a pawn, he is bound by
the Exodus 22.26. Deuteronomy. 24.13.
Law of the poor man's raiment, to restore it ere the Sun go down. Thus is
my doctrine established.

The pledge of a poor man, such as is necessary for his use, is not to be
withholden from him.

This doctrine has its use in this wringing world. It may serve to reprove the
wealthy, the great deuourers, the Sea-gulfs of this age. No money shall out of
their purses to the poor without a pawn. Tell them it is cruelty. They will
say; No. He comes to borrow of me; I may deny him if I will. I lend him my
money; I look for no profit; I take no usury. Shall I have no assurance? Shall
I not be suffered to take a pawn?

Foolish man! Why pleadest thou so? It is the will of God, that thou lend
without a pawn: or if thou lend upon a pawn, that thou restore it before the
Sun go down. This is the will of God: Why will thou not obey it?

Say; thou lendest a poor man thy money, and he buyeth bread therewith, and
eats; and in the mean time through want of his raiment, which thou have to
pawn, the poor man be frozen to death: how have thou relieved him? What
difference is there, whether he die for hunger, or for cold? If thou slack his
hunger, and starve him with cold, thou do but change his torment; thou do
not succor him. In like sort: if thou lendest a poor man thy money, and for
thy security take to pawn the tools, those necessary tools, with which
he gets his living, thou do not relieve him, but do, as much as in
thee lies, cut the poor man's throat.

Flatter not thy self (beloved) whosoever thou art, that have accustomed thy
self to secure the loan of thy money by taking of pawnes. If the course be
simply and absolutely lawful, what means the Law, Deuteronomy. 24.17. Thou shall
not take a widows raiment to pledge? And why does Job, Chap. 24.3. reprove
them, who take the widows ox for a pledge? It is in thy power I grant, to
take a pledge of thy debtor, to assure thy self, that thou may receive
thine own again: but if in taking thy pledge, thou transgress the Law of
charity; if thou take such a pledge, as thy neighbor cannot spare without the
hazard and peril of his liuelihood, it is thy sin; and thou art bound with
speed to restore it. If thou restore it not, what then? Ezechiel chap. 18.13.
will tell thee: Moriendo morieris, thou shall surely die, thy blood shall be
upon thee.

But here thou will apologize, defend thy self, and plead that for thy taking
of pawnes, thou have thy warrant out of Prove. 20.16. I must confess, thou art
there permitted to take a man's garment as a pledge or pawn, for the assurance
of thy money. But of whom? of him, to whom thou lendest thy money? No. But of
him, who rashly, unadvisedly, and lauishly becomes suertie unto thee, for the
man he knows not. And what is this to the poor man, that borrows of thee?
Of him if thou take any such pledge, thou may be strained with the
abomination of Usury.

I put thee a case: Thou lendest ten pounds, upon a pawn of bedding, or
linen, and thou lendest it freely: but as the borrower uses thy money, so
thou use his pawn. This is Usury in thee. For the bedding or linen, which
thou have in pawn is the worse for the wearing: so is not thy money in the
borrowers hand. I know the very name of Usury is detested of thee, and thou
hate to be called an Usurer. Take heed then, that by thy taking of pawnes,
thou become not one of that damned crew.

If therefore you have taken any pawn of a poor man, any such pawn, as by
the Law thou ought not to have taken of him, restore it unto him according
to the Law, even before the Sun go down. So shall the poor man, to whom
thou have showed mercy in lending thy money, bless thee, and it shall be
righteousness unto thee before the Lord thy God. Hereof art thou assured,
Deuteronomy. 24.13. Yea, Viuendo vives, thou shall surely live. The Lord God has said
it, Ezechiel. 18.9.

Hitherto (Beloved) you have heard of the cruelty of the Israelites, toward
the poor; their cruelty in deteining the pledges of the poor: they laid
themselves down upon clothes laid to pledge. And this they did vnseasonablie,
even before their Altars, which argues their Idolatry; the next thing to be
considered.

By every Altar] Multa erant altaria Idolorum; altar autem Domini non nisi
vnum. It is a Bishops note; the note of Albertus Magnus upon my text. Many were
the Altars that were erected for the service of Idols, but for the worship of
God, there was but one Altar: but one Altar, whereon to offer sacrifice.

This one Altar at first was to be made of earth, or of stone rough and
vnhewen, as appears, Exodus 20.24.25. Such an Altar was fittest for the
then-estate of the children of Israel. They were then in the desert iourneying
toward the holy Land, and were to remove from place to place. An Altar of earth
would soon be made: so would an Altar of stone, rough, and vnhewen. They might
make their Altar of earth, that when they should change their station, they
might with ease destroy it, Ne aut abusui aut superstitioni esset, that it
might not be superstitiously abused. Or, they might make it of rough and
vnhewen stone tumultuarily, Ne sollicitaret quemquam ad conservationem
religionemque constantem illius altaris, that it might not allure any one to a
constant reverence, and dread of the holiness of that Altar.

In the 27. of Exodus ver. 1. there is a prescription of an Altar of better
fashion. (...), the Altar of Holocaustes, of burnt offerings, of sacrifices, is
there described according to the matter, the measure, the form, the
instruments and vessels thereof. Thou shall make an Altar of wood, of the
choicest Cedar. An Altar, not Altars, It was but one Altar.

And why would God have but one Altar? He would have but one, quod vnum atque
eundem cultum inter omnes esse vellet. Because he would have but one and the
same worship among all, therefore would he have but one Altar: so says See
Willet upon Exodus 20.24.
Galasius. He would have but one Altar, to note unto us Babington upon Exodus
20.24.
one truth, one religion. But one Altar Marlorat. in Esa. 1.29.
Vt vinculum esset sacrae vnitatis, that it might be unto the rude people, a
bond of sacred unity. That one and the same religion might remain among them
inviolable. God would have but one Altar.

It was therefore sin in Jeroboam to set up two other Altars, one in Bethel,
the other in Dan, 1. King. 12.29. It was sin in Vrijah, the high Priest, when
to please the idolatrous King Ahaz, he caused a new Altar to be set up after
the pattern of the Altar of Damascus, 2. King. 16.11. It must needs be a sin
in the children of Israel, to multiply their Altars according to the multitude
of their fruit, Hos. 10.1. And I may not excuse the Israelites, whom my text
concerns, they laid themselves upon clothes, laid to pledge by every Altar.
They had there many Altars too. But, Altar Domini non nisi vnum: For the
worship of God there was but one Altar.

And that one Altar was a type of our blessed Savior; a lively figure, or
representation of Christ crucified. In regard whereof, Heb. 13.10. Christ is
called an Altar; yea, our Altar: We have an Altar. We have an Altar, whereof
they have no right to eat, that serve at the tabernacle. Christ is this Altar;
he is our Altar; Christ with all his benefits. Which his benefits are nothing
available, nothing profitable for them which are under the Law, who yet are in
bondage under the rudiments, under the ceremonies of Moses Law. Those benefits
of Christ are spiritual; Regeneration, faith, remission of sins,
justification, the favor of God, security against our enemies, (the world,
the Devil, death, and hell) life and eternal glory: these are the benefits,
which Christ through his most glorious death and passion has purchased for his
elect. This purchase he wrought not by the blood of Goats, and Calves, but by
his own blood, whereby he entered in once into the holy place, and so obtained
for us eternal redemption, as the Apostle speaks, Heb. 9.12.

Thus has Christ, the sacrificer, the sacrifice, and the Altar made full
satisfaction to God for all our sins. Now a^e we not to rely upon our own
good works, upon the merits of Saints, or upon their mediation. For this were
nothing else quam aliud novum Altar praeter Christum instituere; It were to
appoint another new Altar beside Christ. And that Christians may not do.

May not Christians do it? How then is it that in Popery there are so many
Altars? It is (Beloved in the Lord) one of the blemishes, one of the shames of
that religion. They have their many Altars, some of De consecrat. Did. 1. C.
Altaria.
stone, sumptuously built, and dedicated with the unction of oil, and the
Altaria placuit.
Priests benediction: as appears by the decrees of two Counsels, the one
called Apaunense, the other Agathense, Stone-Altars they make for steadiness
and continuance; and why so? But, Quia Petra erat Christus, because the Rock
was Christ? It is the devise of Durandus. A profound reason sure. The wit of
fore-ages could not reach unto it.

The Primitive times of the Church knew no such Altars of stone, no nor of
wood. Then there were no Altars at all. Origin may witness it. He flourished
in the year of Christ 230. Then it was objected unto him by Lib. 6. contra
Celsum: and lib. 8.
Celsus, that the Christians had neither Altars, nor Images, nor Temples.
Arnobius flourished after Origin in the year 290. and Arnob. lib. 4.
contragentes. Babington in Exodus 27.1. page 403. Hospintan. Hist. Sacram. lib.
2. page 54.
in his time the Heathen accused the Christians, for that they had neither
Churches, nor Altars, nor Images. So for two hundred and ninety years, there
were no Altars in the primitive Church.

None for 290. years? Yet Martin of Polonia sometimes an Archbishop, and
Penitentiarie to Innocent the fourth, affirms in his Chronicle, that Pope
Sixtus did institute, Vt missa super Altar celebreter: that the Mass should
be celebrated upon an Altar. Hospin. ibid. page 121.
Sixtus of whom he speaks was Bishop of Rome Anno Christi 125. So by Martins
opinion, Altars should have bin in the Church above a hundred years, before
either Arnobius, or Origin were writers.

But what small credit is to be given to this Chronicler Martin, let Bellarmine
tell you. Fuit Martinus vir simplex and fabellas pro historijs obtrudit. This
censure he gives in his Book of Ecclesiastical writers upon the year 1250.
Martin was a simple man, and one that obtrudeth fables for histories.

If Martin be false in this point of the institution of Altars, how shall we
find out the truth? Bellarmine lib. 4. de verbo Dei cap. 3. will seem to
deliver it. There reproving Kemnitius for making Felix the fourth to have
instituted the consecration of Altars, calls that a lie, and says; Octavum
est.
Constat, Sylvestrum autorem huius ritus fuisse. It is manifest that Sylvester
was the author of this rite, of the consecration of Altars. Now Sylvester
ascended to the Popedom in the year 314. So by Bellarmines opinion, (and what
writer among the Papists is of greater authority then Bellarmine?) by
Bellarmines opinion there were no Altars of use in the Church before the year
314. So my proposition stands good: The primitive times of the Church knew not
the use of stony, or wooden Altars.

Which truth, as it has served to condemn the Papists of blind superstition,
for creeping unto, and worshipping before, their Altars, whereof they have out
of Gods book no warrant: so may it be a motive to us to lift up our hearts
unto the Lord, and to give him thanks, for that it has pleased him to deliver
us from the more then Egyptian darkness of Popery, wherein our forefathers
living, committed abomination before stocks and stones.

We have not now an Altar properly so called, no material Altar: our Altar is
metaphorical, it is spiritual. As our sacrifices are, which we are to offer
up unto the Lord, so is our Altar: our sacrifices are spiritual; our Altar
therefore must be spiritual.

There were under the Law many kinds of sacrifices: Exodus 20.24.
Burnt offerings, Number. 6.11.
Sin offerings, Verse. 15.
Meat offerings, Drink offerings, Exodus 20.24
Peace offerings. All are reduceable to two heads; they were either (...), or
(...), either propitiatory, or Eucharisticall; either expiatorie, or
gratulatorie; either sacrifices of satisfaction, or sacrifices of
thanksgiving. The first sort of sacrifices, which I call propitiatory,
expiatorie, or satisfactorie, had their end in the death of Christ: the other
which I call Eucharisticall, gratulatorie, or sacrifices of thanksgiving do
remain for ever; but without legal rites and ceremonies: that which was
legal in them is done away; there remains only that which was Evangelical,
that which was Spiritual. These sacrifices gratulatorie, these sacrifices of
praise and thanksgiving are the sacrifices, which we can, and must, offer unto
Almighty God.

Of these sacrifices I observe three sorts, according to the three sorts of
goods which man usually enjoys. The Arist. Eth. lib. 1. cap. 8.
Philosopher deuides them into goods of the mind, goods of the body, and
external goods. By external goods, you may understand Arist. Magn. Moral.
lib. 1. cap. 3.
riches, rule, honor: by the goods of the body, you may understand health,
beauty, comeliness: by the goods of the mind, you may understand virtues,
and virtuous actions, functions, and operations, together with all the powers
and faculties of the soul.

All these goods must we offer up unto the Lord in sacrifice. First, we must
offer up (...), our external goods, the goods of this world. The author of the
Epistle to the Hebrews wishes us not to forget it, chap. 13.16. To do good
and to distribute forget not. And to make us remember it the more willingly, he
gives this reason: for with such sacrifices God is well pleased. It is true,
God accepts, and takes in good part, as bestowed upon himself, whatsoever
is bestowed upon the poor. Give meat to the hungry, drink to the thirsty,
take in the stranger, cloth the naked, visit the sick, yield comfort to the
poor prisoner; thou do all to Christ. The day shall come wherein Christ
will tell thee so, Mat. 25.40. Verily I say unto you, in as much as ye have
done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me.
Do good to the poor, you do it unto Christ. Say not; if I give, I shall want
my self. Give, and it shall be given to thee. The promise is, Luke 6.38. Give,
and it shall be given unto you, good measure, pressed down and shaken
together, and running over. So your giving will be but a lending, and good
payment will be made unto you. Solomon bears record hereunto, Prou. 19.17. He
that has mercy upon the poor, lends unto the Lord, and that which he has
given, will he pay him again. Thus must we offer up unto the Lord (...), our
external goods, the goods of this world.

Secondly, we must offer up unto the Lord in sacrifice (...), the goods of the
body. The goods of our body we may offer up in sacrifice two manner of ways,
patiendo or faciendo, by suffering, or by doing; by dying for the Lord, or by
doing that which is acceptable to the Lord.

This sacrifice of suffering or dying for the Lord is a precious sacrifice;
according to that, Psalm. 116.15. Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death
of his Saints. It is acceptable with God. St Peter affirms it, 1. Epi. chap.
2.20. If when ye do well, and suffer for it, ye take it patiently, this is
acceptable with God. In the verse following he exhorts us to this suffering:
Christ has suffered for us, leaving us an example, that we should follow his
steps. Christ has suffered for us: we must if need be, suffer for him.
Martyrdom! It is so pleasing a sacrifice, as that it made Ambrose say of his
sister: Appellabo Martyrem, and praedicabo satis: I will call her Martyr, and
so shall I be sure to commend her enough. S. Hierome in his Ep. to Heidibia
says, Triumphus Dei est passio Martyrum: The suffering of Martyrs is Gods
triumph.

What do I? In time of peace exhort to Martyrdom? Why not? Though through
Gods goodness (blessed be his name for it) there is not now among us any
occasion of persecution, habet tamen and pax nostra Martyrium suum, as Gregory
the Great spoke of his time, Homil. 3. in Euangelia, yet has our peace her
Martyrdom. Albeit we do not yield carnis colla ferro, our necks to the iron,
or our bodies to the stake, yet do we gladio spirituali, with the spiritual
sword slay the carnal desires within us. You have seen what it is to offer up
unto the Lord the goods of our body patiendo, by suffering, by dying for the
Lord.

Now let us see what it is to offer them up faciendo, by doing that, which is
acceptable to the Lord. It is that, whereto S. Paul exhorts us, Romans 12.1.
even our reasonable service of God. I beseech you, brethren, by the mercies of
God, that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God.

Our Bodies a sacrifice! How may that be? S. Chrysostom Hom. 20. in Ep. ad
Romans does elegantly express it. Let the eye behold no evil, (...), and the
eye is a sacrifice: let the tongue speak no evil, (...), and the tongue is an
oblation: let the hand do no evil, (...), and the hand is a burnt offering.
So that sweet Father. We may enlarge the meditation; let the ear hear no
evil, and the ear is a sacrifice: let the arm embrace no evil, and the arm
is a sacrifice: let the foot follow no evil, and the foot is a sacrifice. In
a word, let all other parts of the body be preserved from evil, and they are
all sacrifices. The eye that is 2. Pet. 2.14.
full of adultery, is no fit offering; the tongue that is Psalm. 120.3.
deceitful, is no fit offering: the hand that is ever shut against the poor,
is no fit offering: the uncircumcised ear, the wanton arm, the cruel foot,
they are no fit offerings: neither is any part of our body, that is
unsanctified, a fit offering for the Lord. Wherefore (dearly beloved in the
Lord) let it be the care of every one of us, to present our bodies unto the
Lord a living and a holy sacrifice; for that only will be acceptable unto him.

Now that our sacrifice may be living and holy, and so acceptable to the Lord,
it is not enough for us to Psalm. 34.15. And 37.27.
abstain from doing of evil, but we must willingly and chearefully betake our
selves to the doing of good: and this must we do betimes.

You deceive your selves if you think to offer your youthful years unto the
Devil, and to lay your old bones upon Gods Altar. Gods sacrifice must be the
fattest; it must be the fairest. He must have both head and hinder parts; to
teach you, that your duty is to remember your Creator, as well in the days of
your nonage, as in the days of your dotage; as well while you are young, as
when you shall be old. For if you defer your offerings till the last hour,
till sickness, deaths-Bailiffe, shall arest you, your offering may prove
sick, it may prove dead, it may prove an unholy sacrifice. Receive therefore
S. Paul's word of exhortation, I beseech you brethren, by the mercies of God,
that ye present your bodies, a living and an holy sacrifice unto God.

You have heard, that (...), our external goods, and (...), the goods of our
bodies, are to be offered up in sacrifice unto the Lord: the same I am now in
brief to show concerning (...), the goods of our mind.

The goods of our mind I called virtues, and virtuous actions, functions, and
operations; together with all the faculties and powers of the soul: all these
we must offer up unto the Lord.

But how shall we offer them up? devotione and contritione: by devotion and
contrition. For as it is, Psalm. 51.17. The sacrifices of God are a broken
spirit: a broken and a contrite heart is such a sacrifice, as God will not
despise. Whosoever by divine meditation, and devout prayer, beats down the
proud conceits of his rebellious heart, he kills, and offers up, as it
were, his son Isaac, that which is most nere unto him, that which is most
dear unto him: he offers up a broken spirit: and that is Sacrificia Dei, the
sacrifices of God. The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit.

Sacrifices in the Plural number: because this one sacrifice of a broken
spirit, is instar omnium, in steed of all; its worth all other sacrifices in
the world. And well may it be so: for it is the sacrifices of God: of God, that
is, accepta Deo, acceptable, and well pleasing unto God.

But what is this broken spirit I speak off? It is animus contritus,
commut^^^, and abjectus propriae infirmitatis ac indignitatis conscientia. It
is a mind contrite, beaten as it were to dust, or powder, broken in pieces, and
cast down with the conscience of its own infirmity and unworthiness. It is
a mind, that is void of any conceit of its own worth, that thinks it self
worthy of any punishment; that esteems all its own goods most base, that
follows the word of God upon any occasion, that is comforted at the least
sign of Gods favor; that is cast down at any token of his displeasure; that
is easily moved with affections of love, fear, joy, and hope; that is always
full of pity to others; that makes conscience of the smallest transgression.
The man that is of such a broken spirit, and so contrite a mind, he may well
be said to offer up in sacrifice unto the Lord, the goods of his mind.

Thus you see that we are, and how we are, to offer up in sacrifice unto the
Lord the goods of this world, the goods of the body, and the goods of the
mind. But whereon shall we offer them? where is our Altar? Our Altar is within
us: even our heart: that is our Altar.

Durandus in his Lib. 1. cap. 7. N. 18.
Rational of Divine offices deduceth it out of the first to the Corinthians,
Chap. 3.17. The Temple of God is holy, which ye are. Ye are the Temple of
GOD. Si Templum Dei sumus, Altar habemus. Altar nostrum est cor nostrum. Hoc
enim est cor in homine, quod Altar in Templo. If we are the Temple of God, we
have an Altar. Our Altar is our Heart. For the Heart is that in man, as the
Altar is in the Temple. Our Heart then is our Altar: no Legal Altar, but an
Evangelicall Altar. Answereable to our Altar must our sacrifices be:
Evangelicall too.

Now says Lactantius Divin. institut. lib. 6. cap. 24. Now the Lord requires
not of us any sacrifice of a dumb beast, of death and bloodshed, but Victimam
hominis and vitae, the sacrifice of man and his life. In our now-sacrifices we
need not garlands of Vervim, nor the inwards of beasts, nor turffs of earth,
but such things only, as proceed from the inner man, righteousness, patience,
faith, innocence, chastity, abstinence; such are the sacrifices to be offered
up upon Gods holy Altar, placed in our hearts.

In the Chapter following, Chap. 25. his observation is, that there are two
things to be offered up unto God; donum and sacrificium, a gift and a
sacrifice; the one perpetual, the other temporal. According to some, the gift
is, whatsoever is made of gold, silver, purple, or silk; and the sacrifice is
a beast slain, or whatsoever is burnt upon the Altar. But God has no use of
these. These are subject to corruption, but God is incorrupt. We must
therefore offer both, gift and sacrifice, in a spiritual manner; so shall God
have use of both. Our gift must be integritas animi, the uprightness of our
mind: our sacrifice, laus and hymnus, praise and thanksgiving.

That I may conclude (Beloved brethren) let me sum up together the Evangelical
sacrifices, which the giver of the new law requires of us. A broken spirit,
obedience to the will of God, love toward God and man, judgment, justice,
mercy, prayer, thanksgiving, almes-deedes, our bodies, and our souls; these
are the Evangelical sacrifices, the sacrifices of Christianity, to be offered
up unto the Lord upon the Altar of a faithful heart.

A faithful heart, I say. For if the heart be unfaithful, the sacrifices will
not be acceptable; they will not be esteemed above the sorceries of Simon
Magus. Call them not sacrifices, they are sacriledges, if the heart be
unfaithful. But let the heart be faithful, and the sacrifices which it
offers up, will be as the beneficence was, Phil. 4.18.
which the Philippians sent by Epaphroditus unto Paul: they will be odours of a
sweet smell, acceptable sacrifices, and well pleasing unto God.

Neither did that precious ointment, that ran down Aarons beard. Psalm.
133.2. nor that, that the woman powered upon Christ's head, Mat. 26.7. nor that
sweet incense, Exodus 25.6. nor that wine of Lebanon, Hos. 14.7. yield so
pleasant a savor, as do the sacrifices of Christianity, that ascend from a
faithful heart. O! the sweet savor of a good life, that springs and sprouts
from a true belief, far surpasses all other sweets in the world.

O! Let our sacrifices be such. Let them spring from a true belief, let them
proceed from a faithful heart, so shall our minds when we think on God; and
our wills, when we obey God; and our souls, when we love God; and our tongues
when we praise God; and our feet, when we walk with God; and whatsoever else
we have, when we use it for the glory of God, be an odor of a sweet smell, an
acceptable sacrifice, and well pleasing unto God. I end.

Vouchsafe, we beseech thee, most merciful Father, so thoroughly to sanctify
us with thine holy Spirit, that all our sacrifices, our preaching, our hearing,
our prayers, our praises, our thankesgiuings, our deeds of mercy, and pity,
and charity, may ever be acceptable in thy sight. Grant this dear Father,
for thy best beloved Son, Jesus Christ his sake: to whom with thee, in the
unity of the holy Spirit, be all praise, and power, might, and majesty,
dignity, and dominion, for evermore. Amen.

THE XII. LECTVRE.
AMOS 2.8. And they drink the wine of the condemned in the house of their God.


THis is the last branch in the enumeration of the sins of the Israelites. It
concerns the Judges of Israel, and the Rulers of that state; them
principally. It is appliable to others also, to the richer sort. The words are
a reproof of the gross superstition of that people. They thought their duty
touching the service of God, well discharged, so they repaired to their
temples. Such holy places they thought were of themselves sufficient to cleanse
them, albeit they should even there betake themselves to inordinate eating, to
unmeasurable drinking, to infamous luxury, yea, to every kind of villainy.

For my more plain proceeding in the handling of the words of this text, will
you be pleased to note in them,

First, the action, for which the Israelites are here reproved; it is a
drinking of wine. They drink wine.

Secondly, whose wine it is, they drink. Its not their own; its vinum
damnatorum; it is the wine of the condemned. They drink the wine of the
condemned.

Thirdly, where they drink it. They drink it not at home, which were more
tolerable; but in domo deorum suorum, in the house of their Gods. They drink
the wine of the condemned in the house of their Gods.

The first convinces them of riot, and excess. They drink wine immoderately.
They are so given to it, that they abstain not even then, when they are in
their temples, and would seem most religious. For they drink it in the house
of their Gods.

The second convinces them of oppression. The wine they drink, is vinum
damnatorum; it is the wine of the condemned: it is vinum mulctatorum, the wine
of such as they have fined or mulcted: wine, bought with the money of them,
whom they have in their unrighteous judgments spoiled of their goods.

The third conuinceth them of idolatry. They drink their wine in the house of
their Gods; not in the Temple at Jerusalem, that once glorious Temple of the
true and living God, but in the temple of their gods, in Dan and Bethel, and
other places, before their golden calves and other their Idols. They drink the
wine of the condemned in the house of their Gods.

First, They drink wine.

Wine! Why might they not? Is it not one of the good 1. Tim. 4.4.
creatures of God, that may well be used with thanksgiving? God himself gives
it to the obedient, to them that love and serve him, Deuteronomy. 11.14. I will give
you the rain of your land in due season, the first rain and the latter rain,
that thou may gather in thy corn, and thy wine, and thine oil. That thou
may gather in thy wine.

Christ his miraculous turning of water into wine at the marriage of Cana in
Galilee, Ioh. 2.11. is evidence enough that he allowed the drinking of wine.
Yea, himself drank wine. Else the people would never have called him a
wine-bibber, as it appears they did, Matthew. 11.19. S Paul, 1. Tim. 5.23.
wishes Timothy no longer to drink water, but to use a little wine for his
stomachs sake. Wine has its praises in the Scripture. It makes glad the heart
of man, Psalm. 104.15. It cheareth God and man, Judge. 9.13.

How then is it, that the Israelites are here reproved for drinking wine? I
answer, not for drinking wine, but for the abuse in drinking are the Israelites
here reproved. It is with wine, as it is with every other good creature of God.
It may he abused. Wine is abused, when men are drunken with it. This abuse of
wine, S. Paul desirous either to prevent, or to reform in the Ephesians, thus
speaks to the Ephesians, chap. 5.18. Be ye not drunk with wine, wherein is
excess. It is as if he had said: Take heed of wine; be not overcome of it. In
vino luxus. Consider the man that is given over to drunkenness. His life its
profuse, its dissolute, its unclean, its luxurious, its unworthy a Christian.
Take heed of wine.

Solomon, Proverb. 20.1. says: Wine is a mocker. It is so: wine taken
immoderately deceiues him that takes it. He takes it to be sweet and pleasant,
but will find it in the effect exceeding bitter. What more bitter then
drunkenness? and what causes drunkenness more then wine? Aufert memoriam,
dissipat sensum, confundit intellectum, incitat libidinem, omnia membra
debilitat, vitamque exterminat. It is Drusius Prou. Class. 2. li. 1. 257.
said to be S. Austines. Drunkenness! it takes away the memory, it consumes
the senses, it confounds the understanding, it provoke lust, it weakneth the
body, it drives life away.

The drunkard is notably deciphered by the same Father in his book de
poenitentia. Quum absorbet vinum, absorbetur a vino; the drunkard while he
deuoureth his wine, is devoured of his wine: abominatur a Deo, despicitur ab
Angelis, deridetur ab hominibus, destituitur virtutibus, confunditur a
daemonibus, conculcatur ab omnibus. God detesteth him, the Angels despise him,
men deride him, virtues forsake him, the Devils do confound him, all do
spurn him.

The ancient Fathers generally are eloquent in beating down this sin of
drunkenness. Hom. 14. in ebrietatem.
Basil calls it a voluntary Devil, the mother of naughtiness, the enemy of
virtue. Chrysostom, Homil. 57. ad populum Antiochenum says: where
drunkenness is, there is the Devil. Drunkenness, its a disease remediless,
a ruin without excuse, the common reproach of mankind. The drunken man, he is
a voluntary Devil, a dead-liuing man: Chrysostom st. Hom. 58. in Math.
worse then an Ass, worse then a dog, worse then any brute beast. The brute
beast cannot be compelled to drink, when he has no thirst: but this drunkard
is so intemperate, that when he is replete, even to the mouth, yet will he
power in more. He will verify the saying of the Prophet, Esaias 28.8. Your
tables are full of filthy vomitings, no place is clean. S. Ambrose in his
book de Elia and Ieiunio, cap. 17. to work in us a detestation of this sin,
says: Ebrietas fomentum libidinis, ebrietas incentivum insaniae, ebrietas
venenum insipientiae. Drunkenness, its a cherisher of lust, a prouoker of
madness, the poison of folly. Hereby are men strangely affected. Vocem
amittunt, color variantur, oculis ignescunt, ore anhelant, fremunt naribus, in
furore ardescunt, sensu excidunt. They loose their voice, their color is
changed, their eyes are fiery, at the mouth they fetch breath a pace, in the
nosthrils they snore aloud, they are fierce in their fury, they are deprived
of their sense. They have for their attendants, dangerous frensies, grievous
pains of the stone, deadly crudities, frequent castings. Mentior, says
Ambrose; I lie, if the Lord has not said as much by his Prophet Jeremy, chap.
25.27. Drink ye, and be drunken, and spew, and fall, and rise no more.

I may not pass by S. Hierome. He in an Epistle of his, which he wrote to that
noble virgin Eustochium, to persuade her still to continue a Virgin, warns
and exhorts her, to fly from wine, as from poison. He tells her, the Devils
have not a better weapon wherewith to conquer or corrupt youth. Youth!
Covetousness may shake it, pride may puff it up, ambition may delight it; but
drunkenness will overthrow it. Other vices we may in time forsake: hic hostis
nobis inclusus est. If this enemy once get possession of us, it will along
with us, whither soever we go. Wine and youth! each of them is incendium
voluptatis, fit to set lust on fire: young men and young women, fly from wine.
Quid oleum flammae? why cast we oil upon the flame? Quid ardenti corpusculo
fomenta ignium? why bring we tinder, why touchwood, to a fire already kindled?
So discourses that good Father to persuade the Virgin Eustachium to hate wine
as poison. The discommodities of wine he briefly touches in his Comment upon
Galat. 5. Vino, hominis sensus evertitur, pedes corruunt, men's vacillat, libido
succenditur: by wine, a man's sense and feeling is impaired, his feet do fail
him, his understanding is abolished, his lust is inflamed.

It were infinite to relate, how Super Genesin Homil. 6. cap. 19. super Levit.
hom. 7. cap. 0.
Origin, how Pet. Rauennus in Sermon. quodam.
Chrysologus, how De modo been viuendi Ser 25.
Bernard, how Hilarious in Psalm. 125. Hugo de S. Victore. Clemens Alex. Paedag.
l. 2. c. 2.
others have painted out this vice, with the mischiefs which it brings.

But what need any such relation? Why hear we the Fathers speak, when the
Scripture is plain? Solomon, Prou. 23. propounds a question. It is verse 29.
Who has we? who has sorrow? who has contentions? who has babbling? who has
wounds without a cause, who has redness of eyes? His answer is, verse. 30.
They that tarry long at the wine. You see a troop of mischiefs at the heels
of a drunkard. Solomon well weighing this, in the next verse, in the 31. he
prescribes a remedy against drunkenness. Look not thou upon the wine, when
it is red, when it gives his color in the cup, when it moves it self
aright. Let not the pleasant color of the wine, glorious and fair to thine
eye, let it not deceive thee. If it do, what then? Then, as it is, verse. 32. it
will bite thee like a serpent, it will sting thee like an adder, like a
cockatrice, like a viper. And as it is, verse. 33. Thine eyes shall behold
strange women] thou will become shameless and unchaste: or, Thine eyes shall
behold strange visions] Bina, pro singulis putabis te videre: Every thing will
seem double to thee. Thou will think thou see two candles, when there is
but one in the room. And thine heart shall utter perverse things] Out of the
abundance of thine heart, openly, in the presence of others, thou shall speak
things filthy and unseemly: out will thy greatest secrets. Yea, says he, verse.
34. Thou shall be as he that lies down in the midst of the Sea, or as he
that lies upon the top of a mast] careless and secure in greatest danger. It
follows, verse. 35. Though thou be stricken, though beaten grievously, yet will thou not feel it; so dead thou art in the sleep of thy drunkenness: and
which is to be admired, when thou awakest thou will to thy wine again. So
excellently does Solomon give the picture of a Drunkard.

Beloved in the Lord, I hope there is none of you that hears me this day,
given over to this vile sin. If any one has at any time through infirmity
bin overtaken with it, let him be wary for the time to come, that he fall so
no more. This sin, it is morbus regius, as Did. salutis ^
Bonaventure calls it. Its a costly sin. Costly indeed. For he that draws
his patrimony through his throat, eating and drinking more in a day, then he
is able to earne in a whole week, his end must needs be beggary; according to
that of the wise man, Prove. 23.21. The duunkard and the glutton shall come to
poverty. You have heard of many other inconveniences that do accompany this
sin. They may move the mere natural man, the man whose Heaven is here on
earth, to take good heed, that this sin have no dominion over him. Much more
should the true Christian, he, who has his Heaven above, withstand the rage
and fury of this sin. It is a work of the flesh. So its called, Galat.
5.21. and there the Apostle has past his doom upon it: They which do such
things shall not inherit the kingdom of God. Parallel to which is that of the
same Apostle, 1. Cor. 6.9. Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit
the kingdom of God? Be not deceived; no drunkard shall inherit the kingdom of
God.

I shut up this point with a word of exhortation. I borrow it from Luke 21.34.
The words are the words of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, to his Disciples:
Take heed to your selves, lest at any time your hearts be ouer-charged with
surfeiting and drunkenness, and so the last day come upon you unawares. For as
a snare shall it come on all them, that dwell upon the face of the whole earth.
Watch ye therefore, and pray always that ye may be accounted worthy, to
escape all these things that shall come to pass, and to stand before the son
of man.

Thus far of the first general part, the action of these Israelites, their
drinking of wine. Now in the second place we are to consider, whose wine it
was. It was not their own; it was vinum damnatorum, the wine of the condemned.

They drink the wine of the condemned. By this wine of the condemned, some
understand the wine, that was of custom given to condemned persons, to refresh
and comfort them, when they were to suffer execution, for their offenses. Of
this custom a certain Hebrew in a book of his entitled, See Nichol. de Lyra
in Math. 27.34.
Liber iudicum ordinariorum, makes mention, after this manner: It is the advice of Lemuel the King, Prove. 31.6. Give strong drink unto him that is
ready to perish, and wine unto those that be of heavy heart. Let him drink and
forget his poverty, and remember his misery no more. Upon occasion of these
words the Seniours of the Jews made this constitution, vt condemnatis ad
mortem daretur vinum aromaticum ad bibendu^, vt facilius tolerarent passionem:
that sweet and odoriferous wine should be provided for such as were condemned
to death, which they might drink, and so the more easily endure their
suffering. This constitution was put in practice by the Jews.

At the time of Christ's suffering, there were in Jerusalem certain devout
Matrons, full of compassion, who did out of their devotion bestow this wine.
This wine so provided, for Christ, and those that suffered with him, some
cruel Jews took unto themselves, according to these words of Amos, They
drink the wine of the condemned. This wine they took unto themselves, and in
the place thereof they did put vinegar mixed with gall, as S. Matthew says,
chap. 27.34. If vinegar mixed with gall might serve Christ's turn, so it was:
the Jews would have the wine: They would drink the wine of the condemned.

This custom of giving wine to such as were condemned to dye, you see was very
ancient. The learned Mus^ulus, Aretius, Hunnius, Muthesius.
expositors of the Gospel in their Commentaries upon the 27. of S. Matthew do
generally remember it. Lucas Brugensis very precisely: Moris erat, qui and
hodie apud nos in vsu est; It was a custom, and is this day in use with us,
that to malefactors, brought to the place of execution, wine should be given
them, and that of the best, partly to refresh their thirsty, and wearied
bodies; and partly to exhilarate and cheer up their hearts, that they might
the less think of death, and with more ease endure it. If to this custom our
Prophet here alludeth, then are the Israelites here reproved for their cruelty,
for taking to themselves; to their own private use, what was of custom
belonging to poor condemned prisoners.

But I take it more agreeable to the meaning of the Holy Ghost in this place, if
we understand by the wine of the condemned, wine bought with the money of such
as the Judges of Israel had in their unrighteous judgments put to the worse.

This wine the Septuagint do call (...), vinum de calumnijs, wine gotten by
deceitful dealing, by malicious surmises, by false accusations. The Chaldee
Paraphrast terms it vinum rapinae, the wine of oppression, of pillage, of
robbery. Luther styles it vinum mulctatorum; and Castalio, vinum mulctatitiu^,
wine issuing from mulctes, from fines. In our now English translation, it is
the wine of the condemned: cast your eye but to the margent, and you will find
it to be the wine of such as were fined or mulcted. Here then by the wine of
the condemned, we are to understand, that the Judges of Israel laid upon the
poor men unjust penalties, by which they might be provided of wine and other
delicates, and so spend their days in iollity.

You see now, what sin it is, whereat this second general part does aim. It
is an oppressing sin; the sin of oppression: when Judges, rulers of states,
and men in authority make havoc of the poor. Of this sin I spoke at large
in my Ninth Lecture upon this second chapter of Amos; at what time I delivered
this doctrine.

God pleads the cause of the poor, against their oppressors. The less need
have I now to spend my time upon it. Yet a word of it. My now-doctrine I
deliver in this positio^: It is not lawful for any man to oppress another.

Oppression I call every injustice, used of the mightier, either by violence,
or by color of law, or by any other cunning dealing, against such as are not
able to withstand them.

This description of oppression, I gather from Levit. 25.14. from Micah 2.1, 2.
and from 1 Thessalonians. 4.6. In each place the unlawfulness of oppression is
manifested.

The first place is, Levit. 25.14. The commandment there is: If thou sell
ought unto thy neighbor, or buyest ought of thy neighbors hand, ye shall not
oppress one another. Whether you sell or buy, you may not oppress: the very
forbidding of oppression, is a sufficient argument, that oppression is
unlawful.

The second place is, Micah 2.1, 2. Woe to them that devise iniquity, and
work evil upon their beds: when the morning is light, they practice it,
because it is in the power of their hands. And they covet fields, and take them
by violence; and houses, and take them away. So they oppress a man and his
house, even a man and his heritage. where you have an imprecation against
oppressors, a woe thundered out against them. It is enough to prove oppression
to be unlawful.

The third place is, 1 Thessalonians. 4.6. This is the will of God, that no man
oppress, or ouer-reach his brother in any matter. Is it Gods will? Then surely
it is not lawful for you to oppress or ouer-reach one another in any
business. Men of trade may not gain by their false weights, false measures,
false speeches, or false oaths; neither may men in any other course of life
gain by violence, or by color of Law, or by any other cunning dealing. Thus
is my doctrine confirmed, It is not lawful for any man to oppress another.

First, it may serve for a reproof of the Oppressors of this age, who make
gold their hope, and the wedge of gold their confidence, as Job speaks, chap.
31.24. S. Paul, he taught, 1. Tim. 6.6. that Godliness is great gain: but
these men suppose the contrary, that gain is great godliness: and therefore
they fear not to gain with the hurt of others.

They build their houses, as the moth. So says Job, chap. 27.18. As the moth!
How is that? The moth is made full by spoiling the barks, and books wherein
it lives. So is it with these men; they make themselves full, by spoiling
others, with whom they live, and have to deal. I express it in Ieremies
phrase, chap. 22.13. They build their houses by unrighteousness, and their
chambers by wrong: and in Habakkuks phrase, chap. 2.12. They build them towns
with blood, and stablish their Cities by iniquity. Against these is that
complaint of the Lord, Esai. 3.14, 15. Ye have eaten up the vineyard; the
spoil of the poor is in your houses. What mean ye, that ye beat my people
to pieces, and grind the faces of the poor? Woe to these men; a woe from
Micah, a woe from Jeremy, a woe from Habakkuk in the now-alleaged places; a
woe from Esaias too, Chap. 5.8. Woe upon woe and yet will they not cease from
joining house to house, and laying land to land, as if the way to the
spiritual Canaan were all by Land, and not through a red Sea of death, as one
wittily speaks.

From this contempt of the Prophets of the Lord, or rather, of the Lord
himself speaking by his Prophets, it is now come to pass, that many a poor
tenant is thrust out of his house; that Villages are depopulated, that those
streets which were wont to be sown with the seeds of men, are now become
pastures for the sending forth of oxen, and for the treading of sheep, as Esaias
speaks, chap. 7.25.

Now may Hythlodaeus his complaint have place: Mori Vtopia lib. 1.
Our sheep in England were sometimes the meekest beasts of the field, and
contented themselves with a little: but now are they become so fierce and
greedy, that they devour men, and Towne-fields, and houses, and villages, and
lay all waste. Alas, silly sheep, it is no fault of yours; you are as meek as
ever you were. Whose then is the fault? It is yours, ye grinding oppressors:
yours, whose hearts are like the vast Ocean, fit to swallow up every base
commodity, that the earth is able to afford you.

O that these men would at length call themselves to a strict account of the
oppressions, wherewith they have oppressed the poor, either by depopulating,
or by raising rents, or by hoysing fines, or by interest, or otherwise: and
would once begin to make some restitution. Did they but know in what estimation
they stand in Church and Commonwealth, they would remit somewhat of their
Cruelty.

The Church heretofore denied them Christian burial. Its apparent in the Canon
Law: Extra de Vsuris, Cap. Quia in omnibus.

How the Commonwealth brooketh them, they may perceive by two instances.
Catillus a British King 170. years before Christ, did hang them up: He hung up
all oppressors of the poor. My Stow in his Summarie.
Chronicler writes in the margent; A good example. Long after him, King Edward,
commonly called good King Edward, banished them his Land. So writes Glanvil
lib. 7. de Leg. and consuet. Angliae c. 37. The same author in the same book
cap. 16. affirms; that by the most ancient laws of England, the goods of a
defamed o^pressor, dying without restitution, were escheated unto the King; and
all his lands unto the Lord of the town.

Wherefore let the oppressor now at last forsake his oppressions. What can all
the wealth, all the mucke of the earth avail him, if for it he loose the
kingdom of Heaven? Momentaneum est, quod delectat; aeternum, quod cruciat. The
wealth he here heapeth up may for a time yield him some delight: but what is a
moment of delight to the eternity of sorrow that must follow? Must follow! Yea
it must follow, if amendment hinder it not. If he amend not, I say, as God is
God, so certainly shall the oppressor be destroyed, though not in the red Sea,
as the oppressing Egyptians once were, yet in a Sea, a black Sea of Hellish
deeps, where he shall be pained unspeakably, tormented intolerably, both
everlastingly.

Thus have you the first use of my doctrine. My doctrine was, It is not lawful
for any man to oppress another.

The use was a general reproof of our now-oppressors.

A second use may be to admonish Judges, Justices, and other Magistrates and
Rulers, that they suffer not themselves to be stained with this sin of
oppression. It is the Pilkinton exposit. in Nehem. cap. 5. fol. 80. A.
duty of the Magistrate to deliver the oppressed out of the hand of the
oppressor.

This duty is laid upon him, Ierem. 21.12. There thus says the Lord to the
house of David: Execute iudgem^nt in the morning, and deliver him that is
oppressed out of the hand of the oppressor. It is likewise laid upon him, Esai.
1.17. Seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless, and defend
the widow. Where first Gods commandment is, that Magistrates should execute
judgment in the morning. In the morning: Therefore they are not to use delays
in doing justice. Secondly, Gods commandment is, that Magistrates should seek
judgment. Must they seek judgment? Therefore in cases of oppression they are
not to stay till they be called for. Thirdly, God commends unto Magistrates,
all that are oppressed, but specially the fatherless and widow: the
fatherless, because they want the defense of their parents; and the widow,
because she is destitute of the help of her husband; and we know, every man
goes over, where the hedge is lowest. Therefore are Magistrates to take upon
them the defense of the fatherless, the defense of the widow, the defense of
every one, that is oppressed.

Is it so? Then are Magistrates to take special heed, that themselves be
neither principalls, nor accessaries, in the sin of Oppression. They must abhor
the practice of the Princes of Jerusalem, who Esaias 1.23. are styled companions
of thieves, because they loved gifts, and followed after rewards. They are to
detest the corruption of the rulers of Israel, who Hos. 4.18. love with shame
to cry, Bring ye, Bring ye. They must hate the ways of Samuels sons, who
1. Sam. 8.3. turned aside after lucre, took bribes, and perverted judgment.
They must loath the courses of cursed Balaam, who 2. Pet. 2.15. Loved the wages
of unrighteousness.

Happy is the land that is ruled by such Magistrates. Such may with boldness
stand up, and make protestation with just and vncorrupt Samuel, 1. Sam. 12.3.
Behold, here we are; witness against us: whose ox have we taken? whom have we
defrauded? whom have we oppressed? of whose hand have we received any bribes to
blind our eyes therewith? and no man shall be able to accuse them.

Are ours such? I stand not here to plead against them. Only this I say: If
ours be not such, but are of another stamp: if they love the wages of
unrighteousness, if they love gifts, if they follow after rewards, if they
turn aside after lucre, if they take bribes, if they shame not to cry, Bring
ye, bring ye; I may rank them with these Israelites in my text: They will
sell the righteous for silver; they will sell the poor for a pair of shoes;
they will pant after the dust of the earth on the head of the poor; they will
turn aside the way of the meek, and they will drink the wine of the
condemned.

Thus have you the second use of my doctrine. My doctrine was, It is not
lawful for any man to oppress another. The use was an admonition to
Magistrates, rulers, and other officers, that they suffer not themselves to be
stained with the sin of oppression.

A third use follows. It reaches to the poor oppressed. They may from hence
receive consolation; from hence they may be comforted. Is it not an exceeding
great comfort to a poor oppressed wretch, to know, that God takes notice of
the oppressions, under which he groaneth? That God does so, I have already made
it manifest in the proof of my doctrine, in the reproof of oppressors, and in
the Magistrates admonition. It is clear also in the letter of my text. Here
God takes notice of the oppressions of the poor in Israel, in as much as the
Judges, the Rulers, and great men there did drink the wine of the condemned.

Hereto I add that Psalm. 12.5. For the oppression of the poor, for the
sighing of the needy, now will I arise (says the Lord) I will set him in
safety from him that puffs at him, from him that would ensnare him. Behold
here, first Gods readiness to help the poor, and secondly, how forcible with
God the poor man's prayers are. Are not both these to a poor oppressed man
points of singular comfort? Out of doubt they are.

But some poor man pressed down with the burden of oppression, may here say
unto me. Has God promised to deliver me from mine oppressors? Why then am I
still oppressed?

Stay a while, and thou shall behold the goodness of the Lord. Its not for thee
to make haste, or to seek by vile, and unwarrantable courses to wind thy
self out of thine oppressors hands. Until it shall please the Lord to put an
end to thy present grieuances, its thy duty to possess thy soul in patience.
Prescribe not thou unto the Lord, what he shall do. Let his grace, let his
favor be sufficient for thee, whatsoever it bring with it; be it want, or
poverty, or adversity. One drop of his favor is better worth unto thee, and
more of value, then this whole world. If thou have but a taste, but a touch of
it, it will make thee sing with David, Psalm. 119.71. Its good for me that I
have bin afflicted: good, that I have bin in want, in poverty, in adversity,
under the griping hand of the oppressor. O! how sweet is the quiet fruit of
righteousness, that springs forth from the bitter root of tribulation!

I have done with the poor oppressed, when I shall have given them a Caveat.
The Caveat is, that they themselves oppress not themselves. There is no
oppression to the oppression, that one poor man exercises toward another.
For a poor man that oppresses the poor, is like a sweeping rain, that
leaves no food. Solomon avoweth it, Prove. 28.3. A poor man] a man of mean
estate, if he oppresse] by force, by fraud, by bargaining, or otherwise, a
poor man] such as he himself is, whom he should tender and pity, because by
him he may be put in mind of his own estate, he is like a sweeping raine]
like a flood that rises through abundance of rain, or he is like a great
storm and tempest of rain, that suddenly carries away corn, hay, and
whatsoever it meets with, and leaves behind it no food for men or cattle to
live on. A poor man if he oppress the poor, is like a sweeping rain, that
leaves no food.

A poor man, and yet an oppressor! Such a one is much more intolerable then a
rich man, that oppresses. For, whereas by the law of God, every oppressor is
bound to make actual restitution for the wrongs he has done, the rich man may
be in case to do it, the poor man never.

My exhortation is, to rich, to poor, to all; that all would be of the same
mind one toward another. So S. Paul exhorted the Romans, chap. 12.16. Be of
the same mind one toward another. Mind not high things, but condescend to
men of low estate. Recompense to no man evil for evil. If it be possible, as
much as lies in you, live peaceably with all men. Since here we have no
continuing city, Heb. 13.14. since here we are but pilgrims and strangers, 1.
Pet. 2.11. since here is not our rest, Micah 2.10. why use we fraudulencie and
forgerie in our contracts? why bribery in justice? why cruelty in our
dealings? why ouer-beare we right by might? why grind we the poor like corn
with the milstones of oppression? why eat we them up like bread? yea, why do
the poor grind themselves? why oppress they one another? Will we never leave
crushing one another? Dearly beloved, we forget our selves: we think we are
at home, but are not. Our home is above; it is Heaven. Here we are but
strangers: and say; Is it fit that strangers, when they are but passing through
a strange country, should devour and consume one another?

Beloved in the bowels of Jesus Christ, let us for the time to come so live and
love together, whilst we shall be here iornying toward our wished-for-home,
that Celestial Canaan, that when it shall please God to call us to our
accounts, how we have here carried our selves, we may with blessed Paul, 2. Cor.
7.2. boldly make our profession: We have wronged no man, we have consumed no
man, we have defrauded no man.

Thus far of the second general part, whose wine it was that these Israelites
did drink. It was the wine of the condemned. I can but salute the third; it
notes the place where the Israelites drank their wine: it was in domo deorum
suorum, in the house of their Gods. They drink the wine of the condemned in
the house of their Gods.

In the house of their Gods. The Septuagint have (...). In the house of their
God. So reads the author of the Vulgar Latin: So Luther, and Calvin, and
Munster, and Castalio, and Gualter, and so our new English. The reading I
disallow not. Yet because the Israelites, the ten tribes of Israel, they to
whom this prophecy of Amos was directed, went not now up to Jerusalem, to the
Temple there, there to worship the true and living God; but had Temples of
their own, Temples in Dan, in Bethel, in other places, to which they repaired
for the worship of their golden calves, and Baal, and other their Idols; I
rather read (and the Hebrew text will well bear it) in the house of their
Gods. Mercer so reads it; so does Vatablus, so Drusius, so Tremellius and
Iunius. Jonathan the Chaldee Paraphrast he reads; In the house of their Idols.
He has respect to the purpose of the Holy Ghost. His purpose in this place is
to tax the Israelites for their superstition, for their idolatry, for their
riot and excess in spending their goods, gotten by the oppression of the poor
in the houses, Temples, or Churches of their Idol Gods. The doctrine, we may
take from hence is this, Goods gotten unlawfully are not fit to be employed in
the service of God. No, nor in the service of Idols.

Not in the service of God. They are rejected by Ecclesiasticus, chap. 34.18.
He that sacrifices of a thing wrongfully gotten, his offering is ridiculous.
Ridiculous! And will you think a ridiculous offering fit for Gods service? In
the 20. verse. of the same Chapter Ecclesiasticus says further: Who so brings
an offering of the goods of the poor, does as one that kills the son
before the fathers eyes. Can a father be pleased to have his son slain
before his eyes? You will say, no. No more will it be pleasing to God to have
an offering of ill gotten goods presented to him.

Solomon Prove. 15.8. says, The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to
the Lord. He says it again, chap. 21.27. The sacrifice of the wicked is an
abomination. Its true. Whatsoever Sacrifice the wicked man offers to the
Lord, be it offered never so solemnly, never so sumptuously, it will be an
abomination to the Lord, the Lord will abhor it, he will detest it. Much more
will he abhor and detest any offering that shall be made of goods ill gotten,
of the goods of the poor. Of such sacrificers he says in Esaias, chap. 66.3. He
that kills an ox, is as if he slew a man: he that sacrifices a lamb, as he
that cut off a dogs neck, he that offers an oblation, as if he offered swines
flesh, he that burns incense, as if he blessed an Idol.

You acknowledge the truth of the first part of my doctrine.

Goods gotten unlawfully are not fit to be employed in the service of God. But
may they be employed in the service of Idols? No, they may not. My reason is:
The Idolater having no perfect knowledge of the true and living God, takes his
Idol to be his God, and worshippeth him as God. Now ^en worship him amiss, if
carelessly, if with goods of oppr^^^ with ill-gotten goods, he dishonors the
true and living God: and the true and living God will be the auenger of such
dishonor done unto him. This is the very reason why our Prophet here reproves
the Israelites for bringing into the Temples of their Idols, their ill-gotten
goods, the wine of the condemned. They thought thereby to do service, not so
much to their Idols, as to the great God of Heaven, whom by their Idols they
represented. Thus have you my whole doctrine established, Goods gotten
unlawfully are not fit to be employed in the service of God: No, nor in the
service of Idols.

1. This may serve to admonish such, as shall hereafter found Colleges, build
Hospitals, erect Schools, ordain Aniuersaries, that they endow them not, that
they enrich them not with lands and possessions, purchased with ill-gotten
treasure.

2. Here is a lesson for all such as have heaped up unto themselves abundance
of wealth by oppression, by extortion, by usury, by deceit, or otherwise
unlawfully. Such may here be put in mind to make actual restitution in their
life time. Happily they will by their last Will and Testament bequeath part of
their ill-gotten wealth to the Church, and part to the poor, and will leave
but a portion to their heirs. A poor shift. Can they think that God will be
so mocked? He will not.

What remains then, but that every one, who has increased his substance by
wrong, do while he is living, make actual restitution. Zacheus the Publican
professes unto Christ, Luke 19.8. Behold Lord, the half of my goods I give to
the poor, and if I have taken any thing from any man, by forged cavillation, I
restore him fourfold. Zacheus of Jericho, he being converted to Christianity
was content to restore fourfold. It is a good consequent, they are scarce
half Christians, that will not restore the principal. Thou will say, what
need restitution? I will repent for my oppressing sins, and God is gracious;
he never turns away the sinner that repents. Take heed, deceive not thy
self: if thou be able to make actual restitution, and do it not,
poenitentia non agitur, sed fingitur. S. Austine tells thee so, Ep. 54. which
is to Macedonius. Thy repentance is no repentance; thou do but feign
repentance. It will never procure thee pardon for thy sin. Make thou
therefore actual restitution.

Thus far of the 8. verse.

THE XIII. LECTVRE.
AMOS 2.9.10.11. Yet destroyed I the Amorite before them, whose height was like
the height of the Cedars, and he was strong as the Oaks, yet I destroyed his
fruit from above, and his roots from beneath.

Also I brought you up from the land of Egypt, and led you forty years
through the wilderness, to possess the land of the Amorite.

And I raised up of your sons for Prophets, and of your young men for
Nazarites. Is it not even thus, O ye children of Israel, says the Lord?


MY meditations have been heretofore five times exercised in discoursing unto
you of the sins, wherewith the people of Israel in the precedent verses stand
charged. Their sins were, Covetousness, Cruelty, Oppression, False dealing,
Filthy lusts, Incest, Idolatry, Riot, and Excess. Gross and palpable
enormities. My endeavor was by the sword of the Spirit, the word of God, to
arm you against them, that ye give them no passage, no not a little; that ye
suffer them not by any means to have dominion over you.

From their sins we come to their Blessings; those blessings wherewith God
had blessed them. Four are here mentioned.

One is, the ruin of the Amorites, set down verse 9. Yet destroyed I the
Amorite before them, whose height was like the height of the Cedars, and he was
strong as the Oaks, yet I destroyed his fruit from above, and his roots from
beneath.

The second is, their deliverance from the servitude of Egypt. ver. 10. Also I
brought you up from the land of Egypt.

The third is, their safe passage through the desert, touched in the same
verse; I led you forty years through the wilderness. And why so? but, to
possess the land of the Amorite.

These were three great blessings; yet were they but temporal. The fourth
passes; It is spiritual, ver. 11. I raised up of your sons for Prophets,
and of your young men for Nazarites.

The confirmation of all follows in the same verse: Is it not even thus, O
ye children of Israel, says the Lord? Say O ye children of Israel; Have I
not done so and so for you? Have I not destroyed the Amorite for your sake?
Have I not freed you from your Egyptian yoke? Have I not guided you through the
desert? Have I not given you Prophets and Nazarites of your own sons, and of
your own young men for your instruction in the true service and worship of your
God? Is it even thus, O ye children of Israel, says the Lord?

You have now the scope of my Prophet, and the sum of this Scripture. My
present discourse must begin with the first mentioned benefit bestowed by God
upon that people. It is the ruin of the Amorites for their sake, thus
expressed, ver. 9. Yet destroyed I the Amorite before them, etc.

Herein I commend unto you three principal parts;

The first has a general touch of the ruin of the Amorites: Yet destroyed I
the Amorite before them.

The second has a description of that people. They are described, from their
stature, and from their valor. Each is set forth unto us by way of comparison:
their stature or tallnesse by the Cedar, their valor or strength by the Oak;
Their height was like the height of the Cedars, and he was strong as the Oaks.

The third has a particular explication or amplification of their ruin; It
was not any gentle stripe that they received, not any light incision, not any
small wound; but it was their extermination, their contrition, their universal
overthrow, their utter ruin. Their root and fruit; Princes and subjects;
Parents and children, young and old, were all brought to naught: Yet I destroyed
his fruit from above, and his roots from beneath.

Of the first of these three parts at this time. It has a general touch of
the ruin of the Amorites. Yet I destroyed the Amorite before them.

Yet.] The Hebrew letter is Vau; it is most usually put for Et.
And: It is here so rendered by Leo Judah, by Calvin, by Gualter, by Brentius,
and by Drusius. The (...).
Septuagint, the author of the Autem.
Vulgar Latin, and Vatablus do translate it But. Quamvis.
Tremellius and the Licet.
Translator of the Chaldee Paraphrase have Although. Our English Bible has
Yet. Be it either And, or Although, or But, or Yet, it varieth not the meaning
of the holy Ghost.

The meaning of the holy Ghost, is, by this enumeration of Gods benefits upon
Israel, to tax Israel of Ingratitude. God showred down his benefits upon
them, yet they returned no thanks. So much is here enforced by this particle,
Yet, to this sense: Notwithstanding all the good I have done unto Israel,
whether for their temporal, or for their spiritual estate; for their
temporal, by destroying the Amorite before them, by freeing them from their
servitude in Egypt, and by guiding them through the wilderness: and for their
spiritual estate, by giving unto them Prophets even of their own sons: yet
Israel, Hos. 11.7.
my people Israel, have Hos. 13.6.
forgotten me. Cruelty, Covetousness, Oppression, False dealing, Filthy
lusts, Incest, Idolatry, Riot, and Excess, these are the fruits wherewith they
repay me: Yet destroyed I the Amorite before them.

Here we are to take out a lesson against Unthankfulness. It is this,
Unthankfulness is a sin very odious in the sight of God.

This truth you will acknowledge to be very evident, and out of question, if
you will be pleased to consider three things.

The First is, that God does seriously forbid Unthankfulness. The Second is,
that he does severely reprehend it. The Third is, that he does duly punish it.
First, God forbids unthankfulness. It is forbidden, Deuteronomy. 6.12. Take
heed, that thou forget not the Lord thy God when thou art full. Deuteronomy. 6.10.
When the Lord thy God shall have brought thee into the land which he swear
unto thy Fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, to give thee, and shall
have given thee great and goodly Cities, which thou buildest not: V^^s. 11.
And houses full of all good things, which thou filledst not, and Wells di^g^d
which thou diggedst not; vineyards and olive trees planted, which thou
plantedst not, Deuteronomy. 8.10.11.12.
when thou have eaten and be full, Deuteronomy. 6.12.
Then beware lest thou forget the Lord, which brought thee forth out of the
land of Egypt, from the house of bondage. Take heed that thou be not
unthankful.

Secondly, God reprehendeth unthankfulness. He reprehendeth it in the Jews,
Esa. 1.2. I have nourished, I have brought up children, but they have rebelled
against me. He reprehendeth it in the Gentiles, Romans 1.21. There are the
Gentiles said to be without excuse, Because when they knew God, they glorified
him not as God, neither were they thankful. He reprehendeth it in the proud
Christian, 1. Cor. 4.7. The proud Christian he boasts of his dignity, of his
good works, of his merits. Unthankful man, what have thou, that thou have not
received? And if thou have received it, why do thou glory, why boasts thou
as if thou had not received? It is a reprehension of Unthankfulness which
you have, Mat. 25 26. There the servant that received of his Master one Talent
to be employed to the best advantage, and employed it not, is thus checked:
Thou wicked and slothful servant, thou know that I reap, where I sowed
not, and gather where I have not strawed: Thou ought therefore to have put
my money to the exchangers.

I may not pass by Jesus his censure, which he gives of the Leapers, Luke
17.17. It is a reprehension of their Unthankfulness. Ten were cleansed: only
one, and he a Samaritane, returned to give thanks. It drew from Jesus this
expostulation: Were there not ten cleansed? but where are the nine?

Let me recall you to review that reproof of Unthankfulness, Esa. 1.2. How
begins it? Hear o men, hearken o Angels? No. A greater Auditorie must yield
attention. Hear o Heavens, and hearken o earth. Why? What is the matter? I
have nourished, and brought up children, and they have rebelled against me.
What? Children! and they rebel! If servants had done it, if bondmen, if the
sons of Agar, of whom it was said of old, Genesis 21.10.
Cast out this bondwoman, and her son, if these had rebelled against me, it
were the less to be maruailed at: but they are children, mine own children,
children of mine own education, nourished and brought up by my self: That
these should rebel against me! Hear o Heavens, and hearken o earth, stand ye
hereat astonished.

Mark, I beseech you, how the Lord goes on to amplify this Unthankfulness
of his people, ver. 3. The ox knows his owner, and the ass his Masters
crib, but Israel does not know, my people does not consider. See you not, how
God sets his people, as it were to School, to the Ox, and to the Ass, to
learn of them what their duty is? And no marvel is it, says a good Calvin.
Interpreter. For it often times falls out, that bruit beasts do make a
greater show of humanity, then man himself does.

It is a commendation given unto dogs, that they are fidelissimi dominis, and
gratissimi, most faithful, most grateful unto their Masters: that by night
they watch and ward, and keep their Masters houses; that by day they attend
their Masters abroad; that they fight for them, ye and sometimes Bosqui^r
s^cunda naufragij tabula Conc. in d^dicativis Templi page 158.
die for them too. The Dog that in K. Pyrrhus his Theat^^m mundi Launaei lib.
1. sub finem.
Camp in the midst of his armed soldiers invaded the parricide and murderer
of his Master, is recorded for a pattern of thankfulness. So is that
Merchants dog, that in the Island Teos, lay upon a bag of money of his
Masters, which his Masters boy had by negligence left behind him in a by-way:
and so long he lay upon it, that at his masters return to seek what he had
lost, tum custodiae finem fecit, tum caninam efflavit animam, says my Elias
Cretens, comment ad ^rat. 2. Naziazenus de Theologia. p. 60.
Author, he yielded up the custody of the bag, and dyed.

I could tell you of as great thankfulness in Lions. It was a thankful Lion
that spared Androclus a runnagate from his Master, put into Circus Maximus at
Rome, to be devoured by the Beasts there. The kindness he had done to the Lion
was in Africa: and it was nothing else but the plucking of a thorn out of his
foot, It was a kindness, and the Lion forgot it not. Its registered by Gellius
Noct: Attic. lib. 5. cap. 14.

It was a thankful Lion, that followed Gerasimus the Abbot to keep his
Asses: the kindness that the Abbot had done to the Lion, was done at the river
Jordan. It was nothing else, but the remoouing of a little bramble from the
Lions foot; It was a kindness, and the Lion did him service for it. Its
reported by Johan. Moscus in his pratum spirituale c. 107. And Fran. Costerus
the Jesuit cites it to be true, in his Page 255.
Sermon upon the thirteenth Dominicall after Pentecoast.

It was a thankful Lion that followed a certain soldier that went with Duke
Godfrey of Bullein to the Conquest of the Holy land. The kindness that the
soldier had done to the Lion, was done not far from Jerusalem. And what was
it? A serpent that had gotten this Lion at the advantage, and was like to be
his executioner, was slain by this soldier: This was a kindness, and the
Lion was thankful for it. It is storied by Bernardus Guidonis in his
Chronicle: And Philip Diez, a Friar minorite of Portugal in his Summa
predicantium at the word, Ingratitude, takes it for true: and upon the relation
thereof breaks out into this exclamation: Page 4^5.
O magnam bestiae gratitudinem, and ingentem hominum ingratitudinem! Quare haec
audientes vos, non confunditis! O the great thankfulness of a beast, and the
exceeding great unthankfulness of men! How is it that you hear this, and are
not confounded.

Solomon, the wisest among the sons of men, Prove. 6.6. sends the sluggard to
the Ant, to learn of her to labor. Go to the Ant, thou sluggard, consider
her ways, and be wise. She Prou. 6.7.
having no guide, ouerseer, or ruler, provides her meat in summer, and
gathers her food in the harvest. Go, learn of her, do thou likewise. Is
the sluggard sent to the Ant to learn? Then well may the Unthankful man be
sent to the Lion, to the dog, to the ox, and to the ass. He may learn to
be thankful of the Lion, and of the dog: I have showed it unto you by humane
testimonies. The ox and the ass may also teach it them: divine demonstration
makes it good. Remember, I beseech you that same exaggeration of the
ingratitude of Israel: The ox knows his owner, and the ass his masters
cribbe, but Israel does not know, my people does not consider. And let this
suffice to show, that God does severely reprehend unthankfulness.

Now in the third place, I am to show, that he does punish it.

The punishments wherewith God repayeth unthankfulness are of two sorts. They
are either Temporal or Eternal.

Among Temporal punishments I rank the loss of the commodities of this life.

Such a punishment, a temporal punishment it was, wherewith God repayed the
Unthankfulness of the Israelites in the wilderness of Pharan, at
Kibroth-Hattaauah, or the graves of lust, their thirteenth mansion, so called
because there Number. 11.34.
they buried the people that lusted for flesh. This punishment, Psalm. 78.30,
31. is thus described: While their meat was yet in their mouths, the wrath of
God came upon them, and slew the fattest of them, and smote down the chosen of
Israel. In the 11. of Numbers, ver. 33. thus: While the flesh was yet between
their teeth, ere it was chewed, the wrath of the Lord was kindled against the
people, and the Lord smote the people with a very great plague.

A temporal punishment it was, wherewith God repayed the mother Hos. 2.5.
that played the Harlot, Hos. chap. 2. for her unthankfulness. She knew not,
that the Lord gave Ver. 8.
her Corn, and wine, and oil, and multiplied her silver, and her gold. For
she said verse 5. I will go after my lovers, that give me my bread and my
water, my wool and my flax, mine oil and my drink. You may see her
punishment resolved upon, verse. 9. I will return, says the Lord, and will
take away my Corn in the time thereof, and my wine, in the season thereof, and
I will recover my wool and my flax. Mine says the Lord. They are all his. It
was the Harlots Unthankfulness to call them hers. But she was punished with
the loss of them.

A temporal punishment it is, which is threatened to fall upon every
Unthankful wretch, Prove. 17.13. Who so rewards evil for good, evil shall
not depart from his house. Plagues and punishments from God shall be his
portion.

Thus is Unthankfulness repayed with temporal punishments. It is repaid
likewise with Eternal.

An Eternal punishment it is, which is adjudged to the unthankful, and
unprofitable servant, in the parable of the talents, Matthew. 25.30. Cast him
into utter darkness; there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

Eternal is the punishment, which Judas suffers for his unthankfulness. He
fell Act 1.18.
headlong, he burst asunder in the midst, all his bowels gushed out, and so
he went into his own place, Act. 1.25. His own place! Ex proprijs meritis
damnationis locum, suum effecit, says Caietane, Judas by his own deserts made
the place of damnation, his own place. His own place, not by any desire or
affectation of his own, but by Gods ordination. He went into his own place:
Abijt in Infernum, says Lorinus, he went into Hell: and there he suffers
the Revel. 21.8.
second death; a death after death, a death and yet everlasting. For as Hell is
large, so its long, and strong too. Between us and you says Abraham in
Paradise to Dives in hell, there is a great gulf fixed, Luke 16.26.
so that they which would pass from hence to you, cannot; neither can they
pass to us, that would come from thence. Ex inferno nulla redemptio: there is
no getting out of Hell: and therefore Judas his punishment is Eternal.

St Paul 2. Tim. 3.2. sets down a catalogue of the wicked: Among them, (...),
the unthankful have their place. They have their place among the wicked; and
therefore the portion of the wicked, must be their portion. And what shall
become of the wicked? S. Paul says, 1. Cor. 6.10. They shall not inherit the
kingdom of God. He says it again, Gal. 5.21. They shall not inherit the
kingdom of God. S. John in his Revelation, Chap. 21.8. says, They shall have
their part in the lake, which burns with fire and brimstone. The Unthankful
therefore, as wicked, shall not inherit the kingdom of God, but shall have
their part in the lake, which burns with fire and brimstone. Their punishment
shall be Eternal.

Hitherto you have heard; First, that God does seriously forbid
Unthankfulness. Secondly, that he does severely reprehend it. Thirdly, that
he does duly punish it. From hence is the lesson, which I commended unto you,
made good.

Unthankfulness is a sin very odious in the sight of God.

The consideration hereof should work in us a resolution to give thanks unto
our God for all his benefits. And although Dignas Deo gratias agere non
sufficimus, though we be not able worthily to give God thanks; yet let every
one of us profess with S. Bernard, in his second Sermon Domin. 6. Pentac. page
230. h.
de septem panibus: Ingratitudinem prorsus odit anima mea, my soul does hate
unthankfulness. Peremtoria siquidem res est Ingratitudo. Unthankfulness!
its a killing sin, its an enemy to grace, its a black friend to salvation.
I tell you, says that Father, quoniam pro meo sapere, I tell you, that to my
understanding, there is nothing, that so much displeases God, especially in
the children of Grace, and men of Conversion, as unthankfulness does. His
reason is: Vias obstruit gratiae; and vbi fuerit illa, iam gratia accessum non
invenit, locum non habet. Unthankfulness, it stops, it dams up the passage of
grace. Let Unthankfulness be any where, the good graces of God will have no
access thither; much less will they reside there.

The same sweet Father Sermon. 51. in Cantica Page 719 h.
speaks to like purpose. Unthankfulness! its the souls enemy; its a
burning wind, siccans tibi fontem pietatis, rorem misericordiae, fluenta
gratiae. It dries up the fountain of piety, the dew of mercy, the rivers of
grace.

He may seem to have reference to that Heavenly meditation of S. Austine in
the 18. chapter of his Tom. 9. fol. 159. ^.
Soliloquies: Lord I will recount in my mind all the good which thou have done
for me all my life long, even from my Psalm. 71.5.
youth. For I know right well, that unthankfulness does much displease thee,
as being the root of all spiritual wickedness. It is ventus quidam
desiccans, and vrens omne bonum; It is a certain wind, that dries and burns
up whatsoever good is, and stops the fountain of thy heavenly mercies, o
Lord.

Such should be our every days meditation. Every day should we recount in our
minds, all the good things which God has done for us all our life long, even
from our youth. Here to are we exhorted by S. Paul, 1. These. 5.18. In every
thing give thanks. His exhortation is made strong with a reason annexed. For
this is the will of God in Christ Jesus concerning you. The like exhortation is
made to the Colossians, chap. 3.15. Be ye thankful, and ver. 17. Whatsoever
ye do in word or in deed, do all things in the name of the Lord Jesus,
giving thanks to God, and the Father by him. The Ephesians are in like sort
exhorted, chap. 5.20. Give thanks always for all things unto God and the
Father, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ.

In this Apostolical exhortation to thanksgiving four circumstances are
principally remarkable, Quando, pro quibus, cui, per quem.

One is, Quando; When we are to give thanks. We are to do it, (...), always,
at all times.

The second is, pro quibus; for what we are to give thanks, We are to do it
(...), for all things. For all things which God sends upon us, or our
neighbors, be they prosperous or otherwise. For even adversity R^m. 8.28.
works for the good of them, that love God.

The third is, cui; to whom we are to give thanks. We are to do it (...), to
God and the Father, because he is God and Father: God in greatness, and Father
in goodness: God, for his creation and general government of the world, and
Father, for his election, redemption, and justification of the faithful.

The fourth is, Per quem; By whom we are to give thanks, we are to do it
(...), in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. Not in our own name, for there is
no Romans 7.8.
good in us. Of our selves we cannot so much as 2. Cor. 3.5.
think a good thought; much less can we speak a good word, or do a good
deed. Nor in any Angels name, for the Angels are but Heb. 1.14.
(...), they are but ministering spirits. Nor in any Saints name: for this were
to mingle the blood of Thomas with Christ's blood, as Luke 13.1.
Pilate mingled the blood of the Galileans with their own sacrifice: Christ,
he alone is our Savior, our Redeemer, our Mediator, our Advocate: in his name
alone are we to give thanks. Give thanks always for all things to God the
Father, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ.

This is our duty, beloved, even to give thanks always for all things to God
the Father, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Is it our duty? Let us then embrace it. Ascendant gratiae, vt descendat
gratia: let our thanks ascend up to God, that his grace may descend down upon
us. For cessat decursus gratiarum, vbi non fuerit recursus, says Bernard Sermon.
1. in capite ieiunij. The course and descent of the graces of God cease, and
the spring is dried up, when there is not a recourse and tide of our
thankfulness.

O! Why should so good an exercise be a burden and grief to any Christian
soul. Let the unrighteous vanish away in their graceless unthankfulness,
and become as the dung of the earth: but let the righteous always rejoice in
the Lord, Psalm. 33.1.
for it well becomes the just to be thankful.

Early and late let us praise his holy name, though not with the harp, nor
with the Psalterie, nor with an instrument of ten strings, as the Psalmist
advises, Psalm. 33.2. Yet let us do it with the best members, and instruments
we have, with our bodies, and with our souls.

An eminent B. King in Jon. lect 25. p 328.
pillar of our Church, has for this place a sweet meditation: Let us never
turn our Eze. 8.16.
backs to the Temple of the Lord, nor our faces from his mercy seat. Let us
not take without giving, as unprofitable ground drinks and deuoureth seed
without restoring. Let us neither eat nor drink, nay, let us neither hunger
nor thirst, without this condiment to it, The Lord be praised. Let the
frontlets between your eyes, the bracelets upon our arms, the gards upon our
garments, be thanks. Whatsoever we receive to use or enjoy, let us write that
posie and Epiphoneme of Chap. 4.7.
Zachary upon it; Grace, grace unto it: for all is grace.

To shut up this point, let our daily devotion, be the same that David's was.
Psalm. 103.1, 2. let it be our daily song: Bless the Lord o my soul, and all
that is within me bless his holy name. Bless the Lord o my soul, and forget
not all his benefits.

Thus far has the unthankfulness of Israel, noted in the particle Yet,
carried me. I now go on with the explication of the first benefit here
mentioned, to have bin bestowed by God upon that unthankful people.

I destroyed the Amorite before them. (...), say the Septuagint, I have taken
away; Exterminavi, the Vulgar, Calvin, and Gualter, I have cast out; Delevi,
Leo, Judah, and Castalio, I have wiped away; Excidi, O^colampadius, I have cut
off; Perdidi, Vatablus, Tremellius, and Iunius, I have destroyed; Drusius
expounds it, Delevi, Perdidi, profligavi; Mercerus, Disperdidi, abolevi. The
word in the original signifies, so to abolish and wipe away a people or a
nation, that there be not any memory left of it.

I destroyed the Amorite. The Amorites were descended from Canaan the fourth
son of Ham. In Genesis 10.16. Canaan is said to have begotten, the Iebusite, and
the Amorite, and the Gargasite. He begat the Amorite.

I destroyed the Ammorite] What? The Ammorite alone? Not so: But the Ammorites
and other nations of the land of Canaan: whom, when they had fulfilled the
measure of their iniquity, God did cut of, that he might give their land for
an habitation to the posterity of Jacob, the people of Israel, according to
his covenant made with Abraham, Genesis 15.18. Unto thy seed have I given this
land from the river of Egypt unto the great river, the river Euphrates. The
Kenites and the Kenizites, and the Kadmonites, and the Hittites, and the
Perizzites, and the Rephaims, and the Amorites, and the Canaanites, and the
Girgasites, and the Iebusites. The Amorites you see were not alone.

According to this covenant with Abraham, a promise is made to the Fathers in
the desert, Exodus 23.27. I will send my fear before thee, and will destroy all
the people, to whom thou shall come, and I will make all thine enemies turn
their backs unto thee. And I will send hornets before thee, which shall drive
out from before thee. Whom? The Hivite, the Canaanite, and the Hittite? Its
true. But they are not all. Look back to the 23. verse. There shall you find
the Lord thus to speak. Mine Angel shall go before thee, and bring thee unto
the Amorites, and the Hittites, and the Perizzites, and the Canaanites, and the
Hivites, and the Iebusites: and I will cut them off. You see again, the
Amorites were not alone.

I pervse the Catalogue of the Nations, whom the Lord has cast out before
Israel. It is Deuteronomy. 7.1. There I find, that he has cast out, the Hittites,
and the Girgasites, and the Amorites, and the Canaanites, and the Perizzites,
and the Heuites, and the Iebusites, seven Nations, greater and mightier then
Israel was. Seven Nations? Then the Amorites were not alone.

Were they seven Nations, that were driven out before Israel? How then is it,
that the Lord here in my text recounting unto Israel this great benefit,
names only the Amorite, saying, Yet destroyed I the Ammorite.

The Jesuit Pererius in his third Tome of Commentaries upon Genesis, writing
upon the 15. Chapter, ver. 16. these words, The iniquity of the Amorite is not
yet full, moves this very doubt, but thus: The reader may here wonder, why
mention is made only of one Nation of the Amorite, since it is plain by other
places of holy Scripture, that there were seven Nations, which the Lord drove
out from before the Israelites.

His first answer is: It may by a Synecdoche. A part may be put for the whole;
one Nation of the Amorites for all the seven. A like Synecdoche there is,
Josh. 1.4. There thus says the Lord unto Ioshuah: From the wilderness and
this Lebanon, even unto the great river, the river Euphrates, all the land of
the Hittites, and unto the great Sea, toward the going down of the Sun,
shall be your coast. All the land of the Hittites, shall be your coast; The
Hittites only are named; and yet within the bounds described all the seven
had their habitations. It is therefore a Synecdoche. A part is put for the
whole: One Nation of the Hittites for all the seven. Its so here: One Nation
of the Amorites for all the seven.

This answer admitting a Synecdoche is approved by Piscator, Tremellius, and
Iunius. Yet Pererius thinks to give a better. And therefore his second answer
is: that the Amorites are praecipue and singulariter, chiefly and principally,
named above all the rest, and for them all; because for the largeness of their
Nation, and for their height of stature, and for their strength of body, and
for their excessive cruelty, and impiety, they were above all, famous and
much spoken of.

Mercerus, that great Professor of the Hebrew tongue in the University of
Paris, is of opinion, that the Amorite here, and elsewhere, is above all, and
for all mentioned, because he of all was the most terrible, the most mighty,
and the strongest.

The like is affirmed by Arias Montanus, that learned Spaniard; Amorrhaeum
potissimum appellat, The Amorite he especially names, because that Nation and
multitudine, and copijs, atque potentia, in multitude, in forces, and in power,
excelled all the rest of the Nations, that were cast out before Israel.

Here then, where the Lord has said, Yet destroyed I the Amorite, in the
Amorite we are to understand also, the rest of those seven Nations, which the
Lord drove out from before Israel: the Hittites, and the Girgasites, and the
Canaanites, and the Perezzites, and the Hivites, and the Iebusites. Seven they
were in number, greater and mightier then Israel was. All seven were cast out
by the Lord from before Israel: and so much are we to understand by this, that
the Lord here says, Yet destroyed I the Amorite before them.

Before them] (...), say the Septuagint. They well render the Hebrew, which
word for word is a facie ipsorum, from their face. Mercerus says, a conspectu
eorum, from their sight; that is, says he, little causa, ad eorum adventum, for
their sake, or at their coming. Albertus Magnus renders it, a praesentia
eorum, from their presence. Our English, before them, hits the sense. The sense
is: God stroke such a terror into those seven Nations, the inhabitants of the
land of Canaan; that at the coming of the Israelites, at the hearing of the
name of Israel, they vanished, they fled away, they forsook their ancient
habitations; or else were suddenly slain without much resistance.

Thus have you the exposition of the first branch of this ninth verse, which
contains a general touch of the ruin of the Amorites. Yet destroyed I the
Amorite before them.] The Israelites, their unthankfulness toward me is
very notorious, yet have I destroyed the Amorite before them. Yet I] the Lord
their God, who have freed them from their bondage in Egypt, and have led them
forty years through the wilderness, I have destroyed] have overthrown, have
driven out, have brought to ruin -- The Amorite] not only the Amorites, but
also the rest of the Nations, six other mighty Nations, whose dwelling was in
the land of Canaan: all these have I destroyed before them] for their sake, for
Isreal's sake; that Israel might without resistance take quiet possession of the
land of Canaan, the land that flows with milk and honey. The lesson which we
may take from hence is this: God is all in all, either in the overthrow of his
enemies, or in the upholding of his children.

For further proof hereof we may have recourse to the 15. chapter of the Book
of Exodus. There Moses sings a song unto the Lord, a song of thanksgiving,
wherein he acknowledges the Lord to be all in all, in the overthrow of his
enemies, Pharaoh and his host in the red Sea. His acknowledgment is, verse. 6.
Thy right hand, O Lord, is become glorious in power: thy right hand, O Lord,
has dashed in pieces the enemy: In the greatness of thine excellency, thou
have overthrown them: thou sentest forth thy wrath, which has consumed them
as stubble. With the blast of thy nostrills the waters were gathered together:
the floods stood upright as an heap: the depths were congealed in the heart of
the Sea. The enemy feared not to enter. But thou Lord, did blow with thy
wind: the Sea covered them; they sanke as lead in the mighty waters. Who is
like unto thee, O Lord? Who is like thee? God is all in all in the overthrow of
his enemies.

He is also all in all in the upholding of his children. Moses in the same song
avouches it, verse. 13. Thou, Lord, in thy mercy have led forth the people
which thou have redeemed: Thou have guided them in thy strength unto thine holy
habitation. It was not their Psalm. 44.3.
own sword that delivered them, neither did their own arm save them. But the
Lord, He and his mercy He and his strength delivered them, God is all in all
in upholding of his children.

Is it thus dearly beloved? Is God all in all in the overthrow of his enemies?
Then for the overthrow of that great Navy, called the invincible Navy, the
great Armada of Spain, which This Sermon was preached A gust. 27. 1615.
twenty seven years Au. Chapter 1588.
since threatened desolation to the inhabitants of this I Will, let God have the
glory. It was the right hand of the Lord; not our virtue, not our merits, not
our arms, not our men of might, but the right hand of the Lord it was, that
brought that great work to pass. Their Exodus 15.4.5.
chosen Captains were drowned in the Sea: the depth covered them; they sanke
into the bottom as a stone. Some of them that were taken from the fury of the
waves, and were brought prisoners to the honourablest city in this land, in
their anguish of mind spared not to say, Letter to Mendoza. pa. 17.
that in all those fights, which at Sea they saw, Christ showed himself a
Lutheran. Sure I am, that Christ showed himself to be little Englands Psalm.
18.1.
rock, and fortress, and strength, and deliverer. Quid retribuemus? What
shall we render? nay, what can we render, unto the Lord for so great a
deliverance? Let our song begin as the Psalm does, the 115. Psalm. Non nobis,
Domine, non nobis: Not unto us, Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name give the
glory, for thy mercy and for thy truths sake.

With like affection recount we the deliverance of our King and State, from
that infernal and hellish exployt of the powder treason. The contriuers
thereof I now name not. What could they expect, but upon the least discovery
of so execrable an action, to incur an universal detestation, to have all
the hatred of the earth poured upon them and theirs, to be the outcasts of the
Common wealth, and the Maranathaes of the Church, they and their names for ever
to be an abhorring to all flesh. Yet they so far proceeded in that their
Diabolical machination, that they were at the point to have given the blow;
that blow, that should have been the common ruin of us all. But God, our God,
who is (...), as the Greeks describe him, Psalm. 9.9. A helper at
opportunities, in the needful times of trouble, when we were thus Ioh. 4.35.
albi ad messem, white for their harvest, ready to be cut down by them; then,
even then did our God deliver us. Quid retribuemus? What, what shall we render?
nay, what can we render unto the Lord for so great a deliverance? Let our song
be as before: Non nobis Domine, non nobis: Not unto us, Lord, not unto us, but
unto thy name give the glory, for thy mercy, and for thy truths sake.

God, you see, is all in all in the overthrow of his enemies: So is he, all in
all in the upholding of his children.

Of his children, that is, of such, as live by faith in Christ, and do serve
the Lord their God in spirit and in truth. Such if they be oppressed, if they
be in need, if in trouble, have God for their refuge, Psalm. 9.9. God will be
the same God to them, as he was to David, Psalm. 18.2. He will be their Rock,
their Fortress, their Deliverer, their God, their Strength, their Buckler, the
horn of their salvation, and their high Tower.

Here are they to be admonished, who, neglecting the strong God of their
salvation, put their confidence in the transitory things of this world. They,
who trust in their wealth, and boast themselves in the multitude of their
riches, they are here reprooueable. How can their wealth, how can their riches
profit them in the evil day? Will they serve for a ransom unto God for thee?
Look to the 49th Psalm, and the 8. verse, and you shall find, that the
redemption of a soul is much more precious.

And they who rely upon great men, thinking themselves safe in the shadow of
their wings, are here reprooueable. They have their warning, Psalm. 146.3. Put
not your trust in Princes, nor in any son of man. And why not? There is no
help in them: and why no help? Their breath goes forth, they return to
their earth, and their very thoughts do perish.

They also who make any other creature their confidence, are here reproueable.
They for their instruction may have recourse to the 33. Psalm, at the 16.
verse, thereof they may thus read: There is no King saved by the multitude of
an host: a mighty man is not delivered by much strength. An horse is a vain
thing for saftie, neither shall he deliver any by his great strength.

What? Is a horse a vain thing to save a man? Is much strength vain? Is there
no saftie for a King in the multitude of an h^st? Is there no trust to be put
in Princes? Nor in any man? Nor in wealth? Nor in the multitude of riches? Nor
in any of the transitory things of this world? Quid nos? What shall we then
do, beloved? Let us say with the confidence, that the Church has in Gods
succor, Psalm. 20.7. Some put their trust in Chariots, and some in Horses, some
in Princes, some in other men, some in their strength, some in their riches,
some in something else, that is vain and transitory, but we will remember the
name of the Lord our God. The Lord our God who was all in all in destroying the
Amorites before his people Israel; is now all in all in upholding us, his
Children by adoption and grace, against the fury of all our enemies, that have
had evil will at our prosperity. I conclude with the words of the Psalm.
146.5. Happy is he, that has the God of Jacob for his help; whose hope is in
the Lord his God, which made Heaven and earth, the sea, and all that therein
is. To this Lord our God, Father, Son, and holy Ghost, one true and
everliving God, sing we an Hallelujah. Hallelujah, salvation and glory, and
honor, and power, be unto the Lord our God for evermore.

THE XIIII. LECTVRE.
AMOS 2.9. Yet destroyed I the Amorite before them, whose height was like the
height of the Cedars, and he was strong as the Oaks, yet I destroyed his fruit
from above, and his roots from beneath.


OF the benefits here mentioned to have been bestowed by God upon his people,
the people of Israel, in the first place we have the overthrow of the Amorites.
It is delivered, verse. 9. Therein I propounded to your religious attentions
three principal parts.

In the first, we have the overthrow of the Amorites; Yet destroyed I the
Amorite before them.

In the second, the Amorites are described. Their description is taken from
their stature, and from their valor, each is set forth unto us by way of
Comparison: their stature or height by the Cedars; their valor or strength by
the Oak. Their height was like the height of the Cedars, and he was strong as
the Oaks.

The third has an explication, or an amplification of the overthrow of the
Amorites. It was not any gentle stripe that they received, not any light
incision, not any small wound; but it was their extermination, their
contrition, their universal overthrow, their utter ruin. Fruit and root,
Prince and people, Parents and children, old and young, were all brought to
naught: Yet destroyed I their fruit from above, and their root from beneath.

The first of these three principal parts, delivering in a generality the
overthrow of the Amorites, was the subject of my last discourse out of this
place. Now follows the second: the description of that people, the people of
the Amorites. They are for their height or stature compared to the Cedars, and
for their strength and valor to the Oaks. Their height was like the height of
the Cedars, and he was strong as the Oaks.

Their height was like the height of the Cedars. IN Syria, and especially in
mount Lebanon, the Cedar trees grew very high. Sennacherib King of Assyria by
his message to Hezekiah King of Judah, gives testimony hereunto. His message
is, 2. King. 19.23. With the multitude of my chariots, I am come up to the
height of the mountains, to the sides of Lebanon, and will cut down the tall
Cedars thereof. Succidam altitudinem Cedrorum eius, so he speaks in the
Hebrew, I will cut down the tallnesse of the Cedars of Lebanon. The words are
repeated, Esa. 37.24. I will cut down the tallnesse of the Cedars of Lebanon.
The tallnesse of the Cedars] out of doubt they are very high.

The Cedars of Lebanon, Esa. 2.13. are said to be sublimes and elevatae, high
and lifted up. In Tremellius his translation, they are celsissimae and
elatissimae, most tall and towering. Out of doubt they are very high.

If humane authority may be added to divine, Theophrastus in his fifth Book of
his history of Plants, chap. 9. says, that the Cedar for its length or height
is (...), its worthy admiration. Rovillius in his History of Plants, lib. 1.
cap. 11. affirms, that the Cedar of Phoenicia or Syria bears a body
straight and very tall, mounting above all other trees. Arias Montanus says as
much: Cedrus vbicumque fuerit, the Cedar wheresoever it grows, it ouertoppeth
all other trees, and is above all pre-eminent and conspicuous. To prove it, he
brings those words of the spouse concerning her Beloved, Cant. 5.15. His
countenance is as Lebanon, excellent as the Cedars: that is, his Heroical
proceritie and the majesty of his countenance is like unto the Cedars of
Lebanon.

The Spouse thus comparing the countenance of her beloved, to mount Lebanon and
the Cedars there, intimates, that the increase of the knowledge of God and his
worship shall be so great, as that the open profession of Christ, for its
durablenesse and stabilitie, may well be likened to mountains: and that the
Cedars of Lebanon do not so much ouergrow other trees in tallnesse; as true
Christian religion for its reverend majesty shall ouergoe whatsoever blind,
bushie, and thornie superstitions.

It is out of doubt. Cedar trees are very high. So high, that never man, never
Giant was so high. How then is it, that my text thus speaks of the Amorites,
Their height was like the height of the Cedars?

It is by a figure, which the Greeks call Hyperbole. Whereof many instances
may be alleged out of holy Scripture. In the 2. of Sam. 1.23. it is said of
Saul and Jonathan, They were swifter then Eagles, they were stronger then
Lions. Swifter then Eagles, and yet the Eagle of birds is the swiftest;
stronger then Lions, and yet the Lion of Beasts is the strongest. They were
swifter then Eagles, they were stronger then Lions: they are two Hyperboles, or
prouerbiall speeches. By them the holy Ghost lets us understand, that Saul and
Jonathan, were exceeding swift of foot, and strong of body.

In Psalm 107.26. it is said of the waves of the Sea in a great tempest; They
mount up to Heaven, they go down again to the depths. They are two
Hyperboles. By them the Psalmist sets as it were before our eyes, the
greatness of the danger, wherein they often times are, that trade by Sea.

In Genes. 13.16. The Lord said to Abram, I will make thy seed as the dust of
the earth: so that if a man can number the dust of the earth, then shall thy
seed also be numbered. I will make (...) seed as the dust of the earth, says
the Lord. It is an Hyperbole. S. Austine so takes it, de Civ. Dei lib. 16. c.
21. And well. For who sees not, how incomparably greater the number of the
dust is, then the number of all the men, that ever have bin, are, or shall be,
from the first man, Adam, to the end of the world, can be? And therefore where
the Lord says, I will make thy seed as the dust of the earth; we are not to
imagine that the posterity of Abram, was to be in number as the dust (all the
people of the earth put together cannot stand in this comparison) but we are
given to understand, that they were to be a very great people.

I pass over with silence, many instances of like nature, and return to my
text, where it is said of the Amorites, Their height was like the height of the
Cedars. The speech is prouerbiall, its hyperbolicall. We may not from it
collect, that the Amorites were as high as the Cedars, but this only that the
Amorites were a people very tall and high of stature. Never did any man equal
the Cedars in height: yet show me a man, that is of a vaste body, and of an
unusual proceritie, I may take up this Scripture phrase, and say of him; His
height is like the height of Cedars.

Thus you see the Amorites for their height or talnes are likened to the Cedar.
For their strength or valor they are resembled to the Oak, in the next words:
He was strong as the Oaks.

The figure of speech is, as before. Its prouerbiall. The Oak you know, is a
hard kind of wood, strong, firm, and durable. Hence is the proverb, Quercu
robustior, or robore validior, stronger then the Oak. Never was there man of so
firm a constitution, that he can properly be said to be stronger then the Oak:
Yet show me a man of extraordinary strength, I may take up this
Scripture Phrase, and say of him, Fortis ipse quasi quercus, he is strong as
the Oaks. And in this sense it is here said of the Amorite, He was strong as
the Oaks.

That the Amorites were of an unusual and extraordinary height and strength,
as they are here described by our Prophet Amos, you may further know by the
relation which the Spies made unto Moses after their return from the search of
the Holy land. Their relation is, Number. 13.28. The people be strong that dwell
in the land; we saw the children of Anak there. At the 32. verse they speak
more fully: All the people, that we saw in it, are men of great stature. And
there we saw the Giants, the sons of Anak, which come of the Giants, and we
were in our own sight, as grasshoppers, and so were we in their sight. By this
relation of the Spies you see, that the Amorites, the inhabitants of the land
of Canaan, were more, then ordinary tall and strong.

The tallest and strongest of the Amorites (of these Amorites, which the Lord
destroyed before Israel) was Og the King of Basan. Of his height and strength,
the Jews make strange reports. For his height they say* he was in his cradle
and swaddling cloutes thirty cubits high, and as he grew in years, so grew he
in tallnesse. For his strength they say, when he had heard that the tents of
the children of Israel, took up the space of three miles, he rooted up a
mountain of like space, and set it on his head, with purpose to cast it upon
the tents of Israel: but as he carried it, Ants made a hole through the midst of
it, and so it descended and rested upon his neck: whence by reason of his
teeth excessiuely increasing and running into the holes of the mountain, the
mountain stuck so fast, that he could not remove it, to cast it, as he had
purposed, upon the camp of the Israelites. This the Jews do write in their
book of Benedictions; and Lyra in his Postill upon Number. 21. makes mention of
it: but withal censures it to be so absurd, that it needs no other refutation:
yet he makes mention of it, that we may see quanta coecitas est in Iudaeis, how
blind the Jews are, to believe such fables.

It is, I grant, one of those Jewish fables, whereto S. Paul wished Titus,
chap. 1.14. not to give any heed: and I believe it no more, then I do, that
the Giant Antaeus was threescore cubits high, because Gabinius in the 17. book
of Strabo his page 960.
Geographie affirms it: or that in Scythia in a rock by the river Tyres,
there was to be seen the print of Hercules his foot of two cubits length,
because Herodotus in his page 110.
Melpomene is the relator of it.

Yet believe I, that Og the King of Basan was of more then ordinary tallnes
and strength. And you will believe it too, if you will estimate a monument of
his, which was to be seen in Rabbath, the Metropoliticall City of the
children of Ammon, now called Philadelphia. The monument was a bedsted of his.
It is described, Deuteronomy. 3.11. His bedsted was a bedsted of iron: nine cubits was
the length thereof, and four cubits the breadth of it, after the cubit of a
man. Of a man of reasonable stature; not of a Giant, nor of a dwarf. Nine
cubits long was his bedsted, and bedsteds usually exceed the common stature of
men by two feet: therefore the stature of Og was about seven cubits and a
foot. So he was about three yards, two foot, and six inches high. Such an
unusual tallnes could not but be accompanied with strength answerable to it:
and therefore Og the King of Basan was of extraordinary tallnes and strength
If the rest of the Amorites were any thing like unto Og, then might the
relation of the Spies be just: Number. 13.28,
The people of the land are strong; verse. 32.
they are men of a great stature: and my text says well, Their height was like
the height of the Cedars, and he was strong as the Oaks.

Thus have you the description of the Amorites, They were tall of stature, and
strong of body. Tall and strong. Yet, were they not thereby the more
acceptable to the Lord. The Lord, notwithstanding their talnes, and their
strength brought them to ruin. For so it follows: Yet destroyed I their
fruit from above, and their root from beneath. The lesson which we are to take
from hence is: God respects not, the tall man for his talnes, nor the strong
man for his strength.

Its true. 1 Samuel 16.7.
God sees not as man sees. Man indeed looks on the outward appearance; but
God looks on the heart. Man usually esteems of a man, by the beauty of his
face, by the fairness of his countenance, by the comely feature of his body.
God does not so.

Saul, the first of the Kings of Israel, was a choice young man, and a goodly:
there was not among the children of Israel a goodlier person then he: from his
shoulders and upward he was higher, then any of the people. He is so described,
1. Sam. 9.2. So is he, chap. 10.23. Saul, when he stood among the people, was
higher, then any of the people, from the shoulders and upward. In the next
verse Samuel asks the people: Do you see him whom the Lord has chosen, that
there is none like him among all the people? What is the peoples answer? They
shout, and say; God save the King. They saw him a goodly man of person; and
therefore judged him fit to be a King. But the Lord, who sees not as man
sees, and respects not man's outward appearance, rejected him from being
King. His talnes, and the goodly proportion of his body were no privilege
unto him. You are to believe it upon the Lords own words, 1. Sam. 16.1. There
the Lord tells Samuel, that he has rejected Saul from reigning over Israel.

Upon the reiection of Saul, the Lord 1. Sam. 16.1.
provided him a King among the sons of Iesse the Bethlehemite, and Samuel was
to anoint him. Samuel for that purpose went unto verse. 4.
Bethlehem, and called for Iesse his verse. 5.
sons. verse. 6.
Eliab the eldest, came first in place. Him would Samuel have anointed. His
motives were two. Abulensis quaest. 22. in 1 Samuel 16. sets them down. One was,
the prerogative of birth in Eliab; the other was, his fair countenance and
goodly stature.

Eliab had the prerogative of birth: he was the firstborn son. Some of the
prerogatives of the firstborn son are couched by old Jacob in his prophecy
concerning his eldest son, Reuben, Genesis 49.3. Reuben, thou art my
firstborn, my might, and the beginning of my strength, the excellency of
dignity, and the excellency of power. Prior in donis, mayor in imperio; so
the vulgar Latin concludes that verse.

Prior in donis] There is the first prerogative belonging to the eldest son;
it concerns his profit. Prior in donis; he was first to be respected in the
division of his Fathers inheritance; he was to have a double portion of all his
substance, according to the Commandment, Deuteronomy, 21.17. The Father shall give
to his eldest son a double portion of all that he has. The reason is
annexed: For he is the beginning of his strength: the right of the first borne
is his.

Mayor in imperio] It is the second prerogative of the eldest son. It
concerns his honor and state of authority. He had a certain regal
principality and rule over his brethren. It appears by the blessing which
Isaac bestowed upon Jacob, who had gotten the birthright from his brother
Esau, Genesis 27.29. Be Lord over thy brethren, and let thy mothers sons bow
down to thee.

Onkelos paraphrasing the prophecy of Jacob concerning Reuben, mentions a
threefold prerogative of the eldest son. Reuben, it was thy right to have
received three better portions, then thy brethren; the priesthood, the birth
right, and the kingdom.

Now, if the eldest son had such prerogatives; if he were prior in donis, and
was to have the best respect in the division of his Fathers inheritance: if he
were mayor in imperio, and had regal principality and rule over his brethren,
if the excellency of dignity, and the excellency of power were his; if his
were the priesthood, the birthright, and the kingdom; why might not Samuel,
think Eliab, Iesses eldest son, to be the man, whom the Lord had chosen to
be King over Israel, rather then a younger brother?

A second motive, why Samuel might think Eliab fit to be the anointed king of
Israel, was Eliabs fair countenance, and his goodly stature. Euripides could
say, (...), beauty, its worthy an Empire. Atheneus the Dipnosophist, Cap. 7.
page 366. 18.
lib. 13. affirms it, and Porphyrie in the second Chapterl of his Introduction
cites it. Beauty, its worthy an Empire. Priamus in Homer, admiring the
beauty of Agamemnon, says unto Helena, Iliad. ^ 16^
with these mine eyes I never yet beheld man so fair; and adddeth Verse. 170.
(...), In his countenance he is like a King. Many Nations (says Athenaeus in
the same place) have chosen for their Kings the fairest among them. And well.
For (...), Beauty, it best of all beseems Kings.

Now if Eliab were of a fair countenance, and of a goodly stature, why might
not Samuel think Eliab to be the man, whom the Lord had chosen to be King over
Israel, rather then any other of his brethren, who could not be compared unto
him, either for fairness of face, or for goodlinesse of stature?

Thus, what for prioritie of birth, and what for comelines of person, Eliab was
by Samuel thought to be the man, whom the Lord had chosen for his King among
all the sons of Iesse. It seems, Samuel thought so. For when Eliab was brought
before him, he looked on him, and said of him: Surely the Lords anointed is
before him, 1. Sam. 16.6. Surely, Eliab is the man, whom the Lord has designed
to be his anointed.

But the Lord, the Lord who sees not as man sees, who respects not man's
outward appearance, he refused Eliab. Eliab was no King for him. For thus says
the Lord to Samuel concerning Eliab. 1. Sam. 16.7. Looks not on his
countenance, or on the height of his stature, because I have refused him.
Eliab, notwithstanding the prioritie of his birth, and notwithstanding the
comeliness of his person, he is refused: and David, little David, little in
his fathers eyes, and little in the eyes of his brethren, neglected and
despised of all (for he was the youngest of all) he is chosen to be the Lords
anointed. He is taken Psalm 78 70.71.72. 1. Sam. 16.11. 2. Sam 7.8.
from the sheepe-folds, from following the Ewes great with young, and is placed
in rule and government, to feed Jacob the people of the Lord, and Israel the
Lords inheritance.

Thus much may serve for the confirmation of my propounded doctrine: God
respects not the tall man for his tallnesse, nor the strong man, for his
strength: You may add, nor the great man, for his greatness, nor the rich man
for his wealth, nor the wise man, for his wisdom. The reason I have already
touched. It is expressed, 1. Sam. 16.7. The Lord sees not as man sees. For
man looks on the outward appearance, but the Lord looks on the heart. He
looks on the heart: and therefore he chooses not as man chooses, the tall,
the great, the strong, the rich, the wise; but the low man, the little man, the
weak man, the poor man, the foolish man. Whereto else tends the Apostles
speech to the faithful among the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 1.26. You see your
calling brethren, how that not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty,
not many noble are called. But God has chosen the foolish things of the world
to confound the wise: and God has chosen the weak things of the world, to
confound the things that are mighty: and base things of the world, and things
which are despised has God chosen, yea, and things which are not, to bring to
naught things that are. And what is the end of all? Its this: that no flesh
should glory in the presence of God. It is the use we are to make of the
doctrine now delivered.

We are urged unto it, Ierem. 9.23. There thus says the Lord, Let not the wise
man glory in his wisdom, neither let the mighty man glory in his might, let
not the rich man glory in his riches. But let him that glories, glory in this,
that he understands and knows me, that I am the Lord, which exercise loving
kindness, judgment, and righteousness in the earth. In like sort say we: Let
not the tall man glory in his tallnesse, neither let the strong man glory in
his strength, though the height of the one be like the height of the Cedars,
and the other be strong like the Oaks, yet let them not glory therein: but let
them glory in this, that they understand and know God to be the Lord, which
exercises loving kindness, judgment, and righteousness in the earth: that is,
in the Apostles phrase, 1. Cor. 1.31. He that glories, let him glory in the
Lord. And again, 2. Cor. 10.17. He that glories, let him glory in the Lord.
All other glorying is vain. Glory not in thy tallnesse; what can it avail
thee? Glory not in thy strength; it cannot help thee. Say thou were as tall as
the Amorites in my text, and thy height were like the height of the Cedars; say
thou were as strong as they, strong as the Oaks: yet notwithstanding the one,
or the other, height or strength, thou may perish and come to naught, as they
did. Glory thou therefore in the Lord.

Here may the man that is low of stature, or weak of body, be comforted; for
as much as God sees not as man sees, nor chooses as man chooses. Be thou
little, or be thou weak, thou art never a whit the further from the grace and
favor of God. No further then Zacheus was. Zacheus was a very little man. In
the 19. of Luke, ver. 3. it is said of him (...), that he was little of
stature. Jesus passed through Jericho. Zacheus was very desirous to see him,
but could not, for the press of the people; because he was little of stature.
To supply this defect of his, he gets him up into a tree, and sees Jesus.
Jesus for it spoke graciously unto him: Zacheus, make have, and come down, for
to day I must abide at thy house. You see, Jesus respected Zacheus for all his
little stature.

He was of little stature] Statura brevis, and magnus in opere; S. T^m. 8. fol.
310. H.
Austin says it, Enarr: in Psalm. 129. Zacheus was in deed little of stature,
but was great in good works. Great in his love toward Jesus, whom he was so
desirous to see; and great in charity toward men, to whom he was ready to
make a fourefold restitution, if he had done wrong to any.

Zacheus, little of stature! Chrysologus Sermon. 54. thus meditates upon it: Page
225.
Satis hic animo magnus erat, qui pusillus videbatur in corpore. Nam mente
tangebat coelos, qui corpore homines non aequabat. Zacheus was great enough in
mind, albeit he was but little in body: in body he was no match for men, and
yet his mind reached up to Heaven. Whereupon he frames this exhortation: Nemo
de brevitate corporis, cui addere nil potest, curet; sed vt fide emineat, hoc
procuret: Let not any man be grieved, because he is little of stature, whereto
he cannot add one cubite, but let every man's care be, to be eminent above
others in faith.

You have hitherto heard of the variety of men's statures: you have heard of
the Amorites, that their height was like the height of the Cedars: Of King
Saul, that he was higher then any of his people, from the shoulders and upward;
of Eliab, that he was high of stature; of Zacheus, that he was low of stature:
This variety of men's statures is by every days experience confirmed unto you.
And why is there such variety of men's statures?

One reason may be to stir us up to this consideration; that God is the most
provident author of every man's stature. It is not in man, to add any thing to
his stature: not one cubite, says our Savior, Mat. 6 27. He says it again,
Luke, 12.25. Which of you with taking thought, can add one cubite to his
stature? No man. No man can do it. Nay, it is not in man, to amend the
imperfections, wherewith he is borne into the world. The man that was borne
blind confesses it, Ioh. 9.32. Since the world began was it not heard, that
any man opened the eyes of one that was borne blind. We cannot supply any
defect wherewith we are borne into this world; much less can we add any thing
unto our stature? It may thus far serve for our instruction, Vt ex illo
capite neminem contemnamus, vel exagitemus, says Franzius Disp. 2. in Deuter.
These. 92. that we despise not any man, nor speak ill of him for his stature,
be it great or little, or for any defect he has in nature from his nativity.

A second reason, why there is such variety of statures in the world, may be
to let us understand, that a man's stature of it self is not to be reckoned as
a part of his felicity or glory. For if a great and a goodly stature be as
common, nay, more common to the wicked, then to the godly, as S. Austin seems
to prove, De Civit. Dei. lib. 15. cap. 9. why should a godly man boast himself
of his great and goodly stature? Especially, since for the most part, men that
are conspicuous for their elegant and well featured bodies, are defective for
understanding, wisdom, and piety.

Baruch observes it, Chap. 3. ver. 26.27.28 There were (says he) Giants,
famous from the beginning, that were of so great stature, and so expert in
war. Those did not the Lord choose, neither gave he the way of knowledge unto
them. But they were destroyed, because they had no wisdom, and perished
through their own foolishness. His observation is: there were giants, men of
great stature, yet were they without knowledge, without wisdom. Great men,
and yet fools. Whereas pumiliones, dwarfs, little men, men of very little
stature, sometime scarce a cubite high, do excel in fortitude, understanding,
and wisdom, as the but now cited Franzius has noted.

Tydeus corpore, animo Hercules. Its an old proverb. Tydeus was a man of very
little stature, but (as Menander the Historian says) (...), he was Hercules
for his mind. The proverb, appliable to such as being of little stature are
of an undaunted courage, shows, that many a little man is such.

Many a man of little stature is of the liuelier wit. So it pleases God, our
most wise, and provident God, to temper the gifts of the body and mind in men
of diverse statures. He does not always give all to one; but for the most part
he recompenseth the defects of the body with the endowments of the mind. Give
me the endowments of the mind; what care I for the stature of my body. Aeque
enim brevis, and longus viuit, says Musculus Comment. in Matthew. 6. As long
lives the short man as the tall man. Nihil detrimenti habet brevis statura, nec
plus aliquid habet longa: The short stature has no loss, neither has the
long stature any advantage for Heavenly affairs. Be my stature what it will;
let me be transformed by the Romans 12.2.
renewing of my mind I am well; For so shall I prove what is that good, that
acceptable and perfect will of God, which is our 1. These. 4.3.
sanctification. Blessed is that man, whatsoever his stature be, that shall be
so transformed by the renewing of his mind, that he may prove what is that good,
that acceptable and perfect will of God: which is his sanctification.

I have stood long upon the second part of this verse, the description of the
Amorites: the time requires, that I go on with the third part. It is the
explication, or the amplification, of the ruin of the Amorites. The words are,
Yet I destroyed his fruit from above, and his roots from beneath.

The words are prouerbiall, they are figurative, they are metaphorical. I
destroyed his fruit from above, and his roots from beneath. The meaning is,
exterminavi eum totum, Drusius.
quantus, quantus erat: I have wholly cast him out, I have utterly destroyed him.

The like phrase we meet with, Job 18.16. Its there said of the wicked man: His
roots shall be dried up beneath, and above shall his branch be cut off. The
comparison stands between a wicked man, and a dry tree. A dry tree may seem
to be firmly rooted, and may have fair and wide spreading bows, when its
good for nothing, but to be cut down and cast into the fire. So it is with the
wicked man. All his pomp, all his power, all his excellency, all his honor,
all his glory (which are to him as the fruit and the roots are unto a tree)
shall more then suffer an Eclipse, they shall utterly vanish. His roots shall
be dried up beneath, and above shall his branches be cut off.

I cannot give you an easier or plainer exposition of the Allegory, then
Bildad the Shuhite does in the same chapter of the book of Job, and the verse
following: His remembrance shall perish from the earth, and he shall have no
name in the street. He shall have no name in the street! What Is that? Its this:
His old friends and acquaintance shall not so much as speak of him but to
vilify him; as to say, He was a wicked wretch, an adulterer, an usurer, a
thief, a drunkard, a slanderer, a swearer, a blasphemer, a man, that neither
feared God, nor loved his neighbor. Upon such a man, the wicked man, Solomon
has passed his censure, Prove. 2.22. He shall be cut off from the earth, he
shall be rooted out of it. This also may serve for an exposition of the
Allegory: His roots shall be dried up beneath, and above shall his branch be
cut off.

The like Allegory you see is in my text: I destroyed his fruit from above,
and his roots from beneath.

Fruit and rootes] That is, says Lyranus, patres and filios, fathers and their
sons. Paulus de palatio by the fruit and the roots understands viros,
mulieres, parvulos; men, women, and the little ones. The little ones are the
fruit, men and women are the root. Albertus Magnus will have the fruit to be
divitias, aedificia, culturam; their riches, their buildings, their husbandry;
and the roots to be, tribus, familias, and successionem filiorum and nepotum;
their tribes, families, kinreds, and the succession of their sons and
nephews. Arias Montanus takes the fruit and the roots to signify omnem
illius gentis familiam, posteritatemque, all the lineage of that nation and
their posterity.

I pass by other like interpretations: these few may give us the true meaning
of the words we have in hand. The words are an explication or rather an
amplification of the first part of this verse, concerning the destruction of
the Amorites. There the Lord says, I destroyed the Amorite before them: here
he says, I destroyed his fruit from above, and his roots from beneath. From
hence we know, that it was not any gentle stripe which the Amorites received,
not any light incisio^, not any small wound, but that it was their
extermination, their contrition, their universal overthrow, their utter ruin.
Fruit and root, Prince and subject, Parents and children, old and young, they
were all destroyed. For thus says the Lord, I destroyed their fruit from
above, and their root from beneath.

But when did this great destruction befall the Amorites? It befell them in the
days of Moses, when the Lord delivered over into the hands of Israel, Deuteronomy.
2.33.
Sihon King of the Amorites, and Og the King of Bashan. Then did Israel smite
both those Kings, Number. 21.34. Deuteronomy. 3.3.
Sihon King of the Amorites, and Og the King of Bashan. Them they smote with
the edge of the sword, them and all their people; and took their Cities, all
their Cities, and utterly destroyed the men, the women, and the little ones of
every City: they left none alive, They destroyed their fruit from above, and
their roots from beneath. These famous victories, gotten by Israel over those
two mighty Kings, are described Number. 21. and Deuteronomy. 2. and 3.

Is Israel now the conqueror? Is it the sword of Israel that smites Sihon King
of the Amorites, and Og the King of Bashan, them, and their people, their men,
women, and little ones? How then is it, that the Lord in my text takes it to
himself, and says, I destroyed the Amorite, I destroyed his fruit from above,
and his roots from beneath?

The answer is easy. Israel indeed smote the Amorites; but it was by the power
of the Lord, not by any power of their own. Moses confesses it of Sihon, King
of the Amorites, Deuteronomy. 2.33. The Lord our God delivered him unto us, and we
smote him, and his sons, and all his people. He confesses it likewise of Og
King of Bashan, Deuteronomy. 3.3. The Lord our God delivered into our hands Og the
King of Bashan, and all his people: and we smote him until none was left to
him remaining. Israel could not smite till God had delivered. God first
delivered, then Israel smote. Israel smote the Amorites, not by any power of
their own: they did it by the power of the Lord. And what is done by the power
of the Lord, may well be said to be done by the Lord.

In regard hereof it is, that the Psalmist, Psalm. 135.10. ascribes the
victory, whereof we now speak, immediately unto God: Whatsoever the Lord
pleased, that did he in Heaven and in Earth, in the Seas, and in all deep
places. He smote great Nations, and slew mighty Kings; Sihon King of the
Amorites, and Og King of Bashan: and all the kingdoms of Canaan. And gave
their land for an heritage, even an heritage unto Israel his people.

The like he does in the next Psalm: and in the like words, Psalm. 136.17. O
give thanks unto the Lord, To him, which smote great Kings, and slew famous
Kings: Sihon King of the Amorites, and Og the King of Bashan, and gave their
land for an heritage, even for an heritage unto Israel his servant. In both
Psalms you see the destruction of the Amorite ascribed to God himself, and
his sole power.

So is it, Psalm. 78.55. but more generally: The Lord! He cast out the heathen
before Israel, he cast out the Amorites, and made the Tribes of Israel to dwell
in their Tabernacles.

But no where so plainly is this great work of casting out the Amorites and
other the heathen before Israel, attributed unto God, as Psalm. 44. There the
people of God groaning under their affliction in the midst of their enemies,
do thus begin their confession, verse. 1. We have heard with our ears, O God,
our fathers have told us, what work thou did in their days, in the times
of old. What this work was they express verse. 2. Thou did drive out the
Heathen with thine hand] Thou with thy hand did drive out the Amorites, and
other the Heathen, and in their rooms did plant our forefathers. This was a
great work, and it was Gods work. That it was Gods work and his alone, they
yet further acknowledge, verse. 3. Our forefathers, they got not the land in
possession by their own sword, neither did their own arm save them: but thy
right hand, and thine arm, and the light of thy countenance, O God, did
stablish them.

God was all in all in the overthrow of the Amorites, and the rest of the
Heathen. By his strength, by his might, by his power only were they
overthrown. And therefore albeit Israel smote with the sword Sihon King of the
Amorites, and Og the King of Bashan, them and their people, their men, their
women, and their little ones, since they did it only by the strength, might, and
power of the Lord, the Lord in my text does rightly challenge the whole glory
of this overthrow unto himself; saying first, I destroyed the Amorite before
them: and again, I destroyed his fruit from above, and his roots from beneath.

From hence we may take a profitable lesson. Its this, Though God use means
for the performance of his counsels, yet the accomplishment and glory of them,
belongs to him alone.

This truth is so evident, that it needs no further proof. Israel, the people
of Israel, they were the means which God used for the performance of his
counsels upon the Amorites, even to destroy them, and to root them out from
being a people, but the accomplishment and the glory of that great work was
the Lords alone. The people of Israel, had they had much ado to overcome their
enemies, the Amorites, they might happily have imputed somewhat to their own
force. They might have said; Showed we not great power in the battle? Behaved
we not our selves like men? Did not we fight valiantly?

But when their enemies were driven like chafe with the wind; when they, who
erst were stour, and strong; were tall as the Cedars, and strong as the Oaks;
when they should extraordinarily be dismaide; should have no more heart then a
silly sheep has; but should be scattered at the first onset; should be so
cowardly, as that their enemies might at their pleasure slay them, till they
were weary of slaying them; what can be said of it? what can be thought of it?
This is all. The Lord, who is Lord of battles, though he use means for the
performance of his counsels, and for the atchieving of his victories, yet will
he have the accomplishment and the glory of all to be peculiar unto himself.
Thus is my doctrine illustrated.

Though God use means for the performance of his counsels, yet the
accomplishment and glory of them belongs to him alone. The reason hereof is,
because all power is Gods: and whatsoever power man has to execute or perform
what the counsel of the Lord has appointed, its all derived from God.

The use is, to teach us, to yield God the honor of all the victories, that he
gives us against our enemies. The honor of all victories must be his. When I
say, all victories, I meone not only the victories of Princes, when they make
war, or win a battle in the field, but even our private victories too: as,
when we have bin assailed by some particular man, and are escaped from his
hands; this is a victory, and the honor of it must be the Lords.

If a neighbor, an unkind neighbor, has done us any wrong, or has put us
to some trouble, and we are delivered from it, we must assure our selves, it is
God that has given us the upper hand, to the end, that we should always have
our mouths open to give him thanks for it. This must we do; but this is not
all. We must with the mouth give thanks to God for giving us the upper hand
against those that have wrongfully molested and vexed us; and besides, we must
endeavor by our whole life to show forth, how much we are bound to God for our
deliverance. This is the scope, this is the end of our redemption and
salvation, (according to old Zacharies prophecy, Luke 1.74.) that being
delivered out of the hands of our enemies, we might serve God without fear, in
holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our life.

Thus far of the 9. verse.

THE XV. LECTVRE.
AMOS 2.10. Also I brought you up from the land of Egypt, and led you forty
years through the wilderness, to possess the land of the Amorite.


IN this tenth verse are recounted two other benefits, which Almighty God was
pleased to bestow upon his people, the people of Israel. One was, Their
deliverance from Egypt. The other, Their protection and preservation in the
wilderness.

Their deliverance from Egypt is set down, in the first clause; Also I brought
you up from the land of Egypt.

Their protection and preservation in the wilderness, in the next: And led you
forty years through the wilderness.

The end of both follows in the end of the verse: To possess the land of the
Amorite.

They were delivered from Egypt, and were for forty years protected in the
wilderness, that at length, and in their appointed time, they might possess
the land of the Amorites.

We are to begin with their deliverance from Egypt. Its in the first clause of
the verse: Also I brought you up from the land of Egypt.

This deliverance of theirs out of Egypt was before the Amorites were
destroyed, and yet the destruction of the Amorites is specified in the former
verse. Why is the order of Gods benefits so inverted? Why is the benefit, that
was first collated upon Israel, spoken of in the second place?

Some think it was advisedly and of purpose done, to preoccupate and prevent
an objection, which otherwise Israel might have made. In the former verse, ver.
9. it is said, that the Amorites were destroyed, root and fruit, utterly
destroyed before Israel. Now that Israel should not boast of that overthrow, or
ascribe it to the prowess and valor of their ancestors, their deliverance out
of Egypt is nex set down, in this 10. verse, to put them in mind of the
miserable estate and condition, wherein their forefathers lived in Egypt: to
this sense: Think ye, O ye children of Israel, that the Amorites were
destroyed by the prowess and valor of your forefathers? Think it not.
Remember Egypt. Remember how there they groaned under the heavy yoke of
oppression, and were not able to help themselves, and must of necessity have
perished, had not the Lord with his stretched-forth arm delivered them.

Others are of opinion, that this deliverance of Israel out of Egypt, is in the
second place, and after the destruction of the Amorites, set down, only by a
custom of the Scripture.

Of this opinion I find S. Hierome to be. His rule is: The Scripture in
setting forth the praises of God, does not always observe the order of the
History: but it often comes to pass, Vt quae prima facta sunt, extrema
dicantur, and quae novissima, referantur ad prima: Things first done are last
spoken of, and things last done are first recited. This he will have us to
learn out of two Psalms, the 78. and 105. in which signorum potentia, non
ordo describitur, the power of Gods wonderful works, and not their order is
described: and out of two other Psalms, the 3. and 52. Vbi, quae prius facta
sunt, narrantur extrema, and quae extrema, referuntur in principio: What is
first done is last spoken of, and what is last done is first mentioned. The
third Psalm was composed by David, when he fled from Absalom, his son: the
52. when Doeg the Edomite came unto Saul, and told him, that David was come to
the house of Abimelech. That of Absalom is registered, 2. Sam. 15.14. This of
Doeg, 1. Sam. 22.9. The relation of Doeg is first chronicled, and long after
that, David's flight from Absalom: and yet David's flight from Absalom is first
mentioned in the Book of the Psalms, and long after that, the relation of Doeg
unto Saul. The order of the History is not observed.

Nor is it observed in this our text. The order of the History is: first God
brought the children of Israel out of Egypt, Exodus 12.51. He made them to pass
through the midst of the red Sea, as upon dry land, Exodus 14.22. And when
they had finished their two and forty iourneyes, through diverse wildernesses,
then gave he them victory over Sihon King of the Amorites, Number. 21.24. The
Amorites were last of all destroyed, and yet are they here first mentioned. Non
est obseruatus ordo, says Mercer; the order of the History is not observed.
Ribera also notes it. Mathurinus Quadratus here frames a rule, like to that of
St. Hierome, Scriptura in recensendis Dei beneficijs curiose non seruat
ordinem. The Scripture in rehearsing Gods benefits does not curiously keep the
order, but oftentimes it falls out by a figure, which the Greeks do call
(...), that what was first done, is last of all rehearsed; and what was last
done is first of all recited. From hence we may deduce this conclusion: Though
it be our duty carefully to remember the manifold blessings and benefits,
which God in mercy from time to time has bestowed upon us; yet is it not
necessary, that we ever curiously observe their order, and the time when they
were bestowed.

You see the custom of Scripture is our warrant, to speak of that first,
which was last done for us; and of that last, which we first received. But,
first or last, we must remember all.

Hereto belongs holy David's admonition, Psalm. 103.2. which he there proposes
under the form of an exhortation. He exhorts himself to bless the Lord:
Bless the Lord, o my soul, and forget not all his benefits. Forget not all
his benefits! Nay: Forget not any of his benefits. So much the Hebrew phrase
intends. Bless the Lord, o my soul, and forget not any of his benefits. A
necessary admonition. We forget nothing sooner then a benefit, whether we
receive it from God or man. But iniuriarum tenacissima est memoria; our memory
for injuries, is very tenacious; its a hold-fast. Let an injury be done us, we
will not forget it. Yea let one of us bestow upon another any benefit, be it
never so little, the knowledge whereof should not be imparted from the right hand
to the left, as our Savior Christ speaks in his Sermon upon the Mount,
Matthew. 6.3. how long, how long will we retain the memory of it? Our nature!
its corrupt. Our disposition! its perverse. Who sees not, what need there is,
that we exercise our selves in reteyning the memory of Gods benefits?
Wherefore let every one of us stir up himself to so holy an exercise, as
David did himself: Let us daily sing unto our souls: Bless the Lord, o my
soul, and forget not all his benefits. Forget not All! Nay; Forget not any of
his benefits. Remember them all, either first, or last.

Now from the non-obseruance of the order of the History in this enumeration
of Gods benefits upon Israel, we are particularly to speak of the benefit
mentioned in the second place. It is their deliverance out of Egypt. The words
are, Also I brought you up from the land of Egypt.

I] Jehovah. It is his name, ver. 6. and 11. I] Jehovah, the only true,
everlasting and Almighty God; I, a Trinity in Unity, and the Unity in
Trinity; Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; I, who destroyed the Amorites before
you and for your sakes; I also brought you up from the land of Egypt.

I brought you up. It well expresses the original, which word for word is,
ascendere vos feci, I made you to ascend. Nam ex Aegypto ascenditur Iudaeam
versus, says Drusius: from Egypt to Iudaea you must ascend: and it is a
tradition of the Hebrews, Iudaea est altior Egypto: Iudaea stands higher then
Egypt. Its affirmed, Deuteronomy. 10.22. Its there said, that Jacob with threescore
and ten persons went down into Egypt. Jacob with his family went from Canaan,
from Iudaea; and went d^^ne into Egypt. Canaan therefore and Iudaea stood
higher then Egypt. I brought you up [or, I made you to ascend] from the land of
Egypt.

From the land of Egypt. Maginus in descrip. Aegypti page 203. a
Egypt is a most noble region, and famous, much spoken of by writers, sacred
and profane.

Some would have it to be one of the parts of the world, a diverse part from
Asia and Africa; and to be between them both.

Others supposing the river Nilus, the great river of Egypt, to be the fittest
bound to part Asia from Africa, do make Egypt to partake of both, Asia and
Africa. One part of Egypt they place in Asia, the other in Africa.

The Jesuit Lorinus, Comment. in Act. Apost. cap. 2. 10. makes it a part of
Asia Mayor. He says it is a well known region of Asia the greater near unto
Africa.

But Lib. 4. Geogr. cap. 5. Tab. 3. Aphricae page 98.
Ptolomee, and the greatest part of Geographers, and other writers, holding the
gulf of Arabia, or the Red Sea, to be the fittest bound to sever Asia from
Africa, have placed Egypt in Africa. This is the most received opinion, and
worthiest to be embraced. The land of Egypt is in Africa, and is by an Georg.
Abbot the description of the world. I. 4. b.
Isthmos, or a narrow streit of ground, joined to the Holy land. It was of old
a land very fruitful, as fruitful, as any almost in the world: though in
these days it does not answer to the fertility of former times.

From the land of Egypt] The Hebrew calls it the land of Mizraim. Its so called
in my text, and elsewhere generally in the holy Scriptures: and has its name
from Mitzraim, one of the sons of Ham: of whom we read, Genesis 10.6. He first
inhabited that part of Africa, which was afterward called Egypt.

When it first began to be called Egypt, its not easily defined. Some say, it
was first called Egypt in Moses his time: when Ramesses surnamed Egyptus, son
of Belus, and brother of Danaus, was King of the land. Ramesses, otherwise
called Aegyptus, began his reign in the 29 year from the going of Israel out
of Egypt. Of this opinion is Ad annum Mundi 2482.
Funccius in his Chronology.

S. Willet upon Genesis c 10. p. 120 Per^t. in Genesis Tom. 2. lib 15. Disp. 1. p.
412.
Augustine lib. 18. de civ. Dei. cap. 11. following Ad annum Mundi 3720.
Eusebius in his Chronicle, says, this happened in Iosuahs time, more then
eight hundred years after the flood.

According to the computation of Manethon an Egyptian Chronographer, cited by
Josephus in his Page 451. b
first book against Apion. It was three hundred ninety and three years after
Moses leading Israel out of Egypt.

Whenever it was first called Egypt, its not much material. Were it first so
called in Moses his time, or after, in Iosuahs time; or yet after 393. years
from Isreal's going up from thence, it was many a year so called before our
Prophet Amos wrote this his Prophecy. And yet our Prophet here retains the
old Hebrew name Mizraim. Also I brought you up (...) from the land of Mizraim,
it is in our Language, from the land of Egypt.

But what benefit was it for Israel to be brought up from the land of Egypt?
Had they not there a sweet habitation? Were they not planted in the best of
the land? in the land of Genesis 47.11.
Ramesses, in the land of Verse. 6.
Goshen?

It may not be denied, but that Egypt of it self was a very goodly, fruitful,
and commodious country: yet was it very beneficial to the Israelites, that
they were thence delivered: and that in two respects: one was, because the
people of the land were superstitious. the other, because they were full of
cruelty.

First, the Egyptians were a superstitious people. They had as the Greeks, and
Romans had, their Gods maiorum gentium, and their Gods minorum gentium. Gods of
greater authority, and Gods of less. They had for their Gods many a beast.
Athenagoras a Christian Philosopher, in his embassage or apology for the
Christians to the Emperors Antoninus and Commodus, witnesses, that they
bestowed divine honors upon Cats, and Crocodils, and Serpents, and Aspes, and
Dogs.

Arnobius in his first Book against the Gentiles, says; they built stately
Temples felibus, scarabaeis, and buculis, to Cats, to Beetles, to Heyfers.

Cassiodore in his tripartite history lib. 9. cap. 27. tells of the Image of an
Ape, which they adored: and cap. 28. he says, that a nest of Rats was their
God.

Many other Accipitres Noctuas Hircos, Asinos Hieronym. in Esai 11. Tom. 5. p.
51. a Cironius Hieron. in Joel. 3. Tom. 6 page 67. d.
beasts did they adore. Here their superstition rested not: it proceeded to the
plants of the earth, to base plants; to leekes, and onyons. Leekes and onyons
were to them for Gods.

Porrum and Hieron. in Esai 46. Tom. 5. page 172. a
caepe nefas violare -- Iuvenal. Sat. 15. could note it. O, it was a wicked and
detestable act, to do any hurt to a leeke or onyon. At such their ridiculous
superstition he by and by scoffeth, O sanctas gentes, quibus haec nascantur in
hortis Numina?

Surely, they are holy Nations, that have such Gods growing in their gardens.
Mad Egypt. So the Poet styles it in the beginning of his Satyr. And could it
be less then mad, when it was besotted and bewitched with such foul and
monstrous adoration?

Well might Minutius Felix in his Octavius call those Gods of the Egyptians,
non numina, sed portenta Gods they were not, they were monsters. Well might
Geverharl Elmenhorst. com. ad Minutium Felicem. page 41.
Salisberiensis in his first Book de nugis cvrial. cap. 10. call Egypt, Matrem
superstitionis, the mother of superstition. For, as Tom. 5. page 170. c.
S. Hierome in his Comment. upon Esaias 45. witnesses: Never was there any
Nation so given to Idolatry, or worshipped such a number of monsters, as Egypt
did.

This notorious superstition and Idolatry of the Egyptians, so much spoken of
by Christian writers and others, is also in the sacred volumes of Holy writ
censured and controlled. In Exodus 12.12. the meanacing of the Lord is against
them: Against all the Gods of Egypt I will execute judgment, I the Lord. The
gods of Egypt, that is, the Images, and the Idols which the Egyptians adored
and worshipped. Concerning which De quadraginta duabus mansionibus Man's. 2 Tom.
3. page 42.
S. Hierome in an Epistle of his to Fabiola, reports out of the Hebrew
writers, that in very same night the Children of Israel departed out of Egypt,
all the Temples of Egypt were overthrown, sieve terrae motu, sieve iactu
fulminum; either with earth quakes, or thunderbolts. These Hebrew writers say
further, eadem nocte lignea idola putrefacta fuisse, metallica resoluta and
fusa, lapidea comminuta: that in the same night all the wooden Images were
rotten, all the metal Images were dissolved and moulten, all the stone Images
were broken. If so it were, it was doubtless a great work, a great judgment
of God upon those Egyptian monsters.

In Esaias 19.1. their confusion is again foretold. Behold, says the Prophet,
the Lord rides upon a swift cloud, and shall come into Egypt, and the Idols
of Egypt shall move at his presence, and the heart of Egypt shall melt in the
midst of it. Where the Idols of Egypt are the heart of Egypt. They are called
the heart of Egypt; because the heart of the Egyptians did wholly depend upon
them, for relief and succor. The Lord rides upon a swift cloud and shall
come into Egypt: and the Idols of Egypt shall move at his presence, and the
heart of Egypt shall melt in the midst of it. The Idols of Egypt shall move and
melt at the presence of the Lord.

In Ierem. 43.13. their desolation is likewise denounced. There the Lord
threatens to send Nabuchadnezzar, the K. of Babylon, his servant into Egypt.
What shall he do there? He shall break the Images of Bethshemesh, that is in
the land of Egypt, and the houses of the Gods of the Egyptians shall be burnt
with fire.

Thus you see it confirmed not only by Christian writers, and others, but
also, by the sacred volumes of holy Scripture; that the Egyptians were a
superstitious and an Idolatrous people.

Superstitious were they, and Idolatrous? Happy then wast thou, O Israel,
that the Lord brought thee up from the land of Egypt. Live in Egypt thou
could not with a good conscience, nor would the Egyptians willingly suffer
thee to worship God, otherwise then themselves did. To have worshipped as they
did, must needs have been a Hell unto thy soul: and to have done otherwise,
must needs have brought certain danger to thine outward estate. Acknowledge
it therefore for a great benefit and blessing of God upon thee, that he brought
thee up from the land of Egypt.

God in reckoning up this favor of his, his bringing up Israel out of the land
of Egypt, teaches us, what an intolerable thing it is, to live among
Idolaters; and what a special favor it is, to be delivered from amongst them.
And this should stir us up to a thankful recognition of Gods goodness toward
us, who has delivered the Church, wherein we live, from the Babylonish and
Romish Idolatry; wherein our ancestors were nus-led and trained up, to
worship and adore, not the true and living God, but Angels and Saints, damned
^^^les it may be; silver and gold; stocks and stones; Images and Idols; and
what not?

From such gross and palpable Idolatry we are by Gods goodness delivered: and
now do (as a long time we have done) enjoy the bright Sunshine of the 1.
Tim. 1 11.
glorious Gospel of the blessed God, our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Being
now delivered from the Colos. 1.13.
power of darkness, under Antichrist, and translated into the light of Christ's
Gospel, Let it be our daily care (for it is our duty) to walk worthy the
light, Ephesians. 5.8.
as children of light; to walk in truth, Ep. 3. Ioh. ver. 3. to walk in love,
Colos. 5.2. to walk in newness of life, Romans 6.4. to walk, not after the
flesh, but after the spirit. Romans 8.1. If we walk after the flesh, we shall
mind the things of the flesh; we shall be carnally minded, and our end shall be
death; but if we walk after the spirit, we shall mind the things of the
spirit, we shall be spiritually minded, and our end shall be life and peace.

The choice is not difficult. Life is better then death. If you choose life, you
must abandon and forsake the Gal. 5.19.
works of the flesh, which cause death. Adultery, fornication, uncleanness,
lasciviousness, Verse. 20.
hatred, variance, emulations, wrath, strife, Verse. 21.
envyings, murders, drunkenness, revellings, usury, extortion, oppression,
and such like, are works of the flesh, and do shut you out from life. Yet may
life be yours, if you will be Verse. 18.
led by the spirit. Verse. 22.
Love, joy, peace, long suffering, gentl^nesse, goodness, faith, meekness,
temperance, are the fruit of the spirit. Let these dwell among you, and life
shall be yours. The God of life shall give it you.

Hitherto you have the first respect, why it was beneficial and good for the
people of Israel, that they were brought up from the land of Egypt. It was good
for them because the people of the land were superstitious and idolatrous, and
among such there is no good living.

The other respect now follows. It was beneficial and good for the people of
Israel, that they were brought up from the land of Egypt; because the people of
the land were full of cruelty, and held Israel in subjection and servitude.

Egypt was long a harbor to the Israelites, but at length it proved a Jail
unto them. The posterity of Jacob finds too late, what it was for their
forefathers, to sell Jacob, a slave into Egypt. There arose up a new Pharaoh, a
new king over Egypt: he knew not Joseph. Then, then were the Israelites
contemned as drudges. Exodus 1.11.
Task masters must be set over them, to afflict them with their burdens. Why
so? How had they offended? They prospered too fast. For thus says Pharaoh to
his people, Exodus 1.9. Behold, the people of the children of Israel are more
and mightier then we. Come on, let us deal wisely with them, lest they
multiply, and it come to pass, that when there falls out any war, they
join also v to our enemies, and fight against us. For this cause, because they
prospered too fast, were taskmasters set over them, to afflict them with their
burdens.

But, the more they were afflicted, the more they multiplied and grew. This did
not a little grieve the Egyptians. The Egyptians therefore made the children of
Israel to serve Verse. 13.
with rigor, Verse. 14.
and held them in bondage without mercy: and made their lives bitter unto them
in that cruel bondage, in clay, and brick, and all manner of work in the
field. All their bondage wherein they served them, was full of tyranny.

The cruelty of the Egyptians here stays not. The hopes of succession for
Israel must be prevented. Women, midwiues must be suborned to be murderers, to
kill every man-child that should be borne of an Hebrew woman. A prodigious
cruelty, that a man should kill a man for his sexes sake! yet would Pharaoh
have done it.

The Verse. 17.
fear of God taught the midwiues to disobey the unjust command of Pharaoh.
They disobeyed it; they well knew it was no excuse for so foul a fact, to say,
we were bidden to do it. God said unto their hearts, Thou shall not kill. This
voice was louder, and more powerful, then Pharaohs.

What the midwiues would not, that must Pharaohs people do; they must Verse. 22.
cast into the river and drown, all the sons that were then borne. They did
it. The cruelty which did but smoke before, does now flame up: its become so
shameless, that now it dares proclaim tyranny. All the male children are
cast into the river.

Nor could Pharoahs fury here be appeased. He will have the Exodus 56.78.
task of the Children of Israel to be increased. They must make brick as
before, as much as before; yet shall they not have any allowance of straw, as
they were wont to have. While possible taskes were imposed, there was some
comfort; their diligence might save their backs from stripes. But, to require
taskes not possible to be done is tyrannical, and does only pick a quarrel
to punish. They could neither make straw nor find it, yet must they have it. O
cruelty! O tyranny.

For such cruelty and tyranny, practiced against the children of Israel by
the Egyptians, Egypt it self is in holy Scripture, styled, The house of
servitude, or bondage. Exodus 13.3.14. Exodus 20.2. Deuteronomy. 5.6. And in sundry
Deuteronomy. 6.12. And 7.8. and 8.14 and 135.10 Josh. 24.17. Judge. 6.8.
other places. It is styled likewise the iron furnace, Deuteronomy. 4.20. 1. Kin.
8.51. Ierem. 11.4.

Egypt (you see) was the house of bondage, it was the iron furnace, wherein the
children of Israel were Act. 7.19.
evil entreated, suffered affliction, and endured much misery. You will
confess, that therefore it was beneficial and good for them that they were
from thence delivered. And well may you. For the Lord himself reckons up this
their deliverance for a benefit unto them, and by them to be remembered. From
hence issues this doctrine: Temporal benefits, and bodily favors are not to
be forgotten.

I will not now stand to amplify or enlarge this doctrine. In the beginning of
this exercise, I exhorted you, that you would not forget any one of Gods
benefits bestowed upon you. Temporal benefits, and bodily favors, have been
plentifully shewred down upon us by almighty God. It is Psalm. 100.3.
He that has made us, not we our selves: it is He that provides for us, not
we our selves. S. Austin in his 21. chap. of his Soliloquies, sweetly
meditateth hereupon: From Heaven, from the Air, from the Earth, from the Sea,
from light, from darkness, from heat, from shade, from dew, from rain, and
winds, and showers, and birds, and fishes, and beasts, and trees, and from the
diversity of herbs, and fruit of the earth, and from the service of all
creatures, which serve for man's use, Thou, O Lord have provided, to comfort man
withal.

St Austines Lord is our Lord, the Lord of all the world. He has preserved us,
our bodies, and all our lims, to this very hour: he has delivered us from
many dangers, and distresses: He has so blessed our going out, and coming in,
when we have traveled from home, that we have returned home in good health,
and disposition: whatsoever good we have had, we have had it from the Lord.
Offer we therefore unto him, the sacrifice of praise.

Hitherto you have seen the deliverance of the people of Israel out of Egypt.
It was an exceeding great benefit unto them, that they were thence delivered:
First, because the Egyptians were Idolaters, and to live among Idolaters is a
very Hell. Secondly, because they were kept under by the Egyptians with
extremity of servitude and bondage. The servant in the Plautus Captivis Act.
1. Sc. 2. verse. 10.
Poet could say, Omnes profecto liberi lubentius
Sumus, quam servi:


Every man prefers freedom before slavery. The Israelites could do no
less: they could not but account it a great favor of God toward them, that
they were by him freed from the slavery they endured in Egypt. God when he
begins a good work, will perfect it. He brought the children of Israel out
of Egypt: if he had then left them, he had left them a prey and spoil unto
their enemies. It was against Gods goodness so to do: and therefore he
protected and preserved them in the wilderness, which is the next benefit in
this verse mentioned to have been bestowed by the Lord upon his people, the
people of Israel, in these words, I led you forty years through the
wilderness.

A wonderful benefit. Wonderful: whether we consider the multitude that were
led; or the place, through which they were led; or the time, wherein they were
led. Every circumstance is wonderful, and proclaims the great power of the
Lord. The multitude, that was led, was very great; the place, through which
they were led was very barren: and they were a long time in leading.

The first circumstance, is of the multitude, which were led. The number of
this multitude is set down, Exodus 12.37. They were six hundred thousand men
on foot, besides children. A most wonderful increase from seauentie souls.
Old Jacobs seauentie souls which he brought down into Egypt, in spite of
their bondage and bloodshed, go forth six hundred thousand men, besides
children. Tyranny is too weak, where God bids increase and multiply. The
Church of God shall increase, mauger the malice of man, or Devil. In
affliction, in oppression, in tyranny the good herb ouergrowes the weeds: the
Church out-strips the world. Had the Israelites lived in case and delicacie,
while they were in Egypt, would they have been so strong, so numerous? Who can
say it? This I am sure of; never did any true Israelite loose by his affliction.

Six hundred thousand men, besides children, go up out of Egypt. All
Israelites. But these were not all. For there went up also with them, a mixed
multitude: and flocks and herds, even very much cattle; as you may read,
Exodus 12.38.

This mixed multitude what it was, it is not certain. It is probable, that it
consisted of Egyptians, and other Nations, soiourning in Egypt, who being moved
and prepared with those mighty wonders and miracles which they saw in Egypt,
might thereupon resolve to join themselves to Israel, to the people of God.
Whatsoever they were, this mingling of diverse other Nations with the people of
God, was a lively type and evident demonstration of the calling of the Gentiles.

Six hundred thousand men on foot, besides children; and a mixed multitude, a
multitude of sundry sorts of people, went out from Egypt with Israel, and
flocks, and herds, even very much cattle. But which way went they? They went
through the wilderness: It is the second circumstance I am now to point at.

I led you through the wilderness. Through the wilderness! A sandy and an
vntracked wilderness! There they might err: there they might starve for want
of food, and other provision.

But against all such accidents and casualties, they were secured. God himself
Exodus 13.21.
went before them. How could they but cheerfully follow, when they saw, God
led them? God led them by Number. 14 14. Deuteronomy. 1.33. Psalm. 78.14.
pillars: by a pillar 1. Cor. 10.1.
of cloud, and by a pillar of fire. Pillars they were for firmness: they were
of Cloud and fire, of visibilitie and use. The greater light obscureth the
less; therefore in the day time he led them, not by fire, but by a Cloud. In
the night nothing is seen without light; therefore in the night time he led
them not by a cloud, but by fire. The cloud defended them from heat by day:
the fire digested the rawnes of the night. God put himself into those forms
of gracious respects, which might best fit their then necessities.

But where did God show himself so graciously present unto his people Israel
in the cloud, and fire? or in what wilderness was it? It was in the
wilderness of Etham, which was a great and a sandy desert, lying from the
land of Goshen in Egypt, to the Red Sea and beyond it. This is plain by, Exodus
13.20. where we read, that the Children of Israel took their journey from
Succoth, and encamped in Number 23.6.
Etham in the edge of the wilderness And the Lord went before them by day in a
pillar of cloud, to lead them the way, and by night in a pillar of fire to give
them light, to go by day and night. He took not away the pillar of cloud by
day, nor the pillar of fire by night, from before the people.

From Verse. 7.
Etham they removed, and encamped before Piha-hireth, between Migdol and the
Red Sea, over against Baal-zephon: so we read, Exodus 14.2.

From hence, from Pi-hahiroth they removed again and passed through the
midst of the Exodus 14.22.
Red Sea. Through the Red Sea, and not drowned? It was even so. The Lord caused
the Sea to go back by a Verse. 21.
strong East wind, a whole night, and made the Sea dry land: And the Children
of Israel went into the midst of the Sea upon dry ground, and the waters
were a wall unto them, on their right hand, and on their left. Were the waters
a wall unto them? O, the never too-much admired protection of the Almighty.
That, the Sea, the Red Sea, which they feared would be their ruin, became
their preservation. I now see, God can easily make the cruellest of his
creatures to become our friends, and patrons.

The Israelites were safely passed through the Red Sea: they passed by H^b.
11.29.
faith. The Egyptians pursued after them Exodus 14.23.
to the midst of the Sea, and were drowned; for they had not faith. It was
Gods pleasure to get him honor upon them: Verse. 17.
upon Pharaoh, upon all his host, upon his charrets, and upon his horsemen. The
Sea was ready to work his will; she shut her mouth upon the Egyptians, she
swallowed them up in her waves, and after she had made sport with them a
while, she cast them up upon her sands for a spectacle of triumph to their
adversaries.

Let our contemplations be lifted up to those walls of waters, which gave
Israel safe passage, and overwhelmed the Egyptians: we shall see the condition
of the children of God, and his enemies in this world. In this world the
children of God are beset with walls of waters too: on the right hand with the
waters of prosperity; on the left hand with the waters of adversity: and yet,
through a true faith they walk through both, they are hurt by neither, they
ariue on the other side at their wished-for harbor in safety: whereas the
enemies of God, the sons of unbelief and impiety, are confounded in midst
of the waters. The waters of prosperity make them forget God, the waters of
adversity make them curse God. Both, the waters of prosperity, and the waters
of adversity, do ouerwhelme them with confusion.

We are not yet out of the wilderness of Etham. For from the Red Sea, Israel
went three days journey in the wilderness of Etham, and pitched in Marah. The
story is so, Number. 33.8. In the 15. of Exodus, verse. 22. it seems to be
called the wilderness of Shur. For there you may thus read: Moses brought
Israel from the Red Sea, and they went out into the wilderness of Shur, and
they went three days journey in the wilderness.

From hence many think this wilderness of Shur, to be the same with the
wilderness of Etham. Some will have Etham to be the general name of the whole
wilderness, and Shur only a part of it. Others will have Shur to be the
general name of the whole wilderness, and Etham only a part of it. But
neither can be so. The wilderness of Shur, and the wilderness of Etham are
not the same: they are altogether diverse. The wilderness of Etham was a part
of Egypt, as has already been showed: the wilderness of Shur was not a part
of Egypt: therefore the wilderness of Etham, and the wilderness of Shur were
not the same.

That the wilderness Shur was no part of Egypt, I gather from the first of
Samuel, Chap. 15. verse. 7. where I read, that Shur is over against Egypt. Its
over against Egypt; therefore it is no part of Egypt. The like collection I
make from the 25. of Genesis, ver. 18. there I find, that Shur is before Egypt,
as a man goes to Assyria. Its before Egypt; therefore not in Egypt, nor any
part of Egypt: therefore Shur is not Etham.

Why then does Moses in the places now alleged, seem to make Shur and Etham
all one? I answer, if we rightly understand Moses, Moses does not make them
all one. The words of Moses I thus explicate: Moses brought Israel from the Red
Sea, that they might go forward into the wilderness of Shur: but before they
came thither, they spent three days journey in the wilderness of Etham.

We have almost lost our selves in these two wildernesses, Etham, and Shur. We
must make more have through the rest. I will not much more then name them. The
next wilderness they came unto was the wilderness of Number. 33.11.
Sin, Exodus, 16.1. After that they pitched in the wilderness of Verse. 15.
Sinai, Exodus 19.1. From Sinai they came to the wilderness of Paran, Number. 10.12.
thence to the wilderness of Verse. 36.
Zin, which is Kadesh, Number. 20.1. and then to the wilderness of Verse. 44.
Moab, Number. 21.11. Here at Ieabarim they finished their 38. iouraey. They had
four more to make. They soon made them; and last of all they pitched in the
plains of Moab by Jordan nere Jericho, Number. 33.48.

You have now heard of many wildernesses. They are all contained in the
wilderness mentioned in my text: I led you through the wilderness. The
wilderness. Not the wilderness of Etham only; but the wilderness of Shur
too, and the wilderness of Sin, and all other the wildernesses, through which
the Children of Israel travailed in their way to the land of promise. They were
many wildernesses; yet my text speaks as of one, I led you through the
wilderness.

So speaks the Psalmist, in that his remarkable exhortation, to give thanks
to God for particular mercies. It is Psalm. 136.16. O, give thanks Psalm. 136.1.
unto the Lord, unto the Verse. 2.
God of Gods, unto the Verse. 3.
Lord of Lords, to him, who led his people through the wilderness. So also he
speaks, Psalm. 78.52. The Lord! He guided his own people in the wilderness
like a flock. In both places, you hear only the sound of a wilderness: and
yet were they wildernesses, through which the Lord led and guided his people
Israel.

Let it be our comfort. God never forsakes his people. When he has led them
through one wilderness, he will lead them through a second, through a third,
through all: He will never leave them, till he see them safely arrived in the
place, where they wish to be. No expense of time can make him to relent. If we
shall need his protection for forty years together, for forty years
together we shall be sure of it. Israel had it. My text avowes it.

I led you forty years through the wilderness. It is the third circumstance
I noted in Gods protection of his people in the wilderness; the circumstance
of Time. Forty years.

Forty years were the people of Israel in the wilderness. From Egypt to the
wilderness of Sinai, where their Number. 33.15. Exodus 19.1.
twelfth mansion was, they came in seven and forty days. There they
continued almost a year. From thence, from the wilderness of Sinai, by many
iourneys they came to mount Number. 20.22. and 33.37.
Hor, where was their four and thirtieth mansion, in the wilderness of Zin or
Cades. In coming thither they spent nine and thirty years. There in mount
Hor, Number. 20.23. and 33.38. Deuteronomy. 32.50.
died Aaron their priest. He died in the fortieth year after the Children of
Israel were come out of the land of Egypt, in the first day of the fifth
month. Now had they but few iourneys to make: they had but eight to make; all
eight with good success they made in the remainder of that fortieth year: and
they pitched in the plains of Number. 33.48. and 22.1.
Moab by Jordan near Jericho, where was their two and fortieth, and their last
mansion.

Well might that be their last mansion. For now they had gotten the possession
of the land of the Amorite: which in my text is put for the end, why they were
brought up out of the land of Egypt, and were led forty years through the
wilderness: I brought you up out of the land of Egypt, and led you forty
years through the wilderness, To possess the land of the Amorite.

HEre was the fulfilling of that promise, which was long before made to
Abraham. The promise was first made to Abraham, when from Haran he was come
into the land of Canaan, Genesis 12.7. Unto thy seed will I give this land. It was
renewed unto him after his return from Egypt to the land of Canaan, Genesis 13.15.
All the land which thou see, to thee will I give it, and to thy seed for
ever. It was once more renewed, Genesis 15.18. Unto thy Gen 26.4. Deuteronomy. 34.4.
seed have I given this land from the river of Egypt, unto the great river, the
river Euphrates. The Genesis 15.19.
Kenites, and the Kenizites, and the Kadmonites, Verse. 20.
and the Hittites, and the Perizzites, and the Rephaims, Verse. 21.
and the Amorites, and the Canaanites, and the Girgasites, and the Iebusites.
Ten sundry Nations are rehearsed, whose countries are promised to the seed of
Abraham. Among them are the Amorites.

The Amorites country is by promise given to Abraham's seed, and Abraham's seed
in the posterity of Jacob possessed it; but, some four hundred and seauentie
years after the promise. From the promise to their going forth out of Egypt,
were four hundred and thirty years: to which if you will add, their forty
years journey in the wilderness, you have the full number of four hundred
and seauentie years, the space between the promise, and the performance.

Abraham, he believed the promise so many years before it was to take effect.
Great was his faith. He leaving his own country, his kindred, and his fathers
house, comes unto a people who knew him not; (and he knew not them) takes
possession for that seed which he had not, which in nature he was not like to
have; of that land, whereof he should not have one Art. 5.7.
foot, wherein his seed should not be settled for almost five hundred years
after. O, the power of faith! It preuents time: it makes future things as
present. If we be the true sons of Abraham, and have but one grain of his
faith, we have already the possession of our land of promise the celestial
Canaan: though we soiourne here on earth, as if we sought a country, yet have
we it already: we have it by faith.

The seed of Abraham, the children of Israel, after their forty years
travail in the wilderness, got possession of the land of the Amorite, which
long before was promised unto them. It may teach us thus much.

In whatsoever God promises, he approves himself most faithful, both in his
ability, and performances. At the very time prefixed, and not before, he
unchangeably performs what he promised.

If so: then when we are in any distress, and have not speedy deliverance
according to our desires, we must wait the Lords leisure, and must expect with
patience till the time come, which is appointed by him for our ease and
releife. We must ever trust our God on his bare word: we must do it with hope,
besides hope, above hope, against hope. For the small matters of this life we
must wholly rely upon him. How shall we hope to trust in him for greater
matters, for impossibilities, if we trust him not for smaller matters, for
probabilities. How can I depend on God for raising my body from the grave, and
for saving my soul from Hell, if I will distrust him for a morsel of bread
toward my preservation.

The Lord, who brought Israel out of Egypt, and led them forty years through
the wilderness, to possess the land of the Amorite, and all that while
nourished and fed them; not with bread nor wine, nor strong drink, but
miraculously with water out of the hard rock, with Quails, with Manna from
Heaven; and so blessed the very clothes and the shoes they wore, that neither
their clothes nor shoes all that while were waxen old; he is the same Lord
still: still, as ready to be to his faithful ones a present help in all
their troubles.

He has brought us out of Egypt too. Attendamus ergo nos, fratres; so S.
Austin bespake his Readers, Tract. 28. in Johan: and so let me conclude:
Attendamus ergo nos fratres: Brethren, and the rest dearly beloved, let us
diligently observe it, and make we it the matter of our daily meditation:
Educti sumus de Aegypto, we are brought out of Egypt. There were we in bondage
to the Devil, as to a Pharaoh; there Lutea opera in terrenis desiderijs
agebamus, dirtie works in the earthly desires of our flesh were the fruits of
our labors. Let it suffice that we have been such, that we have been
servants, Luteis operibus peccatorum, to the dirtie works of sin, as to the
tyranny of the Egyptians. Now are we passed through Baptism as through the
Red Sea, therefore Red, because it is consecrated with the Blood of Christ. In
this Sea, the Red Sea of Baptism, the Egyptians our enemies, even all our
sins, are drowned. Now are we in the wilderness, in cremo huius vitae
(says the same Saint Austine lib. 50. Homil. 20.) we are in the wilderness of
this life. Here Christ is with us. He protecteth us, he preserves us, he
feeds us with his Word and Sacraments. His word is a light unto our steps, to
guide us that we err not. His Sacraments are two: that of Baptism assures
us, that the Blood of Christ, applied to our souls, cleanses us from all our
sins: the other, of his Supper, is a sign, a seal, a pledge unto us, of
him, our Savior, Christ Jesus, given for us, and to us.

Thus passing through the wilderness of this world, we shall in the prefixed
time, the due time appointed by the Lord, Patriam promissionis ingredi; We
shall have the full fruition of the promised land, of the supernall Jerusalem,
of the land of the living, of the Kingdom of Heaven. To which God bring us all.

THE XVI. LECTVRE.
AMOS 2.11. And I raised up of your sons for Prophets, and of your young men
for Nazarites. Is it not even thus, O ye children of Israel, says the Lord?


THe blessings and benefits which Amos in this Chapter remembers to have been
bestowed by Almighty God upon his people, the ten tribes of Israel, are partly
Corporal, and partly Spiritual. Of their Corporal benefits I have heretofore
in your hearing discoursed in my two former Sermons. They were the destruction
of the Amorites before them, and for their sake, verse. 9. their deliverance out
of Egypt, their protection and preservation in the wilderness for forty
years, to the end that they might at length possess the land of the Amorite,
ver. 10. These were notable benefits, though they were but Corporal. But the
benefit, whereof I am now to speak, is Spiritual. It is the doctrine of the
sincere worship of God, and of eternal salvation, together with the free use
and passage thereof: or if you will, it is the ordinary ministry of the Word,
thus expressed, verse. 11.

And I raised up of your sons for Prophets, and of your young men for
Nazarites, etc.

In these words I commend unto you two general parts. One is, A description of
the now mentioned Spiritual benefit: I raised up of your sons for Prophets,
and of your young men for Nazarites.

The other is, A testification, that such a benefit was bestowed; Is it not
even thus, o ye children of Israel, says the Lord?

In the description we may note: 1. Quis: Who was the bestower of this benefit,
I, the Lord. 2. Quomodo: How it was bestowed; by a raising up. I raised up. 3.
Quid: What was bestowed: Prophets and Nazarites. 4. Quibus auxilijs; what help
was used; No stranger, no forrainer had here ought to do: they were their own
sons, and their own young men, that were employed. I raised up of your
sons, etc.


The testification follows: you may also call it an asseueration. Its set
down in the form of a question: where you may observe, who moves the
question, to whom it is moved, and what the question is. The Lord is he, that
moves the question; the children of Israel are they, to whom it is moved: the
question is, Is it not even thus? Is it not even thus, O ye children of Israel,
says the Lord?

Such is the division of my text. I might handle each part precisely: but that
happily would seem ouer-curious. I make choice therefore, to apply my self,
after my old and wonted fashion, to fit an exposition to the words, as here
they are conveyed unto us, by the ministry of Amos: and this with all brevity
and plainness.

And I] I, the Lord. I, who destroyed the Amorite before you, and for your
sake; I, who brought you up from the land of Egypt, I, who for forty years
together led you through the wilderness, that you might possess the land of
the Amorites; I, who thus blessed you with corporal benedictions, have not
been wanting to you in Spiritual; I also raised up of your sons for
Prophets, and of your young men for Nazarites.

I raised vp] (...) word for word: feci surgere, or feci vt surgerent, I made
to arise, I made Prophets to rise out of your sons. I made them to rise; that
is, feci vt existerent, I made them to be. In this sense I find the word used,
Deuteronomy. 34.10. (...) And there arose not a Prophet since in Israel like unto
Moses. There arose not, that is, there was not. There was not a Prophet since
like unto Moses. So Mat. 11.11. where the Greek is (...), the Vulgar Latin
has, Non surrexit. Our now English renders it, There has not risen. Among
them that are borne of women, there has not risen a greater then John the
Baptist. There has not risen, that is, there has not been. Among them that
are borne of women, there has not been a greater then John the Baptist. So
here; I have raised up, that is, I have made to be. I have made your sons to
be Prophets.

I have raised up of your sonnes] aliquot e filijs vestris, says Mercer, some
of your sons; such your sons as Joel speaks of, Chap. 2.28. I will power
out of my Spirit upon all flesh, and your sons, and your daughters shall
prophecy. Or, of your sonnes] de hominibus vestri generis, says Peter a
Figuero, of men like your selves; of your brethren; so they are called, Deuteronomy.
18.15. The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a Prophet from the midst of
thee, of thy brethren like unto me. Of your sonnes] or of thy brethren. The
signification is one says Drusius. Of your sonnes] not strangers, or
forrainers, but such as were home bred, and of your own lineage, says
Brentius. Of your sonnes] that is (say some Hebrews, R. David, and R. Solomo)
ex parvulis, of your little ones; such as were Samuel and Jeremy. I raised up
of your sons.

For Prophets] Such, as should, not only preach my will unto you, and instruct
you in the way of righteousness, but also admonish you, and foretell you, what
was to come to pass in future times.

Prophets] I read in the old Testament of two sorts of Prophets. Some were
taught in Schools under the discipline of other Prophets; who were heretofore
called Filij Prophetarum, sons of the Prophets. They are so called, 2. King.
4.1. and 6.1. Others had their calling immediately from God, and were by him
extraordinarily inspired with gifts from above, and so were sent forth to the
exercise of their holy function. Of both these Amos chap. 7.14. makes mention.
There he says unto Amaziah: I was no Prophet, neither was I a Prophets son,
but I was an heardman, and a gatherer of Sycomore fruit. This he speaks of
himself, as he was before his calling. I was no Prophet, immediately called of
God; nor was I the son of a Prophet; I was not trained up or taught in any of
the Schools of the Prophets: but I was an heardman, and a gatherer of Sycomore
fruit. He had no other calling, till the Lord was pleased to advance him to the
dignity and office of a Prophet: and then was his calling extraordinary. Amos
tells, how it was, verse. 15. The Lord took me as I followed the flock, and the
Lord said unto me, Go prophecy unto my people Israel.

The Prophets mentioned in my text, may be of both sorts: such as had their
institution in the Schools of the Prophets, and such as were called of God
immediately and extraordinarily. God was the raiser up of both. Yet especially
by Prophets here, I understand, such as had their calling of God immediate, and
extraordinary. And these were fitted to their holy function sundry ways: as,
by dreams, by visions, by inspiration of the holy Spirit, by express word,
uttered by some Angel representing God; and by God himself, speaking to them
face to face.

That they were fitted to their Prophetical function by dreams and visions.
We know by, Number. 12.6. where the Lord thus speaks unto Aaron, and to Miriam:
Hear now my words. If there be a Prophet among you, I the Lord will make my
self known unto him in a vision, and will speak unto him in a dream. We
know it likewise by Elihues words unto Job, chap. 33.14. God speaks once, yea
twice, yet man perceives it not. In a dream, in a vision of the night, when
deep sleep falls upon men, in slumbrings upon the bed: Then he opens the
ears of men, and seals their instruction. It may also be gathered out of the
euen-now cited place of Joel, chap. 2.28. I will power of my Spirit upon all
flesh, and your sons and your daughters shall prophecy, your old men shall
dream dreams, your young men shall see visions. Dreams and visions, you see,
were means by which Almighty God fitted his Prophets to the exercise of their
holy function.

They were likewise fitted thereunto, by the inspiration of the holy Ghost. S.
Peter says it, Epist. 2. chap. 1. verse. 21. Holy men of God in old time spoke,
as they were moved by the holy Ghost. So were they, by the express word of
some Angel representing God; as, Genesis 19.13. There shall you find two Angels
instructing Lot concerning the overthrow of Sodom. And sometime they were
enabled to their holy calling by God himself, speaking to them face to face.
So was Moses. The Lord spoke unto Moses face to face, as a man speaks unto
his friend. Exodus 33.11.

Now whether Prophets of old time, were enabled to the exercise of their sacred
function by God himself, speaking unto them face to face, or by the apparition
of Angels representing God, or by the inspiration of the holy Spirit, or by
visions, or by dreams, it was out of doubt a great blessing unto Israel, to
have Prophets sent unto them: and therefore says the Lord unto them, I raised
up of your sons for Prophets. It follows, And of your young men for
Nazarites.

Of your young men] It is emphatically spoken. For though young men for the most
part are addicted unto pleasures, yet did God raise up of them, some, that
should withdraw themselves from the pleasures of this world, either for a time,
or for ever; and these were called Nazirites, Naziraei. They were called
Nazaraei, quasi Separatitij, says Mercer; as Separatists, or men separated
from wine, and vulgar delights, that they might the more freely apply their
wits and studies to the law of God and his worship.

Nazarites] Nazarai: They are so called by the author of the Vulgar Latin, and
so almost by all the Ancient, and by many modern interpreters, by Benedictus,
Castalio, and Calvin, by Iunius and Tremellius in their Bible printed by
Wechell at Francford A. C. 1579. But the same Iunius and Tremellius in their
later editions of the Bible, do call them Neziraeos, Nezirites, so does
Vatablus. Drusius calls them Naziraeos, Nezirites, so does Pagnine in (...)
Nezirites or Nazirites. Well may they be so called for distinctions sake, even
to distinguish them from Nazarites.

Christ is called a Nazarite, Matthew. 2.23. (...), which is by many translated
Nazaraeus, a Nazarite. He dwelt in a City called Nazareth, that it might be
fulfilled which was spoken by the Prophets, He shall be called a Nazarite.
(...), a Nazarite. Our now English well translates it a Nazarene; for Jesus,
Marc. 1.24. is called (...), a Nazarene. Nazaraeus and Nazarenus, each name is
derived from Nazareth the City, wherein Jesus had his habitation.

Wherefore they who interpret that, Matthew. 2. (...), he shall be called a
Nazarite, and do think that S. Matthew had respect to the Nazarites of the old
Testament, as to the types of Christ, may well be deceived. Some, I grant, are
of opinion, that S. Matthew does allude to those voluntary and vowed
Nazarites, of whom we read, Number. 6. and some, that S. Matthew has reference to
Samson, who was a Nazarite by Gods singular ordination. But in these opinions I
find no soliditie: for they have no ground either in the name of Nazarite, or
in the matter.

Not in the name. The name of Nazarites in the old Testament is Nezirim, by the
letter Zaijn, from the root Nazar, which signifies to separate: but the name
in S. Matthew according to the Syriack Paraphrast is Notzraia, by the letter
Tsadi, from the root (...) which signifies to keep. There is therefore no
ground in the name, why any should think, S. Matthew alludeth to the Nazarites
of the old Testament.

Nor is their any ground in the matter. For Christ did, what was not lawful
for Nazarites to do. It was not lawful for Nazarites to Number. 6.3.
drink wine; Christ Math. 11.19.
drank it. It was not lawful for the Nazarites to come near Number. 6.6.
unto a dead body: Christ came near unto the Joan. 11.38.
dead, and touched them. It was not lawful for the Nazarites to suffer a Number.
6.5.
rasour to come upon their heads; they were to let the locks of the hairs of
their head grow: but its likely that Christ did not wear long hair; it may be
gathered from 1. Cor. 11.14. and from the common custom of the Jews. There is
therefore no ground in the matter, why any should think, that S. Matthew
alludeth to the Nazarites of the old Testament.

The Nazarites of the old Testament, I told you, were for distinction sake
called by Iunius, Tremellius and Vatablus, Nezirites, and by Drusius and
Pagnine, Nazarites. It is according to the Hebrew points. The Hebrew is (...)
The right of this appellation is approved by the Septuagint, Judge. 13.5. where
the Angel of the Lord tells Manoahs wife, that she shall conceive and bear a
son, on whose head no rasour shall come, (...), for the child shall be
called a Nazarite unto God. Some in that place for (...), do read (...), a
Nazir or a Nazarite of God; and this reading is approved by Not. in editionem
LXX.
Eusebius. Likewise Judge. 16.18. Samson tells Delilah all his heart, and says
unto her, There has not come a rasour upon my head, (...), for I am a Nazarite
of God. In that place for (...), some read (...), as Eusebius witnesses in his
7. book of Evangelical Demonstration, chap. 5. A Nazirite. (...), says he,
is according to the Septuagint (...), holy; according to Aquila, (...), a
separation; according to Symmachus, (...), untouched: from hence (...), a
Nazirite, signifies either one that is holy, or one that is separate, or one
that is untouched, integrious and unspotted.

(...), a Nazarite is one, that is holy, according to the Septuagint. Whence
they have a threefold reading of my text: I raised up of your young men; (...),
for a sanctification: or, I raised up of your young men, (...), for men
sanctified; or I raised up of your young men, (...), for Nazirites.

For Nazarites] Certainly they were so called of Nazar, which signifies to
separate. For they were separated from the vulgar sort of men, by a certain
course of life, whereto they were to be tied by vow. The law that concerns
them is in the sixth of Numbers. The law has sundry branches.

One is, Whosoever shall separate himself to vow the vow of a Nazirite, to
separate himself unto the Lord, he shall not drink wine or strong drink, or
any thing that shall make him drunken: he shall not eat grapes moist or dried,
he shall not eat any thing that is made of the Vine tree from the kernels to
the husk. This branch you have verse. 3. and 4.

The second branch of the Law is: Whosoever shall separate himself to vow the
vow of a Nazarite, there shall no rasour come upon his head, the locks of the
hair of his head shall be suffered to grow. It is in the 5. verse.

The third branch is: He shall not defile himself with the dead: that is, He
shall not come into the house where a dead man is, neither shall he follow a
dead corpse to the grave. This you have verse. 6, 7, 8.

The fourth branch is: If he that has vowed the vow of a Nazarite, shall very
suddenly and unawares come near unto a dead body, he shall renew his
Naziriteship; thus: first he shall shave his head: secondly, he shall offer up
sacrifices. These sacrifices were two Turtles or two young Pigeons, and a Lamb
of the first year. One of Turtles or Pigeons was to be offered for a
sinne-offering, the other for a burnt offering; and the Lamb for a trespass
offering. This you have verse. 9, 10, 11, 12.

The fifth branch is: When a Nazarite shall have fulfilled the vow of his
Naziriteship, four things are to be performed; three of them by the Nazirite,
the fourth by the Priest: First, the Nazirite shall offer up certain
sacrifices, verse. 14, 15, 16, 17. Secondly, he shall shave his head, verse. 18.
Thirdly, he shall burn the hair of his head in the fire which is under one of
the sacrifices, verse. 18. Fourthly, the Priest shall take certain parts of the
sacrifice, and shall wave them for a wave offering before the Lord, verse. 19,
20. I have given you the law of the Nazarite in five branches. It is the law,
to the observance whereof the Nazirites in my text were obliged. I raised up of
your young men for Nazirites.

Nazirites] You now see what they are. They were young men consecrated to the
study of the word of God, and trained up thereunto, even from their childhood,
under a severe discipline, and an austere course of life, that at length they
might be able to go before the people, as well by soundnes of doctrine, as by
the example of a good life.

I raised up of your sons for Prophets, and of your young men for Nazirites.]
Prophets, and Nazirites. Some have put this difference between them: that the
Prophets indeed taught the people the law of God, and withal foretold things
to come: whereas the Nazirites did only teach the law. Be it so or otherwise;
the meaning of my text is this. God would have the ministry of his word to be
ordinary, and perpetual, among the Israelites, and for that end, he gave them
Prophets of their sons, men of riper years; and Nazirites of their young men,
who were to be trained up in Schools among them, there to be fitted for the
holy ministry. Such is the blessing (and it is a very great one) which is
here mentioned to have bin bestowed by the Lord upon Israel. It is (as I said
in the beginning of this exercise) it is the doctrine of the sincere worship of
God, and of eternal salvation, together with the free use and passage thereof:
or, if you will, it is the ordinary ministry of the word. The doctrine which
hence I would commend unto you, I deliver in this position; The ministry of
the word of God freely exercised in any nation, is to that nation a blessing of
an inestimable value.

I need not be long in the proof of this truth; you already give your assent
unto it. The word of God, its a Jewel, then which nothing is more precious,
unto which any thing else compared is but dross; by which any thing else tried
is found lighter then vanity: its a trumpet, whereby we are called from the
slippery paths of sin into the way of Godliness. Its a lamp unto our feet,
its a light unto our paths, Psalm. 119.105. Its the Matthew. 4.4. Luke 4.4. Ierem.
15.16. Ezech. 3.3. Revel. 10.9. Ezech. 2.8. Wisd. 16.26.
food of our souls; by it our souls do live, Deuteronomy. 8.3. Its (...), 1. Pet.
1.23. incorruptible seed. Seed committed to the earth, takes root, grows
up, blossometh, and bears fruit. So is it with the word of God. If it be
sown in your hearts, and there take root, it will grow up, blossom, and
bear fruit unto eternal life. In which respect S. James, chap. 1.21. calls it
(...), an engrafted word, engrafted in your hearts, able to save your souls.

Since the word of God is such, does it not follow of necessity, that the
ministry of it, freely exercised in any Nation, will be to that Nation a
blessing of an inestimable value? Can it be denied? The Prophet Esaias, chap.
52.7. with admiration avouches it: How beautiful upon the mountains are the
Nahum 1.15.
feet of him, that brings good tidings, that publishes peace, that brings
good tidings of good, that publishes salvation, that says unto Zion, Thy God
reigns? S. Paul is so resolved upon the certainty of this truth, that Romans
10.15. he resumeth the words of the Prophet. How beautiful are the feet of
them, that preach the Gospel of peace, and bring glad tidings of good things?

Confer we these two places, one with the other, that of Esaias, with this of
Paul, and we shall behold a heap of blessings showring down upon them, to
whom God sends the ministers of his Gospel; for they bring with them the
word of salvation, the doctrine of peace, the doctrine of good things, and the
doctrine of the kingdom. Such is the Gospel of Christ.

First, it is the word of salvation. The Gospel of Christ is called the word
of salvation, first, because it is the power of God unto salvation, as S. Paul
speaks Romans 1.16. It is the power of God unto salvation, that is, it is the
instrument of the power of God; or it is the powerful instrument of God, which
he uses to bring men unto salvation. And secondly, because it teaches us
concerning the author of our Salvation, even Christ Jesus.

An Angel of the Lord appeared unto Joseph in a dream, and says unto him:
Joseph, the son of David, fear not to take unto thee Mary thy wife, for that
which is conceived in her, is of the Holy Ghost: And she shall bring forth a
son, and thou shall call his name Luk 1.31.
Jesus: for he shall save his people from their sins, Matthew. 1.21. He shall
save his people, that is, he shall be their Savior.

Jesus, he is the Savior of his people, merito, and efficacia, by merit and by
efficacy. By merit; because he has by his death purchased for his people, for
all the elect, the remission of their sins, and the donation of the holy
Spirit, and life eternal. And by efficacy; because by the Holy Spirit, and by
the preaching of the Gospel, he works in the elect true faith, by which they
do not only lay hold on the merit of Christ in the promise of the Gospel,
but also they study to serve God according to his holy commandments.

An Angel of the Lord relating the nativity of Christ unto the Shepherds,
Luk 2.10, 11. says unto them. Fear not, For I bring you glad tidings of great
joy, which shall be to all people. For unto you is borne this day, in the City
of David, a Savior, which is Christ the Lord. Unto you is borne a Savior:
where you have, what you are to believe of the Nativity of Christ. He is borne
a Savior unto you. Unto you: not only to those shepherds, to whom this
Angel of the Lord speaks the words; but unto you. Unto you: not only to Peter
and Paul and some other of Christ's Apostles and Disciples of old, but unto you,
unto you: unto every one of you in particular, and unto me. When I hear the
Angels words, Christ is borne a Savior unto you, I apply them unto my self,
and say, Christ is borne a Savior unto me. In this persuasion and confidence I
rest, and say with S. Paul, Gal. 2.20. I live, yet not I now, but Christ lives
in me, and that life which I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the
Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me. Christ is borne a Savior
unto me.

Peter filled with the Holy Ghost seals this truth, Act. 4.12. There is no
Salvation in any other, then in the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth. There is
no other name under Heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved, then the
name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth. Again Act. 15.11. he professes it: We
believe, that through the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, we shall be saved. It
must be our belief too, if we will be saved. We, we in particular must
believe, that through the grace of the Lord Jesus, we shall be saved. We shall
be saved! What Is that? It is in S. Paul's phrase, we shall be made alive, 1. Cor.
15.22. As in Adam all dye, so in Christ shall all be made alive.

St Austine Ep. 157. which is to Optatus, does thus illustrate it: Sicut in
regno mortis nemo sine Adam, ita in regno vitae nemo sine Christo: As in the
kingdom of death there is no man without Adam, so in the kingdom of life,
there is no man without Christ: as by Adam all men were made unrighteous, so by
Christ are all men made righteous: sicut per Adam omnes mortales in poena facti
sunt filij seculi, ita and per Christum omnes immortales in gratia fiunt filij
Dei: As by Adam, all men mortal in punishment, were made the sons of this
world: so by Christ all men immortal in grace are made the sons of God.

Thus have I proved unto you, that the Gospel of Christ is the word of
Salvation, as well because it is the power of God unto Salvation, as also
because it teaches us of the author of our Salvation.

Secondly, it is the doctrine of Peace. The Gospel of Christ is called the
doctrine of peace, because the ministers of the Gospel do publish and preach
Peace. This Peace which they publish and preach is threefold: Between God and
man. Man and man. Man and himself.


First, they preach Peace between God and man: that Peace, which Christ has
procured us by the blood of his Cross, Coloss. 1.20. In which respect he is
called our Peace, Ephesians. 2.14. For in him has God reconciled us unto himself,
2. Cor. 5.18.

Secondly, they preach Peace between man and man. They exhort you with the
Apostle, Romans 12.18. If it be possible, as much as lies in you, have peace
with all men, and 2. Cor. 13.11. Be of one mind, live in Peace. Live in Peace,
and the God of Peace shall be with you.

Thirdly, they preach peace between man and himself: between man and his
own conscience. It is that Peace, whereof we read, Psalm. 119.165. Great Peace
have they which love thy Law, O Lord, and nothing shall offend them; they shall
have no stumbling block laid in their ways: though outwardly they be
assaulted by adversity, crosses and troubles, yet within they are quiet: they
have the Peace of conscience; they are at Peace with themselves.

From this threefold peace published and preached by the ministers of the
Gospel of Christ, the Gospel of Christ may well be called, the doctrine of
Peace.

Thirdly, it is the doctrine of good things. The Gospel of Christ is called
the doctrine of good things. Of good things! The name of Gospel in the Greek
tongue imports as much. The Greeks call it (...); the word signifies a good
message, that is, a happy, and a joyful message of good things.

What else I pray you is (...), that, which you call the Gospel, but a
celestial doctrine, which God first revealed in Paradise, afterward published
by the Patriarchs and Prophets, shadowed out in sacrifices and ceremonies, and
last of all accomplished by his only begotten Son? God who is only good,
yea, is goodness it self, is the author of the Gospel, and therefore the
Gospel must needs bring with it a message of good things. The message it
brings is this; that mankind is redeemed by the death of Christ, the only
begotten Son of God, our Messiah and Savior, in whom is promised and
preached to all that truly believe in him, perfect deliverance from sin,
death, and the everlasting curse. Could there be any more happy or welcome
tidings to mankind, then this was? Out of doubt the Gospel of Christ is the
doctrine of good things.

Fourthly, it is the doctrine of the Kingdom. The Gospel of Christ is the
doctrine of the Kingdom. Its so called, Luke 4.43. where Christ says of
himself, I must preach the kingdom of God to other Cities also. So is it,
Mark 1.14. there the Evangelist says of Christ, that he preached the kingdom
of God in Galilee. This Kingdom is twofold; of Grace, and of Glory: of Grace
here on earth, and of glory hereafter in Heaven. Of grace here: here Christ
reigns in the souls of the faithful by his word and holy Spirit. Of glory
hereafter, when Christ shall have delivered up the Kingdom to God the Father,
as Saint Paul speaks, 1. Cor. 15.24.

If so it be: if the Gospel of Christ be the word of Salvation: if it be the
doctrine of Peace, of Peace between God and man, between man and man,
between man and himself: if it be the doctrine of good things, of our
deliverance from sin, from death, and from the curse of the Law: if it be the
doctrine of the Kingdom; the Kingdom of grace, and the Kingdom of glory.
then must it be granted, that the Ministers of the Gospel do bring with them
blessings of an inestimable value. And such is my doctrine; The ministry of
the word of God freely exercised in any nation, is to that nation a blessing of
an inestimable value.

The use hereof concerns the Ministers of the Gospel, and their auditors.
First, the Ministers of the Gospel. They may here be put in mind of their
duty, which is willingly and cheerfully to preach the Gospel. This their
duty may be called a debt. S. Paul calls it so, Romans 1.14, 15. I am debtor
both to the Grecians and to the Barbarians, both to the wise men, and to the
unwise. Therefore as much as in me is, I am ready to preach the Gospel to you
also that are at Rome. S. Paul (you see) acknowledges a debt, and makes a
conscience of discharging it. The obligation or bond whereby he was made a
debtor was his Apostolical calling: his debt was, to preach the Gospel: the
persons to whom he was indebted, were Greeks and Barbarians, the wise and the
unwise. His good conscience to discharge his debt, appears in his readiness
to do it: I am ready, as much as in me is, to preach the Gospel.

S. Paul may be unto us a pattern of imitation. We also must acknowledge a
debt, and must make a conscience of discharging it. The obligation or bond
whereby we are made debtors is our ministerial calling. Our debt is, to preach
the Gospel. The persons to whom we are indebted, are our own flock, our own
people, the people over whom the Lord has made us ouer-seers. Our good
conscience to discharge our debt will appear in our readiness to do it. I,
and every other minister of the Gospel must say, as S. Paul does, I am ready,
as much as in me is, to preach the Gospel to you. So far forth as God shall
permit and make way for discharge, I am ready to preach the Gospel to you.
Nothing has hitherto, or shall hereafter with hold me from paying you this
debt, but only the impediments which the Lord obiecteth.

Secondly, the use of my doctrine concerns you, who are the hearers of the
word. You also may here be put in mind of your duty, which is patiently and
attentively to hear the word preached. Of your readiness in this behalf I
should not doubt, if you would but remember what an invaluable treasure it is,
which we bring unto you. Is it not the word of Salvation, the Salvation of your
souls? Is it not your peace inward, and outward, your peace with God, your
peace with man, your peace with your own consciences? Is it not the doctrine
of good things, your deliverance from sin, from death, and from the curse of
the Law? Is it not the publication of the Kingdom of God, his kingdom of
gra^e, wherein you now may live, tha hereafter you may live in the Kingdom of
glory? Is it not even thus? Can it be denied?

Beloved in the Lord, the Lord who raised up unto the ten Tribes of Israel of
their sons for Prophets, and of their young men for Nazarites, he raises up
unto you of your sons Ministers, Prophets, and Teachers; and of your young
men, such as may be trained up and fitted in the Schools of the Prophets, in
our Naioths, in our Universities for a present supply, when God shall be
pleased to remove from you, those which have labored among you, and are over
you in the Lord.

Its an admirable and a gracious dispensation from God, to speak unto man, not
in his own person, and by the voice of his Exodus 20.18, 19.
thunderings and lightnings, or with the noise of a trumpet, as he did upon
Mount Sinai, when he gave the Law (for then should we run away, and cry unto
Moses, or some other servant of God, Speak thou with us, and we will hear:
but let not God speak with us, lest we dye) but by Doctors, Pastors, and other
Ministers, men of our own nature, flesh of our flesh, and bones of our bones,
men subject to the same James 5.17.
passions, whereto we are. Admirable and gracious is this dispensation.

God thus borrowing, and using the tongues of men to speak unto men, does it
quasi imperans, non quasi mendicans, (as Bernard speaks Sermon. 5. upon the
Canticles) he does it not begging, but commanding: and in that he does it,
indulgentia est, non indigentia; it is not from any want in himself, but it is
from his indulgence and favor unto us: and in doing it non efficaciam quaerit,
sed congruentiam, he seeks not any strength to his own words, but congruence
and proportion to our infirmities? Its even so. For we were not able to bear
the glory of that Majesty, if it did not in some sort hide and temper it self
under these earthly instruments.

Now therefore when we take the counsels of God from the lips of our sons,
and of our young men, from the lips of our Brethren, from the lips of the
Ministers of the word of God, we may say of them, as the men of Listra once
said of Paul and Barnabas, but renouncing the idolatry of the speech, Act.
14.11. God is come down to us in the likeness of men. God is he that speaks
from above, that blesses and curses, that binds and loses, that exhorts
and dehorteth by the mouth of his Ministers.

For this respect and relations sake between God and his Ministers, whom it
has pleased him to dignifie and honor in some sort with the representation of
his own person upon earth, they have ever heretofore bin holden in very
reverend estimation. Such was the estimation holden of S. Paul by the
Galatians. S. Paul himself confesses it, Gal. 4.14, 15. where he bears them
record, that albeit through infirmity of the flesh, he preached the Gospel
unto them at the first, yet they despised him not, or rejected him, but
received him as an Angel of God, even as Christ Jesus: yea, that if it had bin
possible (Nature and the Law forbidding it) they would have plucked out their
own eyes, and given them to him.

But why speak I of the reverend regard given to Saint Paul, or to any other
the Ministers of the word of God in the primitive times of the Church? Look ye
but to the days of late, to the days of your Fathers; and you will see them
in very high esteem. Then, though your Priests, were but Lignei sacerdotes,
wooden priests, priests of Babylon, that were your leaders and your guides, you
highly honored them. You bestowed upon them your eareings, and your frontlets,
your lands and revenues to maintain them in their Couents, and Cloisters. To
every Friar that drew you aside to confess you, you submitted your selves,
with Pater meus es tu, you are my Father, my ghostly Father. So far were you
from despising or rejecting them, that ye received them as Angels of God, yea
as Christ Jesus himself. Such honor had the Priests in your forefathers
days.

No marvel, will some say. For then Religion had eaten up Policy, the Church
had devoured the Commonwealth, Cloisters were richer in treasure, then Kings
houses, all the wealth and fatnes of the Land was swallowed down into the
bellies of Frieryes and N^neryes. No marvel if then Priests were held in high
esteem. But now the times are changed, and we with them.

True, I grant: the times are changed indeed. For as a worthy Prelat yet living
( Lect. 34. in Ionam) speaks: Now Policy has eaten up Religion, the
Commonwealth the Church, and men rob God, as God expostulateth, Malac. 3.8.
Men rob God against all equity and conscience. But wherein do they rob him?
In tithes and offerings. His tithes and offerings are translated to strangers:
they eat the material bread of the Prophets, who never give them spiritual
food: and they that serve not at the Altar, do live by it: whereas many a
Minister, that serves at the Altar, has not whereon to live. Hence is the
Ministry grown into contempt; and they who should be honored for their
calling sake, are for their wants sake very basely thought of.

I speak not this to tax you of this place: you rob not God, but do duly pay
your tithes and offerings; the Church here has its right; and ever may it have
to your comfort. But I do it to move you to lift up your hearts to the throne
of grace, and to bless the Lord, for as much as when the tithes and offerings
of some of your neighbor Villages are made appropriate, yours are by Gods
goodness exempted from the spoil, and reserved to their proper use: whereby you
may in all ages be provided, though not of Prophets and Nazirites, such as God
raised up unto Israel, but of Pastors and Teachers, such as may be able to
break unto you the bread of life, and to preach unto you the Gospel of
Christ, which is the Gospel of Salvation, the Gospel of Peace, the Gospel of
good things, and the Gospel of the Kingdom of God.

Hitherto you have heard, that God bestowed a benefit of inestimable value upon
the ten tribes of Israel, in raising up unto them of their sons for Prophets,
and of their young men for Nazirites.

Now follows the Testification that such a benefit was bestowed; you may call
it an asseueration. Its propounded by way of question, wherein you may observe,
Who moves the question.
To whom it is moved, and
What the question is.


The Lord is he, that moves the question, the children of Israel are they to
whom the question is moved: the question is, Is it not even thus? Is it not
even thus, o ye children of Israel, says the Lord?

Neither the time, nor your patience will give way to the several handling of
these particulars: nor is there any need of enlargment, the words are so
plain and without obscurity. The question is vehement, it urges the
Israelites, it calls their consciences to witness.

Is it not even thus, o ye children of Israel, says the Lord? Say, O ye
children of Israel; have I not done so and so for you? Have I not bestowed such
and such benefits upon you? Can any of you deny it? Vtique nemo, says
Rupertus: there is none of you can be so impudent as to deny it. I, the Lord,
who destroyed the Amorite before you and for your sake; I, who brought you up
out of the land of Egypt, and led you forty years through the wilderness, to
possess the land of the Amorites; I, even I, also raised up of your sons for
Prophets, and of your young men for Nazirites. Is it not even thus, O ye
children of Israel? I, the Lord, ask you the question, Is it not thus?

The points of doctrine from hence to be collected are diverse;

1. God will have the blessings and benefits which he bestows upon us, ever
to be had in remembrance.

2. We must acknowledge, that whatsoever good we have, we have it from the Lord.

3. The blessings which God bestows upon us, are nothing inferior to those
he bestowed upon the Israelites.

I make this plain by a brief collation of the blessings bestowed by the Lord
upon them and us.

The Lord brought Israel out of Egypt, the house of bondage, with a mighty
hand, and he overthrew Pharaoh in the red sea: the same Lord has delivered us
from as great a bondage, has freed us from the house of Hell, and has spoiled
that infernal Pharaoh, the Devil.

The Lord gave unto the Israelites the land of the Amorites for their
possession, when he had driven out the Amorites from before their face: the
same Lord has given us a good land for our possession, and has from out our
Churches expulsed the spiritual Amorite, Antichrist, Balaam of Rome.

The Lord raised up unto Israel of their sons for Prophets: the same Lord
has raised up unto us of our sons for Prophets; he gives us orthodoxall and
sound interpreters of his holy word, and Pastors, to declare unto us, what his
sacred will is.

The Lord raised up unto Israel of their young men for Nazirites: the same Lord
has given us Schools and Nurseries of good literature for the trayning up of
our young men, as Nazirites, in knowledge and in piety; yea, he has given us
(...), one most holy Nazirite, even Christ Jesus; in whom he makes us all
(...), that is, Nazirites, that is, Christians, sanctifying us by his Holy
Spirit in Baptism, wherein we promised to forsake the Devil, and all his
works, and to give up our selves wholly to the obedience and service of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

Haec frequenter and serio cogitemus fratres. Dearly beloved, let us
frequently and seriously think of these things. So shall we the more esteem
Gods benefits bestowed upon us, and shall the less abuse them, and shall the
longer enjoy them. Which God of his infinite mercy grant unto us through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

THE XVII. LECTVRE.
AMOS 2.12. But ye gave the Nazirites wine to drink, and commanded the
Prophets, saying, Prophecy not.


IN this prophetical Sermon written by Amos concerning the Israelites, I have
heretofore in my eight Lecture upon this Chapter, observed four principal
parts; A Reprehension. An Enumeration. An Exprobation, and A Commination.


The first is, a reproof of Israel for sin, verse. 6.7.8.

The second, a recital of the benefits which God has bestowed upon Israel,
verse. 9.10.11.

The third, a twyting of Israel with their unthankfulness, verse. 12.

The fourth, a threatening of punishment to befall them, from the 13. verse, to
the end of the Chapter.

Of the two former, the Reprehension and the Enumeration, you have at sundry
times already heard. Now are we to proceed to the Exprobation, contained in
the words at this time read unto you.

For our easier understanding whereof, we are to cast back an eye upon those
benefits which in the precedent verses are mentioned to have been bestowed by
the Lord upon his people Israel. They were either Corporal or Spiritual.
Corporal, as the destruction of the Amorites before the Israelites, and for
their sakes, verse. 9. their deliverance out of Egypt, their protection and
preservation in the wilderness for forty years together, that at length they
might possess the land of the Amorite, verse. 10. And Spiritual, as the
doctrine of the sincere worship of God, and of eternal salvation, together
with the free use and passage thereof, expressed, verse. 11. by the raising up
of their sons for Prophets; and of their young men for Nazirites.

These were very great benefits, and worthy all thankful acknowledgement. But
the people of Israel, were so far from giving thanks for them, that they
Ruffinus.
vilely esteemed them, and too too contemptuously rejected them. This appears
in this 12. verse, which I therefore call an Exprobration, an vpbraiding, or
twyting of Israel, with the foulness of their Albertus Magnus.
ingratitude. Two things here are said unto their charge: one is, Their
soliciting the Nazirites to break their vow. The other is their hindering the
Prophets in the execution of their function. The first in these words, ye gave
the Nazirites wine to drink. The second in these, ye commanded the Prophets,
saying Prophecy not. Of these in their order.

The first is, their soliciting the Nazirites to break their vow: Ye gave the
Nazarites wine to drink.

Of the name of Nazirites, and of their institution, I spoke in my last
exercise out of this place. I will not now spend time upon the repetition of
that, I then delivered. It shall suffice, if I add but a word or two for the
further illustration thereof.

The Babington in Number 6.
Nazirites had their name of Nazar, which signifies to separate. They were
young men, separate from the ordinary course of men, and bound to a certain
peculiar course and profession of life. They were Ecclesiae ornamenta, says
Harmon. in 4 (...). Moses.
Calvin, ornaments of the Church, and God would in them, as in a glass make
his honor and glory in some sort to appear. They were, quasi pretiosae
gemmae, to shine as rich Jewels among the people of God. They were, tanquam
signiferi, ante signani, and duces, as standard-bearers, ringleaders, and
chiefetaines to show the way of divine worship unto others.

Singular was the honor and dignity of this order and calling of Nazirites.
Jeremy in his Lamentations chap. 4.7. thus sets them forth. Her Nazirites were
purer then snow, they were whiter then milk, they were more ruddie in body
then Rubies, they were like polished Sapphires.

The author of this order and calling is God. This appears by the verse next
before my text. There the Lord has said, I have raised up of your young men for
Nazirites.

The first branch of the Law, that concerns this order and calling is
accurately described, Number, 6.3, 4. Whosoever shall vow the vow of a Nazirite,
he shall abstain from wine and strong drink, he shall drink no vinegar of
wine, or vinegar of strong drink, neither shall be drink any liquor of
grapes, nor eat moist grapes nor dried. All the days of his Naziriteship
shall he eat nothing that is made of the vine tree from the kernels even to
the husk.

These Nazirites for the time of their Naziriteship were to apply themselves
wholly to the study of the law of God, and therefore was abstinence from wine
and strong drink enjoined them. God would have them refrain all things that
might trouble the brain, stir up lust, and make them unfitly disposed for so
holy a study: of which sort are wine and strong drink.

Solomon so accounts of them, Prove. 20.1. For there he says, Wine is a mocker,
strong drink is raging, and whosoever is deceived thereby is not wise.
Salomons Mother does likewise so account of them, Prove. 31.4. There her
counsel to her son is: It is not for Kings, O Lemuel, it is not for Kings
to drink wine, nor for Princes to drink strong drink: left they being
drunken, forget the Law, and pervert the judgment of any of the afflicted. For
this cause also were the Priests forbidden wine, when they were to go into the
tabernacle of the Congregation, and that upon pain of death. The prohibition
is, Levit. 10.9. There thus says the Lord to Aaron; Do not drink wine, nor
strong drink, thou nor thy sons with thee, when ye go into the Tabernacle
of the Congregation, lest ye die. It shall be a statute for ever throughout
your generations. Hitherto I refer that, Exech. 44.21. No priest shall drink
wine, when he enters into the inner court.

From the places now alleged arises this position: Sobriety is a virtue fit
for all men, but especially for Ministers of the word and Sacraments.
Especially for Ministers.

The reasons are:

First, it is not for Ministers to speak foolishly, or to do any thing
indecently. Yet can they not but offend both in the one and the other, if they
suffer themselves to be overcome with swilling of wine or strong drink.

Secondly, it is for Ministers, to be vigilant in their vocations; to be
diligent in their ministerial employments, in reading, in study, in
meditation to be devout in their prayers unto God for themselves and the
people, over whom God has made them overseers; to handle the word of life
reverently, and to dispense it in due season to every weary soul. Yet must
they needs fail in the performance of these duties, if they give themselves to
the drinking of wine and strong drink.

Here may all that serve at the Altar be admonished, evermore to be mindful of
their calling, and of the hatred which God has of excess in men deuouted to
his service, above all others; as also of the fearful judgment, that will in
the end without all fail ensue. For if of all it be true, that the drunkard
shall never enter into the kingdom of God (which you know to be true, and the
holy Spirit has passed it for a truth, 1. Cor. 6 10.) then must it needs be
sealed up in the conscience of any Minister, that a Minister through his
excess in drinking causing the holy things of God to be despised, shall never,
never come within the gates, of that eternal joy, but in stead thereof shall
reap the reward of his sin in everlasting torments, both of body and soul.
But this by the way.

The thing wherewith the Israelites in my text stand charged, is, their giving
the Nazirites wine to drink. The Israelites knew full well, that it was the
peremptory mandate and express commandment of the Lord, that the Nazirites
should abstain from wine, and strong drink: yet did they contrary thereunto
give unto the Nazirites wine to drink.

Gave they the Nazirites wine to drink? was this such an offense, that God
should take displeasure at it? To what end then serves the precept of giving
wine to him, that is ready to perish through the anxietie and bitterness of
his mind, that thereby he may be cheared and comforted? The precept is, Prove.
31.6. Give strong drink unto him that is ready to perish, and wine unto those
that be of heavy hearts. Let him drink, and forget his poverty, and remember
his misery no more. In vain were this precept, were the drinking of wine an
offense, whereat God should take displeasure. And S. Paul does amiss, 1. Tim.
5.23. to wish him to drink no longer water, but to use a little wine for his
stomachs sake, and his often infirmities; if the drinking of wine be an
offense. If the drinking of wine be an offense, why does the same Apostle tell
the Romans, chap. 14.17. that the kingdom of God consists not in meat and
drink, thereby giving them liberty, not only to eat, but also to drink
what they would, even to drink wine?

To this I say: It is not of it self any offense to drink wine, or to give
others wine to drink; but herein consists the offense of the Israelites,
that they gave the Nazirites wine to drink contrary to the Law of God, and his
holy commandment. Toll verbum Domini, et liberum est vinum bibere: add
verbum Domini, and vinum exhibere aut bibere, tam grande est nefas, quam
adulterium aut latrocinium. So Brentius. Let there be no law, no commandment
of God against the drinking of wine, and you may at your pleasure drink wine:
But if Gods law and commandment be against it, then for a man to drink wine
himself, or to give others wine to drink, its as great a sin, as adultery,
or robbery.

Adam in Paradise had a law given him, that he should not eat of the tree of
knowledge of good and evil. The law is expressed, Genesis 2.17. Of the tree of
knowledge of good and evil thou shall not eat of it; for in the day that thou
eatest thereof, thou shall surely die. To eat an Apple was of it self but a
small matter; but the Law of God, whereby the eating of the Apple was
forbidden, was a matter of great weight. The very eating of the Apple God did
not much care for: it was the observance of his commandment, and the obedience
thereunto, that he required.

Saul had a commandment given him, that he should go down to Gilgal, and
tarry there seven days, till Samuel should come, and direct him what to do.
The commandment is expressed, 1. Sam. 10.8. Thou shall go down before me to
Gilgal, and behold, I will come down unto thee, to offer burnt offerings, and
to sacrifice sacrifices of peace offerings: seven days shall thou tarry,
till I come to thee, and show thee what thou shall do. According to this
commandment, Saul went to Gilgal, and tarried there 1. Sam. 13.8.
seven days according to the set time that Samuel had appointed. The seventh
day a little before Samuel came, Saul Verse. 9.
offered a burnt ofring. Verse. 10.
As soon as he had made an end of offering the burnt offering, Samuel came.
Saul understanding thereof went out to meet him, that he might salute him.
Samuel seeing what was done, tells Saul, that he had done Verse. 13
foolishly in not keeping the commandment of the Lord his God, which he
commanded him: and withal foretells him of a heavy judgment to befall him,
Verse. 14.
Thy kingdom shall not continue. The offering of the Holocauste or burnt
offering to the Lord, was it not of it self a good work? Yet because Saul
offered it out of due time, namely before Samuel was come, it was sin unto
him, and the loss of his kingdom. Did the Lord care for the preoccupation, or
prevention of so little time, as if it were a matter of it self to be
regarded? No: it was the observance of his commandment, and the obedience
thereunto, that he required.

So for my text I say: The giving the Nazirites wine to drink, was not of it
self a matter that the Lord much regarded: but it was the observance of his
commandment, and the obedience thereunto, that he required. The commandment
I even now repeated unto you out of Number. 6. The sum of it is, The Nazarite
shall abstain from wine and strong drink. Contrary to this commandment, did
the Israelites here give unto the Nazarites wine to drink: which is the thing,
wherewith they are here twyted, to this sense: Ye gave the Nazarites wine to
drink: in so doing you made proof of your contempt of my Law, and your
disobedience thereunto. I looked you should have been thankful unto me, for
bestowing so great a benefit upon you, as is the order and calling of the
Nazarites, for the trayning up of your young men in piety and religion: but
you, unthankful you, have repaid me with contempt, and disobedience, you have
solicited the Nazarites to break their vow and contrary to my Law, ye gave
them wine to drink. The doctrine we are to gather from hence, is, Disobedience
against Gods holy laws and commandments, is a sin, carefully to be
eschewed by every child of God.

As by the knowledge of light we may know what darkness is, and by the
knowledge of good what evil is, so by the knowledge of obedience toward God,
we may know what disobedience against him is. Of obedience toward God I
entreated in my fifth Lecture upon this Chapter. I then handled this conclusion.
Obedience to the commandments of the Lord, is a duty, which the Lord
requires to be performed by every child of his. Whence by the Law of
contraries follows my now-conclusion; Disobedience against the commandments
of the Lord, is a sin, which the Lord requires to be eschewed by every child
of his.

For the illustration of this conclusion we are to note in man a twofold
disobedience; one in the state of corruption, the other in the state of
regeneration. Disobedience in man in the state of corruption, is an evil
quality inbred in him by nature, whereby he is made of himself altogether
unable and unwilling to live in subjection unto God, to hear his voice to obey
his will, or to do what he commands. By this disobedience man is not able to
do any thing, but hate God, his word, his will, and whatsoever is pleasing to
him. He ever rebels against God, he ever resists the will of God, he ever
despises the commandments of God, and embraces with all his might what God
forbids.

How great this disobedience is, the holy Scripture does evidently demonstrate,
when it describes the nature of man, his thoughts, his counsels, his
affections, his desires, his actions in the state of corruption, and before his
regeneration. So it calls us Number. 20.10.
rebels, Ezech. 2.3. impudent children, and stiffe-hearted, verse. 4. Gods
adversaries and his enemies, Esaias 1.24. Children of Ephesians. 5.6. C^l^s. 3.6.
diffidence and incredulity, Ephesians. 2.2. Children of wrath, ver. 3. Children
of darkness, Ephesians. 5.8. Children of the 1. Ioh. 3.8. Ioh. 8.49.
Devil, 1. John, 3.10. It says of us, Genesis 6.5. that every imagination of the
thoughts of our hearts is only evil continually. It says of us, Job 15.25.
that we stretch out our hands against God, and strengthen our selves against
the Almighty. It says of us, Ephesians. 4 17. that we walk in the varitie of our
minds; that having our understanding darkened, we are alienated from the life
of God, through the ignorance that is in us, b cause of the blindness of our
hearts, that as men past feeling, we have given our selves over unto
lasciviousness, to work all uncleanness, even with greediness.

Such is the disobedience that is in man, while he is in the state of
corruption before he is regenerate. There is another kind of disobedience in
man, when he is in the state of Regeneration.

This disobedience is common to every child of God, while he lives in this
world, albeit in some it be greater, in some l^sse, as regeneration is
perfecter in some, then in others. This I thus describe: disobedience in man in
the state of regeneration, is an evil quality inbred in him by nature, whereby
he is made unable to yield due subjection unto God wholly on every part, with
all his heart, and all his might, or, so to obey his holy will simply in all
things, and always without tergiuersation, as never to decline from the rule
of true obedience.

By this disobedience we are all made guilty of the wrath of God, of
damnation, and of eternal death. The consideration hereof made David Psalm.
130.3. to cry out unto the Lord: If thou, Lord, should mark iniquities: O
Lord, who shall stand? It drew from him that humble supplication, Psalm. 143.2.
O Lord, Enter not into judgment with thy servant: for in thy sight shall no
man living be justified. It wrested from him that same confession, Psalm. 32.6.
namely, that the very godly, have need to pray for the remission of their
sins. There speaking of the remission of sins he says; For this shall
every one that is godly pray unto thee. For this, for the remission of sins,
shall every one that is godly pray unto thee, O Lord. From hence is it, that
our blessed Lord, and Savior Jesus Christ taught his Apostles, the most
perfect Christians that ever were, and therefore the most godly, to pray for
remission of their sins.

This disobedience, which as yet resideth in us, in the best of us, S. Paul
elegantly describes, Romans 7.14. where thus he speaks in his own person as a
man regenerate: we know that the law is spiritual: but I am carnal, sold
under sin. R^m. 17.15.
For that which I do, I allow not: for what I would, that do I not; but what
I hate, that do I. Verse. 16.
If then I do that which I would not, I consent unto the law, that it is good.
Verse. 17.
Now then, it is no more I, that do it, but sin, that dwells in me. Verse.
18.
For I know that in me (that is, in my flesh) dwells no good thing. For to
will is present with me: but how to perform that which is good, I find not.
Verse 19.
For the good that I would, I do not: but the evil that I would not; that I
do, etc.

I am not ignorant, that the Pelagians of old, and diverse of late, as Erasmus,
Ochinus, Castellio, Faustus, Socinus the Samosatenian, Iacobus Arminius, and
their adherents do affirm, that S. Paul speaks these words, not of
himself, as a man regenerate, but does in them describe a man that is a
profane, incontinent, sensual, unregenerate, or does describe the nature of
man after his fall, what and how much he is able to do without the grace of
God.

This their opinion is erroneous. The truth is, that S. Paul in the place
alleged, speaks not of any other but of himself, not as he was in
Pharisaisme, under the law; but as he was now, when he wrote this Epistle, in
the state of grace, a man regenerate. This great combat in S. Paul, now
regenerate; between the ^^m. 7.23.
law of his mind, and the law of his members, between the Verse. 22.25.
law of God and the law of sin, between the Verse. 22.
inward man and the outward, between the Verse. 18.
flesh and spirit, does clearly show, that the holiest man living has a
tincture of disobedience against the Lord his God. This is the second kind of
disobedience, which I noted to be in man, as he is in the state of
regeneration: and serves for the illustration of my propounded doctrine, which
was, Disobedience against Gods holy laws and commandments, is a sin, which
the Lord requires to be eschewed by every child of his.

Disobedience, not only that, which is in every man that is yet in the state
of corruption, but that other too, which is incident to the truly regenerate,
is a sin carefully to be eschewed by every child of God. Every child of God
should be unwilling to displease God: and what can more displease him then
disobedience?

Disobedience! Gods curse is upon it. The curse is, Psalm. 119 21. Maledicti,
qui declinant a mandatis tuis; cursed are they that do err from thy
commandments. Maledicti, a Deo scilicet, Cursed of God are all they, of what
estate or condition soever they are, that do err, in their life and
conversation, from his commandments, which he has prescribed as footsteps
and paths for men to tread in. Cursed are they that do err, he says not,
they that have erred; for they that have erred, may have repented; but cursed
are they that do err from thy commandments.

And here by erring we understand, not, every offense indifferently, but an
unbridled license to offend; we understand, not every slip, but a falling away
from God. We understand, not every disobedience, of ignorance, or infirmity,
but the disobedience of pride and presumption. Maledicti, Cursed are they, that
do err from thy commandments.

The like Curse is, Deuteronomy. 27.26. Maledictus, qui non permanet in sermonibus
legis huius, nec eos opere perficit. Cursed be he that continues not in the
words of this law to do them. It is cited by S. Paul, Gal. 3.10. Cursed is
every one, that continues not in all things, which are written in the Book of
the law to do them. In both places the end of the Law is poynted at. It is not
(...), but (...) not so much contemplation, as action, for the Law was given,
not only to be known, but also to be performed: and therefore, Romans 2.13. it
is avouched, that not the hearers of the Law are righteous before God, but the
doers of the Law shall be justified. The covenant of the Law requires from us
absolute obedience. In this obedience these things must concur according to
the tenor of the Law.

1. It must be performed by our selves; for the law reueales not the Mediator.

2. It must be inward, as well as outward.

3. It must be perfect in parts and degrees.

4. It must be constant and continual from the first moment of our conception,
without the least interruption through the whole course of our lives.

The least thought dissonant to the law inuolues us in disobedience, and lays
us open to the Curse. Maledictus, Cursed be he, that continues not in all
things which are written in the book of the Law, to do them.

Vae vobis is no better then a Curse, and that shall you find denounced to the
disobedient, Ecclus. 41.8. Vae vobis impij Viri qui dereliquistis legem
Altissimi; scilicet per inobedientiam, says Antoninus Sum. part. 2. Tit. 4.
cap. 2. Woe be unto you, ungodly men, which have forsaken the law of the most
high God, through your disobedience: Vae vobis, woe be unto you. And why so?
The reason is added: For if you increase, it shall be to your destruction: And
if you be borne you shall be borne to a curse: and if you die, a curse shall be
your portion, Vae vobis, woe be unto you, ye ungodly men, which have forsaken
the law of the most high God, through your disobedience.

Is disobedience thus cursed? Then must it be punished. For as Dicere Dei is
facere, so Maledicere Dei is malum poenae facere. If God says a thing, he does
it: and if he curses he punishes. He curses disobedience, and therefore he
punishes disobedience.

He punishes it, says Antoninus, three manner of ways.

First, per afflictionem corporis, by afflicting man in his body.

Secondly, per impugnationem orbis, by setting the whole world against man. and

Thirdly, per privationem numinis, by depriving him of the vision of God.

First, God punishes disobedience, by laying affliction upon man in his body.
For the disobedience of Adam, he says unto Adam, Genesis 3.17. Maledicta terra in
opere tuo. Cursed be the earth for thy work, for the work of thy
transgression, for thy sin, for thy sake. Cursed be the earth of thy body,
for thy body is but earth: cursed shall it be, and many ways afflicted.
Thorns and Thistles, diverse passions and infirmities, shall it bring forth
unto thee. All the evils of punishment, whereto these weak bodies of ours are
subject, hunger, and thirst, and heat and cold, and travail, and trouble, and
misery, and calamity, and weakness, and diseases, yea, and death too:
together with that neuer-ceasing rebellion of the flesh against the Spirit,
called in Scripture, the Concupiscence of the flesh, which cleaves fast unto
us all our life long, and is the fountain and root of all our evil deeds, all
these are upon us for disobedience.

Secondly, God punishes disobedience by setting the whole world against man.
For as it is Wisd. 5.21. Pugnabit cum illo orbis terrarum contra insensatos.
The world shall fight with him against the unwise; the world shall take part
with God against the disobedient. The world, that is, all the creatures in the
world whereof we read, verse. 18. Armabit creaturam ad vltionem inimicorum; The
Lord, he shall take to him his jealousy for complete Armor, and make the
Wisd. 5.17.
creature his weapon, for the revenge of his enemies. Where by the creature, I
understand Lorinus.
vniuersitatem creaturarum, the university of Creatures, all the Creatures in
the world; orbem terrarum, even the whole world of Creatures. God shall make
the creature his weapon for the revenge of his enemies, and the world shall
fight with him against the unwise.

The thunderbolt is his weapon against the disobedient, verse. 21. Then shall
the right aiming thunderbolts go abroad; and from the clouds as from a well
drawn bow, shall they fly to the mark, They shall fly to the mark, as from
a bow: therefore are they called the Lords arrows, Psalm. 18.14. The Lord
thundered in the Heavens, and the highest gave his voice: he sent out his
arrows, and she shot out lightnings; so did she scatter and discomfit the
wicked. The like sentence you have, Job 27.2. where the thunder is called, the
noise of this voice of the Lord, and the sound that goes out of his mouth, Job
37.4.
the voice of his excellency, the voice wherewith he thundreth Verse. 5.
marueilously. This his voice, the thunder, he Verse. 3.
directs under the whole Heaven, and his lightning unto the ends of the
earth. The thunder, the Creature of the Lord, is the Lords weapon wherewith
sometimes he reuengeth the wicked and disobedient.

So is the Hail: so is the water; so is the wind. These also fight with the
Lord, against the disobedient. Their fight is described, Wisd 5.22.
Haile-stones full of wrath shall be cast as out of a stone-bow against the
wicked, and the water of the sea, shall rage against them, and the floods shall
cruelly drown them. Yea, a mighty wind shall stand up against them, and like
a storm shall blow them away.

Hail! It was one of the great plagues of Egypt, Exodus 9.23. Hail with
Thunder, and fire mingled with hail, a very grievous hail was upon the land
of Egypt: it smote all that was in the field, Exodus 9.25.
both man and beast: it smote every herb of the field, and brake eu^ry tree
thereof. With Hail stones the Lord fought for Iosuah, when he went up to the
rescue of Gibeon against the five Kings of the Amorites, Josh. 10.11. The
enemies were discomfited, and a great slaughter was made of them: yet more died
with Ecclus 46.6.
hailestones, then were slain with the sword.

The Lord has a treasury of Hail, for the time of his battles. You may
read of it in the Book of Job, chap. 38.22. There the Lord thus questioneth
with Job: Have thou seen the treasures of the hail, which I have reserved
against the time of trouble, against the day of battle and war? I could yet
far^her tell you out of the Revelation of S. John chap. 16.21. of a Hail, a
great Hail, that fell from out of Heaven upon men every stone thereof was
about the weight of a Talent, and men blasphemed God because of the plague of
the Hail: for, the plague thereof was exceeding great. But I have said enough
to prove that the Hail, the creature of the Lord, is the Lords weapon,
wherewith sometimes, he reuengeth the wicked and disobedient.

From the Hail come we to the Water. Of the fifteen signs, that shall be
before the last Judgment, and are by J^ 4. Sent. D^^. 48. Dub. 3.
Bonauenture, Holkot, In ^undem D^^^. qu. 3.
Richardus de Media Villa, and ^orinus c^m. in Sup. 5.23.
others cited out of S. Hierome (though Eusebius Emissenus in his Sermon upon
the second Dominical of Advent cites them out of the Annals of the Jews) the
first is, that the Sea shall swell fifteen Cubits high above the tops of
mountains, and shall not run back, but there consist like unto walls. For
the truth whereof I can say nothing. But thus much Christ tells us, Luke
21.25. that before that great day, the Sea and waves shall roar. Granatensis
in his exercises thus meditateth upon the words: Most of all other elements,
the Sea shall at that time show greatest rage and fury, and the waves thereof
shall be so high and so furious, that many shall think, they will utterly
ouerwhelme the whole earth. Such as dwell by the Seaside shall be in great
dread and terror for the incredible and unusual swelling and elevation of the
waters: and such as dwell farther off shall be wonderfully affrayd, and even
astonished at the horrible roaring and noise of the waves, which shall be so
extremely outrageous, that they shall be heard for many a mile off.

But what speak I now of waters, that shall be hereafter? There was a flood of
waters in the days of Noah, that prevailed upon the earth for an hundred and
fifty days together; you all know it, Genesis 7.24. The Waters then prevailed
against man for the sin of man, the fruit of his disobedience.

And they shall again prevail, if Gods pleasure be such; and the disobedience
of man shall so require. For the Almighty, he, who shut up the Sea with doors,
when it brake forth as a child issues forth of his mothers womb, as Job
speaks, chap. 38.8. and made the clouds to be a covering for it, and swadled
it with a band of thick darkness; and established his decree upon it, and set
bars and doors unto it, and said: Hitherto shall thou come, but no further,
and here shall thy proud Waves be stayed, he, the Almighty, can easily vnbarre
those doors, and let the waters loose to fight his battles. Hereof we have had
a late woeful and lamentable experience. See my twentieth Lecture upon Amos
2.14. page 241.
The woeful news and report of floods in this Country of ours nine years
since, may hereof be your remembrancers. It shall ever stand for good, that the
water, the creature of the Lord, is the Lords weapon, wherewith sometimes he
reuengeth the wicked and disobedient.

The wind is next. The wind! The Lord blows it out of his mouth, Job 37.10.
it is called the breath of his mouth, Job 15.30. he brings them out of his
Ierem. 10.13.
treasuries, Psalm. 135.7. He flies upon the wings thereof, Psalm. 18.10. and
walks upon the wings thereof, Psalm. 104.3. He weighs the winds Job 28.25.
He Mark. 4.39. Luke 8.24.
rebukes the winds, Matthew. 8.26. he commands the winds, and they obey him,
Luke 8.25.

Memorable was the victory of the Emperor Theodosius, against the traitor,
and rebel Eugenius. Eugenius was like to have had the upper hand. It pleased
the Almighty upon the prayers which the Emperor made unto him for aid and
assistance, to work a strange act. He sent a Wind to take part with the
Emperor. It was a most unusual and mighty Wind. It blew with such force and
violence, that it brake the array of Eugenius his soldiers; did beat back
their arrows, their darts, and their iauelings, upon themselves; did strike
their targets out of their hands; did bring upon them incredible abundance of
dust and filth: and d^d drive the arrows of the Emperors side, with such
forcible flight against them, that they soon gave the field for lost. The
story is Ecclesiastical, written by Socrates lib. 5. cap. 24. by Theodorite
lib. 5. cap. 24. by Sozomene lib 7. cap. 24. by Nicephorus lib. 12. cap. 39.
and recounted by Cassiodore in his Tripartite lib. 9. cap. 45. and by Claudian
the Poet in his Panegyricke to Honorius. I could here tell you how the winds
fought for us against that great Armada and invincible Navy, that was provided
for our overthrow: but I may not now stand upon amplifications. Its out of
doubt: the wind, the creature of the Lord, is the Lords weapon, wherewith
sometimes he reuengeth the wicked and disobedient.

Every other creature of the Lord, has his place, to fight the Lords battles
against the disobedient. To avenge Gods quarrel against the disobedient, the
Heaven, that is over our heads, shall become as brass, and the earth that is
under us, as iron, Deuteronomy. 28.23. Heaven and earth shall fight for him. Levit. 26
22. Ezech. 5.17.
Wild beasts, evil beasts, all the beasts of the field shall fight for him,
Esaias. 56.9 Every feathered foul shall fight for him, Ezech. 39.17. The
silliest of creatures etiam vermes, and pulices, and muscae, and araneae, says
Summa Theol. part. 2. Tit. 4. ^ap 2. 1.
Antoninus, worms, and fleas, and flies, and spiders, shall all fight for him.
So true is that which in the second place I affirmed; God punishes
disobedience per impugnationem orbis, by setting the world against man.

Thirdly, God punishes disobedience per privationem Numinis, by depriving man
of the vision of God. This appears by the severity of that sentence which
the Judge of all flesh, the Judge of quick and dead, shall at the last day
pronounce against the Reprobate for their disobedience to Gods holy Laws and
Commandments. The sentence is expressed, Mat. 25.41. Depart from me ye
cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels.

Depart from me] There is preuatio numinis; a separation from the face of God,
an exclusion from the beatificall and blessed vision of God.

Depart from me ye cursed] Cursed are ye, and therefore depart. Cursed,
because ye have not obeyed the Law of the Lord: Cursed, because ye have
contemptuously rejected the holy Gospel: Cursed, because ye have trodden under
foot the sweet grace of God freely offered unto you: Cursed, because ye have
been so far from relieuing the weak and poor members of Christ, as that
ye have rather oppressed and crushed them with wrong and violence. Cursed are
ye and therefore depart.

Depart from me ye Cursed, into everlasting fire] Behold, the torment, where
into the disobedient shall be cast, and the infinity of it. Its fire, and fire
everlasting. But why fire? Are there not other kinds of punishments in Hell.
Yes, there are. Dionysius the Carthusian in his third Novissimum art. 6.
reckons up eleven kinds: the Centuriators in their first Centurie lib. 1.
cap. 4. nine kinds. Durandus de S. Porciano in 4. Sent. Did. 50. qu. 1.
diverse kinds. Why then does the Judge in pronouncing the sentence of the
damned speak only of fire? Caietane says it is, propter supplicij
vehementiam; for the vehemency of the punishment: because, of all the
punishments in Hell that shall torment the body, the fire is the sharpest. So
says Jn Mat. 25. qu. 403.
Abulensis, In afflictivis, nihil est nobis tam terribile, quam ignis; of
things that may afflict our bodies, there is nothing so terrible unto us, as
fire. So Durandus in the place now cited,. 9. Of all the punishments in Hell,
wherewith the body shall be tormented, the punishment of fire is the greatest;
quia, quod est magis activum, est magis afflictivum; the more active any thing
is, the more it tormenteth: but the fire is maxim activus, and therefore
maxim afflictivus; the fire is the most active, and therefore it most of all
tormenteth. For this cause, when other punishments are in Scripture passed over
with silence, the sole punishment of fire is expressed, because in it, as in
the greatest of all, all other punishments are understood.

Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and
his Angels] Prepared of God the Father by his eternal decree of absolute
reprobation. Prepared for the Devil and his Angels] God from everlasting
determined concerning such Angels, as should fall, not to confirm them in
good, but to turn them out of heaven, and to exclude them from eternal
beatitude, together with their head and prince, the Devil. The Devil and his
Angels] Horrenda societas! Such shall be the companions of the cursed and
damned after this life ended.

I must draw toward an end. Dearly beloved, you have hitherto heard
concerning Disobedience, that it is a foul sin; that God curses it, and does
punish it: that he punishes it, first per afflictionem corporis, by laying
affliction upon man in his body: secondly, per impugnationem orbis, by setting
the whole world against him, and thirdly, per privationem numinis, by depriving
him of the beatificall and blessed vision of God: which of all the punishments
of Hell is far the greatest, far greater then the punishment of fire.

What now remains for us, but that we labor to eschew and to fly from so
damnable a sin? and to embrace the contrary virtue, due obedience to the holy
will of God? Let not the pleasures of sin, the lusts of the flesh, the
riches, the snares, the cares of this world, nor any transitory delight that
may tickle man for an hour, but will wound him for ever, let not all these,
nor any one of these, inuolue us in the gulf of disobedience against the holy
Gospel of Christ, and the eternal will of God.

But think we, oh think we ever, that there is a Heaven, a God, a Jesus, a
Kingdom of glory, a society of Angels, a communion of Saints, joy, peace,
and happiness, and an eternity of all these: and strive we with all humility
and obedience to the attainement of these; so shall God in this world shower
down upon us his blessings in abundance, and after this life ended, he shall
transplant us to his Heavenly Paradise. There shall this corruptible put on
incorruption, and our mortality shall be swallowed up of life.

THE XVIII. LECTVRE.
AMOS 2.12. But ye gave the Nazirites wine to drink; and commanded the
Prophets, saying, Prophecy not.


THat these words are an exprobation, an vpbraiding or twiting of Israel with
the foulness of their ingratitude, I signified in my last exercise out of
this place. I then observed in the words a double oversight in the Israelites:
the first was, that they solicited the Nazirites to break their vow; the
second, that they hindered the Prophets in the execution of their holy function.
The first in these words, Ye gave the Nazirites wine to drink: The second in
these, Ye commanded the Prophets, saying, Prophecy not. Of the first then.
Now of the second.

My method shall be first, to take a view of the words: then, to examine the
matter contained in them. The words are, Ye commanded the Prophets, saying,
Prophecy not.

Ye commanded (...) It is in Pihel, from the root (...) and it signifies, to
give in charge, to will, to command. If it be joined in construction with (...)
it properly signifies to forbid, as upon this place the learned Parisian
Professor of the Hebrew tongue Mercer, has observed. So shall the words sound
thus: You, unthankful I^raelites, you to whom I have raised up of your sons
for Prophets, you have taken upon you authority over my Prophets, to forbid
them to prophecy in my name, and to threaten them, if they obey you not, that
it shall fare the worse with them.

With this exposition agrees that of Calvin; whose note is, that (...) the
word in my text signifies Praecipere vel iubere, to give in charge, to will,
or to command, vel statuere, quum intercedit publica autoritas, to appoint or
to ordain by public authority. Hereto assenteth Petrus Lusitanus. By the word
mandabatis or praecipiebatis, which in the Hebrew is (...) he understands
edicta publica, public edicts or proclamations against such, as should dare to
preach true doctrine unto the people. So shall the words sound thus: You,
unthankful Israelites, you, to whom I have raised up of your sons for
Prophets, you have not only in secret corners, in your private conventicles,
murmured against, repined at, or cried out upon my Prophets, but also by
public order and proclamation you have enjoined them silence. Ye commanded
the Prophets, saying, Prophecy not,

The Prophets] What Prophets? We are to distinguish betwixt the Priests of the
Sanctuary, and Ieroboams priests: between Stars in the right hand of
Christ, fixed in their stations, and planets of an uncertain motion; between
shepherds and hirelings. There was an Aaron, and there was an Abiram; there
was a Simon Peter, and there was a Simon Magus; there was a Jude, and there was
a Judas. Not every one that calls himself a Prophet, is by and by a Prophet;
for even the woman Iezebel calls herself a Prophetess^, Revel. 2.20. Baal
had his four hundred and fifty Prophets; not one of them a true Prophet; all
of them against Elias, the Prophet of the Lord, 1. Kin. 18.22. Ahab had his
four hundred Prophets; not one of them a true Prophet; all of them against
Micaiah, the Prophet of the Lord, 1. King. 22 6.

Against such intruders, seducers and lying Prophets we are armed with an
admonition from the Lord, Ierem. 23.16. There thus says the Lord of Hosts,
Hearken not unto the words of the Prophets, that prophecy unto you; they make
you vain: they speak a vision of their own heart, and not out of the mouth
of the Lord. In this rank of seducers and lying Prophets, I place those
vpholders of the man of sin, Priests and Jesuits, who from the Seminaries
beyond the Seas come over hither into this our Country, here to sow the seeds
of disloyalty and blind superstition in the hearts of the people. God has
not sent them, yet they run; God has not spoken to them, yet they prophecy:
as Jeremy speaks of the false Prophets in his days, chap. 23.21. They
prophecy lies in the Lords name, and cry, I have dreamed, I have dreamed,
verse. 25.

Dreams they have: but what truth, what true vision? I answer in the words of
Jeremy, chap. 14.14. They prophecy unto you a false vision, a divination, a
thing of naught, and the deceit of their own hearts. Their sweet tongues utter
unto you as deadly poison, as is Deuteronomy. 32.33.
the poison of Dragons, or the venom of Aspes. They will allure you with
plausible notes of Peace, Peace. But take heed, you can expect no peace from
them. No peace, either to the weal public, or to the private conscience of
any man. Not to the weal public: for, their conspiracies are nefarious and
bloody. Not to the private conscience of any man: for, to be reconciled to that
unsound Church of theirs, the Church of Rome, to partake of their formal, and
counterfeit absolution of sins, to hear and see their histrionicall Masses,
to visit the shrines and relics of the dead, to say a number of
Pater-Nosters, or Ave-Maries upon beads, to invocate Saints, to adore Images;
can these, or any such forgeries yield any peace to a distressed conscience?
No, they cannot. Yet care not these false teachers and seducers, so they may
with such their untempered mortar of unwritten traditions, dawbe up the walls
of their Antichristian synagogue.

Now, will you know what shall be the portion of such intruders, seducers, and
lying Prophets? Jeremy will tell you chap. 23. that the Lord is Ierem. 23.30,
31, 32.
against them: that the v rs. 19.
whirlewinde of the Lord is gone forth against them in a fury, even a grievous
whi^lewinde, which shall fall upon them grievously: that the verse. 20.
anger of the Lord shall not return, until it have executed his will upon
them: that the Lord will bring upon them an verse. 40.
everlasting reproach, and a perpetual shame.

Their cup is tempered with no less gall and bitterness by the Prophet
Ezechiel chap. 13. There, for following Ezech. 13.3.
their own spirit, for resembling verse. 4.
the foxes in the deserts, for neglecting verse. 5.
to go up into the gap, to make up the hedge for the house of Israel, and to
stand in the battle in the day of the Lord, for seeing verse. 6, 7.
vain visions, for speaking lying diuinations, for building and verse. 10.
dawbing up walls with untempered mortar, they are accursed. Their curse, what
for the head thereof and for the foot, is full of unhappiness. It enters
with a Vae proph^tis insipientibus, woe unto the foolish Prophets, verse. 3. and
it bids farewell with an Anathema, with a cursed excommunication, verse. 8, 9. I
am against you, says the Lord God. Mine hand shall be upon you; ye shall not
be in the assembly of my people, ye shall not be written in the writing of the
house of Israel; ye shall not enter into the land of Israel. A heavy sentence!
Will you have the plain meaning of it? Its thus: The Lord is against all false
Prophets; He will come unto battle, and will fight against the wicked crew,
even with that sharp two edged sword, which proceeds out of his mouth. His
hand shall be upon them, for their destruction and ruin. They shall not be of
the number of Gods elect. They shall Psalm. 69.28.
be blotted out of the book of the living, and not be written with the
righteous. They shall never enter into that Celestial Jerusalem which is
above, and is the habitation of the blessed.

You have heard in general of Prophets, true and false. I should now speak
somewhat more distinctly.

There are two sorts of false Prophets: Some have no calling at all; some have
a calling, but without efficacy. Of the first sort were these Priests in
Judah, who were neither chosen by man, nor called of God; of whom the Lord
complains Ierem. 14 14. Ierem. 14.15. and 27.15. and 29.8, 9.
I sent them not, neither have I commanded them, neither spoke I unto them, yet
they prophecy: and chap. 23.21. I sent them not, yet they ran, I spoke not
to them, yet they prophesied. Of the second sort, were those Prophets in
Israel, whom men chose, but God called not. Of such some would have these
words, Hos. 9.8. to be understood, The Prophet is the snare of a fowler in all
his ways, and hatred in the house of his God.

In opposition to these, there are of true Prophets two sorts also. Both of
them are lawfully called to their holy function; some by God alone, some by God
and man. The holy Prophets in the Old Testament, and the blessed Apostles in
the New, had their calling from God alone: but Timothy, Titus, and the seven
Deacons, and the residue of religious and godly Doctors and Pastors of the
Church, had and have their calling, both from God and man.

This distinction thus given, it is now easy to define, who the Prophets are,
that are meant in my text. They are true Prophets, such as had their calling
immediately from God, and from him alone: even those holy men of God, who lived
in the time of the old Testament; some of which had the honor, to be the
blessed penmen thereof. Such were the Prophets, whom the Israelites commanded,
saying, Prophecy not.

Prophecy not] Speak not any more unto us in the name of the Lord. What? No
more! Can there be any one so execrably audacious, as utterly to forbid the
passage of the word of God? any forhead so brazen, as simply and precisely to
reject it? Its not to be imagined. The most wicked dare not do it. Yet would
they by their wills have less liberty of speech permitted to Gods Prophets,
Ministers, and servants: they would have their tongues somewhat tied, that they
might not by their crying out against sins, vex and gall their seared
consciences.

Hitherto we have taken a view of the words. It follows, that we examine the
matter contained in them.

Ye commanded the Prophets, saying, Prophecy not. Hoc nimirum erat, says
Rupertus, non solum loqui, sed etiam agere contra Spiritum Sanctum, qui
loquebatur per os Prophetarum: This indeed were not only to speak against,
but also to do against the holy Ghost, who spoke by the mouth of the Prophets.
He notes the disordered and frantic humor, that was in the people of
Israel, to vilitie and neglect those Prophets and teachers, which the Lord out
of the abundance of his mercy had sent unto them, to be their guides and
directors in the way of true piety and religion. The lesson we are to take
from hence, I give in this proposition, The wicked are evermore in a readiness
to do all the disgrace and despite they can to the true Prophets of the Lord,
and his Ministers.

This truth grounded upon my text, and thereby sufficiently warranted, may
further be illustrated by other places of this volume of the Book of God.

In the seventh Chapter of this Prophecy we see what course entertainment our
Prophet Amos receives from Amaziah, a Priest of Bethel. He there forbids Amos
to prophecy any more in the kingdom of the ten Tribes; and advises him to
get him away by flight to the kingdom of Judah, where the Lords prophets were
better welcome and more regarded: and tells him that in Israel, they needed no
such Prophets, nor cared for them, nor would suffer them to preach so plainly
to their King Jeroboam. Will you have Amaziah^ own words unto Amos? They are
in the twelfth and thirteenth verses. O thou Seer (for he that is now 1. Sam 9
9.
called a Prophet, was before time called a Seer) O thou Seer, go, flee thee
away into the land of Judah, and there eat bread, and Prophecy there. But
Prophecy not again any more at Bethel: For it is the Kings Chapel, and it
is the kings Court.

Was the entertainment, of the Prophet Jeremy found in Jerusalem, any whit
better? Not a whit. In the 18. chapter of his Prophecy, verse. 18 I find the
men of Judah plotting against him. Come, say they, let us devise devises
against Jeremiah: Come, and let us smite him with the tongue, and let us not
give heed to any of his words. In the 30. Chapter, ver. 2. I find him smitten
and put in the stocks by Pashur, the chief governor of the Lords house. In
the 26. Chapter, verse, 8. I see him again apprehended; threatened with death,
and arraigned. In the 33. chapter, verse. 1. I see him shut up in the Court of
the prison. In the 38. Chapter, verse. 6. I find him let down with cords into a
miry and dirtie dungeon. And all this befell him, because he prophesied in the
name of the Lord.

The usage of Micaiah the Prophet is likewise memorable. King Ahab, K. of
Israel 2. Chro. 18.7.
hates him, 1. King. 22.8. Zedekiah Verse. 23.
smites him on the cheek, verse. 24. and Amon, the governor of the City is
commanded to put him Verse. 26.
in prison, and to feed him with bread of affliction, and with water of
affliction, verse. 27.

There was a Seer, a Prophet, called 2. Chro. 16.7.
Anani. He had a message from the Lord to Asa King of Judah, and did faithfully
deliver it. But for so doing the King was in a rage with him, and put him in a
prisonhouse, 2. Chron. 16.10.

As ill affected to the Prophets of the Lord were the people of Judah for the
most part of them. And therefore is Esaias chapter 30.8. commanded to write it in
a table, and to note it in a Book, that it might be for the time to come for
ever and ever an evidence against that people, that they were a rebellious
people, lying children, children, that would not hear the Law of the Lord:
such, as blushed not, to say to the Seers, See not, and to the Prophets,
Prophecy not unto us right things: but if you will needs be Seeing, or
Prophesying, or Preaching, or speaking unto us, then speak unto us smooth
things, Prophecy deceits: Get you out of the way; turn aside out of the path:
cause the Holy one of Israel to cease from before us. Strange that there should
be in the people of the Lord, such contempt, such a detestation of the Prophets
of the Lord! But you see the lot of Gods Prophets under the old Testament.

Were they more regarded in the time of the New? It seems not. For it could
not but fall out with them according to that prediction of our Savior Christ,
Mat. 23.34. Behold, says he, I send unto you Prophets, and wise men, and
Scribes, and some of them ye shall kill and Crucify, and some of them shall
ye scourge in your Synagogues, and persecute them from city to city.
According to this prediction it came to pass.

Some they killed. They killed Eusebius. Histor. Eccles. lib. 2. ca. 9
James, the brother of John, with the sword, Act. 12.2. Some they crucified.
They crucified Christ himself, the Lord of life, Act. 3.15. Some they
scourged. They scourged Paul. He shall testify for himself, 2. Cor. 11.24. Of
the Jews five times received I forty stripes save one. and verse. 25. Thrice
was I beaten with rods. Some they persecuted from city to city. So they dealt
with Barnabas, Act. 13.50. Some they vexed with many kinds of cruelty. S.
Steven may be one instance. They gnashed on him with their teeth, Act. 7.54.
They smote him with their tongues, saying, we have heard him speak blasphemous
words against Moses, and against God, Act. 6.11. They came upon him, and caught
him, and brought him to the council, verse. 12. They cast him out of the
city, Act. 7.58. and they stoned him, verse. 59. In a word, they made such
Act. 8.3.
havoc of the Church in those prime days thereof, as that the messengers of
God were enforced through the bitterness of their spirit to complain with the
Apostle, Romans 8.36. Psalm. 44.22.
For thy sake we are killed all the day long, we are counted as sheep
appointed for the slaughter. And thus you see what is the portion of Gods
Ministers under the new Testament. Under both New, and Old, they are liable to
the disgraces and vexations of this wicked world. So true is my proposition.

The wicked are evermore in a readiness, to do all the disgrace and dispite
they can to the true Prophets of the Lord, and his Ministers. Yet not to them
only, not only to the true Prophets of the Lord, and his ministers; but to
you also of the laity, to as many of you, as have a true desire to live in the
fear of God, and to die in his favor: to as many of you, as are willing to
deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, that ye may live Tit. 2.13.
soberly justly, and piously in this present world. Your lot will be the same
with ours. The wicked will be evermore in a readiness, to do unto you also,
all the disgrace and despite they can.

You must put on the Livery and cognizance of Christ, as well as we. The most
principal and royal garment, which he wore, while he lived upon the earth,
was affliction. Affliction! It must be your coat too, it must be your livery.
You will hold him for an undutiful, and an ungracious child, that is ashamed
of his father: you will take him for a malapert and a saucy servant, that
refuses to wear his masters livery; Christ is your Father; he is your Master.
Take heed then, that you show not your selves undutiful, ungracious, malap^rt,
or saucy, in refusing to be, as he was, clothed Revel. 19.13.
with a vesture dipped in blood.

The Mark. 3.17.
sons of Thunder, James and John, would needs be advanced in the Kingdom of
Christ, to sit, the one on his right hand, the other, on his left. But what
does Christ? Does he grant their request? He does it not. He thus speaks unto
them: Mat. 20 22. Mark. 10.38.
Are ye able to drink of the cup, that I shall drink of, and to be baptized
with the baptism, that I am baptized with? Upon their answer which is
affirmative, we are able, Christ farther says unto them, ye shall indeed
drink of the cup, that I drink of, and with the baptism that I am baptized
with, shall ye be baptized. But to sit on my right hand, and on my left hand,
is not mine to give, but it shall be given to them for whom it is prepared. It
is as if Christ had said in fewer words, ye must of necessity bear the
Cross, before ye can wear the Crown.

But you will say; James and John were of the number of the twelve Apostles;
and that they indeed by their calling were to take up their cross, and to
follow Christ: but what is that to us? to us, who are not of the rank? who are
not Prophets? nor Apostles, nor Ministers? S. Paul shall answer you for me, 2.
Tim. 3.12. All that will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution.

Thu^ have you my doctrine enlarged: The wicked are evermore in a readiness,
to do all the disgrace and despite they can, not only to the true Prophets of
the Lord, and his Ministers, but also to the true servants of God; of what
vocations estate, or condition soever they be.

Now let us a little examine the reason why the wicked should stand thus
affected toward the godly. The reason is, because they hate the Godly. They
hate the Godly: and therefore will they do them all the disgrace and despite
they can.

The wicked hate the Godly. It is no new thing: Its no rare thing. No new
thing; for Genesis 27.41.
Esaias hated Jacob, Genesis 21.9.
Ismaell Isaac, and Genesis 4.8.
Cain Abell. Its no rare thing; for it is exceeding common at all times, in all
places. The consideration whereof made S. Peter thus to speak unto the
faithful in his days; Beloved, think it not strange concerning the fiery
trial, which is to try you, as though some strange thing were come unto you.
Think it not strange; its no strange thing. It is Epistle 1. chap. 4.12. So S.
John, Epist. 1. chap. 3.13. Marvel not my brethren, if the world hate you.
Marvel not. Its no point of wisdom to wonder at that which is neither
Magnum, nor Novum, nor Rarum. If it be not a great thing, or new, or rare,
marvel not at it.

A Father of the Schools, Comments in 1. Johan. 3.
Aquinas avouches it, that there is no cause of marvel, if it be not either
great, or new, or rare. Now that the world, that is, amatores mundi, the lovers
of the world, wicked, carnal, irreligious, and profane men living in the
world, should hate the Godly, non est magnum: it is no great matter.

The Physician that binds a frantic man, if he be bitten by him, non reputat
magnum, he counts it not any great matter; but excuses his patient for his
frensies sake. The wicked are as this frantic man; the Godly as the
Physician: whence it is, that upon those words, Genesis 4.8. Cain rose up against
Abel; for against Abel, the gloss says, Contra medicum.
against his Physician. Thus you see, its not magrum, no great matter, that the
wicked do hate the Godly.

Nor is it Novum, nor is it Rarum; its neither new, nor rare, as you have
already heard. Its no great matter, nor is it any new thing, or rare that the
world should hate you, therefore marvel not, if it hate you! Yea, say I: it
were much to be maruailed at, if it should not hate you. For such are the
contrary dispositions of Saints, and worldlings, of the wicked and the Godly,
that of necessity there will ever be occasioned contentious oppositions
between them. The consideration hereof drew from S. James those words, chap.
4.4. Know ye not, that the friendship of the world is enmity with God? Know ye
not, that is, says Aquinas, Ignorare non debetis, ye ought not to be ignorant
of this, that the amity of the world is enmity with God; and that whosoever
is a friend of the world, he is the enemy of God: I may add, yea, and of the
Godly too.

Hereto agrees that demand of S. Paul 2. Cor. 6.14.15. What fellowship has
righteousness with unrighteousness? What communion has light with darkness?
What concord has Christ with Belial? God is righteous, the world is wicked,
and 1. John. 5.19
lies altogether in sin, therefore there can be no fellowship between God
and the world. God is 1. I ha^. 1.5.
light, he is the Iam. 1.17.
Father of lights; in him there is no darkness at all: The world what is it
but Ephe. 5.8.
darkness, what but a receptacle of the unfruitful Verse. 11.
works of darkness? therefore there can be no communion between God and
the world. Christ is holy, altogether holy, and immaculate; Belial is wicked,
he is the Prince of wickedness: therefore there can be no concord between
Christ and Belial.

Now if there can be no fellowship, if no communion between God and the world;
can we look there should be any fellowship, any communion, between Saints and
worldlings, between the godly, and the wicked, between such as love God, and
such as love the w^rld? If there be no concord between Christ and Belial, can
we expect there should be any concord between true Christians and Belialists,
between the followers of Christ, and the sons of Belial?

It cannot be expected. These, whom I call Belialists or the sons of Beliall,
worldlings and the wicked, are such as love the world: the other, whom I call
true Christians, or followers of Christ, Saints, and the godly, are such as
love God. The repugnancie that is between the qualities of these two, is
elegantly delivered in holy writ.

The lovers of God are Romans 8.14. Galat. 5.18.
led by the Spirit of God; they Galat. 5.16.
walk in the Spirit, and bring forth the Verse. 22.23.
fruits thereof, as love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness,
faith, meekenes, temperance, and such like; but they that love the world, are
invested, with Ver. 19.20.21
adultery, fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, Idolatry, witchcraft,
hatred, variance, emulations, wrath, strife, seditions; heresies, envyings,
murders, drunkenness, revellings, and such like. What greater repugnancie can
there be then this?

Again, they that love God, are 2. Tim. 2.22.
of pure hearts, and of 1. Tim. 1.5.
good consciences, they Coloss. 1.22.
present themselves holy, unblameable and unreprovable in the sight of God;
they serve the Lord Johan. 4.23.
in Spirit and in truth: but they that love the world are of Psalm. 14.1. And
53.1.
corrupt hearts, of Tit. 1.15.
defiled minds and consciences, their works are Psalm. 14.1.
abominable, they are Psalm. 58.3.
deceitful from the womb, they are altogether Psalm. 14.3.
become filthy, their service of God is but a flattering of him; for they Psalm.
78.36.
lie unto him with their double tongue. What greater repugnancie can there be
then this?

Once more. They that love God, cast all their 1. Pet. 5.7.
care upon him; they are Verse. 8.
sober and vigilant: for they know that their adversary the Devil, as a
roaring Lion walks about seeking, whom he may devour: but they that love the
world, like the fool in the Psalm Psalm. 14.1. and 53.1. and 10.4.
say in their heart, there is no God. Sobriety they care not for, vigilancie,
they will none of it. Philip. 3.19.
Minding earthly things, and glutted with the pleasure thereof, their sole care
is, Romans 16.18.
to serve their own belly, Philip. 3.19.
their God is their belly, their glory is their shame, their end is damnation.
What greater repugnancie can there be then this?

Will it now please you to collect with me? the qualities of the wicked, the
sons of Belial, worldlings, such as love the world, are wholly repugnant and
contrary to the qualities, of the Godly, the followers of Christ, Saints, such
as love God: and therefore there can be no agreement between them: No better
then was between Cain and Abel. And that you know was bad enough. For Cain
slew Abel. And wherefore slew he him? S. John gives you the reason, 1. Epist.
3.12. Because his own works were evil, and his brothers righteous.

Thus far of the hatred of the wicked against the Godly, the true reason of
my doctrine, which was: The wicked are evermore in a readiness, to do all the
disgrace and despite they can, not only to the true Prophets of the Lord, and
his Ministers, but also to the true servants of God, of what vocation; estate,
or condition soever they be.

Let us now make some use of that which has been hitherto delivered, for the
bettering, and the amendment of our sinful lives.

First, the Ministers of Gods word, may from hence learn, not to take it unto
heart, if such, as are bound by the Law of God and nature, and by all good
order, to yield them due love and reverence, shall in pride and contempt insult
over them, to disgrace and to despite them. They may well remember, that its
neither great, nor new, nor rare thing, that they meet with such course
entertainment in the world; forasmuch as they cannot be ignorant, that the
world hates them. And what if the world hate them! Shall they therefore be
altogether dejected? They need not. For Christ gives them encouragement and
comfort, John. 15.18. If the world hate you, ye know that it hated me before
it hated you.

The argument is drawn ab exemplo, from Christ's own example. The world hates
me, you know it to be so, you see it. It needs not then to be any
disparagement to you if it hate you, it hated me before it hated you. Cur ergo
se membrum, supra verticem extollit? S. Austine propounds the question Tract.
88. in Iohannem. Why does a member extol it self above the head? Recusas esse
in corpore, si non vis odium mundi sustinere cum capite: thou refusest to be in
the body, if thou will not with the head sustain the hatred of the world.

A second argument of encouragement and comfort to us against the hatred of the
world; is drawn from the nature of the world, verse. 19. If ye were of the
world the world would love his own: but because ye are not of the world, but I
have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hates you. This argument
is evident even to the common sense of men; who cannot but know, that between
contraries there is no agreement, and between men of unlike qualities, no full
consent of minds. It is then as if Christ had thus said: The world loves none
but his own; none but those that are addicted, devoted, and wholly given over
to it: but you are not of the world; therefore it loves not you. You are not of
the world; for you are mine; and Johan. 8.23. and 17.14.
I am not of the world. I have separated you from the service of the world, to
do me service; and therefore the world hates you.

A third argument of encouragement and comfort to us, is verse. 20. Remember the
word, that I said unto you: The servant is not greater then the Lord: if they
have persecuted me, they will also persecute you. This argument is like the
first: Its drawn from Christ's own example, as that was. All the difference
is: the first specifieth the hatred of the world; this the effect of that
hatred, Persecution.

Thus stands the argument. The world persecuteth me; you are my witnesses it
does so. Think it not much then, if it also persecute you. Remember the word
that I said unto you; The Matthew. 10.24 Johan. 13.16.
servant is not greater then the Lord. Salmeron Tom. 9. Com. Tract. 60
Si me Dominum, Regem, caput, magistrum, persecutisunt, vos quoque servos ac
subditos meos, membra mea, atque discipulos meos persequentur. If they have
persecuted me your Lord, your King, your head, your Master, they will also
persecute you, my servants, my subjects, my members, my disciples. If they have
called me a Johan. 10.20
mad man, one that has a Devil, Mat. 27.63.
a seducer, Mat. 26.65.
a blasphemer, Mat. 11.19.
a glutton, a wine-bibber, a friend of Publicans and sinners, will they not
much more speak of you reproachfully? Mat. 10.25.
If they have called the Master of the house Beelzebub, how much more shall they
call them of his household so? Turpe profecto est, and dedecore plenum, Rege in
castris vulnerato existente, milites cius sine vulnere in civitate epulantes
manner, says Salmeron: It were very base and shameful, for soldiers to
remain in the City at ease without hurt, while their King lies wounded in the
Camp. Pudeat, says Saint Bernard Sermon. 5. in Festo omnium Sanct. pudeat sub
spinato capite, membrum fieri delicatum: It were a shame for us to live
deliciously and in pleasures, says our head, Christ, was crowned with thorns.

I conclude the first use: Let the wicked fret, and fume, and stamp, and stare,
and grudge, and murmr against us, let them forbid us to prophecy, let them
refuse to hear us, let them lay upon us all the disgrace and despite they can;
yet will we possess our souls in patience, knowing it to be a faithful
saying, which S. Paul has. 2. Tim. 2.11.12. that, if we die with Christ, we
shall also live with him, and if we suffer with him, we shall also reign with
him.

A second use is for all other the true servants of God, of what vocation,
condition, or estate soever they be: for as much as the wicked lie in wait for
them also, to do them all the disgrace and despite they can, as has already
bin proved unto you. The use is to admonish you, that ye take it not to heart,
if they, who are bound by the law of God and nature, by the bond of
neighborhood, and our Christian profession, to love you, and to tender your
good, shall in pride and contempt insult over you, to disgrace and to despite
you.

The arguments for your encouragement and comfort in such a case, may be the
same with those, which I but even now produced for the encouragement and
comfort of our selves in the like: will you have them su^med up unto you? Then
thus.

You find but course respect and entertainment in the world, because the world
hates you. It hates you. Marvel not at it, nor fear it. For first it hated
Christ, before it hated you.

Secondly, the world would love you, if you were his own. But you are not. You
are not of the world, and therefore the world hates you. Be of good comfort:
you are not of the world, for Christ has chosen you out of the world, to be
his beloved.

Thirdly, the world from hating you proceeds to persecute you. Let not this
discourage you. For it persecuted Christ first. They have persecuted Christ,
and therefore will they persecute you. Math. 10.25.
It is enough for the Disciple, that he be as his Master, and the servant as
the Lord. Christ is your Master, he is your Lord: you are his disciples, you
are his servants. Let his 1. Pet. 2.21.
example be your rule; be it our rule too, (for herein we are all equal) be it
the rule of direction to us all; the rule of all our sufferings. verse. 23.
When he was reviled, he reviled not again; when he suffered, he threatened
not; but committed his cause to him, that judges righteously. Here is matter
worthy our imitation.

The resolved Christian hereupon thus sweetly meditateth. Shall Christ lie in
the manger, and we ruffle it out in our palaces? Shall he mourn in sackcloth,
and we bath in pleasure? Shall he fighting in our defense, be wounded and
crucified among thieves; and shall we disport and solace our selves with fond
and vain delights? Shall he be pierced through with the sword of Gods justice
for our sins, and shall we be unwilling to suffer any thing for our selves?
This were too-too unnatural and unkind.

Let not therefore the cross adventures that may betide us, dismay us: Let not
the cruelty of our enemies, the sharpnes of our miseries, the continuance of
our afflictions, daunt us: but let us (following the advice of S. Peter 1. Ep.
chap. 4. verse. 13.) Let us rejoice, in as much as we are partakers of Christ's
sufferings. So when his glory shall be revealed, we shall be glad also with
exceeding joy. Thus much of the second use.

A third follows. You remember the doctrine.

The wicked are evermore in a readiness, to do all the disgrace and despite
they can, not only to the true Prophets of the Lord and his Ministers, but
also to all other, the true servants of God, of what vocation, estate, or
condition soever they be. The use is, to reprove those, who esteem not aright
of the sufferings of the godly. Let a godly man be humbled under the cross,
let him feel the hand of God upon him; how will some wonder at him, as at a
Ps. 102.6, 7.
Pelican of the wilderness, as at an Owl of the desert, as at a sparrow that
sits alone upon the house top? They will hold him for a great sinner, and will
measure his condition by the chastisement, that he endures.

Did not Eliphaz deal so with Job? From the afflictions, the miseries, the
calamities, that Job suffered, Eliphaz concludes, that Job is no innocent man,
no righteous man, but a deep dissembler, and a hollow-hearted hypocrite. His
censure of Job you may find chap. 4.7. Remember I pray thee, says Eliphaz to
Job, Remember I pray thee, who ever perished being innocent? Or where were the
righteous cut off?

Who ever perished being innocent? Or where were the righteous cut off? It was
Eliphaz his error, to collect, because Job was afflicted, and that most
grievously, that therefore he was to perish, or to be cut off utterly. God
suffers not his elect children, such as Job was, utterly to perish, or to be
cut off. He afflicts them, but with a purpose to deliver them; his hand is
sometimes upon them, but it is for their good, not for their ruin. For albeit
they may seem to us to perish, when in the fire of their calamities and
trials, they are surprised by death, yet they perish not; the Lord, he receives
them into his glory, and to a more happy life.

Wherefore to Eliphaz his question, Who ever perished being innocent? Or where
were the righteous cut off? I answer; If Eliphaz take the words of perishing,
and cutting off, in the strict sense and properly, I answer, never did the
innocent perish, never was any righteous man cut off. But if he take the words
in a larger sense for wallowing in misery, or lying in affliction; my answer
then, is the same that S. Gregory has lib. 5. Moral. cap. 14. Saepe quippe
hic and innocents pereunt, and recti funditus delentur. Surely here in this
world the innocent do oftentimes perish, and the righteous are utterly cut
off: sed tamen ad aeternam gloriam, pereundo seruantur: yet in perishing, and
in being cut off, they are reserved to eternal glory.

Si nullus innocens periret, if no man should perish, that is innocent, why
should the Prophet Esai say, chap. 57.1. The righteous perishes, and no man
lays it to heart! Si rectos, Deus providendo non raperet, if God in his
providence should not take away any righteous man, why should the wise man,
chap. 4.11. say, The righteous was speedily taken away, lest that wickedness
should alter his understanding, or deceit beguile his soul? Si iustos,
animadversio nulla percuteret, if no punishment should smite the just, why
should S. Peter say, 1. Ep. 4, 17. The time is, that judgment must begin at
the house of God?

Now, dearly beloved, since it may in some sense be truly said of the man
that is innocent, that he perishes; and of the righteous man, that he is
punished, is taken away, is cut off; and of the faithful of Gods house, that
judgment must begin with them: let it ever be our care to esteem aright of
the afflictions of our neighbors, and to judge of them, with a righteous
judgment. Though they be judged, be plagued, be smitten of God, it is not for
us slightly to regard them, to despise them, or to hide our faces from them: it
is our parts rather to have a fellowfeeling and a tender compassion of their
trials.

It were an unchristian, an uncharitable, yea a hellish conceit, thus to
infer: My neighbor, such a man, or such a man, is exercised under the
Cross, and is sensible of the scourge of God upon him, therefore he is in Gods
disfavor, and a very grievous sinner. No such inference is allowable in
Christ's schole. In his schole, these Maxims pass for good. Where God
purposes to heal, he spares not to lance. He ministers bitter sirupes to
purge corrupt humors: he sends embassies of death and revenge, where he means
to bestow eternal life. I conclude with that blessing which S. James chap.
1.12. bestows upon the afflicted. Blessed is the man that endures
temptation: for when he is tried, he shall receive the crown of life, which
the Lord has promised to them that love him.

THE XIX. LECTVRE.
AMOS 2.13, 14, 15, 16. Behold, I am pressed under you, as a cart is pressed
that is full of sheaues.

Therefore the flight shall perish from the swift, and the strong shall not
strengthen his force, neither shall the mighty deliver himself.

Neither shall he stand, that handles the bow, and he that is swift of foot
shall not deliver himself, neither shall he, that rides the Horse, deliver
himself.

And he, that is courageous among the mighty, shall flee away naked in that
day, says the Lord.


WE are now come to the fourth part of this first Sermon of Amos, concerning
the kingdom of the ten tribes of Israel. I heretofore called it a
Commination. So I call it still. For here are the Israelites threatened with
punishment for the enormitie of their sins, expressed, verse. 6, 7, 8. and for
the foulness of their ingratitude, laid to their charge, verse. 12. In this
Commination we may observe two things.

First, how the Lord, in respect of the sins of Israel, and of their
unthankfulness for benefits bestowed on them, esteems of them, verse. 13.
Behold, I am pressed under you as a Cart is pressed, that is full of sheaues.

The other is, a menacing or threatening of punishment to befall them: I may
term it, A sending of defiance unto them; a denouncing of war against them,
verse. 14, 15, 16. Wherein we may note three things.

The first is, impotentia fugiendi, their unableness to escape the flight in
the day of battle: thus set down in the 14. verse. The flight shall perish
from the swift. And verse. 15. thus: He that is swift of foot, shall not
deliver himself: neither shall he that rides the horse deliver himself.

The second is, Debilitas in resistendo, their weakness in resisting the
enemy thus set down, verse. 14. The strong shall not strengthen his force,
neither shall the mighty deliver himself, and verse. 15. thus: Neither shall
he stand that handles the bow.

The third is, Fugae fortium: the flight of the valiant, and stout of heart,
set down in the last verse, and there amplified by the adiunct of nakedness:
He that is courageous among the mighty, shall flee away naked in that day.
Then follows the confirmation of all, (...) says the Lord: the Lord, who is
the truth, and is omnipotent. He is the Lord of Hosts; if he Esa. 14.27. 2.
Chro. 20.6. I^b. 9.12. Pro 21.30. Dan. 4.32.
purpose to do a thing, who shall disanull it? if his hand be stretched out,
who shall turn it back?

My meditations for this time will be confined within the limits of the 13.
verse. Behold, I am pressed under you, as a cart is pressed that is full of
sheanes. In the handling whereof, my order shall be first to run over the
words; then to draw from them, some profitable note of doctrine.

Behold.

THis particle, set in the front of this verse, is as it were a watchword to
stir up our attentions, for as much as we are to hear of some important
matter. A learned Divine in his exposition upon the fifth of Nehemiah has alike
note: This word Ecce, Lo, Mark, or Behold, ever betokens throughout the
Scripture some notable thing very good, or very ill, that is spoken of
immediately afterward, and such a one as commonly falls not out among men:
and the holy Ghost of purpose uses to mark such notable things, with this
word Ecce, Lo, Mark, or Behold, to put men in remembrance, and to awake them
to the consideration of the weighty matter that follows, that they should
not lightly pass over it, but deeply mark and consider it.

The Jesuit Lorinus Comment. in Act. Apost. observes out of holy Scripture,
diverse acceptions and uses of this particle, Ecce, Behold.

First, it notes rem novam, ac inopinatam, atque mirabilem: some thing that is
new and unlooked for, and wonderful: as Act. 1.10. while the Apostles looked
steadfastly toward heaven, at the time of Christ's ascension, Ecce, Behold, two
men, or two Angels in the form of men, stood by them in white apparel. So is
it used by the blessed Virgin in her Magnificat, Luke 1.48. Behold from
henceforth all generations shall call me blessed. Where Ecce, Behold, rem
magnam, novam, and admiratione dignam, designat, says Alfonsus Salmeron.
Behold! it designeth and poynteth out unto us, some great matter, new, and
admirable, such as is, creaturam in lucem edere creatorem famulam Dominum
generare, Virginem Deum parere. What greater, what newer, what matter more
wonderful, then that a Creature should conceive in her womb and bring forth
her Creator, a handmaid her Lord, a virgin, God? It is so full of wonder, that
the Prophet Esaias foretelling it, chap. 7.14. stamps it with an Ecce, Behold,
Behold, a virgin shall conceive and bear a son.

The Evangelist S. Matthew, chap. 1.23. reciting the Prophets prediction,
leaves not out this stamp, Behold: Behold, a virgin shall be with child, and
shall bring forth a son.

The Angel Gabriel, who was sent from God to the virgin Mary, to report unto
her, this great wonder, omits not this stamp, Ecce, Behold. See the Angels
words, Luke 1.31. Behold, thou shall conceive in thy womb, and bring forth a
son, and shall call his name Jesus. This the Postillers do call Ecce
admirativum, an Ecce of Admiration: and it is the first use of the particle
Behold, observed by Lorinus.

Secondly, it betokens propinquum tempus, some time near at hand, as Esai
41.27. The first shall say to Sion (...) Behold, behold them, or behold these
things, and I will give to Jerusalem one that brings good tidings. The place
I understand of Christ, who is Alpha, or primus, the first; and Euangelista, he
that brings the good tidings: him God gives to Sion, and to Jerusalem, and
in him, Ecce ecce ista erunt: Behold, behold all the promises of God shall come
to pass, and that speedily. This is true of Christ, who says in the
Revelation, chap. 22.7. Behold, I come quickly; and Verse. 12. Behold, I come
quickly, and my reward is with me to give every man according as his work
shall be. If I would imitate the Postillers, I could call this Ecce
Admonitivum, an Ecce of Admonition, a warning word for every one to be in a
readiness to embrace Christ at his coming.

Thirdly, Ecce, Behold, is a note of asseueration, or certainty, and is put
for Sane or Certe, verily or certainly. Such it is Iere. 23.39. Ecce, Behold I,
even I will utterly forget you, and I will forsake you, and cast you out of my
presence, And I will bring an everlasting reproach upon you, and a perpetual
shame, which shall not be forgotten. Behold I will do it; I will surely do it.

Fourthly, Ecce, Behold, is a particle, ordinarily used by God in his
Comminations, when he threatens some great and heavy punishment to come as
Ezech. 5.8. Thus says the Lord against Jerusalem, Behold, I, even I am against
thee, and will execute judgments in the midst of thee, in the sight of the
Nations, And, chap. 6.3. Thus says the Lord against Israel, Behold, I, even I,
will bring a sword upon you, and I will destroy your high places. And against
Tyrus, chap. 26.3. Behold, I am against thee, O Tyrus, and will cause many
Nations to come up against thee, as the Sea causes his waves to come up. And
against Zidon, chap. 28.22. Behold, I am against thee, O Zidon, and I will be
glorified in the midst of thee. And against Pharaoh, chap. 29.3. Behold, I am
against thee, Pharaoh, King of Egypt, I will put hooks in thy Jaws. Many
other like places I might allege yet farther, to show unto you, the frequent
use of this particle, Ecce, Behold, in the Comminations of Gods punishments.
But I will not hold you any longer with this discourse.

Sufficient shall it be for you at this time to be advertised, that as often
as you meet with this word Ecce, Behold, in the sacred Volume of the word of
God; so often you have a watchword, to stir up your attention, to listen to
the matter that ensues, for its weight and worth. Such is it in my text.
Behold. Your attention is called upon, to give ear to that which follows.

I am pressed under you, as a cart is pressed that is full of sheaues. I am
pressed] (...) It is in Hifhil, the root of it is (...) which in Hifhil is
sometimes Transitiue, sometimes Intransitiue or Neutrall: from whence there is
a twofold Interpretation of this place. One is, I am pressed under you as a
Cart is pressed, that is full of sheaues; the other, I will press your place,
as a Cart full of sheaues presses. That is our Textuall reading, this our
Marginall. Some incline to that; some to this. Each has a proper, and a
profitable understanding. First of the first.

Behold, I am pressed under you as a Cart is pressed, that is full of sheaues.
THis meaning the Vulgar Latin seems to express; Ecce, ego stridebo subter
vos, sicut stridet plaustrum onustum foeno: which I find thus handsomely
translated in an old English Manuscript (some take it to be Wickliphes) Lo, I
shall sound strongly under you, as a wayne charged with hay sounds strongly.
S. Hierome thus glosseth it. As a cart or wayne, that is full laden with
stubble or hay, makes a noise, sounds out, and bowleth: so I, not any longer
enduring your sins, but as it were committing stubble to the fire, shall cry
out.

With this exposition of S. Hierome, agrees that of Gregory the great, Moral.
32.6. Who there takes these words of my text to intimate, that God under the
burden of sins makes a noise and cries out. Aliquando (says he) etiam
insensatis rebus propter infirmitatem nostram alta condescensione se comparat:
God sometimes condescends to our weak capacities, and for our infirmities sake
compares himself to things void of sense: as here: Behold, I shall skreeke, or
cry out under you, as a cart or wayne full-laden with sheaues skreeketh or
cries out. For, because fenum est vita carnalium, the life of carnal men is
as hay, according to that, Esa. 40.6. Omnis caro fenum, All flesh is grass,
the Lord patiently enduring the life of carnal men, testifies of himself,
more plaustri fenum se portare, that likevnto a cart or wayne he is charged
with hay. Now for him, Sub feni onere stridere, to skreeke out under a load of
hay, it is nothing else, but pondera and iniquitates peccantium cum querela
tolerare, with complaint to tolerate the burdens and iniquities of sinful men.

This his construction seems probable to Ribera. Probable to him: but it is
good with Brentius, good with Gualter, good with Drusius, good with Winckelman,
good with others with Remigius, with Albertus, with Hugo, with Lyra, with
Dionysius, as Castrus has observed.

According to whom; the true meaning of my text is, as if the Lord should thus
have said: Behold, O ye Israelites; A^^s 3.2.
you, whom only of all the families of the earth I have known; you, whom I
have borne, Deuteronomy. 1.31.
as a man does bear his son; you, whom I have carried in my bosom, Number.
11.12.
as a nursing father bears the sucking Child; You, once my De^^. 9.26.29.
people, and mine inheritance, whom I brought forth out of Egypt, by my mighty
power, and by my stretched out arm, Behold: Behold such has been, and is
your Deuteronomy. 9.29.
stubbornness, such your wickedness, such the multitude of your sins, that
I am Isa. 1.14.
weary to bear them: Behold, I am pressed under you, as a Cart is pressed that
is full of sheaues. As many sheaues, as much hay or stubble is unto a cart, so
are you to me, in regard of your sins you are so to me; so troublesome, so
grievous, that I even faint under you, and am not able any longer to bear you.

Its a very grievous complaint; and may teach us thus much: that our sins are
sometimes burdensome and grievous unto God. It is my doctrine: Our sins are
sometimes burdensome and grievous unto God.

Such were the sins of the old world, we know it by, Genesis 6.5, 6. For God
saw, that the wickedness of man was great in the earth, and that every
imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil continually. And it
repented the Lord, that he had made man on the earth, and it grieved him at his
heart. It repented him, and grieved him at his heart.

Such were the sins of Judah. We know it by the first Chapter of the
Prophecy of Esai. The complaints which God makes there, do prove it: verse.
21. How is the faithful City become an Harlot? It was full of judgment,
righteousness lodged in it; but now murderers. Thy silver is become dross,
thy wine is mixed with water. Thy Princes are rebellious, and companions of
thieves: Every one loves gifts, and follows after rewards: they judge not
the fatherless, neither does the cause of the widow come unto them. And verse
14. Your new moons, and your appointed feasts, my soul hates, they are a
trouble unto me, I am weary to bear them. You see; the sins of Judah were a
trouble unto God, he was weary to bear them. They were burdensome and grievous
unto him.

Such were the sins of Israel, we know it by the 43. chap. of Esai. There
verse 24. thus says the Lord to Israel: Thou have made me to serve with thy
sins; thou have wearied me with thine iniquities. What! Was God made to serve
with the sins of Israel? Was he wearied with their iniquities? Its more then
evident: the sons of Israel, were burdensome, and grievous unto God.

Are not the sins of the whole world such? Are not our sins such? Sweet
Jesus, thou know they are such. The labors, the troubles, the miseries, the
griefs, the torments which in the days of thy flesh, from the first hour of
thy Nativity, to the last moment of thy suffering upon the Cross, thou have
endured for us, are so many demonstrations, that our sins are such; that they
are burdensome and grievous unto thee.

Dearly beloved, behold we Christ Jesus in the Phil. 2.7.
form of a servant, laid in a Luk 2.7.
manger, exiled Matthew. 2.14
from his country, Mat. 13.55.
reputed for a Carpenters son, yea for a Mark. 6.3.
carpenter; Mat. 4.2.
hungering, I^b. 4.7. and 19.28.
thirsting, I^^. 8.23. etc.
reviled, rayled upon, (...) 22.63.
shamefully abused; and in an agony, ^e^s. 44.
sweating great drops of blood; we must confess our sins to have been the
cause of all.

Behold we his glorious head crowned Mat. 27.29
with thorns; behold we his sweet face Mat. 26 67 Mark 14 65.
buffetted and spit upon; behold we his harmless I^h 20.20, 25
hands distilling forth goare blood; behold we his naked side ^^h. 19 34 37
pierced through with a sharp spear; behold we his undefiled feet, which
never stood in the way of sinners, dented through with cruel nails; we must
confess our sins to have been the cause of all.

Our sins the cause of all ^. Esaias confesses it, chap. 53.4 Surely, He
[Christ Iesus] has borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows: he was wounded
Esa. 53.5.
for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities; the chastisement of
our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed. S. Matthew repeats
it, chap. 8.17. Himself took our infirmities, and bare our sicknesses. So
does S Peter, 1. Epist. chap. 2.24. Christ his own self bare our sins in
his own body on the tree: by his stripes are we healed. S. Paul speaks as
plainly, Romans 4.25. Christ was delivered for our offenses: and 1. Cor. 15.3.
Christ died for our sins. Our sins are the cause of all Christ's sufferings.

Our sins the cause of all Christ's sufferings! Its even so. S. Augustine
Meditat. cap. 7. does thus elegantly deliver it: The sinner offends, the just
is punished; the guilty transgresses, the innocent is beaten; the wicked
sins, the godly is condemned; that which the evil deserves, the good
suffers; the servant does amiss, the master makes amends; man commits
sin, and God bears the punishment. So true is my doctrine, Our sins are
sometimes burdensome and grievous unto God.

So burdensome, so grievous, as that he is enforced to complain, as here he
does against Israel, I am pressed under you, as a Cart is pressed, that is full
of sheaues. Stands it thus Beloved? May our sins be burdensome and grievous
unto God? May they press him, as a Cart is pressed, that is full of sheaues?
Make we hereof this use; to hate sin, to detest it, to fly from it, as from
the Devil, who is the Author of it.

Syracides in his Ecclesiasticus, chap. 21. to incite us to the hatred of
sin, to the detestation of it, and to fly from it, compares sin to a
Serpent, to a Lion, to a two edged sword. To a Serpent, verse. 2. Flee from
sin, as from the face of a Serpent; for it thou come too near it, it will
bite thee. To a Lion in the same verse, Flee from sin as from a Lion; the
teeth thereof are as the teeth of a Lion, slaying the souls of men. To a two
edged sword, verse. 3. Flee from sin as from a two edged sword; for all
iniquity is as a two edged sword, the wounds whereof cannot be healed.

But what is a two edged sword? what the teeth of a Lion? what the face of a
Serpent? what the Devil himself, to the love of God? Flee from sin for the
love of God, that with thy sins thou be not burdensome and grievous unto God.
If we cannot but sin (as, the truth is we cannot, such is our imperfection)
yet let us not increase the measure of our sin, by any wicked malice. If we
cannot stay our selves from going in the paths of sin, yet let us stay our
selves for going on therein. Stop we the course of our sins, as the Lord
shall enable us; and let us not, by the fullness of their measure, pull
vengeance from Heaven, whether God will or no. A heavy day and hour will it
be to you, to me, to any, if the Lord shall once say unto us, as here he does
to Israel, I am pressed under you, as a Cart is pressed, that is full of
sheaues.

Again, stands it thus, beloved? May our sins be burdensome and grievous
unto God? May they press him as a Cart is pressed, that is full of sheaues?
Make we then here of a second use, even to admonish such sinners as are
obstinate and impenitent. They may from hence be remembered, that if they be
burdensome and grievous unto God, [with their obstinacy and impenitencie] God
will be burdensome and grievous unto them with his plagues.

Obstinacy, impenitencie! O let sins of such an elevation be far from our
Coasts. If we drive God to call a convocation of Heaven and Earth, as Esa. 1.2.
Hear O heavens, and give ear O earth: I have nourished and brought up
Children, and they have rebelled against me; if we drive him to call on the
mountains and the foundations of the earth to hear his controversy, as Micah
6.2. Hear ye, O mountains, the Lords controversy, and ye strong
foundations of the earth; the Lord has a controversy with his people, and
will plead with them: if we drive him to his old complaint, Hos 4.1. There is
no truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of God in the land, By swearing, and lying,
and killing, and stealing, and whoring ye break out, and blood touches
blood: if we thus and thus force God, what shall become of us in the end? Will
he not again force us, to cry out, houle, and repent, that ever we thus and
thus forced him? Yes, without all controversy he will. He will pour out Nahum
16.
his fury like fire, he will throw down rocks before him; and shall we then
be able to stand? Its impossible we should, unless truly and unfeignedly
renouncing all show of obstinacy and impenitencie, we become dutiful and
obedient children to the Lord our God. O how desirous, how earnest is our
sweet Savior, we should be such? How pathetically does he persuade our, and
the whole Churches reformation? Cant. 6.13. Return, return O Shulamite;
return, return. Let our reply be, with Saint Austine, Domine, da quod jubes,
and jube quod vis, Lord, give us ability to return to thee, and then command
us to return: or with Jeremy chap. 31.18. Turn thou us unto thee, o Lord,
and we shall be turned; thou art the Lord our God.

Thus have you my doctrine, and the uses thereof. My doctrine was: Our sins
are sometimes burdensome and grievous unto God. My first use was; an incitement
to the detestation of sin in general. My second was, a caveat against the
foulest of sins, obstinacy and impenitencie. My doctrine branding our sins
with burdensomenesse and grieuousnesse in respect of God; I grounded upon the
complaint, which in my text, God makes against Israel; I am pressed under you,
as a Cart is pressed that is full of sheaues. God is pressed under our sins;
therefore our sins are burdensome unto him, they are grievous unto him.

But here it may be questioned, how God can be said to complain of our sins,
to be burdened with them, to be grieved at them, since in himself he has all
pleasure and content? He dwells in such 1. Tim. 6.16.
light, such brightness of glory, as never mortal foot could approach unto:
the sight of his face is to us on earth insufferable; no mortal eye ever saw
him, nor can see him: he Esa. 57.15.
inhabiteth the eternity, is the Esa. 44.6.
first, and is the last, and Mala. 3.6.
changes not; yea, has not so much as a Iam. 1.17.
shadow of change. How then is it, that he often complains? how can he be
burdened? how grieved?

Complaints, we know, are the witnesses of a burdened, and grieved soul. God
here complains of pressure, that he is pressed under Israel, as a Cart is
pressed, that is full of sheaues: from whence the collection is, that the
sins of Israel are burdensome and grievous unto God. But can this be so
indeed? Can our sins be burdensome unto God? Can they be grievous unto him?
or can God complain that they are such? What can be said unto it?

Will you, that I speak properly, without a figure? Then thus I say: God
cannot complain, because he cannot be burdened, or grieved. Could he be
burdened or grieved, he could suffer: But he cannot suffer. Every blow of
ours, though we were as strong and high, as the sons of Anak, light short of
him. If some could have reached him, it had gone ill with him long ere this.
But God cannot suffer. So true is that axiom of the Schools: No passion can
befall the Deity. Aquinas 1. qu. 20. art. 1. thus delivers it: Nulla passio
est in Deo; there is no passion in God: and lib. 1. Contra Gentiles cap. 89. In
Deo non sunt Passiones affectuum; there are no affectiue passions in God. By
affectiue passions be understands the passions of the sensitive appetite,
which therefore are not in God, because God has no such appetite, as
Ferrariensis has well observed.

Well then, if these passions of complaining, of repenting of grieuing, of
fainting, and the like, cannot properly be said to be in God, how are they so
frequently in holy Scripture ascribed unto him?

My answer is, they are ascribed unto him (...), per (...), abusiuely, by an
Anthropopathie. It is Athanasius his golden rule (...). Say God complains;
say he repents; say he grieueth; say he faints, or is wearied; all these
are spoken of God for our capacities, but are to be understood, as its fit for
God.

God in holy Scripture speaking of himself as if these passions were familiar
with him, he appears as transfigured into the likeness of our nature, and in
our own familiar terms speaks to our shallow understandings. As an old man
speaking to a child, frames his voice in a childish phrase. So God speaking to
us men, speaks as the manner of men is to speak. (...) (says Athanasius
Disput. contra Ariam in Niceno concilio) for our imbecillitie God thus
speaks: he descends to our capacities: and that men may in some measure know
him, he will be known as man; by passions or affections, by complaining, by
repenting, by grieuing, by fainting. By these he signifies not what he is
indeed, but what is needful for us to know of him. For we well acquainted with
the use of these natural passions in our selves, may the better guess at the
knowledge of that God, to whom we hear them ascribed by translation. By
translation, not properly: or as one well says, per figuram, non naturam, by a
figure, not by nature: or as the Schools speak quoad effectum, non quoad
affectum, in the effect, not in the affection; So Aquinas Par. 1a. qu. 21. art.
3. C.

But having entreated else where of this question, Whether there be any
affection or passion in God, in my 17. Sermon upon Hoseah chap. 10. I now say
no more of it. Only I conclude it affirming with Gregory Moral. lib. 20. cap.
23. that God is, Sine Zelo Z^lans, sine ira irascens, sine dolor and
poenitentia poenitens, sine misero cord misericors, sine praevisionibus
praesci^ns: that God is zealous without zeal, angry without anger, grieuing
without sorrow, repenting without penitencie, pitiful without pity,
foreknowing without foresight. There is no passion at all in God.

Thus have you my answer to the question even now propounded. The question
was: How God may be said to complain of our sins, to be burdened with them,
or to be grieved at them, since in himself he has all pleasure and content? My
answer is, He cannot be said so to do in a proper sense and understanding,
because God is not obnoxious to any passion, but improperly, in a figure,
abusiuely, metaphorically, by an Anthropopathic, and metonymically, he may well
be said so to do: he may well be said to complain of our sins, to be
burdened with them, and to be grieved at them. So he complains against
Israel, here in my text; I am pressed under you, as a Cart is pressed that is
full of sheaues.

Hitherto have I stood upon the first Interpretation of these words, depending
upon the intransitiue or newtrall signification of the Hebrew verb (...) I am
pressed. The other Interpretation growing upon the transitiue signification of
the same verb, is put in the Margent of our newest English translation, and
thus it is, I will press your place, as a Cart full of sheaues presses.

It is the very reading of Tremellius and Iunius. Jonathan does not much vary
from it; nor R. Abraham, and other Hebrew Doctors, nor the wise men of Spain,
as Pagnine has observed. Our new expositors for the most part do mention it,
Calvin, and Danaeus, Brentius and Winclelman, Mercerus and Quadratus,
Christopherus a Castro, and Petrus a Figuiero, I will press you.

In an old English Bible, It may be Taverners translation) I find this place
thus Interpreted; I will crashe you in sunder, like as a wayne crasheth, that
is full of sheaues. I will crash you, or, I will press you: the meaning is the
same: and thus I paraphrase it,

I] the Lord, Jehovah, your Lord God, will press your place, wheresoever it
shall be; But how? Either as a cart full laden with sheaues presseth] the
earth, and whatsoever else it passes over; or as a cart full laden presses
the sheaues in the threshing floare: or as a cart full laden with sheaues is
it self pressed. I will press you, as a cart full of sheaues presses, or is
pressed.

By this second Interpretation of my text, my text is Comminatorie. The Lord
threatens to punish Israel for their sins; to punish them non levi manu, aut
viribus languidis, not with a light hand, or languishing force, sed magno nisu
acrobore, but with great endeavor and strength. I will press you, as a cart
full of sheaues presses, or is pressed.

God ever just, and immutable, assigns to like sins like punishments. We
for sinning come not short of the Israelites. May we not then well expect their
punishments? Yes doubtless, we may: and this Commination may be as well to us,
as to them; I will press you, as a cart full of sheaues presses, or is
pressed. From this Commination we may take this lesson: God will never suffer
sin to escape altogether unpunished.

He will not. His commination of punishment given in Paradise to the
transgressor of his law, i^ a proof of this truth. The Commination is, Genesis
2.17. In the day that thou eatest thereof, [of the tree of knowledge of good
and euill] thou shall dye the death. Adam transgressed the Law; it was his
sin; the punishment of it, in him and his whole posterity, is death.

Hitherto belongs that malediction, Deuteronomy. 27.26. which is repeated, Gal.
3.10. Cursed is every one, that continues not in all things, which are written
in the Book of the Law, to do them. Now God is ever true in his sayings, and
he ever performs, what he says. If thou then fail in the performance gf any
one Commandment of his Law, or of any branch thereof, the Curse lays hold
on thee, and obliges thee to punishment.

In the first Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans verse. 32. we know it to be
(...), the Law of God, his righteous and just Law, his Law of Nature, that,
they which do such things, (as are there rehearsed) are worthy of death. Art
thou filled with unrighteousness, with fornication, with wickedness, with
covetousness, with maliciousness? Thou art worthy of death. Art thou full of
envy, of murder, of debate, of deceit, of malignitie? Thou art worthy of
death. Art thou a whisperer, a backbiter, a hater of God? Thou art worthy of
death. Art thou despiteful, or proud or a boaster, or an inuentor of evil, or
disobedient to thy parents? thou art worthy of death. Art thou without
understanding, or without natural affection? Art thou a covenant breaker, or
implacable, or unmerciful? Thou art worthy of death. It is (...), the Law of
God, his righteous and just Law, his Law of Nature, that they which commit such
things, are worthy of death. They are worthy of death: and death must be
their wages. It must be so. So true is my Doctrine, God will never suffer sin
to escape altogether unpunished.

For the further illustration of this truth, I might produce the suffrages of
the ancient; of Austine, and of Gregory. But having elsewhere done that in my
18. Sermon upon the 10. of Hoseah, I will not now again do it: and what need
I draw from the Rivers, when I am full of the fountain? Yet may I not end,
without making some use hereof.

My first use shall be, to reprove such as teach otherwise, as Socinus
Osterodius, Gittichius, and other the enemies of Christ's satisfaction. They
will thus argue: if God will never suffer sin to escape unpunished, then
belike he casts all men into Hell, there to be punished with infernal
torments.

I answer, No. Sed quosdam infernalibus poenis punit, caeteris peccata
remittit: Far be it from God, that he should punish all, the Elect as well
as the Reprobate, with infernal torments. Some, all the Reprobate, he so
punishes: but to others, to all the Elect, he forgiues their sins.

Their reply here is: Does God forgive the Elect their sins? Why then it is
likely, he leaves them altogether unpunished.

Our answer is: Not so. God does not leave the sins of the Elect altogether
unpunished; but does punish them all, by translating their sins from them, to
his own son, Christ Jesus: according to that, Esaias 53.6. The Lord has laid
on him the iniquity of us all. He was wounded for our transgressions; he was
bruised for our iniquities. The sum of all is; Our transgressions, our
iniquities, our sins God punishes in Christ, and for his sake forgiues them
us. Thus far the reproof.

My second Use is, a short word of exhortation. Will not God suffer any sin
to escape altogether unpunished? What then shall become of us, beloved? Our
sins! Are they not impudent and vnblushing? Are they not acted with lifting
up the hand, and heel against God? The hand in opposition, the heel in
contempt? Our sins! They keep not low water; the tide of them is ever
swelling: they are objects to the eye of the world, and are proud, that they
are observed.

I have read of two ladders, by which me^ climb to Heaven; prayers and sins:
the godly by their prayers; the wicked by their sins. By this la^ter ladder
did Sodom and Niniv^h climb. O let not our sins be such climbers! Rather
then they should press into the presence chamber of Heaven, and grow
acquainted with God, let us keep them down, and here punish them. For they
must be punished.

Must be! Yea, says S. Austine Enarrat. in Psalm. 58. Iniquitas omnis, parva
magnaue fit, puniatur necesse est: Every sin, be it great, or be it little,
must of necessity be punished.

Must it! By whom? He there tells you, aut ab ipso homine poenitente, aut a Deo
vindicante; either by man repenting, or by God revenging. For quem poenitet,
scipsum punit, who so repents of his sins, he punishes himself for his
sins. Ergo, fratres, puniamus peccata nostra: therefore brethren, let us be
our own punishers: punish we our selves, our sins, that God may have mercy
on us.

He cannot show mercy upon workers of iniquity, quasi blandiens peccatis, aut
non eradicens peccata, as if he flattered men in their sins, or had no
purpose to root out sin.

Prorsus aut punis, aut punit. Believe it either thou must punish thy self, or
God will punish thee. Vis non puniat, puni tu. Will thou that God should not
punish thee, then punish thou thy self: and wash away thy sins with the salt
and bitter tears of unfeigned Repentance, through a lively faith in the blood
of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: So shall not thy sins be laid unto thy
Charge: but they shall be as a bundle that is bound up and is cast into the
bottom of the Sea: they shall never rise up against thee.

If thou thus punish thy self, God will not complain of thee, that he is
pressed under thee as a Cart is pressed, that is full of sheaues: nor will he
threaten, to press thee, as a Cart full of sheaues presses, or is pressed.

Now forsaking the ladder of our sins, climb we to Heaven with the ladder of
our prayers.

O Lord, our God, the giver of all grace, grant, we beseech thee, that we may
unfeignedly bewail our sins, be they never so small, and may amend all
without excuse, as well our secret sins, as those that are known, that we
may in thy good time be translated from this valley of sins, to that thy
blessed habitation above, where we may with all Saints for ever sing:
Halleluja, Salvation, and glory, and honor, and power, unto the Lord our God
for evermore. Amen.

THE XX. LECTVRE.
AMOS 2.14, 15, 16. Therefore the flight shall perish from the swift, and the
strong shall not strengthen his force, neither shall the mighty deliver
himself.

Neither shall he stand, that handles the bow, and he that is swift of foot
shall not deliver himself, neither shall he, that rides the Horse, deliver
himself.

And he, that is courageous among the mighty, shall flee away naked in that
day, says the Lord.


THE defiance is set, the trumpet is blown, the war is proclaimed from the
Majesty of heaven, against the Kingdom of the ten tribes of Israel. Such was
the height of their impieties, discovered, verse. 6, 7, 8. such the foulness
of their ingratitude, blased verse. 12. that they could not look for less,
then a dissipation, a dispersion and overthrow by war.

The proclamation you heard of, of late, out of the 13. verse, it was made,
either by way of a grievous complaint, Behold, I am pressed under you, as a
cart is pressed, that is full of sheaues: or by way of a terrible commination,
Behold, I will press you, as a cart full of sheaues presses, or is pressed.

The success and event of this war now follows, verse. 14, 15, 16. wherein
three generals have bin observed: Impotentia fugiendi, Debilitas in refistendo,
and Fuga fortium.

The first was, their impotencie and unableness to escape by flight in the day
of battle: the second, their debilitie and weakness in resisting the enemy:
the third, the flight of their most valiant and stout of heart. Three generals
they are, and are by our Prophet divided into seven several branches: in
which he describes gravitatem tribulationis, as Castrus speaks, the
grieuousnes of their tribulation; or as Quadratus, summam calamitatem and
angustiam, the extreme misery and anguish, whereinto they were to fall.

He shows Gods judgments to be ineluctable. If he will the punishment of
any, there is no place for refuge, no evasion, no means to escape. Neither he
that is of an expedite and agile body, nor the strong man, nor the mighty, nor
the bow-man, nor the swift of foot, nor the horseman, nor the courageous and
stout of heart, shall be able to help himself in that day, in the day of Gods
reuengement.

Thus have you summarily the scope of our Prophet in this Scripture, and the
meaning thereof. I must now descend to the particulars. The first of the seven
miseries, here foretold to betide the Israelites, is in the beginning of the
14. verse.

The flight shall perish from the swift. IT is an Hebrew phrase. I meet with
the like, Psalm. 142.4. Perijt fuga a me. So David in extreme danger in the
Cave, complains: The flight perished from me, or Refuge failed me; or, I had
no place to fly unto: that is, I saw not which way I might escape; all hope of
evasion was gone from me; I was in mine own eyes, of necessity to have
perished. Perijt fuga a me, The flight perished from me.

The like form of speech is, Ierem. 25.35. Peribit fuga a pastoribus, and
saluatio ab optima^ibus gregis: The flight shall perish from the shepherds,
and safety from the chief of the flock: that is, The shepherds shall have
no way to flee, and the principal of the flock, the Rams of the flock shall
have no way to escape; Peribit fuga, the flight shall perish from the
shepherds, and saftie from the chief of the flock.

So, Job 11.20. it is part of the infelicitie of the wicked, Peribit fuga ab
cis, flight shall perish from them, that is, they shall not escape.

The meaning of this phrase is well expressed, Amos 9.1. Non erit fuga cis qui
fugient, and non saluabitur ex cis, qui fugerit. He that flees of them, shall
not flee away, and he that escapes of them, shall not be delivered. Surely
from such peribit fuga, flight shall perish; flee they may, but by their flight
they shall not escape.

Peribit fuga, the flight shall perish from the swift. As the flight perishes,
so may other things be said to perish, the Law, and Counsel, and the Word; the
Law from the Priest, and counsel from the wise, and the word from the Prophet.
Ier. 18.18.

So, Ezech. 7.26. it is said, The law shall perish from the Priest, and
counsel from the Ancients. And Ierem. 49.7. Counsel is perished from the
prudent. And Esai. 29.14. the wisdom of the wise men shall perish.

Now for the law, and the word, and wisdom, and counsel to perish from the
Priest, from the Prophet, from the Wise, from the Prudent, and from the
Ancient, what else is it, then for such men to be destitute of such things; the
Priest of the Law, the Prophet of the Word, the wise, the prudent, and the
ancient, of wisdom and counsel?

So touching my text, I say, for the flight to perish from the swift, it is
nothing else, then for the swift to be destitute of flight, to be deprived of
flight, to be altogether unable to flee away, when he would.

The flight shall perish from the swift. The swift! Who is that? The old
Hebrews say, it is Jeroboam, son of Nebat 1. King 11.40.
, who fled from Solomon into Egypt, as S. Hierome, and after him Christ^ph. a
Castro.
Remigius, Rupertus, Albertus, Hugo, and Dionysius have observed. This Jewish
conceit is in this place enlarged: As by the Swift they understand Jeroboam,
son of Nebat, who fled from Solomon; so by the Strong, they understand 1.
King 15.16.
Baasha, that warlike King, who all his days had war with Asa King of Judah;
by the Mighty, King 1. King. 16.16.
Omri; by the Bowman, Cap. 19.16.
Iehu, the son of Nimshi, who slew King Ioram with an 2. King. 9.24.
arrow; by the Swift of foot, King 2 King. 15.19.
Menahem; by the Horseman, King Cap. 15.25.
Pekah, the son of Remaliah; and by the Courageous and stout of heart, K.
Cap. 17 1. etc.
Hoshea, son of Elah, the last of the Kings of Israel.

But these are Hebraeorum somnia, as Lyra calls them; or, as Mercerus,
Nugamenta: they are Jewish dreams and toys, unworthy the majesty of holy
Scripture. I therefore pass them over: and do understand this branch, of the
flight perishing from the swift, with the other six that follow, of the utter
subversion of the state of Israel, and the final captivity of that people
when they were carried away by Salmanassar into Assyria. In that day (a heavy
day to them) neither he that was of a swift, an expedite and an agile body,
nor the strong man, nor the mighty, nor the archer, nor the swift of foot, nor
the rider, nor the courageous and stout of heart, found any means to save or
help himself.

From the first of these seven miseries thus expressed in this first branch,
The flight shall perish from the swift, we may take this lesson, When God
resolves to punish man for sin, there is no refuge for him, no evasion, no
escaping by flight, though he be of a swift, an expedite, and an agile body.

This truth Albertus would ratify with those words, Prove. 92. Velox pedibus
offendet. He that is swift of foot offends, stumbleth, hitteth against some
stone, or stump, and so falls, and is overtaken. But the allegation is
impertinent. The words are against rash and unadvised actions in the course of
man's life; and do bear with them this sense: As he that runs hastily, if
he look not to his feet, that he may choose the good way, and leave the bad,
is in great danger of continual falling: so he, that hastily and without due
deliberation goes about this or that, may easily transgress before he be
aware. This sense is natural to the words, as we render them: He that hastes
with his feet, sins. If thou run hastily to evil, thou sinnest against
God and thine own soul.

The other place alleged by Albertus to prove, that there is no evasion, no
escaping for the swift, is more pertinent. It is in Esaias chap. 30.16.
Velociores erunt, qui persequentur vos. Think you not by flight to save your
selves: for they, that shall pursue you, shall be as swift as you, or swifter.

As pertinent is that of the Preacher, Eccl. 9.11. There is no race to the
swift, or, in running it helps not to be swift. The meaning of it the Chaldee
Paraphrase thus expresses: though men be as swift as Eagles, yet shall they
not by running help themselves, or deliver themselves from death in the day of
battle. The Hebrews refer this to Hasahel, one of the sons of Tzeruiah, who
though he were an exceeding swift runner, as light of foot as a wild Roe, as
he is described, 2. Sam. 2.18. yet could he not escape, but he must be slain
2. Sam. 2.23.
by Abner.

We read of diverse, swift of foot beyond admiration: of Atalanta in the Ovid.
Metam. lib. 10. fab. 14.
Poet, who seemed Scythica non segnius ire sagitta, to run as fast, as an
arrow flies from a strong bow: of Camilla in an other Virg. Aeneid. lib. 7.
Poet, that she did cursu pedum, with her swift feet, out-runne the winds;
that she flew over standing corn, nec teneras cursu laesisset aristus and did
no hurt to the ears thereof; that she iournied upon the restles and swelling
Ocean, and never dipped the sole of her foot therein. Of Iphictus in In sacro
sermon.
Orpheus, Dionysius lib. 28.
Nonnus, and Hesiodus. Demaratus. Hygin. Astrom. lib. 2. in Orione.
others, that he likewise ran over standing corn without hurt unto the
ears, and walked upon the Sea: of Orior, Neptuns son in Hyginus, that he
could run upon the waves of the Sea: of Arias, Menecles his son, in the
Greek I^^. 1. Epig. 3. Antipater.
Epigram, that running in a race from the b^ginning to the end no man could see
him, so swift he was of foot.

But these I take to be either fabulous, or hyperbolicall. Yet say, there were
such; say, there are such; I say, neither was there for them, neither is there
for these, any evasion, or escaping from God. No, not any at all. My Prophet in
the next verse, the 15. of this Chapter, speaks it in plain terms; He, that
is swift of foot, shall not deliver himself.

Not deliver himself! and yet swift of foot. It is even so. Why may he not
attempt to flee? Perchance he may: yet shall his attempt be frustrate: for thus
says the Lord, Amos 9.1. He, that flees, shall not flee away, and he that
escapes, shall not be delivered. Yea, says he, though they dig into Hell,
thence shall mine hand take them: though they climb up to Heaven, thence will
I bring them down. And though they hide themselves in the top of Carmel, I
will search and take them out thence; and though they be hid from my sight in
the bottom of the Sea, thence will I command the serpent and he shall bite
them. And though they go into captivity before their enemies, thence will I
command the sword, and it shall slay them. In this Hyperbolicall exaggeration,
(for such it is in the judgments of S. Hierome, Remigius, Albertus, Hugo, and
Dionysius) he shows, how impossible it is for man, by seeking to flee, to
lurk, or to hide himself, to exempt himself from the power or wrath of GOD.

This impossibility of hiding our selves from the power, or wrath of God,
either in Heaven, or Hell, or Sea, or dark place, or any where else, is
elegantly and fully illustrated by the sweetest singer of Psalms, David, Psalm
139.7.

Whither shall I go from thy spirit? or whither shall fly from thy presence?

If I ascend up into Heaven, thou art there: if I make my bed in Hell, behold,
thou art there.

If I take the wings of the morning, and dwell in the uttermost parts of the
Sea,

Even there shall thy hand lead me, and thy right hand shall hold me.

If I say, Surely the darkness shall cover me: even the night shall be light
about me.

Yea the darkness hides not from thee, but the night shines as the day: the
darkness and the light are both alike to thee.

You see, nor Heaven, nor Hell, nor Sea, nor darkness could hide David from
the presence of God. Could they not hide David, and shall they be able to hide
others? They shall not. God makes it good by that his vehement asseueration,
Ierem. 23.23. Am I a God at hand, says the Lord, and not a God a far off?

Can any hide himself in secret places, that I shall not see him, says the
Lord? Do not I fill Heaven, and Earth says the Lord? You see again: At hand
or further off, in Heaven, or Earth, in places of most secrecy, our Lord he is
God, he sees all things, he fills both Heaven and Earth. Thus have you the
confirmation of my doctrine, which was, When God resolves to punish man for
sin, there is no refuge for him, no evasion, no escaping by flight, though he
be of a swift, an expedite, and an agile body.

Is there no refuge for us, no evasion, no escaping by flight, when God will
punish? No, there is none. How can there be any? since our persecutors shall be
swifter then the Eagles of the Heaven to pursue us upon the mountains, and to
lay wait for us in the wilderness: according to the moon that the daughter of
Sion makes, Lament. 4 19. Flee we, as we may, to mountains, to the
wilderness, to hide our selves; our flight shall be in vain: for our
persecutors shall be swifter then the Eagles of the Heaven; they whom God will
employ, to be the executioners of his displeasure toward us, shall still have
means to overtake us, and to find us out.

Will there be no refuge for us, no evasion, no escaping by flight, when God
will visit for our sins? What shall we then do beloved? What? Vis audire
consilium? Will thou hear counsel, says S. Austine in his sixth Treatise
upon S. John's Epistle, Si vis ab illo fugere, ad ipsum fuge; If thou will flee
from him, flee to him. Ad ipsum fuge confitendo, non ab ipso latendo. Flee to
him by confessing thy sins, but hide not thy self from him. Latere enim non
potes, sed confiteri potes. For its impossible thou should lie hid from him,
yet may thou confess thy self unto him. Say unto him, Psalm. 91.2.
Refugium meum es tu, Lord thou art my refuge and my fortress: my God, in thee
will I trust. Refugium meum es tu, Lord thou art my refuge.

To like purpose the same S. Austine upon Psalm. 71. says, Non est quo fugiatur
ab illo, nisi ad illum, there is no flying from God, but by flying to Him. Si
vis evadere iratum, fuge ad placatum, if thou will flee from him, as he is
angry, flee to him as pacified.

So upon Psalm. 75. Non est, quo fugias a Deo irato, nisi ad Deum placatum;
there is no flying from God angry, but to God pacified. Prorsus non est, quo
fugias, believe it, there is no flying from God. Vis fugere ab ipso? fuge ad
ipsum. Will thou needs flee from him? then flee to him.

Flee to him! From whence and whither? Can I flee from any place where God is
not, to some place where he is? Or is he not every where? Fills he not Heaven
and Earth? How then can I flee to him?

Understand not any local flying de loco ad locum, but a flying de vita ad
vitam, de actu ad actum, de bonis ad meliora, de vtilibus ad vtiliora, de
sanctis ad sanctiora, as Origin speaks, Homil. 12. in Genesin, and so may
thou flee to God. Flee from life to life, from an evil life to a good life;
from act to act, from an evil act to a good act; from good to better; from
profitable courses to more profitable; from sanctified thoughts to more
sanctified; and thou do flee to God. The performance of this thy flight must
be, non passibus pedum, sed mentis profectibus, not by the agilitie or swiftnes
of thy feet, but by the increase or bettering of will and understanding.

Thus to flee to God, is nothing else, then to draw near unto him, to have
access unto him, to come unto him.

To draw near unto him we are exhorted, Iam. 4.8. Draw nigh unto God, and he
will draw nigh to you. Draw nigh to God! but how? Pedibus, aut passibus
corporis, with your bodily feet or paces? No, sed cordis, but with the feet
and paces of our heart. Per bona opera, says the Gloss, by good works: per
morum imitationem, says Aquinas, by honesty of life and conversation: fide,
affectu, pijs precibus, says another, by true faith, by sincere affection, by
godly and devout prayers. Such are the feet, such the paces of our hearts; by
which, if we are contrite, broken, and sorrowful in spirit, for our sins
already past, and are careful to prevent all occasion of sin hereafter, we
draw nigh to God; yea, we have access unto him.

To have access to God we are invited, Psalm. 34.5. Accedite ad cum and
illuminamini, and facies vestrae non confundentur. Let your access be to God,
and be lightened, and your faces shall not be confounded. And this access to
God, according to S. Austine upon Psalm. 145.16. is to be, animo, non vehiculo;
affectibus, non pedibus; with the mind, not with a chariot; with our
affections, not with our feet.

So the same Father upon the 59 Psalm. Our access to God must be, non gressu
pedum, non subvectione vehiculorum, non celeritate animalium, non elevatione
pennarum, not by running with our feet, not by hurrying in a coach, not by
riding upon the swiftest of horses, not by mounting up with feathered wings;
sed puritate affectuum, and probitate sanctorum morum, but with purity of
affections, and sanctity of behavior.

This our access unto God, is nothing else, then our coming unto God. The
invitation to come unto him is general, Matthew. 11.28. It is there made by our
Lord Romans 1.3, 7.
Jesus Christ, our Matthew. 1.21.
Savior, and Galat. 3.13.
Redeemer, the Revel. 17.14.
Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, the head of all principality and power, the
joy and crown of all Saints, the assured trust and certain Col^ss. 1.27.
hope of all the faithful: and its made unto all: Come unto me, all ye that
labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.

Come, Come unto me. Quibus gressibus ad semetipsam nos veritas vocat? Christ
the Truth, calls us; but how shall we come unto him? Quibus gressibus? by what
steps or paces? Gregory frames the question, Moral. lib. 21. cap. 4. and there
gives this answer: Ad se quippe venire nos Dominus praecipit, nimirum non
gressibus corporis, sed profectibus cordis: its true; the Lord commands us to
come unto him, not with the motion of our bodies, but with the proceedings of
our hearts.

Thus I have made plain unto you, what it is Ad Deum fugere, to flee to God.
Its nothing else, then Deo appropinquare, ad Deum accedere, ad Deum venire: to
draw nigh to God, to approach unto him, to come unto him: but whether we flee,
or draw nigh, or approach, or come unto him, the understanding of all must be
spiritual. Our wings, our charriots, our coaches, our feet, wherewith we are
to fly, to draw nigh, to approach, to come to God, are all spiritual.

And what are they? They are contrition, faith, and obedience. With these we
approach, we draw nigh, we fly, we come to God. Vt miseri ad misericordiam, vt
nudi ad divitem, vt famelici ad panem, vt infirmi ad medicum, vt serui ad
dominum, vt discipuli ad magistrum, vt caeci ad lumen, vt frigidi ad ignem; as
the wretched to the merciful, as the naked to the rich, as the hunger-staruen
to bread, as the sick to the Physician, as the servant to his Lord, as the
scholar to his Master, as the blind to the light, as the cold to the fire: so
Hugo Cardinalis upon the 4th of S. James.

Now with these three, Contrition, Faith, and Obedience, the inseparable
companions of true and unfeigned Repentance, let us make haste to God, and fly
we with all speed from the wolf to the shepherd, from death to life, from
our sins to our Savior, from the paths of Hell, full of all darkness and
horror, to the way of Heaven, full of all true joy and pleasure. So will God
draw nigh to us, Liberando ab angustijs, gratiam dando, and de virtute ad
virtutem promovendo, says the same Hugo: he will free us from distress, will
give us of his grace, and will promote us from virtue to virtue.

Thus shall it be with us, if with the affection of the spouse in the Canticles
we call upon the Lord. Her affection is seen Chap. 1.4. Draw me, says she,
and we will run after thee. Say we with like affection, Lord draw us and we
will run after thee. Draw us and we will run.

That we may begin zealously to run after God, we have need to be drawn,
and that with great force. For unless he draw us, we cannot Joh. 6.44.
come to him, we cannot follow him. But if he once draw, Lo, then we hasten,
then we run, then we wax hot. Wherefore let the Lord draw us, let him pull us
out from the bondage of our sins, let him deliver us from this wicked world;
let him powerfully incline our wills and affections toward him, let him give
us strength to cleave unto him; and then we, and all the faithful, will at
once with speed and earnestness, fly unto him, draw nigh unto him, have our
access unto him, and come unto him.

Hitherto of the first branch of this fourteenth verse, expressing the first of
the seven miseries here foretold to betide the Israelites, that, the flight
should perish from the swift. Now follows the second, and it concerns their
strong men; And the strong shall not strengthen his force.

THE strong, (...) He in whom is strength; strength not of mind, but of body;
he shall not strengthen his force] though he be (...), very strong and Iustie,
yet (...), he shall not retain his force: so daunted shall he be in heart, and
his courage so abated, that he shall not dare for his own defense to use the
strength he has. He shall be, as if he had no strength at all. The lesson to
be taken hence, is: When God means to punish, a man's strength will not help
him.

It will not. For as it is in the song of Hannah, the mother of Samuel, 1. Sam.
2.9. By strength shall no man prevail. No man against God. For God is
Almighty. He remoueth the mountains, and they know not: He overcomes them
in his anger. He shakes the Earth out of her place, and the pillars thereof
tremble. He commands the Sun, and it rises not: and seals up the Stars.
He alone spreads out the Heavens, and treads upon the waves of the Sea. He
makes Arcturus, Orion, and Ple^ades, and the chambers of the South. He does
great things past finding out: yea, and wonders without number. He is the
Almighty: Who ever has hardened himself against him, and has prospered? So
devout Job, chap. 9 4. It is as if he had thus bri^fly argued: God is Almighty:
and therefore there is no contending against him, no withstanding him, by any
strength of man.

Here may the strong be admonished, that they glory not in their strength, nor
put their trust in it. I would wish them to listen to the words of S. Austine
in his Enarration upon the 33 Psalm: Ad Dominum omnes, In Deo omnes: Get ye
all to the Lord, trust ye all in God. Spes tua Deus sit, fo^titudo tua Deus
sit, firmitas tua Deus sit, exeratio tua ipse si, laus tua ipse sit; finis, in
quo requiescas, ipse sit; adiutorium, cum laboras, ipse sit: Let God be thy
hope, let him be thy fortitude, let him be thy strength, let him be thy
reconcil^m^nt, let him be thy praise, let him be thy end, wherein thou may
pleasure and solace thy self, let him be thy refuge in time of trouble. Ad
Dominum omnes, in Deo omnes: Get ye all to God, rest ye all in God. Trust not
in thy self, nor in thine own strength.

But thou would still be reputed for strong and valiant. Would thou so?
Then be thou so: but take this for thy character; Thou strong and valiant man,
be thou the master of thy self; subdue thy passions to reason; and by this
inward victory work thou thine own peace. Be thou afraid of nothing, but of
the displeasure of the Almighty, and run away from nothing but from sin.
Look not on thy hands but thy cause; not how strong thou art, but how
innocent. Let goodness ever be thy warrant, and I assure thee, though thou
may be ouer-mastered, yet shall thou never be foiled. For Deus fortitudo tua,
God will be thy strength.

Thus have you heard in brief of the second misery, here foretold to betide
the Israelites, that, the strong should not strengthen his force. The third is,
Neither shall the mighty deliver himself.

THE mighty (...) Gibbor. He that excels in strength; in strength, not of
body only, but of mind too. This stout and douty man is called by the
Septuagint, (...), a man of arms, a fighter, a warrior; such a one as has
(...), as S. Cyrill speaks, and is skillful in military affairs. This man
for all his skill, strength, and valor shall not deliver himself.

Himselfe] The Hebrew is (...) Naphscho, his soul or life. His soul, that is,
his life. Well. For what is life, but as the Philosopher defines it, (...);
the composition and colligation of the soul to the body. The soul for life!
It is often so put in holy Scripture. As 1. King. 19.4. Elias, in the
wilderness, requesting for himself, that he might dye, said, It is enough now,
O Lord, take away my soul from me. My soul, he meant his life. So Jonas,
chap. 4.3. O Lord, Take away my soul from me. That by his soul, he meant his
life, it is plain: for he adds, It is better for me to dye, then to live.
Satan, Job 2.4. thus says unto the Lord; Skin for skin, yea, all that a man
has, will he give for his soul. For his soul, that is, for his life: and so
the Greek Scholia upon the first of S. James do expound it: (...), The soul
is also called life, as in these words; All that a man has will he give (...),
for his soul or life.

God tells the rich man in the Gospel, who was talking of larger buildings,
when the building within him was near pulling down, and thought he had goods
enough for his soul to delight in, when he had not soul enough to delight in
his goods, Thou fool, this night (...), this night do they require and
redemaund thy soul of thee, Luke 12.10. Thy soul, that is, thy life, for the
meaning is, this night thou must dye.

S. Austine in his second Book concerning Christ his Sermon upon the Mount,
upon these words, Nonne anima plus est, quam esca? Is not the soul more then
meat? says, Anim^ hoc loco pro ista vita posita^ noverimus, know we, that the
soul in this place is put for this life, whose retinacle or stay, is the
corporal sustenance we daily take. According to this signification is that
also spoken, Ioh. 12.25. Qui amat animam suam, perdet illam, he that loves his
soul shall loose it. In each place, the soul is put for life; and accordingly
is it rendered in our newest English: in the one place, Is not the life more
then meat? in the other, He that loves his life, shall loose it.

As in these now-cited places, and (...) 31.13. Act. 20 24. in (...). etc.
many other, Anima pro Vita, the soul is put for the life; so is it in my
text: The mighty shall not deliver his soul, that is, his life. The meaning
is, He shall not save his life; he shall not save himself.

The doctrine to be taken from hence is this, No man can be privileged by his
might, against the Lord.

No man can. The Wiseman affirms it, Eccles. 9.11. There is no battle to the
strong; (...) Laggibborim; to the mighty, to the man of arms there is no
battle, no victory in battle. The Psalmist speaks it plainly, Psalm. 33.16.
A mighty man is not delivered by much strength, (...) Gibbor, a mighty man is
not delivered from the danger and power of his enemies, by much or great
strength, of himself, or others for him. This mighty man in the Vulgar Latin,
is styled a Giant: Gigas non saluabitur in multitudine virtutis suae; A Giant
shall not be safe in the multitude of his strength. Little David, but a 1. Sam.
17.42.
youth, without verse. 39.
armor, only with verse. 50.
a sling and a stone, slew the Philistim, great Goliath. It is true; No man is
privileged by his might against the Lord.

The reason hereof is that, 1. Sam. 2.2. Non est fortis, sicut Deus noster:
There is none strong, like our God. None so mighty, none so potent, as our God.
Men of this world, may seem to be mighty, and of great power: but, our God in
Heaven is mightier, and does whatsoever pleases him, even upon the mighty here
on the Earth.

From hence may the mighty man take instruction; the instruction that is given
him, Ierem. 9.23. Let not the mighty man glory in his might: But if he will
needs glory, let him glory in this, that he understands and knows the Lord.
Upon this Lord, the Lord of Heaven and Earth, Iudeth 9.12.
creator of the waters, and King of every creature, let us wholly depend; being
well assured, that none of these outward things, agilitie of body, strength,
might, or the like, can be any way avayleable to us, if Gods special blessing
be not upon them.

Thus much of the third misery, here foretold to betide the Israelites, which
has ended the fourteenth verse. The fourth follows, and is expressed in the
first branch of the fifteenth verse: these words, Neither shall he stand, that
handles the bow.

HE that handles the bow, is in the language of the Septuagint, (...), the
bowman, the archer, the shooter. He shall not stand] He shall not dare to
abide his ground: or, if he abide it, he shall not be able to bend his bow; so
through fear shall the Dan. 5.6.
joints of his loins be loosed, and his knees shall smite the one against the
other. This anguish or perplexity shall betide him, according to Jonathan in
his Targum (...) Bicrabha, in time of skirmish and fight, even then, when his
bow should stand him most in steed. By this bow. I understand, not the bow
alone and arrows, but every other weapon and instrument of war. From hence
arises this doctrine, Its not the bow and arrows, or sword, or any other
instrument of war, that can any whit avayle us, when God will punish.

For proof hereof I produce the judgment of God upon Gog, the chief Prince
of Meshech and Tubal, Ezech. 39.3. where thus says the Lord, Behold, I am
against thee, O Gog, and I will smite thy bow out of thy left hand, and will
cause thine arrows to fall out of thy right hand. Bow and arrows! There is no
help in them. None at all: nor in the sword; nor in any other military
engine. Therefore does the Psalmist, Psalm. 44 6. renounce all trust in them.
His words are, I do not trust in my bow, neither can my sword save me. His bow
and sword, he does not much care for. Wherein then is his trust? It is in the
might and strength of God. Gods power was his buckler, whereto he trusted for
his own defense, and for the discomfiture of his enemies.

It is the Use we are to make of the doctrine now propounded. We must not
repose our trust in any external help, the bow, the sword, or the like, for
this were indeed, to rob God of his glory, and to run to the creature for
help. Our help is but one; and that is the Lord of Hosts. Dominus Deus
auxiliator meus: Esaias proclaims it twice in one chapter, chap. 50. First
verse. 7. The Lord God is my helper: secondly, verse. 9. Behold, the Lord God is
my helper. The Lord God is my helper, behold, he is my helper. Surely Esaias
looked for no help, but from the Lord his God.

Nor did Jeremy look for any, but from the same eternal fountain of help:
and therefore, chap. 20.11. he says: Dominus mecum est, quasi bellator fortis:
the Lord is with me, as a stout or mighty warrior.

Nor did David look for any, but from the same. He Psalm. 18.2. acknowledges
the Lord, and him only, to be his strength, his succor, his fortress, his
deliverer, his God, his rock wherein he trusts, his buckler, the horn of
his salvation, and his high tower.

The like he does, Psalm. 144.1, 2. Where, what is his strength, but the Lord?
What his goodness, his fortress, his high tower, his deliverer, his shield,
but the Lord? The Lord alone is he, in whom David trusts. The bow, the sword,
the spear, and every other military weapon, he knew to be mere vanity
without help^ from the Lord: and therefore the Lord was to him in steed of all.

And let the Lord be to us in steed of all, in steed, of bow, of sword, of
spear, of buckler, of shield, of fortress, of tower, and of every other
military engine, and under Psalm. 36.7.
the shadow and Psalm. 61.4.
covert of his wings, we Psa. 119.117.
shall be safe.

Must the Lord be unto us in steed of all? In steed of bow, of sword, of
spear, and the rest? Ergone omnis armorum vsus abijciendus? What? Shall we
therefore condemn, cast away, or neglect, the bow, the sword, the spear, all
kind of artillery, furniture, or munition that men do use, either for the
private defense of themselves, or for the public of the Country?

No, in no wise. This were too too Anabaptisticall. And I am no Anabaptist,
that I should maintain it to be unlawful for a Christian, either to make
weapons for the use of man, or to use them being made. They deny it to be
lawful to use the sword. I affirm it to be lawful. My assertion is; All men
into whose hands God puts the sword, may use the sword, even to strike and
kill, if need be. Now God puts the sword first and principally into the
hand of the public Magistrate, who when just occasion serves, may draw it
out. And sometime he puts it into the hand of a private man. A private man
when he is assailed of his enemy, may take the sword in way of his own
defense, and may (if there be no other help) kill his enemy therewith, so he
do it not upon any malice, but only because he cannot otherwise escape, and
save his own life.

Now to the question: My answer is; Non reijcitur vsus, sed fiducia. The bow,
the sword, the spear, and other instruments of war, are not to be condemned,
not to be cast away, not to be neglected, but to be used. Non reijcitur vsus,
sed fiducia; their use is not forbidden, but our trust in them. The use of all
kind of weapons is common as well to the wicked as to the godly: the
difference is in the trust. The wicked, they use them, and trust in them; the
godly, they use them too, but their trust mounts higher, even to the Lord of
Hosts. The distinction then here to be observed is, Vt vsus creaturis fiducia
vero creatori deputetur. Use the bow, the sword, the spear, and every other
martial weapon when then shall have just occasion; but see that thy trust be
ever in the Lord.

S. Chrysostom upon those words of the 44. Psalm, I trust not in my bow,
neither shall my sword save me, says: Why then do thou use them? Why art
thou armed? Why handlest thou the bow? Why the sword? The answer there is
returned; Because our God has so commanded, therefore I use them: (...), yet I
cast my whole care on him; in him I do wholly trust. Thus (...), thus fortified
and fensed with power from above, we are to fight against our visible enemies:
and thus fortified and fensed with power from above, we are to fight against
our Spiritual enemies. The chief of them is the Devil.

Our fight against him is a daily fight. For our direction in this fight, we
have S. Chrysostomes direction. When thou art to combat with the Devil, say,
I trust not in my weapons. I trust not in mine own strength, or mine own
righteousness, but in the mercy of God: say with Daniel, chap. 9.18. O my God,
incline thine ear and hear: open thine eyes, and behold our desolation; we
present our supplications before thee, not for our own righteousness, but for
thy great mercies.

Save us, O Lord, save thy people, from the power and fury of this immortal
enemy. Though as a roaring Lion he walks about seeking whom he may devour,
yet shall we, placing all our hope and confidence in thee our Lord and God, be
safe under thy protection. Protect and keep us, O Lord, among the manifold
dangers of this life, and in thy good time, by the conduct of thy favor, bring
us home from this valley of misery and mourning, to that our hoped for country
of eternal glory, where we may with all Saints sing unto thee a perpetual
Halleluiah. Salvation and glory and honor unto the Lord our God. THE XXI.
LECTVRE.
AMOS 2.15, 16. And he that is swift of foot shall not deliver himself,
neither shall he, that rides the Horse, deliver himself.

And he, that is courageous among the mighty, shall flee away naked in that
day, says the Lord.


I Now bring you the remainder of the fourth part of Amos his first Sermon. I
called it heretofore a Commination. I still call it so. It contains
menacings, or threats against the kingdom of the ten tribes, the children of
Israel for the foulness of their ingratitude. These menacings or threats
proceeding from him who only is omnipotent, and all-sufficient to effect what
he threatens, even from the Lord, Jehovah, do plainly demonstrate, that Gods
judgments are ineluctable, not to be avoided. If God will the punishment of
any, there is no place for refuge, no cuasion, no means to escape. Neither he
that is of an expedite and agile body, nor the strong man, nor the mighty,
nor the bow-man, nor the swift of foot, nor the horseman, nor the courageous,
and stout of heart shall be able to help himself in that day, in the day of
Gods vengeance.

Seven particulars are here disabled from helping themselves, in that day,
when the Lord will be pleased to execute vengeance for sin. Of four of them,
you heard at large in my last Lecture out of this place, that, neither he that
is of an expedite and agile body, nor the strong man, nor the mighty, nor the
bow-man, can any way help themselves. Let it please you now to give ear; and
you shall hear as much of the other three; of the swift of foot, of the
horseman, of the courageous and stout of heart. Begin we with the swift of
foot. It is the next branch that follows, verse. 15.

And he that is swift of foot shall not deliver himself. THe original is;
the swift of foot shall not deliver. Shall not deliver! What shall he not
deliver; Supply the defect according to the last clauses of this and the former
verse: and the full shall be, Velox pedibus, non liberabit animam suam, the
swift of foot shall not deliver his soul; His soul, that is, his life, or
himself.

The Author of the Vulgar Latin here reads, Velox pedibus suis non salvabitur
the swift of foot shall not be saved. So does S. Hierome; so the Septuagint; so
an old In Biblioth^ca Nicolsoniana in aede Christi Oxon.
English Manuscript. Some read thus: The swift of foot shall not escape, as
the Caldee Paraphrast, and Montanus, and Munster, and our late Church Bible.

Admit of which reading you will, you cannot miss of the true understanding of
the place. Read if you will; the swift of foot shall not be saved, or, shall
not escape, or, shall not deliver himself; you will forthwith understand,
that, a man cannot by the swiftness of his feet out-runne God. This is the
very marrow of that lesson, which we are to learn from hence. The lesson is:
The swift of foot has no advantage above others, for the saving of himself,
if God do once resolve to punish.

This agrees with that which I have observed upon the first clause of the 14.
verse: The flight shall perish from the swift. With that, this which we have
now in hand is coincident. The flight shall perish from the swift, and, The
swift of foot shall not deliver himself; these two, to the understanding are
but one, and do yield unto us one and the same observation. The observation is,

When God resolves to punish man for sin, there is no refuge for him, no
evasion, no escaping by flight, though he be of a swift, an expedite, and an
agile body.

This truth stands ratified with that in the ninth Chapter of this Prophecy,
verse. 1. Non erit fuga eis, qui fugient, and non salvabitur ex eis, qui
fugerit. He that flees of them, shall not flee away; and he that escapes of
them shall not be delivered. And with that Eccles. 9.11. There is no race to
the swift, or, In running it helps not to be swift: that is, as Jonathan
expounds the place; Though men be as swift as Eagles, yet shall they not by
running help themselves, or deliver themselves from death in the day of
battle.

The many evidences of holy Writ, which are usually brought to prove, that God
is every where present, and in all places at once, may serve for a further
ratification of my propounded doctrine. For if God be every where present, if
he be at once in all places, then certainly there is no refuge for man against
him, no evasion, no escaping by flight. Nor the caves of the earth, nor the
secrets of walls, nor the darkness of the night, nor the distance of place by
land or by sea, can hide us from his presence.

Can they not? How then may that be excused which we read of Adam and his wife,
Genesis 3.8. that they HID themselves from the presence of the Lord God among the
trees of the garden? How that which we read of Cain, Genesis 4.16. that he went
out from the presence of the Lord? How that which we read of Jonah, chap. 1.3.
that he, when he was sent to Ni^iveh, rose up to flee to Tarshish from the
presence of the Lord.

These scruples I am now to remove: The first concerns Adam and his wife,
their hiding themselves among the trees of Paradise. Some say; Adam hid
himself through fear, not as if he could flee from God, but because he
thought himself unworthy to come into Gods sight. So Irenaeus lib. 3 adversus
haereses cap. 37. He seems to take in good part this flight of Adam, and his
endeavor to hide himself, as if it proceeded from a pious and profitable fear
and dread of an humble and repentant soul.

Other say, that Adam exceedingly troubled in mind, much ashamed and afraid,
that he had transgressed the commandment of God, like unto a mad man, that
knows not which way to turn himself, went about to hide himself. So S.
Austine lib. 11. de Genesi ad literam cap. 33.

A third opinion there is, that taxes Adam and Eve of infidelity and
impenitencie, for hiding of themselves: as if guilty of transgression, they
had thought simply to hide themselves from the presence of God. Of this opinion
I find Rupertus, who Comment. in Genesin lib. 3. cap. 12. thus expresses
himself. Abscondendo se, vterque de Deo male sensit, and sibi insipienter
providit, tanquam impaenitens, tanquam infidelis. Adam and his wife in hiding
themselves thought amiss concerning God, and provided foolishly for
themselves, as if they had been impenitent and unbelieving.

It is no ill or idle opinion, to say that, Perhaps Adam and his wife, for want
of experience (for they had never fallen before) might think, that by running
among the trees of Paradise they might hide themselves. But when God had once
found them out (and quickly he found them out) they could not any longer so
think. Then they could not but be resolved upon this; that there is no fleeing
away, no hiding of our selves from the presence of God.

Thus is the first scruple removed. Adam and his wife hid themselves from the
presence of the Lord God among the trees of a garden. They hid themselves, that
is, they would have hid themselves, they would but could not.

The second scruple, concerns Caine his going out from the presence of the
Lord. If Cain could go out from the presence of the Lord, how is the Lord
every where present?

For answer hereunto we are to note, that the presence of God does sometime in
holy Scripture betoken the place of his presence; the place where God was first
worshipped by sacrifice, and showed visible signs of his presence: And that it
does sometime signify the grace of God, his favor, his care, his providence,
and protection. In both these respects may Cain be said to have gone out from
the presence of the Lord. For first he was expelled from the land of his
nativity, from that land where God was wont to show his face, and under the
visible form of humane nature, to talk with man familiarly: and secondly he
was excluded from Gods grace and favor.

Thus much does Cain himself confess, verse. 14. Lord, says he, Behold, thou
have driven me out this day from the face of the earth; and from thy face shall
I be hid, and I shall be a fugitive and a vagabond in the earth. Thou have
driven me out this day from the face of the earth, that is, Thou expellest me
from my native soil, which to me is most dear and sweet, wherein I was
borne, have been bred up, and have lived with my parents and kins-folke even
unto this day: thou driuest me out from a most fruitful and pleasant land, a
land, that is next to the Paradise of the earth; a land, which thou have
consecrated to thy self, to be the land of thy sacrifices oblations, and holy
worship; a land wherein thou art wont to manifest thy self unto men, and to
instruct them by thy sacred oracles, and answers. From this land, the land of
my nativity, thou driuest me out.

And from thy face shall I be hid] I shall for ever and every where, find thee
displeased with me, angry at me, and mine enemy, to the intolerable horror
and amazement of my mind: thou will not deigne to look upon me with the eyes
of thy mercy, but wilt for ever hide thy face from me, and so deprive me of
thy singular benevolence, care, tutele and protection. So was Cain hid from the
face of the Lord, and so went he out from his presence. Otherwise he could not
be hid, he would not go out from the presence of the Lord.

The third scruple concerns Jonah his fleeing to Tarshish. from the presence
of the Lord. If Jonah could flee to Tarshish from the presence of the Lord, how
is the Lord every where present?

Of this fleeing of Jonah from the presence of the Lord, there is a twofold
understanding. Some thus understand it; that he left the whole border and
ground of Israel, where the presence of the Lord, though it were not more then
in other places, was yet more evident by the manifestations of his favors and
graces toward them. There was the arc of the covenant, and the sanctuary,
there the Lord gave them answer by dreams, and oracles: there were other more
special favors of the Lords abode there.

Others by this fleeing of Jonah from the presence of the Lord, do understand
his turning his back upon the Lord, his shaking off the yoke of the Lord, his
wilful renouncing the Commandment of the Lord; his departing from his duty
and from the execution of his office, enjoined him by the Lord.

In the language of the Scripture, they are said to be in the Lords presence,
or to stand before the Lord, who do carefully attend his pleasure, and are
ready to receive and execute whatsoever he imposes. In the 10. of Deuteronomy. verse.
8. The Tribe of Levi is separated by the Lord, to stand before the Lord. To
stand before the Lord, that is, as it is there expounded, to minister unto the
Lord, and to bless in his name.

So is the phrase used by Elias, 1. King. 17.1. Where thus says he, unto Ahab:
As the Lord God of Israel lives, before whom I stand, there shall not be dew
nor rain these years, but according to my word. The Lord God, before whom I
stand; that is, the Lord God, whom faithfully I do serve. And so is it by
Elizeus in those his words to Naaman the Syrian. 2. King. 5.16. As the Lord
lives before whom I stand, I will receive no blessing of thee. As the Lord
lives before whom I stand, a witness to my actions, the searcher of my heart,
whose honor and service I tender more then mine own gain, I will receive no
blessing, no reward of thee.

Now if they, who duly serve the Lord, are said to stand before the Lord, and
to be in his presence, then may they who cast off the yoke of the service due
unto him, well be said to hide themselves from the face of the Lord, and to
flee from his presence.

We see now what this phrase of fleeing from the presence of the Lord does
mean. It gives us to understand, that Jonas, as a fugitive and refractary
servant ran from the Lord, breaking his bonds of duty, and making no
conscience or care to do him service.

Thus are the scruples done away and my doctrine stands good,

There is no refuge, no evasion, no escaping, no hiding, no fleeing from the
face of the Lord, from his presence, from his judgments, no not for the swift
of foot.

Well. What if the footman for all his swiftness cannot save himself; fares
it not better with the horseman? Cannot he deliver himself? No. He cannot. He
is disabled in the next words, Neither shall he that rides the horse deliver
himself.

This rider of the Horse is in the Septuagint (...), the horseman. Cyrill calls
him so. So does Castalio, and Taverner, in his English translation. In the
Vulgar Latin he is Ascensor equi. So is he in S. Hierome. The appellation
pleases Luther, and Calvin, and Osiander. Nor does Gualter dislike it. For he
has, Qui ascendit super equum. Ascensor equi, or qui ascendit super equum, he
that mounts on horseback. He is with Tremellius, and Iunius, insidens equo; so
is he with Vatablus, with M^rcer, and with Piscator: Insidens equo, he that
sits on horseback. With Drusius he is Vector equi, with Brentius Vectus equo.
Vector equi, or Vectus equo, he that is carried on horseback. With
Oecolampadius, he is equitans Equum, he that rides the horse. This last
reading is that which the learned trans^ators of our now English Bible have
made choice of. He that rides the horse. This rider of the horse, this
horseman, mounting, sitting, or, carried on horseback shall not deliver
himself.

Shall not deliver himself. In the Hebrew it is, he shall not deliver his
soul. So is it in the Chaldee. The reading is retained by Brentius, Calvin,
Drusius, Vatablus, and Mercer. In the Septuagint it is (...), he shall not save
his soul. It is the very reading of S. Hierome, and S. Cyrill, and the author
of the Vulgar Latin: and is followed by Luther and by Munster.

He shall not deliver, he shall not save his soul. His soul, that is his
life. Whence some do read: He shall not save his life; so Castalio, so
Osiander, and so our countryman Taverner in his old English translation. Let
the reading be Soul, or Life, man himself is meant: and therefore some have
read, He shall not deliver himself. So Tremellius and Iunius, and Piscator:
and so we read in our newest English Bible, He shall not deliver himself.

Thus have you the Grammatical sense and understanding of these words, He that
rides the horse shall not deliver himself: This rider of the horse, this
horseman mounting, sitting, or carried on horseback, shall not deliver, shall
not save his soul, his life, himself. The lesson we are to learn from hence,
is, He that is mounted on horseback, has no advantage above others, for the
saving of himself, if God do once resolve to punish.

Be thine horse every way answerable to that Horse (of which thou may read in
the Book of Job chap. 39.) whose neck is clothed with thunder, the glory of
whose nostrils is terror; that paweth in the valley, and rejoices in his
strength, and goes on to meet the armed men; that mocketh at fear and is not
affrighted, and turns not back from the sword: no, though the quiver rattle
against him, though the spear and shield do glister, yet swalloweth he the
ground with fierceness and rage. The sound of the trumpet terrifieth him not,
but rather rejoices him: for he smells the battle a far off, the thunder
of the Captains, and the shouting. Be thine horse every way answererable to
this horse, yet repose not any confidence in him for thy saftie: for he will
fail thee.

He will do so. What else is it that thou read, Psalm. 33.17. An horse is a
vain thing to save a man, neither shall he deliver any by his great strength.
Let S. Austine instruct thee, Mentitur tibi equus, quando promittit salutem: if
thy horse promise thee safety, he lies unto thee. The promise of a horse!
Nunquid equus alicui loquitur, and promittit salutem? Does a horse speak to
man? does he promise him safety? It cannot be. Yet when thou considerest the
comely feature and proportion of thy horse, his stout courage, his admired
swiftness, ista omnia, velut promittunt tibi de illo salutem, all these things
do, as it were promise thee saftie by him. Sed fallunt, si Deus non tuetur,
but without the especial blessing of God all these things will fail thee.
For, Mendax equus ad salutem, an horse is a lying thing for safety, a vain
thing to save a man, and shall not deliver any man by his great strength.

This is it, which you may read in the Book of Proverbs chap. 21.31. The horse
is prepared against the day of battle, but safety is of the Lord. Let the
horse be made ready, let him be thoroughly furnished for the war, yet rely
not upon him for thy safety. For safety, all safety is of the Lord, and of
him alone. Let the Lord rebuke, yea, let him but speak the word, both the
chariot and horse shall be cast into a dead sleep. So we read, Psalm. 76.6. The
meaning is: By the only word of the Lord it often comes to pass, that they
who trust in their Chariots and Horses, do vanish and come to naught, like a
dream, yea, like the shadow of a dream.

Pharaoh, proud and cruel Pharaoh, sorry that he had let the children of Israel
go, would needs go fetch them back again. He assured himself before hand
of success, either to spoil them, or to reduce them to bondage. In the
strength of this conceit, furnishing himself with horses and chariots of
war, six hundred chariots, and all the chariots of Egypt, accompanied with
his nobles, captains, and soldiers he marched furiously and pursued the
Israelites, even to the midst of the Red Sea: To the midst of that Sea they
came, and no one wave rose up against them, to wet so much as the hoofes of
their horses. When they were come so far (too far to return) they were
suddenly stricken with their last terror. Their chariots and horses, in which
they trusted, failed them, as having done them service enough, to carry them
into perdition. For the Sea shut her mouth upon them, and swallowed them up in
her waves: you know it to be so, Exodus 14.26. Where is now the safety, which
they promised themselves by their Horses and Chariots? I must again say,
Mendax equus ad salutem, A horse is a lying thing for safety, a vain thing to
save a man. Thus is my doctrine confirmed; He that is mounted on horseback,
has no advantage above others, for the saving of himself, if God do once
resolve to punish.

Now let us make some use of this doctrine. It may first serve for reproof of
such, as for the time of war do glory in the multitude and strength of their
horses, and presume that they shall prevail and get the victory by the valor
of their horsemen. The holy Scripture would have them to be of an other mind,
and to be persuaded, that victory is ever from the Lord, and from him alone,
and that without him the horse and the rider can do nothing. But they will not
change their mind, they will not be thus persuaded. To these therefore thus
says the Lord God, the holy one of Israel, Esa. 30.15. In returning and rest
shall ye be saved, in quietness and confidence, shall be your strength; and ye
would not. But ye said; No, for we will flee upon horses, and will ride upon
the swift. Will you flee upon horses? therefore shall ye flee. Will ye ride
upon the swift? therefore shall they that pursue you be swift. A thousand of
you shall flee at the rebuke of one: or at the most at the rebuke of five shall
ye flee till ye be left as a beacon upon the top of a mountain, and as an
ensign on a hill.

Against these there is a curse gone forth, Esa. 31.1. Woe be unto them that
go down to Egypt for help, and trust in horses, and comfort themselves with
chariots, because they are many; and with horsemen, because they are lusty and
strong: but look not unto the holy one of Israel, nor seek the Lord.

Concerning these I now say no more. I go on with a second use: and that is,
to admonish our selves, that we put no trust, no confidence in horse, chariot,
horsemen, or like external mean for safety. Since it is evident, that these
cannot deliver us, from any the least judgment, that God in his displeasure
shall lay upon us. Let us for ever trust in the Lord alone, and his power. It
is a sweet strain which the faithful have in their song, Psalm. 20.7. Hi,
curruum, and illi equorum; nos vero nominis Iehovae Dei nostri recordamur. Let
it be the matter of our meditation in the day of trouble and distress. Say we
in faith and a sure hope; Some trust in Chariots, and some in horses, but we
will remember the name of the Lord our God. We will remember him, to put our
trust in him, and to settle our hope on him alone. So shall a blessing attend
us. It is promised, Ierem. 17.7. Blessed is the man that trusts in the Lord,
and whose hope the Lord is. Blessed is he! What is that to say? It follows:
He shall be as a tree planted by the waters, that spreads out her roots by
the river, whom the heat, when it comes, cannot hurt, whose leaves are
always green, that is not careful in the year of drought, and never cease
from yielding fruit.

In this comparison between a faithful man, that trusts in the Lord, and a
tree planted by the waters side, we may note the steadfastness and stabilitie
wherewith the faithful people of God are supported, so, that they can never
fall away from faith, and from the grace of God: whereby is condemned the
doctrine of doubting, that Popish doctrine, very pernicious, yea, deadly to
every soul, that shall drink it in. But I will not here make any excursion.
Let that which has already been delivered suffice for the explication of the
15. verse. The sixteenth follows.

And he that is courageous among the mighty shall flee away naked in that day,
says the Lord. HE that is courageous among the mightie] This courageous man is
in the Hebrew thus described, the stout of heart among the mighty. In the
Vulgar Latin thus: Robustus cord inter fortes, the strong of heart among the
stout. This reading is embraced by Brensius, and Osiander, and Luther, and
Calvin, and Gualter. Some vary the phrase; as thus; fortis animo inter
robustes, the stout of courage among the strong; so Drusius. Some thus, fortis
animo inter potentissim^s, the stout of courage among the mighty; so
Tremellius, Iunius, and Piscator. Some thus, qui roborat cor suum inter
robustos, he that strengthens his heart among the strong, so Vatablus Munster
thus translates it, qui inter fortes virili est cord, he that is of a manly
heart among the stout. In Tauerners translation thus I read; He that is as
manly of stomach as a Giant. In our late Church-Bible thus; He that is of
mighty courage among the strong men.

The reading of the Septuagint is far different. They thus: (...). It is so
in the Franckford Edition. S. Hierome thus renders it; Inventum cor eius inter
potentes, his heart is found among the mighty; for (...), some have (...), so
it must be, inventum cor eius in potentatibus, his heart is found in potentates
or dominions. Its obscure enough. S. Cyrill unfolds it: he finds his heart
mightily oppressed with terrors, and without resistance gives the victory to
the spoyler.

The former readings, Latin and English, are more natural, and do better
express the original. Ours is good; He that is courageous among the mighty
(...) bagibborim in potentibus, or inter potentes, among the mighty. The
Hebrews by the particle In or Inter, do use to signify the highest degree,
the superlatiue. Ia^l the wise of Heber the Kenite, Judge. 5.24. is styled,
benedicta inter mulieres, blessed among women. The phrase is used by the Angel
in his Ave Maria, Luc. 1.28. Benedicta tu in mulieribus. Elizabeth repeats it,
verse. 42. Benedicta tu inter mulieres. Benedicta in mulieribus or inter
mulieres, Blessed in, or among women, that is, Benedictarum benedictissim^, of
women, that are blessed, the most blessed; blessed above all.

Such is the exposition that Petrus Lusitanus gives of these words, robustu^
cord inter sorts, the strong of heart among the stout, that is, says he,
robustorum cord robustissimus, and fortium fortissimus, of the strong of heart
the strongest and of stout men the stoutest: or as Castalio has it, militum
anim^sissimus, of soulders the most courageous and hardiest. With us, he is the
courageous among the mighty.

Of this courageous man, courageous among the mighty, notwithstanding his
strength, his mighty, his manhood, his valor, his stoutnesse, his hardiness,
his couragiousnes, it is said, that he shall fly away.

(...) ianus, he shall flee away. Shall he flee away? How is it possible? Is
not the contrary already confirmed by all the passages of the two precedent
verses, the 14. and the 15? Yes it has. I therefore understand by this flying
away, not simply a flying away, but only a desire, or an endeavor to fly
away. He shall fly away, that is, he shall desire to fly away, or, he shall
endeavor to fly away; yet to his little or no advantage, though his desire or
endeavor be to fly away naked.

He shall flee away (...) hharom naked. A man is sometimes said to be naked,
when he wants necessaries for the supply of present occasions. It is said of
Saul, 1. Sam. 19.24. that he stripped off his clothes, and prophesied, and was
all that day and all that night naked. I cannot imagine, that Saul was indeed
altogether naked, but he is said to be so, because he had laid aside his
princely robes; as R. Chimchi thinks; or because he had put off his military
apparel, and was now as another common person, as Iunius supposes; or because
he was sine pallio prophetico, because he had not on a Prophets cloak, as
Drusius affirms obseruat. lib. 14. c. 14. So is Esaias said to have gone naked,
chap. 20.2. because he was nudatus vest sua prophetica, because he had loosed
the sackcloth from off his loins, and had put off his prophetical attire.

In the second of Samuel, chap. 6.20. Michal tells David, that he had
uncovered himself, or made himself naked. And why? but because he had put of
his princely apparel, and danced in a linen Ephod.

Naked also may they, be said to be, that have no good apparel, no good
clothing on. So are the Apostles said to be naked, 1. Cor. 4.11. Even to this
present hour we both hunger and thirst, and are naked, and are buffeted, and
have no certain dwelling place. We are naked, that is, says Drusius, non ita
been vestiti, we are not very well clothed. No more were that brother and
sister, of whom S. James speaks, chap. 2.15. They were naked: Naked, that is,
male vestiti, or necessario vestitu destituti; they were ill clothed, or wanted
necessary apparel.

By the places now alleged you see, that he may be said to be naked, that is
not simply and altogether so. So of the courageous man in my text it is said,
that he shall flee away naked. Naked, that is, unarmed, without armor: having
cast away his weapons, and all other instruments of military discipline;
content to escape with life, if he may be so happy; but shall not: for there is
no escaping, as you well know by that you have already heard.

But when shall this courageous man be in such a straight, as that he shall be
feign to flee away naked? It shall be, says my text (...) Baijom habu, in
that day. In that day, the day of Gods judgment: in that day, when God will
exercise his judgment against the rebellious, and refractarie.

This day may be called the day of the Lord, whereof we read, Esai. 13.6. Howl
ye, for the day of the Lord is at hand: it shall come as a destruction from
the Almighty. It is so called, Joel 1.15. Alas for the day: for the day of the
Lord is at hand, and as a destruction from the Almighty shall it come.

This day, the day of the Lord, for the horror thereof, is by our Prophet Amos
called darkness, chap. 5.18. Woe unto you, that desire the day of the Lord: to
what end is it for you? The day of the Lord is darkness and not light. A day,
and yet darkness! a day and no light in it! Its even so: and is repeated by an
(...), verse. 20. Shall not the day of the Lord be darkness and not light? even
very dark and no brightness in it. I cannot better set forth unto you the
state of this day, then the Prophet Zephaniah does, chap. 1.15. Read him, and
you shall find this day, the day of the Lord, to be a day of wrath, a day of
trouble and distress, a day of wastnesse and desolation, a day of darkness
and gloominesse, a day of clouds and thick darkness, a day of the trumpet and
alarm. No marvel then if our courageous man, the courageous among the
mighty, shall endeauou or desire to flee away naked in that day.

But shall he endeavor, or shall he desire to do it? Yes. He must be fame to
do it. For it follows by way of confirmation (...) Neum Jehovah, says the
Lord.

Says the Lord.

THis is the conclusion and confirmation of all. The Lord, the Deuteronomy. 32 4.
God of truth, who Number. 2^.^9. Tit. 1.2. Ha^. 6.18.
lies not nor deceives, whose words are 2. Cor. 1.20.
yea and amen, who ever Number 23.19.
does according to that he says, and accomplisheth what he speaks, he it is,
that here threatens the courageous among the mighty, that they shall flee away
naked in the day of their visitation. And so out of doubt it came to pass.

It came to pass in the days of Peka K. of Israel, at what time Tiglath
Pilesar K. of Assyria came up against the Israelites, took diverse of their
Cities, the whole Region that was beyond Jordan, the possession of the
Reubenites, Gadites, and half tribe of Manasseh, yea all the land of
Nephthali: and carried some of their inhabitants captive into Assyria. 2. King.
15.29.

After that in the days of Hoseah son of Elah, the last of the Kings of
Israel, this prediction was fulfilled, at what time Salmanasser King of Assyria
invaded Israel, the Kingdom of the ten Tribes, took Samaria, and carried much
people away into Assyria. Of this we read 2. King. 17.6.

In that day, that day when Tiglath Pilesar prevailed against Israel, and that
day wherein Salmanasser was conqueror, he that was courageous among the mighty,
was feign no doubt to run away, and that naked, according to this prediction,
He that is courageous among the mighty, shall flee away naked in that day. My
observation from hence is this: It is not a stout courage, a valiant heart, or
a bold spirit, that can steed a man in the day of Gods vengeance.

Believe it, it is not. For in that day, the stoutest, the most valiant and
bold, shall be stricken with astonishment of heart, Deuteronomy. 28.28.29.
and shall grope at noone days, as the blind man does in darkness. It shall
then be with him, as it was with Belshazzar the King, Daniel 5.6. His
countenance shall be changed, his thoughts shall trouble him, the ioynes of
his loins shall be loosed, and his knees shall smite one against the other.
Yea then (for then will the Lord arise to shake terribly the earth) then shall
he go into the holes and clefts of the ragged rocks, and into the caves of
the earth, for fear of the Lord, and for the glory of his Majesty. So says
Esaias elegantly, chap. 2.19, 21. And say you now, what can a stout courage, a
valiant heart, a bold spirit steed a man in that day, in the day of Gods
vengeance? You must needs confess, it can steed him nothing.

Nothing! Let us then for our good make some profitable use hereof. We shall
the better make it if we will sum up together those natural abilities, which
our Prophet Amos has here disabled, from yielding any help unto us in the day
of God his reuengement: If neither he that is of an expedite and agile body,
nor the strong man, nor the mighty man, nor the bow-man, nor the swift of
foot, nor the horseman, shall in that day be able to deliver or help himself:
if he that is courageous among the mighty, shall be feign to run away naked
in that day, whence then shall we in that day look for safety? It must not be
from any aid of man.

Now the Use we are to make hereof is, that we trust not in man, or in any
thing that is in or about man. To this duty we are advised by the Prophet
Esai, chap. 2.22. Cease ye from man, whose breath is in his nostrils: for
wherein is he to be accounted of? If you will be safe and without danger in the
day of trouble, Cease from man; See that ye have no confidence, no affiance in
him, as though against God or without God he were able to help you. His breath
is in his nostrils; his soul, his vital spirit, his life is but a blast, and
is gone with a puff. Then where is his help? Weak, frail, and brittle man,
wherein is he to be accounted of? Is he to be accounted of for any thing that
is in him? for his actiuitie, for his dexterity, for his valor, for his
wisdom, or the like? No: for if he be gone, all these are likewise vanished.

But may he not be accounted of for somewhat that is about him? for his riches,
for his munition, and weapons of defense, for his honor, and the reputation he
holds in the state wherein thou live? No, no. For what cares the Almighty
for these? The Psalmist was not ill advised, Psalm. 146.3. Where he thus
advises us: Put not your trust in Princes, nor in any son of man, in whom
there is no help, his breath goes forth, he returns to his earth, in that
very day his thoughts perish. See man here pictured and drawn forth in lively
colors: Put not your trust in Princes] not in Princes? Why? Is not their
authority and pre-eminence here exceeding great? Yes. But they are sons of
men] Well. Be it so. The sons of men are creatures not far inferior to the
Angels. True. But there is no help in them] no help in them? Why so? Their
breath goes forth] They dye. What if they dye? Is there no place for them in
Heaven among the stars? No, they return to their earth] there to participate
with rottenness and corruption. What if corruption be in their flesh, may not
their intendments and devises be canonized and kept for eternity? No, they may
not. For in that very day their thoughts perish] their thoughts are as
transitory as their bodies, and come to naught. And therefore put not your
trust in them; not in Princes, nor in any son of man.

Wherein then shall we put our trust? Even in the Lord our God. To this trust
in the Lord, we are invited, Psalm. 118.8, 9. It is botter to trust in the Lord
then to put confidence in man. It is better to trust in the Lord, then to put
confidence in Princes. Is one better then the other? Why, then both may be
good, and it may be good to put confidence in man. Not so. You may not take the
word better in this place to be so spoken. For if you put any confidence in
man, you rob God of his glory; which to do can never be good. I therefore thus
expound the words: It is better] by infinite degrees, absolutely and simply
better, to trust in the Lord] to trust steadfastly in him alone, then to put any
confidence] any manner of trust or confidence, in man] of what estate or
dignity soever he be, though he be of the rank of Princes, who have all the
power and authority in the world. Its every way better to trust in the Lord,
then to trust in such, ever good to trust in the Lord, but never good to trust
in man. Trust we in the Lord, and blessed shall we be: but cursed is the man
that trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm; the Lord himself has said
it, Ierem. 17.5.

Now therefore, O Lord, since thou have from hence taught us, that from the aid
of man there is no safety to be expected, neither from him, that is of an
expedite, and agile body, nor from the strong man, nor from the mighty man,
nor from the bow-man, nor from the swift of foot, nor from the horseman, nor
from the courageous among the mighty, nor from any thing else that is in man,
or about him, give us grace we beseech thee, that in thee alone we may place
all our hope and confidence. In thee alone our God and Father of mercies do we
trust: and do thou according to the multitude of thy compassions look upon
us. Hear the supplications of us thy poor servants, living far, as banished
men in a savage Country. Protect, we beseech thee, and keep our souls among
the many dangers of this mortal life, and bring us by the conduct of thy
gracious favor into that thy sacred habitation, and seat of eternal glory.
Grant this unto us, most dear Father, for thy best beloved Son Jesus Christ
his sake.

FINIS.
A Table of such particulars as are contained in this Commentary.
A
Abraham, his mild speech to Lot. 29 Access to God. 347 No accident in God.
114 Adam, 287. 360 Adultery, 148 Adulterers. 148 Natural Affection. 28
Affliction. 254 Alexander the sixth. 157 An Altar, of earth. 169 of stone. of
Holocausts. ibid.
There was but one Altar. 169 The Altar a tipe of Christ. 170 Popish Altars.
171 none such in the Primitive Church ibid.
Our Altar now, not material. 172 It is our heart. 177
The Ammonites, enemies to the people of God. 18 Excluded from that Church. 18
The Amorite 214 Destroyed. ibid.
Amorites, they were tale and strong. 226 They were destroyed. 236
Amos. 307 Amos, why he first prophesied against Foreign nations. 2. 47
Antaeus. 226 Antiochus. 149 Antonius Caracalla. ibid. Arias. 344 Asaphel. 343
Aspasia. 149 Assurance of our faith. 7. Atalanta. 343 Atheists, denying God and
his truth. 12
B
Men of Base estate comforted. 45 Beast worshipped for Gods. 247 Beauty. 229
Behold. 322 Benefits, the order of Gods Benefits Not observed. 242 We must
remember Gods Benefits. 252
The Bible the greatest treasure. 54 The Bible must be had. ibid. The Bible to
be read. ibid. Men Blaspheme God. 152 Gods name Blasphemed. 150 Our Bodies a
sacrifice. 174 The goods of our Bodies, must be offered. ibid. The Bond of
blood. 28 of christianity. ibid
The greatest Bond between men. ibid A Broken spirit. 176 D. Bucknham. 89 The
Burial of the dead. 27
C
Cain. 360. 361 Camilla. 343 A Calumniator. 138 A Calumny. ibid. Carioth. 33
Cedars. 223 They grow high. ibid.
Cerijoth. 33 We have been Chastised of God. 42 Christ, our altar. 170 His
benefits toward us. ibid His death and passion. ibid
A Christian in name. 106 A Christian who. ibid The Church of God. 253 A City
not safe against God by munition etc. 35 Consanguinitie. 27 Contempt. 64
Contempt of the law of the Lord. 67 Contempt may be a sin and not. 65
Covetousness. 133 The causes of our Crosses is sin. 60 Cruelty. 23. 133
Cruelty against the dead. 25 Cruelty displeases God. 23. 37
D
Darius. 98. 149 The natural man in Darkness. 86 David chosen king. 230 David
George. 89 The Day of the Lord. 134. 371 Cruelty toward the Dead. 25 Burial
of the Dead. 27 Death of 4. sorts. 36 Death terrible. 37 Death considered in a
double respect. 38 Death to be feared, of whom. 39 Death welcome to the
penitent. 38. 40 Of three things no Definition. 112 The Denying of a contrary
is sometime an affirmation. 70 All must once Die. 36. 37 Disobedience. 74. 77.
289. 292 Dispensations Popish. 155 Dogs thankful. 207 Draw nigh to God. 347 A
Drunkard. 182. 286 described. 182
Drunkenness: the effects of it. ibid etc. Our Dwelling houses a blessing unto
us. 35
E
Eagle: swifter then Eagles. 224 The Edomites descended from Abraham. 22 Egypt,
345. 250 Where situate. 245.
The Egyptians superstitious. 246 Their Gods. ibid. Their cruelty. 251
The Israelites brought up from the land of Egypt. 244. 245 Eliab: Iesse his
eldest son. 228 liked by Samuel. 229. 230 fair of countenance and of goodly
stature. 229 refused. 230
No Escaping from God. 342 Etham. 255 No Evasion from God. 342 The cause of
Evil is sin. 60 Extortion. 133 God wholly an Eye. 105 The Eyes of the Lord,
behold all things. 104
F
Faith: the power of it. 260 Assurance of our Faith 7 Perseverance in our
Faith. 8 Faithful: their steadfastness and stability. 368 Our first parents
Fall. 10 The Famine of Jerusalem. 100 Fathers. 83 Our Fathers not simply to be
followed in matters of religion. 92 The Papists follow their Fathers in
religion. 93 Fire. 34. 97 No Fleeing from God. 342. 360 Flee to God. 346 The
father of a Fool rejoices not. 70 Fornication. 149 152 abstain from
fornication. 152 name not Fornication. ibid.
Fornication unlawful by the law of nature. 153. Fornicators. 149 Freedom.
253 Fridericke the fourth. 94 Fruit. 237
G
Gentiles their calling. 254 Their Gods. 247 Giants. 234 Glory only in the
Lord. 231 God: his counsels. 238 all power is his. 239 the honor of victories
is his. 239 is present every where 344 sees all things. 104. 345 is all in all
in the overthrow of his enemies. 218 and in the upholding his children. 218.
219 faithful in his promises. 260 a present help. 261
What God is. 113 No accident in God. 114. Gods attributes, negative. 113
Affirmative 114
God is impartial. 103 Goods external we must offer up in sacrifice. 173
Goods of the body must be offered. 174 Goods of the mind to be offered. 176
Goods unlawfully gotten, not fit to be employed in Gods service. 200 nor in the
service of Idols. ibid.
The Gospel of Christ. 272 its the word of salvation. ibid the doctrine of
peace. ibid the doctrine of good things. 275
Great personages punished by God. 44 Grubenheimer. 88
H
Hail. 295 Hanani. 308 Hearers of the word, must be attentive. 16, 50 A
faithful Heart. 178 Our Hearts must not be set on the outward things of this
world. 45 Heaven. 139 Hell. 210 Hercules: the print of his foot. 227 A Horse a
vain thing. 366 A Horse described. 365 The Horseman 364 Hyperbole. 224. 225
I
K. James. 94 Idols. 80 Idolaters: Its a blessing to be freed from them. 249
Jehovah. 5. 49. 112 Jeremy. 307 Jews: their captivity. 98 their return from
captivity, ibid
The Jews a stifnecked people. 83 The destruction of the Jews foretold. 97
Jerusalem. ibid. 107 had fair appellations. 99. 107 Afflicted with famine. 100
The destruction of Jerusalem. 101. 102 the desolation foretold. 100
Impiety taken for Impiety by God wheresoever he finds it, 104 Like Impieties
like punishment 105 Incest. 148 Incestuous persons. ibid, Incestuous marriages.
149. 155 Incestuous marriages among the heathen, 149 Incontinen 153 John of
Leyden, 88 John the thirteenth. 156 John the three and twentieth. 157 Johannes
de Casa. ibid. Jonah. 360. 362 Iphictus. 343 Israel. 150 their sins. 161
their prerogatives. 150
Isreal's unthankfulness, 207. 209 The people of Israel: their number when they
went out of Egypt. 254 Judah. 55, 80. 111 The kingdom of Judah. 55. 97 Judas.
2^^ Judges admonished. 19^ Judgment begins with God children. 108 The
Judgment of God exercised upon great ones. 44 The last Judgment. 296 Iulia.
149 Gods Justice goes on slowly. 62 Justices admonished. 195
K
Kerioth. 33 Kindred. 29, 148
L
The Law of the Lord. 66 The Law of the Lord not to be contemned. 67 It
surpasses all other Laws. 66 A Lie in words. 81 in manners. ibid in things.
ibid
Lies. 81 in the worship of God, ibid of two sorts, ibid in commerce with men
of three sorts. ibid
An exhortation to Love. 30 The praises of christian Love. ibid Lying down at
meat. 162 Lions thankful. 208 stronger then Lions. 234
Carnal Lusts. 159 Fleshly Lusts. ibid
M
Magistrates. 195 their duty. ibid
Man should be courteous. 24 Men of two sorts. 39 Martyrdom. 174 in peace. ibid.
Martin of Polonia. 171 Means used by God. 238 Ministers of the Gospel 272
Their duty. 276. 286
The Ministry of the word. 271 Micaiah. 308 Mirraim, 246
Moab. 18. 32. 36 The Moabites: 22 there inhumanitie. 19 their pride, ibid,
their cruelty. 22
A cruel Mother. 101 Munition. 35
N
Naked. 370 The Names of God. 4. 114 how profaned. 146 how sanctified. 147
Nazarene. 268 Nazarites. ibid, their law. 270, 284
Nazirites. 268 Nazirites. 268
O
Obedience. 76 Obedience better then sacrifice. 73. 74 Obedience to the
commandments of the Lord. 73 Og K. of Bashan. 226. 236 height and strength.
226 his bedsteed. 227
Oak, strong as the Oaks, 225 Oppression, 133, 187. 188 unlawful. ibid,
Oppressions of this age. 187, 188 Oppressors hated, 194 Oppressors of the
poor God sees, 197 One poor man may not oppress another. ibid The Order of
Gods benefits inuerted. 242 Orion. 343
P
Pain the companion of a fault. 105 A Painter of Prussia. 88 The Paradise of
Heaven. 139 The Patience of God. 21, 42, 45, 61 Paulus the third. 157 Taking of
Pannes. 165 We enjoy Peace. 45 Perseverance in faith, 8 Persons. 103 Persons
not respected by God, ibid Pharaoh, 366 Pius the third. 157 Pledges. 165 A
Poor man's Pledge not to be taken, 166 Poor: God pleads their cause. 130.
135 do good to them, 138 they will carry thee to heaven, 139
For the Poor oppressed consolation, 135 The Poor not to be turned out of his
way. 138 The Poor that are wicked, 136 Popes wicked. 156 incestuous, ibid
Popes dispensations, 155 Powder treason. 219 Promises of God. 260 Preachers,
must deliver the word of God, 15, 50 God Present every where. Prophets, 265,
303 how instructed. 266
True Prophets two sorts, 306 False Prophets two sorts, 305 Lying Prophets. 303
Punishment follows wickedness. 103
R
To Raise up. 264 Rechabites, 76 Rehoboam. 56 Repent. 46 Repentance. 46, 78,
202 Restitution. 201 The Rider. 364 Root. 235
S
Sacrifices under the law. 172 of two sorts. 172
Propiciatorie, Expiatorie, or Satisfactorie. 172 Eucharisticall or
gratulatorie. 172 Eucharisticall of three sorts. 173 Evangelical. 177
The Sacrifices of God. 176 Gods Sacrifice must be the fattest. 175
Salmanasser. 372 Saul. 288 Saul: a good man of person. 228 rejected by the
Lord. ibid.
God the author of Holy Scriptures. 14 50 Speaks in the Scriptures 13
The holy Scriptures of no private motion. 13 The Scriptures vilified by
Papists. 14 51. magnified. 54. 55 Easy. 90 had free passage in old time. ibid
diversely resembled. 91
In the Scriptures Christians generally had knowledge. 94 The red Sea. 255
Sheep in England cruel. 193 A Shouting. 40 Shur, 255 Sihon K. of the Amorites.
236 Sin a greiuous burden. 1 punished by God in the Angels. 21 The cause of
our crosses. 60 to be punished. 104 resembled. 106 the effects of it. 124
Grievous Sins, have grievous punishments. 62 Elee from Sin, 106 God will
punish Sin, in his dearest children. 107 s a part of Gods justice, to punish
It sin. 108
The filthiness of Sin. 150 An exhortation against Sin. 60 Our Sins
press into Gods presence. 42 God punishes for one Sin. 62 Every Sin is to
be punished. ibid Our state of Sin and death. 10 Sins procure Gods wrath.
20 Sins hated of God. 20. 59 Sixtus the fourth. 157 Sobriety. 286 Sons.
265 The eldest Sons prerogative. 14 13 (...). 28 The Spanish invasion. 298
Stand before the Lord. 363 Stature. 233 Our States of regeneration and
election. 11 Stratonice. 149 Stwes in Rome. 157 patronised. ibid confuted. 158
Swift of foot. 359
T
Testament. the Old. 53 the New. ibid.
Thankfulness in dogs. 207 in Lions 208
An exhortation to Thankefulnes. 211 Three and four Transgressions. 57. 116
Thunder. 295 Tiglath Pileser. 372 The Translations of the Scriptures into
vulgar tongues, withstood by Papists. 88 their exceptions. ibid.
Treasures of wickedness, profit not. 71 God is True, 6 We must strive to be
True, as God is True. 11 Trust not in wealth nor in any wordly help. 220 Trust
not in external helps. 367 Trust in the Lord. 368. 374 Trust not in man. 373
Trumpets used in war. 40. 41 God is Truth in himself, in his words and in
his works. 6 We must be thankful to God for our knowledge of the Truth. 8 We
must strive to represent God in Truth. 10. 12 A Tumult. 40 An exhortation to
Turn to the Lord 46 Tydeus. 234 Tyranny. 253
V
The execution of Vengeance proper to the Lord. 33. Victories. 239 Vilages
depopulated. 193 Unthankfulness. 205. 211 Odious before God. 205. 211
forbidden. 206 reprehended. ibid, punished. 209
Usury. 133
W
To walk. 84 how we are to walk. 249
The Water, 296 War the executioner of Gods vengeance, 41 A Way taken
properly and figuratively 137 Wealth: trust not in it. 220 The wicked man, 235
Wilderness of Etham. 254 of Shur. 256
The Wind. 297 Wine allowed, 181 to be avoided, 184 forbidden to the
Nazirites, 285 to Priests, 286 to Kings. 285
Wine given to the condemned, 186 of the condemned, ibid
The abuse of Wine. 181 A Woman of Munster. 88 An english Woman. 89 The Word of
God praised, 16, 272 magnified, 54, 55 not to be declined from, 85 to be
embraced with diligence, 87 compared to a lamp or, light, 86
We must be thankful for having the Word of God. 87 The Church of Rome
withholds the Word of God. ibid, The Works of God internal and external. 7
Z
Zacheus, 201, 232 Zedechiah K. of Judah. 97.
FINIS.
A Commentary OR EXPOSITION UPON THE THIRD Chapter of the Prophecy of AMOS.

Delivered In XVII. Sermons in the Parish Church of MEYSEY-HAMPTON in the
Diocese of Gloucester.

BY SEBASTIAN BENEFIELD Doctor of Divinity.

2 COR. 12.14. I seek not yours, but you.

LONDON, Printed by John Hauiland, and are to be sold by Hugh Perry at the
Harrow in Britains Burse. 1629.

A TABLE OF THE PRINCIPAL THINGS contained in the Exposition of the third
Chapter of the Prophecy of AMOS.
A
ABimelech. 184 Absalom. 309 Actions of God. 297 Adouai. 146 Affliction, of the
Lord. 142. 281 Alexander the Great. 212 All. 30 Ashdod. 180 Azotus. 181
B
BEnefits temporal remember. 17 Benefits upon Israel. 24 Bethel. 289. 292
Bethschemites. 240 Builders, Of houses. 307 Of Babel. 307. 308
Building stately. 306
C
CAlamities from God. 281 Cham. 182 Children. 4 Choice of God. 22 Christ
patient. 286 City. 140 Cloisters. 214 Cockatrice. 98 Comminations. 61
Conversion. 213
D
David, patient. 286 Decree of God. 76 Devil: a fowler. 78 Discord. 76. ^^. 97
Divinity. 131
E
EGypt. 182 Election of God. 22 Enemies: their reproaches. 183 Evil: two
ways. 134 Two kinds. 135

F
FAith. 265, 266 Fool: the Atheist. 312 The rich man. 309, 310, 311 A Fox. 98
The Fowler. 73
G
GEdeon. 240 Gilgal. 292 The Grace of God. 76 God: A Fowler. 79 A Lion. 59. 61
God: he is good. 133 His Name. 130 Sees all. 214
God of Hosts. 258, 259, 260 Of Sabbath. 258, etc.
God: the principal Agent. 298. 300 The goodness of God: general. 133
Special. 133

H
Hear the word of God. 8 Hearers of the word. 265. 270 Of diverse sorts. 13
Hearing twofold. 265 Heart: to be kept. 101 Our Hearts our houses. 312 Hosts:
God of Hosts. 258. etc. Houses spiritual. 312 Stately. 306

I
Idolatry. Jehovah. 130, 131 Iehouih. 147 Ignorance of God. 199 Instruments:
how regarded. 299, 300, etc. Job. 299 His patience. 286
Israel: Prerogatives. 23
K
To KNow. 21, 2^ Knowledge of God. 19. 21 199 Known of God. 2^
L
Leaven. 9^ Lions roaring. 5^ Their names. 16^ Comparisons from them. 59 60. 16
M
MAgistrates. 213 Man. 77 A Fowler. 79 A Lion. 60
Ministers: their calling. 240 Mitzraijm. 18^
N
NAmes of God. 130 Numbers changed. 290
P
PAlaestina. 180 Patience in trouble. 285 Whence? 286
Places of Idols. 291. 292 Poor: rich men's barnes. 309 Powder Traitors. 214
Power: all of God. 283 Prophets. 42 Providence of God. 75. 80 Of two sorts. 81
General. 81 Special. 84 Particular. 86 Over his Church. 85
Punishment: all of God. 31 The Author of it. 136 Evil of punishment. 135. 139
God punishes all sin. 34 His own servants. 33

R
REligion; true. 294, 295 Rich man; his barnes. 309
S
Sabbath: God of Sabbath. 258, etc. Samaria. 191 Saul. 184 Scripture praised.
130 Selfe-killing, a sin. 185 Serpent. 98 Shimei. 299 Similitudes. 75 Sin:
Evil of sin. 135
Sinners. 76 Smite: God smites. 16 Snare. 74. 76 Snares, Of Punishment. 78 Of
Sin. ibid.
Sodom. 281, 282 Sons. 6
T
Threatenings of God not in vain. 61 Accomplished. 63 Absolute. 65
Conditional. 66
Tongue, to be tamed. 99 Troubles from God. 281 Endured with patience. 285,
286, etc.
Trumpeters. 42 Trumpets. 117
V
VAriance. 76. 94. 97 Visit. 29 Our Visitations of God. 281 God visits for
evil. 278, 279 For good. 278, 279 In judgment. 278, 279
Vzzah. 240
W
Walk with God. 47 Watchmen. 43. 117 Water of bitterness. 98 Will of God: is
one. 69 Word of God: a Jewel. 25. 45 To be heard. 8 Appropriate to the Jews.
27 A two-edged sword. 106 Effectual. 94. 102. 105

Y
YOungling of Babylon. 99 Yuorie houses. 303. 304
Z
ZEchariah. 4 Zerubhabel. 4
THE First Lecture.
AMOS 3.1. Hear this word, that the Lord has spoken against you, O children
of Israel, against the whole family, which I brought up from the land of
Egypt, saying,

You only have I known of all the families of the earth: therefore will I
punish you for all your iniquities.


Having heretofore, by the gracious assistance of the Almighty, finished my
Exposition upon the first and second Chapters of this Prophecy of Amos, I do
now adventure upon the third, in a sure hope and confidence, of the continuance
of the same assistance unto me, not doubting, but that the Lord will enable me
to go forward in this course, if he shall see it to be to his glory, and to
the good of his Church.

This third Chapter is Amos his second Sermon against the Kingdom of the ten
Tribes, the Kingdom of Israel. It was made, as it seems, when their then
King, Jeroboam son of Ioash, the thirteenth King of Israel, though wicked for
his life, yet happy in war, had vanquished and subdued many of the Syrians,
and had recovered the coast of Israel from the 2 King. 14.25.
entering of Hamath, unto the Sea of the plain; and had taken Ve^s 28.
Damascus and Hamath. Then the people of Israel, grown insolent with
victories, and rich with spoils, became lasciuient and wanton, and spurned at
the preaching of the Word of God. It was now high time for Amos to bestirre
himself, and to remember them of the fickle estate wherein now they were. He
was their Prophet, peculiarly sent to them from God; and it lay upon him, to
call upon them. He does it in this his second Sermon.

The parts are three: 1 An Exordium, or an entrance into the Sermon, verse. 1. 2
A Proposition, containing the sum of that whereof he admonishes them, verse.
2. 3 An Enarration, a Declaration, an Exposition, or an Expolition of the
matter in hand, from the third verse. to the end of the Chapter.


We are to begin with the Exordium or entrance to the Sermon. It is an
inuitation to attention: and contains certain arguments of persuasion. Three
they are; all of weight, and in themselves available.

The first is taken from the authority of the Word, to the hearing whereof they
are invited. It is Verbum Iehouae, the Word of Iohouah, the only true and
everliving God. Hear this Word, non meum somnium, not any dream of mine, not
my word, nor the word of any mortal wight, but the Word of the Lord, Hear
this Word, that the Lord has spoken.

The second is taken from the quality of the parties invited. They are Flij
Israel, the children of Israel. By this compellation they are put in mind of
their stock and lineage that they were sprung from, and came out of the loins
of Jacob, whose name was changed to Genesis 32.28. and 35.10.
Israel; whereby they may well be admonished, either to insist in the steps of
that holy Patriarch, or like disobedient and degenerate children to expect
punishment from the Lord: Hear this Word that the Lord has spoken against
you, O children of Israel.

The third is taken from the memory of their greatest deliverance, their
deliverance out of Egypt. By this benefit, had there been nothing else, were
the Israelites deeply obliged to give ear to the Word of the Lord their
Redeemer and deliverer. Hear this Word, that the Lord has spoken against you,
O children of Israel, against the whole family which I brought up from the land
of Egypt, saying.

In the handling of these words, I purpose to hold this course: first, to
expound the words; and then to observe out of them such instructions as they
naturally offer unto us, and may be for our good.

Hear this Word that the Lord speaks against you.

Hear, Listen unto it, not only with the outward sense of your ears, but
yield unto it also willing assent in your minds. Hear it interiori auditu: so
Albertus Magnus expounds it, Hear with your inward hearing. In the phrase of
the Gospel, it is Audite and intelligite, Matthew. 15.10. Hear and understand.

Hear this Word] This word is with Castalio, dictum, a saying; with Albertus
it is, something signified by voice, which remains in the heart of the
hearer, after the voice is gone. It may be the decree of God and his
ordinance, touching that he will do unto Israel; and so Jonathan in his
Chaldee paraphrase seems to take it; Hear this Word, that the Lord has
decreed. In the Vulgar Latin I read, Audite verbum, quod locutus est Dominus;
Hear the Word that the Lord has spoken. Our now English is right: Hear this
Word that the Lord has spoken.

Has spoken! To, or against whom? (...) Hhal^e^m, To you, or against you: so
Drusius. The original is, Super vos, over you or upon you: Drusius well
renders it, to you, or against you; and Petrus Lusitanus not amiss, contra
vos, vel de vobis, against you, or concerning you.

You children of Israel. The Hebrew is (...) Benei Iischrael, sons of Israel.
Children of Israel, or sons of Israel, the Israelites are meant. Each phrase
may be paralleld in the Greek tongue. First, the children of Israel, for the
Israelites: So speak the Greeks, Herod. l. 3.
(...), the children of the Aethiopians, for Aethiopians themselves. (...), the
children of Philosophers, for Philosophers themselves. (...), the children of
Physicians, for Physicians themselves. Again, the sons of Israel, for the
Israelites. And so speak the Greeks, (...), the sons of the Grecians, for
the Grecians themselves. Its very frequent in Jliad. and 162.237 240.276.368.
etc.
Homer. I meet with one place in the Greek Bible, wherewith I will for the
present content my self. It is Joel 3 6. The words are (...); the sons of
Judah, and the sons of Jerusalem, ye sold to the sons of the Grecians; where
the sons of Judah are put for the people of Judah, and the sons of Jerusalem
for the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and the sons of the Grecians for the
Grecians themselves: just, as it is here, the sons of Israel for the
Israelites themselves.

Sons of Israel] It is an Hebrew Proverb; Drusius Adag. Hebruir. Druuia. 2
8. ex R. Heuna.
Filij filiorum cece sunt vt filij; Sons sons, behold they are as sons.
You may understand thus: The sons of sons are accounted of as sons; or,
they are truly sons; sons not in name only, but in very deed.

In the name of son, sometime the Nephew is to be understood. So it is,
Haggai 1.1. Zerubbabel is there called the son of Shealtiel; whose son he
was not, but Nephew, for he was son of Chron. 3.19.
Pedaiah, and Pedaiah son of Schealtiel. And so is it Ezra 5.1. Zechariah the
Prophet is there called the son of Iddo, whose son he was not, but Nephew;
for he was the son of Barachiah, and Zachar. 1.1.
Barachiah the son of Iddo. Now as a son is sometimes put for a Nephew, so
are sons for a posterity; So in my Text, the sons of Israel are put for the
posterity of Israel. The sons of Israel, Secundum carnem, non secundu^
spiritum, as Petrus a Figuciro speaks; the sons of Israel after the flesh,
not after the spirit. Sons of Israel, such as were lineally descended from
the loins of Jacob, who was surnamed Israel. These sons or children of
Israel are here further described to be that whole family which the Lord
brought up from the land of Egypt. Hear this Word, that the Lord has spoken
against you, O children of Israel, against the whole family, which I brought up
from the land of Egypt.

Against the whole family] The Hebrew word here is (...) Mischpachah, and
signifies a family. So its translated by Brentius, and Calvin, and Drusius,
and Gualter, and Iunius, and Piscator: and so is it in our newest English;
against the whole family. A family, to speak properly, is of them that are
contained in one and the same house: it is a household consisting of persons of
diverse sexes, ages, statures, strengths, and abilities. But this narrow
signification of a family will not serve for this place. For it was not only a
household that the Lord brought out of Egypt, it was more than so.

The Author of the Vulgar Latin gives here a larger scope. Familia contents
him not; Cognatio is his word. Not a family, but a kindred must serve his
turn. His reading is Super omnem cognationem. It pleases Luther, and Mercer,
and Vatablus. Against all the kindred. A kindred we know may contain many
families: and many were the families which the Lord brought up from the Land of
Egypt; yet is not this word kindred of extent sufficient to comprehend the
great multitude that was brought up from the land of Egypt.

Nation is a fitter word with Castalio: Hear this word, that the Lord
pronounces to you, to the whole Nation, which I brought up from the land of
Egypt. It was indeed a Nation that the Lord brought up. A Nation, and
therefore many kindreds, and more families. Yet need we not refuse either the
word kindred or family as unfit for this place; for each of them may well be
used to signify a Nation. The reason whereof Kimhi gives, quia ab initio
gentes singulae ab vno aliquo viro defluxerunt; because at first Nations had
their beginning from some one man that was head of a family or kindred.

A Family for a Nation you have, Mic. 2.3. Behold, says the Lord; behold,
against this family do I devise an evil. Against this family, that is,
against this Nation of the Israelites. So have you, Ierem. 8.3. Death shall be
chosen rather than life, by all the residue of them that remain of this evil
family. This evil family is the nation of the Jews. I read of the family of
Egypt, Zach. 14.18. and there the family of Egypt, is the nation of the
Egyptians. Such is the signification of the word family in my Text; against
the whole family, that is, against the whole nation of the Israelites.

By this whole family of the children of Israel, some do understand all the
people which the Lord brought up from Egypt, which afterward was rent into two
Kingdoms, the Kingdom of Judah, and the Kingdom of Israel. So Saint Hierome,
and Remigius, and Hugo, and Lyra, and Dionysius. Some by the children of Israel
do understand the Kingdom of Israel, the Kingdom of the ten Tribes, and in
the whole family brought up from the land of Egypt, they will have included
the Kingdom of Judah, the other two Tribes; the Tribes of Benjamin and Judah.
So Theodoret, and Albertus, and Montanus, and Quadratus, and Christophorus a
Castro.

Petrus a Figueiro takes this whole family to be here used Appositorie, by
Apposition, to express what is meant by the children of Israel. The children
of Israel, that is, the whole family, kindred, or nation of the Israelites
which the Lord brought up from the land of Egypt. The like does Tauerner in
his English Bible; his Translation runs thus: Hear what the Lord speaks
unto you, O ye children of Israel, namely unto all the Tribes whom I brought
out of Egypt.

I take them to be in the right, who by the children of Israel, do understand
the Kingdom of the ten Tribes, and by the whole family brought up from Egypt,
the other two Tribes: the Tribes of Judah and Benjamin: to this sense, Hear
this word, this sentence, that the Lord pronounces against you, O children of
Israel, and not against you alone, but even against all those whom I brought up
from the land of Egypt. All that are in the same fault do well deserve the
same punishment. If Judah sin as well as Israel, Judah shall be punished as
well as Israel. Hear therefore this word, not only you of Israel, but you of
Judah too, all you whom I brought up from the land of Egypt.

All, which I brought up from the land of Aegypt] How can this be? Of those
which the Lord brought up out of Egypt, all that were of Numb. 14.30. and
32.11, 12.
twenty years old and upward, all save two, Caleb the son of Iephunneh, and
Joshua the son of Nun, died in the Wilderness. They died there, and
therefore they came not into the Holy Land.

Again, the deliverance of Israel out of Egypt was about An. M. 2454.
seven hundred years before the Which was An. M. 3158.
time that this Prophecy came by the ministry of Amos unto Israel.

What? Seven hundred years before this time! Its then to be presumed, that
all, which so long before were brought up from Egypt, were long ere this time
dead. And so out of doubt they were. How then is it, that here so long after it
is said to the children of Israel from the Lord, Eduxi, I brought you, your
whole family, up from the Land of Egypt? The Israelites, to whom this speech
is, had for the place of their nativity and habitation the land of Iudaea.
Never had they been in the land of Egypt, and yet may there be a good
construction of what is here said unto them; Eduxi, I brought you, your whole
family, up from the land of Egypt. Albertus makes the construction; I brought
you up, vos in patribus, you in your Fathers. So does Petrus Lusitanus; I
brought you up, vos vtique in parentibus, you in your parents. And so Piscator,
I brought you up, vos in maioribus, you in your Ancestors. You, in your
Fathers, in your Parents, in your Ancestors, I brought you up from the land of
Egypt.

I brought up from the land of Aegypt] The words we met with before, Chap.
2.10. There they were by me expounded; and happily you will not think it fit, I
should say the same again unto you. Wherefore for a full exposition of these
words, and the profit to be taken by them, I refer you to my fifteenth
Lecture upon the second Chapter of this Prophecy of Amos.

Hitherto have I dwelt upon the opening of the words of my present Text. I
gather up all in brief. Heare] not only with the outward ear, but also with
the assent of mind; hear and understand, -- this word] this thing, this
sentence, this decree, -- that the Lord] Jehovah, the only true everlasting
and Almighty God -- has spoken] has pronounced -- over you] upon you, to you,
against you; against you O children of Israel] ye the sons, the posterity of
Jacob, and not against you only, but also -- against the whole family] the
whole Nation of you, them of Judah too, against you all, whose Fathers,
Parents, and Ancestors -- I brought vp] and delivered with a mighty hand and
outstretched arm -- from the land of Aegypt] that land, wherein they lived in
great slavery and bondage, -- saying] after this manner as it follows, verse.
2. You only have I known, etc.

The words you see are expounded. It remains now, that we gather from hence
such observations as are here naturally offered unto us, and may be for our
instruction.

Of the three perswasory arguments here used by Amos to move the Israelites to
attention, the first is taken from the authority of the Word to the hearing
whereof they are invited, it is verbum Iehouae; Hear this word, non meum
somnium, not any dream of mine, not my word, nor the word of any mortal
wight, but verbum Iehouae, the Word of Jehovah, the only true and everliving
God. Hear this word that the Lord speaks against you. My observation is: The
Word of the Lord is diligently to be hearkened unto.

Were it not so, never would the holy Prophets have been so frequent in that
their inuitation; Isa 1.10. and 28 14. I^rem. 2.4.7.1. c 2^.10.1.27.20.^9
3.21.11.29.20.31.10.
Audite verbum Iehouae, Hear ye the Word of the Lord. That same general
Proclamation, Mat. 11.15. Whosoever has ears to hear, let him hear;
repeated in Matthew. 13 93. Mark. 7 91. and 23. Luke 8.8.13.3^. Revel. 2.7,
11.17.29.3.6, 13 22.
sundry others places of the New Testament, what else implies it, but that all
are bound to hear? The voice that spoke out of the cloud at the time of Christ
his transfiguration, Matthew. 17.5. it said no more but this, This is my beloved
Son in whom I am well pleased, hear ye him. Hear him, says that voice, as
if in hearing were comprised all the duties of man. Christ Jesus in the tenth
of Luke, the nine and thirtieth verse, speaking of one thing that is necessary,
speaks of nothing but of hearing the word. Martha, Martha, thou art careful,
and troubled about many things: But one thing is necessary, and Mary has
chosen that good part. One thing necessary, and Mary has chosen it! what is
that? She sitting at Jesus feet did hear his Word. See now, to hear the Word
of God is so necessary a thing, that all other necessities should give place
unto it.

It makes much for this necessity of hearing, that the Word of God is called
meat, Heb. 5.12. and the want of this word, a famine, Amos 8.11. What can from
hence be collected, but, that it is as necessary for us to hear the word of
God, as it is to eat?

Much more might be spoken to show the necessity of this duty of hearing the
word of God; but I have said enough for the confirmation of my doctrine: The
word of the Lord is diligently to be hearkened unto.

One reason to enforce this duty, I take from the person of him, from whom this
duty is enjoined us. He is in my Text called Jehovah, the Lord: Hear this word
that Jehovah the Lord speaks. Jehovah, he is our Deuteronomy. 32.18:
Creator, we are his creatures; he is our Psalm. 23.1.
Shepherd, we are his Sheep; he is our Mal. 1.6.
Master, we are his Servants; he is our Father, we are his children; he is
our Psalm. 44.4.
King, we are his Subjects. Say now, is not the creature bound to obey his
Creator, the sheep his Shepherd, the servant his Master, the child his
Father, the subject his King? The Scripture shows it: yea nature teaches it.
If then the Lord speak unto us, we are to hear him.

A second reason to enforce this duty, I take from the great value and high
price of obedient hearing. Obedience in this kind is better worth than any
sacrifice, yea than all the sacrifices that can be offered. Samuel avouches
it, 1 Samuel 15.22, 23. where he that reproves Saul to his face: Has the Lord
as great delight in burnt offerings and sacrifices, as when the voice of the
Lord is obeyed? Behold, to obey is better than sacrifice: and to hearken, than
the fat of Rams. For rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, and
stubbornness is as iniquity and idolatry. See here how elegantly Samuel
deciphereth two contraries, Obedience and disobedience? He makes the one to be
better than sacrifice; the other to be as witchcraft and idolatry. Obedience
is better than sacrifice: for he that offers a Sacrifice, Gre^. Moral. lib.
35. c. 10.
offers the flesh of some beast: but he that obeys offers his own will,
as a quick and reasonable sacrifice, which the Lord well accepts.
Disobedience is as witchcraft and Idolatry. If, when the Lord imposes some
du^y upon us, we then confer with our own hearts, as 1 S^^ 2^.7.
Saul consulted with the woman of Endor, or as 2 (...) 1.2.
Ahaziah with Beelzebub, whether we shall hearken unto the voice of the Lord,
or not; this is disobedience, and disobedience in a high degree; as prodigious
as witchcraft and idolatry. Now this second reason I thus frame. God likes of
obedience, and prefers it before sacrifice; he hates disobedience as he
does witchcraft and idolatry; therefore it is our duty, refusing this, to
embrace that: and when the Lord shall speak unto us, to hearken unto him, and
obey his Word.

A third reason to enforce this duty of hearing the Word of God, I take from
the consideration of the punishment that shall betide the disobedient. The
disobedient shall be sure to be punished. Our warrant for this we have, Deuteronomy.
28.15. If thou will not hearken unto the voice of the Lord thy God, to observe
and to do all his Commandments and his Statutes which he commands thee;
then shall all these curses come upon thee, and ou^rtake thee. Cursed shall
thou be Deuteronomy. 28.16.
in the City, and cursed in the field: Cursed in thy basket, and cursed in thy
store: Cursed in the fruit of thy body, in the fruit of thy land, in the
increase of thy kine, and in the stocks of thy sheep: Cursed when thou come
in, and cursed when thou go out. With these and the like curses, how sly
soever thou be, thou shall always be environed, it will not boot thee to seek
starting holes. If thou go into thine house, and shut the door, and double
bar it, yet shall the Amos 5.19.
serpent come in and sting thee there. If thou go into the field, and seek
means to escape, thou shall meet with a Lion upon the way: if thou slip aside
from the Lion, a Bear shall meet thee. Be thou assured, God has his
storehouse full of rods, nor of three or four sorts only, but of infinite to
pay thee home, if thou will not hearken unto his voice.

But if thou will hearken unto the voice of the Lord thy God, Deuteronomy. 28.1.
to observe and to do all his Commandments which he commands thee, then
shall blessings come as thick upon thee. Blessed shall thou be in the City,
and blessed in the field: blessed in thy b^sket, and blessed in thy store:
blessed in the fruit of thy body, in the fruit of thy ground, in the fruit of
thy Cattle, in the increase of thy kine, and in the flocks of thy sheep:
blessed when thou come in, and blessed when thou go out. With these and
other like blessings shall thou be compassed about, if thou give ear unto the
voice of the Lord thy God.

Now this third reason I frame thus: If the obedient shall be blessed and
rewarded for hearing, and the disobedient cursed and punished for not hearing
the voice of the Lord our God, then it behooves us with all diligence to give
ear unto his holy Word.

From the reasons enforcing the duty of hearing the Word of God, I come now to
make some use of the doctrine delivered.

It may serve first for reproof. For the reproof of such as refuse to ^^are
the Word of God. Such, as if they had no soul to save, yea, as if they
believed, that there is neither God nor Devil, neither Heaven nor Hell, do
stop their ears, that they may not hear. Very desperate is their disease. The
Mat. 12.42.
Queen of the South shall rise up in judgment and condemn them. She thought
it worthy her labor, to make a long journey to hear the wisdom of Solomon;
and yet, behold, more than Solomon is here. Here, not far hence, in this
place, and present with you is Christ our Lord. Solomon, a man. Christ is God.
Solomon a mortal King, of the Kingdom of Christ there is no end. Solomon a
King by humane succession, Christ by divine eternity. Solomon a sinner
inwrapped in the allurements of lasciviousness, Christ 1 Pet. 2.22.
without sin, without guile, Heb. 7.26.
harmless and undefiled. Solomon gave his Parables only in Jerusalem;
Christ gives his voice thorowout the Christian world, he gives it us in our
streets, in our Temples, in this his house wherein now I stand.

Inexcusable therefore art thou O man, O woman, O child of understanding,
whosoever thou art that refusest to hear the word of Christ, thy Lord and God.
For such your refusal you shall be sure to give an account at the great day of
Gods vengeance. Against such refusal the voice of wisdom cries out, Prou.
1.24. Because I have called, and ye refused; I have stretched out mine hand
and no man regarded, I also will laugh at your calamity, I will mock when your
fear comes.

Parallel to this is that, Esa. 65.12. There thus says the Lord; Because when
I called, ye did not answer; when I spoke, ye did not hear; but did evil
before mine eyes, and did choose that wherein I delighted not, therefore will I
number you to the sword, and ye shall all bow down to the slaughter.

Hereunto may that be added, Ierem. 7.13. Because I spoke unto you, rising up
early and speaking, but ye heard not, and I called you, but ye answered not,
therefore will I do unto you thus, and thus: I will cast you out of my fight:
I will power out mine anger and my fury upon the place of your habitation, upon
man, and upon beast, and upon the trees of the field, and upon the fruit of the
ground: I will cause to cease from your streets the voice of mirth, and the
voice of gladness, the voice of the bridegroom, and the voice of the bride.
Thus and thus shall it befall them, that refuse to hear, when the Lord
speaks; the Ier. 14.12, 16.
famine shall pinch them, the Ier. 15.3.
sword shall slay them, the Ier. 21.9. Ez^h. 6.11. and 7.15.
pestilence shall waste them, Ie^m. 15.3.
dogs shall tear them, wild beasts shall destroy them, and the Fowls of
Heaven shall devour them. You have the first use.

The second use may be for reproof too; for the reproof of such as come to
hear, but hear not as they should. I have read of a generation of such
hearers.

Some, says my Author, hearken after news; If the Preacher say any thing of
beyond Sea matters, or of court affairs at home, that is his lure.

Some hearken whether any thing be said, that may be wrested to be spoken
against persons in high place, that they may accuse the Preacher.

Some smacke of eloquence, and gape for a phrase, that when they come abroad in
company, they may have a fine word to grace their talk.

Some sit, as Malcontents, till the Preacher come to gird some, whom they
spite: then prick they up their ears to listen, and it shall go hard, if
they remember not something of what is spoken.

Some come to gaze about the Church: their eyes are evil eyes, they are wanton
eyes, they are evermore looking upon that, from which holy Job turned his eyes
away.

Some sit musing all the Sermon time, some of their Lawsuits, some of their
bargains, some of their iourneyes, some of some other employments. The Sermon
is ended before these men think where they are.

Some that come to hear, so soon as the Prayer is done, or soon after, fall
fast asleep; as though they had been brought into the Church for corpses, and
the Preacher should preach at their funerals.

You see now a generation of hearers: seven sorts of them; not one of them
hears as he should. If they come to the Church, and do remain there for the
Sermon time, they think their duty well and sufficiently discharged. But much
more than so is required at their hands. Outward service without inward
obedience is but Hypocrisy. The naked hearing of the Word of God, is but an
halting with God. If thou keep from him thy heart, he cares not for thy
presence, nor for thy tongue, nor for thy ear.

Cares he not for our presence, nor for our tongue, nor for our ear, unless
he have our heart too? Then may that Caveat, which Christ gives his Disciples,
Luke 8.18. when he had expounded unto them the parable of the Sower, be a
seasonable caveat for us. The Caveat is, Take heed how ye hear. This same take
heed, ever goes before some danger. Some danger there is in hearing: for you
may easily hear amiss. You may easily hear amiss, and therefore take heed.
Take heed how you hear. When you sow your seed in the field, you will tak^
h^ed how you sow, lest your seed should be lost. Your care herein is
commendable. Let not your care be less to further the growth of Gods seed.
Gods seed! it is immortal seed, even his holy Word; O take heed how you hear,
that none of this seed be lost. No seed grows so fast as this, if it be
received in good ground, in an honest and good heart: for so it grows in a
moment as high as Heaven. Take heed therefore how ye hear.

Would ye now know how ye should hear? The Prophet Ierem. shall teach you,
Chap. 13.15. Hear and give care. So shall Es^^, Chap. 28.23. Give ye ear and
hear, hearken and hear. He^re, give ear and hearken! Why is this multiplying
of words, but to teach you, that you are to hear and mere th^n hear? More
than hear! What is that to say? It is to hear interiori auditu, with the
inward hearing, as before I noted out of Albertus. It is audire and
intelligere, to hear and understand, as in the phrase of the Gospel already
alleged. It is to hear for the after time, as Esaias speaks, Chap. 42.23. It
is to mark, and understand, and remember, and believe, and follow that which
you hear.

This duty of hearing as we should, we shall the better perform, if as Moses
at the commandment of the Lord did put off his sho^es, the shoes from off his
feet, because the place wherein be stood was h ly ground, Exodus 3.5. so shall
we, as often as we come to this or the like holy place, the House of God, to
hear his Word read and preached unto us, put off our shoes too; not our
shoes from off our feet; but our much fouler shoes, our lusts, our thoughts,
our cares, our fancies, our businesses, even all that corruption and sin
wherewith in this life we are clogged: which, as the dust to the shoe, and the
sh oe to the foot, cleaues fast to us.

If thus prepared we come to hear the Word of God, we shall be sure of a
blessing. When the woman said to Christ, Blessed is the womb that bare thee,
and the paps which thou have sucked, Christ replied, Luke 11.28. Yea, rather
blessed are they that hear the Word of God, and keep it. By this his reply,
he shows that his Disciples were more blessed for hearing him, than his
Mother for bearing him. Yet hereby he denies not his Mother to have been
blessed even for bearing him: but insinuates only that she was more blessed in
being his child, than in being his Mother. Saint Austine, De Sancta
Virginitate, cap. 3. well expresses it; Beatior percipiende fidem Christi,
quam concipiendo carnem Christi; The blessed Virgin, the Mother of Christ, was
more blessed by receiving the faith of Christ, then by conceiving the flesh of
Christ.

Christ said unto his Disciples, Matthew. 13.16. Blessed are your ears for you
hear; showing, that they were more blessed than all the world besides, because
they had this one blessing to hear the truth. This is the blessing which you
come hither for. God in the abundance of his goodness brings it home unto you.
And well may you call it a blessing. For the word which we bring unto you is
verbum regni, Mat. 13.19. The word of a Kingdom; it brings a Kingdom with it:
It is verbum vitae, Ioh. 6.68. the word of life: it brings life with it. It is
not only a word of authority, to command and bind the conscience, nor only a
word of wisdom to direct you, nor only a word of power to convert you, nor
only a word of grace to comfort and uphold you, but the word of a neuerfading
Kingdom, and of eternal life to make you perfectly and for ever blessed.

Thus far has my first Doctrine carried me. The Doctrine was delivered in
these words: The word of the Lord is diligently to be hearkened unto.

It was grounded upon the first branch of my Text, wherein is contained the
first perswasory argument of attention drawn from the authority of the word to
be hearkened unto. Hear this word that the Lord speaks against you.

The next argument of persuasion to enforce attention in the hearer, is drawn
from the persons of them who are here invited to give ear. They are Filty
Israel, the children, the sons, the posterity of Israel; a people descended
from the holy Patriarch Jacob, chosen above all other nations to be Gods
peculiar people, with whom God had made a covenant, and had on his part most
absolutely performed it, preserving them from their enemies, and multiplying
upon them all his benefits. So graciously did God deal with these sons of
Israel, not only whilst they loved him, kept their conjugal faith with him,
and served him according to his word, but even then too, when they had despised
him, and forsaken him, had violated their faith with him, and committed
spiritual whoredom with false gods. Yet, when those their impieties,
disobediences, and rebellions were grown to the height, God was resolved to
come against them in judgment, and to punish them. This his resolution
appears in the many menaces and threats, which from time to time the Lord
sent unto them by his holy Prophets. One of which is in my Text, Hear this
word that the Lord speaks against you, O children of Israel; Against you, to
punish you, O children of Israel, even you. My observation here is:

God will not spare to smite his dearest children, when they sin against him.

One reason hereof may be, that the Lord may declare himself an adversary to
sin in all men without partiality.

A second is, that the Lord may reduce his children from running on headlong to
perdition with the wicked.

And the uses may be two: One to teach us, to magnify the righteousness of
God, as generally in all his works, so particularly in the afflictions of his
people.

The other to admonish us, that we look not for any certain earthly peace,
though we are by faith the children of Israel, but that we prepare our selves
for a continual succession of crosses and calamities.

The third argument of persuasion to move attention in these children of
Israel, is taken from the commemoration of their greatest deliverance, their
deliverance out of Egypt; Hear this w rd that the Lord speaks against you,
O children of Israel; against the whole family, which I brought up from the
land of Egypt. My observation is: The temporal benefits and manifold
deliverances, which the Lord bestows upon his people, are ever to be had in
remembrance, and in thankful acknowledgement.

This very doctrine for the substance of it, I have heretofore in your hearing
propounded and proved, in my fifteenth Lecture upon the second chapter of this
book, occasioned thereunto by the tenth verse, wherein this great deliverance
out of Egypt is mentioned. I will not therefore at this time stand to enlarge
it. Only let me now tell you, that this delivery of the Israelites out of
Egypt, is not appropriate only unto them, but that in some sort it
appertains to the Church of God in all ages: for as much as it was a type of
a more surpassing delivery from that fearful Kingdom of sin and darkness.
It appertains even unto us, whom God of his infinite goodness and mercy,
through the precious blood of his Son, and our Savior, Christ Jesus, has
delivered from this spiritual Egypt, the Kingdom of sin and darkness, and
will in his good time give us safe passage from hence, to that heavenly Canaan,
the true Country and Inheritance of all Saints. Whither, most gracious God,
vouchsafe to bring us all. Amen.

THE Second Lecture.
AMOS 3.2. You only have I known of all the families of the earth: therefore
will I punish you for all your iniquities.


THis second verse is the second part of Amos his second Sermon concerning the
Kingdom of the ten Tribes, the Kingdom of Israel. It is the proposition, and
contains the very substance of the whole Sermon: which is to let the
Israelites understand, that, for as much as the Lord has been good unto them
above all the Nations of the earth, and they have returned unto him nothing but
unthankfulness, the Lord will surely punish them for all their iniquities.

The parts are two: 1 A Commemoration. 2 A Commination.


The Commemoration is of benefits, the Commination is of punishments. The
Commemoration is for words short, yet for matter very copious. It has
reference to the many singular and exceeding great benefits, which the Lord
has bestowed upon his people, Israel. You only have I known of all the
families of the earth.

The Commination is sharp, but very just. It may serve thus far to instruct
the Israelites, that if the Lord should at any time with his strong hand Job
30.21.
oppose himself against them, and make their Verse. 15.
welfare to pass away as a cloud, and lay terrors upon them, yet they should
not calumniate, and Job 1.22.
charge God with folly, but should lay the whole blame thereof upon themselves
and their own deseruings. Therefore will I punish you for all your iniquities.
Of both in their order.

First, of the Commemoration.

You only have I known of all the families of the earth.

You only! Only you! How can this be so? Did not the knowledge of God extend
it self to other Nations, as well as to the Israelites? It may not be denied.
It extends it self, not to men only, but to whatsoever else is in the world.

You may consider it two manner of ways: either in it self, or as it has
reference to things known. If it be considered in it self, it is most
certain, and is ever the same: as necessary and immutable, as is the very
divine Essence; from which it differs not indeed, but only consideration.
For that axiom of the Schools is true, Quicquid est in Deo, est ipsa Dei
Essentia; Whatsoever is in God, is Gods own Essence. And therefore the
knowledge of God is his divine Essence, and God is his own knowledge. Whence
it follows, that wheresoever God is and his holy Essence, there is his
knowledge. Now God is every where, his Essence is every where: his knowledge
therefore must be every where. Its impossible that any thing should be
concealed from it.

Again, the knowledge of God may be considered, as it has reference to things
known: and so also nothing can be hid from it. For it knows it self, and
every thing else. Things universal and singular; things past, present, and to
come; things which neither are, nor have been, nor ever shall be; things
necessary and contingent, natural and voluntary, good and evil, achieved and
thought upon, finite and infinite, all, are known unto him. So says the
Apostle, Heb. 4.13. There is no creature that is not manifest in the sight of
God. No creature! Nay, unto his eyes all things are naked and open. All things!
How then is it, that here he says to the Israelites, You only have I known
of all the families of the earth?

For the clearing of this doubt, we are to note, that knowledge attributed unto
God in holy Scripture, does not ever betoken a bare and naked knowledge, but
sometimes his love, his favor, his care, his providence, his choice, his
approbation, his allowance, his acceptance, or the like. As Psalm. 1.6. The Lord
knows the way of the righteous. He knows, that is, he loves, he
approves, he accepts, he is well pleased with, and graciously directs, the
way of the righteous. And so are we to expound that of the 37. Psalm. Verse. 18.
The Lord knows the days of the upright. He knows, that is, He does not
only foresee, but also he allows, he cares and provides for the life of
the upright. So I understand that branch of David, prayer which he made in the
cave, Psalm. 142.3. When my spirit was ouer-whelmed within me, then thou knew
my path. Thou knew, that is, thou did approve and allow of the order of my
life, and innocent conversation.

In the book of Exodus, Chap. 33.17. the Lord said unto Moses, Thou have found
grace in my sight, and I know thee by name. I know thee by name, that is, I
have respect unto thee, I approve thee, I care and provide for thee. In the
first Chapter of the Prophecy of Nahum, verse. 7. it is said of the Lord, that
he knows them that trust in him. And there to know, is to love, to defend, to
approve, to regard. Them that trust in him he knows, he suffers them not to
perish. In the second Epistle to Timothy, Chap. 2.19. we read of a foundation,
a foundation of God, a sure foundation, the seal whereof is, Nouit Dominus,
q^^ sunt ejus: The Lord knows those that are his. The Lord knows;
understand not only a knowledge in general but a special knowledge; such a
knowledge as is joined cum applicatione cordis ac voluntatis (...), as a
learned Divine well speaks, such a knowledge as is associated with the
applying of the heart, and will, and good pleasure of the Lord. The Lord
knows who are his: He so knows them, as that they Joan. 10.28.
shall never perish, neither shall any man pluck them out of his hand.

Other like places I could produce yet further, to show this idiotisme of the
holy tongue, that verba notitiae, words of knowledge, do not ever betoken a
bare and naked knowledge, but sometime such a Mat. 7.23. Luke 13.27. Mat.
25.12. Romans 7 15.
knowledge, as is joined with some Vorflius a^ica Duplicat. cap. 4. page 225.
decree of him that knows, with some action of his will, with his
approbation. But I shall not need to do it. From the Texts of Scripture
before alleged, arises a distinction of the Schoolmen: their distinction of
the knowledge of God. The knowledge of God, say they, is twofold: the one is
the knowledge of his Aquin. ^^.2^. qu. 188. 5. 1.
apprehension; the other, the knowledge of his Ripa in 1. Th. qu. 14. Art. 13.
Dub. 4. cap. 4. fol. 83. col. 3. and Wendalin. Suppl. in 4. Sentent. Did. 50.
qu. 1.
approbation. That they call his absolute and speculatiue knowledge; this his
special, and practical: and this, not that, is the knowledge to be
understood in the places even now by me expounded. And this, not that, is the
knowledge intended in my Text.

Thus is the doubt resolved. The doubt was; How it is here said, that the Lord
only knew the Israelites above all the Nations of the Earth? The answer is:
He knew them, not only as he knew other Nations, by his absolute and
speculatiue knowledge, but also by his special and practical; not only by
the knowledge of his apprehension, but also by the knowledge of his approbation.

Some there are, that by knowledge here, do understand a possession. To know,
say they, is to possess, to have in our power, to enjoy as our own. For
proof whereof they bring that, Psalm. 50.11. I know all the fowls of the
mountains, and the wild beasts of the field are mine. The words are the words
of God unto his people Israel. Hear, O my people, and I will speak, O Israel.
I am God even thy God. I know all the fowls of the Mountains. I know them, I
so know them, that I can count them, and call them when I list; they are in my
power, I enjoy them as mine own, they are mine own possession.

And so they expound my Text: You only have I known of all the families of
the earth. I have known you only. Vos tantummodo mihi in viros cultores
assumpsi, aut possedi, says Illyricus. You only have I taken to be the men for
my worship: you alone have I possessed.

For I have known you, the Chaldee Paraphrast has, I have chosen you. I have
chosen you. Not amiss: if by this choice, you understand not, that special
election Ephesians. 1.4.
and choice of God, by which he has ordained to life eternal those, whom of
his free good will and pleasure he has decreed to endow with a celestial
inheritance. For its not to be denied, but that among the people of Israel,
there were many, that had no part in this eternal election and choice of God.
Many of them had no part in it, and therefore this election and choice is not
here to be understood.

But there is another election and choice of God, an election and choice more
general; an election, a choice, whereby God prefers some one Nation above
others, graciously to manifest himself, and to reveal his saving word unto
them. And thus may God be said only to have elected and chosen the people of
Israel. You only have I chosen of all the families of the earth.

That the people of Israel were alone thus elected and chosen of God, Moses
confesses, Deuteronomy. 4.7, 8. What nation, says he, is there so great, who has
God so nigh unto them, as the Lord our God is in all things, that we call upon
him for? And what nation is there so great, that has statutes and judgments
so righteous, as all this Law is, which is set before us this day? It is as if
he had thus said: Let us be compared with the rest of the Nations of the
world, and we shall find that God is good and gracious unto us above them all.
As soon as we pray unto our God, and resort unto him, we feel him near us by
and by. It is not so with other Nations. Again, we have his Laws and
Statutes, and righteous Ordinances: other Nations have not so.

This does the same Moses more plainly deliver, in sundry places of the same
book of Deuteronomy, Chap. 7.6. Chap. 10.15. Chap. 14.2. Chap. 26.18. In all
which places his purpose is to fasten it in the memories of the people of
Israel, that they were an holy people unto the Lord their God: that the Lord
their God had chosen them to be a peculiar people unto himself above all
people that were upon the face of the earth. In the three first places is
expressly said, that the Lord did choose Israel to be a peculiar people unto
himself above all the Nations that are upon the earth: in the fourth, that the
Lord avouched them to be his peculiar people. He chose them, he avouched them
to be his peculiar people; and all for his promise sake.

The promise is, Exodus 19.5. Ye shall be a peculiar or chief treasure unto me
above all people, though all the earth be mine. A peculiar, or a chief
treasure! The Hebrew word is (...) Segullah, which signifies ones own proper
good, which he loves and keeps in store for himself, and for special use.

You shall be (...) Segullah, a peculiar, a chief treasure unto me above all
people. The meaning of this promise is, that, although the whole earth be the
Lords by the right of creation, yet this people, the people of Israel, should
above all other have a special interest in him. Or the meaning is, that the
Lord would commit unto this people, his people Israel, as a chief and
principal treasure, his Laws and Statutes, which he would not do to any
other people in the world besides. So much is acknowledged, Psalm. 147.19, 20.
He shows his word unto Jacob, his statutes and ordinances unto Israel. He
has not dealt so with any Nation. Certainly hereby the Lord shows how dear
and how precious the people of Israel were in his eyes; and what prerogatives
they were to have above other people.

A chief prerogative of theirs, is, that the Oracles of God were committed
unto them. Saint Paul affirms it, Romans 3.1, 2. What advantage then has the
Jew? or what profit is there of circumcision? Much every way: chiefly, because
that unto them were committed the Oracles of God.

Many other, and very excellent prerogatives had they. They are heaped up
together, Romans 9.4. They were Israelites; to them pertained the adoption, and
the glory, and the covenants, and the giving of the Law, and the service of
God, and the promises: Theirs were the Fathers, and of them as concerning the
flesh Christ came, who is over all, God blessed for ever.

So many preeminences, are so many evidences and demonstrations, that of all
the nations of the Earth, the Israelites were known of God, were chosen by
him, and were his possession. They were known of him by the knowledge of his
approbation: they were chosen by him, and were separated from among all the
people of the earth to be his inheritance. So Solomon confesses, 1 King. 8.53.
and the Lord himself here in my Text avouches: You only have I known of all
the families of the earth.

You will now confess with me, that these words are, as in the beginning I
said they were, a Commemoration of Gods benefits upon Israel. Every prerogative
of theirs was a benefit, a blessing of God upon them. It was Gods blessing upon
them, that to them were committed the Oracles of God. It was Gods blessing upon
them that they were Israelites, that to them pertained the adoption, and the
glory, and the Covenants, and the giving of the Law, and the service of God,
and the promises. It was Gods blessing upon them, that theirs were the Fathers,
and that of them, concerning the flesh, Christ came.

These great benefits, these blessings of God upon the Israelites, Albertus
Magnus in his Enarration upon the words of my Text, reduces to the number of
five. Thus: You only have I known of all the families of the Earth, per
beneplacitum. Only you of all the families of the Earth have I known by my
good pleasure: Quia me vobis reuelaui, lege^ vobis posui, promissiones adhibui,
pramiis remuneraui, prophetiis illuminaui. I have revealed my self unto you, I
have given you the Law, I have made to you the promises, I have recompensed you
with rewards, I have illuminated you with Prophesies. Then adds he that of the
Psalm, Non taliter fecit omni nationi: He has not dealt so with every
Nation. With every Nation! Nay he has not so with any Nation.

Upon this first part of my Text; this Commemoration of Gods benefits bestowed
upon Israel, I grounded my first observation. It is this: It is an excellent
privilege to be known of God by the knowledge of his approbation; to be
chosen of him to be his people, to be in his love and favor; to be under his
care and providence.

The excellency of this privilege appears in this, that the Lord here calls
Israel to the remembrance of it, saying, You only have I known of all the
families of the earth. This excellent privilege, the true service of the living
God through the free use of his holy Word and Sacraments wheresoever it is found
among any people, is a sure pledge that the Lord knows that people with the
knowledge of his approbation, that he has chosen them to be his peculiar
people, that they are in his love and favor, and that he cares and provides
for them.

How much then (Beloved) how much are we indebted to the Majesty and bounty of
Almighty God, who has graced us with so excellent a blessing as is the
Ministry of his holy Word? His holy Word! It is a Jewel, than which nothing
is more precious; to which any thing compared is but dross; by which
whatsoever is tried, will be found lighter than vanity.

The true estimate of this Jewel may be had out of the 19. Psalm. At the 7.
verse. it is Perfect, nothing may be added to it, without marring of it: it
conuerteth the soul, and turns it from evil to good. It is sure; you may
build upon the truth of it, as well for the promises of mercy, as for the
threatenings of judgment. It gives wisdom, the wisdom of the spirit, even
unto the simple, to the humble and lowly of mind. At the eighth verse, It is
right, without any injustice or corruption. It rejoices the heart, with true
and sound joy. It is pure, pure in all points, and gives light to the eyes,
the eyes of the mind, that we may securely trace the way to Heaven: At the
ninth verse, It is clean, without spot or show of evil, and endures for ever
without alteration or change. It is truth without falsehood, and is righteous
all together, there is no error in it.

Is your desire for profit, or for pleasure? This Jewel yields you both. At
the tenth verse; for profit, it is compared to Gold, for pleasure to Honey. For
profit it is more to be desired than gold, yea than much fine gold: for
pleasure, it is sweeter than honey or the honey comb.

Moreover, at the tenth verse. It will make you circumspect; it will show you
the danger of sin, and will teach you how to avoid it, and may encourage you
to obedience, for as much as in the keeping of it, there is great reward. Great
reward; yet through Gods mercy, and not of your merit.

Now dearly beloved, is the holy Word of God a Jewel so precious? of such an
estimate? Then give ear to the exhortation of wisdom, Prou. 23.23. Buy it,
and sell it not. Buy it, what ere it cost you, seek by all means to obtain
it; and when you have gotten it, sell it not at any hand: depart not from it
for any price, for any cause. But let it (according to the exhortation, that
Saint Paul made to the Colossians, Chap. 3.16. Let it dwell in you plenteously
in all wisdom. It is, as one wittily speaks, Gods best friend, and the Kings
best friend, and the Courts best friend, and the Cities best friend, and the
Countries best friend, and every man's best friend. Give it therefore
entertainment, not as to a forreiner or stranger, but as to your familiar, as
to your best friend, let it dwell in you. And since it comes not empty, but
brings with it, as well pleasure, as profit, as you have already heard, Let it
dwell in you plenteously. Plenteously; Yet in all wisdom. Let us hear it in
all wisdom, read it in all wisdom, meditate upon it in all wisdom, speak
of it in all wisdom, and preach it in all wisdom; not only in wisdom, but in
all wisdom, that the words of our mouths, and the meditations of our hearts
may ever be acceptable in the sight of the Lord our strength and our Redeemer.

Thus far of my first observation, grounded upon the Commemoration of Gods
blessings upon Israel; You only have I known of all the families of the earth.

You only! My second observation is: that, this great bl^ssing of the true
service of God, and the free use of his holy Word, was in the days before
Christ appropriate to the people of the Jews.

This appears by some of those places before alleged, Deuteronomy. 4.7, 8. and
Psalm. 147.19, 20. for the further illustration of the point, that of the 76.
Psalm, verse. 1, 2. may well serve: In Judah is God known, his name is great
in Israel, in Salem is his tabernacle, and his dwelling in Sion. In which
words, the Psalmist gives unto the land of Judah and Israel this prerogative
above the rest of the Nations of the whole earth, that there God was known,
and his name was great, but especially in Salem, that is, in Jerusalem, and in
Mount Sion, the place which he desired for his habitation. Psalm. 132.13.
There was God known; his name was great there. Elsewhere it was not so. It
was not so among the Nations. For (as Barnabas and Paul told the men of Lystra,
Acts 14.16.) in times past God suffered all Nations to walk in their own
ways. The way of God they then knew not.

The then state of the Nations Saint Paul, Ephesians. 2.12. elegantly decyphereth
in five circumstances. He bids them remember what they were in time past: as
that first, they were without Christ; secondly, they were aliens from the
common we^lth of Israel; thirdly, they were strangers from the covenants of
promise; fourthly, they were without hope; fifthly, they were without God in the
world. Enough is said for the confirmation of my second observation, which was,
that in time of old, in time past, in the days before Christ his coming in
the flesh, the true service of God, and the exercise of his holy word, was
appropriate to the people of the Jews, to the children of Israel.

Now the reasons of this appropriation, are two. One is, Gods undeserved and
special love; the other is, the truth of his promise. Both are expressed,
Deuteronomy. 7. At the seventh verse the false cause is removed; at the eighth the
true is put. The Lord did not set his love upon you, nor choose you, because ye
were more in number than any people: for ye were the fewest of all people.
There the false cause is removed. The true cause is put in the words following:
But because the Lord loved you, and because he would keep the oath, which he
swore unto your fathers, therefore has the Lord brought you out with a mighty
hand, and redeemed you out of the house of bondmen, from the hand of Pharaoh
King of Egypt: and has given you the rich treasure of his true service and
holy Word. To you only has he been so gracious, not for any dignity or worth
of yours, but for his own loves sake, and for his promise sake.

One use of this observation may be to show, that heretofore Grace was not so
universal, as Papists now would have it to be. The knowledge of the means of
salvation was denied to the Nations.

A second use may be, to admonish us, that we hold it for a singular blessing,
that the Lord has reserved us for these last days, wherein the word of God of
old time limited to the coasts of Iudaea and Palaestina, is now published unto
us of the Gentiles. Ephesians. 2.13.
Now in Christ Jesus, we who were sometimes far off, are made nigh by the
blood of Christ. Now therefore we are no more strangers and forreiners, but
fellow-heires with the Saints, Psalm. 107.8.
and of the household of God. O that we would therefore praise the Lord for this
his goodness, and declare this wonder that he has done for us.

It is time, that from the Commemoration, we descend to the Commination. The
Commination is in these words: Therefore I will punish you for all your
iniquities.

Therefore! Why? Because the Lord has known Israel above all the families of
the earth, will he therefore punish them for all their iniquities? Is not the
sequel absurd, You only have I known of all the families of the earth,
therefore I will punish you for all your iniquities? Were it not better thus;
You only have I known of all the families of the earth, therefore I will
spare you, I will pardon you, I will not punish you for all your iniquities.

For removing of this scruple, we must have recourse to that Covenant which
the Lord made with Israel in Horeb. Deuteronomy. 5.2.
The form of the Covenant is extant, Exodus 19.5. If you will obey my voice
indeed, and keep my Covenant, then ye shall be a peculiar treasure unto me
above all people. This Covenant is more at large described in Deuteronomy. 7. and 28.
The sum of it is: If thou will hearken diligently to the voice of the Lord
thy God, to observe and to do all his Commandments which he commands thee,
then blessed shall thou be; but if thou will not, accursed shall thou be.

The Covenant you see is upon a condition. If the condition be broken on
Isreal's part, God is no longer on his part tied to any performance. This
sequel then may be good: I have chosen you by Covenant above all the nations
of the earth, that ye should keep my Law; but you have failed in the
condition; you have not kept my Law. Therefore I will punish you; and will
punish you for all your iniquities.

Therefore] because you having been graciously received by me into favor, do
run headlong into all iniquity, I will punish you: therefore I will punish
you. In the Hebrew it is Visitabo super vos, or contra vos, I will visit upon
you, or against you. The Vulgar Latin has Visitabo super vos, I will visit
upon you all your iniquities.

I will visit.] To visit, is sometimes in the holy Scripture taken in the evil
part, for to visit in anger or dispeasure, whence by a Synecdoche of the Genus
for the Species, it betokens to punish. So is God said to visit, when with
some sudden, and unlooked for scourge or calamity, he takes vengeance upon
men for those sins, which for a long time he seemed to take no notice of.

In that part of David's Prayer, Psalm. 59.5. O Lord God of hosts, the God of
Israel, awake thou to visit the heathen, to visit is to visit in anger, it is
to corroct, it is to punish. In the 89. Psalm. verse. 32. to such as depart from
the Law of the Lord, and from that rule of righteousness which it prescribes
them to walk in, the Lord threatens, that he will visit their transgression
with the rod, and their iniquity with stripes. And there to visit, must needs
be to visit in anger, for as much as it brings a rod and stripes with it. It is
to correct, it is to punish. In the thirteetnh of Esaias, verse. 11. the Lord
says, I will visit the world for their evil, and the wicked for their
iniquity. And there also to visit, is to visit in anger: it is to correct, it
is to punish.

Now as to visit signifies in the now alleged places, so does it in my Text,
I will visit you, I will visit you in mine anger: it is to correct, it is to
punish.

Now as to visit signifies in the now alleged places, so does it in my Text,
I will visit you, I will visit you in mine anger, I will correct you, I will
punish you. But for what? It follows, For all your iniquities.

For all, either universal, or indefinitely. For all universally; so the
gloss takes it, so Albertus the Bishop of Ratisbone; so Rupertus the Abbot of
Tuitium. I will punish you for all, Vt sit nihil impunitum, that nothing be
unpunished. I will punish you for all, Instante judicio, remot a misericordia,
summa cum seueritate; with instant judgment, without mercy, with greatest
severity. I will punish you for all. For it is a just thing even with men, that
he that makes a Law, should punish according to the Law.

Or, All, may here be taken indefinitely, for some of all. It is Drusius his
observation; Omnes dixit, pro omne genus, vel plerasque. All, he has said for
all sorts, or for the most part. I will punish you for all your iniquities;
that is, for the sorts of your iniquities, or for the most part of them. For
the Lord of his clemency and mercy remitteth unto his some of their iniquities.

Or these two expositions for this place I prefer the former. So shall this
second branch of my Text bear with it this understanding; Therefore I will
visit upon you all your iniquities. Therefore] because you, having been
respected by me, and received into my favor above all the Nations of the
earth, have notwithstanding forsaken my Laws, and corrupted my service, I will
visit upon you all your iniquities. I will punish you for all; for all,
universally; for all your iniquities; not one of them shall escape unpunished.
I will punish you for all your iniquities. I] there is the Agent. Will punish]
there is the Action. You] there is the Patient. For all your iniquities] there
is the Cause. I will punish you for all your iniquities.

From the Agent and his Action, arises this observation; Whatsoever punishment
befalls any one in this life, it is from the Lord.

The Lord! He is (...), he is efficiens primarum, he is the primary and
principal actor in all punishments. He is a sure revenger of all impiety, as
he is the maintainer of his holy Law.

This office of punishing, the Lord assumeth to himself, Esaias. 45.7. I am the
Lord, and there is none else: I form the light, and create darkness: I make
peace, and create evil: I the Lord do all these things. I create evil. In
this place, by Evil, we are not to understand malum culpae, (...), not
robbery, not covetousness, nor any like wickedness; but malum poene, (...),
as Saint Chrysostom speaks, Homily 23. upon Matthew, the stripes or wounds
that we receive from above. Gasper Sanchius does here reckon up, whatsoever
disturbeth our tranquillity or quiet, whatsoever external or domestical
vexation we have, whatsoever takes from us the faculty and opportunity of
those things that are necessary for our life; as war, and exile, and
depredation, and servitude, and want, and the like. Of all these it may be
truly affirmed, that the Lord creates them; the Lord does them all.

Of such evils is that also to be understood, which our Prophet Amos has in
the sixth verse of this Chapter: Shall there be evil in a City, and the Lord
has not done it? The interrogation is used, the more to urge the point. Shall
there be evil in a City, and the Lord has not done it? There shall be none.
No evil of punishment, no calamity, no misery, no cross, no affliction shall
be in any City, or in any other place of the world, but the Lord is the actor
of it: he does it.

Hereof was holy Job well advised. The check he gives his Wife shows it. She
seeing him all smitten over with sore biles from the sole of his foot unto the
crown of his head, falls a tempting him: Do thou yet retain thine
integrity? Curse God and die. Jobs reply unto her is, Chap. 2.10. Thou speak
as one of the foolish women speaks: What? Shall we receive good at the hand
of God, and shall we not receive Evil? Shall we not receive Evil? By Evil
he means the Evil not of sin, but of punishment: as calamities, miseries,
crosses, afflictions, and the like: which he calls evil, not because they
are so indeed, but because many think them so to be. For things may be
termed Evil in a twofold understanding. Some are indeed Evil; such are our
sins, and of them God is not the cause. Some are not indeed Evil, but only
in regard of us, in regard of our sense, of our feeling, of our apprehension,
of our estimation. Such are the punishments, the calamities, the miseries, the
afflictions, whereto we are in this life subject: and of these God is the
cause. This is it which Job acknowledges in the reproof of his wives folly;
Shall we receive good at the hand of God, and shall we not receive Evil? and
it fitly serves for the establishment of my doctrine.

Whatsoever punishment befalls any one in this life, its from the Lord. The
reason hereof is: because the Lord is the principal doer of all things. He is
the primary agent, the chiefest actor in all things, and therefore in all the
punishments which do befall us in this life.

The uses of this observation are two:

One is to reprove some Philosophers of old, and some ignorant people now
adays, for a vain opinion of theirs, whereby they attribute to accident,
chance, and fortune, all those their afflictions, from the least to the
greatest, whereof they fee not any apparent cause.

The other is, to admonish us, that when any affliction is upon us, we take it
patiently as coming from the Lord; and repine not at the instruments, by whom
we are afflicted. They without him could do nothing against us. Whatsoever
they do, they do it by his permission. The hand of his particular providence
is with them to appoint the beginning, and end, and measure, and continuance of
all our afflictions. Wherefore in all our afflictions let our practice be, as
holy David's was, Psalm. 39.9. even to hold our peace, and say nothing, because
the Lord has done it.

From the Agent and his Action, I pass to the Patient: You. I will punish You.
You, mine own possession; You, my peculiar treasure; You, my chosen people
above all the Nations of the earth, I will punish you. My observation from
hence is: The Lord does punish his servants in this life above others.

This truth I further prove out of Saint Peter, Epist. 1. Chap. 4. Verse. 17. He
there says, The time is come, that judgment must begin at the house of God.
At the house of God it must begin. His servants therefore must have the first
taste of it: and the time is come for them to have it. Is the time now come?
Was it not before? Yes; it was ever. Nadab and Abihu, two of Aarons sons,
they offer strange fire before the Lord: and a fire comes out from the Lord,
and deuoures. This is it, that the Lord spoke saying, In propinquis meis
sanctificabor, Leuit. 10.3. I will be sanctified in them, that come nigh me. If
they that come nigh unto me transgress my laws I will not spare them; they,
even they shall feel the heaviness of my hand.

So says the Lord, Ierem. 25.29. Lo, I begin to bring evil on the City, in
which my name is called upon. And there you see: It is not the service of God,
not the calling upon his holy Name, that can exempt a place from punishment if
it be polluted with iniquity.

Begin at my Sanctuary. It is the Lords direction for the punishment of
Jerusalem, Ezech. 9.6. Go through the City, and smite, Let not your eye spare,
neither have ye pity: Slay utterly old and young: yea, maids and little
children, and women. But come not near any man upon whom is the mark; the
rest slay utterly old and young, Spare not, Pity not, and begin at my
Sanctuary.

Now lay we all this together: Begin with them, that are nigh unto me:
begin at my City, at my house, at my Sanctuary, spare none; pity none, smite
all. You see my observation made good: The Lord does punish his servants in
this life above others.

I say in this life.

One reason hereof may be; because the Lord, out of his love to his servants,
will not suffer them to go on in sin.

A second may be; eternal punishments are prepared for the wicked hereafter,
and therefore here in this life are they the less punished.

And the uses may be two:

One, to lessen us, that in the multitude and the greatness of our
afflictions, we acknowledge Gods great mercy, and endeavor to bear them all
with patience and contentment. Whenever Gods hand shall be upon us, in
judgment for our sins; let that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 11.32. be our
comfort, When we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord, that we should not
be condemned with the world.

A second use may be, to show unto us, how fearful their case is, who pass
all their time here in this world without any touch of affliction. Affliction!
it is the badge of every son of God. Whosoever has no part herein, he is a
bastard, he is no son. So says the Apostle, Heb. 12.8.

I have done with the Patient; with the parties punished. Now a word or two of
the cause of their punishment, which is the last circumstance, in these words;
For all your iniquites. I will punish you for all your iniquities; for all your
sins; for all, not only original, but also actual: and for all actual, not
only of commission, but also of omission; not only of knowledge, but also of
ignorance; not only of presumption, but also of infirmity: I will punish you
for all your sins. For all. The observation is: The Lord will not suffer any
sin to escape unpunished.

Sin! It is causa (...), it is the impulsive cause of punishment. It plucks
down vengeance from the Majesty of Heaven. Its true of every sin, even of
the least sin: Cognatum, immo innatum omni sceleri, scelaris supplicium. The
wages of sin is death. As the work is ready, so the pay is present. Nec
aufertur, nec differtur. If impiety, no impunity. Its impossible, any sin
should be without punishment. Impossibl. The reasons are two:

One is taken from the justice of God. It is a part of Gods justice to punish
sin, and therefore he cannot but punish it.

The other is taken from the truth of God. God who is ever true, has threatened
to punish sin, and therefore he will not leave any sin unpunished.

The consideration of this point, Beloved, should be unto us a bar to keep
us in, that we be not too secure, too presumptuous of our own estate. We
cannot be ignorant, for we have learned it out of Gods Word, that we have
whole armies of enemies to encounter withal, not only out of us, in the world
abroad, but also within us lurking within our own flesh, even our sins.
These sins of ours are our cruelest enemies. They are ever hurring us on to
punishment. Wherefore let us be at utter defiance with them; and use we all
holy means to get the victory over them, by the daily exercises of prayer and
repentance, and by a continual practice of new obedience to Gods most holy
Will, according to that measure of grace which we have received. So shall our
sins, all our sins, lie drowned in the most precious blood of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, as in a bottomless Sea, from which they shall never be
able to rise up against us for our hurt.

THE Third Lecture.
AMOS 3.3. Can two walk together, except they be agreed?

Will a Lion roar in the Forest, when he has no prey? Will a young Lion cry
out of his d^^, If he have taken nothing?

Can a bird fall in a sna^e upon the earth, where no gin is for him? Shall one
take up a snare from the earth, and have taken nothing at all?

Shall a Trumpet be blown in the City, and the people not be afraid? Shall
there be evil in a City, and the Lord has not done it?


OF the three parts, which heretofore I have observed in this third Chapter and
second Sermon of Amos concerning the kingdom of the ten Tribes, this is the
third, and is continued from this third verse to the end of this Chapter. I
termed it an Enarration, a Declaration, an Exposition, an Expolition. Call you
it as you will. Here shall you find the Proposition, whereof you heard in my
last Lecture, powerfully and elegantly made good. The substance of the
Proposition was; God having been good and gracious to a people, if he be
repaid with unthankfulness, will assuredly visit that people, and punish them
for all their iniquities.

For the polishing and adorning hereof we have here diverse similitudes, by
diverse Interpreters, diversely expounded. I find among them five different
expositions.

Some will have all these similitudes, all six, to be brought to prove one and
the same thing; namely: That no evil can befall any city, except the Lord
command it. Of this exposition Saint Hierome makes mention. It is the
exposition of Theodoret, and Remigius: and may run thus. As it cannot be,
that two should walk together, except they be agreed; or that a Lion should
roar in the forest, when he has no prey; or, that a Lions whelpe should cry
out of his den, if he have gotten nothing; or, that a bird should fall in a
snare upon the earth, where no gin is for him; or, that a Fowler should take up
his snare from the ground, before he have taken somewhat; or, that the Trumpet
should sound an Alarm in the City, and the people not fear: so it cannot be,
that there should be any evil, any evil of punishment, any plague in a City,
except the Lord command it so to be.

Some there are that expound these similitudes, of Gods agreement with his
Prophets for the denouncing of some evil that is eminent and near at hand.
Lyra, Hugo, and Dionysius, do so expound them. Their exposition runs thus:
As it cannot be, that two should walk together for the dispatch of a
business, except they be first agreed; or, that a Lion should roar in the
forest when he has no prey, and so forth of the rest; So it cannot be, that
Gods Prophets should forewarne us of any judgment that shall befall us, except
they be first agreed with God, and God speak in them. This exposition
Christophorus a Castro takes for good, because it is said verse. 7. of this
Chapter, Surely, the Lord God will do nothing, but he reuealeth his secret
unto his servants the Prophets. By his servants, the Prophets, the Lord roareth
as a Lion, he lays his snares as a Fowler, he sounds an alarm as with a
trumpet, and proclaims evil to a City.

Others there are, that refer these similitudes to the disagreement that is
between God and Israel. Albertus, Rupertus, and Isidore, do so refer them.
Their exposition may run thus: as it cannot be, that two should walk
together, except they be agreed; so it cannot be, that God should walk with
Israel. The time indeed was, when God walked with his people Israel, and Israel
with God. It was then, when they of Israel were desirous to please God, to do
his holy will, and to depend upon him. But afterward, when they forsook God,
and betook themselves to the service of strange gods, Idoll-gods, Devils, it
could not be, that God should walk any longer with them, or they with God. No
marvel then, if upon this disagreement, the Lord by his Prophets do roar at
Israel, as a Lion roareth at his prey: nor marvel, if he lay a snare for them,
as a Fowler does for birds: no marvel, if he sound an alarm as with a
Trumpet, and proclaim against them.

There is yet a fourth exposition; the exposition of Arias Montanus. He
understands these similitudes of the disagreement, that was between the two
peoples, of Israel and Judah. Notorious was the revolt of Israel from Judah:
notorious the rent of the ten Tribes from the other two. By this revolt, or
rent, of one kingdom were made two: the kingdom of Israel, and the kingdom
of Judah. Here was much a do, much contention, which kingdom should be the
chief, which should have the preeminence. Notwithstanding this their variance,
yet was there a concord between them: a concord, to forsake the Law of the
Lord and his holy worship: a concord to tread the paths of superstition, and
to embrace the service of Idols. Herein they were agreed. Agreed among
themselves, but not with God. The more they were agreed among themselves, the
further off they were from any agreement with God. Now this exposition is: As
it cannot be, that two should walk together, except they be agreed: so it
cannot be that God should walk either with Israel or Judah: As well Judah, as
Israel, being at odds with God, as having left his holy Law, and polluted
themselves with superstition, must taste of the severity of Gods displeasure.
God will be unto them as a Lion that roareth at his prey; and as a snare that
is spread by the Fowler; he will cause an alarm to be heard among them, and
will summon them to battle, whereby their ruin shall be wrought: ruin upon
Israel through Salmanasser, and ruin upon Judah through Nabuchodonosor.

I cannot pass by a fifth exposition. I have it from Saint Hieroms relation;
from his reading Legi in cuiusdam commentario, rem difficilem persuadere
cupientis, I have read, says he, in a Commentary of one, that is willing to
persuade a hard matter; that here are eight comminations, answering to eight
precedent impieties. Those eight impieties are these: the first of Damascus;
the second of Gaza, and other Cities of Palaestina; the third of Tire; the
fourth of Idumaea or Edom; the fifth of the children of Ammon; the sixth of Moab;
the seventh of Judah, or of the two Tribes; the eight of Israel, or, of the ten
Tribes. Five of them are discovered in the first Chapter, the other three in
the second. To these eight impieties, eight comminations are here rendered; to
the first, the first; to the second, the second; to the rest, the rest in their
order. Quod vtrum rerum sit, nouerit ipse, qui scripsit: But whether this be
so, or not, let him that wrote it, look to it. So does Saint Hierome put by
this fifth exposition: neither do I see any reason to admit it.

The four former are more pertinent to this place, and of them the two first
are most of all, as Castrus supposes. But which is indeed the most pertinent,
it will appear by the particular consideration of each similitude in its
order. I begin with the first. The first similitude is taken from wayfaring
men, from travelers: verse. 3.

Can two walk together, except they be agreed? (...). So Saint Cyrill begins
his exposition of this verse. We have here a profound riddle, and an obscure
saying; (...), yet will we speak of it, we will expound it, as we may.

Can two walk together, except they be agreed?] The translation of the
Septuagint is, (...), Will two walk wholly to the same purpose, (...), unless
they know one the other? The Vulgar Latin has Nunquid ambulabunt duo pariter,
Will two walk together, nisi conuenerit eis, unless they be agreed? Tremelius
and Iunius, and Piscator; their translation is; An ambulaturi essent duo vna.
Would two walk together, nisi conuenirent, unless they could agree? Drusius
he reads: An ibunt duo simul, Will two go together, nisi conuenerint, unless
they meet in some certain place? Tauerner, an ancient English Translator, he
has, May twain walk together, except they be agreed among themselves. Will
two, Would two, May twain, Can two walk or go together, unless they know
one the other, unless they be agreed, unless they could agree, unless they
meet together, except they be agreed among themselves? Some difference you see
there is in the translations, but the understanding of the place is not thereby
much varied. I follow our newest and best approved English.

Can two walk together, except they be agreed?] Can they? The answer must be
negative; No. They cannot. Can they not? How so? Carthusian says they may. For
a man may be compelled to walk with another. And its plain by that, which our
Savior in his Sermon, in the Mount, says to his Auditors, Mat. 5.41.
Whosoever shall compel thee to go a mile, go with him twain. Now where
compulsion is, there is no agreement: and therefore may two walk together,
though they be not agreed. May they so? To what end then serves this
Interrogation; Can two walk together, except they be agreed?

I answer with Carthusian, that our Prophet here speaks, secundum communem
cursum, according to the common course: and communiter verum esse, that it is
commonly true, that two cannot walk together, except they be agreed. Commonly
it is true, yet not ever so. Drusius has a Solent, to express the meaning
with: Can two walk together, except they be agreed? Minime solent, they use
not so to do. Mercerus has likewise his Solet, Can two walk together, except
they be agreed? Fere fieri non solet: it is not usual they should do so: For
the most part they do it not. This is it, that Paulus de Palatio has: Solent,
qui volunt iter simul facere, prius secum de eo itinere conuenire; they who
undertake any journey together, do use first to agree upon it. Should they not
first agree, how could they come together, how walk together? Commonly and for
the most part they could not.

You see now what answer is to be made to the interrogation here; Can two walk
together, except they be agreed? The answer is, They cannot, Commonly they
cannot, for the most part they cannot; usually they cannot. They cannot walk
t^gether, except they be agreed.

It is a known rule: Interrogatio quandoque vim habet negandi: An
Interrogation has sometimes the force of a Negation. So has it, Genesis 18.14.
Is any thing too hard for the Lord? The answer must be, No; there is nothing
too hard for him. The Angel Gabriel well renders it, Luke 1.37. With God
nothing shall be impossible.

In the seventh Chapter of Saint Matthew, verse. 9, 10. you have a twofold
Interrogation: What man is there of you, whom if his son ask bread, will he
give him a stone? or if he ask a fish, will he give him a serpent? The answer
must be, No. You will not give any son of yours, a stone in stead of bread,
or a serpent in stead of fish. You will not. You know how to give good gifts
unto your children.

In the same Chapter, verse. 16. the Interrogation is, Do men gather grapes of
thorns, or figs of thistles? The answer must be, No. They do not. It is
against the course of nature, that either thorns should bring forth grapes, or
thistles figs.

Such is the Interrogation here. It has the force of a Negation. Can two walk
together, except they be agreed? The answer must be, No. They cannot. Two
cannot walk together, except they be agreed.

Hitherto you have had the (...), the proposition of this first similitude; now
follows the (...), the reddition of it. Hitherto has been rei extrariae
consideratio, now follows rei praesentis accommodatio: hitherto the
explication of the former part; now, the application of the latter. Thus:

As it cannot be, that two should walk together, except they be agreed: so it
cannot be, that the Prophets of the Lord should forewarne us of any judgment,
that shall befall us, except they be first agreed with God, and God speak in
them. This is the second of those five expositions, whereof you heard in the
beginning of this exercise. It was the exposition of Lyra, Hugo, and Dionysius:
and is embraced by later Expositors; by Paulus de Palatio, Marthurinus
Quadratus, and Christophorus a Castro, by Brentius, and Winckleman, by Calvin
and Mercer. The observation is: The Prophets of the Lord cannot forewarne us of
any judgment that shall befall us, except they be first agreed with God, and
God speak in them.

This truth Saint Peter expressly delivers, Ep. 2. Chap. 1. verse. 20, 21. No
prophecy of the Scripture is of any private interpretation: for the prophecy
came not in old time by the will of man; but holy men of God spoke, as they
were moved by the holy Ghost. The Prophets of the Lord spoke not of their own
heads; God spoke in them.

Prophets! They are criers: and criers speak nothing, but what is put into
their mouths. Esaias is a crier. He makes a noise after the manner of a crier,
Esaias 55.1. Hoe, every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters. The Lord bids
him cry, Esaias 40.6. and he says, What shall I cry? Then are the words put into
his mouth: All flesh is grass, and all the goodlinesse thereof is as the
flower of the field. John Baptist is a crier. So he styles himself, Ioh. 1.23.
I am the voice of a crier in the wilderness. And how cries he? Even as the
words are put into his mouth: Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his paths
strait.

Prophets! They are Trumpetors. Their voice is like a Trumpet. Esaias 58.1. Cry
aloud, spare not, Lift up thy voice like a trumpet, show my people their
transgression, and the house of Jacob their sins. They must set the trumpet
to their mouths, Hos. 8.1. They must blow the trumpet, Joel 2.1. But they must
blow it with the breath of the Lord: Otherwise it gives but an uncertain
sound, and a false alarm.

Prophets! They are Watchmen. Their office is, to hear the Word at the Lords
mouth, and then to warn the people. The charge is given them, Ezech. 3.17.
Son of man, I have made thee a watchman unto the house of Israel: therefore
hear the Word at my mouth, and give them warning from me. This their charge is
reiterated, Ezech. 33.7. O son of man, I have set thee a watchman unto the
house of Israel: therefore thou shall hear the Word at my mouth, and warn
them from me. You see; they are not to speak a word, but they have it from the
Lord, and accordingly must they warn the people.

Jeremy, a Prophet. He eats the words of the Lord, Chap. 15.16. and is thereby
fitted to his function.

Ezechiel, a Prophet. A hand is sent unto him, and lo, a roll of a book
therein. The roll is spread before him, and is written within and without.
Within is written, Lamentations, and mournings, and woe. This roll he is
commanded to eat. He eats it. So he goes and speaks unto the house of Israel,
Ezech. 3.3.

Saint John the Divine a Prophet too. He sees an Angel with a little book in
his hand, and begs the book. The Angel gives it him, and bids him eat it. He
takes it and eats it. Then is he fit to prophecy before many peoples, and
nations, and Kings, and tongues, Revel. 10 11.

The Prophets profess of themselves, that they speak nothing besides the pure
word of God. Joshua, he says to the children of Israel: Come hither and hear
the Word of the Lord your God. Chap. 3.9. The words which I shall deliver unto
you concerning what shall come to pass hereafter, they are not my words; they
are the words of the Lord your God. Esaias calls upon Heaven and Earth to hear,
Chap. 1.2. Hear O Heavens, and give ear, O Earth, for the Lord has spoken.
The words, which I now speak unto you, they are not my words, they are the
words of the Lord. Amos our Prophet: he likewise calls upon the children of
Israel in the beginning of this Chapter. Hear this word that the Lord has
spoken against you, O children of Israel. Hear it. It is not my word, it is
the word of the Lord; the Lord has spoken it.

What more familiar in the writings of the Prophets, than these forms of
speech, Thus says the Lord, Says the Lord, the burden of the Word of the
Lord; the Word of the Lord came unto me? They all make for the authority of the
Prophets of old, and their prophesies.

From hence, as also from that they are Eaters of the Word of God, and are
Watchmen, and are Trumpeters, and are Cryers, its evident, their prophesies
were not of their own wills: they spoke not of their own heads; God spoke in
them.

Thus the truth of my Doctrine stands inviolable: The Prophets of the Lord
cannot forewarne us of any judgment that shall befall us, except they be first
agreed with God, and God speak in them.

Here first is a lesson for us, who succeed the Prophets in the Ministry of
the Church. We may not deliver any thing unto you, but what we have gathered
out of the Word of God. Every Minister of the New Testament, should be as
Moses was of the Old. Moses his charge was not to conceal any thing, but to
speak all, Exodus 7.2. Thou shall speak all that I command thee. It is our
part to do the like. It is our part to speak in the Name of God, and in his
Name alone, to feed the flock of Christ with his pure word, and with his word
alone: and to do it as learnedly, as faithfully, as sincerely, as constantly
as we may; leaving the success of all to him that has sent us, and disposes
of all men's hearts at his pleasure. So running our race, we shall one day be at
rest in eternal comfort, fully delivered from this vile world, from wicked
men, from evil natures: from such, who are ever ready to take our best
endeavors in the worst sense, and to require our honest affections with their
foul disgraces.

Here secondly is a lesson for you. For you, Beloved: for all such as are the
Auditors and hearers of the Word of God. This duty of hearing is to be put in
practice; not dully, but with diligence; not heavily, but with cheerfulness,
as to the Lord. There is a generation of hearers, that would seem desirous to
hear the Word preached, but they would have it of free cost: they like not the
charges it brings with it. O let not any such repiner, any such grudger be
found in the assembly of the Saints. Such, if they confer any thing to the
maintenance of the Ministry, they do it not for conscience sake, but of
necessity; not for any love they bear unto the Word preached, but by
compulsion of Law: not as a free will offering to God for the recompense of his
Kingdom among them, but as a taxation, which they cannot resist. To such the
preaching of the Word is not a benefit, but a burden. So far are they from
taking any delight therein, as that by their good wills they would wholly shake
and shift it off. Carnally minded men, careless and prodigal of the salvation
of their own souls. The horse-keeper that dresseth their horses, the
shepherd that watches their sheep, the heardman that looks to their swine,
the Cobbler that clouteth their shoes, shall willingly be considered for their
pains: but the Minister or Pastor that breaks unto them the bread of life,
shall have no supply from them to the relief of his necessities. No supply!
Nay, well were he if he could hold his own, even that portion of maintenance,
which is allotted to him by the Word of God.

But I hope there cannot be found in this assembly, any one so sacrilegiously
affected. I have good reason to be persuaded much better of you all. Yet you,
as well affected as you are in this behalf, are to be admonished, that to
these exercises of our religion ye come willingly and joyfully. Willingly for
your own duties sake, and joyfully, because from hence you may carry home with
you a Jewel of an inualuable price, even the precious Word of God: wherein
quicquid docetur, veritas; quicquid praecipitur, bonitas; quicquid promittitur,
felicitas est, as Hugo lib. 3. de Anima speaks: Whatsoever is taught, its
truth; whatsoever is commanded, its goodness; whatsoever is promised, its
happiness. Nam Deus veritas est, sine fallacia; bonitas, sine malitia;
felicitas, sine miseria: for God is truth, without falsehood; goodness, without
malice; happiness, without misery.

O come ye then hither, as willingly for your duties sake, so also joyfully for
your profits sake. Willingly, and joyfully. It is somewhat, I grant, to come
hither, to this house of God to divine service; but to come willingly and
joyfully, it is a double virtue, and that which gives life unto your coming.
If you come unwillingly or grudgingly, if you be drawn hither, either for
shame of the world, or through fear of Law, you come as men more than half
dead, without either operation of the spirit, or desire of profit, or feeling
of comfort, or increase of faith, or bettering of obedience.

Wherefore, dearly Beloved, let your care be, ever willingly and joyfully to
present your selves in these Courts of the Lord, in his holy Temple. Be ye well
assured, that as he is accursed that does the work of the Lord negligently;
so is he also accursed that comes into the house of the Lord either
unwillingly or grudgingly, as if he were discouraged with the tediousness
either of the way, or of the word.

It is recorded of the people of God, Psalm. 84. that they traveling toward
the place of Gods worship, passed through many dangers, endured much heat,
suffered wants in the wilderness, and all for the delight they took in his
service. The delight that they took in the service of God, did swallow up all
their wants, their travel, their labor, and their pains. It made them say; A
day in thy courts is better than a thousand. And, I had rather be a
doore-keeper in the house of my God, than to dwell in the tents of wickedness.
A day in thy courts is better than a thousand.] A day] one day only, and no
more, in thy courts] in the courts of God, in his Temple, and the public
meetings and assemblies there, is better] is more sweet, more comfortable, more
profitable, than a thousand] elsewhere, yea, though the place be never so full
of pleasure. And, I had rather be a doore-keeper in the house of my God] I had
rather be of the meanest account in the Church, the place where my God, the
only true and everliving God is served; than to dwell in the tents of
wickednesse] than to make my abode in most stately and gorgeous Palaces,
wherein wickedness is practiced and professed. O! how amiable are thy
tabernacles, O Lord of hosts!

How excellent was this zeal of Gods people? how great their forwardness to
do him service? We would be accounted Gods people, as well as they. But where
is our zeal? Were ours as theirs was, certainly neither blasts of wind, nor
fear of rain, nor heat of Summer, nor cold of Winter, nor a Lion in the way,
nor any like trifle should stop us from coming to the house of God, his
Temple, the place where by his Ministers he speaks to his people.

Thus far by the occasion of my first observation, which was grounded upon
the second of those five expositions, whereof you heard in the beginning of
this exercise. My observation was: The Prophets of the Lord cannot forewarne us
of any judgments that shall befall us, except they be first agreed with God,
and God speak in them. I proceed.

A second application of this first similitude to the matter here intended by
the Holy Ghost, may be thus: As it cannot be, that two should walk together,
except they be agreed; So it cannot be that God should walk with Israel, for
as much as there is a disagreement between them. The time indeed was, when God
walked with Israel, and Israel with God. Then it was, when the people of Israel
were desirous to please God, to do his holy will, and to depend upon him. But
afterward, when rebelliously they forsook God, and applied themselves to the
service of false gods, it could not be, that God should any longer walk with
them, or they with God. This is the third of those five expositions, whereof
even now you heard. It was the exposition of Albertus, Rupertus, and Isidore;
and is embraced by later Expositors, by Franciscus Ribera, by Petrus Lusitanus,
by Oecolampadius, Danaeus, Gualter, Tremellius, and Iunius, and Piscator. The
observation is: When man through his evil courses leaves off to walk with
God, or forsakes him; then will God no longer walk with man, but will also
forsake him.

To walk with God is lovingly to adhere unto him, and to please him. So is the
phrase used in the Prophecy of Micah, Chap. 6.8. What does the Lord require of
thee, O man, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to humble thy self to
walk with thy God. To walk with thy God, that is, Jonathan translates it, to
walk in the worship and fear of God. Petrus Lusitanus says, it is to live
according to the Law and will of God. And this doubtless is to please God.

It is said of Enoch, Genesis 5.22, 24. that he walked with God. He walked with
God, that is, he pleased God. So does the Author of the Epistle to the
Hebrews expound the place, chap. 11.5. Enoch before his translation, had this
testimony, that he pleased God. The testimony which he had was, that he walked
with God; and therefore to walk with God, is to please God. Syracides in the
44. of his Ecclesiasticus, verse. 16. says to the same effect. Enoch pleased
the Lord, and was translated, being an example of repentance to all
generations. Enoch pleased the Lord, says Ecclesiasticus; in Genesis it is,
Enoch walked with God: and therefore to walk with God is to please God.
Onkelos says it is, to live in the fear of God; surely he that so lives
pleases God.

It is said of Noah, Genesis 6.9. that he walked with God: Noah was a just man,
perfect in his generations, and walked with God. He walked with God, What Is
that? He lived a solitary life, and professed Monkery? No: He left the
concourse of the world, and got him aside into some wilderness? Nor so. He
lead a single life, and therefore no marvel if he pleased God? Nor this. What
is it then, he walked with God? It is this: He served God, as was fit he
should, in his vocation; he lived piously, and without blame: he composed
himself, not to man's beck, to man's example, to man's applause, but wholly to
the holy Will of God: in a word, he led a life acceptable and pleasing unto
God; and so he walked with God.

That which God says to Abram, Genesis 17.1. Walk before me, and be thou
perfect, is all one, as if he had said, Walk with me, and be thou perfect. To
walk with God, or to walk before God, is all one. It is not Foris simulare
pietatem, hypocritarum more; it is not to make outwardly a show of piety, as
Hypocrites use to do; but it is Sincere Deo fidere; it is to trust in God
sincerely, to depend upon him wholly, to serve him alone, and to obey him
according to his will. Such are those servants of the Lord, of whom Solomon
speaks, 2 Chronicles. 6.14. that walk before the Lord with all their hearts. Such
are they that walk in the Law of God, Exodus 16.4. Such they, that walk after
the Lord their God, Deuteronomy. 13.4. where they are further described to fear the
Lord, to keep his Commandments, to obey his voice, to serve him, and to
cleave unto him. In the language of Canaan you see it is all one, to walk in
the Law of God, to walk before God, to walk after God, and to walk with God.
The Metaphore is very elegant: and may serve thus far to instruct us; that,
as when we walk, we stand not still, but are ever in motion, and do go
forward: so in the way of piety, in the course of godliness, when we walk
either in the Law of God, or after God, or before God, or with God, we are not
to stand still, but are ever to be in motion, in a spiritual motion, and to
go forward: to go forward, as Origin speaks in his twelfth Homily upon
Genesis, De vita ad vitam, de actu ad actum, de bonis ad meliora, de vtilibus
ad vtiliora, de sanctis ad sanctiora. Our going forward must be from life to
life, from action to action, from good to better, from profitable to more
profitable, from sanctified actions to more sanctified: and all this must be,
Non passibus pedum, sed mentis profectibus, not with the steps of our feet, but
with the profit of our understanding. Our motion in this our walk must be
perpetual. Hominis, qua Christianus est, proprium est, non quiescere: it is
the propriety of a man, as he is a Christian, not to be at quiet, not to rest,
not to stand still, not to be at a stay. For in Schola Christi non progredi est
regredi: in the School of Christ, not to go forward, is indeed to go
backward. Saint Bernard in his 341. Epistle thus expresses it; In the School
of Christ, Non proficere, sine dubio deficere est: not to proceed and profit,
without doubt it is to retire and to faint. And therefore let no man say, Satis
est, sic volo manner, sufficit mihi esse, sicut heri and nudius tertius: It is
enough for me; thus will I abide; its sufficient for me that I am as I was
yesterday and the day before. Let no man say thus with himself. In via
residet, qui huiusmodi est; he that is such a one sits him down in the way. He
goes not forward: he walks not, as he should, either in the Law of God, or
before God, or after God, or with God. Thus far has this Metaphor of walking
led me. Yet may I not leave it without giving some rule of it. The rule is:
Solet Scriptura verbo Ambulandi consensionem animorum explicare: it is the
custom of the Scripture, by this word of walking to express the agreement and
consent of minds.

It is the voice of wisdom to her son, Proverb. 1.15. My son, if sinners
shall say unto thee, Come with us, cast in thy lot among us, let us all have
one purse, Walk not thou in the way with them; refrain thy foot from their
path. Walk thou not in the way with them, that is, ne acquiescas eis, ne illis
assentiaris, yield not to them, agree not with them. This exposition is good by
that, verse. 10. My son, if sinners intise thee, consent thou not.

Syracides in his Ecclesiasticus, Chap. 7.38. according to the vulgar says,
Non de sit plorantibus in consolatione, and cum lugentibus ambula. Fail not to
be a comfort to them that weep, and walk with them that mourn. Walk with
them that mourn, that is, Idem sentito, quod illi, think as they think; Eo
animo esto, ac si tua essent illa mala: be thou affected, as if their losses
were thine.

The Psalmist, Psalm. 1.1. pronounces the man blessed, that walks not in the
counsel of the wicked. There is therefore a walking in the counsel of the
wicked. But what is it so to walk? To walk in the counsel of the wicked, is
to yield thine assent, to agree unto, to join thy self in naughty practices
with the wicked. Blessed is the man that so walks not.

Enough for the rule. The rule was: It is the custom of the Scripture by this
word of Walking to express the agreement and consent of minds. Its justified
by my Text: Can two walk together except they be agreed? and may conclude the
truth of my observation: When man through his evil courses leaves off to
walk with God, then will God no longer walk with him. When man forsakes God,
then will God also forsake him.

Then, and not before. The ancient Fathers are frequent in auowing this truth.
Saint Augustine in his book, De bono Perseuerantiae, cap. 6. gives it for
granted; Voluntate sua quemque deserere Deum, vt merito deseratur a Deo; that a
man of his own will first forsakes God, that God may well forsake him. The
same Father in his 88. Sermon De Tempore, exhorts his then Auditors, faithfully
and firmly to believe, that God never forsakes man, nisi prius deseratur ab
homine, unless he be first forsaken of man. In his Soliloquies, cap. 14. he
brings in the soul in her private talk with God acknowledging as much:
Quocunque iero, tu me Domine non deseris, nisi prior ego te deseram: O my Lord,
go I whither I will, thou will never forsake me, unless I forsake thee first.

To this purpose writes Saint Prosper in his answer to the objections of the
French, his sentence upon the seventh objection: Although the omnipotency of
God could have given to them that would fall, strength to stand, Gratia tamen
eius non prius eos deseruit, quam ab eis desereretur; Yet did not God forsake
them, before he was forsaken of them.

Saint Bernard in his deuoutest Meditations, cap. 7. speaks home to this
point. God! fidelis socius est, he is a faithful companion; nec deserit
sperantes in se, nisi ipse prior deseratur, and forsakes not them that trust in
him, unless he be first forsaken of them.

Neither the time, nor your patience will suffer me to allege, what Hom. 4. in
1. cap. ad Romans
Chrysostom, what Hom. 4. Qui deficiunt a Deo, ab eo deseruntur.
Macarius, what others of the ancient have in their books delivered concerning
the point in hand. Sufficient has been said already, not only for the
confirmation, but also for the illustration of my second observation; which
was, When man, through his evil courses, leaves off to walk with God, then
will God no longer walk with him. When man forsakes God, then will God also
forsake him.

But why is it thus? Why is it, that man first leaves off to walk with God,
ere God leaves off to walk with man? Why is it, that man first forsakes God,
ere God forsake him?

The reason hereof may be taken from the promise of God. His promise is to
Joshua, chap. 1.5. I will not leave thee nor forsake thee. Not to Ioshuah alone
is this promise made, but to all; to all the godly. The Author of the Epistle
to the Hebrews so applies it, chap. 13.5. I will never leave thee nor forsake
thee. He brings it for a motive against Covetousness; against the insatiable
greediness after the Mammon of this world, which is to many their delight,
their love, their solace, and to some their God. Let your conversation be
without Covetousness, and be content with such things as you have. For he
has said, God has said it, I will never leave it, I will never leave thee nor
forsake thee. God is ever as good as his word. He has said it, I will never
leave thee nor forsake thee. Nor will he. Look what care he had of Ioshuah,
the like he has of all that trust in him. He will never leave them, he will
not forsake them. If they leave God, if they leave off to walk with him, if
they forsake him, so it is: the fault is their own, God is no way to be
blamed.

Now lets make some use of my second observation: I can but point at it.

If it be thus, Beloved. If God leaves not off to walk with us, till we leave
off to walk with him; if he forsake not us, till we forsake him: O then let
it be our care, never to leave off to walk with him, never to forsake him. Our
sins they are, that break off our walk with God, and cause us to forsake
him. To what purpose make we a show of walking with him, of delighting in him,
if in the mean time we hold fast by those funes peccatorum of Prou. 5.22.
Solomon, the cords of sin, those vincula plaustri of Cap. 5.18.
Esaias, the Cartropes of sin, and so drive God from us? If by our sins, our
drunkenness, our luxury, our uncleanness, our covetousness, our oppression,
our uncharitableness, and other our sins no less odious, which indeed are
the very diet and dainties of the Devil, we feast the foul fiends of Hell,
we drive God from us. He can no longer walk with us, he cannot but forsake us.

What shall we then do, Beloved? What? Certainly, Ne Deum moueamus, vt nos
deserat, opus est vt inter nos and ipsum conueniat: that we cause not God to
forsake us, there must be between him and us an agreement. Agreement there
can be none, if we go on still to provoke him with our impieties. Wherefore
that there may be between us an agreement, tread we the way scored out unto
us by Saint Paul, Titus the second Chapter and the twelfth Verse, which is,
that, denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we live for the time to come
soberly, righteously, and godlily in this present world, looking for that
blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God, and our Savior
Jesus Christ. So doing, we shall be at agreement with God and walk with him.

But here, Beloved, Magna custodia tibi necessaria est, as Bernard speaks in
the sixth Chapter of his Meditations: Its necessary that thou keep a diligent
watch and ward over thy self, that thou neither do, nor say, nor think any
thing that is unlawful, and may offend. For thou live before the eyes of the
Judge that sees all things. Cum illo tamen semper et securus, yet with him,
with so all-seeing a Judge, thou art secure and safe, if thou so behave thy
self, that he may vouchsafe to be with thee. What said I? So behave thy
self that he may vouchsafe to be with thee? Nay howeuer thou behave thy
self, he will not fail to be with thee. Si tecum non est per gratiam,
ad-est per vindictam; if he be not with thee by his gracious favor, he will
assuredly be with thee in vengeance, to pay thee home for thy mis-doings. Sed
vae tibi, si ita tecum est: but woe is thee, if he be so with thee.

What then remains for thee, for me, for every one of us, but that we all
endeavor so to spend the residue of the days of our pilgrimage here in this
life, in all righteousness and true holiness, that God, our good God, be not
at any time provoked to be with us, per vindictam, by his vengeance, who is
ever most willing to be with us per gratiam, by his gracious favor. So having
finished our course here, in this mortality, we shall be advanced to a state
immortal in the Paradise of Heaven, where we shall with all Saints sing
perpetually Hallelujah, Salvation, and Honor, and Glory, and Power, unto the
Lord our God. To this state immortal, the immortal, invisible, and only wise
God vouchsafe to bring us all, for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

THE Fourth Lecture.
AMOS 3.4. Will a Lion roar in the Forest, when he has no prey? Will a young
Lion cry out of his den, if he have taken nothing?


THat a people, chosen by God himself to be his peculiar, above all the
Nations upon the earth, honored with many singular and super-eminent
privileges, advanced to the custody of Gods holiest Oracles, should be so
stif-necked, so uncircumcised of hearts and ears, so disobedient, so
rebellious, as to set at naught the threatenings of the Lord, to account them
vain, to esteem of them as of sports, could it ever be imagined? Yet thus
stood the case with the people of the ten Tribes, the children of Israel, with
whom this our Prophet Amos was to deal.

Amos, to meet with such their gross stupidity, and to reform their erroneous
conceits of those fearful threatenings, which the Almighty by the mouth of his
holy Prophets uses to give forth against sinners and wicked men, instructs
them by similitudes. The similitudes which here he brings, are in number six.
They are all taken from vulgar experience, and such as is incident to a
Shepherds walk. Of the first, taken from wayfaring men, from two travelers
upon the way, I spoke in my last exercise, occasioned thereunto by the third
verse of this Chapter.

This fourth verse, now read unto you, will yield us two other, taken from the
custom of Lions, old and young. From the custom of the old Lion in these
words; Will a Lion roar in the forest, when he has no prey? From the custom
of the young Lion, in these; Will a young Lion cry out of his den, if he have
taken nothing at all? Of both in their order: and first of the old Lion.

Will a Lion roar in the forest, when he has no prey?] The answer should be
negative; No; he will not. Will he not? It seems he will. Else how may that
be understood which is spoken of our adversary, the Devil, 1 Pet. 5.8. that
he, as a roaring Lion walks about, seeking whom he may devour? There it
seems the Lion roareth before he have his prey. That he does so, many of the
Ancient have affirmed it. Its affirmed by R. David, he says; When the beasts
of the forest hear the Lions voice, they by and by through fear stand still,
and the Lion takes for his prey, which of them he will. So says Lyra; Ad
rugitum Leonis praeda sequitur; the Lion roareth, and then he takes his prey.
So Dionysius the Carthusian; Leo cum famem patitur, mox vt bestiam viderit,
rugitum dat, quo audito territa bestia gradum figit, and capitur. The Lion,
says he, when he is hungry, if he see a beast, roareth: the beast, terrified
with the Lions voice, stands still and is taken. Saint Basil says as much for
substance. His words are in his ninth Homily upon the Hexaemeron: Nature has
bestowed upon the Lion, such organs or instruments for his voice, that
oftentimes beasts far swifter than the Lion are taken, (...), only by the
roaring of the Lion. The Lion roares; the beast stoopes, and is taken.

Saint Cyril likewise, he that was Archbishop of Alexandria, he has the like
observation, and he takes it from those, who with much curiosity and diligence
have sought into the nature of wild beasts. The observation is, that the hungry
Lion, espying some beast fit for his food, through his hideous and uncouth
roaring seizes upon it for his prey. Now if a Lion will roar before he have
taken his prey, as by the now produced authorities it seems he will, to what
end serves this interrogation, Will a Lion roar in the forest, when he has
no prey?

I must answer as I did out of Carthusian to the former similitude, that Amos
here speaks, secundum communem cursum, according to the common course, and
communiter verum esse, that its commonly true that a Lion will not roar in the
forest, when he has no prey. Commonly it is true, yet not ever so. Mercerus
has a Solet to express the meaning with: Will a Lion roar in the forest,
when he has no prey? Non solet haud dubie; Without doubt he uses not so to
do. Drusius has likewise a Solent for the saluing of this question; Leones
non solent rugire, nisi praedam ceperint, capturine sint; Lions, they use not
to roar, unless they have taken some prey, or are ready to take it. They use
it not, though it may be sometime they do it.

But why will a Lion roar when he has gotten his prey? Should he not then
rather be quiet, and fall to the devouring of his prey? Plutarch in a treatise
of his, concerning this question, Which creatures have more reason, they that
live on the earth, or they that in the water? thus speaks of the Lion: The
Lion, when he has gotten a prey uses to roar, thereby to call his
fellow-lions to be his partakers in the prey. But I will not now diue into the
secrets of nature. Why the Lion roareth when he has his prey, it much skilleth
not: it is plain, he roareth.

It is plain by the 22. Psalm, where David complaining of the cruelty of his
enemies under the name of the Bulls of Bashan, says of them, verse. 13. They
gaped upon me with their mouths, as a ravening and a roaring Lion. It is
likewise plain by the 31. of Esaias. At the fourth verse of that Chapter, you
may see the Lion roaring on his prey. In the 22. of Ezechiel, verse 25. you may
behold in Jerusalem a conspiracy of Prophets like a roaring Lion, ravening the
prey. Well then is it demanded by Amos in my Text, Will a Lion roar in the
forest, when he has no prey? Thus far of the old Lion. It follows of the
young.

Will a young Lion cry out of his den, if he have taken nothing?

This young Lion in the original is (...) Chephir, Leo-iuuenis, ^unculus; in
the Septuagint, he is (...): in the Vulgar, Catulus Leonis, the Lions whelpe.
The property of this young Lion or Lions whelpe is, to lie close in his den
without making any noise at all, till such time as the old Lion brings him a
booty for his food; then does this whelpe rouse up himself, gives forth his
voice, cries and roareth. It is Saint Cyrils observation. Petrus Lusitanus
likes it well. He thus delivers it: Leunculus in latibulo suo jaceus, tacet;
The Lions whelpe couching in his den makes no noise: at vbi praedam a Leone
adductam ceperit, tunc vocem dat, and exultat; but when he has taken his prey,
brought unto him by the old Lion, then for joy he leapeth, then he gives forth
his voice, cries and roareth.

Now to the question, as it is made by Tauerner, Cries a Lions whelpe out of
his den, except he have gotten some thing? or as it is in our newest English,
Will a young Lion cry, or give forth his voice out of his den, if he have taken
nothing? My answer must be, as it was to that of the old Lion, and out of
Mercer too, Non solet haud dubie, Out of doubt, the young Lion, or Lions whelpe
uses not, as he lies in his den, to give forth his voice, to cry or roar
except he have gotten somewhat. He uses not so to do.

Some Expositors there are, that will have these two branches of the Lion, and
the Lions whelpe to be all one; and the latter to be but a repetition of the
former, mutatis verbis, in other words. So R. David, and Lyranus. But Saint
Cyril is of opinion, they are not all one, but are different; So is Saint
Hierome. So R. Abraham. So Albertus, Rupertus, Carthusian, and others: and with
these accords our present exposition.

The exposition thus given, descend we to the application, that we may
understand what this Lion is, and what the Lions whelpe.

Will a Lion roar in the forest, when he has no prey? The Lion is God, the
forest the world, the prey of the Lion the people of the world, the roaring of
the Lion Gods threatenings by his Prophets. You may thus apply it: As a Lion
will not roar in the forest, unless he have a prey; So neither will God by
his Prophets threaten any evil, unless he be thereunto urged by the sins
of the people. Such commonly is the application of this second similitude.

With Rupertus likewise this Lion is God; but the Lions prey is omnis electus,
every one of the Elect: who, wheresoever he be, because he is predestinate unto
life, ab ipso Deo requiritur, is sought for of God himself, that at his voice,
whether it be uttered by an Angel, or by a Prophet, or by the Scriptures, he
may tremble, may be humbled, may repent him of his sins, and be saved. The
application which he makes is after this manner: Nunquid rugiet Leo in saltu,
nisi habuerit praedam? Will a Lion roar in the forest, unless he has a prey?
Idem est, ac si dicet, It is as if he said, Is it worthy of God, there to
speak, or thither to send a Prophet, where he knows there is none worthy of
eternal life? Is it seemly, is it any way fit, that God should there utter
his voice, or send his Messengers thither, where he knows, there is not any
one ordained unto salvation? By all congruity of reason the answer must be
negative; No, its altogether unseemly; its not any way fit. The Lion in the
forest roares not, unless he have his prey. This exposition of Rupertus is by
Ribera mentioned with some approbation: but Petrus a Figueiro says, it is
nimis violenta, too violent, too far fetched. And well may it be so.

Arias Montanus by this Lion, and Lions whelpe, understands Sennacherib and
Nabuchodonozor, two Assyrian Kings, two mighty enemies to the state of the
Kingdom of Judah. According to him thus must the application be: As a prey,
that is between the Lions teeth, or within his paws, cannot escape away; so
shall not the people of Judah escape from out the hands of Sennacherib, or
Nabuchodonozor. But this application of his is not so fit for this place,
because whatsoever is here spoken, it is spoken not to the people of Judah, but
to the people of the ten Tribes.

If great Albert must be followed, this Lion must be vel Deus comminans, vel
melius inimi us inuadens, vel homo, vel Diabolus. This Lion must be either God
threatening, or rather some enemy inuading, be he man or Devil.

The Devil must be this Lion in the construction of diverse, as Carthusian has
observed, for as much as the Devil like a roaring Lion walks about seeking
whom he may devour, Semperque sitit animarum damnationem, and rugit vt eas
deglutiat, and ever thirsts of the damnation of the souls of men, and
roareth that he may swallow them up. I may not deny, but that the Devil for
his extreme fierceness and cruelty joined with force and hurt to annoy
mankind, is by Saint Peter likened to a Lion, to a roaring Lion; yet I cannot
think that he is the Lion in my Text; no, though this in my Text be a roaring
Lion.

But may not some man, an enemy, a tyrant, an oppressor, one or more, be meant
by this Lion, this roaring Lion in my Text? Its not to be doubted, but that
such are diverse times in the holy Scriptures compared to Lions. The wicked man,
who is evermore an enemy to the godly, is likened to a Lion, Psalm. 10.9. He
lies in wait secretly as a Lion in his den; he lies in wait to catch the
poor. David's enemies are as Lions; He so speaks of them, Psalm. 22.13. They
gaped upon me with their mouths, as a ravening and a roaring Lion. Tyrants
and oppressors of the Church are as Lions. Such a one was Nero, Saint Paul
calls him a Lion, 2 Timothy 4.17. I was, says he, delivered out of the mouth of
the Lion. The Lion, not the Devil, as Ambrose says; nor Festus the President
of Iudaea, as Primasius affirms: but Nero, proud and cruel Nero, persecuting
Nero, as its expounded by Chrysostom, Theodoret, Theophylact, Oecumenius,
Aquinas, and Eusebius, Hist. Eccles. lib. 2. cap. 22. Be it then granted, that
Men, enemies to the godly, Tyrants and oppressors are in holy Scripture
sometimes compared to Lions; yet can it not thence be inferred, that therefore
by this roaring Lion in my Text, Men are to be understood.

It remains then, that God either solely or principally be here intended. Sic
communiter omnes intelligunt, says Christophorus a Castre. So do all
Expositors commonly understand this Text: that God should be this Lion. And not
only the old Lion, but the young one too. God is compared to both, as well to
the young Lion as to the old. To both he is compared, Hos. 5.14. There thus
says the Lord: I will be unto Ephraim as a Lion, and as a young Lion to the
house of Judah. I, even I will tear and go away: I will take away, and none
shall rescue him. So likewise, Esaias 31.4. Thus has the Lord spoken: Like as
the Lion and the young Lion roaring on his prey, when a multitude of Shepherds
is called forth against him, he will not be afraid of their voice, nor abase
himself for the noise of them: so shall the Lord of hosts come down to fight
for mount Sion and for the hill thereof. In both places you see, God is
compared not only to the old Lion, but to the young one too, to the Lions
whelpe. So is he here in this Text of mine. Now the meaning is; As a Lion will
not roar in the forest, except he has a prey, nor the young Lion cry out of
his den, except he has gotten somewhat: No more will Almighty God roar from
Sion, or utter his voice from Jerusalem, except there be a prey ready for him:
He will not by his Prophets and Ministers give forth his threatenings, except
there be just cause for him, to be avenged upon a people for their sins. My
observation is: If by our sins we provoke Gods wrath against us, we shall
find that his threatening of us will not be in vain.

The threatenings of God, they are not vana dunt axat puerorum simplicisque
rusticitatis terricula, as Quadratus has well noted, they are not only as
scar-crowes or bugs for the terrifying of little children and the ruder sort of
people; but are certain evidences of Gods resolution for the punishment of
sin. Never are they in vain.

Of two sorts they are: for either they concern a spiritual and eternal
punishment; or a punishment, that is temporary and corporal.

Of the first sort is that commination, Deuteronomy. 27.26. Cursed be he that
confirms not all the words of this Law to do them. The punishment there
threatened is spiritual, it is eternal. Saint Paul so expounds it, Gal. 3.10.
where he says: As many as are of the works of the Law, are under the curse:
for it is written, Cursed is every one that continues not in all things which
are written in the Book of the Law to do them. The curse there spoken of is
no temporal, no corporal matter, it is spiritual, it is eternal. The reason
is, because the curse is opposed to the blessing. Now to be blessed with
faithful Abraham, is to be justified, to be absolved from sin and death, to
be in favor with God, to obtain eternal salvation, and therefore to be
accursed, is to be condemned for sin, to be cast out from God, to be adjudged
to everlasting death and Hell. The blessing is spiritual and eternal, and
therefore must the curse also be spiritual and eternal.

Comminations of the second sort are in holy Writ more frequent and obuious. If
you will not hearken to the Lord your God to do his Commandments, but will
despite his statutes and abhor his judgments, then will the Lord do thus
and thus unto you. In the 26. of Leuit. verse. 16. he will visit you with
vexations, consumptions, and burning agues, that shall consume your eyes, and
cause you sorrow of heart. Verse. 17. he will set his face against you, and ye
shall be slain before your enemies: they that hate you shall reign over you,
and ye shall flee when none pursues you. Verse. 19. He will break the pride
of your power, and will make your Heaven as iron, and your Earth as brass: and
your strength shall be spent in vain; for, neither shall your land yield her
increase, nor your trees their fruits. Verse. 22. He will send wild beasts
among you which shall rob you of your children, and destroy your cattle, and
make you few in number. These and other like threatenings against the wilful
contemners of Gods holy Will you may better read of in the now alleged 26.
Chapter of Leuiticus, and 28. Chapter of Deuteronomy, and other places of holy
Scripture, than I can at this time stand upon to relate them. They are many:
they are fearful. Many and fearful are the punishments, though but
temporary and corporal, which the Lord threatens to the wilful contemners of
his holy Will.

Thus you see, Gods threatenings are of two sorts; either of spiritual and
eternal punishments, or punishments that are temporary and corporal. These
threatenings of punishments, corporal or spiritual, temporary or eternal, are
by the Lord himself accomplished at times certain and unchangeable.

When the old world in the days of Noah had grown to much impiety and
wickedness, the Lord appointed a certain space, the space of 120. years for
their repentance and conversion, Genesis 6.3. My spirit shall not always strive
with man, for that he also is flesh: yet his days shall be an hundred and
twenty years. Though he saw, that the wickedness of man was great in the
earth, and that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was evil, was
only evil, was evil continually, so that with great justice he might
forthwith have swallowed them up with a flood, yet would he not, but would yet
forbear longer, and look for their amendment. A hundred and twenty years yet
would he give them, to see if they would return and avoid his wrath. But they
would not return, and therefore at the very end and term of those hundred and
twenty years he brought the flood upon them. Then, then, and not before, he
brought the flood upon them. For compare we the particular circumstances of
time noted, Genesis 7.3, 6, 11. with that which Saint Peter writes in his first
Epistle, chap. 3.20. we shall find, that the inundation of waters came upon
the earth at the very point of time before determined.

Memorable is that commination of the Lord against the Jews, Ierem. 25.11.
Because you have not heard my voice, behold I will take from you the voice of
mirth, and the voice of gladness, the voice of the bridegroom, and the voice
of the bride, the sound of the Milstones, and the light of the candle: you
shall be a desolation, and an astonishment, and shall serve the King of Babylon
seventy years. The sum of the Commination is, that the Jews for their sins
should be led captive, and serve the King of Babylon seventy years. Now if we
take the just computation of time, it will appear that so soon as those
years, those seventy years were expired, the foresaid threat was
accomplished. And therefore Daniel alluding to this prophecy of Jeremy,
exactly sets it down, Chap. 5.30. saying, The same night was Belshazzar
King of the Chaldeans slain, the same night, the very night wherein those
seventy years came to their full period, was Belshazzar King of the Chaldeans
slain.

To these fearful examples of Noah's flood, and the carrying away of the Jews
into Babylon, may be added the burning of Sodom by fire and brimstone, the
destruction of the ten Tribes, the ruin of Jerusalem, and the Kingdom of
Judah, the desolation of the seven Churches of Asia; all which, besides many
other calamities upon many other places, and persons, accomplished and come to
pass according to the threatenings of the Lord, may well assure us, that
whatsoever he has threatened, will certainly take effect. And certainly, if we
by serious and true repentance do not prevent the execution of his threats, he
will not fail to prevent us, and take us away suddenly. Thus is my observation
made good; If by our sins we provoke Gods wrath against us, we shall find
that his threatening of us will not be in vain.

No, it will not. If God threaten, and no repentance follows, then certainly
the threatenings pronounced will come to pass. He threatens not in vain; he
terrifies not without cause; no more than the Lion roareth when he has no
prey, or the Lions whelpe cries out of his den if he have gotten nothing.

Is it thus, Beloved? Shall we find that Gods threatenings will be effectual
and powerful against us, if we by our sins go on still to provoke him to
displeasure? It seems then, that if we repent us of our sins, and cease any
further to grieve Gods holy Spirit, his threatenings will be vain and without
effect. Understand we therefore, that the threatenings and denuntiations of
Gods judgments are either absolute or conditional. If absolute, then are they
irreuocable, and must take effect: but if conditional, then upon humiliation
and repentance they will be changed, they will be altered.

Absolute was the denunciation that concerned the eating of the forbidden
fruit, Genesis 2.17. In the day that thou eatest thereof thou shall surely die.
This threatening was absolute and peremptory, not to be revoked. If Adam had
prayed all his life long that he might not die, but return to his former
condition, yet the sentence of God had not been reuersed.

Peremptory and absolute was that threatening of the Lord against Moses and
Aaron, Numb. 20.12. Because ye believe me not to sanctify me in the eyes of
the children of Israel, therefore ye shall not bring this congregation into the
land which I have given them. Moses and Aaron, both are threatened that they
shall never enter into the land of Canaan. Moses understanding the threat
conditionally, besought the Lord that he might go over Jordan into that good
land. But the Lord was wroth with him, and would not hear him; but said unto
him, Deuteronomy. 3.26. Let it suffice thee, speak no more unto me of this matter.
Speak no more: the sentence was peremptory and might not be reuersed.

As absolute and peremptory was that threatening by Nathan from the Lord unto
David, 2. Sam. 12.14. Because by thine adultery thou have given great occasion
to the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme, the child also that is borne unto
thee shall surely dye. The child shall surely die. David's hope was, that this
threat was but conditional, and therefore with fasting, weeping, and prayer he
besought God for the child, and said; Who can tell whether God will be gracious
unto me, that the child may live? Yet, as the Prophet had denounced, the child
died. So peremptory was the sentence, and not to be reuersed. So then its
evident, that some of Gods judgments denounced against the sons of men are
absolute and peremptory, not to be reuersed.

Others are conditional, to be understood with this exception, except they
repent and amend. The condition is sometimes expressed; sometimes it is not.
The condition is expressed, Ierem. 18.7, 8. At what instant I shall speak
concerning a nation, and concerning a Kingdom, to pluck up and to pull down,
and to destroy it: If that Nation against whom I have pronounced, turn from
their evil, I will repent of the evil that I thought to do unto them. It is
likewise expressed, Ezech. 33.14, 15. When I say unto the wicked, Thou shall
surely die; if he turn from his sin, and do that which is lawful and
right, he shall surely live, he shall not die. Each of these Comminations is
with an express condition. The first was: Such a Nation, such a Kingdom, I
will pluck up, I will pull down, I will destroy. The Nation, the Kingdom
performs the condition; repents and turns from evil, and God reuerseth his
sentence; I will not pluck up, I will not pull down, I will not destroy it.
The second was; The wicked man shall surely die. The wicked man performs the
condition, repents, and turns from evil, and God reuerseth his sentence; He
shall surely live, he shall not di^.

Sometimes the condition is not expressed, but only to be understood. So is
it, Ierem. 26.18. There we read of Micah the Morushite, that he in the days
of Hezekiah King of Judah, prophesied and spoke to all the people of Judah
saying, Thus says the Lord of hosts; Zion shall be plowed like a field, and
Jerusalem shall become heaps, and the mountain of the house, the high places
of a forest. Fearful is the Commination; it threatens ruin to their Temple,
desolation to their City, the utter overthrow of their whole Kingdom. How did
the King and his people hereupon behave themselves? Did they fall into
desperation? No, they did not. Did they conclude an impossibility of obtaining
pardon? Nor did they so. How then? They conceiving aright of the commination,
as fearful as it was, that it was unto them a Sermon of repentance, they
feared the Lord, they besought the Lord: and the Lord repented him of the evil
which he had pronounced against them. So was the Commination conditional,
though the condition was not expressed.

The like we meet with, Esaias 38.1. There is a comminatory message from the Lord
unto the but-now-named Hezekiah; Set thine house in order, for thou shall die
and not live. The good King conceiues aright of the message, that it was no
otherwise unto him, than as a Sermon of repentance; and therefore he turns his
face unto the wall, prays, and weeps sorely: and the Lord repented him of the
message he had sent; and sends him a new message, verse. 5. Go and say to
Hezekiah: Thus says the Lord, the God of David thy father; I have heard thy
prayer, I have seen thy tears: behold, I will add unto thy days fifteen
years. And so was the commination conditional, though the condition was not
expressed.

And such is that in the Prophecy of Jonah, Chap. 3.4. Yet forty days, and
Nineueh shall be overthrown. The King of Nineueh, though an heathen and an
idolatrous King, yet conceiues aright of this threat, that it was to him and
his people, no otherwise than a Sermon of repentance. The King therefore
touched with repentance, vnseateth himself, vnthroneth himself, comes as
low as the meanest, strips himself of his kingly robes, puts on sackcloth,
sits in ashes; causes it to be proclaimed and published through Nineveh, that
there be a general fast kept by man and beast, that man and beast be covered
with sackcloth, and cry mightily unto God, and turn every one from his evil
way, and from the violence that is in their hands: for, says the King, Who can
tell, if God will turn and repent, and turn away from his fierce anger, that
we perish not? Who can tell? And God saw their works, that they turned from
their evil way, and God repented of the evil that he had said that he would
do unto them, and he did it not. So also was this commination conditional,
though the condition was not expressed.

But why are these and many other threatenings of the Lord against sinners
conditional? Why are they with condition of amendment? Why is the condition
either expressed, or suppressed and only inclusiuely understood?

Its thus, First, because Repentance, if it follow after Gods comminatory
sentence pronounced against sinners, it procures forgiveness of sin, and
takes away the cause of punishment. The cause of punishment is sin; remove
the cause, and the effect must cease. Let sin be washed away with the tears
of unfeigned repentance, and punishment shall never hurt us. This is it, which
but even now you heard out of Ezech. chap. 33.14.15. They were the words of the
Lord; When I say unto the wicked, Thou shall surely die, if he turn from his
sin, and do that which is lawful and right; if he restore the pledge, and
give again that he has robbed, and walk in the statutes of life without
committing iniquity, he shall surely live, he shall not die.

Secondly, the threatenings of God against sinners are for the most part
conditional, because he is a God of mercies, a gracious Psalm. 86.15. Exodus
34.6. Numb 14.18. Psalm 103.8. Psalm. 145.8.
God, a God of long suffering, and much patience, a God of unspeakable
kindness, ever ready to receive us to mercy, as soon as we return unto him.
This is it that the Lord commands to be proclaimed by Jeremy, chap. 3.12.
Return thou backsliding Israel, says the Lord, and I will not cause mine
anger to fall upon you, for I am merciful, says the Lord, and I will not
keep mine anger for ever.

Thirdly, the threatenings of God against sinners are evermore conditional,
because in his threatenings God aims not at the destruction of them that are
threatened, but at their amendment. Their amendment is the thing he aims at.
Its plain by that, Ezech. 18.23. Have I any pleasure at all, that the wicked
should die, says the Lord God? and not, that he should return from his ways
and live? This by way of question. But its out of question and confirmed by
oath, Ezech. 23.11. As I live, says the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the
death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way and live: turn ye,
turn ye from your evil ways, for why will ye die, O house of Israel? Why
will ye die? Return and live, I take no pleasure in your death.

Hitherto you have heard of Gods threatenings, that they are of punishments
either corporal or spiritual; either temporal or eternal: and that they are
either absolute or conditional; and if conditional, that then the condition
is either expressed or only understood; Expressed or understood, and that for
three reasons: first, because repentance washes away sin, the cause of
punishment: secondly, because God is merciful, and will not keep his wrath
for ever: thirdly, because he aims especially at the amendment of the wicked.
It is now time that we make some profitable use hereof.

Our first use may be, to consider that in the greatest and most fearful
threatenings of Gods heavy judgments there is comfort remaining, hope of grace
and mercy to be found, life in death, and health in sickness, if we repent and
amend. Thus did the Princes of Judah profit by the threatenings of Jeremy.
Jeremy, chap. 26.6. comes unto them with a threatening from the Lords own
mouth: I will make this house like Shiloh, and will make this city a curse to
all the nations of the earth. He threatened desolation to the Lords house, and
destruction to their city: and therefore the Priests and the people would have
put him to death. But the Princes of Judah were better advised: they pleaded
the practice and example of King Hezekiah for the comfort of himself and the
people of his time; and thereby stirred up themselves to fear the Lord, and to
turn from their evil ways. And thus did the same King Hezekiah profit at the
threatening of Esaias, and the King of Nineueh at the threatening of Jonah, as you
have already heard. They repented of their evil ways, and God repented of the
evils which he threatened to bring upon them; and he brought them not upon them.

Here we are to meet with an objection. The objection is: If God threaten one
thing, and does another, if he threaten to bring evil upon any one, and
repents him of the evil, it may seem his will is changeable, or he has two
wills.

For answer I say, The will of God is ever one and the same, as God is one: but
for our capacities and for the weakness of our understandings, who cannot
conceive how God does after a diverse manner will and not will the same thing;
the will of God is called sometimes secret or hidden, and sometimes revealed,
as the Church is called sometimes visible, and sometimes invisible, yet is but
one Church. Deuteronomy. 29.29.
The secret will of God is of things hidden in himself, and not manifested in
his word: the revealed is of things made known in the Scriptures, or by daily
experience. The secret will is without condition; its absolute, its peremptory,
its always fulfilled; no man hinders it, Romans 9.19.
no man stops it: the very reprobate, yea the Devils themselves are subject
unto it. His revealed will is with condition; and therefore for the most part
is joined with exhortation, admonition, instruction, and reprehension. Now to
the objection, my answer is: Though God threaten one thing and does another,
though he threaten to bring evil upon any one, and repents him of the evil,
yet is not his will therefore changeable, nor has he two wills: but his will is
ever one and the same. The same will is in diverse respects hidden and revealed:
Its secret at first before it be revealed: but as it is made known to us
either by the written Word of God, or by the continual success of things, so
it is called the revealed will of God. Our duty in regard of the will of God,
as it is secret or hidden, is not curiously to pry into it, but reverently to
adore it. Whatsoever this secret, this hidden will of God is concerning us,
whether to live or die, to be rich or poor, to be of high estimation or of
mean account in this world, it is our part to rest in the same, and to be
contented, and give leave to him that made us to do with us and dispose of us
at his pleasure; and then aftewards, when by the continual success of things
it shall be revealed unto us, what our lot, our portion, our expectation here
must be; much more are we to be therewith contented, and to give thanks to
God, howsoever it fares with us.

The objection thus answered, our recourse should be to the profit, that is yet
further to be made by the threatenings of Gods judgments. You have heard that
in the greatest and most fearful, there is comfort remaining, hope of grace
and mercy to be found; health in sickness, and life in death, if we repent and
amend. I proceed to a second use.

It concerns the duty of the Minister. Its our duty to propound unto you the
threatenings of the Lord with condition. Should we propound them without
condition, we should be, as if we went about to bring you to despair, and to
take from you all hope of mercy and forgiveness. We therefore propound them
with condition, with condition of repentance and amendment of life: and do
offer unto you grace and mercy, to as many of you as be humble and
brokenhearted. Thus we preach not only the Law, but also with the Law the
Gospel: thus we bind and loose, Mat. 16.19.
thus we retain and forgive sins. We preach, and by our preaching we shut up
the Kingdom of Heaven against the obstinate sinner, but do open the same to
every one that is truly penitent. The third follows.

It concerns you, You Beloved, you and every one that has this grace and
favor with God, to be a hearer of his holy Word. Its your duty whenever you
hear the threatenings of Gods judgments against sinners, to stir up your
selves to repentance and to the amendment of your lives. So shall you prevent
his wrath and stay his judgments. O! take heed beloved, that you rush not on,
as the horse in the day of battle, to your own destruction. If the Lord God
from out of Sion shall roar, as a Lion roareth in the forest when he has
taken a prey; if he shall utter his voice from Jerusalem, as a young Lion
couching in his den, cries out when he has gotten somewhat; will it not
then be too late for us to return unto him? Never is it too late to return to
God, so it be done truly, seriously, and from the ground of the heart. But this
be we well assured of, that if there be no change in us, it will be in vain
for us to look for a change from God. Its certain, God will never change his
threatenings, except we change our lives and conuersations.

Wherefore (dearly beloved) suffer we a word of exhortation for conclusion of
all. I will deliver it in the Lords own words, his words to Israel in Jeremy
chap. 4.1, 4. If thou will return, says the Lord, return unto me: and if
thou will put away thine abominations out of my sight, then shall thou not
remove. Circumcise your selves to the Lord, and take away the fore-skinnes of
your hearts, lest my fury come forth like fire, and burn that none can quench
it, because of the evil of your doings. Wash thine heart from wickedness,
that thou may be saved; how long shall thy vain thought lodge within thee?

O come, see and taste, how good and gracious the Lord is unto us, how
seriously he exhorts us, how sweetly he inuiteth us to turn unto him, how
lovingly he calls us to repent, and amend our lives that we may be saved.
Beloved, nothing is wanting, but what is wanting on our parts: and that is the
real performance of true and unfeigned repentance through a lively faith in
Christ Jesus: Concerning which let me give you a rule, a rule that is grounded
and infallible; Without repentance there is no salvation, without sorrow for
sin there is no repentance; without earnest prayer there is no sorrow, no
godly sorrow, and without a due feeling of the Lords wrath, there is no prayer
that can pierce the sky or move the Lord. O therefore let us pray for
repentance, let us sue for repentance, let us work for repentance, let us
bestow all we have upon repentance. All we have! Its nothing to thee, O Lord.
We feel, O Lord, such a benummednesse in our hearts, such a dullness in our
souls, that albeit we see our sins, and know them to be exceeding great, yet
cannot we so bemone them, so lament them, so grieve at them, so detest them as
we should. Smite, O gracious God, smite we beseech thee, our flinty hearts,
make them even to melt within us at the sight of our own transgressions, that
so being cleansed from the filthiness of sin, we may grow up unto full
holiness in thy fear through Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior.

THE Fifth Lecture.
AMOS 3.5. Can a bird fall in a snare upon the earth, where no ginne is for
him? Shall one take up a snare from the earth, and have taken nothing at all?


THat the comminations, the menacies, and threats, which the Almighty by the
ministry of his holy Word gives forth against the sons of men for their
impious and evil courses in their peregrination here upon the earth, are not
in vain, like scar-crowes and bugges, for the terrifying of little children,
and the ruder sort of people, but are certain evidences of Gods resolution for
the punishment of sin, I have heretofore out of the former verse made plain
unto you by a twofold similitude taken from the custom of Lions; the old Lion
and the young. This fifth verse yields us two other to the like effect: and
these are taken from the manner of fowlers or birders, whose practice is to lay
snares, and set ginnes, and spread nets to catch birds with. The first is in
the first branch, the second in the second. In the first there is an
adumbration of the providence of God, by which he rules all things: In the
second there is an illustration of the certainty, the stability, the efficacy
of his judgments, which he fore-sheweth and fore-telleth by his Prophets. Of
both in their order.

The first is: Can a bird fall in a snare upon the earth, where no ginne is for
him? Can he fall? The Vulgar Latin is, Nurquid cadet, shall he fall? So read
the Septuagint, so the Chaldee Paraphrast. Nunquid cadit, does he fall? So
Winckleman, and so our Countryman Tauerner in his English translation, Au
casura esset, could she fall? So Iunius.

Can a bird, could a bird, shall a bird, does a bird fall (...) hal pach
haaretz, in laqueum terrae, word for word, into a snare of the earth: so is it
in the old Latin. This laqueus terrae, is with Iunius laqueus humilis, a snare
lying low by the ground; with Mercer and Vatablus it is laqueus in terra
dispositus, a snare placed on the ground. Albertus Magnus expounds it to be
laqueus in terra absconditus, a snare hidden on the ground.

Into such a snare can a bird fall, where no ginne is for him? (...) Vmokesch
ein lah. This same mokesch is by some taken for a ginne. With Iunius and
Drusius it is tendicula; with Mercer it is offendiculum; with Vatablus it is
laqueus. These, as our late Translators, take mokesch for a ginne. Others take
it for him that lays the ginne, for the fowler. So do the Septuagint; so
does the Author of the Vulgar Latin, so does Saint Hierome take it. With the
Septuagint this mokesch is (...), a birder, one that catches birds with
birdlime; with the author of the Vulgar Latin and Saint Hierome it is Auceps,
a Fowler. So is it with Tauerner in his translation; Does a bird fall in a
snare upon the earth, where no fowler is? Be it a ginne, or he that lays the
ginne, the birder, the fowler, it much skilleth not: for both readings have
their warrant: as well this, where no ginne is for him, as that, where no
fowler is.

Now to the interrogation, Can a bird fall in a snare upon the earth, where no
ginne is for him, or where no fowler is? The answer must be negative; No, he
cannot. And so is the answer made by Nicolaus de Lyra, and the Author of the
Interlineary Gloss. So is it by Petrus Lusitanus; so by Mercerus, so by
others. Can a bird fall! No; it cannot be that a bird should fall in a snare
upon the earth, where by the fowlers art no ginne is set for him.

O quam vilium similitudines rerum, quam pretiosum praedicant sacramentum! O,
says Rupertus, how vile are the things from which similitudes may be taken,
and how precious the mysteries, that may thereby be published! This our Prophet
de pastoralibus assumptus, once a shepherd, now called to be a dispenser of the
secrets of God, is content to dispense them, by drawing similitudes from such
things, as he was wont to observe in his shepherds walk. Such is that in the
first Chapter, verse. 2. The Lord will roar from Zion: and that in the same
verse, the habitations of the shepherds shall mourn; and that in the verse
before my text, will a Lion roar in the forest, when he has no prey; and
this in my text, Can a bird fall in a snare upon the ground, where no ginne is
for him? All you see are pastoral. Sufficient coelesti magisterio res non
solum piscatorum, verum etiam pastorum, vt per eorum similitudines docti sint
and doceant conuenienter gloriam rerum caelestium. Things that fall within the
knowledge not only of fishers, but also of shepherds, are available to divine
instruction, that by the similitudes of both, fishers, and shepherds, the glory
of things celestial may be manifested.

Such is this pastoral similitude: this similitude of birds not falling into a
snare upon the earth, unless by the fowlers art some ginne be set for him. It
serves for the adumbration of Gods wonderful providence: thus. As snares,
wherewith birds are catched, fall not on the ground at all adventures and by
chance; but are laid by the skill, industry and foresight of the fowler: so
the calamities and miseries of this life, wherewith men are usually taken and
snared, come not by chance, but are sent among us by the certain counsel of
God, by his just judgment, by his divine providence.

I know that this similitude is by others otherwise applied. Saint Hierome will
have it to belong to the punishment of such as liu^ in discord and variance; to
this sense: They who through charity are as birds, and do fly aloft in the
liberty of the holy Spirit, through discord do lose their wings, fall down
upon him earth and are a prey unto the fowler. Did they still soar aloft with
the wings of love; they should not need to fear the fowlers snares. For as
Sal^mon says, Prou. 1.17. Surely in vain the net is spread in the eyes of
every thing that has a wing. Keep then thy self above in the air, as if
thou hadest the wings of a dove, and thou art from danger: but if through
variance, through strife, through hatred, and other like impieties thou be
ouer-burdened and pressed down, down thou fallest to the ground, and art by
thine own default ensnared. Iusta enim est ruina peccatorum: for just is the
fall of sinners.

Two Hebrew Rabbis, Abraham and David, apply this similitude to the execution
of the decree of God and his sentence: thus: If men whose dwellings are upon
the earth, can by their cunning and industry cause the birds of the air to
descend upon the earth, and so fall into their snares, from whence there is no
evasion for them: how much more shall I, I the Lord, who have my habitation in
the Heaven of Heavens, bring men themselves within the snare of my decree and
sentence, that there shall be no escaping for them?

Some so apply this similitude, that by this bird they understand a sinner, and
by the snare his sin. Their explication is: As a bird shall not fall into a
snare upon the earth, unless some ginne be laid for him; so shall not sinners
fall into punishment, unless they themselves make snares of their own sins
to catch themselves withal. So may they quickly do; and so says Solomon,
Pro. 5.22. The wickedness of the ungodly shall catch himself, and with the
snares of his own sins, shall he be trapped. What then? Vis non capi laqueo?
would thou not be taken with the snare? rumpe ac frange laqueum: the advice
is good; tear and break the snare. But how? Toll peccatum, and fregisti
laqueum; take away the sin, and thou have broken the snare.

Rupertus so understands this similitude, that he will have the grace of God
herein to be commended. With him this fowler shall be God; his snare the word
of God, the bird to be catched, the soul of man. His conceit runs thus: As
that a bird falls into a snare upon the earth, it is to be attributed to the
care and diligence of the fowler, that laid the snare; so, that the soul of
man comes to be ensnared in the word of salvation, which it neither can
resist, nor is willing so to do, it is wholly to be attributed to the grace of
God. For God alone so spreads the snare of his good word, that this little
bird, this wandering and restless bird, the soul of man, is caught and brought
into the hands of the Lord her God, and so escapes the jaws of the Devil.

This his exposition well meets with the Arminians, with those new Prophets,
who at this day pretending a more moderate divinity, then ours is, as if they
came out of Coelestius his School, have with their sophismes and subtilties
much disquieted the State of the Belgicke Churches, chiefly for the point of
divine Predestination and the appendices thereof.

Their fourth Thesis is, touching the operation of the grace of of God in
Christ, Collat. Hug. Brand. page 216.
whether it be resistable or not. The grace of God, say they, is resistable.
Rupertus here says, it cannot be resisted. He is in the right, and with him we
join; and thus we explain our meaning: Man is to be considered in a twofold
respect; in respect of himself, and in respect of God. If he be considered in
respect of himself, as he is unregenerate, and according to his inbred
prauitie, so is grace by him too too resistable: for as much as man of
himself, in his pure naturals, governed only by nature, reason and sense,
without grace, without the Spirit of God, cannot only resist, but also cannot
but resist the grace of God. So says Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 2.14. (...), the
natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are
foolishness unto him: neither can he know them, for they are spiritually
discerned. To the like purpose the same Apostle, Romans 8.7 (...): the wisdom of
the flesh is enmity against God: for it is not subject to the Law of God,
neither indeed can be. It is true: the Grace of God is resistable; it is too
easily resisted, ex part hominis, by man in respect of himself.

But ex part Dei it is otherwise. In respect of God, and his good pleasure, it
may well be said to be irresistible. I speak of that grace of God, which is
his moving and effectual grace, against which there is no resistance. For to
say, that the effectual grace of God can be resisted, is to deny it to be
effectual. It implies a contradiction, and it is blasphemy to affirm, that
God with his effectual grace is subject to man's resistance.

That of Saint Paul, Romans 9.19. Who has resisted the will of God? being an
Interrogation of a denier, implying that no man has or can resist it, is in
very reason it self most certain. For the superior cause can never suffer of
the inferior: therefore if man's will should go about to resist or frustrate
the will of God, it were even against reason it self: for then should Gods
will suffer of man's will; which is an impossibility.

Saint Augustine has a fit saying for the establishing of this truth: It is in
his book De corrept. and great. cap. 14. Deo volenti saluum facere, nullum
hominum resistit arbitrium; If God be willing to save a man, no will of man can
resist him. Sic enim velle and nolle in volentis aut nolentis est potestate, vt
diuinam voluntatem non impediat, nec superet potestatem; for to will, or not to
will, is so in the power of him that wills or wills not, that it neither
hinders the will of God, nor ouer-commeth his power.

Thus much by occasion of Rupertus his exposition. Let us go on, Can a bird]
Dionysius the Carthusian will tell you, that this fowler, according to the
Expositors, is either the Devil, or man, or God: and that their snares are
either Laquaei culpae, or Laquaei poena; either snares of sin, or snares of
punishment.

That the Devil is in holy Scripture compared unto a fowler, I deny not: for I
read of his wiles, Ephesians. 6.11. where we are advised to put on the whole
armor of God, that we may be able to stand against the wiles of the Devil. I
read likewise of the snares, 1 Timothy 3.7. and 2 Timothy 2.26. His snares are the
snares of sin, by which he entrappeth men, and leads them captive. But that
the Devil is the fowler in my text, I affirm not.

Nor may it be denied, but that man also is in holy Scripture compared to a
fowler. To a fowler he is compared in a twofold respect, in respect of others,
and in respect of himself.

Man is a fowler in respect of others. He has snares, and cords, and nets,
and grinnes to catch others with. Such fowlers were King David's enemies, his
proud enemies, Saul and Doeg, of whom, Psalm. 140 5. he thus complains: They
have hid a snare for me, and cords, they have spread a net by the ways side,
they have set ginnes for me. And such are they, those wicked men, Ierem. 5.26.
They lay wait, as he that sets snares, they set a trap, they catch men. And
such are they, of whom the complaint of the faithful is, Lament. 3.52. Mine
enemies chased me sore like a bird, without cause. They chased me like a bird.
It is true then, Men are fowlers in respect of others; fowlers they are to
catch others.

Yea: and fowlers they are in respect of themselves, even to catch themselves.
Such a one is he, Psalm. 7.15. He made a pit, and dug it, and is fallen into
the ditch which he made. And he, Psalm. 9.15, 16. In the net which he hid, is
his own foot taken: he is snared in the work of his own hands. And he, Prou.
5.22. His own iniquities shall take himself, and he shall be holden with the
cords of his sins. Not amiss then has Carthusian affirmed, that men
sometimes do fall, in laqueum culpae, into the snare of sin, by their own
inclination, or naughtiness. For as Origin witnesses; Quamuis non essent
Diaboli, adhuc homines concupiscentijs pulsarentur: though there were no Devils
at all, yet should men be ensnared with their own lusts.

Thus we see, Man is a fowler; a fowler to catch others, and a fowler to catch
himself: and his snares are laquei culpae, the snares of sin. Yet, that man
is the fowler in my text, I affirm not.

It remains then that by this fowler God must be intended. For God is a
fowler too; and he has snares too: but his snares are laquei poenae, they are
snares of punishment. Of snares of this kind he has no want. He powers them
forth like rain. This is that we read, Psalm. 11.6. Upon the wicked shall the
Lord rain snares, fire and brimstone, and a burning tempest: this shall be the
portion of their cup. Behold a rain of snares upon the wicked. King David
deuoting his enemies to destruction, Psalm. 69.22. Wishes their table to become
a snare unto them, and that which should be for their welfare to become a trap
unto them. The place Saint Paul alleges with some little difference, Romans
11.9. Let their table be made a snare, and a trap, and a stumbling block, and
a recompense unto them. And here behold, a man's own table, and that which
should yield him much comfort, becomes a snare and a trap for God to entangle,
and catch the wicked with.

Remarkable is that of the Prophet Esaias chap. 8.14. where it is said of the
Lord of Hosts himself, that to both the houses of Israel he shall be for a
stone of stumbling, and for a rock of offenses; and to the inhabitants of
Jerusalem for a ginne and for a snare: and that many of them shall stumble, and
fall, and be broken, and be snared, and be taken. And here again behold: The
Lord of Hosts, he that is ever to the faithful a rock of refuge and
salvation, he is to the wicked and the unbelieving a ginne and snare to ensnare
and take them with. It is not to be denied, but that God may very well be
resembled to a fowler. And him I take to be the fowler in my text. Now the
resemblance between God and a fowler stands thus: As snares wherewith birds
are catched, fall not on the ground at all adventures, and by chance, but are
laid of purpose by the skill, industry, and foresight of the fowler: so the
calamities and miseries of this life, wherewith men are usually taken and
snared, come not by chance, but are sent among us by the providence of God. So
this text is, as before I intimated, an adumbration of the providence of God,
by which he rules all things.

The point of doctrine which from hence I would commend unto you, is this,
Nihil accidere, nisi a Deo prouisum, that nothing falls out in this life, no
calamity, no misery, nothing, good or evil, but by Gods providence.

Aquinas 1. quaest. 22. art. 2. makes this demand; Vtrum omnia sint subiecta
diuinae prouidentiae? whether all things are subject to the providence of God?
For the resolution whereof his conclusion is: Since God is of all things the
prime cause, and knows all things in particular, it is of necessity that all
things are subject to his providence, not tantum in universally, sed etiam in
singulari; not only in gen^rall, but also in particular. I speak not now of
the providence of God, as it is potentialis, and immanens; but as it is
actualis, and transiens; not as it is the internal action of God, but as it is
external; not as it is his decree of governing the world, but as it is the
execution of that decree.

This providence of God, this his actual and transient providence, this his
external action, and the execution of his inward and eternal decree, is
nothing else than a perpetual and unchangeable disposition and administration
of all things: or to speak with Aquinas, it is nothing else, than ratio
ordinis rerum ad finem; it is nothing else, than the course which God
perpetually holds for the ordering of the things of the world to some
certain end.

Such is the providence of God, whereof I am now to speak: which is by some
divided into a general, and a special providence: by others into an
universal, a special, and a particular providence.

Gods universal or general providence, I call that, by which he does not only
direct al creatures according to that secret instinct, or inward virtue, which
he has given to every one of them, at the time of their creation, but does
also preserve them in their ordinary course of nature.

Of this universal or general providence of God, Theodoret Bishop of Cyrus,
in his first Sermon concerning this argument, discourses copiously and
elegantly: You that say in your hearts there is no providence of God, consider
the things that are visible, and are obuious to your eyes, consider their
nature, their site, their order, their state, their motion, their agreement,
their harmony, their comeliness, their beauty, their magnitude, their use,
their delight, their variety, their alteration, their continuance; and then, if
you can, deny God's providence. Gods providence is manifest in every work of
creation: you may behold it in the Heaven, and in the lights thereof, the
Sun, the Moon, and the Stars. You may behold it in the air, in the
clouds, in the earth, in the sea, in plants, in herbs, in seeds. You may
behold it in every other creature, every living creature, reasonable, or
unreasonable, man or beast: and in every beast, whether it goes, or flies, or
swimmeth, or creeps. There is not any thing, but it may serve to magnify the
providence of God.

But why run I to the Fathers for the illustration of a point, wherein the
holy Scriptures are so plentiful, so eloquent? The 104. Psalm contains an
egregious description hereof, a fair and goodly picture, and a lively
portraiture of this providence of God, drawn with the pencill of the holy
Ghost. I see therein the air, and clouds, and winds, and water, and the earth,
and the like, so ruled and ordered by the immediate hand of God, that, should
he remove his hand but for a moment, this whole universe would totter, and
fall, and come to nothing.

I go on to the 147. Psalm; There I see God numbering the stars, and
calling them by name: I see him covering the Heavens with clouds preparing
rain for the earth, giving snow like wool, scattering the hoare frost like
ashes, casting forth his ice like morsells, making grass to grow upon the
mountains, giving food to beasts, to Ravens: all this I see, and cannot but
acknowledge his universal providence.

I look back to the book of Job, and Chap. 9. I find God removing
mountains, and ouer-turning them; I find him shaking the earth out of her
place, and commanding the Sun to stand still: I find him alone spreading out
the heavens, and treading upon the waves of the sea: I find him making
Arcturus, O^ion, Pleiades, and the chambers of the South: I find him doing
great things past finding out, yea, and wonders without number. All this I
find, and cannot but admire his universal providence.

Infinite are the testimonies which I might produce out of the old Testament
for this point: but I pass them over, contenting my self with only two out of
the new.

That of our Savior Christ, John 5.17. My Father works hitherto, and I
work, is fit to my purpose. The words are an answer to the Jews, who
persecuted our Savior and sought to slay him, for doing a cure on the Sabbath
day, upon one that had been diseased 38. years. They held it to be unlawful
to do any work upon the Sabbath day: Christ affirms it to be lawful. The
ground of their opinion was; God the Father rested the seventh day from all his
works. This Christ denies not, but explicates the meaning of it. Its true; My
Father rested the seventh day from all his works: yet true also it is, Pater
meus vsque modo operatur; My Father works hitherto.

He rested the seventh day from all his works, and yet he works; how can
this be so? It is thus according to Aquinas: He rested the seventh day a nouis
creaturis condendis, from making any new creatures; yet notwithstanding he
ever works, creaturas in esse conseruando, preserving his creatures in their
being. It may be thus enlarged: Requieuit die septimo, God rested the seventh
day from creating any new world, or from making any new kinds of creatures, but
nor then rested he, nor at any time since has he rested from providing for,
and caring for, and ruling, and governing, and sustaining the world. Never
rests he, but causes his creatures to breed and bring forth after their
kinds, and restores things decaying, and preserves things subsisting to his
good pleasure. This is that saying of our Saviors, Pater meus vsque modo
operatur, my Father works hitherto.

My Father works hitherto! Hom. 37. in Joan. 5.
Saint Chrysostom well discourses thereupon. If, says he, thou should
ask; How is it, that the Father yet works, since he rested the seventh day
from all his works? I tell thee, (...). He provides for, and vpholdeth all
things, that he has made. Behold the Sun rising, and the Moon running, and
pooles of water, and springs, and rivers, and rain, (...), and the course of
nature in seeds, and in the bodies of man and beast; behold, and consider
these, and all other things, whereof (...), this universe consists, and thou will not deny the perpetual operation of the Father, but wilt break forth
into the praises of his universal providence.

That branch of Saint Paul's Sermon to the Athenians, Act. 17.28. In him we
live, and move, and have our being, is also fit to the point we have in hand.
In him, that was to the Athenians the unknown God, but is indeed the only true
and everliving God, we live, we move, we have our being. Saint Ambrose in his
book De bono moutis cap. 12. thus descants upon the words, In Deo mouemur,
quasi in via, sumus quasi in veritate, vinimus quasi in vita aeterna: In him we
move as in the way, we have our being as in the truth, we live as in the life
eternal. S. Cyprian, or whosoever was the Author of that Treatise de Baptism^
Christi, thus: In Patre sumus, in Filio vinimus, in Spiritu Sancto mouemur and
proficimus: We have our being in the Father, we live in the Son, we move in the
Holy Ghost. S. Hilary in his E^arrat, upon Psalm. 13. seems to assign all
these to the holy Ghost: S. Cyril. lib. 2. in Johan. cap. 74. ascribes them all
to the Son. S. Augustine lib. 14. de Trinit. cap. 12. refers them to the
whole Trinity. Of the whole Trinity, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost,
he will have it to be true, that in him we live, and move, and have our being:
and he gives for a reason hereof, that, Romans 11.36. because of him, and through
him, and in him are all things. All things are of him, and through him, and in
him, and therefore in him we live, and move, and have our being.

Homil. 38 in ^^l. Apol.
See, says S. Chrysostom, how all things are his; (...), providence is his,
(...), and preservation is his; (...), our being is from him, (...), our
actiuity is from him; (...), and from him it is that we perish not. In him we
have whatsoever we have, in him we live, in him we move, in him we have our
being. Who hears this, and stands not in admiration of the universal
providence of God?

From this universal or general providence of God, I descend to his special
providence. The special providence of God, is that, by which he rules every
part of the world, and all things in every part, even the things that seem
most vile and abject; all their actions, all their events. Every part of Heaven
he rules: Not so much as a little cloud arises, or moves, or changes, or
vanishes, but nutu Dei, by the pleasure and appointment of God.

Eu ry part of the earth he rules. There is not the man, that either is
conceived, or is borne, or lives, or is preserved, or moves, or does any
thing, or dies, nisi ex nutu and voluntate Dei, but by the will, pleasure, and
appointment of God. There is not so much as animalculum, not any the least
living creature, nor beast, nor fly, nor worm, that is engendered, or fed, or
sustained, nisi a Deo, but by God. There is not so much as herbula, not any the
least flower or grass, that either springs, or blossometh, or withers,
sine manu Dei, but by the hand of God. Gods special providence is over all his
works; but more peculiarly is it over his Church.

His peculiar providence over his Church appears in the wonderful
preservation thereof from its first beginning, but more evidently from the time
that Noah's Arc floated upon the waters until these our days. But of all most
famous, and to be admired, was that his preservation, his protection of the
Church among the people of Israel; when they, Genesis 15.13. Act. 7.6.
sciourning in a strange land, in the Land of Egypt, were for four hundred
and thirty years held in slavery and bondage, and were very ill entreated.
Then, then at the time appointed God sent Act. 7.35.
Moses to be their ruler and deliverer, who led them from out of Egypt into
the wilderness. In the wilderness, a place of desolation, could their
necessities be supplied? They could be, and were supplied. When they needed
guide, God went before them; He went before them Exodus 13.21.
in a pillar of a cloud by day, and in a pillar of fire by night. So day and
night was God their guide. When they wanted bread, flesh, or drink, mercy and
miracle did concur for their supply. Psalm. 78.24.
Heaven gave them bread, the Ve s 26.
wind quails, the Verse. ^5.
rock waters. Of apparel they felt no want: for Deuteronomy. 29.5.
forty years together neither the clothes upon their backs, nor the shoes on
their feet, were waxen old. For the direction of their consciences Exo. 20.2
etc.
a Law was given them from mount Sinai; and for the resolution of their doubts,
they had the oracles of God, from between the Exodus 25.22.
Cherubins. They needed not to fear the force and fury of their enemies: for
they found by experience that the Ios. 10.13.
Sun and Moon, and Exodus 9.23. Psalm. 105.32.
fire from Heaven, and vapors from the clouds, and Exodus 2.20.
water, and Exodus 8 6. Psalm. 105.30.
frogs, and Psalm. 105.^1.
lice, and flies, and Verse. 34.
locusts, and caterpillars took their parts. Yea, the Lord himself Exodus
14.14.25.
fought for them. Very special was the providence of God, for his Church in
Israel.

As special is his providence for his Church among us. Here should I set the
mercies of our Land to run along with Isreal's; we should win ground of them, we
should outrun them. Be i^ that in Gods actual and outward mercies they might
outstrip v^^ yet in his spiritual and saving health, they come short of us.
For, as one well says, they had the shadow, we the substance; they the
candlelight, we the noonday; they the breakfast of the Law, fit for the
morning of the world, we the dinner of the Gospel, fit for the high-noone
thereof. They had a glimpse of the Sun, we have him in the full strength:
they saw per fenestram, we sine medio. They had the Paschall lamb, to expiate
sins ceremonially; we have the Lamb of God to satisfy for us really.
Unthankful we, thrice unthankful are we, if we acknowledge not the providence
of God over his Church among us to be very special.

Now follows the particular or singular providence of God. It is that by
which he provides for every particular creature. That there was Jonah 1 4.
sent out a great wind into the sea to raise a tempest against a ship that was
going to Tarshish; that there was a preparation of a great fish Verse. 17.
to swallow up Jonah, and of a Gourd Jonah 4.6.
to be a shadow over his head against the Sunbeams, and of a worm Verse. 7.
to smite that Gourd, it was wholly from the particular providence of God. From
the same providence it is, that the Sun rises on the evil and the good, and
that the rain falls on the just and on the unjust, Mat. 5.45. From the same
it is, that the Lilies of the field are so arrayed, as Solomon in all his glory
was not so, Mat. 6.28. From the same it is, that the hairs of our head are all
numbered, Mat. 10.30. What? Are the hairs of our head numbered? Sermon. de Martyr.
Are they all numbered? Quid timebo, says Saint Augustine, quid timebo damna
membrorum, quando securitatem accipio capillorum? Surely I that have security
for the hairs of my head, will not fear the loss of any member I have. Yet
if it shall please God to smite me in any member I have, in arm, or in leg,
Psalm. 22.14.
or in all, so that I be, as if all my bones were out of joint; I shall ever
acknowledge the hand of God, and his particular providence, without which not so
much as a little sparrow falls on the ground, as it is testified by our
Savior Christ, Mat. 10.30. So true is my propounded doctrine, Nihil accidere,
nisi a Deo prouisum: that nothing falls out in this life, no calamity, no
misery, nothing, good or evil, but by the providence of God.

The objections, that are by the ignorant cast out against this holy and
comfortable doctrine, I cannot now stand to refute: they may, if God will, be
the groundwork of some other meditation. For the present, that I be not
ouer-troublesome unto you, I will add but a word of use, and application.

The first use may be, to stir us up to glorify God for all his mercies. For
since we know, that whatsoever befalls us in this life, it is by the
providence of God, what should come out of our mouths, and hearts, but that of
holy Job, Blessed, Blessed be the name of the Lord for it? In the time of our
prosperity, when the face of the Lord shines most cheerfully upon us, what
should pierce the inward parts of a child of God, but these or the like
motions? O Lord! Lord! that the hearts of these men my righteous friends or
others, are turned unto me, it is of thee alone. Of thee alone it is, that I
have their love, their favor, their benefits: thou alone art the fountain,
they are but the instruments. Thy instruments they are, such as next after thee
I will thankfully regard, but never before thee, nor without thee. Also what
any other creature yields me of comfort, profit, or good any way, the power,
the strength, and the means thereof is from thee alone, from thee my God, my
strength, my hope, and my stay for ever.

A second use may be to work patience in us, even through our whole life, and
in our greatest afflictions. For since we know, that whatsoever befalls us in
this life, be it to the flesh never so sour, it comes to pass by the
providence of God; why should any one that is the child of God murmr or
repine, when he is fed with the bread of tears? Psalm. 80.5.
O then! when we are pinched with adversity, let us not imagine, that God is
our enemy; believe we rather, that, of his good and fatherly purpose, he
chasteneth us for the remnant of sin, abiding in this corrupted nature of ours,
thereby to stir us up to the exercise of true Christian patience. Upon this
belief I am resolved never to look so much at any ill, that shall betide me,
as at the blessed hand, that shall be the guide thereof.

A third use, which for this time shall be my last use of the doctrine now
delivered, is to drive us to our knees early and late, to beg and desire at
this our good Gods hand, the continuance of his ever sweet providence over us,
and for us, that by his good guidance we may quietly sail over the sea of
this wicked world; and when his blessed will shall be, we may arrive in the
haven of eternal comfort, even his blessed, and glorious, and everlasting
Kingdom; to which the Lord grant us a happy coming, for his dearly beloved
Son Jesus Christ his sake, to whom with the Father in the unity of the holy
Spirit be all praise and power. Amen.

THE Sixth Lecture.
AMOS 3.5. Shall one take up a snare from the earth, and have taken nothing at
all?


YOu may at the first blush think it a needless labor for me to stand upon
the exposition of this second branch of this fifth verse, because it seems to
be coincident with the former. It is true, that as well in this branch as in
that, the similitude is taken from the manner of a fowler; yet I doubt not even
from hence to gather some good and profitable fruit for our instruction in the
way of piety and godly living.

My custom hitherto requires that first I clear the reading; and then
proceed to some wholesome observation.

If the Hebrew be rendered word for word, it will sound thus: Nunquid aescendet
laqueus e terra, and capiendo non capiet? Shall a snare ascend from the earth,
and in taking shall it not take? So are the words translated by Mercerus, and
by Vatablus, and by Drusius. Shall a snare ascend from the earth] To ascend in
the Hebrew tongue, signifies to be taken away, to be removed. Laqueus
ascendit, quum tollitur: a snare ascends from the earth, when it is taken
thence. For this same ascendet, the Septuagint have (...); Shall a snare be
loosed from the earth, shall it be broken upon the earth? Herewith agrees the
Chaldee Paraphrast. The Vulgar Latin has Auferetur, Shall a snare be taken
from the earth? Shall it be taken? By whom? By whom, but by a fowler? The
fowler is expressed by Tremelius and Iunius, and by Calvin; the rest that
express him not, must of necessity understand him.

Shall a fowler remove his snare from the earth, Et capiendo non c^piet? and in
taking shall he not take? It is an Hebraisme: for which the Greeks have (...),
without taking somewhat; the old Latin has antequam quid ceperit, before he
have taken somewhat; Calvin and Brentius, priusquam capturam ceperit, before he
has taken a prey: Gualter, si omnino nihil ce^e it. It he has taken nothing
at all. Those hit the sense of our Prophet, though they leave his Hebraisme:
and herein I reprehend them not. For I dissent not from S. Hierome, Comment, in
c. 1. ad Gal. who there says, Non in verbis Scripturarum esse Euangelium, sed
in sensu; non in superficie, sed in m^dulla, non in sermonum folijs, sed in
radice rationis. His saying is, that the Gospel is not in the words of the
Scriptures, but in the sense; not in the outside, but in the mar w; not ^n the
leaves of the book, but in the root of reason. Well then have the Greeks, and
the Vulgar Latin, and Calvin, and Brentius, and Gualter, left the word, to
give the sense. So has our countrym^n Tauerner, whose reading is, Tak^th a man
his snare up from the ground, before he catch somewhat? The meaning he well
expresses. So do our newest Translators; but the better, by how much the
nearer they cleave unto the words: Shall one take up a snare from the earth,
and have taken nothing at all?

Shall be? To this interrogation, as to the former, the answer should be
negative; No, he shall not. Shall he not? How so? A fowler may be deceived;
he may miss of his prey, and so may be driven to take up his snares, his
ginnes, his nets, though he have taken nothing.

Luther for the removing of this scruple here respects the intention of the
fowler, not his labor, nor the event thereof. The fowler lays his snares, sets
his ginnes, spreads his nets with an intent, with a mind to catch somewhat,
though sometime it may fall out he catches nothing.

Petrus Lusitanus here observes it to be the custom of fowlers, non facile
laqueos amouere, not willing to remove their snares, till they catch somewhat.
The like does Mercerus, Haud save id moris est, surely its not the custom,
that a fowler should take up his snares, if he have taken nothing. So does
Drusius: Non tollitur, A snare is not taken up, before somewhat be catched. Non
tollitur, that is, non tolls solet communiter, (...), commonly and for the most
part a snare uses nor to be taken up, till somewhat be catched. And so says
Carthusian: A net spread to catch birds, is not taken up till some be catched;
Hoc communiter ita est, so commonly it falls out.

It is now easy to give answer to the interrogation. The interrogation is,
Shall one, a man, a fowler, take up his snare from the ground, and have taken
nothing at all? The answer is, Surely no. Commonly, and for the most part he
does it not: he uses not, its not his custom to take up his snare from the
ground, if he have taken nothing at all.

The reading is cleared, the interrogation is answered; and now let us see
whereto this similitude taken from this custom of the fowler is appliable. It
may serve, as in my former Lecture I signified, for the illustration of the
certainty, the stability and the efficacy of the judgments of God, which he
threatens to bring upon the wicked for their sins; thus. A fowler uses not to
take up his snares, till he has catched somewhat: no more is it Gods use, when
he makes show of his judgments, to withdraw his hand, till he has put them
in execution. God gives not forth his threats in vain, nor gathers he up his
nets, nor takes he up his snares, till he has taken what he would; till he
has effected what he threatened by his Prophets. The sum of all is; Verbum
Dei non cadere fine efficacia. The word of God falls not without its
efficacy; what he speaks, that he does. Such is the application of this
present similitude.

Saint Hierome applies it, a^ he does the former. He applies it to such as
live in discord and variance. Their punishment it is, vt capiantur laqueo, to
be taken in a snare; in a snare, that is placed not in the air but on the
ground; from which whosoever is delivered, good cause has he to rejoice; and
to say as it is, Psalm. 124.7. Our soul is escaped, as a bird out of the snare
of the fowlers: the snare is broken, and we are delivered. This is contritus
ille laqueus, that same broken snare, whereof the Apostle speaks, Romans 16.20.
Deus conteret Satanam sub pedibus vestris velociter; God shall bruise, he shall
break Satan under your feet shortly. And hitherto he brings that, Psa.
140.5. Iuxta simitam scandulum posuerunt mihi, they have spread a net for me, by
the way-side. By the way side have they done it. For they are not able any
other way to deceive the simple, then by propounding unto them the name of
Christ, Vt dum putamus nos Christum inuenire, pergamus ad Antichristum: the
while we think we are in the way to find out Christ, we go on the high way
to Antichrist. Thus has Saint Hierome applied this similitude: and he is
followed by Strabus Fuldensis, the Author of the ordinary Gloss.

The doctrine which that good Father would from hence commend unto us is this;
Discordiae poena, in laqueum incidere. It is the punishment of discord to fall
into a snare. I thus explicate it. The man that lives in discord and variance
shall fall into such calamities, out of which there is no escaping for him, as
there is no escaping for a bird out of a snare.

Must calamity be the guerdon, the recompense of the man that lives in
discord and variance? It must needs be so. The foulness, the leprosy of this
sin will nor suffer it to be otherwise. How foul and leprous this sin is,
it may appear, first by the detestation wherein God holds it. Six things
there are which the Lord hates, yea the seventh his soul abhors. A proud
look, a dissembling tongue, hands that shed innocent blood; an heart that
deuiseth wicked imaginations; feet that be swift in running to mischief; a
false witness, that speaks lies: These are the six which the Lord hates:
the seventh which his soul abhors is, He that sows discord among
brethren, Prou. 6.16. And no marvel is it, that he should with his soul
abhor such a one. Non enim est dissentionis Deus, sed pacis, as the Apostle
speaks, 1 Cor. 14.33. For God, he is not a God of tumult, of unquietness, of
conjusion, of dissension, of discord, but a God of peace.

Again, this sin appears to be very foul and leprous, in that it
excludes from the Kingdom of Heaven. That it does so, Saint Paul proves,
Gal. 5.19. because it is a work of the flesh: among which he numbreth, hatred,
variance, emulation, wrath, strife, and seditions: and concludes, that they
which do such things shall not inherit the Kingdom of God.

A third way to find out the foulness and leprosy of this sin, is, to take
a view of the appellations, which in holy Scripture are given to this kind of
sinner. He is carnal, he is froward, he is proud, he is foolish.

First, he is Carnal. Saint Paul avouches it, 1 Cor. 3.3. Ye are yet carnal.
For whereas there is among you envying, and strife, and divisions, are ye not
carnal and walk as men? Are ye not carnal? Deny it not. For you are carnal,
and ye walk as men. You are carnal, you follow the force and provocation of
your flesh, your sensuality, your concupiscence, and ye walk as men: Ye walk
not after God, not after the Spirit, 1 Pet. 4.6. Romans 8.4. Gal. 5.16. Colos.
1.10.
not in the Spirit, not worthy of the Lord, not worthy of the Gospel; as long
as there is among you e^uying, and strife, and divisions.

Secondly, the sinner in this kind is froward. So does Solomon style him,
P^ou. 16.28. A froward man sows strife. This froward man, in the Hebrew, Vir
peruersitatum, A man of frowardnesses; a man given altogether to frowardness,
sows strife between man and man, between neighbor and neighbor, and is a
very batemaker. Will you a fuller description of him? you may have it, Prou.
6.12. There shall you find him to be a naughty person, a wicked man, one that
waketh with a froward mouth, that winketh with his eyes, that speaks with his
feet, that teaches with his fingers, that has frowardness in his heart, that
continually deuiseth mischief, that sows discord. Believe it: it is a sure
mark of a naughty, a wicked, a froward man, to be the Author of contentions
and strife.

Thirdly, this kind of sinner is a proud man. For, as it is, Prou. 13.10.
Only by pride comes contention. Only by pride? The meaning is not, that
pride is the only cause of contention, but one of the chiefest. So is that
place by some expounded. But well may it without gloss or exposition pass for
a truth, that only by pride comes contention, if Saint Augustine in his
book de Not. and Great. against the Pelagians be not deceived. Out of the 26.
Chapter of that book, I thus frame his argument. Every contempt of God is
pride; but every sin is a contempt of God; Therefore every sin is pride;
according to that of Ecclesiasticus, chap. 10.15. Initium omnis peccati est
super^^a, The beginning of every sin is pride. Now if every sin, if the
beginning of every sin be pride, then certain it is, that contention,
variance, strife, debate, and the like, are all from pride.

Fourthly, the sinner in this kind is a fool. For a fool he is taken, Prou.
18.6. Where it is said; Labia stulti miscent se rixis, A fools lips are ever
brawling. The words which a fool utters with his lips, have always strife
annexed unto them, as an inseparable companion.

Thus you see the account wherein the Spirit of God holds brawlers,
make-bates, and sowers of discord, in that it styles them carnal, and
froward, and proud, and foolish. It was the third way, I propounded, to find
out the foulness and leprosy of this sin.

There is yet a fourth way: and that is by the effects thereof, as Busaeus the
Jesuit in his Panary has observed.

One effect thereof is to increase our sins. Well then does Ecclesiasticus
exhort us to abstain from strife. His exhortation is, Chap. 28.8. Abstain
from strife, (...), and thou shall diminish thy sins. If by abstaining from
strife we diminish our sins, then surely by living in strife we increase our
sins.

A second effect of strife he makes to be the subversion of the hearers:
according to that charge which Paul gives to Timothy, 2 Epist. 2.14. Charge
them before the Lord, that they strive not about words to no profit, but to the
subuerting of the hearers.

A third effect is, that it disturbeth the quietness even of a wise man, says
Solomon, Prou. 29.9. A wise man, if he contend with a foolish man, there is no
quietness for him.

A fourth effect is, that it brings ruin, destruction, and desolation, not
only to houses or families, but to Cities also, yea to Countries, yea to
Kingdoms. This our Savior Christ shows by a prouerbiall saying, Mat. 12.25.
The saying is, Every Kingdom divided against it self is brought to desolation:
and every City, or house divided against it self, shall not stand.

Such, Beloved, are the effects of this sin of discord, and may well discover
unto you the foulness and leprosy of it. For if it increase our sins, if it
be the subversion of those that hear us, if it disturb our quietness, if it
bring ruin, destruction, and desolation to all estates, then surely it is a
soul and a leprous sin.

And thus have I led you in four several paths to find out the foulness,
and leprosy of this sin. The first was by Gods detestation of it. His soul
abhors it. The second was by the gates of Heaven fast shut against it; They
that sin this sin shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. The third was by
the titles given to those sinners; they are carnal, and froward, and proud,
and foolish. The fourth was by the effects which this sin produces: it
increases our faults, it subuerteth our hearers, it disturbeth our quietness;
it brings desolation upon all, upon family, upon nation, upon Kingdom.

You now see the foulness; you see the leprosy of this sin; and will yield
your assents to the truth of my propounded doctrine: which was, The man that
lives in discord and variance, shall fall into such calamities, out of which
there is no escaping for him as there is no escaping for a bird out of a snare.

Is it thus, Beloved? Must the man that lives in discord and variance fall into
calamities, out of which there is no escaping for him? Must he? Our best way
then will be, ever to bear about with us, that same Antidote or preservative
which Saint Ambrose has prescribed, Offic. lib. 1. cap. 21. Caueatur
iracundia, aut si pracaueri non potest cohibeatur. Take heed of wrath, beware
of discord, or if thou can not before hand provide against it, keep it
short, bridle it. But first, Caueatur, Beware, or take heed of it. This is the
counsel which Paul gives in his first book concerning the remedy of love;
Principijs obsta, sero medicina paratur
Cum mala per longas inualuere moras.
Withstand beginnings; thy medicines may come too late, if thy disease be grown
strong. And this is the third remedy prescribed by Busaeus against this malady:
Resist contentionum principijs, Resist the beginnings of discord. If thou be
to talk with any man, keep under the first motions of thy mind, that they
break not forth into indignation; and so thou give the occasion of discord.

Discord is a Serpent. This serpent, like Goliath, must be smote dead in the 1 Samuel 17.49.
forehead, he must be crushed in the head, lest if he get in the head, as he
did into 2 Cor. 11.3.
Eve, he bring in the whole body, and when sin is finished, he leave from
his tail, the 1 Cor. 15.55.
sting of death in our souls.

Discord is a Cockatrice. This Cockatrice must be crushed in the Esaias 59.5.
Egg; If we suffer it to be hatched, and to grow a Basiliske, it will be our
poison.

Discord is a Fox. We must take this Fox, Cant. 2.15.
this little Fox before he do any hurt. If we let him grow till he be great,
then like Luke 13.32.
Herod the Fox, he will become bloodthirsty and ravenous, or like Samsons
Judge. 15.4.
Foxes, he will set all on fire.

Discord is as Leaven, whereof it is said, 1 Cor. 5.6. Gal. 5.9.
Paullulo fermenti tota massa fermentatur, If we purge not out this little
leaven, it will sour the whole lump.

Discord is Number. 3.18, 19
Aqua amaritudinis. We must give this water of bitterness no passage, Eccles.
25.25.
no not a little, lest like that in Cap. 47.3, 4, etc.
Ezechiel, it grow from the anckles to the knees, and from the knees to the
loins, and prove a river that cannot be passed over without drowning.

Discord is Paruulus Babylonis. We must betimes take this youngling of
Babylon, and Psalm. 137.9.
dash him against the stones, lest after growth he should cry against us, down
with them, down with them even unto the ground.

Thus, and thus, are we to deal with this youngling of Babylon, with this
water of bitterness, with this leven, this little leaven, with this fox, this
little fox, with this Cockatrice, with this serpent; we are to resist discord
even in the beginning. And this was Saint Ambrose his Caueatur; Cau^atur
iracundia, beware of discord, take heed of it. But if we cannot before hand
provide against it, then follows his Cohibeatur, Keep it short, bridle it.

But how shall we keep it short? how shall we bridle it? The same good Father
will for this point instruct us. Si prauenerit and praeocupauerit mentem tuam
iracundia, non relinqua as locum tuum. If anger, if wrath shall prevent thee,
and prepossesse thy mind, leave not thou thy place. Thy place! What Is that?
Locus tuus patientia est, locus tuus sapientia est, locu^ tuus ratio est, locus
tuus sedatio indignationis est. Thy place is patience, thy place is wisdom,
thy place is reason, thy place is the asswaging, the quieting of thine anger.
By patience, by wisdom, by reason, thou may assuage and quiet anger.

But my neighbor is so sullen, so froward, so selfe-willed, that I cannot
choose but be moved. In this case what shall I do? The Fathers reply unto thee
is, Reprime linguam tuam, Restrain keep under, tame thy tongue. For so it is
written, Psalm. 34.13. Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips that they
speak no guilt.

Restrain, keep under, tame my tongue, keep my tongue from evil. The advice
I confess to be very good. But how shall I be able to follow it? S. James
seems to imply an impossibility in this performance, Chap. 3.8. where he
says, The tongue can no man tame: it is an unruly evil, full of deadly
poison. No man can tame it: How then shall I? It is an unruly evil; how shall
I rule it. It is full of deadly poison; how shall I cleanse it?

It were blasphemy to gainsay, what Saint James has said. He has said, the
tongue is an unruly evil; and so it is. It is an evil, and an evil of a
wild nature, it is an unruly evil. An unruly evil it is, Saint Bernard in
his Treatise De triplici custodia, says of it; facile volat, atque ideo facile
violat; It flies quickly, and therefore it wounds quickly. Speedy is the
pace it goes, and therefore speedy is the mischief it does. When all other
members of the body are dull with age, this though it be but little, this
tongue alone is quick and nimble. An unruly evil it is; an unruly evil to
our selves, an unruly evil to our neighbors, an unruly evil to all the world.

And it is full of deadly poison. Poison! What? is there poison in the tongue?
Poison, that is contrary to the nature of a man, is it in the tongue of a man?
Yes. But it may be this poison is no mortal poison, but such a poison, whose
venom may without much ado be expelled. Nay, says Saint James, it is
mortal, it is a deadly poison. Say it be a deadly poison; peradventure there
is but little of it, and so the danger is the less. Nay, says Saint James, it
is full of it; it is full of deadly poison.

The tongue is an unruly evil, full of deadly poison; who can tame it? No man,
says the Apostle. No. Man has no bridle, no cage of brass, no bars of iron
to tame the tongu^ withal. And yet you see, the Psalmographer calls upon us
to tame this tongue of ours, to keep it from evil. Keep thy tongue from
evil, and thy lips that they speak no guile.

In this case what shall we do, Beloved? Whether shall we have recourse for
help in this time of need? Whether but to the throne of grace, even to him
that sits thereon? He made the tongue, and he alone can tame the tongue. He
that gave man a tongue to speak, can give him a tongue to speak well. He
that placed that unruly member in the mouth of man, can give man a mouth to
rule it. He can give us songs of Sion for loues-sonnets, and heavenly Psalms
for the Ballads of Hell. Wherefore let us move our tongues to entreat of him
help for our tongues. David has scored out this way for us, Psalm. 141.3. Set
a watch, O Lord, before my mouth, keep the door of my lips. Da Domine quod
jubes, and jube quod vis, It was Saint Augustines petition, and be it ours.
Give Lord what thou command, and then command us what thou will. Thou
command that I keep my tongue from evil, and my lips that they speak no
guilt: Lord keep thou my tongue from evil, keep thou my lips, and my lips
shall speak no guile.

Yet Beloved, we must not be idle our selves. The difficulty of keeping our
tongues from evil, should spur us on to a greater diligence. I know you
would keep your house from thieves, your garments from moths, your treasure
from rust: See that ye be as careful to keep your tongues from evil. Give
not over your hearts unto security, and your tongues will be the better. As
far as the heart is good, so far will the tongue be good. If the heart
believe, Romans 10.10.
the tongue will confess. If the heart be meek, the tongue will be gentle.
But if the heart be angry, the tongue will be bitter, James 3.6.
A tongue set on fire of Hell, to tell tales; to speak evil, to backe-bite,
to slander, to curse, to brawle, to revile, discouers a heart as foul, full of
all maliciousness: according to that which our Savior told the Pharisees,
Matthew. 12.34. Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. It is a
polluted heart that makes a foul mouth.

Wherefore, dearly Beloved, make clean within, and all will be clean: hate
evil cogitations, and there will proceed from you no evil communication.
Foster charity in your hearts; and your lips will be like the Spouses lips in
the Canticles; they will be like a thread of scarlet, Chap. 4.3.
and your talk comely; the speech that proceeds from you will be gracious in
it self, and such as may administer grace unto the hearers, Ephesians. 4.29.
full of gravity, full of discretion, full of zeal, full of love. So shall all
bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamor, and evil speaking be put away
from you, with all malice. And ye will be kind one to another, you will be
tenderhearted one toward another, you will forgive one another, even as God
for Christ's sake has forgiven you. Happy are ye that are in such a case. You
shall not need to fear any calamity that hangs over the heads of such as
live in discord and variance: concerning whom, my doctrine was: The man that
lives in discord and variance shall fall into such calamities, out of which
there is no escaping for him, as there is no escaping for a bird out of a snare.

I have with some prolixity insisted upon this argument of discord and
variance, the rather being persuaded of the truth of that which S. Augustine.
Sermon. 57. de verbis Domini has delivered in these words, Non potest concordiam
habere cum Christo, qui discors voluerit esse cum Christiano: It cannot be that
he that is at variance with a Christian, should have any agreement with Christ.

The motive that now drew me to entreat of this argument, was Saint Hieroms
application of my Text to such as live in discord and variance, whereupon his
collection was, Discordiae poenam esse, in laqueum incidere, that it is the
punishment of discord, to fall into a snare. Thus far I have been his. I must
now leave him, and look back to the other application of my Text, wherewith I
acquainted you in the beginning of this exercise. My Text is:

Shall one take up a snare from the earth, and have taken nothing at all. The
application is:

A fowler uses not to take up his snares from the earth; till he has catched
somewhat; No more is it Gods use, when he makes show of his judgments, to
withdraw his hand, till he has put them in execution. God gives not forth his
threats in vain, nor gathers he up his nets, nor takes he up his snares, till
he has taken what he would, till he has effected what he threatened by his
Prophets. The sum of all is, Verbum Dei non cadere fine efficacia: The Word
of God falls not out without its efficacy. And it is the Doctrine, which I
would now further commend unto your Christian and devout attentions.

The Word of God falls not out without its efficacy.

I thus explicate it. The Word of God is a certain, a sure, a faithful word.
All the prophesies, all the predictions of future things therein propounded,
are wonderfully made good in their accomplishment and event. All promises
therein made, all threats therein denounced are ever true in their performance.

That the prophesies, the predictions of future things propounded in the Word
of God are ever true, and have their due accomplishment, I shall make plain in
few words.

In the days of Noah the world was grown so foul with sin, that God would
needs wash it with a flood. With this his purpose to wash the world with a
flood, he acquainted Noah one hundred and twenty years before he sent the
flood. When that time had its period, when those one hundred and twenty years
were expired, then, even then, and not before, he brought in the flood, as it
appears by the collation of Genesis 7.6, 11. with 1 Peter 3.20.

In the fifteenth of Genesis, verse. 13. God says unto Abram: Know of a surety,
that thy seed shall be a stranger in a land that is not theirs, and shall serve
them, and they shall afflict them four hundred years: and afterward shall
they come out with great substance. Here is a prediction unto Abram concerning
his posterity; that they should go into a strange land, should live in
thraldom, and should from thence be delivered at the end of four hundred
years. According to this prediction it came to pass. But first I note here,
that this time of four hundred years, must begin at the birth of Isaak;
though from his An. M. 2049.
birth to the deliverance of the children of Israel An. M. 2454.
out of Egypt were four hundred and five years, which few years in so great
a sum makes no great difference. Again, I note here, that by this land, not
theirs, is meant not Egypt only, but Canaan too. And thirdly I note, that
where the Text rehearses these three, they shall be strangers, they shall
serve, they shall be afflicted; we must jointly, not severally, apply them all
to the time limited of four hundred years, that this whole time of four
hundred years, they were either strangers, or served, or were afflicted. And
so Saint Augustine, quast. 47. in Exodus understands this place. But you see
the accomplishment of the prediction.

Christ the Messiah, the Savior of mankind was promised to our first parents,
even upon the beginning of the world, Genesis 3.15. where God tells the Serpent,
that the seed of the woman should bruise his head. He was promised unto Abram,
Genesis 12.3. In thee shall all the Nations of the earth be blessed. This
promise unto Abraham is seven times reiterated. The seventh repetition of it
is, Genesis 22.18. In thy seed shall all the Nations of the earth be blessed. He
was promised unto Isaac, Genesis 26.4. In thy seed shall all the Nations of the
earth be blessed. The time of his coming is noted by Jacob the Patriarch,
Genesis 49.10. The Scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from
between his feet until Shiloh come. It is noted likewise by the Angel
Gabriel, Dan. 9.25. Who there wishes Daniel to know and understand, that from
the going forth of the commandment to restore and to build Jerusalem, unto the
Messiah, the Prince shall be seven weeks.

All these promises, prophesies, and predictions touching Christ, the Messiah,
the Savior of mankind, we believe and know, they have had their due
accomplishment.

I could here remember you of prophesies or predictions, wherein certain
persons were by name expressed long before they were borne. Such is that, 1
King. 13.2. O altar, altar, thus says the Lord, Behold a child shall be borne
unto the house of David, Josiah by name, and upon thee shall he offer the
Priests of the high places that burn incense upon thee; and men's bones shall
be burnt upon thee. Josiah, you see, is named: but it was An. M. 2971.
three hundred and thirty three years before Josiah was An. M. 3304.
borne, and before the An. M. 3330.
execution of this prediction three hundred fifty and nine years. The
execution of it we have, 2 King. 22.15.

Such is that, Esa. 44.28. There thus says the Lord of Cyrus, He is my
shepherd and shall perform all my pleasure, even saying to Jerusalem, Thou
shall be built, and to the Temple, thy foundation shall be laid. The prediction
is, that Cyrus should take order for the reedifying of the City of Jerusalem,
and the Temple there. Cyrus is the man that must give leave for this great
work to be set on foot. Cyrus, Cyrus is named, and yet at this time Cyrus was
not borne. Nor was he borne within one hundred years after this time. Nay,
says Josephus, Antiq. Iudaic. lib. 11. cap. 1. the prophecy of Esaias was
written two hundred and ten years before Cyrus his time. Yet was the truth of
this Prophecy An. M. 3426.
fulfilled in Cyrus, as it appears, 2 Chronicles. 36.22. and Ezra 1.1.

Thus have I briefly, and in a few instances made it plain, that the
prophesies, the predictions of things to come, propounded in the Word of God,
are ever true, and have their due accomplishment: that all the promises made
therein, all the threats denounced therein, are ever true in their performance.
So, true is my doctrine.

The Word of God falls not out without its efficacy. True; For God himself
has said it, Esaias 55.10. As the rain comes down, and snow from Heaven, and
returns not thither, but waters the earth, and makes it bring forth, and
bud, that it may give seed to the sower, and bread to the eater: So shall my
word be that goes forth out of my mouth: it shall not return unto me void;
but it shall accomplish that which I please, and it shall prosper in the thing
whereto I sent it. By this similitude taken from the rain and snow, the Lord
gives us to understand that his Word has ever an effectiue power. It is ever
working one way or other. It either mollifieth or hardens: it either
conuerteth or conuinceth: it either cures or kills. None ever heard it, but
they were either the better or the worse by it. We preach, says Saint Paul, 1 Corinthians. 1.23. We preach Christ crucified, unto the Jews a stumbling block,
and unto the Greeks foolishness: and these are the worse by the preaching of
the Word. But unto them which are called, both Jews and Greeks, it is the
power of God, and his wisdom; and these are the better by it.

After that heavenly Sermon made by our Savior, Ioh. 6. in the 66. verse, Some
went back and walked no more with him; these were the worse by his preaching.
Others stuck more close, saying verse. 68. Lord, to whom shall we go? Thou
have the words of eternal life: and we believe, and are sure, that thou art
Christ, the Son of the living God: and these were the better by his preaching.

At Paphos in the I Will of Cyprus, Barnabas and Saul upon the request of the
Deputy preached the Word of God. By their preaching Sergius was converted,
Elimas was the more obdurate; the Deputy was the better by it: the Sorcerer
much the worse, Act. 13.7, 8.

This word of God is called a sword, Heb. 4.12. (...), a double edged sword. It
has an edge, and an edge: alijs ad salutem, alijs ad perditionem. It has an
edge for some unto salvation; an edge for others unto perdition: an edge for
receivers unto redemption, an edge for contemners unto reiection. This is it
that our Savior says, Ioh. 12.48. He that rejects me, and receives not my
words, has one that judges him: the word that I have spoken, the same shall
judge him at the last day. The word which he has heard and contemned, the same
shall be his Judge.

Shall it be his Judge? Tell us then, Vbi nam iste talis judex sedebit? Where
shall this Judge, a Judge of this nature, the Word of God, where shall it sit?
Quali de solio suo voces aut sententias iudicij sui dabit? From what bench,
from what tribunal shall it give sentence? Lib. 10. Com. in Joan. ad cap. 12.
Rupertus shall make the answer: Prope aderit, intus sedebit, in conscientia
cujusque iustas sententias terribiliter personabit. It will be near unto thee,
it will have a seal within thee, even in thy conscience: and there it will
terribly pronounce just judgment against thee, if thou be a contemner of the
word of God.

Believe it, dearly Beloved believe it, The Word of God preached among us,
shall either save us or judge us. It shall be either a copy of our pardon, or
a bill of our indictment at the last day. For non cadit fine efficacia, as my
doctrine goes: The Word of God falls not out without its efficacy: it
effects whatsoever it promises, whatsoever it threatens.

This is it which Saint Austin has, Enarrat. in Psalm. 94. Sicut verum est quod
promisit, sic certum est quod minatur: As it is true what God in his holy Word
has promised, so certain is it what therein he threatens. And as thou
should be certainly assured of thy rest, of thy welfare, of thy felicity, of
thine eternity, of thine immortality, if thou be obedient to this Word of God;
so must thou be certainly assured of thy molestation, of thy vexation, of thy
ruin, of thy burning in eternal fire, and of thy damnation with the devils,
if thou be disobedient hereunto.

Thus have you as well the illustration, as the confirmation of my second
doctrine; which was, The Word of God falls not out without its efficacy.

The uses may be two. One for terror, the other for comfort. The terror is
for the wicked, the comfort for the godly. I can but point at them.

The first is terror to the wicked. The wicked when he shall consider, that
the threatenings of God against sinners denounced in the Word of God, are ever
true in their performance, and must therefore be performed upon him, how shall
he stand affected? Shall not a fear seize upon him, Ier. 49.24.
shall not anguish and sorrow enuiron him about? Shall not his heart be as the
heart of a woman in her pangs? His agony will be no less, than was
Belshazzars, Dan. 5.6. His countenance will be changed, his thoughts will be
troubled, the ioints of his loins will be loosed, his knees will smite one
against the other. Such will be his agony, when the threatenings in Gods Word
are brought home unto him, and laid unto his conscience: as that, Psalm. 11.6.
Upon the wicked the Lord shall rain snares, fire, and br^mstone, and a burning
tempest; this shall be the portion of their cup. And that Romans 2.9. Tribulation
and anguish upon every soul of man that does evil: And that Matthew. 5.10.
Every tree that brings not forth good fruit, is hewne down and cast into the
fire: And that Matthew. 25.30. Cast ye the unprofitable servant into utter
darkness, where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. O, what terrors shall
affright the wicked when he shall behold such an army of sorrows coming on
against him with due vengeance from the Lord?

Those terrors that are upon the wicked may be profitable unto us sundry ways.

First, they may teach us rightly to poise the weight of our sins in the
balance of the Sanctuary: and by the fearful issue and after-claps that they
bring, to judge how heinous they are in the sight of God.

Secondly, they may rouse us up to a due consideration of our natural misery.

Thirdly, they may provoke within us an appetite, even to hunger and thirst
after reconciliation by Christ.

Fourthly, they may deter us from the practice of sin. And so passing from
the terrors of the wicked, let us have an eye to the comforts of the godly.

The godly man, he that is the child of God, when he considers that the
promises of God made in his holy Word are ever true in their performance, and
therefore will be performed in his particular, how great cause has he of
exultation and rejoicing? Sweet is that promise made by Christ, Matthew 11.28.
Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you
rest. As sweet is that, John 6.35. He that believes on me shall never thirst;
and that, verse. 37. Him that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out. Turn
but to the second Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans, and there shall you
find a promise of glory, honor, peace, and eternal life, to such as with
patience continue in well doing.

Rest from labor, the asswaging of spiritual thirst, an irreuocable admission
into the fellowship of Christ, glory, honor, peace, and life eternal! Such is
the issue of our obedience, the end of our well-doing. Of this issue, or end,
to speak as it deserves, what tongue of men or Angels is able? A very small
quantity hereof here in life obtained, O, how passes it all understanding! And
who is he that can utter the sweetness of that peace of conscience, and
spiritual rejoicing in God, which himself has here in this life tasted? And
if the beginning be so sweet, how sweet shall the fullness be? Of which
fullness vouchsafe most gracious Father in thy good time to make us all
partakers, for Jesus Christ his sake.

THE Seventh Lecture.
AMOS 3.6. Shall a trumpet be blown in the City, and the people not be afraid?


OF the six similitudes here brought by Amos, this is the last. The first was
from trauailers upon the way, Verse. 3. The second and third were from Lions,
Verse. 4. The fourth and fifth, from Fowlers, Verse. 5. This, the sixth and the
last is from Warriors, Verse. 6. All do serve for the polishing and adorning
of the proposition set down in the second Verse of this Chapter, the substance
whereof is, God being good and gracious to a people, if he be repaid with
unthankfulness, will assuredly visit that people, and punish them for all
their iniquities. My method for the handling of this sixth similitude shall be
no other, then what it was for the other five. I will first clear the reading,
and then proceed to such observation, as may be for the amendment of our lives.

For the reading first. Shall a trumpet be blown in a city, and the people
not be afraid?

This Trumpet with the Vulgar Latin is Tuba, but with Tremelius and Iunius,
with Mercerus and with Drusius it is Buccina. Tuba is the Hebrews (...).
Joseph. Antiq. Iudaic. l. 3. cap. 11.
Chatsotsrah; Buccina is their Sophar, Grace (...). Hier. Hos. 5 8.
Schophar, and so are these two, Chatsotsrah and Schophar translated by the
author of the Vulgar Latin, Hos. 5.8. Claugite buccina in Gabaa, Tuba in Roma.
Saint Hierome upon that place puts a difference between Buccina and Tuba.
Buccina pastoralis est, and cornu recurno efficitur, Tuba autem de aere
efficitur, vel argento. According to this distinction Buccina is the Cornet,
and Tuba the Trumpet. So is that place Englished in our newest translation:
Blow ye the Cornet in Gibeah, and the Trumpet in Romah. And so my text should
speak of a Cornet, not of a Trumpet. Shall a Cornet be blown in a City, and
the people not be afraid? Shall a Cornet be blown? The Hebrew is Schophar.

But this distinction of these two is not perpetually observed. The old
interpreters of the Bible do sometime confound them: and do render (...)
Schophar by Tuba, the Trumpet, and (...)
Chatsotsrah by Buccina, the Cornet. And therefore the reading here will be
indifferent either way, whether you read Cornet, or Trumpet. But I take the
Trumpet to be the fittest for us now to follow; because the Translators of our
new Church Bible, following the ancient Interpreters, do prefer the Trumpet.

That which follows, admits a twofold reading: One is, Shall not be
people be afraid? the other is, Shall not they run together? Each reading is
commended unto you by our late Translators: the first in the text; the second
in the margent. The difference arises from the Hebrew word (...)
Charadh, which signifies either to be afraid, or, to run together. Shall a
trumpet be blown in a city, and shall not the people either be Pauere,
expauescere.
afraid, or Propere accurrere.
run together.

We shall the more easily understand what this interrogation intends; and
what answer is to be made unto it, if we consider what the ancient use of
Trumpets was.

The ancient use of Trumpets is delivered by a writer of greatest antiquity
from Gods own prescription. Moses in the tenth of Numbers is commanded to make
two Trumpets of silver, which were to be for present use, and for use in time
to come. For the present they were to serve Numb. 10.2.
for the calling of the assembly, and for the iourneying of the camps.

There is a double use of them commanded for the time to come; one in time of
war, the other in time of peace. The use of Trumpets in time of war was, to
assure them, that God would then remember them for good, and save them from
their enemies, Verse 9. The use of them in time of peace, was, for their times
of joy, and appointed festiuities. In the day of your gladness, and in your
solemn days, and in the beginnings of your mouths, ye shall blow with the
Trumpets over your burnt offerings, and over the sacrifices of your peace
offerings, that they may be to you for a memorial before your God, Verse. 10.

O^ this double use of the Trumpet Saint Hierome makes mention, in his Comment
upon Hos. 5. Tuba in bellis ac solonnitatibus concrepabant: they blew with the
Trumpet in time of war, and in their solemnities. So does Isidore in the
eleventh book of his Etymologies, chap. 20. Tuba adhibebatur, non solum in
pratijs, sed in omnibus festis diebus: The Trumpet was used not only in war,
but also upon their feast-dayes. Whence is that, Psalm. 81.3. Blow up the
Trumpet in the new moon, in the time appointed, on our solemn feast day.

And why was the Trumpet to be blown upon the solemn feast day, but to call
the people together to their holy assemblies? So says D^usius; Ad sonum
buccinae accurrebat populus, cum ad sacra vocaretur: At the sound of the
Trumpet, the people met together for the hearing of divine service. The Trumpet
then called them together, as now the Bells call us.

This use of the Trumpet was merely Ecclesiastical. There were also civil
uses of it even in the time of peace; as when the people were to be called
together, to hear some charge given them; or to give or take aduisement
concerning the affairs of the Commonwealth.

These uses of the Trumpet, as well Civil as Ecclesiastical, Drusius has
touched in his sacred observations, lib. 14. cap. 18. There he says, that at
the sound of the Trumpet, the people were wont speedily to come together, Vel
ad audiendum aliquid, vel ad orandum, vel denique ad agendum sine consultandum
de republica: they came together, either to hear somewhat, or to pray, or to
deliberate and consult about public matters.

You see, what anciently were the uses of the Trumpet. Now it will not be any
hard matter for us to give an answer to the Interrogation, which way soever it
be made. If it be made according to the reading in the margent, [Shall a
Trumpet be blown in a city, and the people not run together?] the answer
must be negative, No; a Trumpet shall not be blown in a city, but the people
will run together. They will assemble themselves, they will come together at
the sound of the Trumpet, either to hear what shall be delivered to them from
the Magistrate; or to enter into consultation about the affairs of the city;
or to prostrate themselves in devotion before the Lord in his holy Temple. If
the Trumpet be blown, they will run together.

This our marginall reading, Tremelius and Iunius have embraced as the
chiefest, yet so that they reject not the other. Nay, so far are they from
rejecting the other, as that they join both together. They make the
interrogation to be thus: Shall a Trumpet be blown in a city, and populus
trepide non accurrerint? shall not the people tremblingly run together? The
interrogation thus framed, may have an answer affirmative: A Trumpet may be
blown in a city, and the people shall not need tremblingly to run together.
For why should here be any trembling where there is no cause of fear?

There was a feast of Trumpets yearly to be observed in the seventh month, on
the first day of the month, Leuit. 23.24. It was a day Numb. 29.1
of blowing the Trumpets unto the people. The Trumpets were blown and the
people ran together, but without fear, without trembling.

There was a year of Iubile every fiftieth year to be hallowed. Every
fiftieth year on the tenth day of the seventh month, the Trumpet of Iubile
was to sound, Leuit. 5.19. The Trumpet sounded; the people met, but without
fear, without trembling.

You will say these were set times of festiuitie, times of joy, and the blowing
of Trumpets at these times was ordinary, and therefore the people now had no
reason to be afraid at the sound of the Trumpets: but say, the sound of the
Trumpets were extraordinary; would not the people then be afraid, and
tremblingly run together? No; not ever then.

Extraordinary was the sound of the Trumpets, when David with great solemnity
fetched the Arc from Kiriath jearim. He brought up the Arc from thence with
songs and with Harpes, and with Psalteries, and with Timbrels, and with
Cymbals, and with Trumpets, 1 Chronicles. 13.8. The Trumpets were blown. Here was
much joy expressed; here was no show of fear at all.

Extraordinary was the sound of the Trumpets at the dedication of Solomon's
Temple. Then besides the Levites who had their Cymbals and Psalteries and
Harpes, there were an hundred and twenty Priests sounding with Trumpets, 2 Chronicles. 5.12. The Trumpets were blown; much joy was thereby expressed, there
was no show of fear at all.

Extraordinary was the sound of the Trumpets at the restitution of religion by
Hezekiah King of Judah; and then were the Levites present with their Cymbals,
their Psalteries, and their Harpes, and the Priests with their Trumpets, 2 Chronicles. 29.26. The Trumpets were blown, joy was expressed, no fear appeared.

Thus we see Trumpets have been blown, not only at ordinary times, but also at
times extraordinary, and yet have the people had no cause of fear. What shall
we then say to this interrogation, as it is made by Tremelius and Iunius? Shall
a Trumpet be blown in a City, and shall not the people tremblingly with fear
run together?

The interrogation thus framed, for the substance of it, well agrees with our
new translation; Shall a Trumpet be blown in a City, and the people not be
afraid? and therefore we may alike resolve for both.

Our resolution may be thus: This Trumpet must be blown, not in time of peace
when all is quiet; but in time of war, when all is in combustion: and it must
be blown, not in the streets of the city, but from the watchtower: and it
must be blown not at an ordinary time, but when men least think of it, to
give warning of the sudden approach of the enemy unto the city. To this
understanding we are directed by Jonathan, the Chaldee Paraphrast, who adds
unto my text non suo tempore, to give the meaning of it: Shall a Trumpet be
blown in a city, non suo tempore, out of its ordinary time, and shall not the
people be afraid?

So, our Prophet here speaks de clangore buccinae extraordinario, of an
extraordinary blowing of the Trumpet; of its being blown alieno tempore, at a
strange time. Such a blowing of the trumpet, at such a time, was ever a sure
token, aduentantis hostis, that the enemy was not far of: Vnde pauor and
metus, says Drusius; whence fear and trembling were upon the people.

Now to the interrogation, Shall a trumpet be blown in a city, and the people
not be afraid; or, shall they not tremblingly run together? Our answer is
negative; No. It cannot be, that in time of war a trumpet shall be blown in
a city at an extraordinary, an unusual and a strange hour, but the people
will be afraid, and will tremblingly run together.

Hitherto has the reading been cleared, and the interrogation answered: and
now let us see whereto this sixth similitude taken from warriors is appliable.
Saint Hierome applies it, as he does the former. He applies it to such as live
in discord and variance. He makes it to be their punishment; Vt in ciuitate
Domini constituti, tubae sonitu terreantur: that being placed in the city of
the Lord, they be terrified with the sound of the trumpet. By this city of the
Lord, he means the holy Catholic Church, and by this trumpet, the word of
God sounding in the Church. For thus he adds, Whatsoever is spoken in holy
Scriptures, it is tuba comminans, a threatening trumpet, that with a mighty
voice penetrateth the ears of believers. If we be righteous, this Trumpet of
Christ calls us unto blessedness; but if wicked, unto torments. With the
sound of this trumpet shall they be terrified that live in discord, and
variance. Of the foulness and leprosy of which sin, I spoke at large in my
last Sermon out of this place. Now therefore I leave it, and proceed to some
other application of this sixth similitude.

Saint Cyril applies it to the Prophets of the Lord, and his Ministers, thus:
If a trumpet be blown in a city, to give warning of the approach of the
enemy, who is there so without all sense of grief, as not to conceive
exceeding fear of future evils? But you, you the people of Israel, are so void
of all sense and feeling, that though my trumpets cease not continually to
sound aloud in your ears, and to fore-warne you of evils, that shall come to
pass, you receive no profit thereby. Though you understand by the sound of my
trumpets, that your cities which are now inhabited, Ezech. 12.20.
shall be laid waste, and your Land shall be desolate; yet you take courage to
your selves against such terrors, Amos 6.3.
you put far away from you the evil day, you say within your selves, Ezech.
12.27.
the vision which this man sees, is for many days to come, and he prophesies
of the times that are far off. To this purpose Saint Cyril.

With him agree three great Rabbis, R. David, R. Abraham, R. Selomo. They make
the Lord here to speak after this manner: If a trumpet be blown in a city at
an unseasonable hour to give warning that the enemy is coming, the people
will exceedingly tremble and be afraid. Why then, are not you afraid? why
tremble ye not at the voices of my Prophets? My Prophets are my trumpeters: by
them I give you warning of the evils that hang over your heads, and will ere
long fall upon you. Why are you not afraid? why tremble you not?

To this application of this sixth similitude, our new Expositors for the most
part have subscribed. They understand by this City the Church of God, by the
Trumpet the Word of God, by the people the bearers of the Word: and so, thus
stands the application: When a trumpet gives a sudden sign by the sound of it
out of a watchtower, all the people harken, and are troubled, and prepare
themselves this way or that way, according as the trumpet gives the token: So
at the voice of God founding by his Ministers, we ought to give ear and be
attentive, and be moved at the noise of it, and as he gives warning, prepare
our selves and look about us while it is time, lest afterward it be too late.

Now the lesson which we are to take from hence is this, The word of God
uttered by his Ministers, deserves more reverence, fear, and trembling, then
does a trumpet sounding an alarm from a watchtower.

For the word of God is a trumpet too, and a trumpet of a far shriller sound.
The blowers of this trumpet are the Ministers of the Word, who in this regard
are called sometimes Tuba Dei, and sometimes Speculatores. They are Gods
trumpet, and they are watchmen. They are Tuba Dei, Gods trumpet: and hereby
are they put in mind of their duty; even to denounce perpetual war against
the wicked; and to excite men, even to fight against the Devil, and to bid
defiance unto sin. And they are Speculatores, they are Watchmen, placed by
God in his holy City, the Church, Velut in specula, as in a Watchtower, to
watch for the safety of the people, and to blow the trumpet unto them, when
any danger is at hand.

Both appellations are met together in Ierem. 6.17. Constitui super vos
speculatores; audite vocem tubae: I have set over you watchmen: hearken to the
sound of the trumpet. Bishops, Pastors, Ministers; they are these watchmen:
and we are to hearken to the sound of their trumpets.

Their trumpets? True. For Ministers have trumpets. Their trumpets are two. One
is Territoria, the other is Consolatoria. One is a terrifying trumpet; the
other trumpet is comforting.

Of the former God speaks by his Prophet Esaias chap. 58.1. Cry aloud, spare
not, lift up thy voice like a trumpet, and show my people their transgression,
and the house of Jacob their sins. So does he by Zephania, chap. 1.16. A day
of the Trumpet and alarm against the fenced cities, and against the high
towers: And I will bring distress upon men, that they shall walk like blind
men, because they have sinned against the Lord. This trumpet you may call tubam
legis, the trumpet of the Law: because by if the Minister denounces the curses
of the Law, the wrath of God, misery, and calamity to every unrepentant sinner.

Of the other trumpet of the ministry, we may understand that, Esaias 27.13. The
great Trumpet shall be blown, and they shall come, which were ready to perish
in the Land of Assyria, and the outcasts in the Land of Egypt, and shall
worship the Lord in the holy Mount at Jerusalem. This trumpet you may call
tubam Euangelij, the trumpet of the Gospel: because by it the Minister
pronounces the blessings of the Gospel; the love of God, a quiet conscience,
and true felicity to every true believer.

These two trumpets, terrifying and comforting, that of the Law, this of the
Gospel, are still of use in the Church of Christ, the Minister sounding
sometimes woe, sometimes weal, according as our sins shall give him cause.

But why is it, that the ministry of the Word, and the preaching thereof, is
compared to a trumpet? Hector Pintus in his Comment upon the eight and fiftieth
of Esaias gives hereof two reasons. One is, because, as the material trumpet
calls and encourages unto war; so this spiritual trumpet, the preaching
of the Word, calls and encourages us to fight valiantly against the world,
the flesh and the Devil. The other is, because as the material trumpet is
blown at solemnities to betoken joy: so this spiritual trumpet, the preaching
of the Word, should stir us up ad laborem in praesenti, and ad gaudium in
futuro: to labor in this life, and to joy in that to come. For as he adds,
hic est locus vincendi, ibi triumphandi: hic breuis laboris, illic sempiterna
quietis: hic poenae transeuntis, ibi gloriae permanentis. Here is the place for
ouercomming, there for the triumph: here of some little labor, there of
eternal quiet: here of pain that passes away, there of glory that endures.

The comparison standing thus between the preaching of the Word, and a
trumpet, warranteth the truth of the doctrine propounded; which was, The word
of God uttered by his Ministers deserves more reverence, fear, and trembling,
then does a trumpet sounding an alarm from a watchtower.

This representation of the word of God by a trumpet should ever sound, and as
it were, go before us, in all our actions, in war, in peace, in all meetings
and joyful feasts, that all our doings may be acceptable to the Lord our God.

The doctrine now delivered, standing upon the comparison that is between the
preaching of the Word and a trumpet, may in terms absolute be thus; The
preaching of the word of God is to be harkened unto with all reverence. It is
the point I handled in my first Sermon upon this third Chapter of Amos. My
Thesis then was, The word of God is diligently to be harkened unto. What
proofs and reasons out of Scripture I then produced for the confirmation of
that truth, and what use was made thereof, I now stand not to repeat. Nor need
I so to do. The holy Scripture being as the Ocean of waters which can never
be exhausted, yields us great variety of matter, though we speak again
and again to the same point. I proceed then with my Thesis, as it is given in
terms absolute, The preaching of the word of God is to be harkened unto with
all reverence.

I urge this duty,

First, from the honor of him that speaks.

Secondly, from the danger of him that hears negligently.

Thirdly, from the profit of him that hears with diligence.

First, the preaching of the word of God is to be harkened unto with all
reverence for the honors sake of him that speaks. For the honors sake of
him that speaks? Why? Who is he? Is he not some Prophet, some Apostle, some
Priest, or Minister; one whom we know to be of mean descent, some Amos 1.1.
Heard-man, some Matthew. 4.18.
Fisherman, some 1 Thessalonians. 2.9. Act. 18 3.
Tent-maker, some Matthew. 13.55.
Carpenters son. Is not his mother called Mary? and his brethren James and
Ioses, and Simon, and Judas? And his sisters, are they not all with us? How
then is it that you urge us to give ear with reverence to the preaching of the
Word, for the honors sake of him that speaks?

Our blessed Savior Christ Jesus, vntieth this knot for me. He to comfort his
Apostles against the time of persecution, thus says unto them, Matthew. 10.19,
20. Take no thought how or what ye shall speak, for it shall be given you in
the same hour what ye shall speak. For it is not ye that speak, but the
Spirit of your Father, that speaks in you. In the thirteenth of Mark, Verse
11. thus. It is not ye that speak, but the holy Ghost. In the twelfth of
Luke, verse 12. thus. The holy Ghost shall teach you in the same hour what ye
ought to say. Now see; It is the Spirit of your Father; the Spirit of God; the
holy Ghost that speaks in his Ministers. Why then, ye are with reverence to
give ear to them, when they preach unto you, for the honors sake of him that
speaks.

Qui vos audit, me audit, says Christ unto his Disciples, Luke 10.16. He that
hears you, hears me; and he that despises you, despises me. He that
hears you hears me! It is an admirable and gracious dispensation from God,
to speak unto man, not in his own person, and by the voice of his thunders
and lightnings, Exodus 20.18.
or with the exceeding loud sound of a trumpet: but by Prophets, by Apostles,
by Disciples, by Ministers; by men of our own nature, flesh of our flesh, and
bones of our bones, by men of our own shape and language, James 5.17.
by men subject to the same passions, whereto we are subject. God is he that
speaks from above, that blesses and curses, that binds and loses, that
exhorts and disswadeth by the mouth of man. For this respect and relations
sake between God and his Ministers, whom it has pleased of his mercy in some
sort to dignifie with the representation of his own person here upon the
earth, the world has ever held them in very reverent estimation.

Remember the Galatians. Though Saint Paul preached the Gospel unto them
through infirmity of the flesh, Galat. 4.13.
without the honor, without the ostentation, without the pomp of this world,
rather as one that studied to bring his person into contempt, than otherwise;
yet were they so far off from despising or rejecting him, that they rather
received him as an Angel of God, yea, as Christ Jesus. And he bare them
record, that if it had been possible, they would have plucked out their own
eyes, and have given them to him. If it had been possible, that is, if Nature
and the Law of God had not forbidden it: or, if it had been possible, that is,
if they might have done it sine suo dispendio, as Haymo and Remigius do
interpret it, if they might have done it without their own utter undoing: or
if it had been possible, that is, if it might have been ad Ecclesiae
vtilitatem, so speak Aquinas and Gorran, if it might have been for the good
of the Church, they would have plucked out their own eyes, and have given them
to Paul. Would they have plucked out their own eyes? Nihil habet quisquam
charius oculis suis: There is nothing more dear unto a man than are his eyes.
And yet if it had been possible, would the Galatians have plucked out their
own eyes, and have given them to Paul.

When the Children of Israel murmured against Moses and Aaron, Moses said unto
them, Exodus 16.8. The Lord hears your murmurings which ye murmr against
him; and what are we? Your murmurings are not against us, but against the
Lord. What are we, but Serui and Ministri, the Servants and Ministers of the
Lord? Your murmurings are not against us, but against the Lord.

This is that, which the Lord says concerning his Prophet, Deuteronomy. 18.19.
Whosoever will not harken to the words which he shall speak in my name, Ego
vltor existam, I will require it of him, I will be his auenger. Whereupon
Didacus Stella: Hominem non debes aspicere, sed Deum, Enarrat. in cap. 10.
Lucae.
qui in eo loquitur; Look not upon man, set not thy thoughts upon him, but
upon God that speaks in him. For the words which he speaks, he speaks
in the name of God.

But say the Preacher be a naughty, a wicked man; what shall I then do? Deum
qui per ipsum loquitur, debes respicere. Thou must have regard to God, that
speaks by him. God diuina and admirabili sua virtute, God of his divine and
marvelous power, is able to bring to pass excellent and divine works by
evil instruments.

God fed Elias by the ministry of Ravens. Ravens brought him bread and flesh
in the morning; and bread and flesh in the evening, 1 King. 17.6. Did Ravens
bring him food? Cur ita? Why so Lord? Could thou not command Doves, and
other clean birds to feed thy Prophet, but thou must provide for him by
Ravens? Note here the mystery. God uses many times to give unto his people the
spiritual food of their souls, sound and wholesome doctrine, by evil and
wicked men, as he gave good bread and flesh to Elias by Ravens: tu vero comede,
only eat thou, and receive thou from the hand of God what he sends: and be
not curious to know, whether he that brings thee thy souls meat, be a Raven
or a dove, a wicked or a good man, so the food he brings thee be sound and
come from God. By this time you see, you are to give ear with reverence to the
preaching of the word of God for the honors sake of him that speaks.

You are now in the second place to be urged to the performance of this duty,
from the danger of him that hears negligently. The danger is great. Saint
Augustine discouers it by comparing the word of God for the estimation that is
to be held of it, to the Body of Christ in the Eucharist. His words are in the
six and twentieth of his fifty Homilies; Non minus reus erit, qui verbum Dei
negligenter audierit, quam qui Corpus Christi in terram cadere sua negligentia
permiserit: Whosoever shall hear the word of God negligently, shall be no
less guilty, than he that by his own negligence shall suffer the Body of
Christ to fall upon the ground. And therefore with what solicitude and care we
take heed that no part of Christ's body which is given to us by the Minister,
do fall unto the ground; with the like we should take heed, that no part of
Gods word that is offered unto us by the Preacher, do either by our wandering
thoughts, or our irreuerent talking fall from out our hearts and perish.

But say, this solicitude and care be wanting in us; what then? Then the danger
is, our very prayers will be an abomination to the Lord. So says the holy
Ghost, Prou. 28.9. He that turns away his ear from hearing the Law, even his
prayer shall be an abomination: where by turning away the care from hearing,
he means not only the open contemning and despising of the word of God, but
also every negligent, careless, and unprofitable hearing thereof. And so it is
true: He that turns away his ear from hearing the Law, his prayer shall be
an abomination to the Lord, the Lord will loath and abhor the prayer he
makes, and will not hear him.

There is yet a further danger of our negligent hearing, and that is the loss
of the word of God from among us. Negligent hearing deserves no less: for it
is a rebellion against God, and God will tie the tongues of his servants, that
they shall not preach his Word to such. So tied he the tongue of Ezeckiel,
chap. 3.26. O son of man, I will make thy tongue cleave to the roof of thy
mouth, that thou shall be dumb, and shall not be to this people a reprouer,
for they are a rebellious house. Whereupon Great Gregory; Propter ma^^^
auditores bonis sermo doctoribus tollitur: for ill hearers God sometimes
stops the mouths of good teachers. So stopped he the mouth of Saint Paul,
that he should not teach in Jerusalem, Act. 22.18. Make haste, and get thee
quickly out of Jerusalem, for they will not receive thy testimony concerning
me. The Apostles that would have preached in Asia, could not, for the Spirit
would not suffer them, Act. 16.7.

Christ forbids us dare sanctum canibus. Matthew. 7.6. Give not that which is
holy unto dogs, neither cast ye your pearls before swine. Who are those
dogs, who these swine, but men living in incurable impiety without all hope
of amendment, and wallowing in the mire of unbridled luxury? who if they
vouchsafe to come to this Watchtower of the Lord to hear the sound of the
Trumpet, they give ear but negligently, but unprofitably, but contemptuously?
Such are they whom this inhibition concerns, Give not that which is holy unto
dogs, neither cast ye your pearls before swine. For what is this holy
thing, that we must not give unto them, what these pearls, but veritatis
mysteria, the mysteries of truth enclosed within the profunditie of the
Scriptures, as pearls within shell-fishes? These holy mysteries be kept back
from them, that will be negligent, unprofitable and contemptuous hearers. And
thus you see, you are to give ear with reverence to the preaching of the word
of God, for the dangers sake of him that hears negligently.

You will now in the third place be persuaded to the performance of this duty,
for the profits sake of him that hears diligently. Here is a threefold
profit for him.

1. His heart hereby shall be softened. 2. It shall be sweetened. 3. It shall be
cleansed.
Enarrat. 1. Dom. 5. post. Trin. page 237.
That the preaching of the Word softeneth the heart, Petrus de Palude would
prove by the confession of the Spouse, Cant. 5.6. Anima mea liquefacta est, vt
dilectus locutus est; As soon as my beloved spoke, as soon as I heard the
voice of my Savior, my soul even melted. But fitter to our purpose is the
example of Ahab, 1 King. 21. Elias comes unto him with the word of God in his
mouth: In the place where dogs licked the blood of Naboth, shall dogs lick
thy blood, even thine, O King, verse. 19. and verse. 21. I will bring evil upon
thee, and will take away thy posterity, all thy posterity. Ahab hereupon
rents his clothes, puts sackcloth upon his flesh and lies therein, fasteth,
and goes comfortless, verse. 27. See you not the heart of Ahab humbled, his
hard heart softened by the word of God.

In the second Chapter of the book of Judges, a Messenger of the Lord comes up
from Gilgal to Bochim, with words of reproof against the people of Israel, and
says, I made you to go up out of Egypt, and have brou ht you unto the Land,
which I swear unto your Fathers, and I said, I will never break my covenant
with you; and ye shall make no league with the inhabitants of this Land; you
shall throw down their Altars: but ye have not obeyed my voice; why have ye
done this? This was the word of God unto them: they heard it, and cried out,
and wept. Their hearts were humbled: their hard hearts were softened. This is
it that the Lord has said, Ierem. 23.29. Is not my sword like fire? and like a
hammer that breaks the rock in pieces? Yes Lord: thy Word is like fire, and
like a hammer that breaks the rock in pieces: It mollifieth and softeneth
the hard stony and flintie heart.

A second profit that the Word preached brings unto us, is, that it sweetneth
the heart. For the word of God is Manna, habens in se omne delectamentum
saporis, it is as the Celestial Manna, that Angels food, that bread from
Heaven, Wisd. 16.20.
very pleasant and well gusted. David esteems is to be sweeter than Honey, and
the dropping of the hony-combe, Psalm. 19.10. And Psalm. 119.103. out of the
admiration thereof, he says, O how sweet are thy words unto my taste! yea
sweeter are they than Honey to my mouth. Fau^ mellis verba composita, Prou.
16.24. Fair, pleasant, and well composed words are as an Hony-combe, sweet to
the soul, and health to the bones. Quae verba composita, dulcia sunt, si tua
non sunt? So Claudius Aquauiua in his Meditations upon the 119. Psalm: What
fair, what pleasant, what wellcomposed words are sweet, Lord, if thine be
not? Thy words, Lord, de melle coeli mellea, and de lumine tuo luminosa animam
non dulcorant modo, sed dulcedine inebriant. Thy words, Lord, sweet as is the
Honey of Heaven, and full of light through thy light, do not only sweeten the
soul, but do even inebriate it with sweetness.

The third profit that the Word preached brings unto us, is, that it
cleanses the heart. It makes clean the heart, according to that saying of
Christ, John 15.3. Now ye are clean through the Word which I have spoken unto
you. Clean are ye, Non propter baptismum, quo loti estis, Not for the
Baptism wherewith you have been baptized, sed propter verbum quod locutus sum
vobis, but for the Word which I have spoken unto you. You are clean, not for
your Baptism, but for the Word. So Saint Augustine Tract. 80. in Iohannem,
Detrahe verbum and quid est aqua nisi aqua? Accedit verbum ad elementum and sit
sacramentum: Take away the Word, and what is the water but water? the Word
comes to the element, and it is made a Sacrament. You are clean then, not by
your Baptism, but by the Word. And you are clean by the Word, Non quia
dicitur, sed quia creditur. You are clean by the Word, not because the Word is
preached unto you, but because you believe it when it is preached. The
Pharisees and other hypocrites did hear the Word of Christ, yet were they not
thereby made clean, because they did not believe the Word of Christ. And so
does Rupertus expound these words. You are clean. You are clean, because you
believe that which I have said unto you, concerning my death and resurrection,
how I must die for your sins, and rise again for your justification, and go
away to provide a place for you. You have not only heard, but also have
believed the Word which I have spoken unto you, and therefore are ye clean.

The fruit then, and the profit, that arises unto us from our reverent hearing
of the Word preached is by our faith. It is faith that purifieth our hearts,
says Peter, Act. 15.9. Faith it is, by which we apprehend the blood of the
Lamb of God, and are thereby cleansed from all our sins.

But I may not hold you ouer-long with the prosecution of this point. Let it
please you to be remembered, that we have hitherto been moved to the
performance of a holy duty, even to the reverent hearing of the word of God:
and this, first for the honors sake of him that speaks; secondly, for the
danger: sake of him that hears negligently; thirdly, for the profits sake of
him that hears diligently: and that we understand this profit to be
threefold, that it softeneth our hard hearts, that it swe^teneth them, that it
cleanses them. What now remains, but that we pray God to dismiss us with a
blessing?

We humbly beseech thee, most gracious God, so to open our hearts, and to
unlock the cares of our understanding, that now and ever hearing thy Word
profitably, we may observe, learn, and embrace such passages therein, as are
necessary to the confirming of our weak faith, and the Amendment of our
sinful lives. Grant this dear Father, for thy best beloved Son Jesus
Christ. AMEN.

THE Eighth Lecture.
AMOS 3.6. Shall there be evil in a City, and the Lord has not done it?


THis short sentence you may call the Conclusion or the explication of the
similitudes that went before. The similitudes were six; all taken from vulgar
experience, and such as is incident to a Shepherds walk. The explication, as
it is given by Theodoret and Remigius, stands thus: As it cannot be, that two
should walk together, except they be agreed; or that a Lion should roar in
the forest, when he has no prey; or that a lions whelpe should cry out of his
den, if he have gotten nothing; or that a bird should fall in a snare upon
the earth, where no ginne is for him; or that a fowler should take up his snare
from the ground, before he have taken somewhat; or that the Trumpet should
sound an alarm in the City, and the people not fear: so it cannot be, that
there should be any evil in a City, except the Lord command it so to be. This
dependence of these words upon the former is approved by Christophorus a Castro
in his Paraphrase.

Conrad Pelican and others, look not so far back for the coherence of
these words, but confine them within this sixth verse; thus: As a trumpet is
not blown in a City, but that the people thereof should be afraid, and run
together: so neither is there any evil sent by the Lord to any place, city, or
country, but that the people thereof should repent and amend their lives.

The (...), the reddition, suiting with the (...), with the proposition of the
similitude here drawn from the sound of the trumpet, should be thus: Shall a
Prophet in the name of the Lord foreshew any future evil, and shall not the
people be afraid? But, because whatsoever evils a Prophet foretells, he
foretells from the Lord; and the evils which he foretells, fall not out but
by the Lord; therefore Amos here omitting the Antecedent, sets down the
consequent: Shall there be evil in a city, and the Lord has not done it?

Shall there be evil, etc. Some years have passed away since I handled this
Text in the chiefest assembly of this Diocese. My then endeavors were to arm
my self, and that devout auditory with patience against the day of affliction.
And because that day, is a day, which every child of God must look for, I was
induced to publish what I then delivered, if it might be, for the comfort of
such as then heard me not: and I did it, under the title of the haven of the
afflicted.

What need then is there, that I should at this time recommend the same Text
unto you? What the wise son of Syrach in the eighteenth of his
Ecclesiasticus, verse. 6. says of such as search into the works of God, is
true of us, whose office is, to search into the words of God, Cum consummauerit
homo, tunc incipiet: When a man has done what he can, he must begin again.
For as Saint Hierome has well observed in his Comment upon the 90. Psalm,
Singula verba Scripturarum, singula Sacramenta sunt: every word in Scripture is
a Sacrament, and contains a mystery. Every word a Sacrament! The Rabbis stay
not here: they say as much of every letter; Nullum est iota in Scriptura, a quo
non pendeant mont es doctrinarum: there is not an iota, any the least letter in
the Scriptures, but thereon do depend mountains of doctrines. Saint Hierome
in the second book of his Commentaries upon the Epistle to the Ephesians yet
goes further; Singuli apices, singula puncta in diuinis Scripturis, plena sunt
sensibus: there is not a tittle, not a point in the divine Scriptures, but its
full of spiritual meaning, full of senses.

Not a word, but its a Sacrament! not a letter, but it yields mountains of
doctrines! not a point, but its full of senses! Well then may the words which I
have now read unto you, yield variety of matter, fit for our deepest
meditations a second time: and because they follow in course in this Chapter,
the exposit on whereof I have for this place undertaken, I may not in silence
pass them over, but must take a reuiew of them, and recommend them to your
Christian and devout attentions.

Shall there be evil in a City, and the Lord has not done it?

Herein observe with me three circumstances; Quis, Quid, Vbi. Quis, the Agent;
Quid, the Action; Vbi, the place of performance. The Agent, is the Lord; the
Action, is a doing of evil; the place of performance is a City. Shall there
be evil in a City, and the Lord has not done it?

You see the bounds of my present discourse. I will go over them with as much
breuity and perspicuity as I may, Gods holy grace assisting me, and your
Christian and accustomed patience giving leave.

The first point I am to handle is Quis: it is the Agent. His name in my Text
is Jehovah, and it is the most proper name of God.

Is his name Jehovah? How then is it that Jacob the Patriarch, Genesis 32.29.
asking after the name of God, receives answer in the Vulgar Latin, Cur quaeris
nomen meum, quod est mirabile? Wherefore is it, that thou do ask after my
name, seeing it is wonderful? And how comes it to pass, that the like answer
is given unto Manoah, Judges 13 18. Cur quaeris nomen meum, quod est mirabile?
Why ask thou thus after my name, seeing it is secret? And why does Agur
enquire with admiration, Prou. 30.4. Who has ascended up into Heaven? or who
has come down from thence? Who has gathered the wind in his fist? Who has
bound the waters in a garment? Who has established all the ends of the earth?
Quod nomen eius? What is his name? Can thou tell? as if it were impossible to
find out a fit name for God.

Much disputing is there in the Schools about the name of God, which they
reckon up by a threefold divinity. The first is Salmeron Disp. 4. in 1. Ephesians.
Tom. 15. page 187. Et in 1. Joan. 1. Disp. 5. Tom. 16. page 170.
Theologia affirmatiua, an affirmative Divinity: the second is, Theologia
mystica sieve negatiua, a mystical or negative divinity: the third is,
Theologia Symbolica, a symbolicall divinity.

In the affirmative divinity, God is called by such names as do sound out his
perfection, such as are, Genesis 17.1.
Omnipotent, Genesis 21.33.
Everlasting, Good, Romans 16.27.
Wise, Apocal. 15.4.
Holy, Deuteronomy. 32.4.
Just, and Exodus 34.6.
True.

In the mystical or negative divinity, no certain name is given him, to
describe him, what he is, but to show what he is not. Such appellations are
these, 1 Timothy 1.17.
Immortal, Invisible, Romans 1.23.
Incorruptible, Bernard. Ser. 6. Super Cantic.
Incorporeall, Aug. Tom. 10. de verbis Apost. Sermon. 1.
Ineffable, Inestimable, Incomprehensible, Infinite, Bernard paru. Sermon. 51.
Immense, Undivided, Unvariable, Unchangeable.

In the symbolicall divinity any name may be given him: he may be called
Salmeron. D^sp. 5. in 1 Joan. 1. To. 16. p. 170.
a Lion, a Lamb, a Worm, a Calfe, Light, Heaven, a Star, any thing else, by
Trelcat. instit. lib. 1. page 20.
Analogy or similitude, Nulla Salmeron. in Ephesians. 1. Disp. 4. page 187. Apud.
Aquin. 1. q. 13.11. in C.
siquidem res est, quae in aliquo Deum non referat: for there is not any thing,
but in somewhat it resembles God.

To the first of these three belongs this name of God in my Text; his name
Jehovah, Jehovah is among the affirmative names of God; and is of them the most
principal. So says Damascene lib. 1. Orthodox. fidei cap. 12. And well. For
it comprehends totum, all in it self, Velut qu^ddam pelagus, as a Sea of
substance, infinite and indeterminate.

Jehovah! It is the essential name of God, the name of his essence, for three
reasons. First, because God is of himself, not of any other. Secondly, because
other things are from God, not from any thing else, nor from themselves.
Thirdly, because God gives Esse reale, a real being to (and is ever true in)
his promises, and his threats.

All this is confirmed, Esaias 43.10. Ye are my witnesses, says Jehovah, that
ye may know and believe me, and understand that I am he: before me there was
no God formed, neither shall there be after me. I, even I am Jehovah; and
besides me there is no Savior. Yea, before the day was, I am he; and there is
none that can deliver out of my hand: I will work, and who shall let it? It is
from hence plain, that the Lord, Jehovah, is (...), and (...), he is of
himself alone, and ever of himself and of no other, the beginning and
fountain of all things else, that have any being.

See then here his Essence, verse. 10. I am he, verse. 11. I, even I, am the
Lord, verse. 12. Ye are my witnesses, that I am God, verse. 13. I am he. See here
his Eternity, verse. 10. Before me there was no God formed, neither shall there
be any after me: and verse. 13. Before the day was, I am. See also his
Omnipotency, verse. 13. Beside me there is no Savior: verse. 13. There is none
that can deliver out of my hand. Again in the same verse, I will work; and
who shall let it?

Great is the comfort that this name of God, his name Jehovah, may administer
unto us. Our God is Jehovah; of himself, eternal, and omnipotent: and
therefore will not fail to give unto us the good things which he has promised
in his holy Word.

Much too blame then are the Jews, who through their vain superstition,
holding this name of God, this great name, (...) as they call it, to be (...),
ineffable, and not to be pronounced, do neither write it, nor read it, nor
speak it: but as often as they meet with it in holy Scripture, they either read
for it Elohim, or Adonai, or do only name the four letters of which it
consists, Iod, He, Vau, He: whereas yet God has therefore made known this
his name to men, that men might read it, and pronounce it with a reverent and
an holy fear.

This our God the Lord, Jehovah, who is of himself alone, and gives a real
being to all things else, who is ever true; true in himself, true in his
works, and true in his words: this our God is a good God. Good in himself,
and good out of himself. Good in himself of his own essence, and the highest
degree of goodness.

He is sua essentia bonus, good of his own essence. For his goodness is not
by participation of good from any other, but naturally of himself from
everlasting: nor is his goodness accidental, but he is sua ipsius bonitas,
He is his own goodness.

And he is Sum bonus; he is good in the highest degree o^ goodness. For he
is that same Summum Bonum, that same chiefest good, that is of all men to be
sought for.

He is good also, Extrase, out of himself. For he is the Author of all good,
as well in making so many good creatures, as in doing good to them being made.
And this his goodness is either general or special.

His general goodness extends it self to all his creatures: not only to
such as have continued in that goodness, wherein they were created; but also
to such as have fallen away from their primigeniall goodness, even to evil
Angels, and to wicked men. Of this goodness I understand that, Psalm. 33.5. The
earth is full of the goodness of the Lord.

His special goodness I call that, by which he does good to the holy Angels,
confirmed in grace, and to his elect children among the sons of men. Such is
that, whereof we read, Psalm. 73.1. Truly God is good to Israel, even to such
as are of a clean heart. He is good, that is, he is gracious, favorable, and
full of compassion to Israel, to his elect and holy people, his holy Church,
yet militant upon the earth, delivering her from evil, and bestowing good upon
her.

Now if honey of its own nature and essence sweet, has no bitterness in it;
if the Sun of its own nature and essence light, has no darkness in it:
then out of doubt it cannot be, that our God the Lord, Jehovah, who is ever
good; good in se, and good, extra se; good of his own nature and essence, and
good toward all his creatures, should have any evil in him. No, Lord, We
confess before thee with thy holy servant David; Psalm. 5.4.
Thou art not a God that has pleasure in wickedness, neither shall evil
dwell with thee.

Thus you see, Quis, who this Agent is. He is our God, the Lord, I^houah. He,
who is his own being, and gives a real being to all things else; He, who is
absolutely good, good of his own essence, and good to all his creatures; He,
in whom there is no stain of evil. This is He, the Agent. Now follows his
Action, which seems to be a doing of evil, and is my second circumstance.
For my Text is,

Shall there be evil in a City, and the Lord has not done it?

Mat. 7.18.
It is an observation in Nature, that a good tree cannot bring forth evil
fruit. And there is an axiom in Philosophy, Omne agens agit sibi simile, Every
Agent produces the like unto it self. God, the Agent here, being absolutely
good; good in se, good extra se; good in himself, good to all his creatures,
cannot but produce a like action, even very good. How then is it, that here he
is said to do evil? For the untying of this knot, I will produce a few
distinctions; from them I will gather some conclusions; and the doubt will be
cleared.

My first distinction is; Things may be termed evil two manner of ways: some
are evil indeed, and of their own nature: in this rank we must place our
sins: some are evil not indeed, and in their own nature, but in regard of our
sense, apprehension and estimation; and in this rank we must place whatsoever
affliction God lays upon us in this life for our sins. This distinction is
Saint Basils, in his Homily, wherein he proves, that God is not the Author of
evils.

The next distinction is out of Saint Augustine, chap. 26. against Adimantus
the Manichee: There are two sorts of evils; there is malum, quod facit homo,
and there is malum, quod patitur. There is an evil, which the wicked man does;
and there is an evil, which he suffers. That is sin; this, the punishment
of sin. In that, the wicked are Agents; in this, they are Patients: that, is
done by them; this, is done upon them. They offend Gods Justice, and God in his
Justice offends them:

This is otherwise delivered by the same Father, De fide ad Petrum, cap. 21.
Geminum esse constat naturae rationalis malum: vnum, quo voluntary ipsa
deficit a summo Bono, creatore suo: Alterum quo iuuita punietur ignis aeterni
supplicio; illud passura just, quia hoc admisit unjust. It is, says he,
manifest, that there is a twofold evil of the reasonable nature, that is, of
man. One, whereby man voluntarily forsakes the chiefest good, God, his
Creator: the other, whereby he shall against his will be punished in the flames
of everlasting fire. So shall he justly suffer, that unjustly offended.

In his first Disputation against Fortunatus the Manichee, he speaks yet more
plainly. Since, says he, there are two kinds of evil Peccatum, and poena
peccati; Sin, and the punishment of sin; the one, namely sin, pertaines
not unto God: the other, the punishment of sin belongs unto him.

Tertullian lib. 2. contra Marcionem, cap. 14. more than a hundred years
before Saint Augustines time, delivers this distinction with much perspicuity.
There is malum delicti, and malum supplicij: or, there is malum culpae and
malum poenae. There is an evil of sin, and an evil of punishment: and of
each part he nominateth the Author; Malorum quidem peccati and culpae,
Diabolum; malorum vero supplicij and poenae Deum creatorem: Of the evils of
sin or default the Devil is the Author: but of the evils of pain and
punishment, he acknowledges the hand of God, the Creator.

This second distinction of evils, Rupertus well expresses in other terms:
There is malum, quod est iniquitas, and there is malum, quod est Afflictio
propter iniquitatem: There is an evil of Iniquity, and an evil of Affliction.
So he agrees with the ancient Fathers.

My third distinction is of the evils of punishment. Of these there are two
sorts. Some are only the punishments of sin, either eternal in Hell, or
temporal in this world: and some are so the punishments of sin, that they
are also sins and causes of sins.

My fourth distinction is, De malo culpae: it concerns the evil of sin. The
evil of sin may be considered three manner of ways. First, as it is a
sin repugnant to the Law of God; and so only is it malum culpae, the evil
of sin. Secondly, as it is a punishment of some precedent sin, for God
uses to punish sin with sin.

So did he punish it in the Gentiles, when he gave them over to a reprobate
mind, Romans 1.28.
to uncleanness, to the lusts of their own hearts, to do such things as were
not convenient, because when they knew God, they glorified him not as God, Romans
1.12. Thirdly, as it is a cause of some subsequent sin: such as was
excoecatio in Iudaeis, whereof we read, Esaias 6.10. Excoeca cor populi huius,
Make thou the heart of this people blind, or make it fat; make their ears
heavy, and shut their eyes, lest they see with their eyes, and hear with their
ears, and understand with their hearts, and convert, and be healed. This same
excoecation or blindness in the Jews, was the punishment of a pr^cedent
sin, namely, of their infidelity toward Christ; and it was a sin, because
every ignorance of God is a sin; and it was the cause of other sins: so
Saint Augustine teaches, lib. 5. cap. 3. contra Iulianum. And this distinction
is found in Saint Greg. Moral. lib. 25. cap. 9.

My fifth distinction concerns also the evil of sin. In sin there are
two things to be observed: there is Ens, and there is (...); there is Actio,
and there is Actionis malitia: or, there is Actio, and there is Actionis
irrectitudo, which is, declinatio a rectitudine voluntatis Dei in lege
reuelatae. In every sin there is an entitie, being, or action; and there is
of that entitie, being, or action, a crookedness, obliquity, or naughtiness.
Every entity, being, or action, as such is good from a good author, Act. 17.28.
God Almighty, in whom we live, move, and have our being. But the (...), the
crookedness, obliquity, and naughtiness of our Actions, the swaruing of them
from the line of Gods revealed will, as such, is wicked, from a wicked Author,
Genesis 6.5.
man's decayed nature: All the imaginations of the thoughts of man's heart, are
only evil continually.

Thus have you my distinctions. I promised to draw from them some conclusions.

The first is: God is the Author of every evil of punishment. Every such evil
God wills. The will of God is the primarie efficient cause thereof. It may
thus be proved. Every good thing is of God. Now every evil of punishment,
every punishment, is a good thing; for it is a work of justice, by which
sins are punished, and so a just work; and therefore every punishment is of
God, and God wills it.

The second conclusion: The evil of sin, as it is a punishment of some
former sin, God wills and inflicteth. This is that same received and much
used axiom in Diuinty; God punishes sins with sins. In so doing he does
no more, then what becomes a just Judge to do. Hereof Saint August^ne,
Contra aduersarium legis and Prophetarum lib. 1. cap. 24. thus speaks: It is
a fearful judgment, when God takes course, Vt crimina criminibus
vindicantur, and supplicia peccantium non sunt tormenta, sed incrementa
vitiorum. Fearful is the judgment, when God takes course, that sins be
revenged with sins, and the punishment of evil doers be no torment to them,
but additions to their evil doings. O, this is a fearful judgment, which
Saint Gregory, Moral. lib. 25. cap. 9. expresses after this manner: Hoc quippe
agitur, vt culpae culpis feriantur, quatenus suplicia fiant peccantium ipsa
incrementa vitiorum: It is the most admirable judgment of God, and most
dreadful of all other, when he takes course that sin be stricken with
sin, so as that the increase of sin is the punishment of the sinner: it
being ordered by disposition above, but yet by reason of the confusion of
iniquity beneath, both that the former sin is the cause of the latter, and
the latter is the punishment of the former. This of all the judgments of God
is the most admirable, the most dreadful.

My third conclusion, The evil of sin as it is an Action God wills; he
works it, he does it. For whatsoever God properly wills, the same he
works, he does it, either immediately by himself; or Sua virtute, through his
power, by others. Now if Quaecunque voluit, fecit, as it is Psalm. 115.3. if God
has done whatsoever he has willed, then surely, Quaecunque fecit, vult,
whatsoever he does, that he wills. And the truth is, not in Philosophy
only, also in the holy Scriptures, that God is the primary cause of all
actions, whatsoever they are, as far forth as they are actions. This is that
which Saint Paul affirms, 1 Cor. 12.6. God works all in all. For though he
speaks concerning the gifts of the holy Ghost, yet is his proposition
general, God works all in all: like to that, Romans 11.36. God is he, of whom
are all things, through whom are all things, and to whom are all things. All
things? He means not only all substances, but also all the actions of all
things. For as all actions are governed by him, and do tend unto him; so also
are they all of him, as of the first mouer; according to that, Act. 17.28. In
him we live, and move, and have our being.

The fourth Conclusion: The evil of sin, as it is sin, God properly
wills not, neither indeed can he will it. For Sin, as it is sin, is that
same (...) whereof I spoke in my fifth distinction: it is the crookedness, the
obliquity, the naughtiness of an action; it is the swaruing of an action from
the line of the will of God revealed in his holy Word: whereof to make God a
doer, or author, is execrable and blasphemous impiety. Non Deus volens
iniquitatem tu es, Psalm. 5.4. is a description of God according to his proper
nature; God is not a God that wills iniquity. It is proper unto him Nolle
inquitatem, Not to will iniquity. Habbakkuk avouches it, Chap. 1.13. O Lord my
God mine holy one, thou art of purer eyes than to behold evil, and can not
look on iniquity; Mundi sunt oculi tui, thine eyes are pure, free from all
spot and uncleanness; that thou can not behold evil, to approve it; nor
can look on iniquity, to allow it. So true is my fourth Conclusion: The
evil of sin, as it is sin, God properly wills not, neither indeed can he
will it.

Now out of these conclusions, and the fore-alleaged distinctions, I frame the
resolution to the doubt propounded. The doubt was, How is it that God
absolutely good, good in Se, and good Extra se: good in himself, and good to
all his creatures, is here in my Text said to do evil? The resolution is: The
evil in my Text is not malum culpae, delicti aut iniquitatis; it is not the
evil of default, the evil of sin, or the evil of iniquity: but it is malum
poenae supplicij sine afflictionis: It is the evil of pain, the evil of
punishment, the evil of affliction. Not of that, but of this, is my Text to be
understood. Shall there be evil in a City, and the Lord has not done it? No
there shall be no evil in a City; no evil of pain, punishment, or
affliction, but the Lord has done it.

And thus you are to understand that Esaias 45.7. I, the Lord, create evil. And
that, Ierem. 18.11. I, the Lord, frame evil against you. I create evil; I
frame evil. By evil in both places, Tertullian against Marcion, lib. 2, cap.
24. understands mala non peccatoria, sed vlt^ria; he understands, evil not
of sin, but of reuengement. So likewise are we to understand by the name of
evil in all those places of holy Scripture in which God either 1 King. 9.9.
Judge. 9.56. 1 Samuel 6.9. Dan. 9.13.
brings, or 1 King. 14.10. 1 King. 21.21. 2 King. 21.12. 2 King. 22.16.
threatens to bring evil upon any. By evil in all such places as here in my
Text, we are to understand the evil of reuengement; the evil of pain,
punishment, or affliction.

The evil of reuengement! The evil of pain, punishment, or affliction! But
why evil? Surely every reuengement, every pain, every punishment, every
affliction that befalls us in this life, is good. It is good. First, because
it is laid upon us by God, who is of himself, and absolutely good. Secondly,
because it is just, and whatsoever is just must needs be good. Thirdly, because
it has a good end; the glory of God and the salvation of the elect. For these
reasons it cannot be denied, but that every reuengement, pain, punishment, and
affliction is good. Why then is it in my Text, and elsewhere called evil?

I answer according to my second distinction. Reuengements, pains,
punishments, and afflictions are called evils, not because they are evils
indeed and of their own nature, but only in regard of our sense, estimation
and apprehension. The very torments of Hell, eternal fire, and outer darkness
are not indeed and of their nature evil: Mala sunt, his, qui incidunt in ea,
says Irenaeus aduersus haereses, lib. 4. cap. 77. they are evil to such as
fall into them; but Bona, ex justitia Dei, good they are, as they are from Gods
justice.

What Irenaeus says concerning Hell Torments, the same is true of the
adversities, the crosses, the scourges, the afflictions that befall men in this
life. Evils they are called, and God is said to do them. But how evils? Saint
Hierome, lib. 4. Com. in Ierem. will tell us how: they are called evils, non
quod per se mala sint, not because they are of themselves evil, sed quod
patientibus mala esse videantur, but because they seem evil to us who suffer
them.

With these two, Irenaeus and Saint Jerome, do agree Contr. Ad^mantum Manich.
cap. 27. and contr. Epist. Manich. c. 38. and lib. 1. contr. aduers. legis and
Prophet. c. 23.
Saint Augustine, Sermon. 16. in Psalm. 118.
Saint Ambrose, Lib. 3. Moral. cap. 7.
Gregory the Great, Lib. 1. in Genesis cap. 7.
Eucherius Bishop of Lions, Cap. 4. de Diuinis nominibus.
Dionysius the Areopagite, Lib. 1. and 10. Recognit.
Clemens the Roman, In Dialogo and lib. de Monarchia.
Justin Martyr, Homil. Quod Deus non sit author malorum.
Great Basil, and Lib. 4. in Esaiam cap. 45.
Cyril of Alexandria, even all the ancient and Orthodoxall Fathers. All these
with one consent do teach, that the adversities, the crosses, the scourges,
the afflictions, which befall men in this life, though in the Scripture they
are called Mala, Evils; yet indeed they are not Mala, they are not evils sua
natura, simply and of their own nature, but only are mala nobis, evil in
respect of us, evil in regard of our sense, estimation, and apprehension. And
such is the evil in my Text: improperly evil, but indeed good: good in its
own nature, but evil, only, as we call evil, whatsoever likes us not, or
is not for our ease.

I have long stood upon the second circumstance, the Quid, the Action, which
was a doing of evil. I must be the shorter in the third, the Vbi, the place
where this Action is performed. In my Text its called a City.

Shall there be evil in a City; In a City! In ciuitatibus, in Cities; So
Nicolaus de Lyra expounds it. In ciuitate aliqua, in any City; So Mercerus.
In habitatoribus ciuitatis; among the inhabitants of a City; So Petrus a
Figueiro. In populi communitate, among the people of the world; So Albertus
Magnus. I have expounded it, In ciuitate huius mundi, in the City of this world.

This universe and admirable frame of nature, wherein Jehovah, the Lord our
God, the 1 Timothy 6.15.
King of Kings Psalm. 97.1. and Psalm. 99.
reigns, consists of two Cities, the one is Augustine. Retract. lib. 2. c.
43.
Ciuitas Dei, the City of God, the other is Idem de Temp. Sermon. 106.
Ciuitas hujus mundi, the City of this world. The one is Idem de Ciuitate Dei,
lib. 14. cap. 28.
celestial, the other is terrene. The one is of Idem de Catech. Rud. lib. 1.
cap. 19.
Saints, the other is of the wicked. The one is Idem in Psalm. 61.
Jerusalem, the other is Babylon.

In the first, that most glorious City, the City of God, and his Saints, the
celestial Jerusalem, all tears are wiped away from the eyes of the
inhabitants; there they neither weep nor lament; there is neither death, nor
sorrow, nor crying, nor pain; there is no evil there, no not the evil of
affliction: So says the Spirit, Revel. 21.4. And therefore that City, cannot
be the City in my Text.

In the other City, the City of this world, the terrene City, the City of the
wicked, Babylon, great Babylon, the City of confusion, there is no sure repose
for the godly there. There may they become a reproach to their Psalm. 44.13. and
Psalm. 79.4.
neighbors: there may they be a scorn and derision to them that are round
about them: They may be a byword Psalm. 44.14.
among the Heathen, a shaking of the head among the people. There they may
Hebr. 11.37.
be tempted, they may be stoned, they may be slain with the sword, they may
be sawne asunder: There may they daily Psalm. 88.9.
mourn by reason of affliction: For even the godly, who are August. de Ciuit.
Dei. lib. 15. cap. 1.
by grace Ciues sursum, Citizens above, Citizens of the supernall and
celestial City of God; they are also by grace peregrini deorsum, pilgrims or
strangers here below in this terrene City, the City of this world. Here they
must be cut, 1 Pet. 2.5.
hewne, and squared with sundry tribulations, sicknesses and diseases before
they can be made fit, and as lively stones for the Heavenly Jerusalem. And this
is the City in my Text, my third circumstance, the Vbi, the circumstance of the
place, where the Agent, Jehovah, performs his Action, a doing of evil: Shall
there be evil in a City, and the Lord has not done it?

Thus is my Text for the understanding thereof made easy; as thus: Shall there
be euill] any evil of reuengement, pain, punishment, or affliction, In a
City] in the terrene City, in the City of this world; Shall there be any such
evil, any where, and the Lord has not done it? or as the Marginall reading
is, Shall not the Lord do somewhat? The point of observation is: There is no
affliction any where in the world, but its from the Lord, and either he does
it, or does somewhat in it.

By affliction in this my Thesis, I understand the suffering of any thing, the
sense or cogitation whereof our nature shunneth. Whatsoever is any way grievous
or offensive to our humane nature I call affliction. The temptations of the
flesh, the world, and the Devil; the diseases of the body; a froward husband
or wife; rebellious children; unthankful friends; loss of goods; reproaches,
slanders, war, pestilence, famine, imprisonment, death; every cross and
passion, bodily and ghostly, proper to our selves, or pertaining to our
kindred, private or public, secret or manifest, either by our own deserts
gotten, or otherwise imposed upon us, I call afflictions. To be short, the
miseries, the calamities, the vexations, the molestations of this life, from
the least to the greatest, from the pain of the little finger to the very
pangs of death, I call afflictions. Of every such affliction, whatsoever it
betideth any one in this life, God is (...), he is the primary efficient cause
thereof, he does it, or does somewhat in it.

Upon the proof of this point I have now no time to spend: nor needs it any
proof, it is so firmly grounded upon my Text. Nor will I recount unto you the
many uses it affords. Let one suffice for the shutting up of this exercise.

Is it true, Beloved. Is there no affliction that betideth any one any where in
this world, but its from the Lord? Here then we have wherewith to comfort our
selves in the day of affliction. Whatsoever affliction shall befall us, its
from the Lord. The Lo^d whose name is Jehovah, who is himself and of none
other, whose being is from all eternity, who only is omnipotent, who is good in
himself, and good to all his creatures, he will not suffer us to be tempted
above our abilities, but will with the temptation also make away to escape that
we may be able to bear it, Saint Paul is our warrant for it, 1 Cor. 10.13. And
2 Cor. 4 8. he shows it by his own experience. We are troubled on every
side, yet are we distressed: We are perplexed, yet are we not in despair: We
are persecuted, yet are we not forsaken: we are cast down, yet are we not
destroyed. In such a case was Saint Paul. What if we be in the like? If we be
troubled, perplexed, persecuted, and cast down, what shall we do? We will
support our selves with the confidence of David, Psalm. 23.4. Though we walk
through the valley of the shadow of death, yet will we fear no evil; for
thou, Lord, art with us. Thou Lord, art with us! Quis contra nos? Who shall be
against us? We will not fear, what man can do unto us. I draw to a conclusion.

Since there is no affliction, that betideth any one any where in this world,
but its from the Lord; and as the Author to the Hebrews speaks, chap. 12.8.
He is a bastard and not a son, that is not partaker of afflictions; let us,
as Saint James advises, chap. 1.2. account it exceeding joy, when we are
afflicted.

The Patriarchs, the Prophets, the Evangelists, the Apostles, the holy
Martyrs, have found the way to Heaven, narrow, rugged, and bloody, and shall we
think that God will strew Carpets for our nice feet to walk thither?

He that is the door and the way, our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,
has by his own example taught us, that we must through many afflictions enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven. There is but one passage thither, and it is a
straight one. If with much pressure we can get through, and leave but our
superfluous rags as torn from us in the throng, it will be our happiness.

Wherefore whenever any adversity, cross, calamity, misery, or affliction
shall befall us, let us with due regard to the hand of the Lord, that smites
us, receive it with thanks, keep it with patience, digest it in hope, apply
it with wisdom, bury it in meditation, and the end thereof will be peace and
glory: the peace of our consciences in this life, and eternal glory in the
highest Heavens. Whereof God make us all partakers.

THE Ninth Lecture.
AMOS 3.7. Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but he reuealeth his secret
unto his servants, the Prophets.


GOds dealing with his own people, the people of Israel, was not as it was
with other Nations. Others he punished, and gave them no fore-warning. The
Idumaeans, the Ammonites, the Egyptians, the rest of the Heathen, drank
deeply of the viols of his wrath, though thereof they received no admonition
by any Prophet of his. It was otherwise with the Israelites. If the rod of
affliction were to light heavy upon them, they were ever foretold thereof. God
ever prevented them with his Word. He sent unto them his servants, Ierem.
35.14, 15.
the Prophets: he rose early and sent them, with the soonest, to let them
understand of the evils which hung over their heads, that returning every man
from their evil ways, and amending their doings, they might be received to
grace and mercy. This difference between Gods care and providence, toward his
own people and other nations, is thus expressed, Psalm. 147.19, 20. God! He
shows his word unto Jacob, his statutes and ordinances unto Israel; He has
not dealt so with any Nation, neither have the Heathen knowledge of his Laws.
Yet was he known to the Heathen. He was known to them partly by his works,
by his creatures, in which the power and Deity of God shined: and partly by the
light of Nature, and power of understanding which God has given them. Both
ways their Idolatry, their Atheism, their disobedience were made before God
inexcusable.

But to his own people, the people of Israel, was he known after another
manner. To them pertained the adoption, and the glory, and the covenants, and
the giving of the Law, Romans 9.4.
and the service of God, and the promises. To them were committed the oracles
of God. To them at sundry times, Romans 3.2. Hebr. 1.1.
and in diverse manners God spoke by his Prophets. He gave them time and space
to repent them of their sins, and was ready to forgive them, had they on
their parts bin curable. Incurable though they were, yet did God seldom or
never, send among them any of his four sore judgments, either the sword, or
the famine, Ezech. 14.21.
or the noisome beast, or the pestilence, or any other, but he first made it
known unto his holy Prophets, and by them forewarned the people. This our
Prophet, Amos, here avouches.

Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but he reuealeth his secret unto his
servants, the Prophets. The words according unto some, are an Exegesis, and
exposition, or a declaration of what was said before. Before it was said, There
shall be no evil in a city, but the Lord does it; no evil of pain,
punishment or affliction, but the Lord does it. The Lord does it, as well for
that he sends just punishments upon men that are obstinate in their evil
courses; as also for that he reuealeth those evils to his Prophets, that by
them they may be published.

Or, the words are an Aitiologia, and do contain a reason of what was said
before. Shall there be evil in a City, and the Lord has not done it? Surely
no; there shall be none. All evil of punishment is of the Lord. Yet will not
the Lord oppress his people unawares; but long before with holy premonitions
he provides for them by his Prophets; and either by promises he keeps them
in good courses, or by threats he recalleth them from bad.

Be it (...) or (...), an exposition or a reason of what was said before, it is
all one for the matter. But if we respect the form of the sentence, as it
stands in our now- English translation: Surely the Lord God will do nothing,
but he reuealeth his secret to his servants the Prophets, it may be called
(...), an Asseueration. For such it is: and is of a revelation: concerning
which three things are to be observed, 1. Who is the Reuealer. 2. What is
Revealed. 3. To whom.


The Reuealer is the Lord God, His secret is the thing revealed. They to whom
the revelation is made are his servants, the Prophets. Of those in their order.

The Reuealer is first, and is here set forth by two names of his: Adonai
Iehouih, Lord God. The first place of Scripture, wherein these two names are
joined together, is Genesis 15.2. in the complaint made by Abraham for want of an
heir: Lord God, what will thou give me, if I go childlesse? Lord God.

Lord in Hebrew is Adonai, which signifies My Lords; or my stays, or pillars:
implying in it a mystery of the holy Trinity. Matthew. 11.25.
It is one of the proper names of God, the Lord of Heaven and earth, who as a
base sustaineth his faithful children in all their infirmities. It is written
here with kametz or long A in the end, and so is proper to God, having the
vowels of Jehovah: when it is written with Patach or short A, it is applied to
creatures. In the form singular Adon, Lord or sustainer, is also ascribed unto
God, the Lord of all the earth, Psalm. 97 5. The hills melted like wax at the
presence of the Lord: at the presence of the Lord of the whole earth. The Lord
of the whole earth, he is Adon, Adonim in the form plural is likewise
ascribed unto God; Malac. 1.6. If I be Adonim, If I be a Lord where is my fear?

The other name of God in this place is Iehouih. Iehouih? It is usually so
written when it is joined with Adonai: and it has the consonant letters of
Jehovah, and the vowels of Elohim. And where one Prophet writes Adonai
Iehouih, as in the prayer of David, set down, 2 Samuel 7.18. another writing of
the same prayer, says Jehovah Elohim, 1 Chronicles. 17.16. Say Iehouih, or Jehovah,
the signification is the same. But Iehouih, as Tremelius and Iunius have noted
upon the 15. of Genesis, is the more patheticall, the fitter to move affection:
and is therefore used in passionate speeches, and prayers that are very
earnest, by Genesis 15.2, 8.
Abraham, by Deuteronomy. 3.24.9.26.
Moses, by Cap. 4.14. etc.
Ezechiel, and others, as if they were sighing and sobbing. So writes Amandus
Polanus in his Commentary upon Ezechiel, chap. 4.14. But Alsted in his
Theological Lexicon is of another mind: and thinks there is no more passion
showed in saying Iehouih, than in saying Jehovah. Yet may it be otherwise.

Adonai Iehouih, the Lord God. The first of these two names betokens his
Majesty, his sustentation of all things, and his dominion over all: the
second, his Essence, his existing or being.

The first, Adonai, Grammarians derive from Eden, which is as much as Basis or
Stylobates, the base or footstool of a pillar, the foundation thereof: giving
us thereby to understand, that the Lord our God is the sustainer, the
maintainer, the vpholder of all things; that he is most properly, primarily,
and of himself Lord; that he is the only true prime and supreme Lord of all
things, yea, the Lord of Lords; that he alone has absolute, full, free, and
eternal right over all things that are contained within the circuit of Heaven
and Earth.

The second, Iehouih, they derive, as they do Jehovah, from Hauah, which
signifies, He was. The force of this name is opened in the Revelation of Saint
John, chap. 1.4. in that his s^lutation to the seven Churches of Asia: Grace be
unto you and peace from Him, which is, and which was, and which is to come:
that is, from God the Father, Jehovah; from him that is eternal, immortal,
and unchangeable; from him who has his being of himself, and gives being to
all creatures.

In the same chap. verse. 8. I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end,
says the Lord, which is, and which was, and which is to come, the Almighty.
The words are the conclusion or shutting up of the forementioned salutation,
and are a confirmation of that grace and peace that was to come unto the seven
Churches from Jehovah God alone: from him who is the first and the last, our
Redeemer, the Lord of Hosts, besides whom there is no God. Who was; who was
before all, and gave to every creature the being. Who is to come; who is to
come, continues for ever, and supporteth all: even the Almighty, who
exercises his power and providence over all. This same who is, who was, and
who is to come, as before in the distinguishing of the Persons of the Trinity
it was used to express God the Father; so here it is used to declare the union
of substance in the whole three Persons, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

It is likewise used, Reu. 11.17. where those four and twenty Elders which
sat before God on their seats, fell upon their faces and worshipped God,
saying, We give thee thanks O Lord Almighty, which art, and which wast, and
which art to come.

So is it by the Angel of the waters, Revel. 16.5. where he says, Thou art
righteous, O Lord, which art, and which wast, and which shall be.

Thus in the Holy Revelation of Saint John is the force of the name Jehovah,
opened four several times, and implies thus much: 1. That God has his being
or existence of himself before the world was. Esaias 44.6.
2. That He gives being unto all things. For as much as in him all things are
and do consist. Act. 17.25. Exodus 6.3. Esaias 45.2. Ezech. 5.17.
3. That He gives being to his Word, effecting whatsoever He speaks.

We met with this name of God, Jehovah, in the first Chapter of this Book nine
times, in the second seven times; and twice before in this: Now by the change
of a vowell it is Iehouih. This change of a vowell changes not the name:
Jehovah, or Iehouih! the name is the same: the most proper name of God; of God,
whose true Latitude is his Immensitie, whose true Longitude is his Eternity;
whose true Altitude is the Sublimitie of his Nature; whose true Profunditie
being sine fundo, without bottom, is his incomprehensibility. Bernard in his
fifth book de Consideratione, cap. 13. has a discourse to this very purpose,
but with some variety. The question there propounded is, Quid est Deus? What is
God? The answer is, Longitudo, Latitudo, Sublimitas, and Profundum: God, he is
Length, Breadth, Height and Depth. He is Length for his Eternity; Breadth for
his Charity; Height for his Majesty, Depth for his Wisdom. Length He is for
his Eternity. Dan. 7.9. Esaias 57.15. Psalm. 90.2.
He is the Ancient of days, and inhabiteth Eternity. Before the Mountains
were brought forth, or ever the earth and the world were formed, even from
everlasting to everlasting. He is God.

Breadth he is for his Charity, for his Love. Wisd. 11.24.
He loves all the things that are, and abhors nothing which he has made.
Neither would he have made any thing if he had hated it. He makes his Sun to
rise on the evil and the good, Matthew. 5.45.
and sends rain on the just, and on the unjust. The Gulf, or rather the Sea
of this Love of God is exceeding broad.

Height He is for his Majesty. His Majesty! Prou. 25.28.
it is inestimable. He that searches into it, shall surely be oppressed with
the glory thereof. From the glory of this Majesty in the day of the Lord of
Hosts, when he arises to shake terribly the earth, Esaias 2.19, 20.
will the proud man, the lofty man, every wicked man, seek to hide himself
in the clefts of the rocks, Psalm. 72.19.
and in the caves of the earth, but all in vain: for all the earth shall be
filled with his Majesty. In regard of this his Majesty, He is Genesis 14.18. Job
31.28. Psalm. 7.18. and 9^ 2. etc. Psalm. 147.5.
often in holy Scripture styled Altissimus, the most high. So for his Majesty
he is Height.

Depth he is for his wisdom. His wisdom! it is infinite; there is no end
thereof; It is inuariable, incomprehensible, ineffable. Finding no fit words,
to express it with, I betake my self to the Apostles exclamation, Romans 11.33.
(...), O the depth* of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! How
unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out.

Thus far of my first general the Reuealor (...) Adonai Iehouih, the Lord
God. The Lord God will do nothing, but he reuealeth his secret to his servants
the Prophets.

He will do nothing] The original is, (...) Lo jahaseh dabar, he will not do
a word.

A word in the Hebrew tongue signifies sometimes any thing or matter, that is
either said or done.

In the 18. of Exodus, verse. 16. Moses in his reply to Iethro his Father in
law, says, when they have (...) Dabar, a word, they come unto me, and I judge
between them. (...) Dabar a word, with the Greeks it is (...), a
controversy; with the old Latin Interpreter it is Disceptatio, a contention;
with Tremelius it is Negotium, a business; with our late English Translators,
it is a matter. So Moses says in effect thus much: If there happen any
business or matter of controversy or contention between a man and his
neighbor, they come unto me, and I judge between them.

In the 24. of Exodus, verse. 14. Moses with his Minister Iosuah going up to the
Mount of God, says unto the Elders, Tarry ye here for us, until we come
again unto you: and behold Aaron and Hur are with you (...) mi bahal debarim,
who so is a master of words, let him come unto them. And here words with the
Greeks are (...) a judgment, or controversy; with the old interpreter,
quastio, a question; in our now English, they are matters; if any man have any
matters to do: The meaning is, who so has any question or controversy, let
him come unto Aaron and Hur for a resolution.

In the 39. of Esaias, verse. 2. it is recorded of Hezechiah King of Judah, that
when Merodach Baladan, the son of Baladan King of Babylon, had sent messengers
to visit him and to congratulate his recovery; He was glad of them, and showed
them the house of his precious things, the silver, and the gold, and the
spices, and the precious ointment, and all the house of his armor, and all
that was found in his treasures. It is added in the end of the verse, Lo hajah
dabar, there was not a word in his house, nor in all his dominions, that
Hezechiah showed them not. Not a word! A word for a thing according to the
custom of the Hebrew. It is Saint Hieroms note upon the place. It is well
rendered in our new Bibles; There was nothing in his house, nor in all his
dominions, that Hezechiah showed them not.

This Hebrew custom of putting verbum pro re, a word for a thing, frequent in
the old, has place likewise in the New Testament.

In the first of Luke, verse. 37. The Angel Gabriel tells the Virgin Mary that
with God no word shall be impossible, (...), no word. His meaning is, with God
no thing shall be impossible.

In the same Chapter verse. 65. The Evangelist having set down what had passed
concerning Elizabeth and her husband Zacharias, says, (...), all these words
were noised abroad throughout all the hill country of Iudaea, (...), all these
words, that is, all these things were dinulged and made known.

In the second of Luke verse. 15. When the Angels who related to the shepherds
Christ's Nativity, were gone away from them into Heaven, the shepherds said one
to another, Let us now go even unto Bethlehem and see (...), this word, that
is, come to pass, which the Lord has made known unto us. This word? that is,
this thing, this whole business, whereof we have heard by the Angels. It is
the Hebraisme which I have hitherto observed; whereby, that I may speak as
Logicians do, the Abstract is put for the Concret, taken either actiuely or
passiuely: as Verbum pro re dicta, a word for a thing that is spoken of. Or to
speak as a Rhetorician would, it is Metonymia adiuncti; the Adiunct is put for
the Subject. Still it is Verbum pro re, a word for the thing or matter, whereof
the speech is.

So it is in this text of mine; Surely the Lord God, non faciet verbum, he will
not do a word; that is, he will do no thing; no such thing as the verse
before speaks of; no evil of pain, punishment, or affliction, He will do
no such thing, but he reuealeth his secret to his servants the Prophets.

He reuealeth his secret. I am come to my second general, concerning the thing
revealed: it is the secret of the Lord.

(...) Sodh^, his secret, (...), say the Septuagint, translated Eruditionem
suam, his instruction or chastisement. Saint Hierome expounds it Correptionem
suam: the Interlinearie Gloss, Correctionem suam, his reproof or correction.
Theodotio no ill Interpreter of old turned it, (...), his counsel: and Drusius
sees no cause, why it may not well be so turned; for as much as the Hebrew
word (...) Sodh signifies as well confilium as secretum, as well counsel, as
secret. But the current of Translators is for his secret.

His secret] By this secret of his, Albertus Magnus understands
praeordinationis diuinae absconditam voluntatem, the hidden will of Gods
preordination. Arias Montanus expounds it to be, futurarum reru^ cognitionem,
the knowledge of things to come; so does Mathurinus Quadratus. Such a knowledge
they mean, whereof no Mathematician, no Astrologer, no Magician, no Chaldaean,
no Wizard is made partaker. Only the holy Prophets, the servants of our Lord
God, have the privilege and prerogative thereof.

We may not deny that Gods counsels and decrees, things hid from the
understanding of all men, and known only unto God, Ierem. 25.9.
are the secrets of God. But this secret of his whereof my text speaks, is
the decree and purpose of God to bring evil upon a Land and the inhabitants
thereof: to take from them the voice of mirth, and the voice of gladness, the
voice of the Bridegroom, and the voice of the Bride, the sound of the
milstones, and the light of the candle; to make them an astonishment, and a
hissing, and perpetual desolations. The decree and purpose of God to punish a
people for sin is his secret; and this he evermore reuealeth. Yet not this
alone. For of the secrets which God reuealeth there are three kinds.

One is of things supernatural, such as are the mysteries of Religion, the
incarnation of the Son of God, the resurrection of the dead, and the life to
come. These are secrets, to the knowledge of which a man cannot attain,
unless it be revealed unto him from God.

The second is of those things, which are called arcana cordium, the secrets of
the heart, such as are the proper actions of the will and understanding:
Secrets they are; and save to the spirit of man, which is in man, are known to
none, but God, 1 Cor. 2.11. Act. 1.24.
who is, (...), and knows every corner and creuise of the heart.

The third is of those things, which the Schools do call futura contingentia,
such things as are not, nor ever have been, but may hereafter be. And these
are secrets, secrets indeed, only manifest unto him, by whom all things, past,
present, and to come, are acted and governed.

Of these three kinds of secrets, the last is that whereof my text speaks,
the secret of things to come.

Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but he reuealeth his secret to his
servants the Prophets. He reuealeth his secret] he opens it, he tells it
before hand, he makes it known before it come to pass. The lesson to be taken
from hence is, God is the only reuealer of secrets.

He only reuealeth things to come. This truth is avouched by the Prophet
Daniel, in his second Chapter the 22. verse: his assertion is: God is He, that
reuealeth the deep and secret things. At the 28. verse he tells King
Nebuchadnezzar; Though the wisemen, the Astrologians, the Magicians, the
Soothsayers, cannot show unto the King the secret which he demands, yet
there is a God in Heaven that reuealeth secrets, and makes known to the King
what shall be in the latter days. He says it again, verse. 29. He that
reuealeth secrets makes known unto thee, O King, what shall come to pass.
Once more, verse. 45. The great God has make known to the King, what shall
come to pass hereafter. The King acknowledges as much; and thereupon says,
verse. 47. Of a truth, Daniel, your God is a God of gods, and a Lord of Kings,
and a reuealer of secrets. It is true: God is the only reuealer of secrets.

Is it true? What shall we then say to sundry predictions in Gentilisme? What
to those dreams which the Heathen often had? What to their Oracles? Hier.
Comment. in Esai. 41.
What to Apollo Delphicus and Loxias, and Delius, and Clarius? What to other
their Idols, which made fair show, as if they had the knowledge of things to
come, and could reveal secrets?

Our answer is; they were mere shows; no substance of truth was in them.
Saint Hierome in his twelfth book of his Comments upon Esaias at the 41. Chapter
thus reasons against them: If they could foretell things to come, why
foretold they nothing of Christ? Why nothing of the twelve Apostles? Why
nothing of the ruin, and abolition of their own Temples? If they could not
foretell their own destruction, how could they foretell either good or evil,
that should betide others?

But you will say; many things were foretold by the oracles of old. Know then,
that from those oracles the Devil, the Father of lies, that he might not be
reproved of falsehood, did evermore give his answers doubtfully, that you might
expound them both ways, either for good or evil. Such was his answer given to
Pyrrhus King of the Epirotes, when he took part with the Tarentines against
the Romans.

C^c. 2. de Divine. ex Ennio.
Aio te, Aeacida, Romanos vincere posse: I tell thee Pyrrhus, thou that art of
the lineage of Aeacus, I tell thee, te Romanos vincere posse: the words are
ambiguous, and may be rendered, either for Pyrrhus; thou shall overcome the
Romans: or against him, the Romans shall overcome thee. The like answer was
given unto Croesus, when he consulted the Oracle at Delphos, about his
expedition into Persia, Herodotus.
Croesus perdet, Halim transgressus, maxima regna. Croesus, when he is past the
river Halis, perdet maxima regna; the words are ambiguous, and may be rendered,
either for Croesus, He shall destroy great kingdoms of his enemies; or
against him, He shall lose great kingdoms of his own. With such ambiguities
the Devil in those oracles of old, evermore deluded such as sought unto him.

But you will say, those Oracles did sometimes take place; and as they
foretold, so things came to pass.

Be it so. Yet very few of them did hit; which might be by chance, and
hap-hazzard, as we say, a few only of a great number falling out: or the Devil
by the subtlety of his nature, and quickness of his understanding, might by
some antecedent signs foresee the effects and events which should follow: or
he might foretell such things, as by Gods permission, he should effect
himself.

Now to the dreams, which it is said the Heathen often had, whereby they knew
things to come, we say; many of them were devised either by them, who affirmed
they had such dreams; or by the writers to win the more credit thereby. Yet
deny we not, but they had their dreams. Their dreams! Of what sort? There are
three sorts of dreams. Some are (...) or (...), divine dreams; some are (...)
or natural; some are (...) or Diabolical.

The Heathen were not much troubled with the first sort, with divine dreams:
Genesis 41. Dan. 2.
yet we read that Pharaoh and Nabuchodonosor had such. Et Pharaoh and
Nabuchodonosor in iudicium sui somnijs futura cognoscunt, and tamen Deum non
intelligunt reuelantem, says S. Hierome upon the first of Jonas: Both Pharaoh
and Nabuchodonosor to their own condemnation do by their dreams know things
to come, and yet they understand not God the reuealer.

Dreams of the second sort are Natural; and such, no doubt, the Heathen in
their sleep had, as we in ours have. But in these there is no divination; no
fore-knowing of things to come.

The third sort is of dreams diabolical, Hieron. Comment. in Esai. Distinct.
7. part. 2 art. 1. q. 3. lib. 2.
such as the Gentiles sought for in the Temple of Aesculapius. Bonauenture
calls them, Somnia, quae fiunt ex illusione Diabolica; Dreams which happen to
men in time of sleep by the illusion of the Devil. Dreams of this sort, as
they were ever uncertain, so were they as uncertainly interpreted. Such was
the Dream that Darius had before he encountered with Alexander: Curtius lib. 3.
some expounded it to signify the victory that he should have against him:
some gave a contrary sense, Curtius lib. 3. Tully gives another instance. One
going to the Olympicke games had a dream, that he was turned into an Eagle.
One Wiz^rd interpreted it, that he should overcome, because the Eagle is
supreme to all other fowls: another turned it the contrary way, that he
should have the worse, because the Eagle driving other birds before her,
comes last of all.

Such dreams, as these, are well censured by Siracides in the 34. of his
Ecclesiasticus, verse. 5. Diuinations, and sooth-sayi^^^, and dreams are vain.
Dreams are vain. If they be not sent from the most High in thy visitation,
set not thy heart upon them. For dreams have deceived many: and they have
failed, that put their trust in them. For who so regards dreams, is like him
that catches at a shadow, and follows after the wind.

Thus finding no sound ability either in the dreams of the Heathen, or in
their Oracles, to reveal secrets, or foretell things to come: we must ever
acknowledge it for a truth irrefragable, and not to be gainsaid, that God is
the only reuealer of secrets: that he only foretells things to come.

And let this suffice to have been spoken of my second general, the thing
revealed, the secret of God. The third follows, and is of them, to whom the
Revelation is made: they are his servants the Prophets. Surely the Lord God
will do nothing, but he reuealeth his secret to his servants the Prophets.

The Prophets, that were the servants of the Lord God, were of three sorts:
Some were extraordinarily raised up by God, for the government of the Church in
the infancy thereof. Their office was in the common necessities of the Church
to consult God, as occasion should be given; and to give answers concerning
things to come. These from the inward counsel of God uttering oracles, were
wont to be called 1 Samuel 9.9. Amos 7.12.
Seers.

Others extraordinarily also raised up by God, were ordained for the
instruction of the Church. Their office was to interpret and apply the Law, and
to foreshew the sufferings and glory of Christ. These continued from Act. 3.24.
and 10.43. 1 Pet. 1.10.11.
Samuel unto Malachie. Malachie was the last of them.

The third sort is of the Ephesians. 4.11. 1 Cor 12.28.
Prophets of the New Testament; such as were endued with a singular dexterity
and readiness, and wisdom to interpret the Scriptures of the Prophets, and to
apply them. In this third rank every Luke 4.24. 1 Cor. 14.32.
true Minister of the Gospel has a place.

Of all these Prophets Christ is the head, he is the chief of all. To him
Deuteronomy. 18.15. Act. 3.22. and (...) 7.37.
Moses, yea and all the Prophets; all the Act. 3.24.
Prophets from Samuel, and all those that follow after, as many as have spoken,
give witness.

But the Prophets of which my text speaks are of the two first sorts of
Prophets, those whom God extraordinarily raised up, as well for the governing,
as for the instruction of the Church. Both are here styled the servants of the
Lord God.

His seruants] Not only because they served God in the common profession of
godliness, but also because they served him in their particular functions and
callings. To be the servants of the Lord God, it is certainly a notable dignity
and prerogative. How do men delight to shroud themselves under the liueries of
great men? and how much do they take themselves to be honored thereby? How
much more ought we to labor to approve our selves in the presence of the Lord
our God, and to show our selves every man in his several vocation and course
of life to be his faithful servants.

And thus have you the particular exposition of this my text; Surely the Lord
God will do no thing, but he reuealeth his secret to his servants the Prophets.

I may not leave untouched the maine observation which this text affords. It
is this.

God never brings any grievous judgment upon any people or nation, nor upon
any private person, but he does always first fore-warne the same and
foretells it. God always teaches before he punishes: he warns before
he strikes. When he was resolved to wash the World with a Deluge of waters
for the sin thereof, he foretold it unto Noah, Genesis 6.13. Though the cry
of Sodom and Gomorrah were great, and their sin very grievous, yet would not
God destroy them, till he had made known his purpose unto Abraham, Genesis 18.17.
and to Lot, Genesis 19.13. The seven years of famine, that should consume the
Land of Egypt, seven years before he foretold to Joseph, Genesis 41.25. So he
revealed the intended subversion of Nineveh to Jonah; Jonah 3.1.
the famine that should be in the days of Claudius Caesar unto Agabus: Act.
11.28.
the captivity of the ten Tribes to this our Prophet Amos. Amos in the full
assurance of this truth, says with boldness: Surely the Lord God will do
nothing, but he reuealeth his secret to his servants the P ophets.

Will he do nothing, but he reuealeth it? We may not so take it, that God
reuealeth to his Prophets, all things which he has a purpose to do, all
things simply, all his secrets: But with a certain limitation, that he
reuealeth omnia vtilia nobis, as Hugo de S. Charo out of the Gloss has
observed; that he reuealeth all things profitable for us: or, that he
reuealeth, Omnia, quae bonum communitatis concernunt, as Carthusian speaks,
that he reuealeth all things, which concern the common good. All things which
either concern the common good, or are profitable unto us, such as are the
judgments of God to be laid upon a multitude or a private person, God
reuealeth. This is the substance of the doctrine even now delivered.

God never brings any grievous judgment upon any people or Nation, or upon
any private person, but he does always first fore-warne the same, and
foretells it. The reasons hereof are two. One is in regard of the godly: the
other in regard of the wicked.

The first is in regard of the godly. God is unwilling at any time to take them
at unawares. He loves them, and would not have any of them to perish, but
would have them all come to repentance, as Saint Peter witnesses, 2 Epist.
3.9. God would have them all come to repentance, that so they might prevent his
judgments. And therefore he never strikes, but first he warns.

The other reason is in regard of the wicked: namely that the wicked might be
without excuse, their mouths might be stopped, and the justice of God cleared,
they having nothing to answer for themselves, or to accuse God of any unjust
dealing. If I had not come, says our Savior Christ Jesus, Ioh. 15.22. If I
had not come, and spoken to them, they had not had sin; but now they have no
cloak, nor excuse, for their sin. Wherefore let these men, wicked men,
learn, as often as the rod of God lies heavy upon them, to accuse themselves;
because when God gave them warning, they would not be warned: when God would
have healed them, they would not be healed.

You have the reasons; The uses follow. I can but point at them: the time will
not suffer any enlargement. Is it so, beloved? Does God never bring any
grievous judgment upon any people or Nation, or any private person, but he
always first fore-warneth the same and fore-telleth it? Here then acknowledge
we Gods great mercy, and his wonderful patience. Thus God needs not to
deal with us. For upon our own peril we are bound to take heed of his
judgments before they come. Yet so good is our God, so loving, so merciful,
so patient, that he is desirous we should prevent his judgments before they
fall, by sending our prayers unto him as Ambassadors, to treat of conditions
of Peace with him. A subtle enemy would steal upon us at unawares, and take
us at the advantage: but God, our good God ever fore-warneth before he
strikes. He does so, says Carthusian, Vt emendemur and ab imminentibus
eripiamur tormentis: he ever fore-warneth us, that our lives may be amended,
and we delivered from the torments that hang over us ready to fall upon us.

Again, does God never bring any grievous judgment upon any people or Nation,
or any private person, but he always first fore-warneth the same, and
foretells it? Let us then, whenever we see any overtaken with any grievous
judgment, confess with Saint Augustine de vera and falsa poenitentia, cap. 7.
Qui verus est in promittendo, verus etiam est in minando: that God is true, as
in his promises, so also in his threatenings. If his desire were not, that we
should prevent his judgments, doubtless he would never give us warning of
them. If he had a will and purpose to destroy us, he would never tell
beforehand, how we should avoid his judgments. Let no man say, that the
silence of God, and the holding of his peace, is a cause of his security. No,
it cannot be so. God never comes with any judgment, but he always sends a
warning piece before. He sends unto us his servants the Prophets. Prophets we
have among us; and Apostles we have among us: and God gives us his Ministers,
Pastors, and Preachers, as it were to put life again into the dead Prophets
and Apostles, even to open and declare unto us those things which they
delivered. Wherefore, when we shall be admonished by his Ministers, that such
and such judgments shall come; when they shall threaten plagues according to
the general directions, which they have in the word of God, let us not
withstand the Spirit speaking in them. It is the wonderful goodness of God,
that he vouchsafes to send them unto us, and to tell us before of his
judgments.

THE Tenth Lecture.
AMOS 3.8. The Lion has roared, who will not fear? the Lord God has spoken,
who can but prophecy?


IT was a thing too common with the Israelites, if their Prophets or Preachers
did at any time speak sharply against their evil courses, evermore to find
fault and quarrel them. What mean these men? Why do they so far urge us?
Why do they not suffer us to be quiet? Will they ever provoke the wrath of God
against us? Sic enim solent homines: surely so worldlings use to do. If
Prophets, if Preachers be austere in their reprehensions, they will command
them to hold their peace, as you have heard by occasion of the twelfth verse of
the precedent Chapter. If Amos foretell Jeroboam, King of Israel, Amos 7.9.
that the high places of Isaac shall be desolate, that the Sanctuaries of
Israel shall be laid waste; that Ieroboams house shall perish with the sword;
there will be an Amaziah to forbid him to prophecy any more in Bethel, Amos
7.12.

If Hanani, the Seer, reprove King Asa for not relying on the Lord his God, Asa
will be in a rage with him, and will put him in a prison house, 2 Chronicles. 16.10.

If Micaiah foreshew unto King Ahab the evil that shall befall him, the King
will hate him for it, 1 King. 22.8. Zedechiah will smite him on the cheek,
verse. 24. Amon the Governor will put him in prison, and will feed him with
bread of affliction and with water of affliction, verse. 27. If Jeremiah
foreshew unto the Jews their desolation for their sins, some will devise
devices against him, and will smite him with the tongue, Jeremy 18.18. Some
will smite him with the fist, and put him in the stocks, chap. 20.2. Some will
apprehend him, threaten him with death, and arraigne him, chap. 26.8. Some will
shut him up in prison, chap. 32.2. Some will let him down with cords into a
miry and dirty dungeon, chap. 38.6.

It is the lot of the Prophets of the Lord, the portion of his Preachers, Esaias
30.10. Leuit. 19.17.
if they speak not placentia, pleasing and smooth words unto the people, but
do rebuke them and not suffer them to sin, it is their lot and portion never
to have want of enemies that shall make war against them. This ill custom in
the people, Amos here finds fault with, and condemns for unjust, saying, The
Lion has roared, etc. as if he had said, You take me for your enemy, because I
foreshew unto you the judgments of God which shall light upon you, and
therefore you contend, you chide, you quarrel with me: but all in vain; for
I may not hold my peace. If I should, the voice of God will of it self be
terrible enough unto you. The evil whereof I tell you, proceeds not so much
from my mouth, as from the Mandate of God. Will I, nill I, I am constrained to
obey my God. God he has chosen me to be his Prophet, and has put into my
mouth what I speak unto you. The Lion has roared, and I cannot but fear: The
Lord God has spoken, and I must prophecy.

Thus have you the scope and drift of our Prophet in the words I have now read
unto you. Wherein for my easier proceeding, may it please you to observe with
me first a Similitude; secondly, the application thereof. The Similitude it
from a Lion, the Application is to God. The Similitude in these words, The Lion
has roared, who will not fear? The Application in these, The Lord God has
spoken, who can but prophecy? First, of the Similitude.

The Lion has roared, who will not fear? Of all four footed beasts the Lion
does bear away the chief price. He is, says Cyril, (...), the strongest of
wild beasts. This wild beast, the Lion, the King of beasts, excelling all
others in courage and strength, full of fierceness and violence, given to
destroy and devour, is in holy Writ called by sundry names according to his
effects and properties. Sometime he is called (...) Labi, that is, hearty or
courageous, Joel 1.6. Sometime (...) Kephir, that is, lurking or couchant,
abiding in covert places, Ezech. 19.3. Sometime (...) Schachal, that is,
ramping and fierce of nature, Job 10.16. Sometime (...) Lajisch, that is,
subduing his prey, Esaias 30.6. Here he is called (...) Arieh, that is, a
plucker, a renter, a tearer: and so was he called in the fourth verse of this
Chapter. So many names have the Hebrews to call the Lion by, according to his
several properties.

The Lions voice is his roaring. The Lion (...) Schagg, has roared. The word,
as Dones son of Labratus has noted, is proper to the Lion, whose roaring is
very shrill, dreadful, and full of ire. No marvel then is it, if at his
roaring all the beasts of the forest do tremble. That they do so its
acknowledged by Saint Basil, in his ninth Homily upon the Hexameron, where be
says, that Nature has bestowed upon the Lion such organs or instruments for
his voice, that oftentimes beasts far swifter than the Lion, are taken,
(...), only by the roaring of the Lion. The like has Saint Ambrose in his
Hexaemeron, lib. 6. cap. 3. Naturally there is in the Lions voice such a
terror, that many beasts which might by their swiftness escape the Lions
assault, do faint and fall down before the Lion, astonished and stricken as it
were with the hideousness of his roaring. The like has Saint Cyril; the like
R. David; Lyra, and Carthusian the like; as I showed in my fourth Lecture upon
this Chapter.

The Lion has roared] He roareth before he has his prey, when he has it in
pursuit, and after he has gotten it.

Before he has his prey he roareth. Psalm. 104.21. The Lions, the young and
lusty Lions, roar after their prey, and seek their meat from God. 1 Pet. 5.8.
there is a Lion that roareth, seeking whom he may devour.

When he has his prey in pursuit, he roareth. So roareth the ravening Lion,
Rugientibus praeparatis ad escan.
Psalm. 22.14. and so roar those Lions ready to devour, Ecclus. 51 4.

After he has gotten his prey he roareth. Esaias 31.4. The young Lion roareth on
his prey. And above in this Chapter, verse. 4. Will a Lion roar in the forest
when he has no prey?

So, the Lion roareth before he has his prey, when he has it in pursuit, and
after he has gotten it. But of all, his roaring is most terrible, when he is
hungry and in the pursuit of his prey (...) albeit when he is devouring his
prey he roareth very terribly, as Bolducus in his Comment upon Job, cap. 4.
has out of Aristotle, Pliny, and Aelian observed; making the Lion so roaring
to be the express image of ravenous rich men and mighty oppressors.

Pierius Hieroglysh. lib. 1.
From this fearful roaring of the Lion, one of the four Evangelists, Saint
Mark is hieroglyphically figured by the image of a Lion, because as a Lion in
the wilderness sends forth a terrible voice, so Saint Mark in the beginning
of his Gospel, mightily thundereth out vocem clamantis in deserto, the voice
of one crying in the wilderness. It is the observation of Saint Ambrose upon
Luke, of Remigius upon Mark, and of Eucherius.

The Lion has roared, who will not fear?] Frequent and familiar are the
comparisons drawn from the Lion in holy Scripture. The Lion for his good
properties is a symbol of good men, yea of Christ himself; but for his bad,
of bad men, yea of the Devil. Habet Leo virtutem, habet and saeuitiam, says
Gregory, Moral. 5. cap. 17. The Lion has courage, and he has cruelty. For his
courage he betokens Christ; for his cruelty the Devil. So Augustine Sermon.
46. de diuersis: Christus Leo propter fortitudinem, Diabolus propter feritatem:
Christ and the Devil may both be called Lions, Christ for his fortitude, the
Devil for his fierceness.

Christ may be called a Lion, not only for his invincible courage and
fortitude, but also for his great might and power in defending his flock from
bodily and spiritual enemies: so is he the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, Revel.
5.5. that same victorious Lion, our true Shilo and Messiah, who is Non minus
belluo animarum ad illas saluandas, quam Diabolus ad perdendas, as Salmeron
speaks in his eighth Disput. upon the first Epistle of Peter: Christ the Lion
of the Tribe of Judah, does no less greedily hunt after souls to save them,
than the Devil does to destroy them. Christ's a Lion.

So are Kings and mighty Princes that rule over others called Lions. Judah is a
Lions whelpe, -- He stooped down, he couched as a Lion, and as an old Lion;
who shall rouse him up? Genesis 49.9. where David, Solomon, and other Kings, that
were lineally descended from the Tribe of Judah, are compared to the roaring
Lion, because through the fame of their Empire, they were a terror to many of
their neighbor Nations. Kings and Princes are Lions.

Every godly person is a Lion. So says the Holy Ghost, Prou. 28.1. The
righteous are bold as a Lion. They are bold in all their afflictions, how great
soever they be, and their boldness is, not from any trust in themselves, but
by the faith they have in God: and they are bold as a Lion, fearing nothing.
For as a Lion fears no other beasts, so the righteous fear not whatsoever
crosses may befall them. They know that all things work together for good to
them that love God: Romans 8.28.
they know that without the will of God, no ill can betide them: they know if
they lose this life, they shall find a better: and for this cause in their
greatest extremities are they quiet in mind, ever giving a fiat to the will of
God; Gods will be done. The righteous man for his boldness is a Lion.

The wicked man, every tyrant and violent oppressor is a Lion. A Lion for
cruelty. David avouches it, Psalm. 10.9, 10. He lies in wait secretly as a
Lion in his den, he lies in wait to catch the poor, he does catch the poor
when he draws him into his net. He coucheth and humbles himself that the
poor may fall by his authority. So the wicked man for his cruelty is a Lion.

So Nero, tyrannizing and oppressing Nero; Nero, that was the bloody persecutor
of the Christians in the infancy of the Church, is called a Lion, 1 Timothy 4.17.
I was delivered, says Paul, from the mouth of the Lion. Its no doubt, says
Justinian, but that Paul points at the cruelty and immanity of Nero. The like
Metaphore I meet with, Prou. 28.15. As a roaring Lion, so is a wicked ruler
over the poor people. Its plain, Every tyrant and violent oppressor is a Lion.

And the Devil himself is a Lion. You know Saint Peter styles him so, 1
Epist. chap. 5.8. Your adversary the Devil as a roaring Lion, walks about
seeking whom he may devour. For as the Lion delights in blood, gapeth over
his prey, and roareth hideously: so does the Devil; than whom, says
Fen-ardentius, Nihil truculentius, nihil tetrius, nihil terribilius, nihil
infestius hominibus; There is nothing more fierce, more cruel, more
spightfull, more malicious against men, than the Devil is. He thirsts after
the blood of men, to spill it; he gapeth over the souls of men, to devour
them, he is a roaring Lion.

Thus have you heard, that the Lion, for some properties of his is a symbol of
good men, yea, and of Christ himself; and for some a symbol of bad men, yea
and of the Devil, himself.

Now the Lion in my Text is God; and that he is so, it is the joint agreement
of Expositors.

Upon those words of Daniel 6.22. My God has sent his Angel, and has shut
the Lions mouths, in Midras tehilim in the Hebrew exposition of the Psalms,
at the 64. Psalm, there is a remarkable sentence for our present purpose,
Venit Leo, and liberauit Leonem de ore Leonis: A Lion came and delivered a Lion
from the mouth of a Lion. Venit Leo, a Lion came; this Lion is God, holy and
blessed, as it is said in the third of Amos, Leo rugijt, the Lion has roared,
who will not fear? the Lord God has spoken, who will not prophecy? A Lion
came, Et liberauit leonem, and he delivered a Lion, this other Lion is Daniel,
who came from Judah, as it is said, Genesis 49. Catulus Leonis Judah, Judah is a
Lions whelpe. A Lion came and delivered a Lion, de ore Leonis, from the mouth
of a Lion: this third Lion is Nabuchodonosor, as its said, Ierem. 4. Ascendit
Leo de cubili suo; the Lion is come up from his thicket. By this exposition of
the Hebrews the Lion in my Text is God.

So is he in the understanding of Saint Hierome; so Lyranus takes him to be; so
does Hugo de S. Charo; so does Dionysius Carthusianus; so many Rab. David Cyril.
others; most of the Pet. a Figueir. Caluinus. Gualterus. Oecolampadius.
Brentius. Ostander. Pappus, etc.
modern. The Glossator says, that because Amos, whilst he lived a shepherds
life stood in fear of the Lion, therefore he here compares the fear of the
Lord to the roaring of the Lion.

I am not ignorant, that some by this roaring in my Text do understand the
Devil, and by the Lord God here speaking Christ our Savior; that, as the
Devil is heard of the reprobate to their condemnation, so Christ is heard of
the Elect to their salvation. But this opinion being singular, I pass it by,
and following the current of Interpreters, do take this roaring Lion here to
betoken God, to this sense: If at the roaring of the Lion all the beasts of the
forest do tremble; how much more shall men tremble if God roar against them
by his Prophets? The stoutest courage of man, Mascula virtus, the manliest
prowess upon the earth, when it has girded up her loins with strength, and
decked it self with greatest glory, what can it avail where the fortitude of
God is set against it? Pitchers that are fashioned of clay, how is it possible
they should not break and fall asunder, if ever they come to encounter the
brass of Gods unspeakable Majesty? The Lion has roared, who will not fear?
The Lord God has spoken, and commanded us to cry aloud, and spare not, to lift
up our voices like trumpets, and to show his people their transgressions, who
dares be silent?

And thus from the similitude, the Lion roaring, I am come to the application
thereof, God speaking: The Lord God has spoken, who can but prophecy? Wherein
I note, 1 Who speaks. 2 How he speaks. 3 What is the sequel of his speech.


He that speaks is the Lord God.

He speaks after diverse manners.

And if he speak, man must prophecy.

The Lord God has spoken, who can but prophecy?

The Lord God! He is Adonai Iehouih. They are the very names wherewith God was
named in the precedent verse; and were there discoursed upon at large. I will
not now trouble you with any tedious repetition of what was then delivered.
Only be pleased to remember, that the first of these two names, Adonai,
betokens the Majesty of God, his sustentation of all things, and his dominion
over all: the second, Iehouih, his essence, his existing or being. The first,
Adonai, is with Calvin, Occolampadius, and Brentius, Dominator, ruler or
Governor; with the rest, its Dominus, Lord. The second Iehouth, is retained by
Iunius; its Jehovah with Calvin, Mercer, and Vatablus; with the rest, its Deus,
God.

The first, Adonai, Ruler, Governor, or Lord, puts us in mind that God
alone is absolutely Lord, Ruler, and Governor of all things; yea, and our
Lord. Our Lord, not only by the common right of creation; for thereby he is
the Lord of all created things in Heaven and Earth, yea and of the very Devils.
Nor is he our Lord only by the right of his universal providence, or
government; for thereby he rules over sin and death, and sets them bounds.
But our Lord he is by the right of redemption; Tit. 2.14.
for thereby he has made us, through Christ, a peculiar people unto himself,
zealous of good works. Such is the use of this first name, Adonai.

The second, Iehouih, or Jehovah, which we now translate God, may be our
remembrancer, that of himself, and by himself Revel. 1.4. and 16.5.
he ever was, is and shall be; that of him all creatures have their Act 17.28.
Romans 11.36.
being; and that he gives a real being to all his promises and, threats. This
same Jehovah, Adonai, Iehouih, God Almighty, is he that speaks.

But how speaks He? How to men, himself being incorporeall, without the
instruments of speech?

First, God speaks unto men, either by himself immediately, or by some
messenger. This messenger is either an Angel, or a man. If a man, then is he
either a Prophet, or a Priest; the Priest, Exodus 28.30.
that has in the breast plate of iudgemement the Vrim and the Thummim.

Again, God speaks unto men by a voice, either sensible or spiritual; if
with a sensibl^ voice, then he strikes the outward ears; if with a
spiritual, then the inward: as well the left ear, which is the Fantasy, as
the right, which is the Understanding.

Thirdly, God speaks unto men, either sleeping or waking. So Serarius Quaest.
1. in cap. 1. Ioshuae.

What the ancient Fathers have thought of this point touching God his speaking
unto man, I have long since delivered out of this place in my third Lecture
upon the first Chapter of this Prophecy. What was Saint Basils opinion, what
Saint Augustines, what Saint Gregory's, you then heard.

Later Writers have reduced all the speakings of God to two heads; Deeds and
Words.

Christophorus a Castro upon the first of Zachary, Et factis loquitur Deus and
verbis, God speaks both by Deeds and by words. Franciscus Ribera upon the
same Chapter, Deus ita rebus, vt verbis loquitur; God speaks as well by
things as by words.

A learned and a very orthodox Divine, David Pareus, in his Commentary upon
Genesis at the third Chapter, well liking of Saint Gregory's opinion, thus
resolves upon the point: God speaks either by himself, or by some
Angelical creature.

By himself God speaks, when by the sole force of internal inspiration the
heart is opened: or God speaks by himself, when the heart is taught
concerning the word of God, without words or syllables. This speech of God is
sine strepitu sermo, a speech without any noise. It pierces our ears, and yet
has no sound. Such was the speech of God unto the Apostles, at what time they
were filled with the Holy Ghost, Act. 2.2. Suddenly there came a sound from
Heaven, as of a rushing mighty wind, and it fill^d all the house, where they
were sitting: and there appeared unto them cloven tongues, like as of fire, and
it su^e upon each of them. Per ignem quidem Dominus apparuit, sed persemet
ipsum locutionem interius fecit: By the fire indeed God appeared, but by
himself he spoke in secret, within, to the heart of the Apostles Neither was
that fire God, nor was that sound God, but God by those outward things, the
fire and the sound, Expressit hoc, quod interius gessit, he showed what he did
within, and that he spoke to the heart. Those outward things, the fire and the
sound, were only for signification, to show that the Apostles hearts were
taught by an invisible fire, and a voice without a sound. Foris fuit ignis, qui
apparuit, sed intus, qui scientiam dedit: the fire, that appeared, was without;
but the fire that gave them knowledge, was within. So may you judge of the
sound: the sound that was heard was without; but the sound that smote their
hearts, was within. So Gods speech, is a speech to the heart without words,
without a sound.

Such was that speech to Philip, Act. 8.29. Go near, and join thy self to
yonder Chariot. It was the Spirit said so to Philip. Bid expounds it of inward
speech. In cord spiritus Philippo loquebatur, The Spirit said to Philip in his
heart. The Spirit of God may then be said to speak unto us, when by a secret
or hidden power, it intimates unto our hearts, what we are to do. The Spirit
said unto Philip, that is, Philip was by the Spirit of God inwardly moved to
draw near, and join himself to the Chariot, wherein that Ethiopian Eunuch
sat reading the Prophecy of Esaias.

A like speech was that to Peter, Act. 10.19. Behold three men seek thee. It
was the Spirit said so to Peter. And here Bid, In mente haec ab spiritu, non
in aure carnis audiuit: Peter heard these words from the Spirit, in mente, in
his understanding, non in aure carnis, not by his fleshly ear. The Spirit said
unto Peter, that is, Peter was by the Spirit of God inwardly moved to depart
from Ioppa, and go to Caesarea to preach to the Gentiles, to Cornelius and his
company.

From this inward speaking of God by his holy Spirit in the hearts of men
without either words or sound, we may note thus much for our present comfort,
that whenever we are inwardly moved, and do feel our hearts touched with
an earnest desire, either to offer up our private requests to God, or to come
to the place of public prayer, or to hear the preaching of the word, or to
receive the blessed Sacrament of the Eucharist, or to do any good work, we
may be assured, that God by his holy Spirit, God by himself speaks unto us.

Thus you see, how God speaks unto us by himself. He speaks unto us also
by his creatures. By his creatures Angelical, and others. And he does it after
diverse manners.

1 Verbis, by words. By words only; as when nothing is seen, but a voice only
is heard: as Ioh. 12.28. When Christ prayed, Father glorify thy name,
immediately there came a voice from Heaven, saying, I have both glorified it,
and will glorify it again. Here was Vox Patris, the voice of God the Father,
yet ministerio Angelorum formata, it was formed by the ministry of Angels.

2 God speaks Rebus, by things; By things only, as when no voice is heard,
but some thing only is objected to the senses. An example of this kind of Gods
speaking is that vision of Ezechiel, chap. 1.4. He saw a whirlwind come out
of the North, with a great cloud, and a fire enfolding it self; and in the
midst of the fire the color of Amber. All this he saw; but here is no
mention of any voice at all. And yet the Prophet says, Omnino fuit verbum
Iehouae ad Ezechielem; the Word of the Lord came expressly unto Ezechiel. The
word of the Lord came, and I looked, and behold a whirlewind. Here was res sine
verbo, a thing but no voice.

3 God speaks Verbis simul and rebus, both by words and things: as when there
is both a voice heard, and also some thing objected to the senses. So He spoke
to Adam presently after his fall, when he heard the voice of God walking in the
Garden, and saying, Adam where art thou? Genesis 3.8.

4 God speaks, Imaginibus cordis oculis extensis, by some images, shapes, or
semblances exhibited to our inward eyes, the eyes of our hearts. So Jacob in
his dream saw a ladder set upon the earth, the top whereof reached to Heaven,
and the Angels of God ascended and descended on it, Genesis 28.12. So Peter in a
trance saw Heaven opened, and a certain vessel descending unto him, as it had
been a great sheet knit at the four corners, and let down to the earth,
wherein were all manner of four footed beasts of the earth, and wild beasts,
and creeping things, and fowls of the air, Act. 10.10. So Paul in a vision in
the night saw a man of Macedonia standing by him, and praying his help: Come
over into Macedonia, and help us, Act. 16.9.

5 God speaks imaginibus and ante corporeos oculos ad tempus ex aere
assumptis; he speaks by some images, shapes, or semblances, for a time
assumed from the air, and exhibited to our bodily eyes. So he spoke to Abraham
in the plains of M^^^re, Genesis 18.2. Three men, says the Text, stood by
Abraham; yet were they not three men that stood by him, but three Angels in the
shape of men, with true bodies for the time; palpable and tractable bodies for
the time. One of the three more eminent than the rest, to whom Abraham did
reverence above the rest, with whom he talked, calling him Lord, verse. 3. who
is also called Jehovah, verse. 17. was Christ the second person in the Trinity.
And so God spoke unto Lot, by Angels in the likeness of men, Genesis 19. Two
Angels they were, verse. 1. Men they are called, verse. 10. Angels, and yet men.
Angels in nature, and men in their habit. By them God spoke to Lot of the
destruction of Sodom.

6 God speaks Coelestibus substantijs, by celestial substances. By
Celestial substances I mean not only the Heavens with the works therein,
but also the two superior elements, the fire and the air. So at the Baptism
of Christ, D^ nube vox sonuit, a voice was heard out of a cloud, as it was also
at his transfiguration upon the mount, This is my beloved son in whom I am
well pleased.

7 God speaks terrenis substantijs, by terrestrial substances. So to reprove
the dullness of Balaam, In ore Asina humana verba formauit, he enabled Balaams
own Ass to speak, Number. 22.28. Saint Peter, 2 Ep. 2.16. thus delivers it; The
dumb beast speaking with man's voice forbade the madness of the Prophet.

Once more, God speaks simul and terrenis, and coelestibus substantijs, both
by terrestrial and celestial substances: as when he spoke to Moses in a flame
of fire out of the midst of a bush, Exodus 3.2.4. The fire I call the
celestial, the bush the terrestrial substance.

Last of all, God speaks by his Angels, when Secreta eorum praesentia, by a
secret presence of theirs he infuseth the power of his influence to the hearts
of men: and thus may you understand that, Zach. 1.9. Angelus qui loquebatur in
me, the Angel of the Lord that spoke in me said unto me. The Angel that spoke
in me, to my heart.

And thus you see, how God of old at sundry times and in diverse manners did
speak to man. He spoke either by himself, or by his Creatures. By his
Creatures many ways: sometimes by words, sometimes by things, sometimes by
both words and things; sometimes by shapes exhibited to the eyes of the heart,
sometimes by apparitions to the eyes of the body; sometime by celestial
substances, sometimes by terrestrial, sometimes by both celestial and
terrestrial: and last of all, by some secret presence of an Angel within man
to the heart of man.

Thus from time to time has God been used to speak. Now f^lloweth the
sequel of his speech, Quis non prophetabi^? Who can but prophecy? If the Lord
God has spoken, frendent quasi Leunculas, grinding his teeth as a lusty young
Lion, against his people even ready to be devoured, Quis non prophetabit? What
Prophet is there that dares contain himself from prophesying? that dares
keep silence from denouncing the reuengefull threats of God? The Lord God has
spoken, Quis non prophetabit? Who will not prophecy?

Who will not? Anselmus Laudunensis, the Author of the Interlineary Gloss,
says, Panci viri sunt, few such men there are: Hugo Cardinalis; Nullus, vel
rarus est; There is not a man, or scarce a man that dares hold his peace, if
God bid him prophecy.

Moses may go about to excuse himself, that he be not sent to Pharaoh;
Exodus 4.10.
O my Lord, I am not eloquent, but am slow of speech, and of a slow tongue; I
pray thee send some other; but his excuses will not be received.

Esaias 6.5.
Esaias may complain, Woe is me, I am undone, because I am a man of polluted
lips: yet so he cannot put off his commission.

Ierem. 1.6, 7.
Jeremy may cry out, Ah, Lord God, behold I cannot speak, for I am a child.
Yet must he follow his calling. Say not, says the Lord, I am a child; for
thou shall go to all that I shall send thee, and whatsoever I command thee,
thou shall speak.

Ezech. 3.7.
Ezechiel is sent unto a people stiff of forehead, and hard of heart, a people
that would not hearken unto him, by whom he might well fear to lose his life:
yet might he not withdraw himself. Behold, says the Lord, I have made thy
face strong against their faces, and thy forehead strong against their
foreheads. As an Adamant harder than flint have I made thy forehead. Fear them
not, neither be dismayed at their looks, though they be a rebellious house.

Amos 7.14.
Amos, this our Amos, now our Prophet Amos, once no Prophet, nor a Prophets
son, but an heardman, and a gatherer of Sycomore fruit, taken by the Lord, as
he was following the flock, receives his commission from the Lord; Go,
Prophecy unto my people Israel. So he goes, and prophesies.

The Lord God has spoken, who can but prophecy?

Who can but prophecy? The observation is, The office of prophesying when God
enioyneth it, is not to be declined.

The proposition holds true, as well of the Prophets of the New Testament, as
of the Old. The Prophets of the New Testament are the Ministers thereof: who
though they have not the gift of prediction, to foretell things to come, yet
are they called Prophets, Mat. 10.41. He that receives a Prophet in the name
of a Prophet, shall receive a Prophets reward.

Prophets they are called.

First, because their function, sacred and Ecclesiastical, is in place and
stead of the Prophetical office of the Old Testament.

Secondly, because their office is to expound and interpret the writings of the
Prophets.

Thirdly, because they are to preach what is written in the Scriptures of the
Prophets, of the day of judgment, of the rewards of good men, and of the
torments prepared for the wicked in the life to come. Of such Prophets speaks
Gregory 2. part. Pastoralis Curae cap. 4. Prophetae in sacro eloquio nonnunquam
Doctores vocantur, qui dum fugitiua esse praesentia indicant, quae futura sunt
manifestant. Doctors or teachers are oftentimes in holy language called
Prophets, because while they declare things present to be fugitive and
transitory, they do manifest the things that are to come. Thus are Doctors or
Teachers, the Ministers of the New Testament, Prophets in their kind; and the
observation even now made concerning the office of prophesying reaches them.

The office of the Ministry of the Word, when God sends, is not to be
declined. Its not to be declined. He that has once begun to run in this
race, must run on with perseverance, even unto the end. He that has put his
hand to this Plough, may not look back, lest he prove unfit for the Kingdom
of God. Luke 9.62.
In this race and course of life we are to contend and strive with the whole
earth. Though we be despised, despighted, hated, cursed of every man, because
we preach what the Lord has bidden us, and proclaim his vengeance against
sinners, yet will we not be discouraged. Our hand against every man, and every
man's hand against us: Our tongue against every vice, and every tongue walks
and rangeth at liberty through our actions. The Disciple is not above his
Master, Math. 10.24.
nor the Servant above his Lord. If our Master and Lord, Christ Jesus, have
suffered such things, we his Disciples and servants must possess our souls in
patience. If we be thought too clamorous against the disorders of common
life, if too busy, if too severe in striking at offenses; forgive us this
fault. A necessity is laid upon us: The Lord God has spoken, and we cannot
but prophecy.

Is a necessity laid upon us? That's not all. For a Woe is due unto us if we
preach not. Vae mihi, says Paul, 1 Cor. 9.16. Woe is me if I preach not the
Gospel. If I preach not the Gospel! What then shall become of the Law? We
must preach both, as the Gospel so the Law. As we are to publish the tidings
of joy to those that rejoice in our message, so are we to denounce the terrors
of judgment to those that contemn it. As we are to preach liberty to
captives, so are we to threaten captivity to libertines. As we are to pipe to
those that will dance after us, so are we to sound a trumpet of war to those
that will resist us. As we are to build an Arc for those that will be saved,
so are we to power out a flood of maledictions against those that will be
damned. Finally, as we are to open the doors to those that knock and are
penitent, so are we to stand in the doors with a flaming sword in our
mouths, against those that are obstinate.

Thus you see a necessity is laid upon us to preach unto you; to preach not the
Gospel only, but the Law too. Yet is not this necessity, necessitas
coactionis, a necessity of coaction, constraint or compulsion, but necessitas
obligationis and mandati diuini, a necessity of obligation and divine
Commandment. It is our vocation and conscience that imposes this necessity
upon us. If then we preach unto you, we have not whereof to glory or boast our
selves. For we do no more than we are of duty to do. Now if we of duty preach
unto you, then are you of duty likewise to hear us: and a necessity of hearing
is laid upon you: I say not, a necessity of coaction, constraint or compulsion,
but a necessity of obligation and divine Commandment. A necessity is laid upon
you to hear the word of God, God commands you to hear it. And Vae vobis,
Woe unto you if you refuse to hear it. Yet when you hear, take heed how you
hear.

Quid juvat auditus verbi, si non datur vsus? What advantage is it to you to
hear the Word of God, if you make no good use thereof? Ideo audis, vt agas.
Therefore you hear, that you may put in practice what you hear. Sweetly Saint
Augustine upon Psalm. 104. Valde male digerit is, qui been audit, and non been
operatur: Surely he very ill digesteth, that hears well, and works not well.

Now gracious Father, we most humbly beseech thee to open our hearts, and to
unlock the ears of our understanding, that whether we preach, or hear thy
Word, we may preach it and hear it profitably, that we may observe, learn,
and embrace such things as are necessary to the confirming of our weak faith,
and the amendment of our sinful lives. Amen.

THE Eleventh Lecture.
AMOS 3.9, 10, 11. Publish in the palaces of Ashdod, and in the palaces of the
Land of Egypt, and say: Assemble your selves upon the mountains of Samaria:
and be hold the great tumults in the midst thereof, and the oppressed in the
midst thereof.

For they know not to do right, says the Lord; who store violence and robbery
in their palaces.

Therefore thus says the Lord God; An adversary there shall be even round
about the Land: and he shall bring down thy strength from thee, and thy
palaces shall be spoiled.


THe equity of Gods judgments is such, that if strangers see them, they
cannot but approve them. It appears to be so, by this passage of Amos his
second Sermon to or against the people of Israel. This passage is an (...), or
an Exornation, pertaining to the proposition, which was in the second verse of
this Chapter. It amplifieth the iniquity of the Israelites from the
testification of foreign Nations, thus: You, you of Israel, your sins are so
notorious, so gross, so palpable, that the Philistines and Egyptians may
behold them; since you of your selves are not touched with a conscience of your
evil deeds; them, the Philistines and Egyptians I call as witnesses and Judges
of your impuritie and uncleanness. This is the scope of the words now read
unto you.

The parts are two: An Accusation, verse. 9. and 10. A Commination, verse. 11.


The Accusation is delivered by an Apostrophe, by a turning of the speech from
the Israelites to others, verse. 9. Others are called upon to make a
proclamation, in these words, Proclaim in the Palaces of Ashdod, and in the
Palaces of the Land of Egypt, and say: the tenor of their proclamation is in
these, Assemble your selves upon the mountains of Samaria, and behold the
great tumults in the midst thereof, and the oppressed in the midst thereof.

The sins pointed at in this proclamation are two, Cruelty and
Covetousness. Cruelty in their great tumults; Covetousness in their
oppressions. Both are amplified verse. 10. from two places, a genere, and a
specie. First from the general, They know not to do right. Secondly from the
special, They treasure up violence and robbery in their Palaces. Their
violence argues their cruelty, their robbery is a demonstration of their
Covetousness. The truth hereof is not to be questioned. For (...) Neum
Jehovah, the Lord has said it. For they know not to do right, says the Lord,
who store up violence and robbery in their Palaces.

We have a large field for discourse to travel in: we will begin at the gate
or first entrance into it, which is, the iniunction for the proclamation:
Proclaim in the Palaces of Ashdod, and in the Palaces of the Land of Egypt,
and say.

At the entrance into this field the Hebrew word is (...) Haschmignu, and is as
much, as, make to hear. The old Interpreter puts for it, Auditum facite, make
a hearing; so does Saint Hierome: these keep near unto the word. The
Septuagint with their (...), are not far from the meaning, nor is
Oecolampadius with his annunciate, for which our countryman Tauerner has
Preach: Preach in the Palaces at Ashdod.

Calvin. Iunius.
Brentius with his Clamate; Gualter with his Diuulgate; Vat^blus. Marcer,
Drusius, and others, with their Promulgate, are all for the Proclamation: Cry,
Diuulge, Publish, or Proclaim.

Proclaim. Where? In Ashdod, and in the Land of Egypt. First in Ashdod.

P^laestina, the Country of the Philistines, was divided into five Provinces,
Dutchies, or Lordships, mentioned Josh. 13.3. the Provinces of Azz^h, of
Ashdod, of Askelon, of Gath, of Ezron. Those five, the chief and most famous
Cities of Palastina are recorded also, 1 Samuel 6.17. where the Philistines are
said to have returned for a trespass offering unto the Lord, five golden
E^^rods; one for Ashdod, one for Azzab, one for Askelon, one for G^th, and one
for Ekron.

Ashdod! In the first division of the holy Land, it was in the lot of the Tribe
of Judah, and is so described, Josh. 15.47. Afterward it tell to the lot of the
Tribe of the Children of Dan, who had their inheritance, as the Children of
Simeon had, within the inheritance of the Children of Judah; I sh. 19.1.
and is accordingly described by Adrichom and Schrot in their tables of the
Holy Land.

The more familiar name of it is Azotus. In it were left Giants, those that
were called Enakim. It is to this day a famous City of Palaestina. Apud
Hieron. T^^. 3.
So says Eusebius lib. de locis Hebraicis. Another learned Author writing of
the Hebrew places in the Acts of the Apostles, says, Azotus, is a famous town
of Palaestina, called in Hebrew Ashdod, and is one of the five cities of the
Allophyli of the Philistines.

For the Etymology of the word, Saint Hierome says, it signifies as much as
ignis vberis, or ignis patrui, the fire of an vdder, or of an uncle. The words
are in his Commentary upon Amos, chap. 1. where he refuteth those that say, it
is ignis generationis, the fire of generation. And well: for they mistake Resch
for D^leth; taking it for Aschdor, when it is Aschdod. The Author of the book
De nominibus Hebraicis upon Joshua, says, Asdod is dissolutio, vel effusio,
sieve incendium, a dissolution, or an effusion, or a burning. A little after,
ignis patrui mei, vel incendia, my uncles fire or burnings. Ignis patrui, so I
read with Drusius obseru. 6. 8. not Gens patrui, as it is in the old books by
the like mistake of Resch for Daleth. Buntingus in his Itinerarie upon the old
Testament, says it is, Ignis dilectus, a beloved fire. There is no agreement
between these Etymologiz^rs.

The more familiar and Greek name of this City, Azotus, is by Stephanus in
his book of Cities derived from Az^, a woman, that was the Foundresse of this
City. But I rather think that Azotus is so called from the Hebrew Asdod by
the change of some letters; Azotus for Asdotus, as Ez^as for Esdras, and (...)
for (...), in the D^ricke Dialect.

This same City Asdod, or Azotus, was made famous by the Ark of the Lord
brought thither, when it was taken by the Philistines; and by the house of the
Idol Dagon there, 1 Samuel 5.2. This is that Azotus, where Philip the Deacon was
found after he had baptized the Ethiopian Eunuch, Act. 8.40. And this that
Asdod, whereof you heard in my thirteenth Sermon upon the first Chapter of this
book, upon the eight verse, these words, I will cut off the inhabitant from
Asdod.

Yet I take it not, that Ashdod is here put so precisely for the City, but
that it may by a Synecdoche comprehend the whole region or Country of the
Philistines. Commonly it is so understood by Ancients, Saint Hierome, Remigius,
Albertus, Rupertus, Hugo, Lyra, Isidorus, and by modern Writers, Montanus,
Christophorus a Castro, Petrus Lusitanus, and others.

But I must from Ashdod, and go on to the Land of Egypt: for there is this
proclamation likewise to be made. Proclaim in Ashdod, and in the Land of
Egypt.

To this Land of Egypt we came twice before in our view of this Prophecy;
Cap. 2.10. and 3.1.
and therefore need not at this time stand long upon it. Yet may we not leave
it altogether unsaluted. It is here called (...) Eretz Mitzrajim, the L^nd of
Mitzrajim.

Saint Hierome Comment, in Esai. cap. 18. says, that with the Hebrews an
Egyptian man and an Egyptian woman and the Country of Egypt have all one
name Mefraim: Obser. l^b. 5. c 25.
for so Drusius reads out of a Manuscript of Saint Hieromes Works, Apud
Ebraeos and Aegyptius, and Aegyptus, and Aegyptia, vno vocabulo nuncupantur,
M^sraim. But this cannot be so. For the Egyptian man, he is Mesri, the woman
Mesrith, the Country only Mesraim. And if by the name of Mesraim, the
Egyptians be sometime signified, it is by a figure of speech, as when Judah
is put for the Jews, or Ephraim for the Ephraimites.

Josephus in his first book of the Antiquities of the Jews, cap. 7. says,
that Egypt was called Mesr^, and the Egyptians M^sraei: he alludeth to the
Hebrew name Mitzraj^m. And Egypt was so called from Mitzrajim one of the
sons of Chum, his second son, as we find him, Genesis 10.6. He first
inhabited that part of Africa, which was afterward called Egypt, from
Aegyptus, son of Beli^s, King of that Land. Now because this same Mitzrajim
was one of the sons of Cham, the Land of Mitzrajim, or of Egypt, is in the
Psalms of David entitled the Land of Cham; Psalm. 105.27. and 106.2^
as Psalm. 105.23. Iaacob was a stranger in the Land of Cham; and in other
places. And for the same reason is Cham put for Egypt. Psalm. 78 51. He smote
all the first borne in Egypt, even the beginning of their strength, in the
tabernacles of Cham. The latter part of that verse being an exposition of the
former, makes it manifest, that Cham is there put for Mitzrajim, or Egypt.

Enough for this time of Egypt. The Palaces of both Ashdod and Egypt are here
specified: not barely the houses, as the Vulgar Latin here reads, but the
Palaces: to show, that this proclamation was to be made not in obscure houses,
or poor Cottages, but in their Princes Courts. And quod in aulis principum
diuulgatur, latere non potest; what is published in Princes Courts, it will
abroad There is the greatest confluence of honorable persons and men of note;
who have evermore some about them, that will not spare to tell abroad what is
either said or done by the Princes themselves in their most secret closets.
Their very vices cannot be hid. So Honorius the Emperor in the Panegyricke
tells his son Theodosius, Claudian. de 4. Cons. Honorij, verse. 271.
-- cunctis tua gentibus esse
Facta palam: nec posse dari regalibus vsquam
Secretum vitijs.
Whatsoever thou do, it is known abroad; nor can any place be of sufficient
secrecy to conceal the vices of Kings.

Now if Kings secrets done in Court, if their secret vices be made known; much
more shall it be known, that is proclaimed in Court. And therefore is the
Proclamation here enjoined to be made in the Palaces of Palaestina and Egypt,
in their Princes Courts, that the same thereof flying abroad into all the
coasts of those dominions, the rest of the people might understand thereof, and
bear witness to the judgments of God, which he executes upon his people for
their sins, that they are very just.

By this iniunction for the Proclamation now expounded, you see, that Heathens,
the Philistines and Egyptians, aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, and
utter enemies to that State, are invited to be spectators of the evils which
God in judgment was to bring upon that his people, the Israelitish Nation. And
this was to make the evils, which the Israelites were to suffer, the more
grievous unto them. Hence arises this observation: The calamities, or miseries
which the Lord in justice lays upon us for our evil deeds, will be the more
grievous unto us, if our enemies be made privy unto them.

This is it the Lord says to Jerusalem, Ezech. 5.8. Behold, I, even I, will
execute judgment, in the midst of thee, in the sight of the nations thine
enemies. In the sight of thine enemies will I do it.

It could not be but an exceeding great grief to the Virgin daughter of Zion;
that the Lord had caused her enemy to rejoice over her, and had set up the
horn of her adversaries, Lament. 2.17.

The reproach and ignominy that comes from an enemy in time of misery is to
some far more grievous than death it self, who rather choose to die, though
it be by their own hands, or the hands of a friend, than they will endure
dishonor from an enemy. Examples of such a resolution there are many in
profane Histories, as in Plutarch of Tom. 3. vit. in Catone.
Cat^ Minor, In Antonio.
Antonius and Cleopatra; in Annal. lib. 16.
Tacitus of Thraseas: These of the Heathen killed themselves through
impatiencie, as not being able to endure the reproach and shame, which they
feared, the one from Caesar, two of them from Augustus, the fourth from Nero.

Nor is the Sacred story void of examples of this kind.

Abimelech son of Ierubesheth. 2 Samuel 11.21.
Ierubbaal, he, whom the Sichemites Judge. 9.6.
made their King, when at an assault of his given to the tower of Theber he had
his scull broken by a piece of a Millstone which a certain woman had cast upon
his head, he called hastily unto a young man his armor-bearer, and said unto
him, Draw my sword, and slay me, that men say not of me, A woman slew him. And
his young man thrust him through, and he died, Judge. 9.54. Such was the end of
that ambitious and cruel tyrant. He is slain of a woman, and when he sees he
is to die, he is desirous to blot out that infamy: he will not have it said
of him, that a woman slew him. That a woman, of the enemies side, slew him, he
will not by any means have it said of him: Kill him rather than it should be
said, A woman slew him.

Such was the impatience of Saul, Saul, he that was the first King of the
Israelites, when the Philistines had gotten the day against him, 1 Samuel 31.2. 1 Chronicles. 10.2.
had slain three of his sons, Jonathan, Abinadab, and Malchishua, and
himself was wounded by their archers, he thus spoke unto his Armor-bearer,
Draw thy sword and thrust me through therewith, lest these uncircumcised come,
and thrust me through and mock me. Which vile act his Armor-bearer refusing,
Saul became his own executioner, took his own sword and slew himself, 1 Samuel
31.4. He takes his own sword and slayes himself. And why so? Lest, says he,
these uncircumcised Philistines come and thrust me through, and mock me. See,
he will die, that he may not die: he will be thrust through, that he may not be
thrust through; he will kill himself, that the Philistines may not kill him.
He will not endure to come within the power of his enemies.

I commend not Saul for his valor in killing himself, nor Abimelech for his
in causing his Armor-bearer to thrust him through. It was not valor in them,
but cowardice, or impatiencie. For if they could with patience have borne and
endured their troubles, they would not have hastened their own death.

Selfe-killing is a sin so grievous, that scarce there is any more heinous
before the Lord. Many reasons may be alleged to show the unlawfulness of this
fact; and I hold it not amiss to bring a few, especially in the iniquity of
these times, wherein wretchedness has so fearfully prevailed in some
persons, and almost daily does prevail, that they dare plunge themselves into
this pit of terrible destruction.

My first reason shall be; because it is forbidden in that Commandment, Thou
shall not kill. Exodus 20.13.
In that Commandment is forbidden the killing of any man without lawful
authority. But no man has authority over himself, because no man is superior
to himself: and therefore no man may kill himself: Out of S. Augustine lib.
1. de Ciuit. Dei, cap. 20. I thus frame the reason: Thou shall not kill, that
is the Law. The Law is not, Exodus 20.13.
thou shall not kill thy neighbor, limiting it as it were to some, but
indefinitly; Thou shall not kill, extending it largely to all: and therefore a
man may not kill himself.

My second reason I take from that other Law, Thou shall love thy neighbor as
thy self. It is given in the Old: Leuit. 19.18. Matthew. 5.43. and 22.39. Romans
13.9. Galat. 5.14. James 2.8.
and is often repeated in the New Testament; Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy
self. Where the love of our selves, is made measure for the love of our
neighbors. Thou ought to love thy neighbor, but as thou love thy self.
The example of thy charity is drawn from thy self at home. Thy soul, thy
preservation, the good wished to thy self, should be the true direction of thy
deeds unto thy neighbor. But it is unlawful for thee to lay bloody or
murdering hands upon thy neighbor; and therefore thou may not make away
thy self. It is more unnatural for thee to shed thine own blood, than thy
neighbors. Thy neighbors thou may not shed, much less may thou shed
thine own.

Thirdly, for a man to kill himself, it is an injury to the Commonwealth
wherein he lives; for thereby he maimeth the Commonwealth, and cutteth off
one of her members. The King thereby shall want a man, when he has use of him.
This is an injury to the State, and therefore a man may not kill himself.

Fourthly, our life is given us of God. God has placed us in this world, as in
a watch or standing, from whence we may not stir a foot, till God call us and
command us to remove.

Josephus a noble Captain in the war of the Jews, after the loss of the
City Iotapata, which Vespasian the Roman General took, being assembled with
diverse of his soldiers in a cave, where for a while they lay hid from the fury
of the Enemy, when they would take no way, but that they would kill one the
other, rather than they would be taken by their enemies the Romans, uses unto
them a very patheticall speech, as Egesippus lib. 3. de excidio-Hierosolymitano
has recorded it; Thesaurum nobis optimum Deus dedit, The Almighty God has
given unto us our life, as a most precious treasury: he has shut it and sealed
it up in this earthen vessel, and given it us to be kept, till himself do
ask for it again. And were it not a fault now, as on the one side to deny it,
when he shall require it again: so on the other side to spell, and cast this
treasure forth, which was thus committed to us, before he do demand it? If we
should kill our selves, Quis nos admittet ad illa sanctarum animarum consortia?
Who is he, that shall admit us into the company of good souls? Shall it not be
said to us, as once it was said to Adam, where art thou? so, where are ye?
Where are ye, who contrary to my commandment are come, from whence yet you
should not, because yet I have not loosed you from the bonds of your bodies.

Where are ye? Where? The same Josephus in the same speech of his, as himself
has delivered it, lib. 3. de bello Iudaico cap. 14. will tell you, where it is
most likely they are; Quorum manus in seipsos insanierunt, eorum animas
tenebrosior Orcus suscipit; the souls of them who have killed themselves are
descended into Hell. And so much Saint Hierom seems to affirm in an Epistle
of his to Paula concerning the death of her daughter Blaesilla, where he makes
God thus to speak, Nullam animam recipio, quae me nolente separatur a corpore,
I will receive no soul, which against my will goes out of the body to which I
have committed it.

Beloved, without Gods exceeding mercy, whereof no man can presume, nay great
and mighty prejudice is to the contrary, it will be very ill with them, who
do adventure to slay themselves.

Let then those of the Heathen, whom even now I mentioned, Cato Vticensis,
Antony, Cleopatra and Thraseas; let Abimelech and Saul, let others be famous
for killing themselves; let it be said of them, that it was not blood, but
honor that gushed out of their sides, yet are they not warrants for us
Christians to do the like. We have a better Master Christ Jesus, the
Righteous: He has taught us a better lesson; namely, that adversity and bitter
affliction must be borne with patience: that in our miseries and calamities, we
are to expect what end God will make, and not to hasten the issue in our
selves. Mayor animus merito dicendus est, qui vitam aerumnosam magis potest
far, quam fugere, August. de Ciuit. Dei lib. 1. cap. 22. He is worthily said
to have true fortitude, that can with patience bear the sorrows which are
assigned and allotted out for his portion; whereas he that fearfully flies
from them, is no better than a coward. Quis enim ignorant foemineae timiditatis
esse, Cequaeus Comment. in August. de ciu. Dei lib. 1. cap. 24.
and muliebris formidinis, ne moriare, mori velle? Josephus in that his Oration
now cited out of De Excid. Hieros. l. 3. c. 18.
Hegesippus: Who knows it not to be effeminate timorousness and woman-like
faint-heartednesse, to be willing to die, that thou die not, to kill thy self,
that another kill thee not.

So is it, beloved. This same (...), this same (...), this same selfe-killing,
at the best, is no better than the badge of an abject and a base mind. None of
the Saints in their greatest miseries, nor Joseph, nor Job, nor David, nor
Daniel, nor other, thought of any such way to rid themselves out of trouble.
No. Though they felt the sharpness of poverty, the sting of infamy, the
pains of diseases, and the horror of death, yet their courage quailed not,
but they spurned aside all manner of despair. And for the sweetness they
found in the favor and grace of God, they were well content not only to be
deprived of all worldly delights, and earthly pleasures, but also to embrace
the rod of their heavenly Father, and patiently to endure the weight of the
cross laid on them.

These, beloved, these are fit patterns for our imitation. Wherefore, let us
not be dismayed with any cross or affliction. Let not the extremity of the
pain, nor the sharpness of the misery, nor the continuance of the sickness,
daunt our courage, no, though these calamities befall us in the sight of our
enemies. Nay, though we be given up into the hands of our enemies, who will
triumph and rejoice at our downfall, yet will we not offer violent hands unto
our selves; we will not cut asunder that which God has joined, we will not
seek for ease by shortning of our lives. Whatsoever ill shall betide me, I
will say with Jeremy, Chap. 10.19. Truly this is my grief, and I will bear
it.

And my grief will be the more, if in time of misery, mine enemy insult and
triumph over me. This is a case, that has much troubled Gods holy ones, as in
part you have already heard. It much troubled holy David. And therefore he
prays against it, Psalm. 13.4. Consider, and hear me, O Lord my God: and why?
Lest mine enemy say, I have prevailed against him; and those that trouble me
rejoice, when I am moved. The like eiaculation he has, Psalm. 38.16. and his
reason there is the same; Lest mine enemies should rejoice over me; who, when
my foot slippeth, do magnify themselves against me.

The same David, upon the news of the death of King Saul and Jonathan his
son, willing to prevent the opprobrious and disgraceful insultations and
vpbraidings of the enemy, gives a charge for secrecy, as much as might be, 2 Samuel 1.20. Tell it not in Gath, publish it not in the streets of Askelon, lest
the daughters of the Philistines rejoice, lest the daughters of the
uncircumcised triumph.

The little flock of the righteous, the holy Church her self, is sensible of
the insolency of an enemy, Micah. 7.8. O thou enemy of mine, rejoice not at
my fall; for I shall get up again.

Upon these particulars, and the like, depends the truth of the observation
propounded: The calamities or miseries which the Lord in justice lays upon us
for our evil deeds, will be the more grievous unto us, if our enemies be made
privy unto them.

Will they be the more grievous unto us, if our enemies be made privy unto
them? What is the reason? The reason is; because it is a property of wicked
men, enemies to piety, wonderfully to insult over the godly that are afflicted,
and the more these are afflicted, the more insolent are they. Great was the
insolency of those enemies of David, of whom he complains Psalm. 35.15. In
mine adversity they rejoiced, and gathered themselves together; yea, the very
abiects, [the offscouring of the people] gathered themselves together against
me; made mowes at me, and ceased not.

As great was that of Nabal, in his answer to David's messengers, 1 Samuel 25.10.
Who is David? and who is the son of Iesse? There be many servants now adays
that break away every man from his Master. Shall I then take my bread, and my
water, and my flesh that I have killed for my shearers, and give it unto men,
when I know not whence they be? Churlish Nabal; he is not content only not to
give any thing to David, but also raileth at him, and reuileth him.

And was not the insolency of Shemei of as high a strain? Shemei, a man of
the family of the house of Saul, comes forth from Bahurim, and curses still as
he comes, meets David, casts stones at him, and reuileth him; Come out, come
out thou man of blood, and thou man of Belial, 2 Samuel 16.7. See, see; it is the
property of the wicked exceedingly to insult over the Godly, when they are in
misery: and for this cause will our miseries be the more grievous unto us, if
the wicked take notice of them.

Now the uses which we are to make of this observation, are these.

First, it shows, how vile our nature is, that has no more remorse in it
toward them that are in misery.

Secondly, it teaches us when we are in misery to look for no better from
profane persons, than insultation and rejoicing, and therefore in that case to
arm our selves with patience.

Thirdly, we may learn from hence how to behave our selves toward our
enemies, when they are fallen under the cross, we may not triumph over them.
We must do unto them, as we would be done unto: this is the Law and the
Prophets. But when we are in misery, we would not have our enemies insult over
us: and therefore neither must we insult over them, when they are in misery.

This is that the Lord so severely commands in the Prophecy of Obadiah,
verse. 11, 12. Look not, rejoice not, speak not proudly in the day of thy
brother, in the day of his peregrination, in the day of his perdition, in the
day of his anguish, in the day of his ruin, in the day of his calamity, in
the day of his tribulation. And this is that, whereto Solomon exhorts, Prou.
24.17. Rejoice not, when thine enemy falls; and let not thine heart be glad
when he stumbleth. So Ecclesiasticus admonishes, Chap 7.11. Laugh no man to
scorn in the bitterness of his soul. Holy Job, Chap. 31.29. in the Catalogue
of his comforts, reckons up this for one; that he never rejoiced at the hurt
of his enemy, nor was ever glad that any harm happened unto him, nor
euer-suffered his mouth to do such a sin as to wish him evil.

And now (beloved) if neither the precept of the Lord, nor the exhortation of
Solomon, nor the admonition of the wise son of Syrach, nor the example of
holy Job, can move us to the performance of this Christian duty, namely, not to
rejoice at any that are in adversity: What shall I say? Will the fear of
punishment any whit amend us? Then remember we what the Wiseman says, Prou.
17.5. He that rejoices at the harm of another, shall not himself escape
unpunished.

And thus much be spoken by occasion of the iniunction for the proclamation,
these words, Proclaim in the palaces of Ashdod, and in the palaces of the Land
of Egypt, and say. Now follows the tenor of the Proclamation, in these:
Assemble your selves upon the mountains of Samaria, and behold the great
tumults in the midst thereof, and the oppressed in the midst thereof.

Wherein three things are principally to be observed: One is, the calling of an
assembly. Secondly, the place for the assembly. Thirdly, the end of their
meeting.


The calling of the Assembly is first. You that are the Prophets of the Lord,
dicite, say plainly and with a loud voice; say to the Princes of Palaestina and
of Egypt, Congregamini, Be ye gathered together; assemble your selves, Come
and meet together upon the mountains of Samaria.

The mountains of Samaria, are the place for this assembly. Samaria, for the
most common use of the name, is the City registered, 1 King. 16.24. to be built
by King Omrie, upon a mountain purchased by him of one Semer, called in the
allegory, Ezech 23.4 Aholah, sister to Aholibah, named to be the head of
Ephraim, Esai. 7.9. It was a royal city of Israel, the Metropolis, the mother
city of that kingdom. From it the coast adjoining, situate betwixt Galilee and
Iudaea, was named Samaria, and is accordingly described by Cosmographers,
Ptolomee, Ortelias, Maginus and others: and from hence the kingdom of Israel
came to be called the kingdom of Samaria, as 2 King. 17.24. Where the King of
Assyria is said to have brought nations out of Babylon, and other places of his
dominions, and to have seated them in the cities of Samaria, that is, in the
cities of the kingdom of Israel.

Thus may Samaria be either the whole Province, or the chief City thereof.
And so may the mountains of Samaria be either the whole Province, because the
whole was mountainous, as Josephus affirms, Lib. 3. de bello Iudaice, cap. 2.
or they may betoken the chief City thereof, because it was seated on a
mountain. And then our Prophet says, the mountains of Samaria, as we say in
Latin, flumen Euphratis, Vrbs Romae, and herba Lapathi. As we say, the River
of Euphrates for Euphrates, the City of Rome, for Rome, the herb of Patience,
for Patience: so may our Prophet here say, the Mountains of Samaria, for
Samaria. That by these Mountains of Samaria the whole Province is to be
understood, it is the opinion of Saint Hieroms, Remigius, Rupertus, with some
other, with whom agrees Petrus Lusitanus. Yet to Castrus it seems more
probable, that the very City be here meant, as in the midst whereof many
detestable villainies and enormities were acted. But both expositions may well
take place. For if the chief city of the Country were so flagitious, the
rest of the Country could not be blameless.

Thus have we the place for this assembly. But what is the end of their
meetings? It is to behold the great tumults in the midst of Samaria, and the
oppressed in the midst thereof. Et videte, And behold.

You, the Princes of Palastina and Egypt having gathered your selves together
upon the mountains of Samaria, Videte, Look about you. It will be a pleasant
spectacle for you to see the great disorder of a people, whom you have a long
time hated. Videte, look about you therefore, Behold, see, (...) Mehumoth
rabboth, What Is that? Insanias multas, says the old Interpreter; so Saint
Hierome; See their many madnesses, (...), say the Septuagint, many miraculous
and strange demeanours: Oecolampadius says, Stupenda multa, many prodigious
deportments. Drusius, Strages multas, many slaughters: Calvin, Concussiones
multas, many concussions, violent and public extortions. Vatablus and Mercer,
Contritiones multas, many Contritions, brusings, or cursings of the afflicted.
Iunius and Piscator, Vexationes plurimas, very many vexations: Gualter,
Tumultus multos, many tumults: Brentius, Tumultus magnos, great tumults; Great
tumults! Its our translation. See; See then, many madnesses, strange and
prodigious behauiours, slaughters, concussions, contritions, very many
vexations, many and great tumults. All these see.

In medio ejus, in the midst of Samaria. Yet is not this all, you are there
to see. For see also (...) Gnaschukim, the oppressed in the midst thereof.
For the oppressed Calvin has Oppressiones, the oppressions; it is the
marginall reading in our now-Bible. Brentius has Calumnias; so has
Oecolampadius; Saint Hierome, and the Vulgar Latin, Calumniam patientes. Their
meaning is, that in Samaria, in the midst thereof, in penetralibus eius, in
the in most parts thereof, there were many that were calumniated, were accused
falsely, were appeached wrongfully, were charged maliciously, were reproached
unjustly, were reviled injuriously. Such doing was there in Samaria, not only
in the country abroad, but also within the walls thereof. Every where did
cruelty advance it self, and so did Covetousness.

And thus have I expounded the Proclamation; the words thereof; in which the
Philistines and Egyptians, Gentes extra Oeconomiam Dei, profane Nations, are
cited to be witnesses, yea and Judges too, of the impurity and uncleanness,
that was in the Lords own people, the people of Israel. My observation is, God
^ometimes conuinceth his own people of impiety, by comparing them with
foreign Nations.

Such a comparison is that, Ierem. 2.10. Pass over the Isles of Chittim, and
see, and send unto Kedar, and consider diligently, and see if there be any such
thing. Has any Nation changed their Gods, which are yet no Gods? But my people
have changed their glory, for that which does not profit. It is a vehement
expostulation, and in the paraphrase may be thus: You, my people of the Jewish
Nation, pass ye over unto Chittim, to the Macedonians and Cyprians, see of
what Religion and constancy they are: and send ye unto Kedar, to the Hagar^ns,
observe them, mark them diligently. Can you find, think you, any Nations so
like your selves? so inconstant, so mut^ble? Is there any Nation in the whole
world, that so rashly changes her Gods? Gods! Gods of the Nations! They are no
Gods, but Idols, the froth and skumme of man's brain. And yet are the Nations
constant in the worship of these their false Gods, their no Gods. But you, you
of the Jewish Nation, mine own people; you have changed your Glory. Me, the
true, faithful, and everliving God, in whom alone you should have gloried, Me
have you changed for a thing of naught. Be astonished, O ye Heavens, at this:
be ye horribly afraid, be ye very desolate, says the Lord.

A like comparison is that brought by our Savior in the Gospel, Matthew. 12.41.
Where from the example of the Ninevites, he infers the condemnation of the
Jews. The men of Nineveh shall rise up in judgment with this generation, Luke
11.33.
and shall condemn it: because they repented at the preaching of Jonas; and
behold, a greater than Jonas is here. The Ninevites were Gentiles and
Barbarians; the Jews were Gods own people: the Preacher to the Ninevites was
Jonas, a mere man and a stranger, but Christ God and man, of the line and race
of David, was the Preacher to the Jews: Jonas his preaching continued bur for
three days, and the Ninevites repented; Christ preached for three years
together, and the Jews blasphemed. Therefore shall the men of Nineveh rise up
in judgment with the Jews, and shall condemn them.

Saint Paul likewise presses the example of the Gentiles, the more to accuse
the Corinthians of grievous sin among them, 1 Cor. 5.1. It is reported
commonly, that there is fornication among you, and such fornication, as is not
so much as named among the Gentiles. The Gentiles, who know not God, nor have
heard of the faith of Christ, will not commit so foul a sin: and will you,
Christians, you who hope for salvation by faith in Christ, will you defile your
selves with such abomination? For the love of God, for the love of your own
souls, fly from fornication.

And thus have you the confirmation of my second observation, which was: God
sometimes conuinceth his own people of impiety, by comparing them with
foreign Nations.

The use of this observation may be, to teach us, who profess the faith of
Christ, that the glorious name of Christianity is but vain and idle, if a man's
life through his corrupt and dissolute behavior, be not answerable.

Saint Augustine in his time propounded this question to an Auditory of his, in
his second Sermon upon the thirtieth Psalm: Quam multos putatis, fratres mei,
velle esse Christianos, sed offendi malos moribus Christianorum? My brethren,
how many, think ye, there are, that would willingly become Christians, but
that they take exception at the evil lives of the Christians?

Long after him great Gregory, Moral. lib. 25. cap. 10. complained: Nonnulli
fidem medulliter tenent, sed viuere fideliter nullatenus curant; Many there are
that make profession of the faith of a Christian, but they take no care at any
hand to live the life of a Christian.

The life of a Christian, if you take it in its full perfection, is not such a
kind of life, as the Christians use to live at this day in the world; but such
a life, as our Savior Christ lived, such as his Disciples lived, such as the
holy Martyrs under the Primitive Church did live: a life that is a continual
cross and death of the whole man; whereby man thus mortified and annihilated,
is fit to be transformed into the similitude and likeness of God.

But where is the Christian, that now adays lives such a life? Has not
dissimulation and hypocrisy in a manner covered the face of the Earth? Christi
nomen auditis, you hear the name of Christ, but where shall you see the man
that lives the life of Christ? Crepamus Euangelium, we cry, the Gospel, the
Gospel; but where is he that yields obedience to the Gospel? Doctrinam
fidei ebuccinamus, we trumpet out the Doctrine of faith, but the discipline of
a Christian life we exterminate, we banish. Multa passim fides absque operibus,
every where there is much speech of the efficacy of faith without works; but
where is the man that shows me his faith by his works?

Beloved, what shall I say more? If we have a delight to be called the people
of God, if we take any joy in the name of a Christian, let it be our care to
live as it becomes the people of God, as it becomes Christians. If we shall
so lead our lives, that our lives shall be to the unbelieving Atheist, and
blind Papist, a horror and a scandal, shall they not both, Atheist and
Papist, rise up in judgment with us and condemn us? If under the cloak of
Christian liberty, we live petulantly, lasciuiously, dissolutely, in gluttony,
in drunkenness, in chambering, in wantonness, in whoredom, in
luxuriousness, in strife, in maliciousness, in cruelty, in covetousness, and
in other like enormities, shall they not both, Atheist and Papist, rise up in
judgment with us, and condemn us?

Wherefore (dearly beloved) these enormities and the like, let them not once
be named amongst us, Ephesians. 5.3.
as it becomes Saints. But put we on, as the elect of God, holy and beloved,
the bowels of mercies, Coloss. 3.12.
kindness, sanctimony and holiness of life, humbleness of mind, meekness,
long-suffering, forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, (if any man
has a quarrel against any) even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven us. O!
Let us thus do, and our souls shall live. And that all of us may do thus,
God Almighty grant us of his grace for his well-beloved Son JESUS CHRIST his
sake.

THE Twelfth Lecture.
AMOS 3.10. For they know not to do right, says the Lord; who store up
violence and robbery in their Palaces.


MEn are as fishes of the Sea, that have no ruler over them: it is the
complaint of the Prophet Habakkuk, Chap. 1.14. Fishes of the Sea! It is their
property to devour one another: the stronger and the greater devour the
weaker and the less; so says the Emperor Iustine the second, in Cedrenus his
Annals. Saint Ambrose in his Hexameron, lib. 5. cap. 5. shows this to be true
in two kinds of fishes; in the Scarus, which some call the Guilt-head or
Golden-eye, which cheweth like a beast; and in the Silurus, the Sheath-fish, or
Whale of the river. Among these, Minor esca majoris est, the lesser is food for
the greater, and the greater is set upon by a stronger than he, and becomes
his food. So fares it with men. Great men set upon their inferiors, and
mightier than they upon them. Such men, men for quality like fishes, deuourers
one of another, cruel and covetous men, bore the sway in Samaria. It is plain
by this passage of Amos his second Sermon to the Kingdom of the ten Tribes,
the people of Israel. Of this passage there are two parts: An Accusation, verse.
9, 10. A Commination, verse. 11.


In the ninth verse, a part of the accusation, two things have been observed:

An iniunction for a proclamation: Publish in the palaces, etc.

The proclamation it self, Assemble your selves, etc.

In the proclamation two sins were controlled:

Cruelty and Covetousness.

Their Cruelty appeared in their great tumults; their Covetousness in their
oppressions. I gave a touch at both in my last Sermon. I now go on with the
tenth verse, wherein these two enormities; Cruelty and Covetousness, are
amplified by two Topickes; a genere, and a specie. From the Genus thus, They
know not to do right: and thus from the Species, They store up violence and
robbery in their palaces. That so it is God is witness, for (...) Neum
Jehovah, the Lord has said it.

I begin with the amplification from the Genus; They know not to do right.
Saint Hierome reads according to the Hebrew, Nescierunt, they have not
known. So do they who have either non nouerunt, as Calvin, Gualter, and
Brentius; or non norunt, as Vatablus, Mercer, and Piscator: They have not
known. Tremelius and Iunius have, vt ignorent, how they are ignorant; Drusius
has, Nam nesciunt, for they know not. There is our translation. They have not
known, or they are ignorant, and know not, Facere rectum, to do right. So all
save Jonathan, who in his Paraphrase has Facere legem, to do the Law. The
meaning is good; for whosoever knows not to do according to the Law of God,
he knows not to do right.

They know not to do right] Omnino rectum facere nesciunt, says Saint
Hierome; they have no knowledge at all to do what right is; no knowledge to
do any good at all. So then, they of Samaria, the people of Israel, are
accused of Ignorance. Ignorance of the Law of God, and of doing thereafter, is
here laid unto their charge. It yields unto us this observation: Ignorance of
God and his revealed will, is a sin that is damnable and to be avoided.

It is so. I prove it:

1. Because it is against the Commandment.

2. Because God expressly reproves it.

My third proof shall be from the foulness of this ignorance.

First, it is against the Commandment, against the first Commandment, which
is, Thou shall have none other Gods but me, Exodus 20.3. The Commandment is
negative. And the rule is, In the negative the affirmative must be understood,
and in the affirmative the negative. Thou shall have none other Gods but me,
that is the negative; the affirmative to be understood is, Thou shall have me
alone for thy God: where our knowledge of God is commanded. We are to
acknowledge him, that is, we are to know and confess him to be such a God, as
he has revealed himself to be in his word, and in his Creatures. Now as in
this affirmative part the knowledge of God is commanded, so in the negative is
the ignorance of God forbidden. This ignorance of God, is not only not to know,
but also to doubt of such things as God has revealed in his word. And such is
the ignorance of God that is forbidden in that first Commandment.

It is likewise forbidden, if Polanus deceive not, in the 32. Psalm, verse. 9.
Be ye not as the horse, or as the mule, which have no understanding.

Its forbidden in the Epistle to the Ephesians. cap. 4.17, 18. Walk not from
henceforth as other Gentiles walk in the vanity of their mind, having their
understanding darkened, being alienated from the life of God, through the
ignorance that is in them, because of the blindness of their heart. Walk not
on in ignorance; For as the knowledge of God is the true life of the soul; so
on the other side, the ignorance of God is the death of the soul.

Hence is that of Saint Paul, 1 These. 4.13. I would not have you ignorant,
brethren, concerning them which are asleep, that you sorrow not, even as
others which have no hope. It seems the Thessalonians were in great
heaviness, and mourned out of measure when they beheld the persecution of the
Church among them. In this their heaviness and mourning they grew toward
mistrust, and to be like the Heathen, which had no hope. This abuse of theirs
grew of ignorance, for that they knew not the happy estate of such as die in
the Lord. Saint Paul to reform this their error, says, Brethren, I would not
have you ignorant concerning them which are asleep. Be ye not ignorant what
is become of them; what God has done for them. God has tried them as gold,
and made them worthy for himself. Its ignorance that makes you heavy, because
you know not what is become of the dead. Be ye not ignorant concerning them,
and your heaviness will be turned into joy. And let this suffice to have been
spoken to show, that in respect of the Commandment, Ignorance of God, and his
holy Will, is damnable, and to be avoided.

So is it in regard that God has expressly reproved it. There is a sharp
reproof of it, Esaias 1.3. The Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his masters
Crib, but Israel has not known, my people has not understood. Quid stolidius
boue, quid stupidius asino? What is more foolish than the Ox, what more stupid
than the Ass? Yet those bruit beasts do know them, by whom they are fed and
nourished; but Israel, the Lords own people, know not the Lord their God. Not
much unlike is that, Ierem. 8.7. The Storke in the air knows her appointed
times, and the Turtle, and the Crane, and the Swallow observe the time of their
coming, but my people knows not the judgment of the Lord. My people,
Israel, is more ignorant of my judgments, than those birds are of their
appointed seasons. Both these reproves are comparatiue. In the first, is
Israel compared unto beasts; in the second, to birds. Beasts and birds have
more knowledge than Israel.

But the reproof is absolute, Ierem. 4.22. My people is foolish, they have not
known me: they are foolish children, and have no understanding: they are wise
to do evil, but to do well they have no knowledge. As absolute is that,
Ierem. 9.3. They proceed from evil to worse, and have not known me, says the
Lord. They have no understanding, they have no knowledge, they have not known
me, says the Lord. These, and the like reproves of the ignorance of God, from
Gods own mouth, may serve for my second proof, that the ignorance of God is
damnable, and to be avoided.

My third proof I take from the foulness of this ignorance. The foulness
thereof I discover in one position. The position is; The ignorance of God, and
of the things revealed in his holy Word, is a punishment of sin, a cause of
sin, and sin in it self. The position has three branches. I shall
endeavor to speak of each in their order.

The first branch is: Our ignorance of God and of things revealed in his holy
Word, is a punishment of sin. It is a punishment of that sin, which by the
default of our first Father, Adam, was from him derived down to us; and that
is original sin; by reason whereof we are all borne blind: blind in our
understanding, blind in our will, and blind in our affections. There is no
faculty of our soul which is not disabled by this sin.

The chiefest faculties of our soul are three, Men's, Voluntas, Affectiones;
the Understanding, the Will, and the Affections. Men's, Our understanding is by
this sin disabled: For it labors with a defect, or want of light or
knowledge, and with a want of sanctity or holiness; that quality, by which
light or knowledge in the understanding should be seasoned, as indeed it was at
man's first creation.

That in the often repetition of the names of light and knowledge I seem not
tedious, may it please you to take what I shall speak of the one, as spoken of
the other also. For between light and knowledge in the understanding. I put no
essential difference.

Now I note in the understanding a twofold light; the one natural, the other
Spiritual.

The Natural is defective and wanting, not universally, but in part only. For
notwithstanding our first fathers fall, there do yet remain in the
unregenerate man, certain general notions of good and evil things commanded
or forbidden in the Law of God. And these notions are such, that they make man
inexcusable, since they are both maimed and corrupted. The defect or want of
this Natural light is proved, Romans 1.21. When they knew God, they glorified
him not as God. They knew God, there is the light of their understanding: they
glorified him not as God; there is the defect and want of that light, the
maime, the corruption of it.

The spiritual light of the understanding, that is likewise defective and
wanting, not as the natural light in part only, but universally. This is
proved, 1 Cor. 2.14. The natural man receives not the things of the spirit of
God, for they are foolishness unto him, neither can he know them, because they
are spiritually discerned. (...), The natural man, man of himself in his pure
naturals, ruled only by nature, reason, and sense, without grace, without the
Spirit of God, man unregenerate, is altogether destitute of the spiritual
light of the understanding.

Besides this want of light in the understanding, whether natural or
spiritual, there is also carentia sanctitatis, a want of holiness, wherewith
the forenamed light ought now to be, as once it was, seasoned. The want of this
holiness is manifested, Romans 8.7. where you shall find, that whatsoever light
or knowledge is in man, it is all unclean, impure, and profane; the Apostles
words are (...), The wisdom of the flesh is enmity against God; for it is not
subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be. Not subject to the Law of
God, nor can be subject to it! What! Can man exempt himself from subjection
unto God? No: be he never so rebellious, he must abide under Gods dominion. But
the meaning of the Apostle is, to note such a rebellion of man's corrupt nature,
as is not subject according unto order, as gives not orderly subjection unto
God. Thus there is in man a want of that holiness wherewith the light of his
understanding should be seasoned.

What I have now delivered de mente, concerning the mind or understanding,
which is a speculatiue faculty of the soul, the same may be spoken De
voluntate and affectionibus, of the will and affections, which are practical
faculties of the same. And therefore as in the understanding there is a defect
of light and sanctity, so is there in the will and affections, even the
absence of created holiness. Nor is there in these faculties of the soul only
an absence of light, knowledge, and sanctity; but also the presence of their
contrary qualities, as darkness, ignorance, and sinfulness.

If the light be put out, darkness comes in place; if knowledge be departed,
ignorance succeeds; if holiness be lost, sinfulness will domineere. Proofs
hereof there are many in holy Scripture. But in this sunshine I need not light
a candle. I have said enough to show, that ignorance of God and his will is in
all the powers and faculties of the soul of man, a punishment of sin, of
original sin. But this punishment of sin is general, its common to all
men, for as much as all men have sinned in Adam.

I add further, that Ignorance is also a punishment of actual sin.
Sometimes its so. Then it is so, when a man for some particular offense is more
and more blinded, and deprived of the knowledge of God and his truth. So God
punished the Gentiles with ignorance, Romans 1.24. Because when they knew God,
they glorified him not as God, therefore God gave them up to uncleanness
through the lusts of their own hearts to dishonor their own bodies between
themselves. So they became vain in their imaginations; and professing
themselves wise, they became fools. And so God punished the wicked among the
Thessalonians, 2 These. 2.10. Because they received not the truth, that they
might be saved, therefore God did send them strong delusions, that they should
believe lies. Thus is ignorance the punishment also of actual sin. And now is
the first branch of my position clear:

Ignorance is a punishment of sin; evermore of Original, and sometimes of
Actual sin.

The next branch is: Our ignorance of God and his truth is a cause of sin.
Aquin. 1. 2. q. 76. art. 1.


Ignorance is a cause of sin. For whosoever knows not God, he cannot
worship God, he cannot but serve strange Gods. We see that in the Galatians,
chap. 4.8. who therefore did service to them who by nature were not Gods,
because they knew not the true God, Romans 3.11. The like collection is made from
some words in the fourteenth Psalm, that therefore men seek not God because
they know him not. There is none that understands, there is none that seeks
God. In both places Saint Paul makes Ignorance to be the mother of superstition
and idolatry. Men know not God; therefore they seek not God, ^quin. 1. 2. qu.
84. art. 1. 2.
but serve strange Gods. Thus is ignorance a cause of sin, I say, a cause of
sin, as one sin may be a cause of another. And one sin may be a cause of
another diverse ways.

1 One sin is the cause of another, in as much as for a sin committed, the
grace and presence of the Holy Spirit leaves and forsakes us. It being
departed, we cannot but run into foul and filthy sins. If our stay by
which alone we are supported in the way of godliness be taken from us, how
shall we stand?

2 One sin is the cause of another, in as much as God punishes sin with
sin; as when God gave up the Gentiles to their own hearts lusts, to
uncleanness, to defile their own bodies between themselves, Romans 1.24. as
even now you heard.

3 One sin is the cause of another, in as much as by committing of any sin,
we are drawn on again to do the like, and to ingeminate and double action
upon action, until at length we make the sin habitual unto us.

4 One sin is the cause of another, in as much as it cannot be, that a sin
should be committed without attendants. In which sense the Apostle, 1 Timothy
6.10. says of (...), that it is (...); he says that Covetousness, or the
love of money, is the root of all evil. They that will be rich, says he, fall
into tentation and snares, and into many foolish and noisome lusts, which draw
men into perdition and destruction; for the love of money is the root of all
evil, which while some lusted after, they erred from the faith, and pierced
themselves through with many sorrows.

5 One sin is the cause of another, in as much as for one, the other is
committed. Pilat for ambition condemned Christ, Judas for money betrayed his
Master, and Balaam for a like reward cursed Gods people. So many ways may one
sin be said to be the cause of another.

Now our ignorance of God is a cause of sin the fourth way, namely as it is
not without attendants. You heard even now that Paul makes it to be the mother
of superstition and idolatry. I may say it is the mother of all heresies and
errors. To this purpose Saint Hierome in a proeme of his to the Virgin
Eustochium before his Commentaries upon Esaias says, that the ignorance of the
Scriptures, is the ignorance of Christ. If, 1 Cor. 1.24.
says he, according to the Apostle Paul, Christ be the power of God, and the
wisdom of God, and he that knows not the Scriptures, knows not the power
of God, nor his wisdom, Ignoratio Scripturarum ignoratio Christi est; the
ignorance of the Scriptures, is the ignorance of Christ. It is so worthy a
saying, that it is put into the body of the Canon Law, Did. 38. C. Si iuxta.
Thus much for the second branch of my position, wherein I affirmed, that
Ignorance is a cause of sin.

The third branch is: Our ignorance of God, and his truth, is in it self
sin. Here the Schoolmen do distinguish. Aquin. 1. 2. qu. 76. Art. 2.
Lombard. Sent. lib. 2. did. 22. c. est autem.
There is one kind of ignorance in such men as may know and will not: another
in such as may know and care not; a third in such as would know, but cannot.
The first is an ignorance by wilfulness, the second by negligence, the third
by necessity. The first and second they hold for sins: the third they excuse,
yea they deny it to be a sin.

To their judgment concerning the two former kinds, we give our assent. It is
a malicious sin, a sin of commission, a very heinous sin, when men may
know and will not. It is a negligent sin, a sin of omission, yet a grievous
sin, when men may know and care not. But their opinion touching the third
kind we allow not. What if a man would know, and cannot, is he therefore
simply and absolutely excused? No; he is not. Its a truth, and all the powers
of Hell shall not be able to prevail against it: whosoever knows not what he
ought to know by the Law of God, he is holden in (...), he transgresses the
Law of God. And every transgression of the Law of God is sin. This truth is
sealed by the holy Spirit in the mouth of Saint John, 1 Epist. chap. 3.4.
(...), Every transgression of the Law is sin.

The Text of Scripture which they allege for their opinion is, Ioh. 15.22.
There says Christ, If I had not come and spoken unto them, they should not
have had sin, but now have they no cloak for their sin.

My answer is: These words make nothing for them. For Christ by saying so, does
not absolutely excuse the Jews from sin upon the condition that they had not
been able to have heard Christ. The excuse which Christ fitteth to them serves
only to excuse them from the greatness and grieuousnesse of sin, as if he
had thus said, If I had not come and spoken unto them, they should not have had
sin; sin, that is, so grievous sin as now they have, since they have heard
me, and yet do continue in their obstinacy, refusing to give assent to the
truth, which I have told them from my Father. They should not have had sin;
Sin in comparison they should not have had. Their sin of ignorance should
have been none in respect of their sin which now they have.

The place may receive light from Christ's own mouth, Luke 12.47. Our Savior
there affirms, that the servant which knows his masters will and does it
not, shall be beaten with many stripes; with more stripes than he shall that
knows not his masters will, and therefore does it not. Where we are put in
mind of two sorts of sinners: Some there are that know the will of their Lord;
and some that know it not. Both are sinners, and are to be beaten for their
sins; they with more stripes; these with fewer. And these to whom fewer
stripes are assigned, are of three sorts. For either they know not their Lords
will, because they will not know it: or they know it not, because they care not
to know it; or they know it not, because they cannot know it.

They which know not their Lords will because they will not know it, their
ignorance is, as the Schoolmen call it, Biel. Sent. 2. Did. 22. qu. 2.
Ignorantia affectata, an affected ignorance. These shut their ears when God
calls, and being housed in their security, will not step to the door to see
if the Sun shine. This ignorance resideth rather in their will and
affections, than in their understanding part. These are wilfully ignorant,
says Peter, 2 Ep. 3.5. They know but will not know, and they run with broad
eyes unto destruction.

They which know not their Lords will because they care not to know it, their
ignorance is Ignorantia crassa vel supina; a gross, idle, wretchlesse, and
negligent ignorance. And they that are thus ignorant, do also trace the high
way to the pit of destruction: and there shall they be sure to be beaten with
many stripes.

They which know not their Lords will, because they cannot know it, their
ignorance is called Ignorantia inuincibilis, an invincible ignorance, and its
called invincible, says Biel, Sent. 2. Did. 22.
not because it is simply so, but because it remains, after a man has done
all he can to remove it: and this ignorance, says he, does simply excuse a man
from sin, Non solum in tanto, Conclus. 1.
sed in toto, it excuses wholly from sin. So he and the rest of the school.

But by their leaves it is their error; and stands convicted by that laying of
our Savior already produced, The servant that does not his Masters will, by
reason he knows it not, shall be beaten with stripes, though fewer.

But say an ignorance is invincible, an ignorance of necessity, an ignorance
that a man would, but cannot remove: shall not such an ignorance excuse? No, it
shall not, For all men are bound by the Commandment to know God. That some men
know him not, nor can know him, it is not Gods fault, but the fault of their
own parents, and consequently their own fault. Adam had the perfect knowledge
of God imprinted in his nature: but through his own default he lost the same
for himself and his posterity. A man may not for this complain against Gods
justice, since that our first sin has deserved a greater punishment. I say
then, that this invincible ignorance cannot excuse a toto; it may a tanto. It
may be some excuse for the degree and measure of the sin, but not for the
sin it self. And this may serve for the illustration of the third part of my
position, wherein I affirmed, that our ignorance of God and his truth is of it
self sin. Now the whole together stands good: Our ignorance of God, and of
the things revealed in his holy word, whether it be an affected and a wilful
ignorance, or a negligent and careless ignorance, or an invincible and a
necessary ignorance, is an effect and punishment of sin, it is a cause of
sin, and is in it self sin. It was bred by transgression, it does breed
transgression, and is no less than transgression of its own nature. So foul
a thing is ignorance. And therefore in this respect also its true, that
Ignorance of God and his revealed will is a sin that is damnable and to be
avoided.

My observation thus established; Let us now see what profit may from hence
redound unto us.

First, this may serve to warn all Ministers of the Word, that they be
careful to root out ignorance out of the minds of the people, and to plant
the knowledge of God among them. The Minister that neglects his duty, and
either through insufficiency or idleness, suffers the people to go on in
the ways of darkness to their perdition, he becomes accessory, yea a
principal cause of their destruction.

Secondly, this may teach us all to detest this ignorance of God and his
revealed will, and to seek by all means to know God. They that content
themselves to live in their ignorance, and voluntarily submit themselves to be
led by blind guides, such as cannot inform them in the ways of the Lord,
their estate is lamentable. Beloved, it is every man's duty to have care of his
own soul, though others should neglect it. You shall do well to account this
one thing necessary, to be instructed in the knowledge of Gods truth, and
prefer it before your worldly affairs. Should you want this precious pearl
of Gods Word, you would rather sell all you have to purchase it, than content
your selves to be without it. Now you have it brought home unto you, will you
not make the best of it?

Thirdly, it may serve to reprove a Popish practice, by which they endeavor by
all means possible to keep the people in blindness and ignorance, by taking
away from them the light of Gods Word both read and preached; that so keeping
them blind-folded, they may do with them at their pleasure, and like carrion
Crows having picked out their eyes, may make a prey of them.

What else mean they, when they teach, that Ignorance is the mother of
devotion? Page 18.
I know that N. D. in his Wardword denies this to be taught by any Catholic.
He says it is forged by some Minister of ours, and laid upon them. But he
seems to have been past shame in denying that, which is so openly known. A
Deane of Paul's, Doctor Cole by name, one chosen not only to maintain the
assertions of the Papists against the Protestants in a disputation at
Westminster, but appointed by the Bishops and other his Colleagues, to be the
mouth for them all; whose speech in the end, they all being asked, did auow to
be the mind and saying of them all: even he in that honorable assembly of the
Council and Nobles, and frequent concourse of the Commons, did with great
vehemence maintain this position in these words: I say, Ignorance is the
mother of devotion. See, this Popish Doctor, appointed by the consent of Popish
Bishops and other his Colleagues to be their mouth, and avouched, to have spoken
nothing, but what was the mind and saying of them all, says peremptorily,
that Ignorance is the mother of devotion; yet the Author of the Wardword
shamelesly denies, that the Papists have any such assertion.

All the harm I wish them, is, that they had no such. But it appears by the
whole practice and policy of that side, that they are fully persuaded, that
without deep Ignorance of the people, it is not possible for their Church to
stand. Therefore as B. Jewel in his Reply to Master Harding, Art. 37. has well
observed, they chase the simple from the Scriptures; they drown them in
ignorance, and suffer them utterly to know nothing; neither the profession they
made in Baptism; nor the meaning of the holy Mysteries; nor the price of
Christ's blood; nor wherein, nor by whom they may be saved: nor what they desire
of God, either when they pray together in the Church, or when they privately
pray alone. Verily it is with them, as it was with the Scribes and Pharisees,
those Hypocrites, unto whom a woe is denounced by our Savior, Matthew. 23.13.
They shut up the Kingdom of Heaven before men. For they neither go in
themselves, neither do they suffer them that would, to enter. For all the
fair shows they make, for all they curiously paint over this rotten post with
the colors of their devotion; yet the truth is, by depriving the people of
knowledge, they deprive them also of salvation, and make them subject to utter
destruction: and so by consequent they make themselves guilty of the sin and
ruin of the people of both which they have been the principal causes.

I have purposely been liberal in setting before you the amplification from
the Genus: nor need I beg pardon for prolixity. It was necessary for this Text;
no less for these times. Now follows the amplification from the Species; who
store up violence and robbery in their palaces.

(...) Haotzerim in the original is from the root (...) Atzar, which
signifies to treasure up, to hoard up, to store up, to lay up as in a store
house. And accordingly run the translations: the Greek, (...), who treasure
up. So the old Latin, Thesaurizantes; Drusius, qui thesauirzant; Tremelius,
Piscator, and Buxtorfius, qui thesauros faciunt: all these are for the
gathering or making of treasures. Vatablus and Mercer have, qui recondunt, who
lay up: Targum has Implentes cellaria sua, filling their Cellars or
storehouses. Our English translation is for storing up. But what is it that is
thus treasured, laid or stored up?

(...) Chamas vaschod. Chamas with the Greeks is (...), Unrighteousness; with
the old Interpreter, Iniquitas, its Iniquity; with Calvin, Oecolampadius, and
Gualter Rapina, its Rauine; with Brentius Iniuria, its Injury; with Tremelius,
Drusius, and Piscator, Violentia, its Violence; and so it is with us. So, see
stored up in the first place, Unrighteousness, Iniquity, Rauine, Injury, and
Violence. Next is,

(...) Schod: and that is likewise diversely translated: with the Greeks it is
(...), Misery; with the old Latin it is Rapina, Rauine; with Calvin and
Gualter, Praeda, a prey, booty, or spoil; with Brentius, Deuastatio; with
Tremelius and Piscator, Vastatio; with Drusius and Oecolampadius, Vastitas, a
wasting, a spoiling, a ransacking; with Vatablus and Mercer, Direptio, a
polling, pilling, or robbing; with us it is Robbery. So, see stored up in the
second place, Misery, R^uine, Preyes, Booties, Spoils, Wasting, Ransacking,
Polling, Pi^ling, Robbery.

But where is all this to be seen? (...), in their places, so the Septuagint:
in aedibus suis, in their houses, so the Vulgar: in palatijs suis, in their
palaces, so all the rest; and this last best agrees with the Hebrew. Thus have
you the exposition of these words from their diverse readings.

The manner of speech which our Prophet here uses would be observed: They
store up violence and robbery in their palaces.] But how can violence and
robbery be stored up? In their effects they may. By violence and robbery
understand the effects of violence and robbery; goods, riches, and treasures
gotten by violence and robbery; and these were too familiarly stored up.

They store or treasure up violence and robbery, that is, they gather together
treasures of violence and robbery. And we say, treasures of violence and
robbery, as Solomon says, treasures of iniquity, Prou. 10.2. The treasures of
iniquity profit not. By treasures of iniquity, Caietan. Iansen. Rodolphus.
Salazar.
he means such treasures as wicked men do get by wicked means, contra jus
fasque, against right and reason. The like phrase our Savior uses, Luke 16.9.
Make to your selves De mammona iniquitatis, of the Mammon of unrighteousness,
or of the riches of unrighteousness. By the mammon or riches of
unrighteousness, he means such riches as unrighteous men do get by
unrighteous or unlawful means. Stella.


So here may we call the treasures of violence and robbery, such treasures as
violent and cruel men, such as covetous men and robbers do gather together by
pilling, by polling, by robbing, by wasting, by spoiling, by ransacking the
poor, fatherless, widows, and other distressed persons. And these riches
thus gathered together they lay up in palatijs suis.

In their palaces] By mentioning their palaces our Prophet here taxes and
twiteth the great ones of Israel, as if they had built stately and sumptuous
houses, Ex pauperum sanguine, says Mercer, of the blood of the poor; yea
says Quadratus, Ex pauperum visceribus, of the very bowels of the poor; Ex
bonis rapto partis, by goods gotten from the poor by catching and by pillage.
And he further intimates that all this covetous and cruel dealing against the
poor was from their great ones, Kings, Princes, Nobles, and Magistrates, whose
duty it was, not only nor to have committed such enormities, but also to have
defended the poor from all such violence and wrong: as Petrus Lusitanus has
well observed.

Here then are the rulers of Samaria accused of violence and robbery, just as
the rulers of Jerusalem are, Esaias 1.23. Thy Princes are rebellious and
companions of thieves: Every one loves gifts and follows after rewards: they
judge not the fatherless, neither does the cause of the widow come unto them.
Whence my observation is: Magistrates, rulers, men in authority, such as grow
to wealth by oppression, bribery, and unjust dealing, may from hence be noted
to be men of violence and robbery.

What? can Magistrates be robbers? Yes, they can be and are so, if they deal
unjustly. Sweetly Saint Augustine, De Ciuitate Dei, lib. 4. cap. 4. Remota
iustitia, quid sunt regna, nisi magna latrocinta? Away with justice, and what
are Kingdoms but mighty robbings?

Elegantly and truly did the pirate reply to Alexander the great. Alexander
asked him, Quid ei videretur, vt mare haberet infestum? What he meant to be so
troublesome at Sea to rob all that passed by? The Pirat freely and stoutly
replied; Quid tibi vt orbem terrarum? Nay, what mean you Alexander, to be so
troublesome to rob all the world? What I do, I do it but with one ship, Et
latro vocor, and must be called a thief: you do the like with a fleet, with a
number of ships, and you must be called Emperor. The only difference between
us is: I rob out of necessity to supply my wants; you out of your unmeasurable
covetousness.

Of Magistrates in Courts of Justice, if they be corrupt, Saint Cyprian Ep. 2.
ad Donatum gives this censure: Qui sedet crimina vindicaturus, admittit, and vt
reus innocens pereat, fit nocens judex. It is significantly Englished by
Democritus Junior: See a Lamb executed and a Wolf pronounce sentence; Latro
arraigned, and Fur sit on the bench; the Judge severely punish others, and do
worse himself. Such Judges may justly be noted for men of violence and
robbery. But my speech is not to such, for they hear me not.

It is to you, beloved. Shall I say, that among you there are men of violence
and robbery? I auow it not; yet flatter not your selves. He that filcheth or
pilfereth, the least pin, Mark. 10.19.
point or stick of wood from his neighbor, Prou. 22.18.
he that moves ancient bounds, the ancient bounds which his fathers have made,
with a purpose to encroach upon his neighbors land; he that steals another
man's wife, child or servant; 1 Timothy 1.10. Ios. 7.19.
he that commits sacrilege in detaining the rights of the Church; he that
transgresses thus, or thus, he may go for a man of violence and robbery.

Dearly beloved, if any of you has been overtaken with these or the like
transgressions, look into your own hearts; examine your selves in what
measure you have or do transgress. For we must not fear to tell you, you do
offend. And if your conscience tell you, your offense is great, run not
headlong into Hell without returning. De Conuers. cap. 1.
Vita non est nisi in Conuersione, says Saint Bernard; There is no hope of
life, but by turning to the Lord. And your turning to the Lord must be by true
and unfeigned repentance. So turn unto him; and if thou be a Publican, thou
may become an Evangelist; if a blasphemer, an Apostle, if a thief and
robber, a possessor of Paradise.

And so much be spoken of my second part, the special amplification of cruelty
and covetousness, the sins of Samaria, taken from their violence and
robberies, treasured up in their palaces.

My third part is the ratification of the whole accusation. (...) Neum Jehovah,
the Lord has said it. They know not to do right, says the Lord, who store up
violence and robbery in their palace^. Says the Lord.

See, the Lord ^s not idle in the Heavens, as some imagine, but takes notice of
what is done here below. He beholds the great tumults that are in Samaria,
and the oppressions there, their violence and robberies he beholds. My
observation here shall be that, Job 34.21. The eyes of the Lord are upon the
ways of man, and he sees all his goings.

He sees all. He sees our sins in the book of Eternity, before our own
hearts conceived them. He sees our sins in our hearts, as soon as our
inventions have given them form. He s^eth our sins in action on the Theater
of this earth, quite through the scene of our lives: and he sees them to our
pain, when his wrathful eye takes notice of them, and his hand is lift up to
punish them. He sees them all. There is nothing so secret, nothing so
abstracted from the senses of men, Vt creatoris aut lateat cognitionem, aut
effugiat potestatem, that it may either lurk from the eye, or escape the hand
of God; August. de Ciuit. Dei, lib. 22. cap. 20. As plain is that, Job 34 22.
There is no darkness nor shadow of death, where the workers of iniquity may
hide themselves.

The Powder-traitors in the mine and Celler, were not unseen to the revenging
eye of God. The villains of the cloisters were all naked unto him. As dark as
their Vaults were, his all-seeing eye descried their filthiness, and laid
waste their habitations. The obscurity of their Cells and Dorters, the
thickness of their walls, the closeness of their Windows, with the cloak of
a strict profession, covering all, could not hide their sins from the eye of
Heaven.

Nor can our sins be hid, though done with greatest secrecy. Sin as closely
as thou can, there will be witnesses of thy sin; Videt te angelus malus,
videt te angelus bonus, videt and bonis and malis major angelis Deus; Bernard.
de conuers. ad Clericos cap. 16. The bad angel sees thee, and the good sees
thee, and he that is better than the Angels, far above all principalities and
powers, God Almighty, he sees thee.

Wherefore dearly beloved, let our conversation with men be, as in the sight
of God. And since in this mortality we cannot but sin, let us endeavor to see
our sins, to know them, to confess them, to bewail them, and cry we to God
to give us grace to lay hold upon Jesus Christ his Son, that believing we may
be saved by his righteousness. Good God pardon our sins, give us faith,
change our lives to the better, for thy blessed name and mercies sake; even for
Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

THE Thirteenth Lecture.
AMOS 3.11. Therefore thus says the Lord God, An adversary there shall be even
round about the Land: and he shall bring down thy strength from thee, and thy
palaces shall be spoiled.


THis third part of this third Chapter, but second Sermon of Amos to the
kingdom of the ten Tribes, I styled an (...), an Exornation, pertaining to the
proposition delivered in the second verse. It amplifieth the iniquity of the
Israelites from the testification of foreign nations: as thus; You, you of
Israel, your sins are so notorious, so gross, so palpable, that very
strangers, Philistines, and Egyptians, may take notice of them. Since you of
your selves are not touched with a conscience of your evil deeds, them, the
Philistines and Egyptians, I call as witnesses and Judges of your impurity and
uncleanness. It is the scope of this passage.

The passage consists of two parts, An Accusation, verse. 9, 10. A
Commination, verse. 11.


In the ninth verse, a part of the Accusation, two things have been observed:

An Iniunction for a Proclamation, Publish in the palaces at Ashdod, and in the
palaces in the Land of Egypt, and say.

The Proclamation it self; Assemble your selves upon the Mountains of
Samaria: and behold the great tumults in the midst thereof, and the oppressed
in the midst thereof.

In the Proclamation, two sins were controuled: Cruelty, and Covetousness.
Their Cruelty in their great tumults; their Covetousness in their oppressions.

In the tenth verse, the other part of the Accusation, those two enormities,
Cruelty and Covetousness, are amplified from two Topickes; a genere, and a
specie; from the Genus, thus: They know not to do right. From the Species,
thus: They store up violence and robbery in their palaces. That so it is, God
is produced for witness, for Neum Jehovah, The Lord has said it.

These particulars yielded materials for my two former Sermons. Now from the
Accusation I proceed to the Commination, verse. 11.

Therefore thus says the Lord God, An adversary there shall be even round
about the Land: and he shall bring down thy strength from thee, and thy
palaces shall be spoiled. The words are a denunciation of punishment:
concerning which we may observe, The Cause. The Author. The Punishment it self.


The Cause is implied in the particle, Therefore.

The Author is the Lord God.

The Punishment, is a conquest by war, and is described, 1 By the Siege. 2 By
the Victory. 3 By the Spoil.


An adversary there shall be even round about the Land: there is the Siege, the
whole Land beset round about.

And he shall bring down thy strength from thee: there is the Victory, the
overthrow of their strong men.

And thy palaces shall be spoiled. The Spoil is at the lust of the conqueror.
An adversary there shall be even round about the Land, and he shall bring down
thy strength from thee, and thy palaces shall be spoiled.

I have showed you the limits and bounds of my future discourse. I will handle
them as they lie in order, beginning with the cause of the punishment, implied
in this particle, Therefore.

Therefore] It is a particle befitting a Commination. It has relation to the
former verses, and points to the sins there touched: to the great tumults
in the midst of Samaria, and the oppressions there, verse. 9. to the ignorance
of God, and his will; to their violence and robbery stored up in their palaces,
verse. 10. The relation that this particle has to those sins, shows that
those sins are the cause of the punishment here denounced: as if our Prophet
had thus spoken: Because you, that are the Princes and Potentates of Samaria,
do oppress the poor and needy, Therefore will I bring against you mightier
than your selves, that shall oppress and spoil you.

Therefore! The observation is, Sin is the cause of all the evil that
befalls man in this life.

In this my Thesis, by evil I understand malum poenae, the evil of
punishment, or the evil of affliction. Affliction or punishment, whereof sin
is the cause, is two fold, internal or external; either inward or outward.
The inward pertains to the mind, the outward to the body. For the punishment
of sin is to be measured and defined, not only by the torments of the body,
or by the mortality of this life, but also by the most grievous affliction of
the soul: as by the crookedness, obliquitie, and blemish of the soul, by an
evil conscience, by the wrath of God which is importable; by the guilt of
sin, whereby we are obliged to punishment; by vicious habits whereby we are
inclined to a multitude of sins. Foecundum est peccatum; non ibi definit, vbi
incipit. Sin is fruitful; if it once begin, it leaves not there; the worst
thing of it is behind, even the extreme anguish and horror of the soul.

Again, affliction or punishment, whereof sin is the cause, is either
public or private.

Pubike afflictions, I call such whereof many men at once have a sense and
feeling: Such are the floods of great waters; the ruin of Cities by
earthquakes; the waste done in them by fire, war, evil beasts, pestilence,
famine, tyranny, persecution, the death of good Princes, heresy, schism,
every common misery. All these are public.

Private afflictions are such, as private men in their own particular do
suffer; as sickness, grief, infamy, poverty, imprisonment, death.

Of all these afflictions or punishments, whether public, or private, or
outward, or inward, sin is the cause.

Sin! It is causa (...), it is efficiens impellen^; it is the impulsive cause
of all afflictions or punishments: it fetches down vengeance from the
Majesty of Heaven. It brought that same universal deluge upon the whole
world, Genesis 7.17. It brought down fire and brimstone upon Sodom and Gomorrah,
Genesis 19.24. It caused the Land of Canaan to spue out her inhabitants, Leuit.
18.25. It will make any Land sit mourning like a desolate widow, or a
distressed mother, robbed of her children, and spoiled of all her comforts. It
is avouched by the Psalmist, Psalm. 107.34. A fruitful Land God turns into
barrenness, for the wickedness of them that dwell therein. It is that,
whereof the Prophet Jeremy complains, Chap. 12.4. How long shall the Land
mourn, and the herbs of every field wither, for the wickedness of them that
dwell therein? Turn to the Prophecy of Micah, Chap. 1.4. Behold there, the
mountains melting as wax before the fire, and as the waters that are powered
down a steep place, for no other cause, but for the transgression of Jacob,
and for the sins of the house of Israel.

Thus far for the confirmation of my doctrine: Sin is the cause of all the
evil that befalls man in this life.

Saint Augustine Sermon. 139. de tempore, thus delivers it: Malorum omnium
nostrorum causa peccatum est: Sin is the cause of all our evils. Non enim
sine causa homines mala ista patiuntur; It is not to be imagined that men
suffer affliction without cause. God is just; he is omnipotent. Nullo modo ista
pateremur, si non mereremur. Surely, no evil could befall us, if we deserved
it not. There is not a man that sins not; and the least sin that he
commits, deserves all the misery that can be laid upon him.

This truth may teach us, First, in time of affliction to acknowledge our sins
to be the cause thereof, and to profit thereby unto amendment.

Secondly, it may teach us to justify God, whenever he shall ^fflict us,
and to bear his visitation with patience. Wherefore does a living man
complain, a man for the punishment of his sins? Lament. 3.39. A man for the
punishment of his sins, wherefore does he complain? Let us search and try
our ways, and turn again unto the Lord; we have transgressed, and rebelled
against him, and therefore he afflicts us. My resolution shall be in the
words of Micah the Prophet, Chap. 7.9. I will bear the indignation of the
Lord, because I have sinned against him.

And let this suffice to have been spoken of my first general, the cause of
the punishment here denounced, implied in this particle, Therefore. I proceed
to my next general, the Author of this punishment, the Lord God. Therefore,
thus says the Lord God.

Thus says the Lord] It is a note wherewith the Prophets for the most part do
begin their preachings, and prophecyings, to show that they deliver nothing,
but what is of divine credit and authority.

Thus says the Lord] Dicit Dominus, says the Lord. Dicere, with the Prophets,
signifies consilium certum, certamque sententiam, as Arias Montanus upon this
text observes. To say, signifies a certain, a determined sentence or
judgment: it implies, not so much any verbal speech, as the strength and
efficacy of reason and cogitation. Says the Lord, that is, the Lord has in
his secret and infallible counsel decreed and determined to effect what is by
the Prophet here denounced.

Thus says Adonai Iehouih, the Lord God. With these two names of God, Adonai
Iehouih, we have met twice already in this Chapter, verse 7. and 8. Since they
are here again, they are again by us to be saluted: but briefly.

Adonai, the Lord. The name is found in holy Scripture 134. times. It is the
observation of the Massorets. R. Mosche ben Maimon.
Rambam makes this name to be equivalent to the name Jehovah: so does the
Talmud. Yet is there a difference between them. Lib. K^dd^sch in cap. Esre
Iochasin, etc.
Adonai is the name of God of his sustentation and dominion; but Iehouih is his
name of existing or being. By Adonai we know that God alone is absolutely
Lord, Ruler and Governor of all things; yea and our Lord. By Iehouih, that of
himself and by himself, He ever was, is, and shall be: Revel. 1.4.16.5. Act.
17.28. Romans 11.36.
that of him all creatures have their being; and that he gives a real being
to all his promises and threats.

Adonai Iehouih, the Lord God, he that is iudex iustissimus, the most just
Judge, and suffers not a sin to pass without due punishment, He is here
presented unto you for the Author of the punishment here denounced. The
observation is, Of all the evil that befalls man in this life, God is the
Author.

And here by evil I understand as in my former observation, the evil of
punishment, or the evil of affliction, private or public, internal, or
external: God is the Author of all.

It is proved above in this Chap. verse. 6. Shall there be evil in a city, and
the Lord has not done it? No, there shall be none; no evil of pain,
punishment or affliction, but the Lord does it. This is it, the Lord assumeth
to himself, Esai. 45.7. I the Lord; I form the light, and create darkness: I
make peace, and create evil; I the Lord do all these things. It is thus in
the Paraphrase: I am the Lord; and there is none else. I send into the world
light and darkness, prosperity and adversity: I give peace, and with it
tranquillity and abundance, and I give that which is contrary to peace, evil,
war, and misery, and perturbation, and poverty: I, the Lord do all these
things.

It is no more than what he takes unto himself, Ier. 18.11. For there also,
thus says the Lord, Behold, I frame evil against you, and devise a device
against you: where by evil understand with Tertullian lib. 2. aduersus
Marcionem cap. 24. Mala non peccatoria, sed vltoria, Evil not of sin, but of
reuengement. In which sense we are to take evil in all those places of holy
writ, wherein God either brings or threatens to bring evil upon any. By
evil in all such places, as in this my Thesis, we are to understand the evil
of reuengement, the evil of punishment, or the evil of affliction. Of every
such evil God is the Author.

God is the Author of punishment. I say of punishment, non quod poena sit ens
quoddam, not as if the evil of punishment had a being, as other things have
which God made. For God is improperly said to be the efficient of punishment;
since punishment of its own nature, Aquin. 1. qu. 48. Art. 1. C.
is nothing else than priuatio boni, the privation, or absence, of that we call
good; or the withholding of Gods blessings from us. The Father of the Schools
thus delivers it: Idem 1. qu. 49. Art. 2. C.
Cum summum bonum perfectissimum sit, mali causa esse non potest, nisi per
accidens. God being the chiefest good and most perfect, cannot be the author of
evil but by accident.

The author of evil by accident! How is that? Why thus? When God withdraws
from the earth his heavenly benedictions, forbidding the clouds to give their
rain, or the Sun his influence, and taking from us our health, our peace, or
any other temporal blessing, he is the author of evil. And this may serve
for the proof and explanation of my second Doctrine, which was, Of all the
evil that befalls man in this life, God is the Author.

The reason hereof is, because nothing is done in the world, but God is the
principal doer of it: and therefore no evil can befall us, but God is the
author of it.

Is it thus? Hence then in the first place, are they to be reproved, who
think, that the Lord does only suffer many things to be done. He is not only
a sufferer, but an orderer, guider, and governor of all things and actions.

Secondly, from hence may be confuted, the vain opinion of Fortune, whereunto
many Philosophers and carnal ignorant people use to ascribe those things
whereof they see not an apparent cause. What more casual in this world than
Lottery? Yet, therein nothing falls out by fortune, but all is wholly and
altogether directed by the infinite and eternal providence of Almighty God:
Solomon expressly affirms it, Prou. 16.33. The lot is cast into the Lap, but
the whole disposing thereof is of the Lord.

Thirdly, from hence we learn that all our afflictions are from God; and are
therefore by us to be borne with patience. God verily loves those that are
his, and yet notwithstanding he suffers them to be afflicted, because it is
expedient for them so to be: yet in their afflictions he yields them comfort.
Saint Paul blesses God for it, 2 Cor. 1.3. Blessed be God, even the Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of mercies, and the God of all comfort, who
comfort us in all our tribulation. Who comfort us in all our tribulation;
he says not, who suffers us not to be afflicted, but who comfort us,
while we are afflicted. It is the observation of S. Chrysostom and
Theophylact. God though he suffer us to be afflicted, yet he comfort us when
we are afflicted. Our afflictions, they are Emendatoriae potius, quam
interfectoriae, as Saint Augustine speaks, lib. 3. de lib. Arbit. cap. 25.
They tend rather to amend us, than to destroy us. And sweetly Saint Cyprian.
Ep. 8. Deus quem corripit, diligit: quando corripit, ad hoc corripit, vt
emendet, ad hoc emendat vt seruet: Whom God corrects, him he loves: when he
corrects him, he does it to amend him, and he amendeth him that he may save
him.

And thus much be spoken of my second general, the Author of this punishment,
The Lord God. My third follows, the punishment here denounced; which is a
conquest by war; and is described by the Siege, by the victory, and by the
spoil. Of the Siege first, for it is the first in order. The words are,

An adversary there shall be even round about the Land] The old Interpreter
translates it, Tribulabitur and circuietur terra; the Land shall be troubled
and compassed about. Brentius, Obsidebitur and circumdabitur terra, the Land
shall be besieged and beset round about.

(...) Tsar in the original is rendered Arctator by Montanus; Tribulator, by
Oecolampadius; Aduersarius, by Calvin and Drusius; Hostis, by Tremelius,
Piscator, and Gualter; It is Tribulatio with Vatablus and Mercer; but Angustiae
with Jonathan. Well; be it either Arctato^, or Tribulator, or an Adversary, or
an Enemy; or be it Tribulation, or be it Anguish; it is not in a little part
or corner of the Land, but in circuitu terra, it is in the circuit of the Land,
it enuironeth the whole Land. The Septuagint have a reading by themselves,
(...): Tire shall be made desolate; round about shall thy Land be wasted. Saint
Cyril will have them thus to be understood: From Tire and the Land thereabout
the whole country shall by the incursions of robbers be brought to desolation.
Tyrus is in Hebrew Tzor; so is it in the first Chapter of this prophecy, verse.
9 It seems the S ptuagint did in this place read Tzor, Hieron.
as also Aquila once did read. But now the common reading of this place is
Tzar: and Tzar is an enemy or adversary, and has other significations,
whereof even now you heard. Thus our English translation is cleared, it is good.

An adversary there shall be even round about the Land] This adversary is the
Assyrian, the King of Assyria, Salmanassar; He with his armies is to come
against the City and Kingdom of Samaria: he shall so beset and beleaguer the
whole country round about, that there shall be no escaping for any of the
inhabitants. According to this prediction it came to pass some sixty five
years after, Es^y 7.8. 2 King. 18.10.
in the ninth year of the reign of Hoshea son of Elah King of Israel, as it
is, 2 King. 17.6.

An adversary there shall be even round about the Land] Now from this
circumstance of the Siege of Samaria so long before threatened, arises this
observation, Gods threatening to punish long before he punishes, are
inuitations to repentance.

Origin lib. 4. contra Celsum, says, God punishes no man, but whom he does
first warn, terrify, and advertise of the peril. And surely, herein
appears Gods mercy, that he threatens before he punishes, that by his
threatening men might learn to amend. He threatens, says S. Chrysostom, Hom.
12. in Genes. Vt nobis correctis, minas ad opus minime perducat, that we being
amended, his menacing need not take effect.

If this were not the end of Gods threatenings, why does Zephaniah Chap. 2.1, 2.
thus exhort the Jews? Gather your selves together, yea gather together, O
Nation not desired. Before the decree bring forth, before the day pass as the
chafe, before the fierce anger of the Lord come upon you; before the day of
the Lords anger come upon you. Seek ye the Lord, seek righteousness, seek
meekness: it may be, ye shall be hid in the day of the Lords anger. He
calls upon the Jewish Nation to return from their evil ways by true
repentance. Where behold (says Saint Hierome) the clemency of God, Quia non
vult infer supplicia, sed tantum terrere passuros, ipse ad poenitentiam
prouocat, ne faciat quod minatus est. Because Gods will is, rather to terrify
them, than to lay punishments upon them, he incites them to repentance, that he
be not driven to do, as he has threatened.

This is that same (...), it is the goodness, the forbearance, the long
suffering of God, whereof Saint Paul speaks, Romans 2.4. Despisest thou, O man,
the riches of his goodness and forbearance, and long suffering, not knowing
that the goodness of God leads thee to repentance? It leads to repentance.
It is vouchsafed unto us to the amendment of life. And thus is my observation
established, Gods threatenings to punish, long before he punishes, are
inuitations to repentance.

One reason hereof is; because if after threatening repentance follow, it
procures the forgiveness of sin, and takes away the cause of the
punishment. Sin is the cause of Gods judgments; this we heard even now. If
the cause be removed, the effect will cease. For so says the Lord, Ez^ch.
33.14, 15. When I say unto the wicked, Thou shall surely die, if he turn from
his sin and do that which is lawful and right, he shall surely live, he
shall not die.

A second reason I take from the end of Gods threatenings. The end whereat he
aims, when he threatens, is not the destruction of them that are threatened,
but their amendment. For thus says the Lord, Ezech. 18.23. Have I any pleasure
at all that the wicked should die, and not that he should return from his
ways and live? This by way of interrogation. But it is by way of assertion,
Ezech. 33.11. and is backed with an oath; As I live says the Lord God, I have
no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way
and live. As I live, it is so. Here may we say, as Augustine some-where said
of Christ: Felices nos, propter quos ipse Deus jurat; Happy are we for whom
God himself swears. But infoelices, si ne iuranti quidem credimus; Wretched
are we, if we believe him not upon his oath.

I shall but point at the uses of this doctrine, because I have handled them at
large in my fourth Sermon upon this Chapter.

The first is to teach us, that in the greatest and most fearful threatenings
of Gods judgments, there is comfort remaining, hope of grace and mercy to be
found, health in sickness, and life in death.

The second is a warrant for us of the Ministry to propound unto you the
threatenings of God with condition of repentance: and thus we offer unto you
grace and mercy, to as many of you, as shall be of humble and contrite hearts.

The third is a warning unto you, to all that have this grace and favor with
God to be hearers of his holy word. It is your parts whenever you shall hear
of the threatenings of Gods judgments against sinners, to stir up your selves
unto repentance, thereby to prevent the wrath of God and to stay his judgments.

The fourth is to assure us, that if God threaten and no repentance follow,
then certainly the threatenings pronounced will come to pass. God threatens
not in vain, nor does he terrify us without cause. If we prevent not his
threatenings by true repentance, his threatenings will prevent us by just
execution.

And so much be spoken of the first doctrine arising from this circumstance of
the siege of Samaria, foretold so long before it took effect. A second
doctrine arising from the same, is, H^stes diuinitus a Deo excitari, ad regum
and populorum peccata punienda:

Enemies are by God himself raised up to invade a land for the punishment of
the sins of Prince and people. Unless God send them, they cannot come near
our Cities, they cannot besiege us. God does raise them up.

He raises up the Medes against the Babylonians, Esaias 13.17. I stir up the
Medes, who shall not regard silver, nor shall they delight in gold. Their bows
shall dash the young men to pieces; they shall have no pity on the fruit of
the womb; their eye shall not spare children; Babylon the glory of Kingdoms,
the beauty of the Chaldees excellency, shall be as when God overthrew Sodom
and Gomorrah.

He raises up the Chaldeans against the kingdom of Judah, Habac. 1.6. I
raise up the Chaldeans, that bitter and hasty Nation, which shall march through
the breadth of the land, to possess the dwelling places that are not theirs.

He raises up the Romans against Jerusalem, Luke 19.43. The days shall come
upon thee, that thine enemies shall cast a trench about thee, and compass thee
round, and keep thee in on every side; and shall lay thee even with the
ground, and thy children within thee; they shall not leave in thee one stone
upon another.

God is he that raises up enemies against a Land to invade it. Did not God
send them, they could do nothing against us.

The reason is, because they have no power against us, except it be given them
by God. So Christ told Pilate, Ioh. 19.11. Thou could have no power at all
against me, except it were given thee from above.

The uses follow. One is to teach us not to fear man, but God, that gives
power unto man.

A second is to admonish us, that we be not like the dog that snatcheth at
the stone that is cast at him without regard unto the thrower. If God send an
enemy to invade us, our eye must be upon God that sends him.

A third is to advise us, to labor to be at one with God. It will be our best
bulwark against an inuader.

And so I come to gather a third doctrine from this circumstance of the siege,
An adversary there shall be even round about the land.

In circuitu terra: He shall so beset the land round about, that there shall be
no evasion for any of the inhabitants. My observation shall be that of
Brandmyller in his Typical Analysis, In Regni amplitudine non esse gloriandum:
Men ought not to glory in the greatness of the Kingdom wherein they live.


The extent or greatness of the Kingdom whereof thou art, what can it avail
thee? He that once for sin covered the whole earth with an army of waters,
can now for sin enuiron the greatest kingdom of the earth with an army of
warriors. And flagellum inundans cum transierit, eritis ei in conculcationem,
Esaias 28.18. When the ouer-flowing scourge shall pass through, then ye shall be
trodden down by it. Eritis ei in conculcationem, that is, says Saint Hierome,
you shall suffer all those torments, which you thought you should never have
suffered. The threatenings which you thought should never come to pass, shall
come to pass upon you. An adversary there shall be even round about the Land.

Shall be! But yet there is none. O let us therefore with a sweet feeling
acknowledge the infinite love and compassion of God toward this Kingdom, in
so long preserving it from all hostile invasion. There was indeed an invasion
in the year 88. intended against this Kingdom by a supposed invincible
Armado. It gloried in strength, munition, ships, preparations and confederates.
It was the Lords mercy toward us to cross, to curse that proud attempt. The
winds and seas by his appointment fought against them, and we were delivered.
For that deliverance, we then sang songs of thanksgiving: then were our
mouths filled with laughter, and our tongues with joy.

Now since it has pleased God to continue unto us hitherto our peace and
plenty; and we sit every one under his Vine, and under his Fig Tree, whilst our
neighbour-nations are shaken and tossed with the tempest of wars, and all
things round about us are in an vproare; Let us bless Gods holy name for it:
and pray we for the continuance of this our happiness: that there be no taste
of the sharpnes and misery of war among us, that there be no assaulting of our
Cities, that there be no sorrow of heart, nor weeping of eyes, nor wringing of
hands, nor shriking of voices among us. Will you take direction for your prayer
from the royal Prophet? Pray then as he has directed, Psalm. 144.12. Pray,
that our sons may be as plants grown up in their youth, that our daughters
may be as corner stones polished after the similitude of a palace, that our
garners may befull, affoording all manner of store: that our sheep may bring
forth thousands and ten thousands in our streets: that our Oxen may be strong
to labor; that there be no breaking in, nor going out; that there be no
complaining in our streets. O happy is that people that is in such a case: yea,
happy is that people whose God is the Lord.

I have done with the Siege, and am come to the Victory.

(...) Vehoridh mimmek gnuzzek, word for word, and he shall cause thy strength
to come down. Dejiciet a te robur tuum, He shall cast down thy strength from
thee, so Tremelius, Piscator, Drusius, and Gualter; Tollet, he shall take it
away from thee, so Calvin; Detrahet, he shall pull it down, so Vatablus;
Deducet, he shall bring it down, so Oecolampadius. The Vulgar Latin turns it
passiuely, Detrabetur ex te fortitudo tua, thy strength shall be brought down
from thee. So does Brentius with his Dejicietur, thy strength shall be thrown
down.

By this same strength, be it robur, or fortitudo, Iunius understands that,
whereby they heaped up the treasures of violence and robbery. Drusius
understands their strong Castles and fortified Cities. Some understand
Riches. And so qui opibus valent, potentes vocantur, they that excel in
riches, are called mighty men.

Albertus Magnus will have this strength to be, whatsoever it was wherein they
put their trust, as in some fortification: whether it were the substance of
their riches, or the munitions of their Cities, or the multitude of their
soldiers, or the armies of their adherents. Whatsoever it be, down it must.
When God means to give victory to an inuader, no strength shall be able to
withstand him. My observation here shall be that of Albertus, Vltioni diuina
nulla obsistere potest fortitudo:
No strength shall be able to withstand divine reuengement. For there is no
strength against the Lord.


No strength! None at all. So says Esaias, Chap. 2.12. The day of the Lord of
Hosts shall be upon every one that is proud and lofty, upon every one that is
lifted up; upon all the Cedars of Lebanon, upon all the Oaks of Bashan; upon
all high Mountains and Hills; upon every high Tower, and upon every fenced
wall; upon all the ships of Tarshish, and upon all Pictures of desire: the
loftiness of man shall be bowed down, and the haughtiness of man shall be
made low. The Lord alone shall be exalted in that day. In that day when the
Lord shall send a power against a Land, for the iniquity thereof, all strength
shall fail before him.

This is that we read, Esai. 26.5. In the Lord Jehovah is everlasting
strength: For he brings down them that dwell on high; the lofty City he
lays it low; he lays low even to the ground; he brings it even to the
dust. There is no strength against him.

Erit fortitudo vestra, vt fauilla stupae, your strength shall be as the imbers
of tow, and opus vestrum, and the work of your strength shall be as a spark;
they shall both burn together, and none shall quench them, Esai. 1.23. There
is no prevailing by strength against the Lord: it is the acknowledgement of
Hannah in her song of thanksgiving, 1 Samuel 2.9. Our Prophet Amos, Chap. 2.14.
has thus delivered it; The strong shall not strengthen his force. And thus is
my observation confirmed; No strength shall be able to withstand divine
reuengement.

One reason is, because God overthrows the greatest strength that man can
erect, even at his pleasure.

A second is, because there is no strength, but it is of God and from God.
Vastatum superrobustum roborat, Amos 5.9. God above is he that strengthens the
spoiled against the strong, and makes the spoiled to come with might against
the fortress.

I will but name the uses. One is, to teach us, never to put any affiance in
our own strength, but so to use all good means for our defense, that still
we rely upon the Lord for success.

A second is, to stop us from glorying in our strength. There is a caveat
against it, Ierem. 9.23. Let not the strong man glory in his strength. If he
will needs glory, let him glory in the Lord. Let his glorying be in imitation
of the royal Prophet, Psa. 18.2. The Lord is my rock, and my fortress, and
my deliverer: my God, my strength in whom I will trust, my buckler and the
horn of my salvation, and my high tower. The Lord is my strength.

A third is to admonish us of a duty of ours, which is, in trouble sometimes,
yea always, to approach unto the throne of grace by humble prayer, to beg of
God his protection against all the assaults of our enemies, that they never
prevail against us to take away our strength.

I am come to my last circumstance, the circumstance of the spoil, in these
words,

Et diripientur palatia tua, And thy palaces shall be spoiled. The Vulgar
Latin says, Diripientur aedes tuae, thy houses shall be spoiled. Petrus
Lusitanus prefers Palaces, as best agreeing with the Hebrew. He is in the
right. palaces are named, because Conquerours when they have won a City by
assault, do enter into the fairest, stateliest, and most princely houses,
presuming to find in them the greatest booties.

These Palaces are by some taken Metonymically to signify either the goods
heaped up in them, Albertus Magnus.
or the possessions belonging to them.

We shall not do amiss if we follow the letter, and take these Palaces, as
they are, for the Palaces of Samaria, wherein the Princes, Magistrates, and
Rulers of Samaria, did store up the treasures of violence and robbery, as we
saw upon the former verse. So the meaning may be thus: Palatia tua, Thy
Palaces, O Samaria, which were as the receptacles, caves, or dens, in which
thou did treasure up thy goods gotten from the poor by violence and wrong,
diripientur, they shall be spoiled: thou have spoiled others, therefore shall
thou thy self be spoiled. Sic erit poena sceleri consentiens; so shall the
punishment be agreeable to the offense. Observe here, Punishments are most
usually in the like; proper and proportionable to the offenses.

This is that which is vulgarly said, In quo quis peccat, in eo punitur; as a
man offends, in the same manner will God punish him.

They who sought the life of Daniel, sinned in causing him to be cast into the
Lions den. How were they for so sinning punished? God might have revenged
himself upon them by his own immediate hand, but would not. They were
punished the same way: they were cast into the Lions den, and so perished, Dan.
6.24.

It was David's sin to commit adultery with Vriahs wife, and to slay her
husband with the sword of the Ammonites. How was he for so sinning punished? He
was paid home and punished in his own kind. To reward and serve him, as he
had served others, God as a just Judge raises up evil against him out of his
own house. 2 Samuel 12.10.
His own sons break out into the same sins; they rise up against him, and
one against another. A tent is spread for Absalom upon the house top, and he
lies with his fathers Concubines in the sight of all Israel, 2 Samuel 16.22.
Amnon deflowreth his sister Tamar, 2 Samuel 13.14. to revenge this, Absalom
causes his brother Amnon to be slain, verse. 28.

Blood requires blood. Hereof are we assured, Genesis 9 6. Who so sheddeth man's
blood, by man shall his bleud be shed. So says our Savior in the Gospel,
Matthew. 26.51. All they that take the sword, shall perish with the sword. The
like is that in the Revelation, Chap. 13.10. He that kills with the sword,
must be killed with the sword. Blood requires blood. And though peradventure a
murderer do escape the hand of the Magistrate, yet will the vengeance of God
find him out. We see this in Ioab: he shed innocent blood, the blood of Abner,
and Amasa, two Captains of the Hosts of Israel. He escaped a long time, as if
his murders had been forgotten, but at length vengeance came home unto him,
and suffered not his hoare head to go down to the grave in peace; for his
blood was shed, 1 King. 2.34.

Memorable is the example of Adoni-Bezek, who being taken by Judah and Simeon,
had his thumbes and great toes cut off. Herein he confessed that the justice of
God had found him out, and requited him in his kind, according to his own
cruelty. For says he, Threescore and ten Kings, having their thumbes and their
great toes cut off, gathered their meat under my table: as I have done, so God
has requited me, Judge. 1.7. Thus was cruelty repaid with cruelty in the same
kind.

A like example is that of Agag, King of the Amalekites. He having made many a
woman childlesse, is repaid in the like; and is himself hewed in pieces by
Samuel, with this Item; As thy sword has made women childlesse, so shall thy
mother be childlesse among women, 1 Samuel 15.33.

If Haman set up a gallows to hang up Mordecai, Haman may be the first that
shall be hanged thereon, Esther 7.10.

It is the law of equality and equity, that men suffer the same things of
others, which they have offered unto others. Our Savior Christ in his Sermon
upon the Mount thus delivers it; With what measure ye mete, Luke 6.38.
it shall be measured to you again, Matthew. 7.2. Whereupon one says after this
manner; He that rashly and unjustly censureth others, feels at one time or
other the smart of it in the like kind. For God does justly raise up others to
censure him, that thereby he may be recompensed. According to this law of
equity it is said, Reu. 3.10. He that leads into captivity, shall be led
into captivity: And Esaias 33.1. They that deal treacherously with others, shall
have others to deal treacherously with them; and they that spoil others,
shall themselves be spoiled. This last is the very measure, that is in this my
text threatened to the ten Tribes. They spoiled the poor, treasuring up in
their palaces the goods taken from them by violence and robbery, and therefore
shall their palaces be spoiled. Thus far is the confirmation of my doctrine,
which was, Punishments are most usually in the like: proper and proportionable
to the offenses.

Are punishments proportionable to the offenses? One reason hereof may be,
because the justice of God is hereby cleared, and the mouth of iniquity
stopped. When God retaileth us according to the sin that we have committed,
what can we allege or answer for our selves? Surely, we cannot have any
excuse, pretense or allegation for our selves, but must confess with our own
mouth, and against our selves, that God is righteous, and that our selves are
wicked.

A second reason may be taken from the equity of this kind of proceeding. It
is meet that malefactors have their deserts; nor can they complain of
injustice, so long as they receive their own. God will give to every man
according to his works: he will give them wages according to their deseruings.
Upon this equity is grounded the Law of retaliation, by which God requires of
the hands of Magistrates, that they recompense life for life, eye for eye,
tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot, burning for burning, wound for
wound, stripe for stripe, Exodus 21.23. The Law is repeated, Leuit. 24.19, 20.
If a man cause a blemish in his neighbor: as he has done, so shall it be
done unto him. Breach for breach, eye for eye, tooth for tooth; as he has
caused a blemish in a man, so shall it be done to him again. Now if God has
made a law for Magistrates to recompense the sinner according to the manner of
his sin, we may not doubt but that God himself will measure his punishments
according to the rule of justice and equity. Upon the ground of these reasons,
my doctrine stands, Punishments are most usually in the like; proper and
proportionable to the offenses.

Now one use of this doctrine is to teach us, to set a watch over our selves,
to keep out the practice of sin, that carries such a tail and train after
it. The sinner shall ever find a punishment answerable to his sin. This is a
notable bridle to induce us to abstain from all kind of sin: to abstain
from whoredom and drunkenness, the sins that rage among carnal men.
Because Magistrates are slack and careless in punishing of these sins, God
brings upon such as continue in them very loathsome and noisome diseases;
meet punishments for such filthy sins. And if we be wise to commit new
sins, God only wise, will catch us in our wisdom; he will be wise enough to
find out punishments that shall be proportioned to our transgressions. Pro
mensura peccati erit and plagarum modus; Deuteronomy. 25.3. Vulg.
as our sin is, so shall be our punishment.

Again, from hence we learn to be patient under the punishments that do
befall us. Since God does punish us in that wherein we have offended, when we
feel that God has found us out, and that neither our selves, nor our sins can
any longer be hidden from his eyes, let us humble our selves under his mighty
hand, and hold our peace, because he has done it. Psalm 39.9.


Thirdly, this may serve to check all cruel and merciless oppressors, such
as grind the faces of the poor, Es^y 3.15.
and spoil the needy by their covetous and corrupt dealing, pulling from
them, that which is their own, without conscience of sin, or feeling of
judgment to come. God suffers such to have their time, while he holds his
peace, and lets them alone, to fill up the measure of their sins. Yet has
God his seasons too, and has determined what to do, and how to deal with
such offenders: the spoiler shall be spoiled, the robber shall be robbed, the
oppressor shall be oppressed: and they that deal violently with others, shall
have others to deal violently with them. Wherefore, whatsoever you would that
men should do unto you, even so do unto them, for this is the Law of equity.

THE Fourteenth Lecture.
AMOS 3.12. Thus says the Lord, As the shepherd takes out of the mouth of
the Lion two legs or a piece of an ear; so shall the children of Israel be
taken out that dwell in Samaria, in the corner of a bed, and in Damascus in a
couch.


THis verse belongs to the Commination that went before. The Commination was
a denunciation or a menacing of the judgment of God against the Kingdom of
the ten Tribes, the people of Israel. The judgment was a conquest by war,
and that was described by three circumstances, the siege the victory, and the
spoil: all which were handled in my l^st Sermon. Now is the conquest
amplified, from the sad and fearful event thereof, which our Prophet here
delivers by a Similitude taken from the experience of a Shepherd. Such shall
be the conquest of the Assyrians against the Israelites, that the Israelites
shall be no more able to resist the Assyrians, than a silly Sheep is able to
resist a Lion.

The Israelites trusted in the multitude of their people, in the valor of
their soldiers, in their fenced Cities, among which the chief were Samaria
and Damascus; for they had enlarged their territories even unto Damascus.
Therefore it seemed to them impossible, that any foreign power should prevail
against them. To beat down this vain confidence of theirs, Amos here brings
this rural and pastoral Similitude, assuring them, that those things,
whereupon they rely for safety, shall be so far from doing them any good,
that few, very few of them shall escape the hand of the enemy.

For our more easy proceeding at this time, let it please you to observe with
me two things: 1 An introduction to a similitude, Thus says the Lord. 2 The
similitude it self; As the Shepherd takes out, etc.


The Introduction gives credit and authority to the Similitude.

The Similitude has two parts, the two usual parts of a Simile.

1 (...), the Proposition. 2 (...), the Reddition.
The Proposition: A Shepherd takes out of the mouth of a Lion two legs or a
piece of an ear.

The Reddition: So shall the children of Israel be taken out of the hands of
Salmanassar.

The things compared are;

First, a Lion, and Salmanassar King of Assyria.

Secondly, a Sheep, and the Children of Israel.

Thirdly, some fragments of a devoured sheep; two legs, or a piece of an ear,
and the small number of the Israelites that should escape.

These Israelites are here described ab ipsorum securitate, from their security
or lack of care. They live nicely and delicately in all pleasure and delight,
full of confidence, that no evil shall at any time touch them. They dwell in
Samaria in the corner of a bed, and in Damascus in a couch.

Samaria and Damascus, Cities of strength and fortification, were unto the
Israelites as their beds of repose and rest: They thought themselves safe, and
out of danger, by the aid and succor of Ci^ies so well fenced: but were
deceived. For thus says the Lord, As the Shepherd takes out of the mouth of
the Lion two legs or a piece of an ear: so shall the children of Israel be
taken out, that dwell in Samaria in the corner of a bed, and in Damascus in a
couch.

Such is the division of this Text. I now descend to a special handling of the
parts. The first is, the Introduction to the Similitude.

Thus says the Lord.

This Introduction I heretofore copiously handled. I met with it in the first
Chapter of this book five times, Verse. 3, 6, 9, 11, 13. Verse. 1, 4, 6.
in the second, thrice; and once before in this: and therefore the less need
is there, that now I insist upon it. Yet may I not leave it unsaluted, since our
Prophet here repeateth it. And he repeateth it to justify his calling: to
show, that albeit he formerly lived the life of a Shepherd, yet now he ha^h
his calling to be a Prophet from the Lord, Jehovah. Whence my observation is:
It is not lawful for any man to take upon him ministerial function in the
Church without assurance of calling from God.

This truth is by the Apostle, Hebr. 5.4. thus delivered: No man takes this
honor to himself, but he that is called of God, as Aaron was. Now that Aaron
and his sons were consecrated to the Priests office by the authority and
appointment of God, it is plain by the eighth Chapter of Leuiticus, wherein
are set down the sacrifices and ceremonies used at the Consecration, together
with the place and time thereof. Thereby it appears, that the office of holy
Priesthood was not of man, nor from man; but God Almighty did first institute
and ordain it by his own express commandment. Then being ordained, he
confirmed the honor and reputation of it, by that great miracle of the budding
of Aarons rod, Number. 17.8. The rod of Aaron for the house of Leui, brought forth
buds, and bloomed blossoms, and yielded Almonds. Thus was the institution of
holy Priesthood from God alone.

This honor the holy men of God, of old time, took not to themselves. Nor
Esaias, nor Jeremy, nor Ezechiel, nor any of the residue, took this honor to
themselves, but were all called of God, and in the name of God they declared
unto the people his visions and his words: which is intimated by those
passages, very obuious in the writings of the Prophets; as ^say 1.1.
the vision of Esaiah, Cap. 1.1.
the vision of Obadiah, the burden of Nineueh in the book of the vision of
Cap. 1.1.
Nahum; the burden which Habakkuk the Prophet did see; the burden of the word
of the Lord to Israel by Malachy: the word of the Lord which came to Hosea, to
Joel, to Jonah, to Micah, to Zephaniah, to Haggai, to Zachariah. Esaias 1.2.
The Lord has spoken; Ierem. 10.1.
Hear ye the word of the Lord: Thus says the Lord; Says the Lord. By these
and the like passages they show their calling to have been from God; Not one
of them took this honor to himself.

Nor did Christ himself take this honor to himself, but with warrant of his
Fathers calling. For so I read, Heb. 5.5. Christ glorified not himself to be
made an High Priest; but he that said unto him, Thou art my Son, to day have
I begotten thee, He, even God the Father, gave him this honor. And hereunto
does Christ himself bear witness, in all those places of the holy
Evangelists, wherein he acknowledged himself to be Matthew. 10.40. Mark. 9.37.
Luke 4.18, 43. Ioh. 3.17, 34, etc.
sent of God.

The holy Apostles of Christ, whence had they their calling? were they not all
openly ordained by Christ himself? Never did any of them execute that office,
but with protestation, that they had their calling from God, and therefore
their writings begin: Romans 1.1.
Paul a servant of Jesus Christ called to be an Apostle, not of men, neither
by man, but by Jesus Christ, and God the Father. James a servant of God, Gal.
1.1.
and of the Lord Jesus Christ: Peter an Apostle of Jesus Christ: Cap. 1.1.
Jude the servant of Jesus Christ: the revelation of Jesus Christ, which God
gave unto him to show unto his servant John. Thus had Christ's Apostles the
assurance of their calling from God.

So had the blessed Evangelists. So, all those, whom Christ gave unto his
Church for the instruction thereof, Ephesians. 4.11. He gave some Apostles; and
some Prophets; and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers. It is true,
that Christ himself is the chief builder; for so he says, Matthew. 16.18.
Super hanc petram aedificabo Ecclesiam meam; upon this rock will I build my
Church, and he builds it through his holy Spirit; yet he does use Prophets, and
Apostles, and Evangelists, and Pastors, and Teachers, as vnderwork men for this
building, even unto the end of the world. And all these have the assurance of
their calling from God. Who so has it not, he is not to be vouchsafed the name
of Prophet, or Apostle, or Evangelist, or Pastor, or Teacher: for he is an
Intruder.

And great is the danger of Intrusion. Every Intruder was to be put to death.
The Law for it is, Number. 1.51. Every stranger that comes nigh unto the
Tabernacle, shall be put to death: The stranger, any one that is not of the
tribe and family of Leui, that breaks into the Levites function, and medleth
with holy things beyond his calling, he is to be put to death.

An example hereof we have in the Beth-shemites, 1 Samuel 6.19. who, because they
had looked into the Ark of the Lord, contrary to the Law, were smitten with a
great slaughter to the number of fifty thousand and threescore and ten men.

The like we have in Vzzah son of Abinadab, 2 Samuel 6.6. who because he
touched the Ark of God contrary to the Law, was punished with sudden death,
and stricken with the immediate hand of God that fell upon him, to the terror
of others, and to work reverence in the hearts of all men toward the sacred
things of his service.

Add hereto the example of Vzziah, King of Judah, 2 Chronicles. 26.16. He for
inuading the Pri^sts office, for burning Incense upon the Altar of Incense in
the Temple of the Lord, Carthus. in Number. 1.
was stricken with a leprosy.

And Gedeon that valiant man, who judged Israel for forty years, intermedled
too far with the Priests office, when he made the golden Ephod, Judge. 8.27.
All Israel went a whoring after it, and it became a snare to Gedeon himself,
and to his house.

Now from the danger of intrusion, thus laid open, we may infer the
unlawfulness of meddling with ministerial function in the Church, without
assurance of calling from God.

The same may be inferred upon the blame which God lays upon false Prophets,
Ierem. 14.14. I sent them not, neither have I commanded them, neither spoke I
unto them, yet they prophecy. And Chap. 23.21. Ierem. 29.9.
I have not sent these Prophets, yet they run: I have not spoken to them, yet
they prophesied. They have prophesied? What; but lies, though in my name? they
have prophesied false visions, and diuinations, things of naught, and the
deceit of their own heart. Thus have they done, but I sent them not, nor
commanded them, nor spoke unto them. This blame thus laid by the Lord upon
wicked and false Teachers for running before they are sent, and preaching
before they are called, enforces the acknowledgement of the point hitherto
delivered, that It is not lawful for any man to take upon him ministerial
function in the Church without assurance of calling from God.

This calling, the assurance whereof we are to have, is either immediate and
^xtraordinary, or mediate and ordinary. The first is, where God calls
immediately without the ministry of man; so were the Prophets and Apostles
called. The other is wherein God uses the ministry of man, as at this day, in
the designment of every Minister unto his function. Both these callings, as
well the mediate as the immediate, the ordinary as the extraordinary, are of
God: that of God alone; this of God by man: and of this especially is the
doctrine hitherto proved to be understood: we cannot expect a blessing upon our
labors, except G^d has called us: so necessary is Gods calling to the
ministry of the Church.

The point hitherto handled serves for the confutation of the Anabaptist, and
other fanaticall spirits, who run without calling, and preach though they be
not sent: contrary to that of Saint Paul Romans 10.5. How shall they preach,
except they be sent? And yet will these men, if they meet with a Minister that
is lawfully and orderly called, demand of him, Quis te elegit? Sir, Who has
chosen you? though themselves have no calling at all; no, not from their blind
Church: as Gastius has observed in his first book of the errors of the
Catabaptists. Yea, their assertion is; that, if a man understand the doctrine
of the Gospel, be he either Cobbler, or Botcher, or Carpenter, or what else, he
is bound to teach and preach. This is observed of them by Chemnitius in his
Treatise of the Church, Chap. 4.

With these Anabaptists I may join the Photinians, who deny the nec ssity of
vocation in the Ministers of the Church. Socinus in his Treatise of the Church,
Theophilus Nic^laides, in his defense of that Treatise, Institut. ^ap 42
Osterodius, ^n Notis ad lib. S^^g^ ^^^ip 3.
Radeccius, In ^^^ut These. D. Frantz p. 2. Di^p. 4.
Shemalizius, and the ^it. de Eccle^. ca^. 2.
Catechist of Racow: all these are against a necessity of calling in the
Ministry, and do here stand convicted of that their error.

So do all those lay people, men or women, who in the case of ^upp^sed
necessity do adventure to administer the Sacrament of Baptism, which together
with the preaching of the word, the Lord has invested in the persons of
Ministers duly called, Mat. 28.19. Go ye and teach all Nations, baptizing them
in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost. Go ye,
teach and baptize. Go ye. It is our Saviors precept to his Apostles, and in
them to their successors, Ministers duly called. None of the Laity, nor man,
nor woman, has part in this function. And how can it be imagined, that women,
whom Saint Paul has excluded from preaching, 1 Cor. 14 34. should be permitted
to administer any Sacrament? They may not so much as Baptize.

Its objected: women may teach their families; therefore they may also baptize.

Our answer is, that the Consequent holds not. Women may teach, as they are
private Christians, but not as Ministers: Baptize they cannot, but as
Ministers; this being every way, in every respect and manner proper to a
Minister.

It is further objected from the example of Zipporah, Exodus 4.25. Zipporah.
Moses wife, circumcised her son. In the place of Circumcision, Baptism has
succeeded; why then may not women now adays Baptize?

I answer: Circumcision was not of old so appropriated to the Levites, as
Baptism is now to the Ministers of the Gospel. And therefore its no good
Consequence; Some that were not Levites did Circumcise; therefore some that are
not Ministers may Baptize.

Again, what if Zipporah sinned in Circumcising her child? Must she be a
pattern to other women to Baptize? Calvin is not afraid to prove she sinned,
and his proof is sound, in the fourth of his Institutions, chap. 15.. 22. Lib.
1. de Sacr. Baptismi. c. 7.. 11.
though Bellarmine labor to refute him. It was doubtless an inexcusable
temerity ^^her to circumcise her child in the presence of her Husband, Moses,
not a private man, but a prime Prophet of the Lord, than whom there arose not a
greater in Israel, which was no more lawful for her to do, than it is at this
day for a woman to Baptize in the presence of a Bishop. And how can she be
excused from sin in that her act, since she murmured against the ordinance of
the Lord, and reviled her husband? weigh but the bitterness of her speech:
Surely, a bloody husband art thou to me, because of the Circumcision.

Thirdly, say she sinned not in circumcising her child (which yet I may not
grant) then I say, the fact might be extraordinary, and therefore not to be
imitated without like dispensation.

Fourthly, some think she was only the hand of her husband in his weakness;
and so the fact shall be not hers, but her husbands.

For these reasons, the example of Zipporah does not advantage the Bellarm. vbi
supra. Salmeron in Mat. 28.
Papist, or Eckhard fascit. contr. c. 19. qu. 4. Gerhard Loc. Theol. 23. n. 24,
etc.
Lutheran, in their error about Gy^aecobaptismus, or women's Baptism.

But may they not Baptize in case of extreme necessity?

No, not then.

Why then, the child may die unbaptized, and so be in certain danger of
damnation.

We make a great difference between want of baptism and the contempt thereof.
The contempt ever damneth; so does not the want. By want I mean, when God so
preuenteth by death, that Baptism cannot be had according to the manner
allowed in the holy Word of God. In this case the child that dies unbaptized
is not in any danger of damnation. For as Comestor in his Evangelical History,
cap. 197. says, Sine Baptismo saluatur homo cum eum excludit articulus
necessitatis, non contemptus religionis: A man may be saved, though he be
unbaptized, if Baptism be excluded through the instant of necessity, and not
by contempt of religion. So before him taught Saint Bernard, Baptismat^s fructu
priuatur, qui baptizari contempsit, non qui non potuit: It is in his Epistle to
Hugo de S. Victore, Ep. 77. He is deprived of the benefit of Baptism, that
despises Baptism, not he that cannot have it. This truth he supporteth by
two chief pillars of the Christian Church, Saint Ambrose, and Saint Augustine.

Saint Ambrose in his funeral Oration of the death of the Emperor
Valentinian, doubts not to say, that Valentinian was Baptized, because he
desired Baptism, not because he had it. Certe quia poposcit accepit,
doubtless because he desired it, he had it. God accounts us to have, that we
unfeignedly wish.

Saint Augustine, lib. 4. de Baptismo contra Donatistas, cap. 22 says that
faith is available to salvation without the visible Sacrament of Baptism, but
then, Cum ministerium Baptismatis non contemptus religionis, sed articulus
necessitatis excludit; When the ministry of Baptism is excluded not of
contempt, but of necessity.

I could here show unto you from the testimonies of our learned adversaries,
that the absolute necessity of Baptism is not ^ustifiable by the practice of
primitive antiquity: but I stand not in this Mount of God to read a
Controversy. I shut up this Discourse with the words of Saint Bernard in the
Epistle above alleged; Nequaquam omnino possum des^erare salutem, si aquam non
contemptus, sed sola prohibeat impossibilitas: I cannot altogether despair of
the salvation of such as depart this life without Baptism, if it be not done
of contempt, but when as Baptism cannot possibly be had.

Now of the souls of Infants, who live nor to desire Baptism, what shall I
say? May not the desire of others be theirs as well as the faith of others
believing, and the mouth of others confessing is theirs? Here it is safe to
suspend, and dangerous to pass judgment. Secret things belong to God. He
that made all souls knows what to do with them, neither will he make us of
his counsel. Our resolution must be to honor good means and use them; to
honor Baptism and use it if we may; and in the necessary want thereof to
depend upon God, who can work, beyond, without, and against means.

You see how far I have been carried with the objection drawn from women
baptizing in case of necessity, whereby they are intruders into that function
which is appropriate to the Ministers of the Word. If they will needs be
meddling with a calling, I will show them a calling of their own, wherewith
they may busy themselves.

As the Minister holds, his calling from God, so does every other member of the
Church. There is not a member of the Church, man or woman, but holds a
particular standing and function from God, and is ranked in order by Gods
special providence and calling. And it is to great purpose, that you all know
this in your own particulars. For

First, it enforces diligence. If God has set thee in thy calling, then it
stands thee upon to discharge the duties of thy calling with all sedulity and
alacrity.

Secondly, it may admonish thee not to pass the bounds of thy calling. Seeing
thou art in thy place by the Will of God, thou must take heed that thou go not
beyond thy limits, either by using unlawful courses, or by intruding into
other men's functions.

Thirdly, it may teach thee that thy particular calling is to serve the
general. Every Christian has two callings; a particular, and a general. The
particular, which is also personal, is the external designment of a man, to
some outward service in the Church or common wealth, to the discharge of
special duties in regard of the distinction between man and man. The general
calling is the calling of Christianity; it is the singling out of a man by
special sanctification to glorify God, and to seek out his own salvation in
the things of the Kingdom of Christ: this is common to every member of the
Church, to all believers. Both these callings, general and particular must be
joined together in our life, as the body and soul in man. Where they are not
joined together, there may be a show of Christianity, but the substance will be
absent. Mat. 6.23.
Christ's Commandment, that men seek first the Kingdom of God and his
righteousness, is a demonstration, that men ought not so to follow their
outward business and employments, as to omit the means of knowledge and
grace. The particular calling must serve the general.

Fourthly, from this consideration, that we hold our particular callings from
God, we are to learn contentment in the willing undergoing of the daily
molestations, troubles, and crosses, that do befall us in our several courses
and kinds of life. It is a lesson, in the practice whereof Saint Paul had well
profited. I have learned, says he, in whatsoever state I am, therewith to be
content, Philip. 4.11. He knew how to be abased; and he knew how to abound.
Every where and in all things he was instructed both to be full and to be
hungry, both to abound and to suffer need. Let us set him for the pattern of
our imitation, and we will be content with what we have, be it much or little.
If we have little, our account shall be the less; if more, we are bound to do
the more good.

I have done with the Introduction to the similitude: It is time that I proceed
with the similitude it self.

As the shepherd takes out of the mouth of the Lion two legs or a piece of an
ear, so shall the children of Israel be taken out that dwell in Samaria, in
the corner of a bed, and in Damascus in a couch. Hereof I find diverse
expositions. Some will have this similitude to signify, that few of the
Israelites shall be delivered from the spoil of Samaria, and those such as
shall be sick, weak, and feeble, and therefore shall be despised and left
behind as unprofitable, and of no use to be carried into captivity. And this is
the exposition of Theodoret, Vatabius, Isidore, Rupertus, and Montanus.
Christophorus a Castro thus gives it in his paraphrase: As when a Lion has
eaten his fill, and has satiate his hunger, the shepherd finds two legs, or
a leg, or a piece of an ear, to show that the sheep has been worried: so of
the whole body of Samaria, one or other, a few, a very few shall be delivered
from the slaughter of the enemy, and they unprofitable, as being wretched and
sick, lying by couples in the side of a couch, as well in Samaria as in
D^mascus.

Others will have this similitude to be understood by a Sarcasme or Irrision,
as if our Prophet here scoffed at the Israelites for their vain confidence
which they put in Samaria, and D^mascus, thus: As a shepherd uses to save
from the mouth of a Lion that has devoured a sheep, one or two legs, or the
tip of an ear: so surely shall the children of Israel save themselves from the
mouth of the Assyrians, trusting in the strength of Samaria, and in the help
of Damascus or of the King of Syria, in whom they think, as a wearied man is
refreshed in his bed, so themselves to be safe from their enemies: whereas
indeed it shall be nothing so. And this is the exposition of Saint Hierome,
Remigius, Albertus, Rupertus, Hugo and Dionysius.

The third exposition is Lyraes; He will have this similitude to signify, that
very few of the Israelites shall be delivered, and they such, as shall escape
by flight either to King Ez^kiah, to the Kingdom of Judah, to save themselves
there in plagu lectuli, in the side or corner of a bed, that is, in Jerusalem,
where the Temple was Dei lectulus, Gods bed, as its called, Cant. 1.16.
Lectulus noster floridus, our bed is decked with flowers; or to the Kingdom of
Syria, to save themselves there in Damasci grabuto, in a couch at Damascus.

Of these expositions I prefer the second, which I touched in my division of
the Text. Now let us a little look upon the words. The Proposition is,

A shepherd takes out of the mouth of the Lion two legs or a piece of an
eare] This he does according to the Law, Exodus 22.13. If a sheep be torn in
pieces by wild beasts, the shepherd is to bring it, or the remnants of it, a
leg, or an ear, or the like, to the owner for a witness that it is torn, and
he shall not need to make restitution thereof unto the owner, so he did his
best to rescue it. For a shepherd is of duty to rescue his flock. David did
it valiantly. As he kept his fathers sheep, there came a Lion, and took a
Lamb out of the flock; and he went out after him, and smote him, and
delivered it out of his mouth: and when the Lion arose against him, he caught
him by his beard, and smote him, and slew him, 1 Samuel 17.34. My shepherd here
is not so happy to save his sheep: but his sheep being devoured, he finds
some part of it, two legs, or a piece of an ear, whereby he may excuse
himself to his Master for his lost sheep. These parcels, leg or ear, he
takes Ex ore Leonis.

Out of the mouth of the Lion] Non ex ore Lupi, sed ex ore Leonis. He says
not, out of the mouth of the wolf, but out of the mouth of the Lion. For a
thing is recovered with more difficulty and with greater danger from a Lion
than from a Wolf. Johannes Leo in his description of Afric: Credat qui
volet, quicquid Leo prehenderit, etiamsi Camelus foret, rostro aufert; Believe
it he that will, whatsoever a Lion catches, though it be a Camel, he bears
it away in his mouth. Hence its prouerbially said, Ex ore Leonis, out of the
Lions mouth, for, out of extreme danger: and its used when a man has
deliverance beyond hope. Saint Paul uses it, 2 Timothy 4.17. (...), I was
delivered out of the mouth of the Lion: the Lion, not the Devil, as Ambrose
says, nor Festus the President of Iudaea, as Primasius affirms; but Nero,
proud and cruel Nero, persecuting Nero, as its expounded by Chrysostom,
Theodoret, Theophylact, Oecumenius, Aquinas, and Hist. Eccles. l. 2. cap. 22.
Eusebius.

The royal Prophet has it, Psalm. 22.21. Serua me ex ore Leonis. The words are
a part of Christ's Prayer, Save me from the mouth of the Lion. Some will have
that Lion to be the Devil; some Pilat, some Caiaphas, some Herod. Lorinus
will have him to betoken Principes and potentes, all the chief Priests,
Scribes, the Elders of the people, all that were the crucifiers of Christ.

Here it is in proper terms, without a metaphor, The shepherd takes out of
the mouth of the Lion two legs, or a piece of an ear. Yet will Albertus have
this Lion to be, either the King of Babylon, or the Devil. He adds by way of
explication, Os tyranni violentia est, os Diaboli peccatum: the mouth of a
Tyrant is violence, the mouth of the Devil is sin.

This Lion Carthusian in his moral explanation expounds by the Devil, so
does Salmeron in his Tropologie. And I deny not but that the Lion does many
times in a moral and tropologicall sense signify the Devil. But if we will
follow the letter of my Text, this Lion does well resemble the King of Babylon,
or the King of Assyria, Salmanassar.

It is not unusual for a Lion to resemble a King. This resemblance is, Prou.
19.12. The Kings wrath is as the roaring of a Lion. The roaring of a Lion is
fearful and terrible to the beasts of the forest, so is the wrath of a King
to his subjects. The like is that, chap. 20.2. The fear of a King is as the
roaring of a Lion. The fear of a King; the terror which the anger or wrath of
a King strikes into his subjects, is as the roaring of a Lion, very terrible.
The Lion has a Bear for his associate, Prou. 28.15. As a roaring Lion and a
ranging Bear; so is an ungodly Prince over the poor people. An ungodly Prince
is unto the people over whom he rules, as a roaring Lion or a ranging Bear to
a Lamb or Kid. Thus does a Lion resemble a King, either in good or ungodly.

Not amiss then is it, that Salmanassar, King of Assyria, 2 King. 17 3. 2
Esdr. 13.40.
that great and mighty King, who was to carry away into captivity the ten
Tribes of Israel, is here compared unto a Lion: according to the sense above
given. Such shall be the conquest of the Assyrians, under the conduct of
Salmanassar against the Israelites, that the Israelites shall be no more able
to resist the Assyrians, than a silly sheep is able to resist a Lion.

Now to the (...), the Reddition, the other part of this Similitude.

So shall the children of Israel be taken out, that dwell in Samaria in the
corner of a bed, and in Damascus in a couch. Of both these Cities, Samaria and
Damascus, I have heretofore entreated out of this place: Of Damascus upon the
first Chapter of this, verse. 3. and 5. Of Samaria upon the ninth verse of this
Chapter.

1 King. 16.24.
Samaria was the City royal of the ten Tribes. King Omri bought the hill of
Samaria of Shemer for two talents of silver, and built a City thereon, and
called it after the name of Shemer, the owner of the hill, Samaria. It remained
the chief seat of the Kingdom, as long as the Kingdom endured.

Damascus was the Metropoliticall, the chiefest City of Syria. Chap. 7.8.
Esaias calls it the head of Syria. Julian in his Epistle to Sarapion styles it
the City of Jupiter, and eye of the whole East, Holy and Great Damascus.
Tzetzes upon Lycophron, the Trophee of Jupiter, because Jupiter there conquered
the Titans.

These two Cities, Samaria and Damascus, Cities of strength and fortification,
were unto the Israelites as their beds of repose and rest: Nehem. 9.25.
here they thought themselves safe, did eat, were filled and became fat, living
nicely and deliciously in full ease and pleasure. So much is meant by this
their dwelling in Samaria in the corner of a bed, and in Damascus in a couch.

In the corner of a bed, in a couch.] Sermo est de lecto discubitorio sieve
tricliniari, says Villalpandus in Ezech. 23. The speech is of a triclinary or
parlor-bed, of such a bed, whereon of old time men used to take and eat their
meat. It was the use of old to have a dining room, Chamber, or Parlour,
wherein stood three beds whereon they sat at meat, compassing the table on
three sides; the fourth side was left free and clear for waiters. To this
ancient custom our Prophet here alludeth: as also he does, Chap. 6.4. They lie
upon beds of iuory, and stretch themselves upon their couches, and eat the
Lambs out of the flock, and Calves out of the midst of the stall, and Chap.
2.8. They lay themselves down upon clothes laid to pledge by every Altar. When
I handled those words, I spoke at large of this custom. Amos now again
alluding to it, gives us to understand, that the Israelites desiring to lie in
angulo lecti, that is, in capite lecti, at the beds head, in the chiefest
place, feasted it sumptuously and deliciously as well in Samaria, as in
Damascus: Little thought they of going into Captivity.

Now take the similitude to the full. As when a Lion has eaten his fill, and
has satiate his hunger, the shepherd finds two legs, or the tip of an
ear, to show unto the owner, that his sheep was worried: so the children of
Israel, here a man, and there a man, few of them, very few, shall be taken out
of the mouth of the Lion, King Salmanassar, though they trust in the strength
of Samaria, and in the succor of Damascus, thinking thereby to be safe, as in
a bed of rest or feasting.

We have gone the greater part of our journey; let your attentions bear me
company, for the little that is behind. Our Prophet here deriding or scoffing
at the Israelites, for their confidence in the multitude of their people, in
the valor of their soldiers in their fenced Cities, in the strength of
Samaria, in (...) succor of Damascus, teaches us, that All confidence in
creatures, strength of man, or munition of Cities, is vain and sinful.

All such confidence is with all diligence to be shunned. Divine prohibition
is against it, Psalm. 118.8. Put no confidence in man, no not in Princes: and
Psalm. 146.3. Put not your trust in Princes, nor in any son of man. The
prohibition is divine: Put no confidence in man; and therefore all such
confidence is to be shunned.

Now the reasons why no confidence is to be put in man, are diverse.

One is, because it is manifest idolatry so to do. To withdraw and remove the
affections of the heart from the Lord, and set them upon other things, cannot
be less than Idolatry.

A second reason depending hereupon, I take from the description of confidence.
It is described to be indubitata spes futuri auxilij; It is the undoubted hope
of future succor, which is due to God alone. And therefore to put our
confidence in man, is to deny God his due.

A third reason is taken from the condition of man, in whom some put their
trust. The condition of man! What is that? David breaks forth into admiration
of it; Lord, what is man, that thou take knowledge of him? or the son of
man, that thou make account of him? And then shapes unto himself an answer;
Homo vanitati similis factus est; Man is like to vanity, Psalm. 144.4. Like to
vanity! Well were it for him were he only like unto it; Veruntamen vniuersa
vanitas, omnis homo viuens; Verily every man at his best state is altogether
vanity, Psalm. 39.5. Every man at his best state altogether vanity! Surely, men
of low degree are vanity; and men of high degree are a Lie. Lay them in the
balance, they are altogether lighter than vanity, Psalm. 62.9.

What! Man, who has an admirable feature, and abounds with created
excellencies, is he made like unto vanity? Nay, is he altogether vanity? Nay,
is he lighter than vanity? What then can his life be? Pa^^ ^^ies, its but a
tabernacle, 2 Cor. 5 4. and if a tabernacle stand a year, its much. Peter
calls it grass. Epist. 1. Chap. 1.24. and grass grows but a Summer. David
calls it a flow^r, Psalm. 103 15. and a flower has but his month. Esaias
describes i^ by a day, Chap. 21.12. and a day has but a morni^g and an
evening. Job compares it to a shadow, Chap. 14.2. and a shadow has neither
year, nor summer, nor month, nor day, but an hour. Mose^ likens it to a
thought, Psalm. 90 9. and of thoughts there may be an hundred in an hour. So
short a life what else does it argue, but that man is vanity?

And what so little a creature is there, that yields not an argument to prove
man's vanity? A little Plin. Hist. Not. lib. 7. c. 7.
hair in milk strangles Fabius: the stone of a Raison Anacreon; a fly Pope
Adrian the fourth. The Myuntines were chased from their habitations by Pausan.
in Ac a^^. lib. 7.
Gnats; the Atariotes by frogs, some Italians by mice, some Medians by ^^od.
S^culus lib. 4. cap. 3.
sparrowes, the Egyptians oftentimes by grasshoppers. And if Exodus 5.2.
Pharaoh ask, who is the Lord? Frogs, and Lice, and Flies, and other the
basest vermin shall be his Challengers, and Conquerours, and Iaylors; and
ask, who is Pharaoh? so vain a thing is man.

The fourth reason against confidence in man, I take from the dangerous effects
thereof. First, it brings upon us the curse of God: for thus says the Lord,
Ierem. 17.5. Cursed be the man that trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm.
And he whom God curses, shall be accursed. Secondly, it makes us liable to
Gods just vengeance. So were the people of Judah, for the confidence they had
in Rezin and Remaliahs son, Esaias 8.6. So they, who strengthened themselves in
the strength of Pharaoh, and trusted in the shadow of Egypt. The strength of
Pharaoh was their shame, and the shadow of Egypt their confusion, Esaias 30.3.
And so (to omit many other) the Israelites in my Text, for relying upon the
multitude of their people, the valor of their soldiers, their fenced Cities,
the strength of Samaria, and the succor of Damascus.

Thus have you the reasons of my Doctrine: why there is not any confidence to
be put in creatures, either in the strength of man, or the munition of (...) ^s.

The use is to admonish us, that we depend not upon the vain and transitory
things of this life, but upon God alone, who only is unchangeable and
immovable: that we resign our selves wholly into his hands, and confess
before him, in the words of the Psalm 91.9. Tu es Domine spes mea: Thou art, O
Lord, my hope. Sermon. 9. in Psalm. Qui habitat.
Sweet is the meditation of Saint Bernard upon the place: Let others pretend
merit, let them brag that they have borne the burden and heat of the day, let
them tell of their fasting twice a week, let them glory that they are not as
other men; Mihi autem adhaerere Deo, Psalm. 73.28.
bonum est, ponere in Domino Deo spem meam; but its good for me to cleave fast
unto God, to put my hope in the Lord God.

Sperent in ali^s alii, Let others trust in other things; one in his learning,
another in his nobility, a third in his worth, a fourth in any other vanity,
Mihi autem adhaerere Deo, bonum est, but its good for me to cleave fast unto
God, to put my trust in the Lord God.

Dearly beloved; if we shall sacrifice to our own nets, Habak. 1.15, 16.
burn incense to our own yarne, put our trust in outward means, either
riches, or policy, or Princes, or men, or mountains, forsaking God, God will
blow upon these means and turn them to our overthrow. Wherefore though we
have all helps in our own hands to defend our selves, and offend our enemies,
as that, we are fenced by Sea, fortified by ships, blessed by Princes, backed
with friends, stored with munitions, aided with confederates, and armed with
multitudes of men, yet may we not put our trust herein; for nobis etiam
adhaerere Deo, bonum est; its also good for us to cleave fast unto God, to put
our trust in the Lord God, who alone gives the blessing to make all good means
effectual.

There is not much remaining. The small number of the Israelites that were to
be delivered from the fury of the Assyrian, resembled by the two legs, or the
tip of the ear taken by the shepherd out of the Lions mouth, yields us this
observation: that In public calamities God evermore reserueth a remnant to
himself.

When God punished the old world, the world of the ungodly, 1 Pet. 2.5.
bringing the flood upon them, he saved Noah the eighth person, the preacher of
righteousness. When God condemned the Cities of Sodom and Gomorrah with an
overthrow, turning them into ashes, making them an ensample unto those that
after should live wickedly, he delivered just Lot from among them.

There is a remnant left, Esaias 1.9. Except the Lord of hosts had left unto us a
very small remnant, we should have been as Sodom, and we should have been
like unto Gomorrah. You see a remnant reserved, though it be very small. Yea
sometimes there is a reservation of so small a remnant, as is hardly visible;
as in the days of Eliah, who knew of none but himself. I only am left, says
he, 1 King. 19.14. Yet God tells him, verse. 18. of seven thousand in Israel,
which never bowed their knees to Baal. I find, Joel 2.32. deliverance in mount
Sion, deliverance in Jerusalem, and deliverance in the remnant, when the Lord
shall call. There is then a remnant to be called, even in greatest extremity.

Wherefore you, the Elect and chosen children of God the Father, be ye full of
comfort: take unto you, beauty for ashes, Esaias 61.3.
the oil of joy for mourning, the garment of gladness for the spirit of
heaviness, rejoice ye, be glad together and be ye comforted. Let the Prince of
darkness, and all the powers of Hell, assisted with the innumerable company of
his wicked vassals upon the Earth, join together to work your overthrow, they
shall not be able to effect it. For God, even your God, will reserve unto
himself a remnant.

And what is this remnant, but pusillus grex? Its a little flock, the chaste
Spouse of Christ, the holy Catholic Church. Extra came nulla est salus: Out of
it there is no Salvation, for he that has not the Church for his Mother,
shall never have God for his Father. So much for the explanation of this
twelfth verse. And Gods blessing be upon it.

THE Fifteenth Lecture.
AMOS 3.13, 14, 15. Hear ye and testify in the house of Jacob, says the
Lord God, the God of hosts.

That in the day, that I shall visit the transgressions of Israel upon him, I
will also visit the Altars of Bethel, and the horns of the Altar shall be cut
off, and fall to the ground.

And I will smite the winter house with the summer house; and the houses of
Iuory shall perish, and the great houses shall have an end, says the Lord.


THe words of the Lord are just, by whom soever they are uttered: and the
authority of the holy Spirit is wonderful, by whom soever he speaks. Non
minus de ore pastoris, quam de ore Imperatoris pertonat: he thundereth, or he
speaks with as much Majesty from the mouth of a shepherd, as from the mouth
of an Emperor. Amos our Prophet, is this shepherd from whom the holy Spirit
here thundereth. Before he came with a proclamation to the palaces of Ashdod,
and to the palaces of the Land of Egypt. Now he comes with a Contestation to
the house of Jacob. Hereafter you may hear his message to the King of Bashan,
that are in the mountains of Samaria, Chap. 4.1. If Amos had from a shepherd
been advanced to the Majesty of a King, as David was, what could we wish
should have been added to the greater majesty of his elocution? The
contestation is the thing whereupon I shall at this time principally insist.

The words are a Prosopopaeia: the Almighty is brought in, calling upon his
Priests and Prophets to give ear unto him, and to bear witness of the
calamities which he was purposed to lay upon the house of Jacob: that when he
should punish them for their evil deeds, he would visit their Temple, and
proudest buildings with desolation.

The parts are two:

One is a mandate for a Contestation, or Testification.

The other is the matter to be testified. That verse. 13. This verse. 14, 15.

For the first, these particulars may be observed: 1. Who it is that gives the
mandate? It is he that best may do it, Even the Lord. The Lord God, the God of
Hosts. 2. To whom he gives it: Sacerdotibus, and Prophetis, to his Priests and
Prophets: for to them is this by an Apostrophe directed. 3. How he gives it;
thus, Audite and contestamini, Hear and testify. 4. The place where this
testification is to be made, In domo Jacob, In the house of Jacob.


Hear ye, and testify in the house of Jacob, says the Lord God, the God of
Hosts, Verse. 13.

In the other part, which is of the matter to be testified, we may observe,

1. That God is fully resolved to punish Israel for sin: A day there is
wherein the Lord will visit the transgression of Israel upon him, Verse. 14.

2. That this punishment, so resolved upon by the Lord, shall reach unto their
holiest places, to their houses of Religion, to their Altars in Bethel: the
horns of the Altar shall be cut off, and fall to the ground, verse. 14.

3. That this punishment shall extend to the palaces, the chiefest places of
their habitation, even to their demolition and ruin. The winter-house shall be
smitten, so shall the summer house: the houses of Iuory shall perish, and the
great houses shall have an end, verse. 15.

4. The seal and assurance of all, and that we have in the end of this
Chapter, in two words, says the Lord.

In the day that I shall visit the transgressions of Israel upon him, I will
also visit the Altars of Bethel, and the horns of the Altar shall be cut off,
and fall to the ground.

And I will smite the winter-house with the summer house, and the houses of
Iuory shall perish, and the great houses shall have an end, Says the Lord.

Thus have you the division of this text: the branches are many; all
obseruable, and worthy your attention. Order requires that I begin with the
first part, which was the mandate for the testification: the first branch
whereof was of the giver thereof: and that was He, that might best do it,
even the Lord, called here Dominus Iehouih, Deus exercituum; The Lord God, the
God of Hosts.

These names of God have no small weight. They serve to seal the truth of this
Prophecy. Amos might have said in brief, Says the Lord, or the Lord God, as
he had said often before: but not content therewith, he now adds a third title
or appellation, (...) Elohei hatzebaoth, the God of Sabbath. He is called also
Iehouatzebaoth, 1 Samuel 4.4. the Lord of Sabbath. In your Te Deum, that
excellent Canticle of Ambrose and Augustine, he is styled the Lord God of
Sabbath, Sanctus, Sanctus, Sanctus, Dominus Deus Sabbath, Holy, Holy, Holy,
Lord God of Sabbath.

This name of Sabbath is retained by Saint Paul, Romans 9.29. and he has it from
Esaias 1.9. (...), Except the Lord of Sabbath had left us a seed, we had been as
Sodoma, and made like unto Gomorrah. Saint James has it in his Epistle, Chap.
5.4. Behold, the hire of the laborers which have reaped down your fields,
which is of you kept back by fraud, cries: and their cry is entered (...),
into the cares of the Lord of Sabbath.

There are of the Ancient, who have taken this name, Sabbath, for one of the
names of God. Saint Hierome Epist. 136. writing to Marcella of the ten Hebrew
names of God, says, the fourth is Sabbath. Quartum nomen Dei est Sabbath, quod
Septuaginta virtutum, Aquila exercituum transtulerunt: The fourth name of God
in Hebrew is Sabbath, which is by the LXX. translated Virtutum, by Aquila,
Exercituum. Both words Virtutes and Exercitus, signify the same thing,
military forces, an host or band of armed soldiers.

Isiodore Bishop of Hispalis, Orig. lib. 7. cap. 1. agrees with Saint Hierome;
Quartum nomen Dei, dicitur Sabbath, Psalm. 24.10.
quod vertitur in Latinum, exercituum sieve virtutum; de quo in Psalmo ab
Angelis dicitur, Quis est iste Rex gloriae? Dominus virtutum? The fourth name
of God is Sabbath: turn it into Latin, it will be Exercitus, or Virtutes,
hosts or bands of armed soldiers: whereof the Angels in the Psalm do speak;
Who is this King of glory? Dominus virtutum, the Lord of Hosts, he is this King
of glory.

The Author of the Looking-glass in the ninth Tome of Saint Augustines works,
the tenth Chapter of that book speaks thus unto the Lord: Tu mitis and
benign, fortis and zelotes, and Sabbath inuictissime: O thou meek and
gracious, strong and jealous, and most invincible Sabbath.

Origin. Hom. 4. in Esaiam, upon those words of the Song of the Seraphins,
Holy, Holy, Holy Lord God of Sabbath, says, Sabbath is by Aquila's
interpretation Dominus militiarum, the Lord of Hosts. But in this place he
seems to be maimed and imperfect. Drusius in his 23. Epist. corrects him by
adding Adonai unto Sabbath; thus: Adonai Sabbath is by Aquila's interpretation,
Dominus exercituum, the Lord of Hosts. So the meaning is good, and is confirmed
by Epiphanius lib. 1. haeres. 26. Aquila every where in the old Testament, for
Adonai Sabbath, has (...), and that is, Dominus exercituum, the Lord of Hosts.

As for Saint Hierome and Isidore, and the Author of the Looking-glass;
Drusius is of opinion they were deceived, in taking Sabbath for a name of God.
Believe me, says he, Sabbath is never said of God, but it is either Deus
Sabbath, or Dominus Sabbath, either the God of Sabbath, or the Lord of Sabbath.
And he is in the right. For indeed Sabbath is no name of God; nor is it ever
found alone, if it be spoken of God.

Elegantly to this purpose says Epiphanius lib. 1. Haeres. 40. against the
Archontici: (...), the name of Sabbath has the interpretation of Hosts: and
therefore the Lord of Sabbath is the Lord of Hosts. It is well known to every
one that is conversant in holy Scripture, that the Scripture, where it uses
the name of Sabbath, speaks not after this manner, (...), or (...), Sabbath
has said unto me, or Sabbath has spoken; but thus, Dicit Dominus Sabbath,
says the Lord of Sabbath; and that is, if you will interpret, the Lord of
Hosts.

Saint Ambrose his interpretation of this name Sabbath, I may not well pass
by. It is Lib. 4. de fide ad Gratianum, cap. 1. There upon those words of the
24. Psalm, Dominus Sabbath, ipse est Rex gloriae, the Lord of the Sabbath, he
is the King of glory, he says, Sabbath interpretes alicubi Dominum virtutum,
alicubi Regem, alicubi Omnipotentem interpretata sunt. Interpreters have
rendered the name of Sabbath, sometime by the Lord of Hosts, sometime by the
name of King, sometime by the name of Almighty. But the place is manifestly
vicious. For Sabbath no where signifies a King: nor have Interpreters any
where so rendered it. To correct that error, Drusius for Regem reads
exercituum; and he proves his correction out of Eucherius, whose words are
Sabbath, exercituum, sieve virtutum, ant vt aliqui volunt, omnipotens. Sabbath
is for signification as you would say, of armies; or of hosts, or omnipotent.

Sabbath is rendered Omnipotent, or Almighty, by the Septuagint, as in other
places, so in this text of mine, wherein for Elohe hatzebaoth, the God of
Sabbath, they have (...), God Almighty. Whence is that rule of Saint Hierome to
Damasus, Epist. 142. We are to know, that wheresoever the Seventy Interpreters
have expressed Dominum virtutum, and Dominum omnipotentem, the Lord of Hosts,
and the Lord Almighty, there in the Hebrew it is Dominus Sabbath, which is by
Aquila's interpretation, Dominus militiarum, the Lord of Hosts. The Lord of
Hosts, by Aquila's interpretation, is God the Almighty by the interpretation of
the Septuagint.

Well. Elohe hatzebaoth, the God of Sabbath; Be he with the Greeks, (...), or
(...), or (...), or (...); or be he with the Latins, Dominus, or Deus
virtutum, or Militiarum, or Exercituum; all will be well expressed in our
language with one title, The Lord, or God of Hosts.

But what are these Hosts whereof God is the Lord? There is (...), an host of
Heaven, Act. 7.42. And what that is, Saint Hierome expounds to the noble Lady
Algasia, Epist. 151. quaest. 10. The Host of Heaven, is not only the Sun and
Moon, and glistring Stars, but also the whole multitude of Angels, and their
armies: called in Hebrew Sabbath, which is in Latin Virtutum or Exercituum.
Hispalensis for this host of Heaven, does reckon up in the place above
alleged, Angels, Archangels, Principalities and Powers, and all the Orders of
the armies celestial, of whom God is the Lord. For they are all under him, and
subject to his sovereignty.

It is true what those Ancients have said of the Host of Heaven. True it is
that the Angels are of this army. Micaiah tells King Ahab so, 1 King. 22.19. I
saw the Lord sitting on his Throne, and all the Host of Heaven standing by him,
on his right hand, and on his left. There the Host of Heaven are the Angels,
who attend the Lord, to put in execution whatsoever he shall command. At the
birth of Jesus Christ our Savior the Angel that appeared unto the shepherds,
had with him a multitude of the Heavenly Host, Luke 2.13. and that multitude
was of Angels: and they were (by likelihood) created in the first day with the
Heavens, because those sons of God did shout for joy, when God laid and
fastened the foundations of the earth, Job 38.7. These the sons of God, the
Angels, Bartas 1 day, 1. Week.
sweetly described by the Nightingale of France to be, The sacred Tutors of the
Saints; the Guard
Of Gods elect, the Pursuiuants prepared
To execute the counsels of the Highest:
The Heavenly courtiers, to their King the nighest,
Gods glorious Heralds, Heavens swift Harbengers,
Twixt Heaven and earth the true Interpreters;
these, the Sons of God, the Angels, are of the glorious Host of Heaven.

So are the Stars, the Sun, the Moon, the goodly furniture of the visible
Heavens; they are all of the Heavenly host. So shall you find them called,
Deuteronomy. 4.19. The Sun, the Moon, and the Stars, even all the Host of Heaven.
Of this host of Heaven it is prophesied, Esai. 34.4. All the Host of Heaven
shall be dissolved, and the Heavens shall be rolled together as a scroll, and
all their host shall fall down, as the leafe-falleth off from the Vine, and as
a falling fig from the fig tree. As for the Stars, they in their courses
fought against Sisera, Judge. 5.20. The Sun and the Moon stood still; the
Sun upon Gibeon the Moon in the valley of Ajalon, till the people of Israel
had avenged themselves upon their enemies, the Amorites, Ios. 10.12. The Sun,
the Moon, the Stars, all the twinkling spangles of the firmament, you see,
are of Gods host.

Nor is G^ds host only of Celestial creatures, but also of all other creatures
in the world. In the second Chapter of Genesis v. 1. where it is said, the
heavens and the earth were finished, and all the host of them, by all the have
of them, we are to understand all creatures in the Earth and Heavens, which
stand as an army servants to the Lord, Psalm. 119.91. Esaias 45.12.
and are by him comm^nded. That all things are Gods servants is auowed, Psalm.
119.91. The Heaven and Earth continue to this day according to the ordinances
of the Lord, for they are all his servants. Heaven and earth and all things
therein contained Continue] safe, sound, and sure, even to this day] wherein we
live, and so shall do to the worlds end, by the ordinance and appointment of
God, for all are his servants; all creatures yield obedience to him, as
servants to their masters. They are all by him commanded. For thus says the
Lord, Esai. 45.12. I have made the earth, and created man upon it: I, even my
hands have stretched out the Heavens, and all their host have I commanded. The
innumerable Hosts of creatures both in Heaven and Earth are all by God
commanded.

Now from this which has hitherto been delivered, the reason is plain, why
this title of God Elobe hatzebaoth, the God of Sabbath, or the God of Hosts, is
by our Prophet added to the two former appellations, Adonai Iehouih, the Lord
God. It is, the more lively to set forth his rule, dominion, and sovereignty
over all. It shows that as an army or an Host of soldiers obeys their.
Emperor or commander; so all things, all creatures, celestial, terrestrial,
and infernal, are of Gods host, and do yield unto him, as to their Emperor
and commander, all obedience. They all stand ready in martial order and
battell-ray, pressed to do whatsoever God wills: and therefore is the Lord
God, the G^d of Sabbath, or the God of Hosts.

From this consideration, that our Lord God is the God of Hosts, we are taught
the fear of so great a Majesty. For who is he, that will not fear him, by
whom he shall find himself to be beset and compassed about with very many and
potent armies; above, beneath, before, behind, on the one hand, and on the
other, that there can be no evasion, no escaping from him? Our God, is the God
of Hosts. Man, sinful man, how shall he consist, if God once arm his hosts
against him? The fear of God will be his surest refuge. Fear him, and all his
Hosts shall be on your side, and fight for you. Fear him, and both floods and
rocks shall fear you: all winds shall blow you happiness: ship wracks shall
avoid the place where your foot treads; and as to the apples of Gods own
eyes, so shall all his creatures yield to you reverence: they shall not dare to
approach the channel where your way lies. Hills shall fall down, and
mountains shall be cast into the sea: but who so fears the Lord he shall
never miscary. This fear of the Lord will both land your ships in an happy
haven, and after your travels upon the earth, will harbor your souls in his
everlasting Kingdom.

And thus much be spoken of the first thing observed in this Mandate, even the
Giver thereof, the Lord God, the God of Hosts. I proceed to the rest.

The next is, who they are to whom this Manda te is given, and they are
Sacerdotes and Prophetae, Priests and Prophets. For to them is this passage by
an Apostrophe directed. To them. It appears by the manner of giving the
Mandate; it is given in two verbs Imperative, Audite and Contestamini, Hear
ye, and testify: and it further appears by the specification of the
parties, concerning whom the Mandate is: they are of the house of Jacob. The
house of Jacob, is the Kingdom of the ten Tribes, or the Kingdom of Israel.
Understand then by the house of Jacob, the people of Israel; to whom Priests
and Prophets were ordinary messengers from the Lord. And thus have I couched
together three particulars of the Mandate.

1. To whom it is given: to Priests and Prophets. 2. The manner how it is
given, Audite and contestamini, Hear and testify. 3. The place, which, or the
parties, whom it concerns, the house of Jacob. Hear and testify in the
house of Jacob.
Saint Hierome and Lyra do take this Mandate to be of a larger extent, than to
Priests and Prophets. They will have it to be given unto all: to all people: as
if all people were here commanded to hear what the God of Hosts says,
concerning the subversion of the Kingdom of the ten Tribes, and thereof to
bear witness to the house of Jacob, that they hearing, might be converted
from their evil ways.

Eman. Sa. Christ. a Castro.
But Remigius, Albertus, Hugo, Dionysius, Vatablus, Montanus, and others, do
affirm more truly, that Priests and Prophets are here called upon, to hear
from the mouth of the God of Hosts, the destruction that is eminent and ready
to fall upon the house of Jacob, and thereof to bear witness unto them, vt
credant and resipiscant, that they may believe and repent them of their sins,
and so be delivered. Valde enim proficuus est concionator, qui dicit, quae
audiit ex ore Domini: for surely he his a very profitable Preacher, who
speaks only that which he has heard from the mouth of the Lord. Wherefore to
Priests and Prophets be it said; Audite and contestamini; Hear and testify.
First hear, and then testify. Whence the observation is, The Minister of the
Gospel is to hear what God speaks before he presume to deliver his message
to the people.

He is first to hear, and then to testify what he hears. Nemini licet
prophetare, nisi quae prius a Domino audierit, says one: Mercer.
It is not lawful for a man to prophecy, I say, it is not lawful for a man
to preach, but such things as he has heard of the Lord.

But does the Lord now adays speak that he may be heard of his Ministers?
Yes. And I untie the knot by a distinction.

There is a twofold hearing of God when he speaks, or a twofold hearing of
the word of God, Auditus externus and internus, an outward, and an inward
hearing. These two are sometimes severed, and sometimes they are joined
together. For some there are that do hear only outwardly, but within they
are deaf. Of those it may be said, as it is of the Idols of the Heathen, Psalm.
115.6. They have ears but they hear not. They hear but understand not what
they hear, These are they that receive the seed by the ways side, Matthew.
13.19.

Others there are that hear not with the outward ear: all their hearing is
within; it is in the heart; there they hear God speaking to them by the
inspiration of the holy Spirit. Such was the hearing of the Prophets of old.

Besides these, some there are that hear both outwardly and inwardly, with the
ear and with the heart. Such a hearing is peculiar to the faithful: of whom I
understand that, Romans 10.17. Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word
of God. Faith comes by hearing; that is, faith is bred in the hearts of the
elect by the external hearing of the Word, the holy Spirit working in them.
The Preachers sound unto their ears the doctrine of the Word. The ears convey
it to the mind: but that is blind to conceive divine matters. Wherefore comes
Gods holy Spirit, who through the doctrine received in at the ear,
illuminateth the understanding, opens the heart, and inclines the will, to
conceive what the Preacher has delivered, to give assent unto it, and to
delight therein. Thus comes faith by hearing, and hearing by the word of God.
Whence we may gather this definition of Faith: Faith is a true persuasion of
the mercies of God merited by our Lord Jesus Christ: and we attain unto it, by
the Spirit of God, giving us this true persuasion through the doctrine of the
Gospel.

Now the hearing, whereby the Minister of the Gospel hears the word of God,
or God speaking to him, is a mixed kind of hearing: it is partly inward, by the
secret operation of the blessed Spirit; and partly outward, by the revealed
word of God, expressed in the Sacred Scriptures.

Exodus 33.11. Numb. 12.8.
For God in the Scripture speaks unto us, as it were face to face, or mouth to
mouth, as plainly as he spoke out of the cloud, Matthew. 17.5. when that voice
was uttered; This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; hear ye
him. And surely, if God were now to give his voice from Heaven, he would
speak no otherwise than he speaks in the Scriptures. And therefore are we
commanded, Ioh. 5.39. to search the Scriptures. (...), search the Scriptures,
he says not (...), read the Scriptures, but (...), search them. The truth and
sense of the Scripture is profound and deep; it is as gold, that lies, not
upon the face and outside of the Earth, but in the veins thereof: it is as
the marrow, the pith, the heart of a tree, that is not in the bark, but is
covered with the bark. Off must the bark, if we will have the pith: and we
must dig deep in the ground, if we will have any gold: so must our search be
with diligence, beyond the bark and outside of the letter, if we will partake
of the treasure that is hidden under it, and hear God speaking unto us.

Christ confuting the Sadduces for the point of the Resurrection, Matthew. 22.29.
says unto them, (...): You err, not knowing the Scriptures; implying, that,
if they had been diligent in the search of them, God would therein have spoken
to them, and directed them in that truth.

Saint Peter Ep. 2. Chap. 1.19. commending the faithful of his time, for their
diligence in the Scriptures, says unto them, we have a most sure word, (...),
a prophetical word, whereunto you do well that you take heed, as unto a
light, that shines in a dark place; intimating, that, that same (...), that
same prophetical word, or word of prophecy, or word uttered by the Prophets,
is nothing else but the word of God, conveyed unto us by ministry of his
Prophets.

That so it is, we are assured by the Protestation that God himself makes,
Hos. 12.10. I, that am the Lord thy God, I have spoken by the Prophets, and I
have multiplied visions, and used similitudes, by hand or by the ministry of
the Prophets. The like phrase is used by Haggai, Chap. 1.1. to show that his
prophecy was the very word of God: In the second year of the reign of King
Darius came the Word of the Lord by the hand, or by the ministry of Haggai the
Prophet unto Zerubbabel. Haggai was but a conduit to convey the Word; the Word
was the Lords. This is that we read, Hebr. 1.1. that God at sundry times and
in diverse manners spoke in time past unto the Fathers by the Prophets.

Hence appears the harmony, consent, and agreement of all the Prophets even
from the first unto the last. Adam, Seth, Enoch, Noe, Abraham, Moses, David,
Esaias, and the rest, not one of them spoke one word of a natural man in all
their ministry; but only the words of him that sent them: they spoke not of
themselves; it was God that spoke in them. Whenever was the time, whosoever
was the man, wheresoever was the place, whatsoever was the people, the words
were Gods. God spoke by the mouth of his holy Prophets.

And for this cause when we preach unto you, we say not, you are to believe us
in what we say, quia nos dicimus, because we say it, but quia dicit Dominus,
because the Lord says it. And if it be demanded, whence it may be known that
our sayings are the Lords sayings, we answer it is known ex Scripturis, by
this or that place of Scripture. To the Scriptures we are tied, as the Levites
were to the Law, Deuteronomy. 17.11. From the Law they might not decline either to the
right hand or to the left; nor may we from the Scriptures. They were to teach
according to the Law; and we according to the Scriptures. The voice of the Law
was their rule, the voice of the Scriptures must be ours.

The voice of the Scriptures must be our rule. But says the Romanizing Papist,
the Scripture has no voice at all, but is res muta, Sleid. Com. l. 23.
a dumb thing. The Bishop of Poitiers, in the infamous conuenticle of Trent,
was of this mind, Scripturam esse rem inanimem atque mutam, that the Scripture
is a dead and a dumb thing, Controu. 3. de Eccles.
as are all other Politic Laws. Albertus Pighius before that time had
discovered his opinion of the point: Esse Scripturas mutos iudices, that the
Scriptures are dumb judges: and therefore unfit to have matters of
controversy put over to their judgment. Petrus a Soto says as much in
effect, Schol. de Euchar. and Defens. 3.
calling the Scripture, Literam mutam, non respondentem, a dumb letter that
gives no answer. This is but one of the many blasphemies which Papists have
uttered to the disgrace of holy Scripture: against whom to the honor thereof,
we maintain this assertion,

Scripturam non esse mutam, ac vocis expertem; the Scripture is not dumb and
speechless, but has a voice, a clear voice, easy to be heard, except we be
deaf.

For the confirmation of this our assertion, I produce that of Saint Paul, Romans
3.19. Whatsoever things the Scripture says, it says to them that are under
the Law: the Greek word is (...), it speaks to them that are under the Law.
It speaks, therefore it is not dumb.

Moses ascribes to the Law a mouth, Deuteronomy. 17.11. and Pagnines translation
there, is ex ore Legis: the Priests were to teach according to the mouth of the
Law. And why, I pray you, has the Law a mouth, if it cannot speak?

If exhortations of holy writ do speak, why may not precepts, prohibitions,
expostulations, and other passages speak as well? There is an exhortation that
speaks unto you as children, Hebr. 12.5. (...), it speaks, and thus it
speaks: My son, despise not thou the chastning of the Lord, nor faint when
thou art rebuked of him.

The Scripture every where speaks: (...), a phrase often iterated in the New
Testament, is a sure evidence that the Scripture is not dumb. (...), Romans 4.3.
What says the Scripture? Abraham believed God; and it was counted unto him for
righteousness. That Scripture is Genesis 15 6. and therefore the Scripture in
Genesis speaks, (...), Romans 9.17. The Scripture says unto Pharaoh. What?
Even for this same purpose have I raised thee up, that I might show my power in
thee: that Scripture is Exodus 9.16. and therefore the Scripture in Exodus
speaks.

(...), Romans 10.11. The Scripture says; whosoever believes in him, in Jesus
Christ, shall not be ashamed: that Scripture is Esaias 28.16. and therefore the
Scripture in Esaias speaks.

(...), says the Scripture, from this phrase so often reiterated in the New
Covenant, I may conclude for the whole Scripture, that it has a voice and
speaks: and therefore that it is neither dead nor dumb, as the above
alleged Popish Authors have imagined.

It has a voice and speaks. This voice is the voice of God. For God in the
Scriptures speaks with us familiarly, as a friend speaks with a friend.
Quasi amicus familiaris, sine fuco ad cor loquitur indoctorum atque doctorum,
Augustine to Volusian Epist. 3. God in Scriptures daily speaks to us; and he
speaks plainly to the heart, as well of the unlearned, as of the learned, to
the heart of every one of us. Now as God in the Scriptures speaks to us, so
we cannot but acknowledge that he speaks, unless we be without his holy
Spirit. Sic enim loquitur nobiscum, vt nos eius sermonem intelligamus, Ambrose
to Irenaeus Epist. 5. So God speaks with us, that we may understand his
speech. And this that, which above I undertook to prove, that God now adays
speaks, that he may be heard of his Ministers. And since he so speaks, my
doctrine will thereupon follow: The Minister of the Gospel is to hear what
God speaks, before he presume to deliver his message to the people.

He is to hear what God speaks, before he make his contestation to the house
of Jacob. It is the order prescribed in my text: Hear first, then testify,
Hear and testify in the house of Jacob.

The use of the point now delivered is twofold: one concerns the Preachers
of the Gospel; the other the Hearers.

The Preachers are to hear what God speaks, and then to testify and bear
witness thereof to the house of Jacob, to the people of God. They must
remember they are (...), 2 Cor. 5.20. Ambassadors of God in Christ's stead: and
that to them is committed the ministry of reconciliation: and therefore they
may not broach or publish any v^in imaginations of their own, but those things
only which God g ueth them in charge. They must hear what God says, and that
alone must be their message.

Again, they must remember they are (...), Ioh. 15.27. and Act. 1.8. they are
witnesses for Christ. They are to bear witness to the truth of Christ's
person; to his threefold office, his Priestly, Princely, and Prophetical
office, and to the benefits that do flow from thence for the edification of
the Church. All this they are to hear from the mouth of God speaking in his
holy Word, and thereof to make their contestation in the house of Jacob, to
bear witness thereof to Gods people, not by their preaching only, but if need
be, by their dying too.

The other use is for hearers. For if the Preacher be first to hear what God
speaks, and then to testify the truth thereof to the house of Jacob, the
people of God; then are the people of God, all the house of Jacob, to give
attentive care to the Preachers message.

Hearers in hearing are to know that they are to deal with God, and are to
receive the Word delivered by the Minister, not as the Ministers word, but as
the Word of God. Such Hearers were those Thessalonians commended by S. Paul.
Epist. 1. Chap. 2.13. For this cause, says he, thank we God without ceasing,
because when ye received the word of God, which ye heard of us, ye received it
not as the word of men, but as it is in truth, the word of God, which
effectually works also in you that believe. The example is well worthy our
imitation.

Beloved, if an earthly Prince speak or send a message to us, we give all show
of reverence, and hear him with diligence. This Word whereof we now entreat,
is not of flesh and blood; it proceeds not from Kings or Emperors, or
Parliament, or from Councels of men, but from God the Father, and from our Lord
Jesus Christ. When this Word is read, Princes and Emperors stand up, and lay
down their sword, and uncover their head, and bow their body in token of
reverence, because they know it to be the word of God, which God himself has
uttered, that it should be as the Deuteronomy. 32.2.
dew of Heaven to moisten our dry souls, as a Ioh. 4.14.
Well of water springing up to everlasting life, as a 2 Cor. 2.16.
savor of life unto life, and the very Romans 1.16.
power of God unto salvation to every one that believes. Without this Word we
are undone, we perish: we receive no comfort, we see not the light; we grow not
in faith, we abide not in the Church of God.

Wherefore, suffer ye a word of exhortation. It shall be in S. Peter's words, 1
Epist. 2.2. As newborn babes desire ye the sincere milk of the Word, that
ye may grow thereby. Be ye so affected to the word of God, as newborn
infants are to their mothers milk. You know well how that is: A little infant
even by the instinct of nature, almost as soon as it is borne, seeks that
nourishment; it is not long well without it; when nothing else will, that will
still it. So, even so be ye affected; long ye after the word of God, as your
spiritual nourishment, rejoice in it, place your happiness in the use of it;
let it be your chiefest comfort.

This indeed has been evermore the right disposition of Gods holy ones. O,
how great was the felicity that David felt in this word of God? In one Psalm,
Psalm. 119. He prefers it before profit, before pleasure, before glory.

Before profit, V. 127. I love thy Commandments above gold, yea, above fine
gold. Before pleasure, verse. 103. How sweet are thy words unto my taste? yea
sweeter than honey unto my mouth. Before glory, verse. 57. Thou art my portion, O
Lord, I have determined to keep thy words, and verse. 111. Thy testimonies have
I taken as an heritage for ever, for they are the rejoicing of my heart. Now
because in a spoil all those things do meet together, Profit in the treasure,
Pleasure in the overthrow, and Glory in the conquest or triumph, he adds
verse. 162. I rejoice at thy Word, as one that finds great spoil. Thus was
holy David determined and resolved to content himself with the word of God in
stead of all profit, pleasure and glory. For his profit, was his support in
trouble and adversity; his pleasure, was the peace of a good conscience; his
glory, was to be in the favor of God. All which is wrought by the precious and
invaluable word of God.

This word of God was unto Jeremy, Chap. 15.16. the joy and rejoicing of his
heart. And Ezechiels roll, the symbol of this word, was in his mouth as honey
for sweetness, Chap. 3.3. And John's little book, which he received from the
Angel, the badge of this word, was in his mouth sweet as honey, Reu. 10.10.

When Philip was gone down to the City of Samaria, and had preached Christ
unto them, the text says, there was great joy in that city, Act. 8.8. When the
same Philip had taught the mystery of Christ to the Eunuch, the Eunuch went on
his way rejoicing, in the same Chapter, verse. 39. The Angel relating to the
shepherds the Nativity of Christ, said unto them, Fear not, for behold I bring
unto you good tidings of great joy, that shall be to all people, Luke 2.10.

Good tidings of great joy! Happy shepherds to hear so good tidings from an
Angel! Princes would have been glad to have heard it: but they heard it not.
Yet to Princes as well as to others this good tidings of great joy belongs.
Good tidings of great joy! Great joy it is, first in respect of the matter
thereof, which is very great; even our reconciliation with God. Secondly, it is
great joy for the diuturnity and stability thereof; it abides and continues
constant for ever. Thirdly, it is great joy for the universality of it: it
reaches unto all; generibus singulorum, to all kinds of people, though not
singulis generum, to all particulars of all kinds, but only to such as shall
receive it by a true faith. Last of all, it is great joy, quia spirituale,
because it is spiritual, and belongs to the salvation of the whole man, body
and soul. And the good tidings of this great joy is derived unto us in these
our days through the ministry of the word of God.

Wherefore, dearly beloved, let me again put you in mind of your Christian
duty concerning this word of God, that as newborn infants ye desire the
sincere milk thereof to grow thereby. Long ye after it; it is your spiritual
nourishment: rejoice in it; place your happiness in the use of it: Let it be
your chiefest comfort.

Whenever you shall hear this word of God read, or preached, remember whose
Word it is you hear: and think ye thus every man with himself: Surely this
is the word of my gracious God. My God opens his mouth from Heaven above and
speaks to me, that he might save me. He speaks to me to keep me from
error; to comfort me in the troubles and adversities of this life, and to
guide me to the life eternal.

If you stand thus affected to the word of God; if you desire the sincere milk
thereof for your spiritual food, as the little infant does the mothers milk
for its bodily food: if you find your selves truly to love it, carefully to
desire to understand it, and to take comfort in the exercises of it; thank God
for it; it is a good sign; and pray God to increase it.

But if this word of God be a burden to thee; if like a potion it go down
against thy stomach, if thou carest not how little thou be acquainted with it;
if thou esteemest not the exercises of it; take heed, bewail thine estate; it
is a fearful token; pray God, if thou love thine own soul, to remove such
thy dullness from thee.

And let this suffice to have been delivered upon my second observation: which
was, The Minister of the Gospel is to hear what God speaks, before he
presume to deliver his message to the people.

It was grounded upon those words of the Mandate, Audite and contestamini.
Hear and testify. First hear what God speaks, and then make your
contestation, testify and bear witness of that you have heard. Cry aloud,
spare not, Esaias 58.1.
lift up your voices like trumpets: show unto the house of Jacob the calamities
which I have resolved to bring upon them: Hear ye, and testify in the house
of Jacob. Hereupon I ground my third observation: it is this: God evermore
uses to denounce grievous calamities, before they come to pass.

He fore-sheweth them before hand. The universal deluge was a very grievous
calamity. God foreshewed it unto Noah, the Preacher of righteousness, long
before he brought in the Flood, Genesis 6.13.

The cry of Sodom and Gomorrah was great, their sin was very grievous, and
therefore was God resolved to destroy them: yet would he not do it, till he
had told Abraham and Lot thereof: the one, Genesis 18.17. the other, Genesis 19.13.

The seven years of famine which were to consume the land of Egypt, God
foretold to Joseph, seven years before they came, Genesis 41.25.

A man of God is sent to Eli, to foretell him of the evil that should befall
his house, 1 Samuel 2.27. The Prophet Jeremy is sent to the Jews to foretell
them of the seventy years of their captivity in Babylon, Ier. 25.12. And here
in my text, Priests and Prophets are called upon, to foretell to the house of
Jacob the miseries that were ready to fall upon them. Thus stands the doctrine
firm; God evermore uses to advertise us of miseries, before they do befall
us.

Our Prophet expressly and confidently avouches it, verse. 7. of this Chapter.
Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but he reuealeth his secret to his
servants, the Prophets.

In my exposition of those words, I gave of the point in hand a larger
prosecution, than the remainder of this hour will afford. As now, so then I
proved from the evidence of the word, that God never brings any grievous
calamity upon any people or nation, or private person, but he does evermore
first forewarne the same and foretells it.

And hereof I gave two reasons: one in respect of the godly; the other, in
respect of the wicked.

For the Godly. God is unwilling at any time to take them at unawares. He
loves them: he would not have any of them perish, but would they should all
repent, and so prevent his judgments. He is prone to do good, but slow to
punish; and therefore praedicit flagella, vt peccantes resipiscant; He
fore-sheweth his judgments, to draw us to the amendment of our lives.

Now for the wicked. He fore-warneth them also of his future judgments,
Rangol. 1 King. ^.27.
ne dicere queant, se illa euentura non audiuisse, that they may not be able to
say for themselves, they had no fore-warning. So are they left without excuse;
their mouths are stopped, and Gods justice is cleared.

Wherefore, beloved, let us acknowledge the great mercy, and wonderful
patience of our good and gracious God, in that he vouchsafes so to deal with
us, to retire us from sin. He needs not, nor is he bound to deal so kindly
with us. For it is our part upon our own peril to take heed of his judgments
that they overtake us not. Yet so good is the Lord, so loving, so merciful, so
patient, so desirous is he, we should escape the misery, which we have
deserved, that he sends unto us his letters of love, the holy Scriptures, by
his Ministers, to fore-warne us of the evil day.

A sly and subtle adversary, would steal upon us when we should least think
of him, and take us at any advantage: but our loving God seeks not for
advantages against us. He rather provides us means for our safety. The
means are the letters of his love, as even now I called them, the sacred
Scriptures. Them he conueyeth to us by his servants, his Ministers, by whom he
inuites us to good, and deters us from evil: propounds rewards for well
doing, and punishments for ill; threatens unto us the torments of Hell, if we
continue in sin, and so bridleth our wantonness; promises the joys of
Heaven if we turn unto him by repentance, and so spurs on our slothfulness.
So gracious a God fore-warneth ever before he strikes.

And now most gracious and loving Father, we most humbly beseech thee, not only
to fore-warne us, before thou strike; but also to give us grace to take heed by
thy warnings that thou strike us not. So will we arise, run, and open unto
thee: arise by faith from the sepulcher of sin; run with hope, to the gates
of thy mercies; and open with love our broken and contrite hearts, that thou
may come in and dwell with us. Even so be it most merciful Father, for thy
sweet Son our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

THE Sixteenth Lecture.
AMOS 3.14, 15. That in the day, that I shall visit the transgressions of
Israel upon him, I will also visit the Altars of Bethel, and the horns of the
Altar shall be cut off and fall to the ground.

And I will smite the winter house with the summer house; and the houses of
iuory shall perish, and the great houses shall have an end, says the Lord.


THis passage of holy Writ is a Prosopopaeia. The Almighty is here brought in,
calling upon his Priests and Prophets to give care unto him, and to bear
witness of the calamities which he was resolved to lay upon the house of
Jacob. His resolution was, when he should punish the Israelites for their evil
deeds, then to visit their Temple and stateliest buildings with ruin and
desolation.

The words I heretofore divided into two general parts* One was, A mandate for
a Testification.
The other, The matter to be testified.


That was verse. 13. this verse. 14. and 15.

For the first these particulars have been observed; 1 Who it is that gives
the Mandate. Even the Lord; the Lord God, the God of hosts. 2 To whom he gives
it: Sacerdotibus and Prophetis; to his Priests and Prophets. For to them is
this passage by an Apostrophe directed. 3 How he gives it: Audite, and
contestamini, Hear and testify. 4 The place where this testification was to
be made, in domo Jacob, in the house of Jacob. Hear and testify in the house
of Jacob, says the Lord God, the God of Hosts, verse. 13.


In the other part, which concerns the matter to be testified, we may
observe: 1 A resolution of God, to punish Israel for sin: There shall be a
day, wherein the Lord will visit the transgression of Israel upon him, verse.
14. 2 That this punishment so resolved upon by the Lord, shall reach unto their
holiest places, to their houses of religion; to their Altars in Bethel: the
horns of the Altar shall be cut off and fall to the ground, verse. 14. 3 That
this punishment shall extend to the chiefest places of their habitation; even
to the demolition and ruin of their dwelling houses: The winter house shall be
smitten, so shall the summer house: the houses of iuory shall perish, and the
great houses shall have an end, verse. 15. 4 The seal and assurance of all, in
the two last words of this Chapter, Neum Jehovah, says the Lord.


In the day that I shall visit the transgressions of Israel upon him, I will
also visit the Altars of Bethel, and the horns of the Altar shall be cut off
and fall to the ground.

And I will smite the winter house with the summer house; and the houses of
iuory shall perish, and the great houses shall have an end, says the Lord.

Such are the parts of this Scripture. Of the first general, which was the
Mandate for the testification, and of the particulars therein, I discoursed in
my last Sermon out of this place. Now I am to descend to the second general,
which is of the matter to be testified. The first branch therein is, of Gods
resolution to punish Israel for sin: and that is in the beginning of the
fourteenth verse.

In the day that I shall visit the transgressions of Israel upon him.] By the
words its plain, that a day should come, wherein God would punish Israel for
his transgressions. R. David. R. Abraham.
That day some ancient Rabbines refer to the earthquake, that was in the
days of Vzziah King of Judah, whereof we find mention made in the first
Chapter of this Prophecy, verse 1. and Zach. 14.5.

Some refer it to the time of King Iosiahs reign, when he brake down the
Altar that was at Bethel, and the high place there, 2 King. 23.15.

Others hereby do understand that day, wherein Samaria was captiuated by the
Assyrian King, Salmanassar, 2 King. 17.6.

Whenever that day fell out, it was the day of the Lords visitation, the day
wherein the Lord visited Israel for his iniquities.

This word, to visit, signifies a remembrance, providence, care and
performance of a thing spoken, be it good or evil: and it belongs unto God
to visit both ways, either for good or for evil, either in mercy or in
judgment.

It was for good that the Lord visited Sarah, Genesis 21.1. The Lord visited
Sarah, Genesis 17.19. and 18.10.
as he had said; and the Lord did unto Sarah, as he had spoken. For Sarah
conceived, and bare Abraham a son in his old age, at the set time, of which
God had spoken to him. This was a visitation for good; a visitation in mercy.

Such is that whereof dying Joseph tells his brethren, Genesis 50.24. I die: and
God visiting will visit you, and will make you go up out of this land, unto
the land which he swear to Abraham, to Isaak, and to Jacob. God visiting will
visit you. He means a visitation in mercy; God will surely visit you in
mercy. And so he did when they had been bond-slaues in Egypt four hundred
and thirty years. Exodus 12.41.
For at the end of those years, even the self same day that those years were
ended, it came to pass, that all the Hosts of the Lord, the Tribes of Israel,
went out from the land of Egypt. Out they went with an high hand in the sight
of all the Egyptians. And so God visiting visited his people Israel, Numb.
33.3.
according to his promise made by Moses, Exodus 3.16. This was a visitation for
good; a gracious and merciful visitation.

But gracious and merciful above all was the visitation of our Lord Jesus
Christ, when with a true and everlasting redemption he redeemed all true
Israelites from sin, and death, and Satan. It is the visitation for which
Zachary in his Canticle blesses God, Luke 1.68. Blessed be the Lord God of
Israel. And why blessed? for he has visited, and redeemed his people. He has
visited his people; visited in the better part; visited in mercy; in exceeding
great mercy.

Beloved, since Christ has visited us in our persons, Math. 25.40. Luke 16.1.
it is our parts to visit him in his members. We are all his Stewards; and the
good things he has lent us are not our own, but his: if the goods of the
Church, we may not appropriate them: if of the Commonwealth, we may not
enclose them. You know it is a vulgar saying: He is the best subject, that is
highest in the subsidy book. Let it pass for true. But I am sure he is the
best Christian that is most forward in Subsidiis, in helping of his brethren
with such good things as God has bestowed upon him.

Besides this visitation for good, and in mercy; there is also a visitation for
evil and in judgment. Thus to visit, is to visit in anger or displeasure. And
so by a Synecdoche of the Genus for Species, to visit is to punish. Thus is God
said to visit, when with some sudden and unlooked scourge or calamity, he
takes vengeance upon men for their sins, which for a long time he seemed to
take no notice of.

So God visited the iniquity of the fathers upon the children, Exodus 20.5. He
visits, not only by taking notice of, and apprehending children in their
fathers faults, but also by punishing them for the same; in as much as they are
given over to commit the transgressions of their fathers.

David in his devotions calls upon the Lord to visit the Heathen, Psalm. 59.5.
O Lord God of Hosts, the God of Israel, awake thou to visit the Heathen. Where,
to visit, is to visit for evil, to visit in judgment, in anger and
displeasure, it is to correct, it is to punish.

To such as depart from the Law of the Lord, and from that rule of
righteousness which it prescribes them to walk in, the Lord himself
threatens, that he will visit their transgression with the rod, and their
iniquity with stripes, Psalm. 89 32. And there to visit is taken in the worse
part, for, to visit in judgment, in anger or displeasure, for as much as it
brings a rod and stripes with it. It is to correct, it is to punish.

There is, Esaias 10.12. a commination against the King of Assyria, that same rod
of hypocrites, that his pride should be broken. It is thus delivered: I will
visit upon the fruit of the proud heart of the King of Ashur, and the glory of
his high looks. And there also to visit is in the worse part, for, to visit in
judgment, in ire, anger, or displeasure: It is to correct, it is to punish.

As in the now alleged places to visit signifies in the worse part, to visit
in judgment, in ire, anger, or displeasure, and by a consequent, to correct or
punish; so does it in my Text. And therefore for Visitabo, Iunius has
animaduertam. This same visiting is with him a punishing.

In the day that I shall visit] or punish. What? Prauaricationes Israel, says
the Vulgar Latin. The preuarications of Israel. The preuarications of Israel
are his swaruings from truth, reason, and honesty. Iunius translates them,
Defectiones, the reuoltings or slippings of Israel. Our English has the
transgressions of Israel, by which name sins are called, because they exceed
the bounds and marks which God by his Law has appointed unto us, Drusius.
Calvin. O^aller. Bre^ti^s.
for the moderating of our desires and affections. Some here have Scelera
Israel, the wickedness, lewdness, or naughtiness of Israel.

These general appellations do direct us to particular sins, to
covetousness, to pride, to cruelty, to unjust exactions, to robbing and
spoiling of the poor; these were the sins that reigned and raged in Israel;
in the Kingdom of the Ten tribes, or the Kingdom of Israel, called in the
precedent verse, The house of Jacob: and these were the sins, for which the
Lord was resolved to punish Israel; as it is also signified in the second verse
of this Chapter. There is a Visitabo as well as here: Visitabo super vos omnes
iniquitates vestras. I will visit upon you, or I will punish you, for all your
iniquities: Visitabo, I will do it; I will visit, I will punish. I, the Lord
God, the God of Hosts, will visit the transgressions of Israel upon him. Whence
arises this observation: Whatsoever visitation or punishment befalls any of
us in this life, it is laid upon us by the hand of God, by his good will and
pleasure.

The Visitabo in my Text does warrant this truth. A day there shall be, wherein
Visitabo, I shall visit the transgressions of Israel upon him. I shall do it.

When the world was grown so foul with sin, that it deserved to be washed
with a flood, God himself undertook the visitation, Genesis 6.7. I will destroy
man, whom I have created from the face of the earth. And verse. 17. Behold I,
even I, do bring a flood of waters upon the earth to destroy all flesh.

Concerning the sin of the people, that great and grievous sin, when they
made them Gods of gold, the Lord says unto Moses, Exodus 32.34. In the day when
I visit, then will I visit their sin upon them: When I see good to punish
them, I my self will punish them.

For the disobedient and despisers of the will of the Lord, the Lord has a
Visitabo too, Leuit. 26.16. Visitabo vos velociter; I will visit you quickly
with terrors, with consumptions, with burning agues, that shall consume the
eyes, and cause sorrow of heart, with the sword, with famine, and with
pestilence. Visitabo vos velociter, I will quickly visit you. I will do it.

Monstrous and grievous were the sins of Sodom and Gomorrah, that were to be
revenged by so fearful a judgment, as is a rain of brimstone and fire. But
how fell that rain upon them? The Text is, Genesis 19.24. The Lord rained upon
Sodom and upon Gomorrah, brimstone and fire from the Lord out of Heaven. The
Lord rained, says the Text. Then not man, not devil, not necromancy, not any
thing in nature was the cause that this befell those Cities; but the very power
and wrath of God, of a displeased God, at so great abomination as was there
committed, sent down that rain upon them. The Lord was he that gave that
rain.

Prodigious were the plagues wherewith the land of Egypt was visited. I look
into the Sacred story, and there I see above them, Exodus 9.23.
thunder, hail, lightning, tempests: one while Exodus 10.22.
no light at all, another while such fearful flashes as had more terror than
the darkness. I see under them, 7.20.
the waters changed into blood; the earth swarming with 8.6.
frogs and 10.13.
grasshoppers. I see about them 8.24.
swarms of flies, by which the land was corrupted. I see their 9.23.10.15.
fruits destroyed, their 9.6.
cattle dying, their 12.30.
children dead. Turning mine eyes unto themselves, I see them very loathsome
with 8.17.
lice; and deformed with 8.10.
scabs, boiles, and botches. Grievous indeed were these visitations, but who
was he that wrought them? It was the Lord. For so the Text runs, Exodus 7.5.
The Egyptians shall know that I am the Lord, when I stretch forth mine hand
upon Egypt.

Who was it but the Lord that smote Nabal, that he died? 1 Samuel 25.38. Ask of
Esaias, who it is that forms the light, and creates darkness; that makes
peace, and creates evil? he will tell you it is the Lord that does all these
things, Chap. 45.7. It is the Lord does all. Light and peace are the symbols of
prosperity; darkness and evil, of adversity; so the meaning of the place will
be, that the Lord is a doer, not only in the prosperity, but also in the
adversity, wherewith this life is seasoned.

Thus have you the confirmation of my observation, which was, that Whatsoever
visitation or punishment befalls any of us in this life, it is laid upon us
by the hand of God, by his good will and pleasure.

One reason hereof is; because nothing is done in this world, but the Lord is
the principal doer of it. Nothing is done without him: no, not in the carriage
of a lottery, which in man's judgment seems of all things to be the most
casual; yet therein does Gods hand appear. Solomon avouches it, Prou. 16.33.
The lot is cast into the lap, but the whole disposition thereof is of the Lord.
Let Lots be cast into the lap, some hat, or cap, or pot, or box, some secret
and close place, from whence the drawing of them forth may seem to be merely
accidental: yet it is nothing so. For God by his infinite and eternal
providence does both generally and particularly, wholly and altogether direct
and order them. Now if Gods hand be found in the disposing of Lots; shall it
not be found in the ordering of the visitations and punishments that are
incident to us in this life for our evil deeds?

Another reason hereof may be, because all power is of God and from him alone.
There is no creature in the world, devil, man, or other, that has power any
way to hurt or molest us, but from the Lord. All power is his. He alone makes
the earth to open her mouth, and Exodus 15.12. Numb. 16.32.
swallow up his adversaries. He alone Job 9.5.
remoueth mountains and ouerturneth them. He it is, that says to the North,
Esa. 43.6.
Give up; and to the South, Keep not back; and to the Deep, 44.27.
Be dry. He divides the 51.15.
roaring Sea, measures the Job 28.25.
winds and waters; Dan. 4.25.
rules in the kingdoms of men. Whatsoever he is pleased to do, Psalm. 135.6.
that does He in Heaven and in Earth: in the Seas, and all deep places. There
is no power, but from him. And therefore for this reason also it is true, that
Whatsoever visitation or punishment befalls us in this life, it is laid upon
us by the hand of God, by his good will and pleasure.

From the reasons of this observation, proceed we to see what profit we may
reap from hence, for the bettering and amendment of our sinful lives.

First, from hence we learn in all our troubles and calamities to look up to
God, as the chief and principal Author of them, from whom they come; and upon
our selves and our sins, the sole procurers of them, and for whose sake they
are sent. Eliphar among his aduertisements given unto Job, has this for one,
Misery comes not forth of the dust, neither does trouble spring out of the
ground, Job 5.6. Warning Job thereby to have an eye to God, as the Author of
his affliction.

Its very true, affliction comes not upon us at all adventures: it proceeds
not from the Earth, or the Air, or the Heaven: it is the hand of God that is
heavy upon us for our sins. Great is our folly, that we gaze about here and
there, wandering up and down in our own imaginations, and searching all the
corners of our wits to find out the causes of our calamities without us,
whereas indeed the true and right cause of them is within us. We are evermore
accusing either heat or cold, or drought or moisture, or the air, or the
ground, one thing or other to be the cause of our miseries, but we will not be
brought to acknowledge their true and proper cause, even the sin that
reigns in us. I deny not, but the Lord has secret causes, whereof we know
not, either the manifestation of his own works, or the trial of our faith;
yet the revealed and original cause of all our miseries, has his beginning
and springhead from within us; from our iniquities.

The Prophet Jeremy, Lament. 3.39. makes this enquiry: Wherefore should a
living man complain, a man for the punishment of his sin, wherefore should
he complain? Whereunto he fits this answer, man suffers for his sins:
implying thus much, that it is mere folly for a man to vex his soul, in
mis-iudging of his estate, and seeking bypath to wind himself out of
miseries; since miseries befall no man, but for his sins. Whereupon sweetly
Pelican, Non murmuret afflictus contra Dominum, Let not the man that is in
affliction murmr against the Lord, for the Lord does all things well. Sed si
quid patitur imputet peccatis suis, quae Deus impunita non sinit: But if he
suffer any thing, let him lay the blame thereof upon his sins, which God
leaves not unpunished.

Our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, having cured the man that had been
diseased eight and thirty years, and finding him in the Temple, advised him to
consider the cause of his so long and lamentable a visitation; saying unto him,
Behold, thou art made whole, sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee,
Ioh. 5.14. intimating, that his disease of so long continuance was laid upon
him for his sins. Out of doubt this diseased man thought himself happy, when
he was restored to health: yet lest he should rest therein, our Savior
tells him, he must change his heart, and sin no more, lest a worse thing
should befall him. Sciebat Dominus ei quem salvum fecerat, meritis peccatorum
illum etiam carnis accidisse languorem: Augustine de fide and operibus, cap.
20. The Lord knew, that that same infirmity of body upon the man, whom he had
healed, befell him for his sins sake.

I need not press other instances of holy Writ for the further illustration of
the point in hand, since my Text is plain for it. By my Text its plain, that
the visitation which the Lord was resolved to lay upon the house of Jacob, was
for the preuarications thereof; it was for their reuoltings, and
transgressions, and wickedness: it was for the sins of Israel. The sins of
Israel were the cause of Gods visitation upon them.

Wherefore, Beloved, let every visitation of God upon us, be unto us a Sermon
of repentance, to put us in remembrance of our sins, and to admonish us, not
to sow any more upon the furrows of unrighteousness, lest we reap a more
plentiful harvest of affliction, and whenever any visitation shall be upon
us, let us desire God to sanctify the cross unto us, that it may consume
sin in us, and provoke us to a more holy conversation. Thus have you your
first use.

Now in the second place, the consideration of this truth, that whatsoever
visitation or punishment befalls any of us in this life, it is laid upon us
by the hand of God, may teach us to have patience in our troubles, not to
repine or grudge when we are under the rod of affliction. Since it is the hand
of God that does visit us, we are to take it patiently, as a dutiful child
bears the chastisements of his loving father.

This was the practice of holy David, Psalm. 39.9. where he says, Obmutui and
non aperui os meum, quoniam tu fecisti; Lord I was dumb and opened not my
mouth, because thou did it: Quoniam tu fecisti, because thou did it: this
was the fountain, whence he drew his patience. To the reuilings of the wicked,
to their reproaches, to their malicious detractions, to their scoffings, to
their injurious speeches, Obmutuit, he answered not a word, but was as the man
that is dumb, as he that has no tongue, as he whose mouth is shut: he excused
not himself, he returned no evil language, but he held his peace and bore it
patiently. The fountain of this his patience was, Quoniam tu fecisti, because
thou did it. Lord, thou did it: But thou art a Father, I am thy son:
therefore what thou did, thou did it for my good; and therefore I hold my
peace.

Out of this fountain Job drew his patience. When he had lost his children,
and was deprived of all his goods, he murmured not, nor charged he God
foolishly. All he said was, Dominus abstulit, the Lord has taken away, and he
has done so by good right, Quia etiam dedit, for first he gave it, Job 1.21.
The ground of this his patience was, Domine tu fecisti; Lord, thou have done
it. Thou Lord have taken from me my children, and all my substance; and
therefore I hold my peace.

Out of this very Fountain Christ himself drew his patience; when commanding
Peter to put up his sword into the sheath, he asked him this question, Calicem,
quem dedit mihi Pater, Ioh. 18.11.
non bibam illum? The cup which my Father has given me, shall I not drink it?
Domine tu fecisti; my Father has tempered this cup for me, and I will drink
it. This cup is the cup of the Passion of Christ, the cup of his sufferings,
which God gave unto him, Vt Pater, non vt Iudex, says Rupertus. God gave this
cup unto him, as a Father, not as a Judge: and he gave it to him, Amore, non
ira; voluntate, non necessitate; gratia, non vindicta. It was of love, not of
wrath; it was voluntary, not of necessity; it was of grace, not for vengeance,
that this cup was given him. But how did he drink it? Here may we with
Cornelius Mussus, Bishop of Bitonto, in his Passion Sermon cry out; O infinitam
dulcis Jesus nostri patientiam! O the infinite patience of our sweet Jesus!
Dedit illis carnem suam, vt tractarent eam pro sua libidine; he committed unto
the Jews his flesh, to do with it at their pleasure. They insulted over him,
and he resisted not; they threatened him, and he answered not: they loaded him
with injuries, and he sustained them; they bound him fast, and he withstood
them not; they smote him, and he endured it; they flouted him, and he held his
peace; they railed against him, and he defended not himself; they cursed him,
and he prayed for them. O the infinite patience of our sweet Jesus, which he
drew from this fountain, Domine tu fecisti; Lord, thou have provided this cup
for me, and I refuse it not!

Domine tu fecisti; Lord thou have done it: It is the bottomless fountain of
patience, never to be exhausted or drawn dry. If thy wife, thy children, thy
kinsfolks, thy friends or others be taken from thee by the stroke of death; if
thou lose thy goods by water, by fire, by war, or otherwise, thou may
refresh thy languishing soul with the water of this fountain; Domine tu
fecisti; Lord thou have done it.

If thy self be visited with sickness, and so, that there is no soundness in
thy flesh, nor rest in thy bones; Psalm. 38.3.
yet if thou draw from this fountain, the sorrow and bitterness of thy
visitation will be assuaged. It must needs be a great comfort to every child
of God to meditate hereupon, that our sickness, yea that every pang and fit of
our sickness is from God; that the manner of it, the measure of it, the time
of it, and the matter of it is of God. And it may give us good assurance that
God will be merciful and gracious unto us, seeing he that strikes us is our
loving Father, and in the stroke cannot forget his former compassions, but will
make all things fall out to further our salvation. God is faithful; he lays
not upon us more strokes than we are able to bear, 1 Cor. 10.13.
but makes a way for our escape. Psalm. 41.3.
He strengthens us upon the bed of languishing, and makes all our bed in our
sickness. He puts our tears into his bottle. Psalm. 56.8. Cant. 2.6.
Are they not all in his book? His left hand is under our head, and his right
hand embraces us. Beloved Christians, we should comfort one another in these
things.

Thirdly, is it true, Beloved? Are all our visitations and punishments in this
life laid upon us by the hand of God? Here then may we take direction, whither
to make our recourse in the day of visitation. And whither may that be, but to
the same hand of God that visits? God smites, and no man heals; God makes
the wound, and no man restores. No man heals! no man restores! Therefore
put not thy trust in man; for there is no help in him: but put thy trust in
God; for as he kills, so he makes alive again; as he brings down to the
grave, so he raises up again. So sings Hannah, 1 Samuel 2.6. The Lord kills
and makes alive; he brings down to the grave, and brings up.

What then shall become of the Physician? May I not seek to him in time of
sickness? Seek not first to him, as Asa did, 2 Chronicles. 16.12. lest thou be
condemned, as Asa was, for seeking not to the Lord, but to the Physician. But
seek thou first unto the Lord. First, be thou reconciled to him, who is the
chief Physician of soul and body, and then take thy course. For my part I
have no hope, that the Physicians help shall profit me, and prosper with me,
until I be at peace with God, and have renewed my repentance from dead works
for my daily sins.

And let this suffice to have been spoken of the first branch of my second
general part, which was, the resolution of God to punish Israel for sin. Now
follows the second branch: and that is, that the punishment so resolved upon
by the Lord, shall reach to their holiest places, to their houses of religion;
in these words: I will also visit the Altars of Bethel, and the horns of the
Altar shall be cut off and fall to the ground.

Visitabo super Altaria Bethel] Here is a Visitabo like the former; a visiting
in the worse part, a visiting for evil, and in judgment. Visitabo, I will
visit upon the Altars of Bethel, that is with Petrus Lusitanus, Destruam illa,
vt meum sentiant furorem: I will destroy those Altars: they shall feel my
fury. The like phrase is that, Exodus 12.12. In cunctis Dijs Aegyptifaciam
judicia: Against all the Gods of Egypt will I do judgment; and that, Number.
33.4. Dominus in Diis eorum exercuerat vltionem; Upon the Gods of the
Aegytians, the Lord has executed vengeance. In both places the Gods of Egypt,
are the Idols of Egypt; and the Lords doing of judgments, or executing of
vengeance upon them, is all one with the Visitabo here. I will visit the Altars
of Bethel, that is, I will do judgments, or I will execute vengeance upon the
Altars of Bethel.

Bethel] Some Jews, as R. Kimhi, and R. Esaias are of opinion, that there were
two Towns of this name; the one belonging to the Tribe of Benjamin, as
appears Josh. 18.22. the other in the Tribe of Ephraim, as it is manifested,
Judges 1.22. This opinion of two Bethels, Cap. 16.2. and 18.13.
Andrew Masius in his Comment upon Ioshuah rejects as needless.

Bethel here is that, which in former time was called Luz, which name it had
from the abundance of Nuts or Almonds which grew there, Hieron. qu Heb. in Genesis
Tom. 3.
for Luz in Hebrew signifies a Nut or an Almond. Near to this City Jacob
slept, when he saw the vision of Angels ascending and descending upon the
ladder, from whence he called the name of that place Bethel, Genesis 28.19. and
Bethel is by interpretation the house of God.

This Bethel is not Jerusalem, nor is it the mountain of Moria, as some
Hebrews, and Lyranus, and Catetan do affirm: but as Abulensis, Adrichomius,
and others, it is a City distant from Jerusalem some eighteen miles, situate
in the Lot of the Tribe of Ephraim, near unto Sichem. Here in this City, King
Jeroboam, he that was the son of Nebat, set up a calfe of gold to be
worshipped by the revolted Tribes, 1 King. 12.26.
that they need not be at the pains to go up to Jerusalem to worship. Thus
the place, whereof faithful Jacob said, Surely this is no other, but Bethel,
the house of God, Genesis 28.17.
is by faithless Jeroboam turned into Beth-auen, the house of an idol, and is
named Beth-auen by the Prophet Hoseah, chap. 4.15. and in other places. Hos.
5.8. and 10.5.
Such is the Bethel, the visitation of whose Altars the Lord here undertakes:
Visitabo super Altaria Bethel, I will visit the Altars of Bethel.

The Altars!] What Altars? The words immediately following make mention but of
one Altar, and that whose horns should be cut off: and the sacred story, 1
King. 12.32. speaks but of one Altar in Bethel. How then is it that the
Altars of Bethel are here to be visited?

It may be, here is Enallage numeri, one number for another, which is in use
sometimes with the Latin; as when they say, Flumina Nili, or Montes Sion, the
rivers of Nilus, for the river Nilus, or the mountains of Sion, for Mount
Sion: Or rather in progress of time, other Altars were erected for other
Idols, when the Calfe of gold was worshipped but upon one. And this is the
conjecture of Drusius, because he finds, Hos. 8.11. that Ephraim had made
many Altars to sin: and Hos. 10.1. that Israel had increased Altars according
to the multitude of his fruit. And it is not unlikely, but that in course of
time, they had multiplied and increased their Altars: to which this visitabo
casts an eye; I will visit the Altars of Bethel. It follows: And the horns
of the Altar shall be cut off]

Cornua altaris maximi and principalis: so Lusitanus, the horns of the Altar;
of the greatest and most principal Altar. For of the rest it was said but now,
Visitabo super altaria Bethel, I will visit the Altars of Bethel.

The horns of the Altar shall be cut off] The Altar of burnt offering, Exodus
27.2. had four horns upon the four corners thereof. These horns were
Eleuationes quaedam, as Abulensis speaks in his fourth quest. upon Exodus 29.
they were pieces of wood ascending above the Altar, made like unto horns, of
the very wood of the Altar ouer-laid with brass, and were with the Priests
finger anointed with the blood of the sacrifice, to betoken Quatuor Euangeliis
velatam Christi passionem, Leuit. 4.7, 9.
as Cyrillus or rather Hesychius upon Leuiticus has observed; the four horns
of the Altar besprinkled with blood, betokened the passion of Christ covered in
the four Evangelists.

Salomons Altar, Ezech. 43.15. had likewise four horns. These Villalpandus
takes to be quatuor tanrorum cornua, four bulls horns, which rose upward
from the four corners of the Altar to the height of a cubit, as if they grew
from the head of a bull. These horns were not only for ornament, but they
also served to keep up the sacrifice from falling off.

Such were the horns of this Altar of Bethel, made in emulation of Salomons
Altar, as In Psalm. 78.27. 474 B. Salomonici altaris aemulabatur formam.
Lorinus affirms: and upon these is the sentence of the Lord here gone forth,
Amputabuntur, they shall be cut off and fall to the ground, utter desolation
shall betide them. Thorns and thistles shall grow upon them, as the Prophet
Hosea speaks, Chap. 10.8. A dissipation there shall be, both of Idol and
Idolater.

And now, O ye miserable and wretched Israelites, Dii, qui neque se, neque
altaria sua tueri possunt, Ribera.
quomodo vos tuebuntur? The gods which can neither defend themselves, nor their
Altars, how shall they defend you? The Lord will take your Idols from you, will
overthrow your Altars, the very places of your delight: yea the horns of your
Altars, speciefissima instrumenta voluptatum, the fairest and goodliest
spectacles, wherein you take pleasure, shall be cut off, and fall to the
ground. According to this prediction it fell out, either through the Earthquake
in the days of Vzziah King of Judah, Zach. 14.5. 2 King. 17.6.23.15.
or when Salmanasser King of Assyria carried Israel into captivity, or under
the reformation of Josiah, as already it has been touched.

Now from this commination of judgment against Bethel and the Altars there,
namely, that the Lord will visit the Altars of Bethel, and that the horns of
the Altar shall be cut off and fall to the ground, arises this doctrine:
Places of Idols, together with the Idolaters, shall be punished with desolation
and confusion: the places with desolation, the Idolaters with confusion.

Places of Idols shall be punished with desolation. Gilgal, once famous Gilgal,
ennobled by many accidents, which happened there, became afterward through the
Idolatry there committed, so infamous, and of such bad note, that the people of
Judah are forbidden to resort unto it, Hos. 4.15. But where is she now? Lies
she not under the ruins of desolation? And Bethel once famous too, for that
she was the house of God, by the like abuse became Beth-auen, the house of an
Idol. But where is she now? Doubtless she is measured with the line of
desolation, according to this prophecy.

As the places of Idols are punished with desolation: so are the Idolaters with
confusion.

Idolaters, whilst they flourish with prosperity, they flatter themselves in
their sins, and become hereby more obstinate in their superstitions,
imagining that they are priuileged from Gods judgments, and have the fruition
of all his blessings for their false worship sake: and if the hand of God hap
to lie heavy upon them, then do they double their devotions to their Idols,
that by their help they may be delivered. But when they find their hope
frustrate, and themselves forsaken of their Idols when most they need their
help, then overwhelmed with confusion, they bewail their former folly, that
they spent upon them so much unrewarded cost and bootlesse labor.

Of this confusion or shame, the portion of Idolaters, I thus read, Psalm.
97.7. Confundantur omnes, qui adorant sculptilia: Confounded be all they that
serve graven images, that boast themselves of Idols. And Esaias 42.17. They shall
be turned back, they shall be greatly ashamed, that trust in graven images,
Esaias 1.29.44.9.45.16. Ierem. 51.47. Hos. 4.19, etc.
and say to the moulten images, Ye are our gods. Other places I might produce
to warrant this confusion and shame of the Idolater, but the time forbids me.
Yet an example hereof you have in Baals Priests, 1 King. 18.29. who were
confounded with shame, when they were in the sight of the people abandoned of
his help, when they most needed, and implored it.

Thus is my doctrine confirmed. Will you now see how useful it is? Here then
see condemned all such, as do religiously worship for God, that which is not
God: such are Infidels, who worship devils, men, and other creatures, erecting
to their honor graven and carved images, pictures, and statues. From this
Idolatry we may not exempt the now-Church of Rome, for that she yields
religious worship to creatures, Angels, and men: and to men not such only, as
have been held for Saints in respect of their faith and holy life: but also
such as have been noted for their wicked conversation, as their Saint George,
Saint Francis, Saint Dominick, Ignatius Loiola, and the like: yea such as never
had any being in the world, as their Saint Hippolytus, Saint Christopher, Saint
Catharine, fictitious and counterfeited Saints: to such they have set up
pictures, images, and statues, and those forsooth must be worshipped, and that
with religious worship.

And do they not, think you, deserve it, since they are so wonderously decked
and adorned? Garlands and Coronets are set on their heads, precious pearls
hang about their necks, their fingers shine with rings beset with precious
stones; their bodies are clothed with garments stiff with gold. And are not
these worthy to be adored? If you should see the images of their men Saints,
you would believe they were some Princes of Persia, by their proud apparel:
and the idols of their women-saints you would take to be some nice and well
trimmed harlots, tempting their Paramours to wantonness.

The Churches and Chapels that are thus bedeckt and trimmed, are they not as
this Bethel with her golden calfe? Yes. And if there be no reformation, a time
will come, when the lot of Bethel shall be theirs, even to those Idoll-houses,
desolation, and confusion to the Idolaters.

Secondly, shall idolatrous places and persons be punished, they with
desolation, these with confusion? Let the consideration hereof inflame our
hearts to be more zealously thankful to the Lord, for that having freed us
from Heathenish and Antichristian darkness, from idolatry, and the service of
graven images, he has given us the clear light of his gracious Gospel,
through the illumination whereof we may be brought to the right knowledge of
the true worship of him, the only living God. For so, by his sole goodness
are we delivered from all fear of the punishment allotted to Bethel, and the
worshippers of the Idol there.

Thirdly, from this consideration we are to be admonished, that abhorring and
renouncing idols, and all manner of idolatrous superstition, which will leave
us without help and hope in our greatest extremities, we do cleave fast unto
the true Jehovah, performing unto him such faithful and sincere service as he
requires in his Word, without the mixture of humane inventions: so shall we in
the day of visitation be preserved from all evil.

But say, that the Lord for his glory and our trial will bring us to the
touchstone of adversity, and suffer us to taste of some calamity and misery,
yet will he give us such a comfortable feeling of his favor, and will so arm
us with power and patience to bear our troubles, that we shall not need to
fear confusion.

There is no fear of confusion or shame where true religion is. No: there is
none, True religion cleansed from all dregs of Idolatry, makes not ashamed. So
says the kingly Prophet, Psalm. 34.5. They shall look unto him, and run unto
him, and their faces shall not not be ashamed. They, the truly religious, the
humble and faithful, shall look unto the Lord, shall diligently and carefully
attend for aid and succor from him: they shall run unto him with haste in
their troubles, in assurance of finding ease; and their faces shall not be
ashamed. They shall not hang down their heads and countenances for shame, as
they were wont to do, but shall lift up their heads, shall look on high, and
shall go with confidence to the God of their salvation.

That promise of the Lord, Joel 2.26. My people shall never be ashamed,
repeated in the verse following, My people shall never be ashamed, is a promise
to the religious; for the religious only are his people. My people, says he,
shall never be ashamed. O what a marvelous benefit a man has by religion,
which he cannot have by any other thing in the world? There is nothing in all
our life, whereof we have not need to repent, except it be our religion, the
fear of God. Our words, our works, our gettings, our spendings, our wanderings
up and down, our negligence in our vocations, our sleeping, our eating, our
drinking out of measure; of all these we have need to repent. Our thoughts, our
toys, our trifles, our wantonness, our lust, our hatred, our wrath, our malice,
our many other enormities; of all these we may well be ashamed: but of true
religion and the fear of the Lord, we neither need to repent, nor to be
ashamed. If thou forsakest the world, and hate Idols, and beleeuest in the
Lord, and mournest for thy sins, and studiest the Scriptures, and hear the
Preachers, and obeyest the Gospel, and prayest, and watchest, and fastest, and
endurest many troubles, and art ready to die if need be; and all for love of
the Lord Jesus: thou need not to repent, or to be ashamed hereof. For happy
art thou. Thou have fought a good fight. Go on with courage; finish thy
course, keep the faith Henceforth there is laid up for thee a Crown of
righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous Judge, shall give thee in that
great day of his visitation: and not unto thee only, but to them also that
love his appearing: even to us all, holy Father, let that Crown be given for
thy sweet Son Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

THE Seventeenth Lecture
AMOS 3.15. And I will smite the winter house with the summer house, and the
houses of Iuory shall perish, and the great houses shall have an end, says the
Lord.


WHen God punishes the sins of a Nation, he uses such severity, that he
spa^eth not the very places, wherein the sins were acted. Hereof this
Scripture yields a demonstration. It presents unto us a resolution of God to
punish the sins of Israel. The places where they sinned, were either
religious or profane. Religious were the places of their public assembly for
the worship of their Gods. Profane places were all other of ordinary and
common use, as their edifices and houses of habitation of all sorts. Both
places, religious and profane, had their parts in the punishment here resolved
upon.

The resolution for the punishment is in the beginning of the fourteenth verse;
there it is intimated, that a day should come, wherein the Lord would visit the
transgressions of Israel upon him.

In this visitation or punishment their religious places, or houses of
religion, were to have a portion. It is plain by by the latter part of the
fourteenth verse, I will visit the altars of Beth-el: and the horns of the
Altar shall be cut off, and fall to the ground.

Nor were their religious places only to partake of this visitation; but other
places also, profane and civil, their places of ordinary and common vse^
their edifices and dwelling hou^^ Their doom is forespoken in the beginning of
the 15. verse. The winter house shall be smitten; so shall the summer house*
one houses of Iuory shall perish, and the great houses shave an end.

For the seal and assurance of all, the conclusion of this Chapter is Neum
Jehovah, says the Lord.

Of Gods resolution to punish the sins of Israel, together with the
visitation of their religious places, I entreated in my last Sermon. Now am I
to proceed with the punishment inted to their profane and civil places, to
their places of ordinary and common use, to their edifices and dwelling houses,
thus delivered, in this fifteenth verse, And.

I will smite the winter house with the summer house, and the houses of Iuory
shall perish, and the great houses shall have an end. For the easier handling
of these words, I am to speak of an action, and of the object thereof: of a
smiting, and of the thing to be smitten: The smiting is the Lords, the the
things to be smitten belong to the Israelites. Of both in their order. First
for the Action, for the smiting, which is Gods.

Persecution, I will smite. The actions of God and two sorts Immanent, or
Transcient. Immanent, are those, that remain within himself, as to
understand, to will to love. For always, and from all eternity God in himself
understands, wills, and loves. The Transient actions of God are such as
he, in ^^me produces without himself. So he created the world he ^^^leth it,
and works all in all: he justifies, he regnerateth, he punishes. And of
this rank in his action of smiting.

Persecution, I will smite. God in holy Scripture is said to smite, either
immediately of himself, without means; or mediatly, when he uses means; as
Angels, good or bad; or men, godly or wicked, or other creatures.

God immediately, of himself and without means, smote all the firstborn in
the Land of Egypt, from the firstborn of Pharaoh that sat on his throne,
unto the firstborn of the captive, that was in the dungeon, Exodus 12.29. God
of himself smote them all. And though he oft-times uses means, the ministry
of Angels, men, or other creatures for the smiting of transgressors, yet is
God justly said to smite them. For the axiom of the Schools is, Actio non
attribuitur instrumento proprie, sed principali agenti: Tho. 1.2. qu. 16. 1. c.
si.
the action is not properly attributed to the instrument, but to the principal
agent. The building of a house is not to be ascribed to the axe, but to the
Carpenter that uses the axe. Angels, men, and other creatures are to God but
as the axe is to the Carpenter, but as his instruments. Whenever therefore
through their ministry any evil shall betide us, we are to acknowledge God to
be the pricipall doer therereof. He it is that smites us.

2. King. 19.35
It is true, that an Angel in one night smote in the camp of the Assyrians an
hundred fourscore and five thousand, Esaias 37.36. The Angel smote them, that
is the letter; But it was Angelus Domini; it was the Angel of the Lord. The
Lord sent that Angel to cut off all the mighty men of valor, and the Leaders
and Captains in the camp of King Sennacherib. The Lord sent him. The Lord
then was agens principalis, he was the principal doer in that slaughter, the
Angel was but his messenger to put in execution the work of the Lord. So the
Lord was he that smote the Assyrians.

Israel under the conduct of Moses smote two mighty Kings, Sibon of the
Amorites, and Og of Bashan, Numb. 21.35. -- There Israel smote them; yet Psalm.
136.17. the Lord is said, to have smitten them; percusset Reges magnos, He
smote great King, and slew famous Kings, Sibon King of the Amorites, and Og the
King of Bashan. The Lord smote them. The Lord then was Agens principalis: he
was the pricipall doer in this great overthrow; Israel did but execute what the
Lord would have done. So the Lord was he that smote those Kings

If a 1 King. 20.36.
Lion smite us upon the way: if either Esaias 49.10.
hunger, or thirst, if the heat or the Sun smite us: if our Vines Psalm. 78
47, 48.
be smitten with hail, our Sycomore trees with frost, our flocks with hot
thunderbolts, our Deuteronomy. 28.22.
corne-fields with blasting and with mildew: if our selves be smitten with
consumptions, with fevers, with inflammations, with extreme burnings, with the
Verse. 27.
botch of Egypt, with the Emrods, with the scab, and with the itch, whereof we
cannot be healed: if we be smitten with Verse. 28.
madness, with blindness, with astonishment of heart: if we be any way
smitten, whatsoever the means may be, it is the Lord that smites us.

Percutiet te Dominus, the Lord shall smite thee. Verse. 22, 27, 28, 35.
It is in one Chapter, in the 28. of Deuteronomie four times repeated, to show
unto us that if we be smitten with any the now mentioned miseries, or any
other, it is the Lord that smites us.

The Percutiam in my text serves for the corroboration of this truth.
Percutiam, I will smite the winter house with the summer house. If then but a
house be smitten, be it a winter house, or a summer house, the Lord is he that
has smitten it.

So from this percutiam, I will smite, I, I, the Lord will smite, arises this
doctrine: In the miseries or calamities, that do befall us in this life, we
must not look to the instruments, but to the Lord, that smites by them.

Thus have the godly ever done. Holy Job in his time did it. The loss of all
his substance and children by the Sabeans, Job 1.15.
Chaldeans, fire from Heaven, and a great wind from beyond the wilderness,
could not turn away his eyes from the God of Heaven to those second causes.
Those he knew to be but instruments; the Lord was agens principalis; he was the
chief doer. This he acknowledges, and blesses God for it: Dominus abstulit,
The Lord that gave me all, has taken all away, blessed be the name of the
Lord, Job 1.21.

Such was the practice of King David, Shimei, 2 Samuel 16.5.
a man of the family of the house of Saul, comes forth from Bahurim, Verse. 6.
curses still as he comes, meets the King, casts stones at him, raileth upon
him, calls him to his face a man of blood, Verse. 7.
and a man of Belial, a murderer and a wicked man. At so high a strain of
insolency, Verse. 9.
how bears the King himself? Does he suffer the railers head to be cut off?
or, makes he any show of impatiencie? No, His eye is to him, that is agens
principalis, or Primus motor, even to the Lord, the Principal agent and first
mouer in all this business. Shimei, he knows, is but the instrument to work
the will of the Lord. And therefore he says to Abishai, 2 Samuel 16.10. Let him
curse, because the Lord has said unto him, Curse David. Who shall then say,
Wherefore have thou done so? Suffer him to curse, for the Lord has bidden him.

Not unlike was the carriage of the blessed Apostles, Peter, John, and the
rest, Act. 4.27. Though Herod, Pontius Pilat, the Gentiles, and the people of
Israel, had crucified and put to death the Lord of life, our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ; yet did not the Apostles therefore grow into a rage, or bitter
speeches against them. In that great execution of the Lord Jesus, there was
upon the hand of God. They knew, that Herod, Pontius Pilat, the Gentiles, and
the Jews were but instruments. So their acknowledgement before the Lord, verse.
28. Of a truth both Herod and Pontius Pilat, and the Gentiles, and the People
of Israel were gathered together against thine holy Child Jesus, for to do
whatsoever thy hand and thy counsel determined before to be done.

Thus according to the examples of holy Job, King David, and the blessed
Apostles, we are in the miseries and calamities that do befall us in this
life, to look not so much to the instruments, as to the Lord that smites by
them.

And why so? The reason is, because all instruments are second causes; Angels,
men, or other creatures have no power at all against us, but what is given them
of God. So Jesus told Pilat, who had proudly said unto him, Know thou not,
that I have power to crucify thee, and have power to release thee? No, says
Jesus, thou could have no power at all against me, except it were given thee,
(...), from above, Io. 19.11. I will but touch the uses.

One is, for the reproof of such, who are of opinion, that God does only
suffer many things to be done. If he be agens principalis, the principal Agent
in all actions, and all other agents are but his instruments, then is he not
only a sufferer, but also an orderer, guider, and governor of all actions.

The second is for the confutation of such as in their vain thoughts imagine,
that the miseries and calamities which befall men in this life, are but their
misfortunes. If God be agens principalis, if he be the principal agent in all
that is done upon the earth, then wretched man bleare not thine own eyes to
ascribe that to haphazzard wherein the strokes of Gods hand appear.

The third is for the admonishing of us all, that in our miseries, or
calamities, we behave our selves with patience toward the instruments,
wherewith God smites us. It will very ill beseem a man to be like unto the
dog, that snatcheth at the stone thrown at him, without regard unto the
thrower.

The fourth is for consolation. It will be a comfort to us in misery and
distress, to remember that God is agens principalis, that he has a chief
hand in all our troubles, and that others, of what rank soever, are but his
instruments; and therefore they can no further prevail against us, than the
hand and counsel of God gives them leave. This our comfort may rest upon that
of S. Paul, 1 Cor. 10.13. God is faithful: he will not suffer us to be tempted
above that we are able to bear, but will even give an issue with the
temptation, that we may be able to bear it. Qui enim dat tentanti Diabolo
licentia^, ipse dat tentatis misericordia^; Pet. Lomb. upon the place: For God
who gives the devil leave to smite, gives also his mercy to them, that are
smitten.

And thus from the Action, the smiting, which is the Lords, we are come to the
object of the Action, to the thing to be smitten, which do belong to the
Israelites. The things to be smitten were their houses: which are here
described from their use, and precious matter whereof they were; and state. For
use they had their winter houses and summer houses. For precious matter, they
had their houses of Iuory. For state they had their great houses. We will first
take a view of their houses for use, their winter houses, and their summer
houses. Of them it is here said, in the first branch of this fifteenth verse;
Percutiam domum hyemalem cum domo aestiua: I will smite the winter house with
the summer house.

Princes and great Lords of the East of old time had their change of houses: a
house for winter, and a house for summer. The winter house was turned toward
the South, Hieron. Rupe^t. Cyrill.
and open to the heat of the Sun for warmth. The summer house was turned
toward the North from the Sun, and lay open to the cool air. So, for the
variety of seasons they would be provided either for cold or heat.

Iehoiakim, King of Judah, had his winter house. For so we read, Ier. 36.22.
The King sat in the winter house in the ninth month, and there was a fire on
the hearth before him. And it is likely he had his summer house. Else why is
this called his winter house? His summer house may be that, Ier. 22.14. where
the King says, Aedificabo mihi domum latam, coenacula spatiosa: I will build
me a wide house, and large chambers. Those cha^bers R. David calls coenacula
ventosa, Iunius. P scator.
windy chambers, others, perflabilia, chambers with through air; chambers with
windows made of purpose to let in the air. Look the place and you will find
them sieled with Cedar, and painted with Vermilion. And this might well be his
summer house. But if you will have a summer house in precise terms, turn ye
to the book of Judges, Chap. 3.20. There shall you find Eglon King of Moah
sitting alone in a summer Parlour. Our English Bible in the margent calls it
a Parlour of cooling: just as Iunius does, coenaculum refrigerationis, a
chamber or parlour of refrigeration. The old Latin calls it aestiuum
coenaculum, a summer chamber or parlour: the Septuagint. (...), a summer garret
in the highest part of the house.

Our Prophet here speaks of both houses together, the winter house and the
summer house, and threatens the demolition or ruin of them both. Tossarius
thus delivers it in his Paraphrase, Demolibor domum hyemalem simul and
aestiuam, in quibus rex cum suis lasciuire consueuit: I will demolish both
winter-house and summer house in which the King was wont with his minions to
play the wanton: I will overthrow them both.

It is not to be doubted, but that Amos by these winter and summer houses
notes the places of Princes and great ones of the State of Israel. As for the
poorer sort, it is enough for them, if they have but a cottage for their
shelter as well in the winter as in the summer season. They have no change of
houses, nor change they parts of their houses to dwell more warmely in the
winter, and more coolely in the summer. Non est ea commoditas pauperibus. No,
the poor are not so accommodated. One habitacle or mansion house suffices
the^ for all their life time. And therefore is this passage directed to the
rich, to the Princes and chief states of the kingdom of the ten Tribes, to
check them for their cost and pomp in building, and to assure them, that
their spacious and magnificent houses shall not stand them in any stead, when
the vengeance of God shall show it self against them.

That the rich are here intended, it is yet more plain by the second branch of
this fifteenth verse, which now follows.

Et peribunt domus eburneae, and the houses of Iuory shall perish] Thus are
their houses described ex materia pretiosa, from the precious matter, whereof
they were. They were domus eburneae; houses were they of Iuory.

The Hebrew calls them (...) Batte hasschen, the houses of a tooth, meaning the
tooth of the Elephant: and therefore these houses with the Greeks are (...),
houses of the Elephant, that is, of the tooth of the Elephant, which is Iuory.

Theophrastus affirms that there is a mineral Iuory found within the ground
as well black as white. Plin. Hist. Not. lib. 36. cap. 18.
But this is not of that. This is of the tooth, and white.

The teeth of Elephants were of a very high price, Plin. lib. 8. c. 10.
for that they yielded the matter of greatest request, and most commendable for
the making of the statues and images of the Heathen gods. In their Temples were
to be seen Elephants teeth of the greatest size; and yet in the marches of
Afric where it confineth with Aethiopia, the very principals and corner posts
of their houses were made of Iuory, yea therewith they made mounds and pales
both to enclose their grounds, and also to keep in their beasts within their
parks, if it be true which Polybius reports from the authority of King
Gulussa.

If Gulussa his testimony be true, it seems they had in those days no want of
Iuory.

In the Sacred volume of Gods word, I read of benches of Iuory, Ezech. 27.6.
of beds of Iuory, Amos 6.4. of a Tower of Iuory, Cant. 7.4. of a house of Iuory
which King Ahab made, 1 King. 22.39. of Palaces of Iuory, Psalm. 45.8. Why then
may not the houses of Iuory in my text stand according to the history? Saint
Hierome thinks they may.

But the stream of Expositors runs another way. They will have these domus
eburneas to be but eburatas: Those houses of Iuory they will have to be only
houses covered with Iuory. With Jonathan in his paraphrase, they are not aedes
eburneae, houses of Iuory, but aedes ebore tectae and caelatae, houses covered
and engraued with Iuory. Nor does Mercerus think, that these houses of Iuory
were so called, as if they were all of Iuory, but because they were ebore
tessellatae, decked with Iuory checkerwise. Homer when he extolleth and sets
out in the highest degree the most stately palaces of Kings and Princes, P^in.
lib. 36 c. 6.
for the matter, wherewith they were wont to be adorned, he names brass, gold,
amber, silver, and Iuory. Iuory then was rather for ornament, than for a maine
building. And therefore well may these domus eburneae be but Eburatae, these
houses of Iuory may be but houses checkered, decked, inlaid, or trimmed with
Iuory. And though they were but such, yet such they were, that the poor could
not compass; so that from hence also it is evident, that this passage is
directed to the rich, to the Princes and chief States of the kingdom of the
ten Tribes, to check them for their sumptuous and proud buildings, and to
assure them that their houses of Iuory shall not stead them, when the vengeance
of God will show it self against them: For Peribunt domus eburneae, their
houses of Iuory shall perish.

There is yet a third branch of this 15. verse, which makes it probable that
this passage is directed to the rich, to the Princes and chief States of the
kingdom of the ten Tribes; and that is, Et deficient domus magnae; and the
great houses shall have an end. And how should the poor come by great houses?
With Iunius and Piscator, they are domus amplae, large, wide, lofty houses, and
of great compass: and are such houses for the poor? With the Hebrew Schools
they are not only amplae, but also splendidae and magnificae, they are gorgeous
and magnificent. They are houses, not only of commodity and use, such as the
houses of the Vulgar and common sort use to be, but such as have in them
superfluity, splendour, and pomp. And experience teaches that rich and great
men use to exceed, not only in their diet and apparel, but also in their
palaces and dwelling houses. Thus are the houses of the Israelites described
from the state; they are Domus magnae, great houses they are.

Great! yea, and many. For so the Vulgar Latin here reads, Dissipabuntur
aedes multae, many houses shall be brought to naught. Many houses! The reading
is embraced by Luther, Oecolampadius, Brentius, Pelican, Vatablus, Mercer, and
Drusius. Nor will I reject it, fith the word in the original (...) Rabbim,
signifies both great and many. (...) great houses or many houses shall be
brought to naught, shall Oecolamp.
cease, shall Drusius. Vatablus. Mercer. Iunius. Piscator.
have an end.

But is all this to be so for certain? Yes. For (...) Neum Jehovah, the Lord
has said it.

I will smite the winter house with the summer house; and the houses of iuory
shall perish, and the great houses, or many houses, shall have an end, Says
the Lord. Says the Lord] It is the seal and assurance of all, and makes for
the authority of this passage. Authority it had enough from the 13. verse,
Says the Lord God, the God of Hosts. It is here redoubled, Says the Lord.

Has the Lord said it? Then surely he will do it. Has the Lord spoken it?
Then out of doubt he will accomplish it. Numb. 23.19.
For he is not, as man, that he should lie, nor as the son of man, that he
should repent. All his words, yea, all the titles of all his words are Yea, and
Amen; Heaven and Earth shall perish, before one jot or one tittle of his words
shall pass unfulfilled. Matthew. 5.18.
He has said it, and he will not fail to make it good: I will smite the
winter house with the summer house, and the houses of iuory shall perish, and
the great houses shall have an end.

Thus much be spoken for the exposition of the words. Now let us see what
point of observation may from hence arise for our further profit.

In that our Prophet here seems to reprove and tax the rich men, Princes, and
others in the Kingdom of the Ten Tribes for their variety, cost, and state in
their buildings, by threatening destruction to their winter houses and summer
houses, to their houses of iuory, and to their great houses, this question is
propounded: Whether it be lawful for Kings, Princes, and other men of state to
build such houses?

Petrus Lusitanus thus resolves it. If Kings, Princes, and other men of state
be otherwise godly and faithful, and studious of Gods worship, and mindful of
the poor, they may without sin build such sumptuous and magnificent houses
and palaces, according to their own revenues and estate.

Such houses King Solomon built, and is not reproved. He was building of his
own house thirteen years. He built also the house of the forest of Lebanon:
1 King. 7.1.
and he made a house for Pharaohs daughter. All these houses were of precious
stones according to the measures of hewed stones, sawed with Sawes within and
without, even from the foundation unto the coping, 1 King. 7.9. These
doubtless were costly and magnificent houses, yet is Solomon commended for
building them.

And yet nevertheless is all such building blameworthy, and to be reproved,
if it exceed the measure of the ability and dignity of the builder. For then
there is a necessity of oppressing the poor. Against such builders there is a
woe gone forth, Ier. 22.13. Woe unto him that builds by unrighteousness, and
his chambers by wrong.

Again, though a builder exceed not the measure of his ability and dignity,
yet may his building be reproueable through the vanity of his intention; if
his intendment be not Gods honor, but his own praise; for haughtiness and
pride of mind makes the best action faulty.

So much for the question: proceed we to the observation.

From the demolition and overthrow here threatened, and after in due time
brought to pass upon the winter house, with the summer house, upon the houses
of iuory, and upon the great houses in the Kingdom of the Ten Tribes, we may
make this observation: that All the aid and succor a man has from his
buildings whatsoever, is vain, if once the wrath of God break forth against
him.

If once the wrath of God break forth against us, alas, what shall fair,
rich, and great buildings avail us? If these might have yielded any succor in
the day of the Lords visitation, the Israelites might have found it. But they
together with their buildings, thoughfull of state and pomp, are perished and
come to naught. And is it not in like sort fallen out with other most
flourishing common wealths, and most mighty Kingdoms? The daily change of
things does abundantly euict, that there is nothing in this world perpetual.

Here then may Filii huius seculi, this worlds darlings, some rich men, be
reproved for a vanity of theirs. They see that death comes alike to all; to the
rich, as to the poor; and yet they dream of nothing else, than of a
perpetuity of life here. For so they order all their ways, as if they were to
live here for ever. They build them houses, great and goodly houses, and spare
no cost to adorn and deck them gorgeously, supposing hereby to continue a
perpetuity of their name.

This vanity of theirs the Psalmist of old has very well discovered, Psalm.
49.10, 11. They see that wise men also die and perish together, as well as the
ignorant and foolish, and leave their riches for other. And yet they think,
that their houses shall continue for ever: and that their dwelling places shall
endure from generation to generation: and call their lands after their own
names.

By which their vanity they seem to acknowledge no other life but this;
Whatsoever we preach unto them of that better life, that heavenly and eternal
life, they believe it not; but rather they deride it as fabulous. But if at any
time they are convinced in conscience, that there remains after this a better
life, yet they desire it not. Their only desire and wish is, to dwell here for
ever. Their inward thought is, that their houses shall continue for ever, and
their dwelling places to all generations: and for this purpose, they call their
lands after their own names. They will no other Paradise but this.

As vain were they that built the Tower of Babel, Genesis 11.4. Go to, say they,
Let us build us a City, and a Tower, whose top may reach unto Heaven, and let
us make us a name, lest we be scattered abroad upon the face of the whole
earth. Let us build us a City and a Tower! One reason is a desire of dominion.
Hugo says, Genesis 10.10.
Factum esse cupiditate regnandi: that Nimrod set forward the work, that it
might be the beginning and chief of his Kingdom. Another reason is, Ne
diuidaemur, lest we be scattered. They built them a City and a Tower to
maintain society that they might dwell together, and not be scattered upon the
face of the whole earth. Antiq. Iud. lib. 1. cap. 5.
Josephus thinks they did it of purpose, to oppose themselves against the
ordinance and commandment of God, who would have them dispersed into diverse
parts, that the world might be replenished. A third reason is, Vt celebremus
nomen nostrum, to get us a name. They built them a City and a Tower to grow
famous thereby. De confus. ling. 468.
Philo says, they did write their names in this Tower, to revive their memory
with posterity.

In this their proud enterprise they sinned grievously. They sinned through
their impiety toward God. Erigebant turrim contra Dominum, says S. Augustine,
De Ciuit, Dei l. 16. c. 4. they erected a Tower in despite of God. The Prophet
Esaias, according to this pattern brings in the King of Babel thus vaunting
himself, I will ascend above the height of the clouds, I will be like the most
high, Chap. 14.14.

Secondly, they sinned through vanity. For what more vain than to neglect
Heaven, where only immortality is to be found, and to seek to be famous on
earth, where there is nothing that is not vain, and transitory? See, says
Chrysostom, the root of evil, they seek to be famous, aedificiis, non
cleemosynis, by buildings, not by alms.

Thirdly, they sinned through disobedience. For knowing, that it was Gods
ordinance, that the earth by them should be replenished, they did wilfully
oppose themselves against it. They would live together, and would not be
dispersed, as even now I told you out of Josephus.

Fourthly, they sinned through impudency. Philo cries out upon it; O insignem
impudentiam! O notorious impudency! whereas they should rather have covered
their sins, they proclaim their pride, their tyranny, their voluptuousness,
to all posterity.

Absolon was a vain builder too. Too much given to ambitious ostentation, he
built him a pillar to be a monument of his fame unto posterity. And why did he
so? because forsooth he had no son to keep his name in remembrance, 2 Samuel
18.18. Carthusian gives the reason, because he was cupidissimus laudis humanae,
most desirous of the praise of men. But how fared he with this his pride? The
vengeance of God did soon attache him. For besides that, he was smitten
through with darts, as he hung by the hair of the head, so was he also stoned
by Gods just judgment, by whose Law, they which were disobedient to their
parents, were stoned to death: and now in stead of that pillar, he lies
shrouded under a heap of stones.

I have yet one builder more to acquaint you with, and he is as vain as those
that are gone before. It is the rich man in the Gospel, Luke 12.16. When his
ground had brought forth plentifully, he said within himself: What shall I
do, because I have no room where to bestow my fruits? This will I do: I will
pull down my Barnes, and build greater, and there will I bestow all my fruits
and my goods. And will say to my soul, Soul, thou have much goods laid up for
many years; take thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry.

Out of doubt this man thought himself passing wise, in his resolution to
build new barnes. But let us a little examine his care. I have, says he, no
room where to bestow my fruits. Mentitur, says Stella. He lies; Had he not
the houses of the poor and their bodies, where he might bestow his fruits?
These were the Barnes provided for him by the Lord, where if he would lay up
his fruits, neither moth nor rust could hurt them. Thou can not any way
better preserve thy fruits than if thou distribute them among the poor.
Herewith agrees that of Solomon, Prou. 3.9. Give unto the poor of the first
fruits of thine increase: so shall thy barnes be filled with plenty.

But the rich man cares not what Solomon says. He holds on his resolution:
Destruam horrea mea and majora faciam; I will pull down my barnes, and build
greater. He speaks, says Stella, as if he were mad, and as one fitter to be
purged with Hellebor. I will pull down my barnes and make greater! He should
rather have said, Aperiam horrea mea, and dabo indigentibus: I will open my
barnes, and give to them that want: or, as Saint Ambrose elegantly enlarges
it; Aperiam horrea mea; ingrediantur, qui famem tolerare non queunt; veniant
inopes, intrent pauperes, repleant sinus suos, etc. I will open my barnes; if
any cannot endure famine, let them come in; let the needy come, let the poor
enter, let them fill their bosoms: down with the walls which exclude the
hungry. Why shall I hide that wherewith God abundantly enableth me to relieve
others? Why shall I with lock and bolt shut up the Corn, which God makes to
grow and abound in the common fields without a keeper?

Thus should the rich man have said. But his note is of another strain: I will
pull down my barnes, and build greater; and ouer-ioyed with the abundance of
his increase, he thus flattereth his soul: Soul, thou have much goods laid up
for many years.

For many years! O coecit as auari! It is Saint Augustines exclamation, Homil.
48. O the blindness of a covetous man I Vna nox ei supererat, and de multorum
annorum vita satagebat: he had but one night to live, and yet he was as
careful, as if he were to live many years. And in this vein he cheeres up
his soul: Soul, take thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry. It is the voice
of some Sardanapalus, or, of some Hog of Epicurus his heard.

Soul, take thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry! (...)! O the folly of this
covetous wretch, says Basil; If thou had had a Swines soul, what else
could thou have said unto it? Of mercy, of alms, of charity, of virtue, here
is not a word; All here is for iollity: Take thine ease, eat, drink, and be
merry.

But what is the issue, what the end hereof? It is no more but this, (...),
thou fool, this night shall thy soul be required of thee, then whose shall
those things be which thou have prouded?

Thou fool! It is all the commendation he has for his overmuch care and
solicitude. And a fool he is called for diverse reason^.

First, he is a fool, because in his own eyes he seems to be wise. He will
seem to be liberal and magnificent, Prou. 28.11.
whereas indeed he is greedy of money and a niggard. Solomon has a fit censure
of him, Prou. 26.12. See thou a man wise in his own conceit? there is more
hope of a fool than of him.

Secondly, he is a fool, because he keeps those things which are lost by
keeping, and by losing are preserved. Such is your corn. If you keep it, it
will be lost; if you lose it, that is, if you sow it and spread it abroad upon
the earth, it will be multiplied, and will return home unto you with increase.
Whence the advice of Ecclesiasticus is, Chap. 29.10. Lose thy money for thy
brother and thy friend: and let it not rust under a stone to be lost. You see
there is a losing that there be no losing.

Thirdly this rich man is a fool, because he takes no care for a house or
mansion, wherein he may dwell for ever, and yet builds him great houses and
palaces, where he is to abide but for a night. For, if this life be compared
with that which is to come, it may well be styled a night. Vana nox est, it is
a night that soon vanishes. So is the hope of this rich man: it passes away
as the rembrance of a guest, that tarrieth but a day or a night, Wisd. 5.14.

Fourthly, he is a fool, because though he has no power over days or times,
yet he promises unto his soul the enjoying of many years. Soul, thou have
much goods laid up for many years.

For this, and other reasons, God himself puts the fool upon this man; for
God said unto him, (...), thou fool, this night shall thy soul be required of
thee.

What! A rich man a fool! And that, by the sentence of God! Luke 12.21.
So is every one that lays up treasure for himself and is not rich toward
God. And so are these other vain builders, of whom even now you heard: who
erecting cities, towers, pillars; winter houses, summer houses, houses of
Iuory, great and goodly houses, only for monuments to continue a perpetuity of
their names here upon earth, as if there were no other life but this, do
evidently declare, that in heart they say, there is no God. And are they not
fools that say so?

The royal Prophet in express and plain terms says, they are, Psalm. 14.1.
The fool has said in his heart, there is no God. Is it not all one, as if he
had said, Whosoever says in heart there is no God, he is a fool? Now that it
may appear to be no sudden, or rash censure of his, but a thing well conceited
and meditated by him, he iterateth the same again, Psalm. 53.1. The fool has
said in his heart there is no God.

In Prosolog c. 3. T^m. 3.
But why says he so? Cur, says Anselme, nisi quia stultus and insipiens est?
Why is it, that the fool does say there is no God? Surely, even for this
reason, because he is a fool. But why says he so in heart, In Psalm. 51.
rather than in mouth? Saint Hilary will tell you why: Because if he should
utter it in his words, as he smothers it in his thoughts, Stultus esse (sicut
est) publici assensus iudicio argueretur, he should publicly be taken to be a
fool, as he is, even by general consent.

But leave we these fools, these Cosmopolites to their heaven upon earth, since
they look for no other heaven. Leave we them to their planting, tra^splanting,
building, rebuilding, studying for room to lay up their fruits, non in
visceribus pauperu^, not in the bowels of the poor, but in their enlarged
barnes. We are sure they will build neither Church nor Hospital, either in
cultum Christi, or culturam Christiani, either to the service of Christ, or to
the comfort of any Christian.

Wherefore leave we them, and reflect we our eyes for a while to our own
houses, to see how we may build them fair to the Lord. These our houses
whereof I now speak we build, and God builds: Nos, been vinendo; Deus, vt
been viuamus, opitulando, August. de Ciuit. Dei l. 17. c. 12. We build by
living well; and God by assisting us by his grace, that we may live well. For
Nisi Dominus aedificauerit, Except the Lord build the house, they labor in
vain that build it, Psalm. 127.1.

These our houses are not material, but spiritual, they are our hearts; Domus
nostrae, corda nostra sunt, so the same Father upon the 74. ^^. Vulg.
Psalm: Our houses are our hearts. Here is good dwelling, if they be cleansed
from iniquity. If we love the Lord Jesus, and keep his words, his Father will
love us, and they both will come unto us, and make their abode with us, Ioh.
14.23 their abode will be by grace in these houses of ours, our hearts Yet may
they in a spiritual understanding be those same houses of Iuory, Psalm. 45.
Houses of Iuory, great and regal houses the tabernacles of God, are corda
sanctorum, Aug. in. Psalm. 44.
they are the hearts of the Saints.

Other houses we have for our solace as that, Cant. 1.17. The beams of our
house are Cedars, our galleries are of Fur. Such houses are the congregations
of the Saints; the places where we do sweetly converse and walk together.
They are firm and during like Cedars among the trees, not subict through Gods
protecting grace to utter corruption: and they are like to galleries of sweet
wood, full of pleasure and contentment, through the favorable acceptance of
God and his word

Those beams of Cedar and Galleries of F^^e, ha^^ respect unto the buildings
and places of Kings, covered ^^at with battlements, with galleries on the top:
and do show to us* by the similitude of these two odoriferous and not
putrefying trees, that the joining and coupling of the Bridegroom, Christ
Jesus, and his Spouse, the Church, with-draweth us from the stench and
corruption of this vile world, and makes our souls and bodies, so many houses
and Temples, dedicated unto God. And for this reason^ S. Paul calls you the
Temple of God, 1. Cor. 3.16. Know ye not, that ye are the Temple of God and
that the Spirit of God dwells in you? If any man defile ye Temple of God, him
shall God destroy^ for the Temple of God, is holy, which Temple ye are. In the
same Epist. Chap. 6.19. Ye are the Temple of the Holy Ghost. What? Know ye
not that your body is the Temple of the Holy Ghost, which is in you which ye
have of God, and ye are not your own? For ye are bought with a price,
therefore glorify God in your body, and in your spirit which are Gods.

Once more the same Apostle calls you the Temple of God 2. Cor. 6.16. Ye are
the Temple of the living God, and he proves it from the testimony of God
himself: I will dwell in you, Leuit. 26.12 Ezekiel. 36.26, 27.
and walk in you: and I will be your God, and you shall be my people.

Is the testimony of God himself produced by the Apostle to prove that ye are
Templum Dei viui, the Temple of God, of the living God, and that your body is
the Temple of the Holy Ghost? O, look ye to the trimming up of this house, to
the decking and adorning of this temple. Your body, it is the temple of the
Holy Ghost; it is the Temple of God, defile it not. Sweetly S. Ambrose: Apud.
Lombard in 1. Cor. 6.
Si non parcis tibi propter te, vel parce tibi propter Deum, qui sibi fecit te
domum: If thou spare not thy self for thine own sake, yet spare thy self for
Gods sake, who has vouchsafed to make thee, thy body, a house, a Temple for
his holy habitation. What shall I say more, but put you in remembrance that we
have yet another house in store for the fulfilling of our joy? For we know,
that if our earthly house of this tabernacle we dissolved, we have a building
of God, and house not made with hand, but eternal in the Heavens, 2 Cor. 5 1.
This same, (...) this house not made with hand whether it be the glory of the
soul and life eternal, as Photius. Auselm. Thomas. Lyran.
some do understand it: or the body glorified in the resurrection, as
Chrysostom. Theod. Theoph. Ambrose.
others: it is the house full of contentment and beatitude. And we have it.
Lombard.
Habemus spe, habebimus re: we have in hope, we shall have it in possession. We
have it, says the Apostle, because we shall as certainly have it, as if we had
it already in full fruition. To this fulness of contentment and beatitude God
in his good time, bring us all for Christ Jesus sake.

FINIS.

