A BRIEF CENSVRE upon two books WRITTEN IN Answer to M. Edmonde Campions
offer of disputation.

Deuter. capit. 5. ver. 5. You feared the fire, and therefore you ascended not
up the mountain. IHS



Imprinted at Doway by John Lion. 1581. WITH PRIVILEGE.

A Brief Censure upon two books written in answer to M. Ed. Campions offer
of disputation.
THERE Came to my hands two books of late, in answer of Mast. Edmonde
Campion his offer of disputation: The one written by M. Hanmer, the other by M.
Charke. Of both which, under correction, I mean to give my short Censure,
until such time, as either he, to whom the matter appartayneth, or some other,
do make more large and learned reply. Aduertising notwithstanding the Reader,
that in mine opinion, this offer of M. Campion, and so many other as have been
made, required not so much answering in writing, but shorter trial in
disputation. But yet seeing there can be had nothing from them but words: I
will examine a little, what they say at least to the matter.

The effect of M. Hanmers book.
Meredith Hanmer answers more quietly, plainly, and more good fellow like
excepting a foul lie or two, whereof I must tell him when place serves. He
offers also liberally for his part disputation, who notwithstanding is not
like to be one of the disputers, if the matter should come to that pass. He
had gathered some notes out of Sleidan, Kemnitius, and friar Bale against the
Pope, and in dirision of the Catholic religion, which he struggleth to utter
in diverse places, without occasion given. He oppugneth feerslye and confirms
diverse things, nether said, nor denied, nor thought of, by M. Campion. He
frames to him self an aduersarye in the air, and manfully fights and
assaulteth the same. Finallye, his book seems to very little purpose, but
only to spread abroad the copies of the others reasonable offer, which was some
labor before, to write out to so many hands as desired it.

The effect of M. Charke his book.
William Charke deals more suttelly: for he reports the Challenge only for
his purpose, and that also some times falsified, except it came corruptly to
his hands. He utters also much more malice, by drawing every thing to
disloyaltye and rebellion, which is done by the Catholics, for conscience
and religion. He flattereth the higher states, which can pleasure him,
palpably. He wearieth his hearer with the infinite repetition of the worn out
terms, of Pope and Poperye. He exceedethe in invention of rayletyue speech.
He undertakes al manner of lies without blushing, and ventureth upon any
assertion what so ever, for the bringinge of the Jesuits in discredit with
the Reader.

Upon this answer therefore of Master Charke, I mean to enlarge my self a
little, in brotherlye charity, not omitting to remember also the other, where
occasion shall be given. And for the restrayning of Master Charkes rouinge to
some certain points, I mean to consider first of that which he utters
touching the Society of Jesuits. Secondly, touching the man whom he
answers. Thirdly, touching the matter or demand propounded. Lastly,
touching the Apostata brought in, for the defacing of Jesuits and the
Catholic religion.

Towching the Society.
The first part.
MASTER Charke imploye the all his power, and labors paynfully, to bring in
defiance the order of Jesuits, containing most notable, learned, and virtuous
men. For the which purpose he uses diverse means, and first his ordinary way
of railing, by calling them. A blasphemous sect, new and detestable Jesuits,
a weak and sham full order, Scorpions, Heretics, Iebusites, poisoned
spyders, wicked monkish friars, and fryerly monks, scoutes to rebellion,
frogs and caterpillars of Egypt, absurd and blasphemous Doctors, bellows to
kindle persecution, of beggarly estate, traitors, swarms of grasshoppers,
noisome beasts. To whom M. Hanmer adds. That they are the brood of a
cryppled soldier, and of the lowsiest order of al. Al which I let pass
without aunswering, for that it proves nothing but one, which is, that they
lack Christian and honest modesty, which abuse so much so many good men,
whose wisdom learning and honesty of life, is better known to the world,
then any such raylers can be credited to the contrary. Marye I cannot let
pass to tell M. Charke, that to call them A blasphemous sect, Jesuits noe
Sect.
seems not only lewd, but also unlearned. And as for their blasphemies they
come to be examined after: but how they may be termed A Sect, I cannot see,
For if living more straitlye then the common sort, in apparel, diet, or order
of life, do make a Sect: 1. Reg. 17. 4. Reg. 1. 4. Dan. 1. Marc. 1.
then not only Jesuits, but Elias, Elizeus, Daniel and John Baptist, are also
to be called sectaries, for that they are reported in the Scripture have lead a
different and more strayte life in those points, then the common sort, and
yet are commended for the same. But if Sectaries are only made (as in deed they
are) by cutting them selves of, in opinion of religion from the general body
of the Catholic Church, as branches from the tree, and by houlding a several
faith in religion to them selves: then can not Jesuits (by your owen
confession) be any sect, who differ not one jot in opinion of religion, from
the universal Catholic Church, but as you say, defend every little point of
the same, be it never so untrue or absurd in your sight. The name of Jesuits.
Wherefore, unlearnedly you call them a sect, as also unseemly you scofe at their
name of Jesuits, which they chaleng not to them selves, nor ever use it, in
their writings or speech, but only naming them selves a Society, dedicated
peculierly to the honoring of the name of Jesus, by preaching the same in all
places of the world, without any reward, and with what danger bodily soever.

Secondly you seek to deface the Society by contemptuous deprauing of al
religious men: calling them, Base and beggerlye monks and friars, popish
orders, and the like: wherein you follow the oulde heretic of the primative
Church, whose property has been from time to time, to hate and deprave those
kind of men above al others, as S. Austen testifies of the Manachies, and
Rufinus of the Arians. In psalm. 132. lib. 11. hist. ca. 3.
And Petilian the Donatist^ following the same spirit scoffed at S. Austen for
being a friar, as S. Austen him self writes in these words. Li. 3. con. lit.
Petil. ca. 40*
After this, Petilian proceeded on with his slanderous mouth, to speak evil of
monasteries, and of monks, blaming me also for that I had set forth this kind
of life, the which life either he knows not, what it means, or else fayneth
him self not to know it, though it be notorious to all the world. S. Austen
says this kind of life (of Monks and Friars and other religious men) was
notorious and known to the world in his time, both in in respect of the famous
men, that had lived in the same, as Anthony, Paul, Hilarion, Basil,
Nazianzen, Martin him self and others: Books written in the commendation of
monks and friars.
as also of the infinite books and treatises which holy Fathers of the
Primative Church had written in defense and comendation of that kind of life,
as Athanasius in the life of S. Anthony the Abbote, besides a peculiar
treatise entitled An exhortation to monks or to monastical life. S. Basil
also wrote a great volume intuled, Constitutions or laws for monks, besides
diverse other treatises of that argument written both by him self and by
Gregory Nazianzen. S. Christostom has fouer homilies extant in commendation
of the life of monks, and two whole books of the comparison betwixt the monk
and the King, where in he prefers the life of the monk, before that of the
King. Also he wrote a book against you M. Charke, entitled Against the
blamers of Monks and monastical life. Ioha^nes Cassianus a little after wrote
12. books entitled, Of the laws and ordinances of monks. Seuerus Sulpitius
wrote a dialogue containing the notable conversation of the Esterly monks with
Saint Martin Abbot of eyghtie monks. And finally Saint Austen, (for I will
come no lower) has written many treatises of monks, commending highly that
excellent kind of life, and defending it against the detractions of
heretics. Let any man read his hundred thirty seven Epistle, whereof the
title is, That for a few evil monks we should not infame al monks. In which
Epistle he shall see all the slanderous arguments of all heretics, against
this kind of men, answered. Wherefore M. Charke and his fellows in condemning
and deprauing the lives of monks and friars, follow their ancestors, and
make war with all the Saints of Christ his holy Church, who have so much
reverenced and commended the said life. In like manner bye calling them so
often Base and Beggarly, he shows what spirit he is of, that is, far
differing from the spirit of Christ, whose voluntary poverty is noted in the
scripture, and the same most highly commended by him, to al his folowers. Luc.
9. Ioh. 12. Math. 19.


Thirdlye, you endeavor to bring the Jesuits in contempt, by their obscure
conception (as you term it) from one Loyolas a Spaniard and had not their full
creation and commission until about thirtye years paste, from Pope Paulus
quartus, wherein you err: for it was from Paulus tertius, the third Pope
before Paulus quartus, and the third Pope after Leo decimus, in whose time
Luther began. So that there is not much difference, betwixt Jesuits and
Protestants, in there antiquity of name, marye in matter very great: for the
Protestants faith and belief began at that time: but the Jesuits, followinge
with humility the faith which they found in the Catholic Church, only
began a strayter kind of life in manners and behavior, then the common sort
of people used: The true life of Jesuits.
for reforminge of whose vices, they dedicated them selves to God, and to al
kind of labor, pains, travail, and peril, with abandoninge al worldly
pleasures, and al possibility of preferment in the same, so far fourth, as
none of that Society has or may take, any spiritual or temporal livings or
commodities what so ever, though diverse great Princes have pressed them often
times with the same, but of free cost they preach and teach in all places where
they are sent, with all humility of spirit, and without intermeddling with
matters of estate, as shall be showed more hereafter. Wherefore M. Charke
offers them the greater wrong in charginge them with the contrary. M.
Hanmers notorious lie.
And M. Hanmers impudency is the more to be woondered at, who blusheth not to
put in print so notorious an untruth, in the sight of all the world, and to
repeat, urge, and amplify the same so often in his book, saying, that one
Theatinus a Jesuit hypocritically got to be Cardinal and Pope, Vide Iaco.
Payuam li. 1. de ortho. explicat.
meaning thereby Paulus quartus, called before Johannes Petrus Caraffa of the
order of Theatines, and not of Jesuits, which all the world knows to be two
several and distinct orders of religion. And therefore M. Hanmer with friar
Bale whom he cyteth in the margent, may be ashamed of so false a slander, both
toward the man, and also the religion.

But because M. Charke obiecteth against the Jesuits, their first father
Loyolas, whom contemptuouslye he calls a soldier: And M. Hanmer, a crippled
soldier, which lived in the same time with friar Luther, Progenitor of the
Protestants: Let us consider in two or three words, the difference betwixt
these two men, whereby it may appear, which of them had the better spirit, and
whether of them may more justly give credit and commendation to their
followers. The lives of them both, are extant, written by men of their own
times, which knew them and lived with them, and therefore I shall easily
discharge my credit, for that which I shall out of these writers, report of them.

Ignatius the beginner of the Jesuits.
Ignatius de Loyola, was a gentleman of a Noble house in Spain, which yet
remains, who being chief captain of Pompeiopolis, and defending it, against
the frenchmen in the year 1536 was hurt and taken prisoner by the same. Vide
Iaco. Payuam li. 1. orthodo. explicat. and Pet. Maffeum in vita Ignatij de
Loyola.
But afterward being perfectly healed, and courteously restored to liberty
again, and now in great possibility of honor and prefermente in his
country, resolved him self, to serve God only for the time to come, and to
take pains for the gayning of Heaven. Whereupon leaving al his friends, and
distributinge all that he had to the poor: stale away from the Court, and
betook himself to a marvelous strait life, and after he had with contynuall
labor of many years, gotten learning, and gayened many souls from sin,
unto virtue, and from the Devil unto Allmyghtye God, by his example of auster
life and godly persuasions: there adjoined them selves unto him, nine other of
diverse nations in the University of Paris, to the like trauelsome life for
gayning of souls. Which kind of life was afterward (after diverse examinations
and probations of their spirit and purpose) allowed and confirmed by Pope Paulus
tertius, and so consequently (diverse worthy men leaving the world and taking
upon them that order of life) was made a distinct order of religious men, in
the which this Ignatius both lived and dyed with singular example of al
humilytie, virtue and holiness, but espetially in zeal of gayninge of souls
and recalling men from sin, and his posterity after him has by imitatio^ of
the same virtues, brought forth infinite fruit unto the world.

Luther beginner of the new Ghospel.
Martin Luther, walking in his youth in a certain medowe, was stricken with a
thunderboult, and thervppon sodaynlye for very fear made him self an Austen
friar, where after in the Abbaye of Erford, seruinge in the Church upon the
third sunday in Lent, Vide Joan. Cocle. in vi. Lutheri. and Linda^. li. de fug.
ido. ca. 8. and 9.
when the ghospel was read of the deaf and dumme devil throwe^ out by Christ,
he suddenly fell down on the pauemente, and the devil cried horriblye out of his
mouth saying: I am not, I am not du^me, I will speak yet unto the world.
After this, upon a certain emulation and contention, betwixt him and the
friars of S. Dominiks order, he left his religion, cast away his habit, broke
his vows, married a nonne, and by little and little began to preach strange
new doctrines, especially tending to al liberty and carnalitie, as for
example saying. Luthers doctrine.
There is no Sin but incredulity: nether can a man damn him self, do what
mischefe he can, except the will refuse to believe. In his book de capti.
Babil. cap. de baptis.

The ten commandments appertain nothing unto us. Sermon. de Moys.

It is a false opinion, and to be abolished, that there are four ghospels. For
the ghospel of John is the only fair true and principal ghospel. In prefa.
ad nouum Testam. And this he said, because the other three Ghospels spoke too
much of good works.

If any woman can not, or will not prove by order of law, the insufficiency of
her husband: let her request at his hands a dyuorse, or else by his consent,
let her lie priuilye with his brother, or with some other man. Lib. de matri.
in epithal. super 1. Cor. 7.

If the wife will not come, let the maid come. Sermon. de matrim.

Matrimony is much more excellent, then virginity. Li. de vot. euang.

Christ and S. Paul did not counsel, but dissuade virginity unto Christians.

Lib. de vot. monast.

It is as necessary for every man to have a wife, as it is, to eat, drink,
or sleep. Li. de vo. coniu. and in asser. art. 16.

Al Christians, are as holy and is just as the mother of God, and as the
Apostles were. Sermon. de Trin. de B. Maria and com. ep. 1. Pet.



I leave other infinite beastly doctrines which he taught, for the invention
whereof, he had much conference with the devil him self, whom Bishop Lindan,
and diverse others write, to have been seen talk bodyly with him, by men of
very great credit. Lib. de fug. idolis. ca. 8. Li. de miss. angul. page 228.
to. 7. and li. de missa. priua.
And Luther himself confesses in his works, that he had often and familier
speech with him, and that he was first moved by him to write against the
Mass, in the year 1534. He also diserybeth his voice saying, that it was so
terrible, huge, and dreadful, that he was like to dye diverse times, after the
nights conference with him: And that diverse men were slain by such
conference. Notwithstanding it was his chance to escape, albeit (as he says)
he did eat more then a bushel of salt together with this devil. Hoss. li. 1.
de here is. Claudi. de Saint. li. de reb. eucha. Linda^. li. de fug. id. ca. 8.
But yet nevertheless he was deceived in the end, as al men are that deal
with such Marchantes. For Luther going one night drunk to bed, (as Hosius
writes) was found there the next day dead, slain (as is thought) by this
his familier devil. For he was a pitiful creature to look on, (as Saints
describes) al black, with his tongue lying out, as a man stranguled. And this
was the end of Luther after almost thirtye years lyuinge, in all kind of
sensuality, pride, and dissension, not only with the Catholic Church, but
also with his own brood and offspring Carolostadius, Oecolampadius, Bucer, and
Zuinglius parents of the Protestants religion, whom he perseruted, cursed, and
condemned, to the very pit of hell, for damned Heretics, as yet appears in
his books written against them. Luth. ep. ad Argenti. and epist. ad. Io. Har.
Bucer. ep. ad Luth.
Wherefore whether the Protestants, or the Jesuits, may be more ashamed of
their first father, let the indifferent Reader judge. There is the like life or
worse, written of Calum by a french man that lived with him, of the same
religion at that time, and was translated into English by a country man of
ours, and had been put in print ere this, had not my L. of London by an evil
chance gotten the copye into his hands.

Fourthly you will needs bring the Jesuits in discredit by certain
blasphemous doctrines, which you say they hold, in a book written by common
consent, called Censura Coloniensis: out of the which you have, for examples
sake, put down thirtine blasphemies, in their own very words (as you say)
noting the leaf, and adding the clean contrary doctrine out of the word of
God: And that men should know that you deal plainly, and bring their very
words, and no syllable of your own you have put their sayings down, in a
different roman letter. But M. Charke in brotherly charity, let me reason the
matter a little with you: Are you not ashamed of this falshode? did you not
think that this your book might be examined by some man or other? in deed
you have all the Printes to your self, and your searchers are so watchful, as
nothing can pass their hands, to the discovering of your doings, and
therefore you may both say and print what you will: And our ears may well burn
on this side the sea, and our hearts rue, at the shameless untruths which we
hear and see uttered there amongste you daily: but we can not remedy it, and
this that I write now, I make account, it may as well perish as diverse things
of greater importance have done heretofore. But suerly me thincketh a wise man
that had care of his soul, might see the light at a little hole, and descrye
the conclusion by a few premises. If you in so short a pamphlet, utter so
many, so manifest, so inexcusable untruths, as I will now show, which
notwithstanding you might reasonably doubt lest perhapps they might be
disclosed: what will you, and your fellows dare avouch in your sermons,
speeches, and discourses, which you are sure shall never come to the
examination? But now let us consider these wicked blasphemies of the Jesuits:
with whom, if you have dealt truly and honestlye, the^ let al be believed
which you speak daily of us: if you have done otherwise then the same malice
which drove you to abuse your self toward them, may also iustelye be
suspected in the rest of your doings and sayings toward us. 1. First
therefore you report the Jesuits to say: It is not sin, what so ever is
against the word of God. Censura Colon. leaf. 44. These words are guilefully
reported, peeced and culled out for your purpose of a large discourse, and yet
most true in their sense. The occasion whereof was this. One Monhemius a
Luthera^ against whose Catechism this Censure of Cole^ was made, would needs
prove Concupisce^ce remayninge after Baptism, to be a damnable mortal sin,
albeit no consent of heart were given unto the same, and for proof of the
same, he brought in this definition of sin: A definition of Sin.
Sin is what so ever repugneth to the law of God. The which definition, the
Censure of Colen affirms not to be in all respects perfect, but that diverse
words should be added to the same: as for example, in steed of that he says
(Sin is what soever etc.) he should have said (Sin is an action) for that
there be diverse things which repugne against the law of God, as evil men, evil
laws, the devils, and the like, which notwithstanding are not properlye
sins, for that they are not actions. Secondlye he should have said not only
(Sin is an action) but (Sin is a humane or reasonable action) for if a mad
man, a fool, or a beast, should commit an act prohibited by Gods law (as for
example kill a man) it were properly no sin. Thirdly he should have added
(voluntary) for if a man should do a noughtie act against his will, as the
virgins which were ravished by vyolence in the Primative Church did, it were no
sin. Lastly, he should have added (done wittingly) for although Jacob lay
with Lya which was not his wife, Genesis 29.
yet because he knew it not, but thought her to be Rachel his wife, he sinned
not. So that the perfect definition of sin, is not that which Monhemius did
put down and the Protestants follow: but rather that which Jesuits together
with S. Austen and other learned Fathers have set down, Aug. li. 3. de lib.
arb. cap. 19.
to wit. Sin is a humane act voluntarilye and wittingly committed against the
law of God. And this is to be understood of actual sin properly.

But now how does M. Charke overthrow this doctrine, forsooth thus. Contrary
to this (says he) is the word of God 1. John 3. the transgression of the
law is sin. You seem to have made a vow M. Charke not to deal plainly in
any one thing. Can you not aledge one little sentence without falsifyinge? The
words of S. John are these. Every one that sins commits iniquity, and
sin is iniquity. (Or as you will perhapps seem to enforce it out of the
greek word ( Anomia): Sin is transgression of the law. Transposition in
alledginge of Scripture.
But why have you fraudulently turned it backward? you knew well the force of
transposition out of Sophistry that it changes all the meaning of the
sentence. For if I say, Every man is a living creature, it is true: but if I
turn it backward and say: Every lyuinge crature is a man, it is false. So
these words, as S. John utters them are most true, Every sin is
iniquity or transgression of the law: but as you utter them, they are false,
to wit, That every iniquity or transgression of the law, be it never so
little, or done without either consent or knowledge, or by a madd man, or brute
beast, should be properlye a mortal sin. So that this first blasphemye of
the Jesuits comes not to be so heinous as you would make it, but rather to
confound your ignorance which understand not so clear doctrine, but huddle up
matters as M. Campion tells you: also to note your untruth in misreporting
their words, and the Scriptures against them. And of this first depend the
other two that follow.

Concupisence noe sin.
2. You report the Jesuits to say: Concupiscence remaining in the regenerate,
although it be against the law of God, yet is it not sin properlye in it
self or of his own nature. Cens. fol. 38. You will needs help the Jesuits
out, with that which makes for your purpose. Where find you in them, the
words ( Although it be against the law of God?) They say, that albeit this
Concupiscence do stir or move a man some times to do things which are
repugnant to the law of God: yet if no consent of heart be yielded unto it, it
reaches not to the nature of a mortal sin woorthye of eternal damnation. And
albeit S. Paul do some times call it sin: Romans 7.
yet means he not properlye but by a figure, whereby the name of the cause is
often times atributed to the effect: as the latin speech, is called the
latin Tongue, because speech is the effect of the tongue. So Concupiscence
being the effect of original sin, is called some times sin, but not
properly, but only figuratively, as also S. Paul calls Christ him self, Romans
8.
Sin, because he was the sacrifice for sin. And all this is S. Austen his
note, whose plain words in the same place are: Li. de Nup. and conc. ca. 23.
and 25. and li. 1. con. ep. 2. Pelag. ca. 13. et. li. 1. Re tract. ca. 15.
Concupiscence is not sin in the regenerate, if consent be not yielded unto
her for the accomplishing of unlawful works. The same teaches not only S.
Augustine in diverse other places, but also all other Fathers of the Primative
Church, as Nazianzenus orat. de S. Lana. Pacianus orat. de bap. Clemens
Alexandrinus Li. 1. Pedago. cap. 6. Cyprian ser. de. lot. pedu^ et Li. 2. ep.
2. Ambro. Li. 1. de vocat. gentiu^. capit. 5. So that al these good Fathers
are partakers with the Jesuits of this blasphemy which you enforce upon
them. But how do you prove it to be blasphemy? marie because Christ says:
Math. 5.
Whosoever shall see a woman to lust after her, he has alredye committed
adultery with her in his heart. But are you so ignorant M. Charke, do you
not see that Christ by adding the words ( in his heart) means only of him,
which gives consent of heart to his lust and concupiscence, and would put it
in execution if he had time and place and ability? but this is your common
alleging of Scripture.

First motions noe sin.
3. You report the Jesuits to say. That the first motions of lust, are
without hurt of sin. Cens. 54. 89. It is most true and plain, as they
deliver it but you, by clipping their words, make every thing to seem a
paradoxe. They say, the first motions of lust, if they come of natural
instinct only, without any cause given by us, are no sins, so long as we
give no consent of heart unto them. And the reason is, because it lies not in
us, (they being natural) to prohibit them to come, no more then it does, to
prohibit our pulse from beating. And therefore seeing no sin can be committed
without our will and consent of heart, (as I have showed before) these first
motions, can be no more sins in us, then they are in beasts, for the like
reason. Nether is the ten the commandment, Exo. 20.
alleged by you for the contrary doctrine, to wit, Thou shall not covet, any
way repugnant to this. For this commandment forbids consent to these
motions, and not the very motions which are not in our power, as the
Scripture it self signifies when it says. Deu. 30.
This commandment which I do give the this day, is not above thee. Li. de
nupt et concupis. capit. 23.
And as S. Austen learnedlye prouethe out of an other place of scripture, where
this commandment is expounded, to wit. Go not after thy concupiscence. Eccl.
18.
That is, consent not to them, or follow them not.

All things not expressed in Scriptures.
4. You report the Jesuits to say. The holy Scripture is a doctrine
imperfect, maimed, lame, not containing all things necessary to faith and
salvation. Cen. fo. 220. You are tooe shameless, M. Charke, in setting for the
these, for the Jesuits words. Let any man read the place, and he shall
find noe such thing, but rather in contrary manner the holy Scripture with
reuerente words, most highlye commended. Notwithstanding, they reprehend in
that place, Monhemius, for saying, that nothing is to be received or believed,
but that which is expreslye found in the Scripture. For reproof of which
heresy, Things believed which are not in Scripture.
they give examples of many things, which both we and our adversaries also
do believe, which neuerthelese, are not set down expres^ye in the Scripturs,
although perhaps ^educed thereof. As the perpetual virginitye of our Lady
after her childebirth: two natures and two wills in Christ: the proceedinge
of the holy Ghost equally from the Father and the Son, with out generation:
the union of the word unto the nature of man, and not unto the person: That
God the Father begat his Son, only by understanding him self: That infantes
without reason should be baptized: That the common Creed was made by the
Apostles: The celebration of the Sunday, in stead of the satterdaye: The
celebration of Easter only upon a Sunday: The four Gospels which we use to
be the true Gospels and not feigned or corrupted: That our epistle to the
Romans, was written by S. Paul, and the other which is to be seen to the
Laodycenses, is feigned and not written by him, seeinge notwithstanding Saint
Paul never mentions any epistle written by him self to the Romans, Colos. 4.
but yet sayethe that he wrote one to the Laodicenses. Al these things (I say)
and many more, are believed by us generallye, and yet none of them expressye to
be found in scripture.

Objection.
But how do you now overthrow this doctrine, and prove it blasphemy, M.
Charke? By a place of S. Paul: 2. Timo. 3.
Al (the) scripture (is) given, by inspiration of God, (and) is profitable, to
teach, to confute, to correct, and to instruct in justice, that the man of
God may be perfect, (and thoroughly) instructed to every good work. Whereof you
infer, that the Scripture is sufficient to perfection, but how wrongefullye
it shall now appear. And first I let pass your ordinary misusinge of
scripture, by adding five words of your own, in this little sentence, to wit,
(the, is, and, and, thoroughly) which audacitie, if it were in translating of
Aesops fables, it were follerable, but in the holy Scriptures, where every
word must be taken as from the holy Ghost, it is impious. Secondly this
place makes nothing for your purpose: which I prove by two reasons.
Profitable.
The first is, because S. Paul says not here, that the Scripture is
sufficient to perfection, but only, that it is profitable. Necessary.
Now you know, that a thing may be very profitable, yea necessary to an
effect, and yet not sufficient to do the same without all help: As meat is
profitable and necessary to maintain life, and yet not sufficient, without
natural heat, clothes, and the like. The second reason is, for that S. Paul
signifies in this place, that every part, or canonical book of Scripture,
is profitable to make a man perfect: but yet we can not say, that every part
or book is sufficient: for then, al other books of scripture besides that,
were superfluous. And that S. Paul means in this place, every several
canonical book or part of Scripture, by the words ( Omnis scriptura:) it is
evident by that he uses the word, Omnis, and not Tota, which two words how
much they differ both in Greek and Latin, all Logisioners know, For omns
homo, signifies, every man. And M. Charke him self, in this very same
sentence, has translated, Omne opus bonum, Every good work: And yet
deceatcfullye, has he translated Omnis scriptura, All the scripture. As though
S. Paul had mente only, that all the Scripture put together, is sufficient to
perfection: which sense can not stand. First, for that all the Scripture, at
such time as S. Paul wrote this, wanted diverse important parts, as the Ghosepl
of S. John, the Apocalips and some other, which were written after, and
consequentlye should have been superfluous, if the other before, had been
sufficient. Parts of scripture lost.
Secondly, because we lack at this day, many parts of Scripture, which of
likelihoode were in S. Paul's time. As the book of Nathan the Prophet, with
the volume of the Prophet Gad 1. Paralip. vlt. The book of Ahias Salonites,
and the vision of Addo the Prophet 2. Paral. 9. Many of the Parables and verses
of Solomon, for he wrote three thousand of the one, and five thousand of the
other, 3. Reg. 4. Also the epistle of S. Paul to the Laodice^ses Colos. 4.
whereof it follows in M. Charks own sense, that if all the Scripture put
together, is only sufficient to perfection: then our Scripture, now lacking
diverse parts of the same, is not sufficient. And so me thinkethe, M. Charke
wrestethe this place against him self.

Addinge to Scripture.
5. You report the Jesuits to say: That the want of holy Scriptures must be
supplied, by peecing it out by traditions. Cens. fol. 220. This is coin of the
former forge, all false and noe one such word to be found in all their book.
But yet as though they had said so, you fight manfullye against this your
own sentence, saying in manner followinge: Deuteronomy. 4. Non addetis ad verbu^ etc,
Contrary to this is the law in Moses. Thou shalt not add to the words
which I speak to thee, nether shalt thou take from them. But why do you
break the law M. Charke in reportinge the law? you have here added the
singular number in the Verb, and the plural in the Noune, and have taken away
the numbers which the law geuer used, and changed the same at your own
pleasure, and that for a purpose which I could guess at. But let al things be
lawful unto you: what makes this law for your purpose? By your meaning the
Apostles and Evangelists did offend, in adding any thing besides the law of
Moses, which is absurd. Nether did Moses in this place (forbiddinge to add
or take away) speak of his written law (for he had not yet written it) but of
those things which he delivered them by word of mouth at that time, the which
he willed them to keep and observe whollye and perfectly, without changing it
by addition or diminutio^, or by their own corrupt gloses, as noughtie men
are wont to do: And this is the true meaning of that place, and not as you
would have it, that nothing should be believed besides that which Moses set
down: for a little after Moses him self commands the Jews to hear the
Prophet which God should raise after him, Deuteronomy. 18.
as himself, mening thereby Christ.

The Scripture may be wrested to an evil sense.
6 You report the Jesuits to say: The holy Scripture is a nose of wax. Cens.
117. God forgive you, for abusing so much these learned men. Marie you take the
way to ouermatch both learning and truth too, if you may have your desire.
He that will read the place by you quoted, shall find the Jesuits, upon
occasion given them, to say in effect thus: that before the rude and ignorante
people, it is easy for a noughtye man, to wreste the scripture to what
interpretation pleases him best, for the flatteringe either of Prince or
people: even as a man may frame a nose of wax what way, or to what form, he
list. And will you of this make them to say, that the holy Scripture is a
nose of wax? Christ is lykened to a serpent, and yet is no serpent: Nu. 21.
Also to a covetous Vserer, and yet is none: Ioh. 3.
Nether does the Scripture commit blasphemy in vsinge such similitudes. But
how prove you (M. Charke) that the Scripture may not be wrested into many
senses, before the rude people, as a nose of wax may be into many forms?
Math. 25.
Because it is contrary (say you) unto the words of David: Psalm. 18.
The law of the Lord is perfect converting souls. Suerly I would you might
be feed cue^ for the saving of your credit M. Charke, to alege one place,
without corruption. Do you translate Lex domini immaculata The Law of the
Lord is perfect in sense, so that it may not be wrested to a wrong
interpretation? This is marvelous. Immaculata, signisieth in these countries,
unspotted, void of filthe, or dishonestye, wherewith profane wrytings are
often times defiled: But the Law of God is deuoyde of all such things, and
therefore conuerteth souls, whereas other wrytinges, do often times corrupt
them: But that Immaculata can not be translated, perfect in sense, it is
euidente by this, that every syllable and word in God his Law, is unspotted,
but yet not perfect in sense, and much less so clear, as it may not be
perverted to an evil meaning: whereby your fraudulente translation is discovered.

7. You report the Jesuits to say: The readinge of Scripture.
The readinge of the Scripture, is not only not profitable, but many ways
very hurtefull to the Church. Fol. 21. Did you think M. Charke, when you
wrote this, that any of these books whose leaves you cite, were to be had or
seen in England? I think noe, or else you are at a point, to make none
accounte what you speak hereafter. The Jesuits have not this, which you
report here in their names. But only they lay down certain wayghtye
reasons, why the reading of Scripture is not rashelye, and without very
great consideration to to be permitted to the rude and ignorant people, which
understand it not, and therefore may easily misconceaue the meaning thereof,
showing also that al heresies from the beginning, have been founded upon the
misunderstanding of the Scripture, and yet this without al fault of the word
of God, but by the ignorance or malice of the misconsterer. As in like manner
al sins arise by the misuse of the creatures of God, which creatures
notwithstanding are good in their own natures, as the Apostle teaches: 1.
Tim. 4.
and Christ him self is said to be an occasion of ruin unto some, Luc. 2.
and yet without any fault of his.

This is the Jesuits doctrine, the contrary whereof I would see now, how M.
Charke (according to his promise) will prove out of the clear word of God,
Mary (says he) Christ delyuerethe a contrary note. Math. 22. Ye err not
knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of God: whereof he would infer, that
all men must read the Scriptures. A strong argument the circumstances
considered: for first, the men to whom Christ spoke these words, were noe
ignorante people, but learned Saduces, which came prepared to pose Christ,
about the resurrection. This appears by the subtle question which they put
for the, Math. 22.
of seven brethren which had alone wife, Deuteronomy. 2.
grounded upon the law of Moses, whereby they thought to overthrow the
doctrine of resurrection. But Christ having heard their question, toulde them,
that they erred, not understanding the Scriptures touching that point of
resurrection, which Scriptures he interpreted to them presentlye out of the
iij. chapter of Exodus. Also he said, they erred, not understanding the power
of God, whereby he is able to raise again the self same body in number,
which is dead, though it be impossible (as it is) in all natural reason. So
that Christ spoke not here to unlearned men, nor of all Scriptures, nor of
readinge, but of understanding. What makes therefore this to your purpose M.
Charke? forsoothe as much as if you should reason thus: my Lord Chaunceller
said to certain Doctors of the Arches, pleading a case unskillfully before him:
you err, not understanding the common law in this case, nor the Princess
anthoritie. Ergo, by these words he meanethe, that all the clownes of
England, shall fall to readinge of the common law, albeit they understand
never a word thereof.

Faith and works.
8. You report the Jesuits to say: That the rightuous man lives by faith, ne
has it not in Christ, but by his own works. fol. 118. You wearye me out with
your impudent lies: there is noe such thing: what should I answer you? and
yet as though they had said it, you bring in a place of S. Paul against the
same, saying: Romans 11.
If righteousness come by our works, it is not now grace. As though noe man's
works could be rightuous in this life: which is both from the purpose, and
false. For we deny not but the first and chief righteousness, whereof Saint
Paul speakethe in this place, that is, whereby a man is called first from sin
or infidelitye to the service of Christ, his sins forgeuen him, and he
justified by the infusion of grace, this righteousness (I say) is only of Gods
merrye and noe way of our works, or by any merit of the same. But yet
notwithstanding, after we are now made just, and by the mercy of God,
placed once in state of grace, the good works which ensue of this grace, may
be rightuous and meritorious, not of themselves, or of their own natures (as
you wickedly affirm us to hold) but thorough the dignitye of that grace of
Christ, which remaynethe in the doers. The which grace being once lost,
their good deeds are noe more rightuous or merytorious. The which true
doctrine of ours, you will not understand, but always of malice report it
contrary, as also you do shamfully this place of S. Paul, to make it serve
your purpose. For S. Paul says that Gods election, whereby he chooses men to
be Christians, is of grace only and not by merit of works: and you draw it
generallye against the righteousness of al good works. And because it would
not streche so far, you have added unto it of your own, these words: If
righteousness come by our. etc. which words are not in S. Paul.

Faith and hope.
9. You report the Jesuits to say: Men do surely hope, that everlasting
life shall be given them, but they do not believe it: now hope often fails,
otherwise it were no hope. Cens. 118. For confutation of which doctrine you
aleage out of S. Paul, Hope is the sure anchor of the soul. Heb. 6.
And again: Hope makes not ashamed. Romans 5.
In the which you show your self unlearned, huddlinge up and confoundinge,
faith and hope as one thing, the which S. Paul 1 Cor. 13 does affirm to
be distinct things. The Jesuits doctrine (if you understood it) is true,
learned, and clear, to wit: Luc. 10.
that noe man, with out a special revelation from God (as the Apostles had
from Christ, when he said that their names were written in the book of life,)
may believe, that he in particular shall be saved, albeit he may well hope it.
Faith grounded only upon the word of God.
And the reason of this is, for that the only object of faith is the word of
God reveled unto us, either by writing, or by tradition: that is as much to
say, as noe man may believe or have faith in any thing, except it be
revealed unto him by the word of God. Whereof it follows, that whatsoever a
man believes, must be so certain, necessary, and infallablye true, as it
cannot possiblye be false. Which two reasons prove, that albeit a man may hope
his own salvation, in particular, yet he may not make it of his belief.
First, for that he has noe express word of God that he in particular
shall be saved: for what Scripture says, (for examples sake) that Willyam
Charke shall be saved? none I think, but only in general, and upon
conditions: as if he believe as he should do, joining charity with it. 1 Cor.
13. If he keep the commandments. Math. 19. If he persevere in honesty unto
the end. Math. 10. If he leave his lyeinge. Apocal. 21. and 22. and the like.
The which things all, noe man can tell whether he observe or whether he shall
observe them unto the end or not. Secondlye it is not so certain that any
man in particular shall be saved, but he may be damned, at the least wise it
is not impossible: for he may deny his faith, if he will he may committ
adultery, murder, and the like enormityes, and so damn him self. As we see
Judas and diverse other have done which seemed good for a time, and so may I
toe, if I list? and therefore my salvation in particular, being not
infalliblye certain, can not be the obiecte of faith and belief, but only
of hope.

Hope has doubt in it.
Now this hope has joined with it, both confidence and doubt, and that in
respect of two things. For in respect of the goodness and mercy of God, it is
full of confidence and assurance, and in this respect S. Paul callethe hope,
the anchore of the soul which makes not ashamed, Heb. 6. Romans 5.
as you aleadge. But in respect of Gods justice, and our sinful frailty, hope
has also doubt and fear annexed with it. For when I consider that God, as he
is merciful, so is he just, Psalm. 10. nay, that he damneth more by his
justice then he saves by his mercy, Math. 7. and 2. Luc. 13. also that he will
take a strait accounte of every little sin at the day of judgment, Math.
12. and that there be many secret sins which may be in me without my
remembrance, Psalm. 18. 1. Cor. 4. moreover, that diverse shall come
confidentlie at the last day hopinge to be saved and yet shall be damned, Math.
7. when I do consider this (I say) adding to it, mine own noghty inclination
unto sin, and my weakness in perseuera^ce of virtue I cannot chose but join
fear with my confidence, and so the scripture teaches me to do, saying. Do
you converse in fear duringe this time of your habitation: 1. Pet. 1.
And again: Work your salutio^ in fear and trembling. Phil. 2.
The reason whereof, is put down also in the scripture, to wit: Because a man
knows not, whether he be worthy of hate or love. Eccle. 9.
So that we, M. Charke (as you see) reconcile al scriptures together, and
maintain both confidence and fear, in Christian hope, and you take one part
only, and leave out the other, and yet you are offended with M. Campion, for
saying that you confound and huddle up matters.

Invocation of Saints.
10 You report the Jesuits to say: The scripture in deed never teachethe
invocation of Saints: yet we must believe, ^eceaue, and hold it. fol. 230.
This is falslye reported too, for they do not say: The Scripture never
teachethe invocation of Saints. But Monhemius against whom they wrote, said
so, and thereof inferred, that therefore it was not to be believed. Which
consequence of argument, the Jesuits deny to be good, and give examples in
many things which are not expreslye set down in the scriptures, and yet are
to be believed as I have showed before in your fowrthe report. And touching
this doctrine of Invocation of Saints to pray for us and with us to our
Savior: the Catholic Church foundeth it in the word of God, and deduceth
it by necessary consequence, out of many and evident places of Scripture,
adjoining thereunto the explication and determination of the ancient general
Councels, and the testimonies of the holy Fathers, with the universal
practice of all Christendom from the beginning, as it may appear to them
that will read the Catholic books written of this matter. And now you Sir,
to overthrow all this, bring in only, besides your lie, a metaphorical place
of the prophet Esaye: Thou art our Father, and Abraham has not known us, and
Israel has been ignorant of us. Esa. 63.
Are these your plain, clear, and euidente Scriptures, which you brag of
so much? I will answers your place to show your weknes. First if the prophet
had spoken of invocation of Saints in this place, and of their intercession
for us, yet were not these words against us: for we grant that the Fathers of
the old Testament, until Christ's ascension, were not in heaven, as our
Saints are now, but in Limbo patrum, expecting Christ his coming, and therefore
could not here us, or understand our necessities as they can now in heaven, and
therefore in this sense the words may be true: Abraham has not known us etc.
Secondly the prophet talks of no such matter in this place, but only
bringing in Christ, all bloodye after his passion, resoneth with him in the
name of the whole people of Israel, confessing their great sins, from the
which, Abraham and Israel were not able to deliver them, but rather had
rejected and cast the^ of for the same sins, and so knew them no longer.
Wherefore they were constrained to come unto Christ, as to their father and only
redeemer, and therefore they say to him: Thou art our father and Abraham has
not known us etc. The which kind of speech S. Jerome proves out of the
Gospel, Ieron. in ca. 63. Esa. Math. 25.
where Christ said unto the foolish virgins that came to late: I know you not:
that is, I know you not for my servants, I refuse and reject you, I care not
for you: and not, as M. Charke does interpret, I know not your case or your
necessities, for he knew it well enough: but yet would not relieve them.

11. You report ye Jesuits to say: Christ never said to lay men, do this in
remembrance of me: fol. 302. The which (as you say) S. Paul does plainly
confute 1. Co. 11 You will never understand ye Jesuits a right. Hoc facite.
They prove in yt place, yt Christ in his last supper, having consecrated his
own body and blood, and co^ma^ding his Apostles (which were priests) to do the
very same by ye words: Hoc facite: do this, or the fa^e that I have do^e: they
prove (I sai) yt this authority of consecrating Christ his body, was committed
only to priests and not to lay men, nether does S. Paul any way impugn this.
For we deny not to lay men the communion of Christ his body but the
consecration of the same, the which consecration to be given by those words of
Christ. Hoc facite, Do this, all holy Fathers of the Church from time to
time have understood: namely, Clemens Romanus Li. 5. co^st cap. 20. Ambros.
Li. 4. de sacram. ca. 6. Cyprian. Li. 2. Ep. 3. Chrysostom. Ho. 14. in ep. 1.
ad cor. Isodorus. Li. diu. offic. cap. 18. Damascenus. Li. de ortho. fid. cap.
14. with others. Nether imports it any thing, though the word facere
does not signify to consecrate of his own nature: for the fact of Christ,
going before, draws it to that signification: as if a man should singe, and
afterward say to the standers by, Hoc facite, Do the same: here facere
should signify to singe, though not of his own nature.

Traditions.
12. You report the Jesuits to say: Traditions are of equal authority with the
word of God, we must believe the^ though they be manifestlye against the
Scripture. Cens. fol. 230. You draw toward an end M. Chark, and therefore you
will make a sound lie, for a parting blow. You have here added of your own. We
must believe them, though they be manifestlye against the Scripture. The
Jesuits say no such word, but they affirm the former part of your words,
although not so generally, and confusedly, as you report. For they say not
that all traditions are of equal authority with the word of God, but only
such as are certaynlye descended from Christ and his Apostles, and were
delivered by the^ to be observed as part of the word of God. Two kind of
traditions.
For there are two kinds of traditions, or doctrines received only by word of
mouth: the one called Ecclesiastical, because they were begone and left us
only by the Church: and these ar of no greater authority then the writings and
other decrees of the Church are. The other are called, Apostolical or divine,
left unto us by Christ and the Apostles: and these are of no less authority,
then if they had been written by the^, or then are the other things which they
wrote. For if a master should leave unto his servants, one thing in writing,
and an other thing by word of mouth, they are of equal authority as all men
will grant. These traditions therefore if they be certainly known to come from
Christ and his Apostles, the Jesuits say, they are of equal authority with ye
written word, and not al traditions as you maliciously report. And now that
Christ and his Apostles left unto the Church diverse doctrines by word of mouth
only, and not written, it is proved by invincible arguments: as by the
testimonies of the Councels, Fathers, and stories of the Primative church, by
many places of scripture, as namly by that S. Paul says to the
Thessalonians: 2. These. 2.
Brethern stand fast and hold the traditions which you have learned either by
word of mouth or by our epistle. Also it is proved, by doctrines which we have
and hold, and the Church has so done from the beginning: which doctrines
notwithstanding are not written, but received by word of mouth from Christ and
the Apostles: as baptism of infantes, celebration of the sunday, the number
of the books of Scripture, the fast of lent, and the like, whereof I have given
more examples before in your fourth report.

Now this being so, how vainly do you bring in (M. Charke) against this, the
sayng of Christ touching the superstitious scribes and Pharases: Marc. 7.
In vain do they worshipe me teaching doctrines that are but the traditions
of men. In your own conscience, I ask you, is this anything pertaining to our
purpose, or contrary to the Catholics doctrine which I have set dou^e? and
if it be not, why do you so shamlesly deceive the people with such
impertine^t stuff? But this is your only refuge, and herein lyethe the whole
mayntenance of your cause, to report us still amiss, and to refute us with
that which nothing pertayneth to the matter. As in this place which you have
here brought in, let the reader mark how many differences there be, betwixt
it and our purpose. First Christ in this place reprehendeth the teaching of
doctrins that are but of men: and we talk of doctrines, delivered us by Christ
and his Apostles. Secondly Christ reprehendeth not al observation of
traditions of men, but the noughtie observation of them, by esteeming them more
then the word of God, and by breaking the word of God for the obseruinge of
them, which we also do condemn. Thirdlye those traditions of the Pharases
which Christ reprehendeth, were certain idle and foolish external ceremonies:
as the washing of cups, and the like, and diverse of them were direct
contrary to the word of God, as certain corrupt expositio^s of the law, as
Christ notes there: Three kinds of Rabbinical expositions of the Law.
And these were of three kinds: The one left by Rabbi Akiuam, the other by
Rabbi Judah, the third by the sons of Asomoneus, which interpretations all,
were called Deuteroseis, that is, secondarye expositions after Moses, of which
perverse expositions, came al their errors of the Talmud. But now what is
this, to the holy Traditions of Christ and his Apostles, or of the Primative
Church?

Worship of Creatures.
13. Lastly you report the Jesuits to say: We must worship the image of
Christ with like honor that we do the holy books of the Ghospel. fol. 66.
Against which, you bring in S. Paul, askinge, What agreemente is there between
the temple of God and Idols. 2. Cor. 6.
I answer, much more agreement, then there is between the matter we talk of,
and this place of S. Paul. For he talks of drawinge the yoke with infidels,
and our question is, whether the worship done to the image of Christ, and to
the Bible, be al one or no? Act. 5. and 7.
But you by calling the image of our Savior, an Idol, show your self
impious, and you are accursed for it by the seventh general Council. And by
putting such great difference between the worship of Christ's Image and his
books of the Ghospel, you prove your understanding to be very little: For if you
grant any kind of worship to the one, how can you deny the same to the
other? seeinge that both are creatures, and as the Image was made by the
Karuer, so the letter of the Bible, by the Printer, and the hononr done to the
one and the other, is not to them selves, but only to God whose Image and
word, they are. But if you deny al kind of honor to them both, in that they
are creatures, (for we assign no divine honor unto them:) Exodus 25. Number. 21.
Ioh. 3. Psalm. 45. Phil. 2.
The^ first your place of S. Paul of difference, is nothing to the purpose:
Secondlye, what will you say to the worshipppe done unto the Arc, unto the
Cherubins, unto the serpent of brass? Why does David say, Do you adore the
stool of his feet? Why are we commanded to bow our knee at the sound of
the name of Jesus, which is but a creature representing Christ to the ear, as
his image does to the eye? S. Austen gives this reason for it. Aug. li. 3. de
Trin. cap. 9 and 10.
Because the honor done to these things, does redounde unto him, who is
signified by them. But you are so wilful M. Chark, as you will not understand ye
difference between an image and an idol, nor between the honors done unto a
creature and to the creator: but maliciously you will still confound the same in
our names, whether we will or not, and that only to blind the poor people
withal, and to maintain matter of railing against your mother the Catholic
Church, God forgive you for it.

And thus M. Charke, I have answered breefely your slanderous false reports,
of the Jesuits doctrine. Now let modest men judge, what cause you had to
break into those unseemly words, saying: M. Charke his lack of modestye.
These and many other blasphemies, do the Jesuits maintain. There is not a
spider, nor a spiders web in any corner of the Popes breast, but these doctors
will hold it no less holy, the^ that which comes out of Christ's breast. But
do not even the Papists, that know these things, easily see, how these
Jesuits in these doctrines, bewraye the spirit of Antichrist. What needs all
this, M. Charke? If a lying spirit be the spirit of Antichrist: then he is
bewrayed, either in them, or in you. If an ignorant railing spirit, be it: we
can give a good guess, where he dwells. M. Charke his zeal.
Surely me think your zeal ouerran your wit in this place, as it did also not
long agone when you having the bewe of a Mass book, and finding the blessed
virgin named, Mother of God in the same, you cried out Blasphemye, until your
fellow, blushinge at your ignorance, brought you in mind of the antiquity of
that name. You are too ouergreedie of our discredit, and it hurts your own
cause. You seem to have made a compacte between you, every man to lie his
part, and so by force to ouerbeare us. Lyinge for the game.
You have played yours: and M. Hanmer follows prettily after you, who is not
ashamed toauouch (without citing the place) that S. Thomas of Aquyne holdethe
The wearinge of Frauncis and Dominickes cowle, to have power to remove sin,
as well as the Sacrament of Baptism. Which is as true as that which you
affirm, to wit: That Cardinal Poole blushed at diverse enormities in Popery:
And, That the Catholics in England at this day, do confess Images,
Pardones, Prayinge to Saints, and Service in the Latin tongue to be wicked
things. News from Rome printed by 10. Charlewoode and Ed. White.
All which is as true as your news from Rome, caused amongst you to be printed
of late, with your ordinary approbatio^, of Seen and allowed. Wherein for the
defacinge of that city, you show the heavy hand of God toward it in signs
and tokens the 23. 24. and 25. days of January last past, 1580: at what time,
you report 2. sons, and 3. rainbows to have appeared, with most terrible
earthquakes, wherewith fell down the gate of S. Peter's, killinge 14. persons,
besides 8. soldiers. Also two steeples of S. Peter's Church, crushing the Church,
and killing 38. preistes, besides Quiristers and other people: Also the
Churches of the Franciscans, of S. James, of S. Bartholomew, of our Lady, the
whole Abbaie of Marie Magdalene, the brave artillery house of Rome, with a
hospital wherein were 150. persons, besides other infinite buildinges which the
reuenew of a Kingedome will not repair: and all this (as you interpret) in token
of Gods wrath toward the Pope. Of which, no one syllable being true, (as many
both here and in England can testify:) your resolution appears, which you
have made, to avouch any thing be it never so false so blush at nothing be it
never so shamful, and to inuente what so ever may seem for the purpose, to
entertayne or de lude the simple people.

Towching the Man.
The 2. part.
Concerning the man whom you answer: To let pass all your evil speech
toward him, as pardonable in you, which know little civility: you seem to
deal otherwise very hardlye with him: for what so ever he says or does,
you will have it to be taken in evil part. If he speak humblye, he
dissembleth: If he yield commendation, he flattereth: If he she we confidence
in his cause, he vaunteth: If he offer trial, he meanethe not performance: If
he proteste his meaning, he must not be credited: If he desire audience, he
must not be admitted: Finally, what so ever he can imagine to utter for
iustifiinge of him self or his cause, it must avail nothing: William Charke
will have him condemned for unlearned, proud, wicked and traiterous to the
state: and he makethe this general conclusion: M. Charke his conclusion.
That no man can teach or maintain the Catholic faith in England, but he
must be thereby, an enemy to God, and a traitor to the state. The first part
whereof touching God, I let pass, as an ordinary reproach, of his unclean
mouth: whereby he condemns all the noble Princes of England, and other our
virtuous ancestors, from the first conversion of that land, unto our age. But
towchinge the second part of his conclusion, concerning the state, I must say
a word or two.

Religion stands with temporal obedience.
Do you hold, M. Charke, that noe man in England, can be of an other
religion, then yours, but that of necessity he must also be a traitor? This is
hot doctrine. Here again your zeal ouerrunneth your wit, or rather your
malice ouerlashethe all reason. Must every man be an enymie to the state,
which lykethe not that religion which is favored bye the State?

what say you to the Apostles which were of an other religion, then the
states and Princes where they came: and they taught, maintained and furthered
their own religion within the same states: and will you for this fact of
theirs condemn them of treason against the said states; and of teaching
rebellion against those Princes? If you dare affirm it, their own words
shall reprove you, Romans 13. Tit. 3. 1. Pet. 2.
which declare unto us, how they (notwithstanding their contrary religion)
taught all dutiful obedience in temporal matters toward those Princes, being
but infidels and otherwise wicked men: the which notwithstanding the Apostels
did command al Christians to obey in conscience, as substitutes of God, and
so they did, as appears by their Apologies, Vide Apolo. duas Ius^ni. mart.
written in defense of their innocence in these points, at such times, as
they were charged with the contrary as we are now. I might make the like
demand of Athanasius, Hilarious, Eusebius versellensis and others, which
ceased not to mayntaine, teach, and defend, their religion, in the hottest
persecution of the Arians, and yet were noe traitors to the states which
favored the contrary religion. Morouer in Queen Maryes time will you say
that al For his martirs, were traitors to the state? or that all of your
opinion in these and other countries, where the states favor not your
religion, are traitors and rebels? nether makes it any thing to the purpose
for you to say, that our religion is false, and yours true: for the question
is general, whether every man of a contrary relygion must needs be an enemy
to the state, which you affirm, and we deny.

A bad argument.
Nether is that argument to be respected wherewith some of your chief prelates
use to press Catholics some times, saying: that they in Queen Maryes time
wished al evil to the Prince and estate, and therefore we must needs do the
same now. This argument, I say, houldeth not, for that there is difference of
spirits in men. We know your doctrine both in John Wicklife, Wiclif. li. 4.
Trial. ca. 3. Council Co^. sessi. 8.
Luther, Luther in Bulla Leo^. 10.
and Calvin, Calvin. li. 3. inst. cap. 19. and. li. 4. cap. 10.
to be dangerous to al Princes whom you mislyke: teaching, that subjects are
not bound to obey their Princes for conscience sake, but that if the Prince
rule amiss they are free, to restrain him and punish him at their pleasure:
which doctrines we condemn. The commotions also of those of your religion in all countries where they can make their parties good, are known to the world.
And I doubt whether you would live so quietlye in England as Catholics do,
if the state pressed you as it does them: but we teach it to be of conscience
and duty. And it is but the cruel and bloody spirit of your ministers, which
by your books and sermons, seek to stir up both Prince and Maiestrate to
aflict Catholics more and more in England, and to accounte them as disloyal
subjects: whereby you will one day prove, that you hinder your cause more the^
by any one thing. For it comes not of that spirit, which you would seem to
have, nether is it the way to gain men to your religion. As the late racking
and tormenting of those virtuous priests for their consciences in the Tower,
whereof, al Christendom at this day talks, what has it gotten to your
religion? nothing, but the casting of men's hearts into a horror of such
strange and unwonted dealinges, and if you should drive men by such means to
desperation, what gayneth your religion or the state thereby?

But to return to M. Campion again, whose coming into England you will
needs enforce (as a politic man that see the far into common wealths) that
it is for practice against the state, and in hope of a golden day. For the
first, he has answered you, that he commethe with a quite contrary purpose,
and with contrary commandment from his Superiors, who deal in no country
with matters of estate as the world can witness, and as the Indies Iapon, can
give example, where they have dealt so many years for the bringing of men to
the Christian religion, disalowed by the states of those countries, and yet are
noe medlers against those estates, nor ever caused subjects to leave their
obedience to those infidel Princes. And to the second, touching the golden
day, which you talk of, I know not in what sense you may speak it to that
man, whom all the goulde in England (as I think) will not gilte: for that he
contemnethe gould as much as you desire it, and flatter for the means whereby
to gain it. And to tell you more plainly M. Charke in few words, if M. Campion
and you should mete in equal balances, I think you would appear to be to
light in those points, wherein you would seem to your paryshoners to have
your full weight.

Touching the matter.
The third part.
TOuching the petition, or matter demanded, to wit, disputation for trial of
the truth: M. Charke in no wise likethe it, saying more over: That he would
wonder if any which pr ofesse the gospel, should now look for disputation:
whereof he gives diverse reasons. First, for that They have had truth now
established so many years. But this seems a very weak reason, for the
controversy is, whether it be truth or not, and we undertake to prove the
negative part. And for his number of years (they being but two and twenty)
they suffice not for a prescription, by the common laws of England, and much
less to exclude us, which can prove our continuance for a thousand pears
without interruption. An other reason is, for that (as he says) They shall
gain noe great victory in ouerco^ming two or three, of the last and the least
in the quarrel. But this is not so: for they shall gain all the Catholics in
England to their side, and us that are abroad also, if they can show the truth
to be with them. And albeit two or three do speak for the rest in this
demand: yet shall there be more so dispute, even as many as they will admit
with safety for their coming.

A third reason he gives: for that These Jesuits will make the trial with
false weyghtes and measures which are abomination to the Lord: while after
their custom, they dispute with unlearned and peevish distinctio^s, false
arguments, and absurd interpretations. But this shall appear (M. Charke) in
the trial, and your victory shall be the more easy. You have used both lying
arguments, and absurd interpretations, in this little book of yours, as
has been showed: but what the Jesuits will do, you cannot yet tell:
perhaps they are not of your spirit. And in calling them unlearned and
peuishe, you run further then your fellows will allow, for they have proved
and confessed the contrary. And these terms, may easily be returned upon
your self, not in words but in deeds, by the wekest of thowsands of their
scholars. Distinctions.
But in deed their distinctio^s offend you much, which according to the saying
of the Apostle, Epi. Iudae.
you condemn and revile because you understand them not. For you must know,
that distinguishinge in all sciences (according to the Philosopher) Arist. in
Elench.
appertains to the learned and not to the peuishe: but especially in
deuinitie, where al heresies spring by confounding and huddling up matters: and
al truth is displayed, by distinguishing of things into their proper natures.
As also in the controversies of our time, when we have distinguished and put
the clear difference betwixt the things that you confound, as between Idols
and Images: bloody and unbloody sacrifices: Justice by faith and merit of
good works: mediation of Christ, and intercession of Saints: faith and hope:
tradition of men and of the Apostles: and many other the like: when I say, we
have distinguished these things into their proper natures, and showed each
part consonant to the word of God: then you have no more to say, for that
your ignorance is bewrayed, and the truth made to every man's eyes, manifest.

Liberty of pen.
Fourthly you say M. Charke, that disputation is not necessary, for that we
have had and may have the liberty of our pen. The which is as true, as the
rest of your assertions before. No, no: the world knows what search you make
after every pamphlet, that comes from us, and how you persecute them that
bring in, or receive the same within the realm. And is this geuinge us
liberty of our pen? Do you M. Charke, and your fellow ministers, for the
credit of your cause, and for the avoiding the danger of this disputation,
procure us but the liberty of one of your printes, and we will ask no further
trial.

Proofs in disputation.
Lastly you forstraule your opinion of the proofs to be admitted in
disputation, if the matter, against your will, should come so far fourth. That
is, that only scripture were to be admitted in such disputation, and with one
breath you reiecte by name, all Councels, Fathers, Stories, natural and moral
Philosophy. And of Councels and stories you say: They are witnesses of
contrariety one to an other. Of Fathers: Some of them are condemned of
bastardie, and other not guilty of that crime: yet were they but men, how
great so ever they were. Of natural and moral Philosophy you say: That they
are enemies of true religion, and two great nourses of Atheism and heresy. To
which I answer, that albeit we ground our belief only upon the word of
God, and make that only the obiecte of faith more then you do, as I have
showed before in your ninth report: yet do we mislike this audacitie of
yours, in reiectinge these very notable helps, left us by God for the better
understanding of his word. Councels, Fathers, and stories.
For by Councelles, Fathers, and stories, we come to know not only which is
the word of God, and which is not: but also, which is the right meaning of
the same, among so infinite wrong interpretations, which so many heretics
from time to time have invented upon the same: with whom I might easily err,
if I had not this certain way to know what the true Catholic Church (which
can not err) has always holden. And this can not I tell, but only by the
testimony of Councels, Fathers, and stories: by the which only, Theodoret
writes, Theod. li. 1. hist. ca. 8.
that the famous heretic Arrius was convicted, and not by the bare letter of
Scripture, which he and al other heretics, would interpret as they list. Syno.
Constan. Damas. here. 99.
The seventh general Council also convicted the Monothelites, and proved two
distinct wills, to be in Christ, by the help of natural Philosophy:
Philosophy.
by which they showed it, to be a most sure and necessary consequence, that If
Christ had two natures, he must needs have also two distinct wills. For that
there could not be a nature indewed with reason, without a will. And as for
moral Philosophy, who seeeth not the necessity of it, for the understanding
the natures of virtue and vice, and al other actions belonginge to man? And
albeit these things may be abused, as also Scripture may: yet is it gross
ignorance, for an abuse that may be, to condemn the things which are
excellent gifts of God, and sparks of his most high and infinite wisdom. To
deprive us therefore of al these helps, and to turn us over only to a bare
letter of scripture, the which each man may either deny to be scripture, or
wrangle at his pleasure upon the sense, it is as much to say, as that
controversies in religion, shall never be ended: as both reason teaches us,
and experience, not only of al ages past, but also of our times, shows. Note
this reason.
For seeinge there are at this day, the Hussites in Boemeland, the Trinitaries
in Transiluania, the Anabaptists in Pooleland, the Adamites in diverse parts
of Germany, the Lutherans in Saxony, the Caluinistes in France, the Puritanes
and family of Love in England, and other the like sects in the world abroad:
which all with one voice agree against the Catholic Church in this point,
that Scripture only is to be received, and al other testimonies to be rejected:
How comethe it to pass, that these sects groundinge their several religions
upon the mere word of God, as they say, can not yet end their controversies?
If the scripture be so plain, clear, easy, evident, and sufficient to end
al controversies, as they say: why do they so long disagree? How can they
upon so manifest and clear a thing as they say the scripture is, build so
many contrary opinions and defend them out of the same Scripture? But it is
but a shifte of the ^ommon enemy, to depryue men first of their evidences and
witnesses, and afterward to set them by the ears for the title. Flying only
to Scripture condemned as heretical.
And I find this point of flying only to scripture, to have been an old trick
of al heretics of the Primative Church for the maintenance of their own
devices, and therefore condemned in them as heretical, by the same Church.
Namely in the Valentinia^s, as testifies Ireneus li. 3. con. He. And Tertulian
li. 8. de prescript. Also in the Marcionistes, as the same authors witness. Also
in the Arrians, as Epiphanius writes Her. 69. And S. Austen li. 5. con.
Maximum ca. 1. And Socrates li. 1. hist. ca. 14. Also in the Aetians, as S.
Basil writes lib. de spirit. sanct. ca. 27. And finally in the Aerians, as
Epiphanius writes Her. 75. And S. Augustine Her. 53. Wherefore M. Charke
affirminge the same, draws in on line with these progenitors of his.

Touching the Apostata.
The 4. Part.
M. Charke in the end of his book brings in for the defacinge of Jesuits
and al Catholic religion, a dialogue written by one Christian Franken a
Germa^, brought up (as he says) amongst the Jesuits, as one of that
Society: but afterward being made a Protestant, reuileth in that book, both
Jesuits and al Catholic religion, as friar Luther, friar Bale, and many
other Apostatas before him have done. Touching whom, first, (if it be true and
not coined by them selves as the news of Rome before was) I must answer as S.
Austen did to the like thing, whose words are these. Aug. ep. 137 ad ple. Hip.
Simplye I do confess before our Lord, who is witness upon my soul, that
since I began first to serve God, as I have hardely found better men then those
which have profited in monasteries: so I never found worse then such as fell
in monasteries. And again in the very same epistle, handling the place of the
psalm, where Christ says: They insulted against me which sat in the gate,
and song in my reproach which droonke wine: Psalm. 68.
He applies the whole, to such as you are M. Charke, which insulte against
Christ and his religion, for the faule of some on religious man. Wherefore do
these men sit (says S. Auste^ of heretics scoffing at religious men) and
for what do they watch, but only if any bishop, or clarke, or monk, or
nonne should chance a faule, that they may make it to be thought, that al are
such, though in all it be not manifest? And yet notwithstanding, these fellows
do not cast out their own wives, or accuse their own mothers, for that some
one married woman, is found to have committed adultery. But when any fault or
falsehode, does either sound or appear, in any of them that profess the holy
name of religious life: these fellows labor, enforce, and strive by all means
possible, that this fault may be thought to be in all. These men therefore
which seek the pleasure of their tongues, by our greefes and sorrows, may be
compared to the dogs which licked and took pleasure in the sores and woondes
of good Lazarus. Luc. 16.


Secondly, I answer that this railing treatise of this Apostata, translated
and entitled by you, A discovery of Jesuits: has noe foundation at al in it,
but only a lewd foolish applying of every good thing in that religion, to some
evil absurd and wicked meaning, framed by his own imagination without giving
any reason or proof of the same. By which kind of argument, it is easy to
deprave not only al religion but also al other ordinances, al common welthes,
all actions both of God and man, and al creatures in the world, by likning
them to some dishonest or ridiculous thing or other, which a lewd man's
inue^tion may find out, as this apostata has done. But does he charge any
one of the Jesuits (in so many years, as he says, he lived in diverse
places with them) with any one act of dishonestie or disorder of life, which
he might have done many, if he had lived amongst your ministers so long? The
Jesuits life by the enemies confession.
Or does he improve by learning, any one point of their doctrine? noe not
one: but rather utters that, of their good discipline and orderly life, in
continual meditation of heavenly things, with subduing the appetites of their
flesh, as may shame you and your loose ministry. I will put down his own
words translated by you, which God enforced him to let faule, to his own
confusion, and to the iustrifiinge of their honesty. The Jesuits (says he)
do add unto their earnest meditations, Great labor.
the great toil of study also: etc. Divine meditations.
And from the time that a man gives him self to such meditations, he departs
far away from al service and cherishinge of the body: Chastising the flesh.
He abandonethe the societye of the flesh to whippinges, and other voluntarye
punishments of the body: He pressethe and beatethe down pleasure as a blot of
shame: Perfect charity.
and (as our 18. rule does command) he acknowledges the image of Christ, in
every one of his spiritual brethren. Contempt of riches and honor.
As for riches, honor, and al things which he world esteems most excellent,
they contemn them and make none account of them. These are his words M.
Charke, translated by your self, the which, me think, contain praise enough
especially cominge out of the mouth of a professed enemy, which would not
report their life to the best: yet I doubt lest your enemies shall never be
able to charge you iustiy with the like things. Thirdly and lastely I answer
to this matter, that in this kind of argument we could easily repress you,
with many for one of these examples, in learned and profounde men of your
religion, which by the grace of God return daily to the Catholic faith
again: and that not upon a fancy, as this Apostata left it, but upon great
reasons and invincible proofs which after long study and toil they have
found to stand with the same. But for examples sake, I will here recounte only
two, both of them later then the running out of this Apostata, and both which
are exstant in print: of men, that were many years ministers and preachers of
your religion. Causae motiuae N. Xilandri i^pres sae Ingolsta dij 1579.
The first was called Nicolaus Xylander Borussus who yields these causes
folowinge of his conversion, which I have only touched in general, but the
Reader may see them more at large set down and proved by him self in his
book for this purpose. 1. His first reason is, because he has found that the
Catholics have endured these 15. hundredth years in concord of one doctrine,
and he recounteth up 16. distinct Sects spronge of Luther within these 60.
years. 2. For that the Catholics can bring their succession of Bishopes one
after another from Christ his time unto ours, which the Fathers say to be an
invincible demnostration of the true Church. Ire^. li. 3. ca. 3. Optat. li. 2.
co^tr. Donat Aug. ep. 165.
But the contrary side bring none at al. 3. The infinite miracles which have
been in the Catholyque Church the which we must either believe or discredit al
antiquity which report them. 4. The authority of the universal visible
Catholic Church, the which has delivered unto us the Scriptures them
selves, and have triumphed over so many enemies and heresies which from time
to time have assalted her. Whose authority was so great with S. Austen that
he would not have believed the Gospel but only upon her authorytie. 5. The
great holiness of infinite me^ of that Church as S. Anthony, Hilarion, Basil,
Austen, Benedict, Gregory, Bernard, Dominic, Frauncis and the like, which al
were monks and friars and professed men of that religion, and yet noe doubt
are saints in heaven, which cannot be if they lived in error. 6. The reverent
speech of Catholic writers, and the railing, balsphemous, and dishonest
speech to be found in the writings of the other side. 7. The ordinarye lyinge
and fraudulent dealing of Protestants: never almost reportinge the opinions of
Catholics truly, but faininge them to say ye which they never say nor
think. 8. For that Protestants esteem al their Ancestors to be damned, and
do break their wills and ordinances, by converting to propha^^ uses those reave
news and livings which they assigned to the service of God.


Professio. Catholica M. Seb. Flas chij. impres Colo. 1580.
THE Second, is called Sebastianus Flaschius, who besides the reasons which
the other has given (for I omit them which have been touched before) he
yealdethe these reasons of his conversion. 1. For that he has found the
Catholics to teach quite contrary, to that which co^monlye their
adversaries do report of them. 2. For that he has found by Luthers books
that he was moved only of envy to write first against the Catholyque Church.
Li. de cap^ Bab. eth. (...) Pap.
3. For that he has found in Luthers writings so great dishonestie and
scurrilitye of speech, as might shame any harlote to read, which could not
come from a man inspired with the holy Ghost. Li. co^t. Pap. et in sermo.
conuiualib.
4. For that the Protestants do reject easily any book or piece of Scripture
which makes against them, and that which they cannot deny, he has proved
that they corrupt it, and that they esteem noe more of Councels and Fathers
then of the Turks Alcoran. 5. For that he has found by reading of ancient
histories and Fathers of the primative Church, that the most of all their new
opinions, are old heresies condemned expressly and by name, in the heretics
of the primative Church. Vide Sand. de visib. mo^ cap. 57.
6. For that he has found Luther to hold many manifest contrarieties in
his works. Fabius de a^tilogijs. Lut
7. For that Luther seems to have believed in nothing, not being ashamed to
say that he had more confidence in his Katherin Bore, and in his Philipe, then
in Christ. Sermon. conuiu. et tit. de prophet. et. tit. de oper. Dei.
8. For that he has found them by experience, to be parshall and to exaggerate
every little thing that they can find amiss in the lives of Catholics,
although amongst them selves they live most viciouslye, especially in the
sin of the flesh. For albeit they have wives of their own, yet do they in
Germany (according to Luthers doctrine) Ser. de matrimo.
use their maids at their pleasure, and more then this, the ministers use
commutation of wives amongst them selves, and a preacher of no small account
would needs enforce this man to change wives with him. And many other such
things which he proved amongst them, he says, that very shame let him
to report them.


FINIS.

