Divine Sea-seruice: CONTAINING SUNDRY NECESSARY AND VSEFVLL FORMS OF PRAYER
AND THANKSGIVING FOR THE HELP OF SVCH AS TRAVAIL BY SEA, FITTED TO THEIR
SEVERAL NECESSITIES.

By SAMVEL PAGE Dr in Divinity.

1. THESE. 5. 17. 18. Pray continually. In all things give thanks, for this is
the will of God, in Christ Jesus toward you.



LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Oaks for Simon Waterson, and are to be sold at
his shop in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Crown. 1616.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL THE Master, Wardens, and Assistants, and the whole
Society of the Brethren of the Trinitie-house, of Saint CLEMENTS in
Deptford-Strand.
Right Worshipful and Worthy,
BEcause I find not, that any man has of purpose endeavored to help the
devotion of the Seamen, with fitting forms of Prayer and thanksgiving,
applied to their several occasions, I have addressed these meditations to your
use, and the use of your Companies at Sea. I do not herein prejudice the holy
liberty of such as are able without these directions, to power forth their
hearts before God, to use their own forms, but to give help to such as
cannot, beseeching you to recommend these to such, and beseeching Gods Amen to
yours, and their devotions: And to this you shall ever have the Amen of your
euerlouing and thankful friend,

Samuel Page.
Deptford May 1. 1616.
Divine Sea-seruice, Containing sundry necessary and useful forms of prayer
and thanksgiving, for the help of all such as travail by sea, fitted to
their several necessities.
A form of Prayer to be used in our own land for all our brethren at Sea.
Almighty God, whose eye beholds all things in heaven and in earth, and
whose gracious providence keeps an eternal watch over thy servants, so that
the Sun shall not hurt them by day, nor the Moon by night: we thy humble and
unworthy servants confess and acknowledge, to thy glory, that we enjoy many
fruits of thy merciful favor, which many of thy dear children do want: We
humbly recommend to thy favor and protection, all those that are for a time
deprived of that fullness of temporal blessings which we possess; especially
we pray thee for all our brethren, that travail upon the seas in their lawful
vocation: give them the fear of thy name, the love of thy mercy, peace in
their consciences, safety in their ships, health in their persons, mutual love
amongst themselves, obedience to their Governors, contentment with their
provisions, defense against all dangers, success in their business, and safe
return to their own land, that we may all join together in the praise of
thy name, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A form of Prayer to be used at the setting forth of any ships in any voyage
to Sea.
Almighty God and most merciful Father, who have disposed us thy servants in
sundry callings in this world, wherein thou have appointed us to labor
honestly for our livings, we humbly beseech thee for thy blessing upon this
our voyage: we commend the care of our bodies and souls into thy hands,
receive us, we pray thee, into thy protection, keep us in thy faith and
fear, defend us from the danger of sin and Satan, preserve our persons in
health and safety, and keep the goods committed to us from the hand of the
enemy, from the fraud of the deceitful man, from the violence of fire and
water, and from all other evils: go thou forth with us, and accompany us all
the way, crown our honest labors with good success, and safe return, that
we may tell the people, what things thou have done for us, and praise thy name
in the great Congregation, through Jesus Christ our Lord. AMEN.

A Prayer to be used at Sea for our own Land.
GRacious God, by whose providence we are now shipped for a strange land, we thy
poor children do beseech thee to bless our own Lands, and therein we pray
thee for our gracious sovereign Lord king James, Queen Anne, Prince Charles,
the Prince Elector Palatine, and the Lady Elizabeth his wife, and their issue:
bless the whole Council of state, the Clergy, Nobility, Magistracy, and
Commons thereof: maintain amongst them the free passage of thy Gospel, give,
and continue to them sincere religion, peace, plenty, health, prosperity, and
honor, defend them from secret conspiracies, domestical contentions,
schismatic and heretical corruptions, and keep them all in the unity of
thy spirit, and in the bond of peace, and love, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

A Morning Prayer.
Merciful father, by whose watchful care we have been preserved this night
from all dangers, in quiet and comfortable rest: we beseech thee to keep us
also this day in thy fear and favor, sanctify us by thy good spirit, that
neither in thought, word, nor deed we may displease thee: enable us to do the
businesses of our calling, and bless we pray thee, all our labors therein, make
us more sensible of thy good favors, more sorrowful for our sins, more
thankful for all thy mercies, more patient in all our afflictions, and more
constant in our obedience to thy holy will, through our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

A Prayer before Meat.
O Lord bless these thy Creatures which thou have given us for our bodily
sustenance, to the maintenance of our strength and health, make us by them the
better able for thy service, and the works of our calling, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

A thanksgiving after meat.
WE give thee thanks most merciful Father, for these thy creatures, wherewith
thou have now refreshed our weak bodies, beseeching thee to furnish us with
food convenient for us, and to make us always thankful to thee for the same,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An Evening Prayer.
A Almighty and most merciful father, we thank thee unfeignedly for all thy
favors vouchsafed to us this day past, in our health and nourishment, and in
thy powerful defense from all danger of body and soul: we beseech thee to
watch over us this night, and to give us such comfortable rest, that we may
be thereby refreshed, and enabled to the duties, and labors of our calling:
forgive we pray thee to us, all the sins of the day past: suffer us not to
be overcome with drowsinesse, nor dullness in thy service, but that sleeping
or waking we may be ready for thee; and so direct us by thy good spirit, that
we may be more careful in the day following, to serve and please thee, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A Prayer to be used in a time of danger, by Storms, and Tempests at Sea.
Gracious God to whom all creatures stoop, and obey thy will, who rulest the
raging of the sea, and calmest the furges thereof when they arise, we thy
distressed children, beseech thee to have mercy upon us, to forgive us all our
sins, and to remove this present danger from us: We have none in heaven but
thee, and we have none on earth, whom we esteem in comparison of thee: Thou
art our refuge against the stormy wind, and the tempest, speak thou the word,
and our souls shall live, visit us with thy loving kindness, defend us with
thy power, say unto the winds, be still, and to the seas, stay here your
proud waves; let our lives, and goods be precious in thy sight. Thou have
commanded us to seek thee in the day of our trouble, and thou have promised to
hear the prayers of the distressed, arise O Lord, and help now, that we may
know that it is thy hand; if thou helpest not, our souls shall dwell in
silence: Have thee O Lord to help us, O Lord make no long tarrying, O Lord
hear us, and deliver us for thy mercies sake: And whatsoever become of our
bodies, we beseech thee to prepare our souls for death and judgment, that
whenever they shall depart from our bodies, they may rest in the glory of thy
chosen, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

A Thanksgiving for deliverance from the former danger of tempest and foul
weather.
O Lord our deliverer, who have brought us again from the grave of death, and
having only showed us our destruction, have redeemed us from it: by the power
of thy great mercy, thou Lord have changed our fear into rejoicing, and turned
our groanings into praises of thy name; thou have saved our lives, and
refreshed us with thy mercies; O Lord receive from us the remain of our lives
which thou have preserved, and sanctify them to thy service, and to the
obedience of thy will here, and crown them with eternal life with the, in
the Kingdom of thy glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord: Amen.

A Prayer in danger of the enemy.
O Lord the preserver of all, that put their trust in thee, we beseech thee to
save us from the hands of our enemies, protect us from the power of the cruel
man, give us not a prey to them that seek our lives to destroy them, and our
goods to possess them: We confess that our sins have deserved to be
chastised with rods, but O Lord we pray thee to take the matter into thine
own hand, for with thee there is mercy, and in thy rod there is correction,
but not destruction to thy servants; O Lord set not up the right hand of our
enemies, and make not our adversaries to rejoice: We humbly commit our bodies
and souls into thy hands, for we know whom we have trusted, and thou do not
fail them that depend on thee: Hear us O Lord our deliverer, and have mercy
upon us for Jesus Christ his sake, our only Lord and Savior, Amen.

A Thanksgiving for deliverance from the former danger of the enemy.
O Lord our Fortress, and defense against our enemies, which sought our
destruction, we confess that our sins have justly deserved, that thou
should have forsaken us in our greatest fear, and danger, but thou have
exalted thy mercy above all our iniquities, and have given us thy shield to
cover us in the day of our battle, thy strength has magnified it self in our
weakness, and thy right hand has done valiantly; we humbly acknowledge our
duty to thee, and offer unto thee a sacrifice of Thanksgiving for our
deliverance and victory, beseeching thee to fill us with thy praise all the
days of our life, to the glory of thy name, through Jesus Christ our Lord,
Amen.

A Prayer to be used aboard in any visitation, by infectious sickness.
FAther of mercies, and Lord of life, to whom also belong the issues of death,
we thy children acknowledge against our selves, that it is thy hand which
punishes us in our health with sickness, and it is our sin that deserves
this, and a greater judgment to be inflicted upon us, O Lord heal our
souls, for we have sinned against thee, heal our bodies which have been the
instruments of sin, and the weapons of unrighteousness; command thy destroying
Angel to hold his hand, and restore us again to the cheerful light of thy
countenance. Cleanse the corruptions of our defiled souls, and repair the
decaies of our enfeebled bodies, turn our sorrow into joy, our sickness into
health; and that mercy may never forsake us, turn all our sin into obedience
of thy will, and if thou have now appointed us for death, prepare our souls we
pray thee for that remove, and season us for a better life, that we may
cheerfully embrace death, and willingly forsake this world to dwell with thee
in life everlasting, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

A Thanksgiving for deliverance from infectious sickness.
We thy humble, and unworthy servants, most merciful Father, whom thou have
preserved and spared in this great and dangerous visitation, do thankfully
praise thy name for this mercy, confessing, and believing, that thou only have
saned us, and defended us; thou have visited us graciously, and corrected us
justly, but thou have not delivered us over unto death: O Lord make us more and
more thankful to thee for our lives, and obedient in the whole course of them
to thy holy will: Preserve our bodies in health against all sickness, and
disease, and our souls in holiness against the infection and dominion of sin,
that we may serve thee in all humble obedience to the end of our life through
Jesus Christ, our Lord: Amen.

A Prayer for their friends at home, to be used by them who adventure their
own persons to Sea.
ALmighty God, who rulest all things by thy power, and wisdom, and in whose
sight all the inhabitants of the round world do walk: We thy servants, divided
for a time from our dearest friends, to follow the business of our lawful
Calling, do yet most humbly call upon thee for them: Bless, O Lord, our
natural parents, our wives and children, our kindred, and alliance, all our
friends, and acquaintance; preserve them in the true faith of thy Gospel, in
the health of their persons, in the love of their neighbors, in the businesses
of their Callings, in all their ways direct and prosper them. Hear their
prayers for us, and our prayers for them, and grant us a comfortable and happy
meeting again in our own Land, that we may join together in the praising
and glorifying of thy name through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

A Prayer to be used aboard, for the Adventurers and Owners at home.
Merciful Father, we thy servants, employed in the goods of other men, to get
the necessaries of our own lives, do beseech thy blessing upon the owners and
adventurers thereof under our labor and charge: O Lord God of our masters, we
beseech thee to send us good speed in this voyage, prosper their affairs in
our hands, that we may know that thou have showed them mercy, and let their
holy prayers be acceptable with thee, and effectual upon us: direct and bless
them in all their undertakings, and return their adventures to them with
plentiful increase, to the praise of thy goodness, and mercy, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

A thanksgiving for a fair Wind.
GRacious God, we thy unworthy servants do confess to thy glory, that by thy
favor to us, thy creatures do us service, the wind and weather above us, and
the seas under us, obey thy word and holy will to prosper our voyage: we humbly
thank thee for this favor; and we bless thy name with the honor due unto it:
we beseech thee to teach us also by the example of our fellow creatures, to
learn obedience to thy will, that our understanding, reason and religion,
wherein we excel these vnliuely creatures, be not lost in us; but as we in
many things are more excellent then they, so especially we may exceed them in
the maine end of our creation, which is to do thee service and honor in the
obedience of thy will, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

O Lord hear our prayers,
And let our cry come to thee.
FINIS.

