THE REFORMED SPANIARD: To all reformed Churches, embracing the true Faith,
wheresoever dispersed on the Face of the Earth: In special, To the most
Reverend Arch- Bishops, Reverend Bishops, and Worshipful Doctors, and Pastors,
now gathered together in the venerable Synod at London, this year of our
Lord, 1621.

John de Nicholas and Sacharles, Doctor of Physic, wishes health in our LORD.

First published by the Author in Latin, and now thence faithfully Translated
into English.

LONDON, Printed by for Walter Burre, and are to be sold at his shop in Paul's
Churchyard, at the sign of the Crane, 1621.

THE REFORMED SPANIARD.
Declares the reasons and motives, by which he was induced to forsake the
Romish Church.
ALthough I be by birth a Spaniard, and cannot deny but that with my Nurses
milk I have sucked in the corruptions of popery; though my whole Infancy,
child-hoode and youth, has been tainted with the dregs of such my education:
yet no sooner was I come to years of discretion, but I began to suspect the
turning of bread and wine into the very substance of the Body and blood of our
Savior, to be a mere fiction, much like (both in want of ground, and in
wicked illusions) to the coyner thereof, the Antichrist of Rome.

The beginning of my suspicion was, in that our Professor, Bartholmew
Hernandez, a most learned man, in his public Lectures at Ilerda in Catalonia,
in the year of our Lord, 1596. did teach us being his Auditors, to the number
of above 200. that God, by his ordinary power, cannot put one and the same body
in diverse places at the same instant of time. This, quoth he, implies
contradiction, as at once supposing, and not supposing a body. For by taking
away. from any body, the proper passion of a body; namely the possessing one
place, thence follows necessarily the destruction and abolishment of the
form, nature and essence of the body it self: Forasmuch as the property of
occupying one place, flows of necessity from the very form and nature of a
body, nor can by Gods ordinary power be separated therefrom without destroying
the subject it self, on which it depends. And that this confining to one
place, is a true property, or proper passion of a body, it is evident, in that
it suiteth with bodies universally, only and always, and is reciprocated with
a body. But whether God by his absolute and extraordinary power (whereby he
does what he can do, or atchiueth a work, then which he cannot perform a
greater or more perfect) can do a work, which contradicts it self, my said
Master would neither avouch, nor deny. This quoth he, is to me a bottomless
Sea, whereinto I dare not launch with the small cock-boat of my poor
understanding. Yet withal he constantly affirmed, that God never used this his
absolute power, but in one work only, and that was the Incarnating of his
Son. Then which he said, that God cannot produce a more excellent and more
perfect exploit: whereas in the production of this whole world, and of the
invisible, and visible creatures in the same, it is otherwise. For God, if it
had pleased him, could have created much more glorious Angels, men more
excellent, and brighter or better heavens then these which he has made.

Out of this Doctrine thus delivered by our Master, there arose in my mind no
small scruple, whence I forthwith, though then but young, reasoned with my
self, inferring this same Transubstantiation, which presumes to put the bodyof
our Lord in many millions of places at the same instant of time, not to be of
God, much less performable by the sacrificing Priests. Verily, thought I, it
never came from Gods ordinary power, by which he does nothing implying
contradiction; no, nor from his absolute and extraordinary, which (as my Master
would have it) was never used but in the work of Christ's Incarnation. And so I
concluded, that Transubstantiation is no work of Gods making.

To deliver freely what afterward I thought, my conjecture is, that this my
Master, intending here to express himself cautelously, did on purpose speak
perplexedly. For swallowing this pebble stone of Transubstantiation, and being
not able to concoct it, he checked his stomach down as much as he could to
keep it from a dangerous vomit: and in a word to tell his case, he was feign
to windevp himself in the snare of doubtful words, that he might escape the
snare of the Spanish Inquisition. The truth is, this learned man, who knew well
enough, white from black, should boldly have affirmed, that Almighty God,
neither by ordinary nor extraordinary power, can do those things, that are
contradictory to themselves, and therefore cannot set one and the same body in
diverse places at the same instant. And that, not by reason of any want of
active power in God, who is omnipotent; but by defect of passive power in the
creature (if such fictions may be called creatures) which cannot suffer their
essential and concomitant properties be tome away from the maine stock,
without the destruction of the whole nature and essence of the subject, which
nathelesse is here supposed to remain entyre. For what can be more absurd,
then if I should say, I present unto you a man, from whom I will notwithstanding
take away the faculty of reason? which is as much as, behold here a man, no
man: or, speaking of a Geometrical circle, I should instance in a circle,
whose beams I would imagine to be vnequalled one to the other. I am deeply
touched with sorrow, for that hearing this voice, whereby God called me, I
notwithstanding, did not cease to harden mine own heart against it, for the
space of 9. years after; still keeping my wont of saying Masses, of hearing
auricular confessions, and continuing a fierce maintainer of that erroneous
Religion. When I first put on the Cowle (which I undertook in the order of
Saint Hierome, the most renowned in Spain) I was not full seventeen years of
age: in which regard I may be the more excused, if, for want of ripeness in
judgment, I took not a fitter course for my souls health. Yet at that age
was I set in good forwardness in the Latin and Greek Languages, in
Rhetorique, and Poetry, in Logique, and the whole course of Aristotle's
Philosophy; and moreover, I had made also some entrance into the study of
Physic. Being settled in the Monastery, I diuerted my self wholly to
Divinity, and employed me in the daily reading of the Scriptures. Which that I
might the more diligently attend, I was sent to the famous and rich College
of Saint Laurence in the Escuriall, founded by King Philip the second: and in
presence of King Philip the third, I sang that Mass, which was my first
hansell.

I nor may, nor can conceal, that all that long time, whilst I was a
Mass-monger, I found no joy, no comfort, no quiet in my mind, nor peace of
conscience, by communicating in the Mass, and by that unbloody sacrifice, so
called; howsoever I had used more then ordinary diligence in fore-examining my
self, as Saint Paul exhorts us, 1 Cor. 11.28 and in premising auricular
Confession, as the Pope wills us. When therefore by woeful experience I found
daily more and more, that I could not say with the blessed Apostle, our
rejoicing is this, the testimony of our Conscience, 2 Cor. 1.12. And when as I
could not find in the holy Scriptures, any mention or proof of the Mass, of
Transubstantiation, of the unbloody sacrifice, or of Priests appointed to such
a function, I set up my rest concerning the Mass, to let it pass, and meddle
no more with it.

The more was I encouraged to deny Transubstantiation, and to give over the
Massing Trade, not only by my Masters fore-recited Doctrine, which I carefully
chewed upon whilst I remained in the Monastery, but also for that I had
observed, that he good man, would never be brought to say Mass himself,
though he were Priested, and had been by his most worthy friends thereto
entreated. To whom he was wont to give this wary answer, that he was never able
to bear in mind, or to learn by heart, the many ceremonies of the Mass,
whereupon, if he should undertake that action, he doubted the sacrifice of the
Mass, would be marred by the laughter of the bystanders beholding him. In
this his slye answer, gestured not without a smile, me thinks I see one thing
given out in word, and another locked up within his breast. Without doubt he in
this gave way to the common weakness of those that put him to the question,
being unwilling that they should take any scandal at him. For, as for his
private Judgment, his Dictates, before mentioned, show plainly that he had no
small scruple sticking in his mind, which could not easily be pulled out; and
that his suspicion against Transubstantiation had taken very deep root in him:
and therefore he could not find in his heart to undergo the atchieuement of
the Mass: inasmuch as he being persuaded against it, or at least doubting of
it, could not have such intention of Massing, as is required in the very act
thereof.

Another motive drove me further from the Romish Church; namely, that the Pope,
being a Creature, dares to judge the Law of his Creator, even that Law, by
which himself is to be judged at the latter day. For insted of the first
Commandment of the Decalogue, written by the finger of God, he has
substituted and obtruded another unto the Spanish Nation.

To speak more plainly, the first Commandment of the ten, written in Mount
Sinai, is this, Thou shall have none other Gods but me. This Commandment the
Spaniards have not in their vulgar, the common people hear no news of it.
What then is the first Commandment which the people in Spain, are taught to
repeat? Forsooth this, Amor a Dios sobre todas las cosas: To love God above all
things. I deny not this to be Gods commandment, yea the grand Commandment,
being the pith and sum of the whole first Table. But if it be lawful to put
out any particular Commandment, and to place this instead thereof, why in like
manner do they not in the Spanish Catechism blot out some one of the
Commandments in the second Table, and put, in stead of it, Thou shall love thy
neighbor as thy self; which is the sum of the second Table? These are,
without question they are, two general precepts, which in no wise exclude any
of the ten particular Commandments. And verily no man can love God above all,
and his neighbor as himself, unless he most exactly keep all those ten
Commandments. Ye are my friends if ye do whatsoever I command you, says our
Savior, Ioh. 15.14.

But as for the second Commandment, so ratified by our great and dreadful
God, partly by promises, and partly by threats, styling himself a jealous God,
and therein forbidding the worshipping, serving, or falling down to graven
shapes, or likenesses of any thing in heaven, or in earth, or in the waters
beneath the earth, and so condemning all Idolatry, and Iconolatry, that is,
Image Worship; this Commandment, I say, is by the son of perdition cancelled,
and concealed, not only from us poor Spaniards, but also from the Italian,
French, and al other Romanising Churches. Let him that has been thus bold to
blot out Gods words, take heed lest his own name be blotted out of the Book of
life, according to the threat in the end of Saint John's Revelation.

Think other men as they please, every one according to the sway of his private
apprehensions: for my part, if there were no other plague in the Church of
Rome, but this, that the Pope has presumed to change the first Commandment,
and to nimme away the second, both of them being precepts twice written with
the finger of God, and twice delivered to Moses with many signs and miracles,
I shall never hope well of those, that make the Pope their Idol, unless they
shall by Gods grace repent, Acts 5.29.
and learn, that it is better to obey God, then men.

Moreover, another motive to drive me from Papistry was; That, whereas our Lord
and Savior said concerning the Chalice of the Eucharist, Mat. 26.27.
Drink ye all of this, the Pope (with no less sacrilege then the former)
says, Ye shall not all drink of it; but, you Kings and Priests, drink ye
only of it: As for all the rest, they must be content to take the Communion in
one kind only. I am often deeply touched with admiration, and adore with
reverence and humility, the infinite patience, and incomprehensible long
suffering of God; who, in a sort ouercomming himself, can withold his
revenging hand, from sending down fire from heaven, or making the earth to
open, for the punishing such abominable and Luciferian pride of the Roman
Antichrist: When as he has of old stricken King Vzzah with sudden death, for
only daring with his hand to touch and set upright the Arc of the Covenant,
when it tottered by reason of the unruly motion of the Oxen that bare it: which
Arc was a figure of this holy Sacrament.

Lastly, I cannot but acknowledge, that I was wont to be inflamed with no small
indignation, as often as I thought upon this Ringleader of Hypocrites, who
stiling himself The servant of the servants of God, does notwithstanding
believe, and teach. That the power and authority of Kings over their Subjects,
is only of humane and positive right: but, as for him self, h upon the words
of our Savior, All power in heaven and in earth is given to me, (as if this
had been spoken of the Bishop of Rome) challenges by divine right, a power of
deposing Kings excommunicated by him; of dispensing with their Subjects in
their Oath of Allegiance; of appointing those Kings to be slain by whom he
shall think good: so that all this while, this Destroyer will have neither
himself, nor any other, that commit such horrible and dismal parricides, to
be accounted murderers; but rather judges, that the massacring of all the
Kings of the earth is not so great a mischief, as that for the preventing
thereof, there should be suffered a disclosure of any one thing related in
auricular confession; which so rigorous institution of Confession, is an
invention of his own. Verily often musing of these things.

Amazed I stood, my hair did start upright: Virgil.

My voice durst not come forth for deep affright.
Upon these and other like motives, I decreed and resolved to depart out of
Babylon, as soon as ever I could get any cleanly opportunity. Yet was there
remaining one evil spirit unconquered by me, which bare a very strong hand
over me; and that was doting adoration of the Virgin Mary, a disease which had
long bin my bosome-darling, and being bredde in my bones, would very hardly
come out of my flesh. So deep a deuoto of our Lady was I, so duly and daily
did I pray unto her, so reverently was I wont to adore and adorn her Images
(whereof I had no less then six or seven to furnish my Chamber,) offering
unto them sometime Flowers, otherwhile the choicest fruits I could get; and
withal, very frequently using those words in the Roman Breuiary, fraught with
blasphemies: Hail Queen, the Mother of mercy, All hail our life, our joy,
our hope. And, O thou our Advocate, turn unto us those thine eyes full of
pity. And those, Free us from all danger thou blessed euer-virgin, thou happy
gate of heaven, thou Queen of heaven, thou Mistress of the whole world.

I was so deeply dyed heerewith, that I had much ado to quit my self of this
habit, which I had gotten by so many and so fervent actions of this kind:
neither should I ever have shaken it off, unless I had with many tears and
prayers, for long time craved assistance at Gods hands: who being thus called
upon, did in his mercy hear me, and set me free from this spirit of error, in
this manner. The ouer-sight and care of the Library of our Monastery, being
committed to my charge, so that no man could, but by my leave, borrow, or carry
any book out of the Library into his Camber. I was wont every Saturday, to
view over all the books, and to set every of them in his order. Which when I
did according to my custom, I found one time under a deske, amongst some cast
books, a certain Spanish book bearing this Title.

Two Treatises.

The first, concerning the Pope and his Authority.

The second, concerning the Mass, and the holiness thereof.

At the first sight, I thought this book to have been made by a Papist, but
as soon as I had read over the Epistle to the Reader, I was taken with more joy
then I was able to express. I judged that I had found no small treasure, I
kept it as a most precious pearl, I showed it to no man, I read it all over.
Among other things, I found there a certain history taken out of Trithemius, in
manner following.

In the year of our Lord, 1470. one Allen of the Frocke a Dominicall Friar,
devised and composed the Rosary of our Lady, which, neglecting the Gospel of
our Lord and Savior, he preached abroad; and so this Book was published,
wherein are related many miracles of the Virgin Mary, wrought by virtue of this
Rosary. A little after the beginning, the Author tells a Tale, that, Once
upon a time, the blessed Virgin Mary came into the Chamber or cell of this
Friar Allen; and having made a ring of a lock of her own hair, she, by
delivery of it, betroathed her self unto him, kissed him, and offered to him
her paps to be handled, and sucked by him, and finally conuersed with this
sweet Friar Allen as familiarly as the spouse is wont to do with her mate.

Who has the patience to read, or hear this? Out upon such ribald
blasphemies, and blasphemous ribaldries! Verily I blush for shame, whilst I
write out these things. But I yield from my heart all praise to Almighty GOD,
for that presently upon reading this homely Tale, the former devotion which I
bare to the Virgin Mary grew key-cold. The truth is, I presently beheld a
certain new light shining out of the Gospel of our Savior, whence I was fully
instructed, that we have only one Advocate with God the Father, namely, Jesus
Christ: 1 Ioh. 2.1.
but as for an Aduocatresse, we find there no news of any such. Ever since
this, my life seemed irksome unto me, because I had no fit opportunity to make
an escape, and to repair to some place, where I might freely publish that
Religion, which I had entertained into my heart. I was then surprised with a
violent disease of that sort which we Physicians, call acute per decidentiam.
In the height, and consistence of which sickness, I vowed unto God, that (if I
recovered) I would forthwith adioyne my self unto the true Christians, which
worship God in spirit and truth. Ioh. 4.23.
As soon as I made this vow, I began to recover, and for the sooner regaining
of my health, I did get leave to go to the place where I was borne, and to
remain there for two months. Thither I went, there I remained, and recovered
my perfect health. This my appointed time being expired, my Father, brethren,
and kinsfolk thinking that I had returned to our Monastery, I conveyed my self
to a Port in the Mediterranean Sea, called Caulibre: there I took ship, and
thence went too Rome, with intent to see whither Christian Religion do flourish
more in that City, which is called the Head of the world, then in Spain; as
also that I might behold the worlds wonders, which are at Rome, which if I had
not seen, verily I should have ever longed to behold them. What shall I say?
Scarce found I in Rome any thing, that did not give me offense and scandal.
What is there at Rome, that fills all men's eyes and ears, but the Popes
divine power, the Popes Holiness, the Popes Indulgency, Pardons and Jubilees?
Nothing at Rome is trumpeted out with more full mouth, then the most Holy
Father, the Head of the Church, God upon earth. But as for the seven headed
Beast, that is, (by the Angels interpretation) seuen-hilled City; and as for
that Woman, Revel. 17.9.
with whom the Kings of the earth have committed fornication, that is (by the
same interpretation) that great City, Revel. 17.28.
which has dominion over the Kings of the earth; of these and such like
Prophesies, bent directly enough against the grandchildren of Romalus, there
is no news now to be heard among the Romans.

Walking there, and viewing the Churches, Lord, what ougly superstition do I
behold? As one wave crowdeth another, so do their new Saints shoulder out the
old. A fresh yesterdaies Saint there is, that has already gotten three new
Churches at Rome, new built and founded unto him, and their walls from top to
the floare garnished with pictures and tablets, dedicated to him. Of this
vpstart I would not speak, if the Romans would at any time leave speaking of
him, and cease with so loud throats to call upon him; if all places did not
ring again with his name: nay if this Saintling did not beat and banish out of
the Churches not only God and Christ (which perhaps seems a small matter to
the Romanists) but also the Virgin Mary her self. Francis and Anthony, and all
the rest of the Saints of the higher form. Charles the Emperor, who of old was
called Charles the Great, because he vanquished the Saracens, must now come
down, and be called Charles the little, in comparison of this new Charles
Borrhomaeus who thus triumphs, having put to flight, not his enemies, but his
friends and fellow-Saints. And why may not we thus by way of reprehension mock
at the common mockery of the world? but now it is time for me to awaken out of
this ecstasy.

I remained in Rome about a Month, all which while still me thought I heard the
voice of Christ saying unto me, Come forth, come forth out of Babylon. I come
out on Gods name, and pass over to Mompelier, where God showed me his
abundant mercy in the midst of his Church, and strengthened my heart with
the grace of his holy spirit: So that eight years sithence I there put off my
Monkish cowle, and abiuring the gross errors of the Romish Church, I did
publikly embrace the undefiled faith of the true and Reformed Religion, not
without the express joy of (in a manner) all that City. And because I could
not then speak the French tongue, I did by the advice of all the Pastors there
apply my self not to the holy ministry (which my loss I yet with many sighs
deplore) but unto my old intermitted study of Physic. But behold, while I
was thus sailing in the depths of Hyppocrates and Galen, a violent tempest
ouertaketh me, and that was this.

My Father, a man spent with age, (being fourscore years old) and taking it
very heavily that I had fled to the enemies of faith, and heretics (so they
dreamingly deem of us) sent to Monpelier one of my elder Brethren, together
with a Cosen Germane of mine, Priest; both who for the space of eight days did
beleager me, first with fair entreaties, and plentiful tears, then with
Arguments drawn from Divinity and Philosophy; thirdly by rewards and offers of
worldly goods; lastly, by threats and terrible obiurgations, to beat me off
from my found intent, and holy resolution. I think it not amiss here to
relate their language.

Thou have (said they) twelve Neeces now mariageable, which will never get
husbands so long as thou remainest an heretic; for those, who before were
willing to marry them, now start back, saying; God forbid that we should take
to wife those that are akin to an Heretic: Return, return to our religion,
if not for conscience, (for we know that you are a learned man, and have not
rashly; nor without show of reason left us,) yet for the honor of our stock
and blood, which thou have branded with the foul spot of infamy, by forsaking
the Roman Church, and embracing a new religion, which with all the Professors
thereof, (for they are but a few in number) the King of Spain is resolved to
abolish and ruinate. Return therefore to the holy Mother Church, at least for
the love and reverence you owe to our aged Father: who, ever sithence the time
he heard that you were become an heretic, lies sick and bed-ridde, pining
away with grief and sorrow.

Heereto I answered as became a Christian. But because they would give me no
patient audience, nor afford themselves any time to weigh my answer, I used a
very honest slight to bring my brother to the house of Falcarius a very worthy
Minister of Gods Word, who for the space of an whole hour did make a clear
demonstration of the falsehood of the Romish religion, and truth of the
Reformed, out of the Tenets of them both.

My brother making objection of nouelty against the Reformed religion, and want
of Calling and of Antiquity in Calvin and Beza, and other such like Pastors; M.
Falcarius according to his admirable faculty, made answer: Sir, What Religion
call you new? ours? you are far wide. Our Religion is the most ancient; if
the Gospel of our Savior, if the Epistles of Paul, and of other the Apostles
(in a word) if the new Testament, if the Prophets, and the whole old Testament
do teach the true religion, needs must you confess that our religion is most
ancient; for we believe nothing, but that which we read in the old and new
Testament, and that which is drawn thence by necessary consequence. Call your
Religion, I pray you, call it new. For almost every Pope, when he comes new
into the Chair, does impose upon you new precepts, and traditions, taken out
of his unwritten word, to be believed and awefully observed by you, under
pain of mortal sin: and what laws one Pope lays upon you to be kept, as
soon as he is gone his way by disease, or by poison, another does cancel.
Mat. 26. Paul. 1 Cor. 11.
Is not the Communion under both kinds very ancient; being instituted by our
Savior himself? We with the primitive Church, and with the most ancient
Fathers, do retain the same, and acknowledge both kinds to be necessary to
the essence of this Sacrament. Is not the worship of idols, and images a new
thing? and forbidden very instantly in the second Commandment of the
decalogue? We obey this divine prohibition, but ye obey the Pope, commanding
adoration of Images against the express Word of God. Is not the doctrine of
Transubstantiation. a nouelty crept into the Roman Church, not above four
hundred years ago? This we constantly reject, because it is repugnant to Gods
word, implies a thousand contradictions, and makes those to be Idolaters,
that are at Mass. Those words in the Scripture, This is my body, are to be
understood in the same sense and manner with those, That Rock was Christ, 1
Cor. 10.4. that is to say, a Sacramental pledge, whereby Christ was
represented, and exhibited to them. Or as those words of the Patriarch Joseph
expounding Pharaohs dream, Genesis 41. v. 26. Those seven fair kine, are seven
years: Where the word Are, is by the consent of all the Doctors taken for
signify. The same Patriarch expounding the dream of Pharaohs Butler; Genesis
40.12.
Those three branches, are three days; that is, do signify them, when as the
Scripture says, Ye are the body of Christ, and members in particular; are we
therefore transubstantiated into the very body of Christ? are not these
speeches spiritually to be understood? hereto may be added, that the Hebrew
tongue has no verb which signifies to signify, and therefore instead
thereof, uses the verb substantive, Sum. Therefore our Savior speaking
vulgarly, could not say, this signifies my body, but instead thereof said,
This is my body. Which of the Fathers that flourished the first five hundred
years after Christ, did ever believe that we are justified by the works of the
Law, and not by Faith, as the holy Ghost speaks by the mouth of Saint Paul;
Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace with God? Which of the
ancient Fathers have constantly maintained any other Purgatory, whereby our
souls should be purged before they enter into Heaven, but the blood of our
Lord and Savior, who, as Saint Paul speaks, By himself purged our sins?
Who, as Saint John speaks, Loved us, and washed us from our sins by his
own blood; And Paul again, If the blood of Bulls and Goats, and the ashes
of an Heiser, sprinkling the unclean, sanctifies to the purifying of the
flesh; how much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal
Spirit, offered himself without spot to God, purge your conscience from dead
works to serve the living God? Who ever of the Ancients, for the first five
hundred, nay six hundred years did believe, or teach, that the Bishop of Rome
is the head of the universal Church, having power to deprive Kings of their
Kingdoms, to assoile Subjects from their sworn Allegiance, and to dispense
with Vows lawfully made unto God, to admit whom he please into the catalogue
of Saints, to impose laws upon the universal Church; to pardon sins as a
Judge, to set free fowls out of Purgatory, to pronounce absolute, and
supreme judgment, without all possibility of appeal, in matters appertaining
unto Faith? so that he may avouch himself to be out of all hazard of error,
and hereupon that he might lawfully be called, by the high style of divine
Majesty, the Spouse of the Church, and a god upon earth?

This, and much more to that purpose was eloquently urged, in the hearing of my
said Brother, by Master Falcarius, cutting down the tares of errors, by the
sharp sickle of his Arguments, whereby he drew tears from my Brothers eyes.
And yet all this notwithstanding, when my Brother did see me so firmly settled
in the Religion which I have now undertaken, that he could no whit prevail to
draw me back, about four days after, he returned homeward full of sorrow,
together with my Cosen, no less laden with grief; my self the while with
dry eyes, and cheerful spirit, beholding them at their departure.

Two years after this, I took the degree of Batchelar in Physic, in the
famous University of Monpelier: and three years after that, having employed my
time in studying and practicing Physic, I was promoted Doctor in that
faculty, in the flourishing University of Valence in Daulphinee, not in the
ordinary cursory form, but passing the rigor of examination, as appears by
my Testimonial Letters.

Having taken this degree, I practiced Physic, near unto Monpelier, and in
other parts of France, being rewarded by public pension, and (whereof I boast
not) with good measure of reputation: So that by the blessing of God (to whom
only be the honor) I achieved many cures of diseases, hard to be judged of,
and almost incurable.

Whilst I practiced Physique, at Saint Giles, near Nismes, Nismes. Arles.
and Arles upon public pension, there did betide me that which I am willing
to relate for Gods glory. There preached in that City a certain Iudaite (I
should profane the most blessed name, if I should style that sect by the name
of Jesuit) a man eloquent enough, but above measure clamorous and spiteful
against those of the Reformed religion: This man (by name Rampala) in his
Sermon upon All Saints day, expounding the answer made upon that question of
S. John, Who are those that are clothed in white robes, Revel. 7.8.9. and 13.
and whence came they? These are they which came out of great tribulation, and
washed their robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb. Here Sir
Rampala lays about him in this manner: O my beloved souls, take heed lest
ye be seduced; consider, I pray you, the answer of the Angel, he says not, It
was use the Angel, but one of the Elders.
these are they which came out of faith only, which is the Doctrine of the
Hugonots (so they call the Reformed Christians in France) but which came out of
great Tribulation. Let us not therefore be Infidels, like the Hugonots, among
whom there is no Sacrament to be found, no repentance, no good works; which
last words, this valiant Actor thundered out with shameless confidence, and
set them forth with the Theatricall Ornament, of clapping his hands one
against the other.

After Sermon, three or four Papists of my acquaintance, asked me how I liked
this Rampala: whereto I answered, that he might be an eloquent man, but surely
he was vterly ignorant of our confession of faith: which is evident, in that he
imputed to us a Doctrine clean contrary to that which we profess. Forsooth we
have never a Sacrament. What a loud lie is this? we have both the Sacraments
which were instituted by our Savior, Baptism, and the holy Supper: but as for
the other five, which the Church of Rome calls Sacraments upon her own
invention, we deem them no better then bastards. He said that we have no
repentance: This is very false. We believe the Gospel, enioyning repentance in
those words, Luke 13, 3 Mat. 3.2.
Unless ye repent, ye shall perish; and again, Repent, for the Kingdom of
heaven is at hand. Our Ministers do daily inculcate unto us these words of the
Gospel, Exhorting unto repentance, and requiring the same. He said that we
make noaccount of goodworks. This is a mere slander.

We believe with Bernard, that good works are the way to the Kingdom of
Heaven, but not the cause of our reigning in that Kingdom. Lib. 4. de Iusti.
cap. 1.
We acknowledge (and this your Master Bellarmine acknowledges by us) that
good works are necessary unto salvation, not that they are the efficient or
meritorious causes thereof, (for the free mercy of God, for the merits of
Christ's passion by faith in him, does procure, and bring forth that salvation
in us;) but because they do testify the same, and are lively evidences
thereof. Nay moreover, we believe that justifying faith cannot by any means
subsist without good works, which if they be wanting in any man, we (with
Saint James the Apostle) call his faith a dead faith. Iam. 2.20.27.


Rampala, when it was told him what I had said, became my enemy, and hated me.
The Governor of that City, being an honest an learned Gentleman, (and though
himself following the Popish parts, neither a persecuter, nor a contemner of
those of the Reformed Religion) entreated me to come to his garden, and to
bring with me some one of my own Religion, that there I might confess with
Rampala, either by opposing, or answering; I answered the said Governor, that
I took kindly his offer, and would be ready to encounter Rampala there.
Accordingly I came, accompanied with one whom I chose of the Reformed Religion,
by name Master Marcot an Apothecary (a learned, honest and zealous man:) there
we expected Rampala diverse times to meet us in that field, but no Rampala
appeared. It seems his stomach served him not to enter the lists, or to show
his face, in the presence of a Reformed Spaniard. But what did his Worship? he
employed a certain Popish Swash-buckler, who before in the same City of Saint
Giles, had slain a man in the street. Him he suborned to do me some notable
affront: and accordingly this knave taking a very slight occasion, gave me a
blow on the care in the open street. These are the concluding arguments of the
Iudaits; this their openhanded rhetorique: this their close fist of Logique.
Nor must we think this strange in those who set forth cut throats for their
Champions.

What should poor I do in this case? I did pocket up this wrong as patiently
as I could; and when I had spent out my year there, I craved leave to be gone,
and that by the good advice of a certain friend, who wished me to quit that
place, affirming upon his knowledge that the Papists there did lay wait for me.
Being to depart, our brethren of the Reformed Church there held me, and
earnestly entreated me to stay; but on the other side some ten or fifteen
Papists triumphed at my departure, as though it had been a sign of their
conquest over me. So departed I according to our Saviors precept, Mat. 10.23.
If they persecute you in one City, fly into another, and was entertained in
other Towns, where I received convenient stipend, namely, in Bouuer, Bouuer.
Kaylaz.
and Kaylaz, near unto Nismes, whose inhabitants were all protestants.

Whilst I remained here, I read over again and again, a certain French
Treatise written by M. Peter Moulin, called, The Buckler of Faith. In it, I
found many things which did clear unto me the Doctrine of salvation: upon
which passages I did daily meditate, and oftentimes said to my self thus: O
ye my brethren Spaniards, whom God has endued with such depth of wit; O would
our Masters, the Inquisitors would suffer you to take this Buckler into your
hands, to arm your selves with this shield against all the poisonous darts of
the malignant enemy. O would to God I might with loss of my life, buy the
happiness to see you obey our Lord and Savior, John 5.39.
bidding us search the Scriptures, rather then yield unto the yoke of
Antichrist, the Lord of Lords, who commands you the contrary; and taking the
Scriptures from you, gives you, instead thereof, stocks and stones, to be
adored and worshipped by you. O would to God that there might shine in your
eyes, some glimpse of that light, which guides us wretched men out of the
kingdom of darkness, into the glorious kingdom of the Son of God. Colos.
1.13.
O that the same good God, who is light, and in whom there is no darkness, 1
John 1, 5.
would say unto you, that which he said in the beginning, and still says to
his elect, Genesis 1, 3.
Let there be Light. Then surely you should not any longer be darkness, but
Light in the Lord: Ephos. 5.8.
no longer wandering sheep, falling down before Idols, but returned to the
shepherd, and Bishop of our souls, 1 Pet. 2, 28
even unto Christ Jesus, who is ready to betroath them unto himself by true
faith, which works by charity. Hos. 2, 25.


But there is one that hinders you from enjoying this great benefit namely, he
that will be accounted another Christ, and omnipotent; and yet in the mean
either steals from you, or changes Gods Commandments, and will by no
means suffer you to read and hear the holy Scriptures in your Mother tongue,
least you should understand them, and by the light of them, discover his
tyranny.

Would to God that you that sit in darkness, Luke 1, ^9.
and in the shadow of death, might be enlightened by the Sun of righteousness
arising unto you, Mal 4, 2.
that ye might go forth, and grow up, as Calves of the stall, shaking off the
Popes heavy yoke, which himself will not touch so much as with his finger; and
yielding your necks unto the sweet yoke of Christ.

I would to God, the Office of Inquisition, or rather Inquination, would suffer
you to view engraven in this Buckler, a fair and pure Confession of Faith,
most agreeable to the Scriptures. Then should you easily behold the falsehood,
and deformity of your Religion, which you would thereupon loath no less then
now you detest our Religion, being induced so to do by your Preachers, who
decipher it unto you, as foul, false, and contemptible, as it is in it self
fair, true, and amiable. Then should you see as clear as the noone day, That
the Reformed Christians or Protestants (whom ye call Heretics, because they
will not thrust their necks into the Popes tyrannous yoke) do not, as you
dream, believe many things repugnant, not only against the Word of God; but
also against the light of reason. Your clamorous Friars in their sermons, ring
in your ears, that we believe the blessed Virgin Marie, not to have continued
a Virgin after the birth of our Savior: That we have corrupted or dismembered
the Scriptures: That there be no Sacraments in our Churches; or at least, that
we believe, that the Bread and Wine in the Sacrament of the Body and blood of
our Lord, are nothing else, but naked and barren signs: That we damn all good
Works: That we admit no penance. But, as for our persons, your people being
misled, and incensed by the barking of your Friars, thinks that we bear not
the shape of men, but are Monsters with Dogs faces, or Hogs snowts: That we
live barbarously and wildely, in rude Cottages or Dens. These and such like
guls they put upon you, which deserve rather our Laughter in contempt, then our
labor in refutation.

As for that one point, concerning the raising a dishonorable opinion of the
Virgin Marie, let them look to it, who blush not when they read that, which
before we have touched concerning worthy sir Allen, so wooed and courted by
the blessed Virgin.

Considering and weighing with my self, all these particulars, and conferring
with certain learned and discreet Ministers of Gods Word, as also with other
well affected Gentlemen, upon their advice, and entreaty, I was inflamed with
a desire, to translate the aforsaid Buckler of faith, into the Spanish tongue.
And being resolved no longer to resist the motion of Gods Spirit (which with
sorrow I confess my self to have resisted for the space of a year) I set my
hand to this task; and having with four months pains finished it, I
dedicated the same unto the most Excellent Charles, Prince of Wales; being
thereunto led by the first Author, by whom, the said Treatise in the Original
French, was dedicated unto his Highness.

But when as a certain honest man of Monpelier, by whom I had sent Letters
into Spain to my brethren, upon his return thence, had with an Oath
affirmed unto me, that he heard my elder Brother speak these words: All we
his six Brethren desire nothing more ernestly in the world the^ his death
(speaking of me;) we would willingly give a reward unto any man, that would
make an end of him. When I saw, that as long as I remained in France, I was in
daily danger of my life, I betook my self hither into England, as into the
Haven of safety: with intent that my self, who had been in Spain a bad
Physician of souls, in France by Gods blessing a good one of bodies; might in
England become a good Physician in special to my self of body and soul, by
securing them both under the Government of the most gracious King James, the
most powerful defender of the sincere and unpolluted faith; resolving to yield
all obedience unto such a King, professing the Reformed Religion, and
withdrawing my self from Papists (whose company is wont to breed infection)
some-where within his Majesty's Dominions, either to exercise my function of
Ministry, or to practice Physic, and by one, or both of these to maintain
my self in diet and clothing, by my honest labor.

Neither thought I fit to come hither unarmed; and therefore brought I with me
this buckler, which I have already preseted to that most noble Prince Charles
the rising Morning-Starre of Great-Brittaine: which my small present, his
Highness, according to his wonted gentleness, did most graciously accept. And
now have I learned by experience that to be true which all the world witnesses,
namely, that no eloquence can express that piety toward God, and zeal for
Gods house, which is found in the most mighty King of great Britain, and the
most excellent Prince, the lively Image of his renowned Father, upon both whom,
Nature seems to have powered out all her endowments and ornaments culled out
from all others.

But now I betake my self to you, Fathers of this Church; most Reverend
Archbishops; Reverend Bishops; Worshipful, and well-deseruing Doctors and
Pastors; to you I address my self, who are the salt of the earth, Mat. 5.
the light of the World, a City set upon an hill: to this Synod I fly, as to
a City of refuge; not as a Manslayer, but contrariwise, my self having of
late very hardly escaped slaughter.

Namely in the month of February lately past, being in London, and walking in
Paul's, there meets me, as by chance, one unknown to me, but certainly a
slieknaue; who entering into conference with me about matter of Physic,
entreats me that I would take the pains to visit a certain woman which lay
sick of a sore disease, and forsaken of other Physicians, as incurable. This
he diverse times urged, soliciting me four days together, and promising me a
large reward. Poor I, in my simple credulity yielded thereto; he leads me
along the streets for the space of an hour and an half: then at length we
find the house, and therein the sick woman; where, after much questioning and
conferring about her disease, I tarried supper upon on the entreaty of him that
brought me thither; who at Supper said Grace in Latin. Presently after eight
of the clock at night we depart thence. Then he, making as though he would (as
he had promised) guide me back to my chamber, leads me clean another way
beyond the City walls, out of the broad streets, through by-lanes and narrow
allies, into desert places, and into the fields. Sometime he stops his pace and
stands still, sometimes he listneth carefully, and when I ask him the cause
thereof; I listen, says he, to hear if any man come by, of whom I may ask
the way to London, which verily I have lost, and know not where I am. But
verily he lied; for his listening was for nothing else, but that he might have
me sure, to set upon me far enough from any to help me. I call God to
witness, that, when I thus wandered with him in the dark, my mind did
fore-boad some mischance unto me; whereupon I lifted mine eyes to heaven, and
armed my self as well as I could, with repentance toward God, and faith in
our Lord Jesus Christ. Acts 20.21.
Now then about ten of the clock in the night, having gotten me into such a
place as he desired, namely in the great fields called S. Iameses, he on a
sudden flies upon me with his naked dagger, and grievously wounded me near the
left ventricle of the heart; from whence come those two principal vessels of
life, the one called the veiny Artery, and the other Aorta: and presently
running away, left me there half dead. This wound being given me in an
extreme cold night, and being in depth as much as eight fingers breadth, yet
not directly, but obliquely pearcing, was dangerous enough, especially when as
I knew not where I was, nor whom to call on for help, being utterly ignorant
of the English tongue: and surely I had never seen the mornings light, had not
a certain good Samaritane that very night powered wine and oil into my wound:
that is, unless the renowned Doctor Mayern his Majesty's most worthy
principal Physician, being as much replenished with mercy and charity, as with
knowledge and experience, had reached forth unto me his helping hand, and for
three weeks space entertained me in his house, had special care of my
recovery.

Though this wound be healed, yet the scarre thereof remains, and ever will
so long as I live; whereof I am so far from being ashamed (it having been
inflicted upon me in hatred of the reformed Religion) that I rather rejoice in
it, and say with Saint Paul, Gal. 6. v. 17.
I bear in my body the marks of the Lord Jesus. Paphnutius, who was present
at the Council of Nice, having one of his eyes boared out, and his ham-strings
cut, for his constant profession of Christianity, was not thought to be
deformed, but rather more beautified by these marks: Afford unto me, I pray
you reverend Fathers, unto me the meanest and basest Professor, yea and
Confessor of the Christian reformed Religion, a place in this your Synod, not
by way of local presence, but by admission into your good opinion, and
fatherly love.

Paphnutius after he had received those prints and seals of Christian
constancy, ceased not to profess, and confess Christ the more fervently:
verily I am so far from being discouraged by this dangerous conflict from
walking still in that path of pure Religion, which I have set into, that this
same Dagger is become a goade or spur unto me, whereby I am pricked on to
run more courageously, and swiftly in the rest of that race, which I have
undertaken. Now therefore, God thus putting me forward, it the more behooves
me to whet my pen against the errors of papistry, and to do my best for
maintaining the honor of all reformed Churches against the calumniations of
the Spaniards, who are zealous, but not according to knowledge; and father upon
us another manner of Confession of faith, clean contrary to that which we
profess.

Wherefore I entreat all you Pastors and Doctors of the reformed Churches, by
the bowels of Gods mercies, to take especial care and order, that the true
Confession of your sincere Faith may be made known to foraigne people, who are
miserably deceived in this behalf; namely, to that end there may be published
some small Treatises translated or written in the vulgar languages of the
people of Spain, Italy, France, and other Nations. I, for my part, and poor
faculty, am ready and willing to employ herein my pains by day and night, even
to my last gasp. This, this enterprise, I say, does nearly concern the glory
of God, the saving of souls, the maintaining of the honor of the most
gracious King of great Britain, defender of the Faith, as also the shielding
of your own reputations from the slanders of the Papists. Whose reuilings and
forged calumniations against you, by no other means can be refuted, then by
that course, which here is wished, and offered by

Him, that again recommends himself to your charitable and fatherly embraces,
John de Nicholas and Sacharles, Doctor in Physic.

FINIS.

