Herod and Pilate reconciled: OR, THE CONCORD OF PAPIST AND PVRITAN (Against
Scripture, Fathers, Councels, and other Orthodoxall Writers) for the Coercion,
Deposition, and Killing of KINGS.

Discovered by David Owen Batchelour of Divinity, and Chaplain to the right
Honorable Lord Vicount HADINGTON.

Tunc inter se concordant, cum in perniciem iusti conspirant, non quia se
amant, sed quia eum qui amandus erat simul oderunt. August. in Psalm. 36.
concion. 2. PRINTED BY CANTRELL LEG, Printer to the University of Cambridge.
1610.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, SIR JOHN RAMSEY Knight, Lord Vicount Hadington, one
of the most Honorable Gentlemen of the Kings Majesty's bedchamber, my singular
good Lord, and Master.
I Did suppose (my very good Lord) that the sembable opposition of Papist and
Puritan, against the Protestant, concerning the supremacy Ecclesiastical,
and Deposition of Kings, might have been constriued into a few sheets of
paper; which I find both tedious, and intricate: because the opponents,
(though they agree against Kings, as Herod and Pilate did against Christ) are
at diverse irreconciliable iarres among themselves. And no marvel, quia
mendacij multiplex diuortium: Liers never agree in one tale. There are among
the Papists three different opinions concerning the Popes power over Kings. The
first opinion (which Alexand. Car. de potest. Romans Pontif. lib. 2. c. 9.
Alexander Carerius holds) is, that the Pope has absolute power over all the
world, both in Ecclesiastical, and Political things. The second opinion is
Bellarmines, Bellar. de Pontif. lib. 5. c. 6.
who affirms, that though the Pope have not mere temporal power over Kings,
and kingdoms, directly; yet has he supreme authority to dispose of the
Temporalities of all Christians, as well Kings, as others, by an indirect
prerogative, tending to the advancement of the spiritual good. The third is
the opinion of Guliel Barclay. cont. monarchomacos, l. 5. cap. 8.
Barclayus, who auerreth, that the Pope has spiritual power to excommunicate
Kings, but no temporal authority, directly, or indirectly, to afflict the
persons of Kings, to transpose their kingdoms, to persuade forrainers to make
wars, or subjects to rebel against them. And with him agrees M. Blackwell
In the letter annexed to his large examination at Lambeth, p. 157.
in his letter to the Romish Catholics of England, wherein he says, that the
keys Ecclesiastical, do no way extend themselves by Gods law, unto kingdoms
terrene, to open or shut, to toss, or turmoile any of them, they have no
wards in them, to turn, or ouerturne Kingdoms, or to open any lawful
entrance, into such disobedient and doubtful courses. Wheresoever (most noble
Lord) any Papist has laid a stepping-stone in this water of strife, any man
may plainly trace the Puritanes treading. Although they deny an universal
absolute power over all Kings, which the Pope claymeth, they contend for a
national sovereignty, in every kingdom, over Kings, to dispose of them and
their kingdoms. Although the Popes (says Christopher Goodman) Treatise of
obedience, page 52. 53.
for sundry enormities, have deposed Kings, by unlawful authority; the
reason that moved them so to do, was honest, and just, and meet to be
received, and executed by the body of every commonwealth. haec ille. The
Statesmen of the kingdom (says Polit. Christ. l 6. c. 3. p. 156.
Lambertus Danaeus) may punish their King when he transgresses the
fundamental laws of the kingdom, yea if he be obstinate, they may deprive
him of his royal dignity. M. Beza Theses Genevenses, p. 249.
in a scholasticall disputation (one John Iobert being Respondent) did
determine, that the officers of State, such as are the 7. Electors in the
Empire of the Romans, and the Three States in every Monarchy, have authority
to repress tyrannous Princes: which if they do not, they shall answer before
God, for their treachery against the people. Dudley Fenner an English
Sectarie, iumpeth with them: He is a Tyrant by practice (says Sacra Theologia.
lib. 5 c. 13.
Fenner) that dissolueth all, or the chiefest compacts of the Commonwealth, let
them that have that authority, as the Peers of the kingdom, or the public
assembly of all Estates, make him away, vel pacifice, vel cum bello, either by
peaceable practice, or open hostility. Cardinal Bellarmine gives this reason
for the Popes indirect power over Kings: De Pontif l. 5. cap. 7.
The Ecclesiastical Commonwealth must be (says he) perfect, and of it self
sufficient, to attain unto the end whereunto it was ordained: for such are
all Commo^wealths that are well instituted. Therefore it ought to have all
necessary power, to attain to the spiritual end, but power to dispose of all
temporalties, is necessary to the spiritual end: for otherwise evil Kings
will foster heretics, and overthrow religion, wherefore the Church has this
power. Haec ille. Banosus a Puritan in a tractate of Civil and
Ecclesiastical Polity, has the very same reason, for the power of the
Presbiterie: lib. 2. page 51.
If the Church (says he) have not power, by forcible means to compel all
sorts of men to live in order, this absurdity will follow, even under a
faithful magistrate, that the Church can not defend her self, with her own
forces. What (I pray you) will become of the Church, when the Magistrate is
either an Infidel, or so negligent, as to suffer evil to be done without
punishment? and those things which are hallowed to be profaned, or removed?
Should not the Church be utterly overthrown in these eases, if it had not
peculiar right to make powerful resistance? Haec ille. I appeal (my good
Lord) to the consciences of all good men, whether this reason of Bellarmine and
Banosus be not a wicked ouerthwarting of the counsel of God, and his gracious
providence, toward the Church, yea an open bewraying of their unquiet hearts,
and seditious disposition. Our Savior Christ (foreseeing and foreshewing, that
his Disciples the chief pillars of the Church, should be brought before Kings,
hated of the world, yea and put to death Matthew 10.18 etc 24 ^.
for his names sake,) teaches not, to resist, or rebel, but to abide, and
Matthew. 24.13.
endure, not with violence to withstand authority, but Luke 21.19.
with patience to possess their souls. This is a remedy against Tyrants, and
there is no other means revealed in the word of God against persecution then
Matthew. 10.23.
Desertion: if they persecute you in one city, fly to an other: or Psalm ^0.15.
Prayer and Patience; Happy M^. 5.11.12.
are you, when men shall do all manner of evil unto you for my names sake,
rejoice and be glad, for great is your reward in heaven. Let not man therefore
resist their power, which God ordained, but with all meeknes endure persecution
in earth, that they may be crowned in heaven. Lambertus Danaeus a Puritan of
the best note, does freely grant Bellarmines Thesis, viz. that there is a
power in ordine ad spiritualia, to punish kings: denying his hypothesis, viz.
that the Pope has such power. This being granted (says Res^. Dan (...) ad
^ella^ de pontif. lib. 5. cap. 7. page 541.
Danaeus) that Bellarmine contendeth for: it does not follow that the Bishop
of Rome, or any other Prelate, has temporal jurisdiction over that civil
Christian Magistrate, which does either enact laws against the spiritual
determination: or govern the Commonwealth contrary to the spiritual regiment
of the Church. We confess those laws, and that government, should be
reformed, but it ought to be done, by the public assembly, by the Parliament
of the kingdom, or by the Peers themselves of the whole kingdom. Yea in case
the king deserve to be deposed, the Pope, and other Bishops, or Priests, have
no right to dethrone him: Neither batell better hering.
Verum id fieri debet Idem ibidem page 517.
a concilio publico, a Parliamento regni, vel ab ipsis regni ordinibus, but
that ought to be done by the public Council, the Parliament of the kingdom,
or by the Estates of the land: Haec ille. Thus far (my good Lord) they agree
in substance, touching the punishment, and deprivation of Kings, though they
vary in this point of circumstance, whether the Pope, the Peers, or the people
shall punish or depose them.

As concerning the third opinion, which is for the excommunication of Kings;
all Presbyteries which are the tribunal seats of Jesus Christ (as Beza says
in his book against Erastus) do challenge right and power, Theodorus Beza, page
116. Guli l ^eppetus Discipl. Eccl si.
as Christ's immediate Commissaries in earth, to excommunicate the chief
Christian Magistrates, as may appear by these places: viz. Beza de
Presbyterio, page 115. Thomas Cartwright. Lamb. Danaeu^. Gellius Sneca^.
Thomas Cartwright in his last reply, page 65. Lambertus Danaeus in his
Christian Policy, lib. 3. page 232. Gellius Snecanus in his book of
discipline, page 456. Gali^l B^^^ Herm Re^^^.
William Bucanus in his common places of Divinity, page 582. Hermanus
Renecherus in his observation upon the first Psalm, page: 68. The counter
p^^son. The humble petition. The defense of (...).
The counterpoyson, page 175. The humble petition to the late Queen, page 55.
And the defense of discipline against M. Bridges, page 127. And this power,
have they put in practice to the glory of Sion, against diverse kings in the
Christian world, as the said disciplinarian page ^^8
Champion boasts, in more then insolent manner. Consider (honorable Lord)
whether any King may think his state secure, where every offense, though but
suspected, does procure a citation, every citation, does enforce appearance,
every appearance does urge confession, or inioyne purgation, and the least
contempt does breed a contumacie, to draw the greatest censure. These
Parish-popes shall never be able to show any record in the sanctuary, or
practice of Prelates, for a thousand years after Christ to warrant this
Puritan-popish manner of proceeding against Princes. I like well of the opinion
in John de Parisijs De potest. reg. and papal. cap. 13. Every Minister of God
must rather submit his life to the Princes pleasure the^ admit him to the
Sacrament, that shows manifest tokens of impiety, or infidelity: but the
Puritans speak not of the Church ministry, but of their Lordly consistory,
at the Papists due of the Popes court: whom not God but the Devil and Antich
is it has exalted over Kings.
concerning the power of the Keys. Non quilibet peccator, etc. Every offender,
neither is nor ought to be subject to the power of the keys, and
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, but the sinner which is subject thereto. And
therefore the said power has no effect, except against them that are subject
unto it, which subjection, makes a man fit matter, whereupon the power of the
keys has his effectual operation. Haec ille.

The politic Puritans meddle not with this dangerous question, of Deposing
and Killing of Kings, but stand aloof, to give aim, while other desperate,
archers shoot, that if they miss, they may step aside to save themselves, or
in case the mark be hit, they may step in to part the stakes. I accuse not
without cause: M. Beza being seriously consulted by some brethern of England,
whether inferior officers, might not lawfully arm themselves, against him,
who being lawfully confirmed Magistrate, does take away the privileges, and
infringe the liberties, which he has sworn to perform to the subjects; or
does oppress them with manifest tyranny, etc. returned this fectlesse answer,
Beza epist. 24.
cogitmur (...): We must demurre upon this point, not only because it is
dangerous (specially in our time) to set open such a window, but also for that
we may not determine the state of this question, simply as you propound it, but
upon consideration of many most weighty circumstances. Iraque in hoc
Aphrorismo (...)
And therefore for the present we defer our answer to your demand: Thus Beza
demurred at Geneua, in communi fratrum ex verb, and agro collectorum caetu, in
the common assembly of the Brethren, out of the City, and Suburbs: 25. Iunij.
Anno Domini. 1568. the very year before Morton the Popes Nuncio, came to
England, to stir up the Peers of the North, against our late Queen, for
pretended heresy, and tyranny. While the proposition was demurred at Geneva,
the Assumption was framed at Rome, and the conclusion practiced by traitors in
England; could not Beza answer? why did he not confess it? or if he could, why
does he dissemble it? It is truth without color that must direct the
conscience, and settle the simple, desirous to be resolved. Dissimulation is
but dawbing with untempered mortar, ad perdendos homines in sermon mendacij,
to bring men to destruction, with the words of lying: and a very ready way to
bring religion to scandale Princes to jealousy, and male-contented men to
mutiny. I have endeavored (according to my mediocritie of learning) to set
down the judgment of the Church of God in all the former ages, concerning the
Authority of Kings, and the Duty of subjects, that the late learning of
Papist and Puritan, (compared with the old doctrine of ancient Orthodoxals)
may appear to be as new as it is naught: which I offer to your Honorable
protection, as well in respect of your duty to God, as of my service to your
Lordship. Your duty to God: for he that has made you his instrument of honor
to save the Kings life, does require at your hands, the maintenance of the
Kings right. And seeing it has pleased you, to admit me into the number of
your servants, I hope you will favorably accept of this my service, wherein I
do my best endeavor, to make up the gappe against Schism in the Church, and
sedition in the State. The great God, and King of heaven grant your Lordship
many days, much honor, the love of your Country, inward peace, and
everlasting glory. From Clarehall in Cambridge. 12. Octo. 1610.

Your Lordships Chaplain humbly devoted, DAVID OWN.

To the dutiful Subject.
THe Puritan-Church-Policie, and the Jesuitical society began together: See
M^lic^kers preface. And the preface of Chemnic. before his examen against the
first part of the Council of Trent.
the one in Geneva, 1536. and the other in Rome, 1537. since their beginning,
they have bestirred themselves busily (as he that compasses the Job. 1.7.
earth, or they that coasted Matthew. 23.15.
sea and land,) each one in his order. The Puritan to break down the wall of
Sion, by disturbing the peace of the reformed Church: the Jesuit to build up
the ruins of Babylon, by maintaining the abomination of the deformed
Synagogue. These (though brethren in sedition and headie) are head-seuered, the
one staring to the presbytery, and the other to the Papacy, but they are so
fast linked behind, and tayle-tied together with firebrands between them, that
if they be not quenched by the power of Majesty, they cannot chose (when the
means are fitted to their plot) but set the Church on fire, and the state in
an uproar. Their many and long prayers, their much vehement preaching, and
stout opposition against orders established, their show of austeritie in their
conversation, and of singular learning in their profession, (as the evil fiend
transformed into an angel of light) brought them first to admiration. Whereby
they have not only robbed widows houses under pretense of prayer, and
ransacked their seduced disciples by show of deevotion, but also battered the
courts of Princes, by animating the Peers against Kings, and the people
against the Peers for pretended reformation. And whereas God has inseparably
annexed to the crown of earthly majesty, a supreme ecclesiastical
sovereignty for the protection of piety; and an absolute immunitie from the
judicial sentence, and Martial violence, for the preservation of policy:
These sectaries bereave Kings of both these their Princely prerogatives, 2 Thessalonians. 2.3.4.
exalting themselves (as the son of perdition) above all that is called God:
Least they might seem sine ratione insanire, to sow the seeds of sedition
without show of reason, Caedem faciunt scripturarum (as the heretics in
Tertullians time were wont to do) in materiam suam, they kill the Scripture to
serve their turns: and pervert the holy word of the eternal God, by strange
interpretation, and wicked application against the meaning of the Spirit, by
whom it was penned; the doctrine of the Church, to whom it was delivered; and
the practice of all the Godly, (as well under the Law as the Gospel) that did
believe, understand, and obey it; to maintain their late, and lewd opinions. I
have in my hand above forty several places of the old and new Testament, which
both the brethren of the enraged opposite faction do indifferently quote, and
seditiously apply, in defense of their dangerous opposition, and damnable
error, against the Ecclesiastical supremacy, and the indeleble character of
royal invnction. Unto the which places, falsely expounded, perverted, and
applied, I have added the interpretation, of the learned Protestants since the
time of Martin Luther, who began to discover the nakedness of the Romish
Church, 1517. More especially insisting in the K. Henry 8. K James. Th.
Cranmer. lo. Whitgift. Rich. Bancroft Archb. of Cant. Henry Earl of
Northampton. Robert Earl of Salisbury.
most mighty Kings, the most reverend Prelates, The L. Burleigh L. treasurer of
England. The L. Else nere L. chancellor of England. The L. Stafford. The L.
Cook. B. Jewel. B. Horn* B. Pilkington. B Elmere, B Couper. B. Bilson. B.
Babington. B. Andrews. B. Barlowe. B. Bridges. D Ackworth. D. Sarania. D.
Cosen^. D. Sutchliffe. D. Prvthet^h. D. Wilkes D. Morton. D. Tochen. M.
Bekinsaw. M. Fox. M. Nowell. M. Hooker and many others.
honorable Lords, loyal Clergy, and other worthy men, that have in the
Church of England, learnedly defended the Princely right, against disloyal,
and undutiful opponents: which by Gods help I mean to publish, when I have
added the exposition of the Fathers, to confute the falsehood of the
Puritan-popish-faction, and to confirm the truth of the Protestants Doctrine
in each particular quotation. I protest in all sincerity, that I neither have
in this treatise, nor mean in the other, hereafter to be published, to detort
any thing, to make either the cause it self, or the favorers of it more
odious, then their own words, (published with the general approbation of
their several favorites) do truly infer, and necessarily enforce. I hope
the loyal subject, and Godly affected, will accept in good part my endeavor,
and industry, intended for the glory of God, the honor of the King, and the
discovery of the seditious. The displeasure of the malecontented-factious
(which can no more abide the truth, then the owls can light, or the frantique
the Physician) I neither regard nor care for. Farewell.

Errata.
Page 10. l. 15. for subtly, read subtilty. p. 17. l. 4. presto, for praesto.
p. 19. l. 25. Sabanianus, for Sabinianus. p. 34. l. 27. odience, for obedience.
p. 37. l. 13. his, for this. p. 39. l. 5. as very fool, for, as very a fool.
p. 47. l. 1. regnum, for regum. p. 48. l. 17. Prince, for Princes.

The Table of the Book.
The duty of Prelates, Peers, People,
by Scripture, Chap. 1. Page 1. Fathers of the first 300 years, 2 page 3
second 300 years, 3 page 8 third 300 years, cap. 4 page 21 fourth 300 years,
5 page 24 fifth 300 years, 6 page 30

Sedition of Puritans Papists Concord in the matter, of sedition. cap. 7. p. 36
Discord in the manner of sedition. cap. 7. p. 36 Danger of their doctrine to
Prince, cap. 8. p. 43. People, cap. 8. p. 43.
Puritan-Iesuitisme, or the general consent of the principal Puritans and
Jesuits, against Kings, from the year 1536. until the year 1602. out of the
most authentic Authors. cap. 8. p. 46




The first Chapter prooveth by the testimomonie of Scripture, that Kings are
not punishable by man, but reserved to the judgment of God.
KINGS have their authority from God Romans 13.1.
, and are his Vicegerents in earth Prove. 8.15.
, to execute justice and judgment for him amongst the sons of men 2. Chron.
19.6.
. All subjects (as well Prelates and Nobles, as the inferior people) are
forbidden with the tongue, to revile Kings Exodus 22.28.
, with the heart, to think ill of them Eccl. 10.20.
, or with the hand, to resist them Romans 13.2.
. The great King of heaven does impart his own name unto his Lieftenants the
Kings of the earth: and calls them Gods, with an ego dixi Psalm. 82.6.
, whose word is Yea and Amen: with this only difference, that these Gods shall
die like men Psalm. 82.7.
, and fall like other Princes. Wherefore Nathan the man of God, must reprove
David 2. Sam. 12.7
, that he may repent, and be saved. And the Sages, Judges, and Nobles (without
fear or flattery) must advise and direct Roboam 1. Reg 12.7
. Other attempts against Kings, the King of Kings has neither commanded in his
law, nor permitted in his Gospel. Apolog. David cap. 10.
David (says Ambrose) nullis legibus tenebatur, etc. David though he were an
adulterer, and an homicide, was tied to no law: for Kings are free from bonds,
and can by no compulsion of law, be drawn to punishment, being freed by the
power of government. Thus far Ambr.

Saul the first King of Israel was rather a monster, then a man: after the
spirit of God had forsaken him, and the evil spirit was come upon him 1. Sam
16.14.
. There were not many sins against God, Man, or Nature, wherein he
transgressed not; yet his excess was punished, neither by the Sacerdotall
Synod, nor the secular Senate: Who can lay his hand on the Lords Anointed, and
be guiltless 1. Sam. 16.9.
? The very Annointment was the cause of Saul's immunitie from all humane
coercion: as Augustine affirms, Aug. contr. lit. Petil. l. 2. 148.
Quero sinon habebat, Saul sacramenti sanctitatem, quid ineo David venerabatur?
If Saul had not the holiness of the Sacrament, I ask what it was that David
reverenced in him? he honored Saul for the sacred and holy unction, while he
lived: and revenged his death. Yea, he was troubled and trembled at the heart,
because he had cut off a lap of Saul's garment. Lo, Saul had no innocence,
and yet he had holiness: not of life, but of unction. So far Augustine.

Who questioned David for his murder and adultery? who censured Solomon for
his idolatry? though their crimes were capital by the law of God. After that
kingdom was divided, all the Kings of Israel, and most of the Kings of Judah,
were notorious idolaters: yet during those kingdoms, which endured above 200.
years, no Priest did challenge, no Statesmen did claim power from the
highest, to punish or depose their Princes. And the Prophets persuaded all men
to obey, and endure those idolatrous Princes, whose impiety they reproved
with the loss of their lives.

Christ fled when the people would have made him a King Ioh. 6.15.
. He paid tribute for himself and Peter Matthew. 17.27.
. When the question was propounded concerning the Emperors subsidy, he
concluded for Caesar Matthew. 22.21.
. And standing to receive the judgment of death before Pilate, he acknowledged
his power to be of God Ioh. 19.11.
. This Savior of Mankind, whose actions should be our instruction, did never
attempt to change that government, or to displace those governors, which were
directly repugnant to the scope of reformation that he aimed at.

John Baptist did indeed reprove king Herod with a Non licet Mark. 6.18
, but he taught not the soldiers to leave his service, or by strife and
impatience, to wind themselves out of the band of allegiance, wherein the law
had left them, and the Gospel found them Luke 3.14.


The Apostles delivered unto the Church the doctrine of obedience and patience,
which they had learned by the precept, and observed by the practice of our Lord
Christ. Peter commands obedience to all manner of men in authority 1. Pet.
2.13.
. Paul forbids resistance against any power Romans 23.1, 2, 3, 4.
. And S. Jude makes it blasphemy, to revile government, or to speak evil of
governors Jude ^.
. If therefore an Angel from heaven preach otherwise, then they have delivered,
let him be accursed Gal. 1.8.


The second Chapter proves the same by the Fathers of the first 300. years.
THe true Church, which had the spirit of understanding, to discern the voice
of Christ, from the voice of a stranger, never taught, never practiced, never
used or approved other weapons, then salt tears, and humble prayers against
the Paganism, heresy, apostacy, and tyranny of earthly Kings.

Justinius Martyr, Tertullian, and Cyprian, shall bear witness for 300.
years, wherein the Kings and Potentates of the earth, bathed themselves in the
blood of innocents, and professed enmity against Christ and his servants.

Ad inquisitionem vestram, Christianos nos esse profitemur, etc. At your
inquisition, we profess our selves to be Christians, though we know death to
be the guerdon of our profession (says Iustine Martyr to the Emperor
Antoninus, ^ccund. Apolog. ad Ant. Imp. p. 113.
) did we expect an earthly kingdom, we would deny our religion, that escaping
death, we might in time attain our expectation: But we fear not persecution,
which have not our hope fixed on the things of this life, because we are
certainly persuaded, that we must die. As for the preservation of public
peace, we Christians yield to you (O Emperor) more help and assistance, then
any other men. For we teach, that no evil doer, no covetous man, nor
seditious, that lies in wait for blood, can have access to God: And that
every man does pass to life or death, according to the merit of his deeds:
Thus far he.

Tertull. lib. ^^ Scap.
We (says Tertullian to Scapula the Viceroy of Carthage) are defamed, for
seditious against the Imperial Majesty: Yet were the Christians never found to
be Albinians, Nigrians, or Cassians, (Albinus, Niger, and Cassius were traitors
against Marcus Antonius, Commodus, Pertinax, and Seuerus the Emperors) but
they that swear by the Emperors dietie, the very day before: they that vowed
and offered sacrifice for the Emperors health, are found to be the Emperors
enemies. A Christian, is enemy to no man, much less to the Emperor: knowing,
that the Imperial majesty, is ordained of God, and therefore necessarily to
be loved, reverenced, and honored, whose prosperity, together with the
welfare of all the Roman Empire they desire so long as the world stands. We
do therefore honor the Emperor, in such sort, as is lawful for us, and
expedient for him: we reverence him as a mortal man, next unto God, of whom he
holds all his authority, only subject to God, and so we make him,
sovereign over all, in that, we make him subject, but to God alone: So far
Tertullian.

S. Cyprian shows many good reasons, for the patience of the Saints, in his
book against Demetrianus. God (says he) is the revenger of his servants, when
they are annoied. Wherefore no Christian when he is apprehended, does resist or
revenge himself against your unjust violence, though the number of our people
be very great. The confidence we have, that God will reward, does confirm our
patience, the guiltless give way to the guilty, the innocent rest content with
their undeserved punishment, and tortures, being certainly assured that the
wrong done to us, shall not be unrewarded. The more injury we suffer, the more
just and grievous shall Gods vengeance be on them that persecute us. It is
therefore clear and manifest, that the plagues which come down from Gods
indignation, do not come thorough us poor persecuted Christians, but from him
whom we serve, for the wrong done unto us. So far Cyprian.

As many as lived according to Christ's institution, did never revile the
government of Tyrants, much less by force resist their violence, following
the patience of Christ, who could by his own power, the might of his Angels,
or the strength of his creatures, have at the first withstood, or, at the last
revenged, the injury of the people, the buffer of the Priests servant, the
scorn of Herod, the judgment of Pilate, Io^. 10 15. Io (...).
and the violence of the soldiers. He yielded himself patiently to death, to
teach all his disciples, that an injury done by authority, is patiently to be
endured, not forcibly to be repelled. As soon also as Paul became a Christian,
his seditious and bloody spirit, which he had learned of the Pharisees, was
changed into a desire of peace, and quietness. He honored the heathen
Magistrates, as Agrippa, Faelix, and Lisias, ratifying his doctrine, by the
practice of his life. I know that Cardinal Alane, Cardinal Bellarmine,
Ficlerus, Simancha, and other vpholders of the Papal tyranny, that Stephanus
Iunius, Franciscus Hottomanus, Georgius Buchananus, and other pillars of the
Puritan anarchie, do answer, that the Church then, as it were swathed in the
bonds of weakness, had not strength sufficient to make powerful resistance.
But these Fathers that then lived, do convince them, and all other sectaries
of falsehood, by making demonstration, of the strength and potencie of the godly
Christians, in case they would have put their forces to the stro^gest proof.
Seeing that all public places, as Courts, Camps, Consistories, Cities, and
country villages, were stored and furnished with men of that profession and
quality, as does most evidently appear by the words of Tertullian, in his
Apolegeticall defense of the Christians: Vna nox pauculis faculis, etc. One
night with a few firebrands, would yield us sufficient revenge, if it were
lawful for us to requite evil for evil. But God forbid, that Christians
should either revenge themselves with humane fire, or be grieved to suffer that
wherewith they are tried. Were we disposed, not to practice secret revenge, but
to profess open hostility, should we want number of men, or force of arms?
Are the Moors, or the Parthians, or any one nation whatsoever, more in number
then we, that are spread over all the world? We are not of you, and yet we have
filled all the places and rooms which you have. Your Cities, Islands, Castles,
towns, assemblies, your Tents, Tribes, and Wards; yea, the Imperial Palace,
Senate, and seats of judgment. For what war, were not we, able and ready,
though we were fewer in number then you, that go to our Martyrdom so
willingly? if it were not more lawful in our religion to be slain, then to
slay? we could without armor, not by rebelling against you, but by departing
from you, do you displeasure enough, even with our separation. For if so great
a multitude, as we are, should break out from you, in any other corner of the
world, the loss of so many citizens would shame and punish you. You would
fear, to see your selves left solitary, even amazed, as among the dead. You
should then see, silence and desolation every where. You would have many more
enemies, then inhabitants. Whereas now, you have fewer enemies, because of the
multitude of your citizens, that are almost all Christians. Haec Tertullianus.
We see by these three witnesses, that the Church of God, in the first 300.
years wanted, neither number of men, strength, nor courage to resist
persecution, and to have established the Christian faith, if that course had
been lawefull: but because their Lord had given them no sword to strike
withal, they chose rather to be crowned Martyrs, for their religion, then to
be punished as traitors for rebellion. What number of men, what strength of
arms had the Church (think you) the next 300. years after it had been
backed by Princes, defended by laws, provoked by honorable favors, to
profess Christianity? Yet all that while, the servants of God, neither did
nor would resist Apostasy, Heresy, or Tyranny: but yielded their lives, with
all submission, though they wanted neither means nor multitude, convenient for
any wars, as the next chapter by, pregnable demonstration, shall show.

The third Chapter proves by the Fathers, of the second 300. years, that the
pleasure of Princes, must be endured with patience, when their decrees cannot
be obeyed with a good Conscience.
THe next 300. years, the Christians did as patiently endure Heresy,
Apostasy, and Tyranny, to the glorious trial of their faith, and the
eternal reward of their patience. Whereof we have a cloud of witnesses,
namely, Hosius, Liberius, Athanasius, Hilarious, Basilius Magnus, Gregorius
Nazianzenus, Lucifer Calaritanus, Cyrillus Alexandrinus, Optatus Milevitanus,
Ambrosius, Augustinus, Chrysostomus, Leo the first, and Gregory the great.

Hosius was a famous confessor in the Church, before Constantine the great a
worthy Bishop during that Emperors reign, and after his death greatly
esteemed of all good men, yea even of Constantius the Arrian Emperor himself,
for his old age, great experience, excellent learning, and good conversation.
When this worthy Prelate, was commanded by the Emperor, to subscribe to the
condemnation of Athanasius, he returned to the Imperial Majesty, this stout,
Constant, Christian, and dutiful answer; Ego confessionis munus implevi
primum, cum persecutio moueretur, ab avo tuo Maximiniano: I was then a
confessor, when your grandfather Maximinian persecuted the Church. Obsequere
and scithe contra Athanasi^n qui enim contra ^llum scribit the plane nob scum,
etc.
And if you do now raise persecution, I am ready to endure any thing, rather
then betray the truth and shed innocent blood. I do not like your manner of
writing against Athanasius: Cease from it, be not of the Arrian opinion: Give
no ear to the Eastern Bishops: believe me rather, that for age might be your
grandfather. Leave off I beseech you, and call to mind, that you are a mortal
man. Fear that dreadful day of judgment. Enterpose not your self (O
Emperor) into the ecclesiastical service, neither command us in this kind, to
condemn the innocent: but learn rather of us. God has entrusted your
Majesty with the Empire, and committed unto us, the service of the Church: he
that with an envious eye, maligneth your imperial sovereignty, contradicts
the ordinance of God. Take heed (O Prince) least drawing to your self the
right of the Church, you become guilty of grievous transgression. It is
written, Hosius apud Atham ad solitariam vitam agentes.
Give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to God the things that
appertain to God: it is therefore, neither lawful for us Priests, to usurp
your kingdom: nor for you Princes, to meddle with the sacred service, and
sacrifices of the Church. Thus far Hosius. You see the grounds, that this
good Bishop stood upon: rather resolved to suffer any death or torture, then by
his consent to betray the truth, or to condemn the guiltless. He admonishes
freely, and reprooueth sharply, he offreth his life to the Princes pleasure: It
was far from his meaning, to revile the sacred majesty, or to stir up any
rebellion, against this heretical Emperor, which infringed the Canons of the
Church, without all regard of truth or equity, to serve the humors of the
Arrians, and to wreck his anger on them all, which yielded not to that heresy.

Liberius a Bishop of Rome, did neither excommunicate nor depose this wicked
Emperor Constantius, but appeared at his command, and endured his pleasure,
to the admiration of the Arrians, and the confirmation of the Christians, as we
find in Athanasius, Trahitur Liberius ad imperatorem, etc. Liberius was haled
to the Emperor, when he came to his presence he spoke freely, Cease (said he)
O Emperor, to persecute the Christians, go not about, by any means, to bring
heretical impiety into the Church of God. Liberius quo supra apud Athan.
We are ready, rather to endure any torture, then to be called Arrians.
Compel us not to become enemies unto Christ. Fight not against him (we beseech
you) that has bestowed the Empire upon you. Render not impiety to him for his
grace, persecute them not which believe in him, least you hear, it is hard for
thee to kick against the prick. Act 9.5.
Oh would to God you did so hear it that you might (as Paul did) believe it.
Lo we are at hand, and come to your presence, before our enemies the Arrians
can invent any thing to inform against us, we hastened to come at your
command, though we were assured of banishment: that we might abide our
punishment, before any crime could be objected, much less proved against us.
Whereby it may appear, that all Christians are (as we now be) undeservedly
punished, and the crimes laid to their charge not true but fained by sycophancy
or deceitful subtilty. Thus spoke Liberius; and every man admired his
resolution: but the Emperor for answer commanded him to banishment. Thus far
he.

Pope Liberius had not learned the language of his successor Pius Quinius, when
he bellowed against our late Queen, nor that principle of the Puritanes, that
the inferior officer may use force of arms against the chief Magistrate that
shall become a tyrant (whereof every seditious sectarie will be judge) and not
only defend himself, and his own people, but also any other that shall fly
unto him. Poliria Christian. l. 6. c. 3.
Which opinion Lambertus Danaus avouches, contrary to the Law, the Gospel,
and the general consent of all orthodoxall Fathers.

Hilarious, a Bishop of France, Hilarious ad Imperatote^ Constant.
wrote the same time to this same Emperor in most humble manner, Benefica
natura tua domine beatissime Auguste: Your mild nature, most blessed Emperor,
agreeing with your gracious disposition, and the mercy which flows
abundantly, from the fountain of your fatherly godliness, do assure us,
that we shall obtain our desire. We beseech you, not only with words, but
also with tears, that the catholic Churches, be no longer oppressed with
grievous injuries, and endure intolerable persecutions, and contumelies, and
that (which is most shameful) even of our brethren. Let your Clemency
provide, etc.

Surely, if it had then been known, that the Pope, by his absolute power or
indirect authority, could have punished or deposed kings, which the Papists
avouch, or for the Peers or the people to have done it, which the Puritanes
affirm, some of these old Bishops, would have pressed that point against this
heretical Prince, which abused his sword, to the blaspheming of Christ, the
murdering of the Saints, the seducing of many thousand souls: by
strengthening, maintaining, and establishing the Arrian error. But they took
it to be no Christian man's part, to bear armor (no not defensive) against his
Prince, though never so wicked, cruel or ungodly.

Holy Athanasius confesses the power of Kings to be of God, and their impiety
not to be punished by man. Sicut in toto mundo Deus rex est and imperator and
potestatem exeroet in omnibus: As God is King and Emperor over all the world,
and exercises his power in all creatures: so the King and Prince is over all
earthly men, and does by his absolute power, Ad Antioch. quest. 55.
what he will, even as God himself. haec ille.

When it was objected against this reverend father Athanasius, that he had
incensed Constans the religious Emperor of the West, against Constantius, in
the bebehalfe of the persecuted Christians: Apolog. Athan. ad Constant.
he cleared himself from that accusation, in an Apology to the said Emperor
Constantius. The Lord (says he) is my record, and his anointed your brother,
that I never made mention of your Majesty for any evil, before your brother
of blessed memory, that religious Emperor Constans. I did never incite him
against you, as these Arrians do slander me, but whenever I had access
unto him, I recounted your gracious inclination. God knows, what mention I
made of your godly disposition. Give me leave and pardon (most courteous
Emperor) to speak the truth. That servant of God Constans, was not easily
drawn to give ear to any man in this kind. I was never in such credit with
him, that I durst speak of any such matter, or derogate from one brother
before an other, or talk reprochfully of one Emperor, in the hearing of an
other. I am not so mad, neither have I forgotten the voice of God, which
says, Curse not the King in thine heart, and backbite not the mighty in the
secrets of thy chamber: for the birds of the air shall tell it, and the winged
foul shall bewray thee. If then, the things that be spoken in secret against
Princes, can not be hid: is there any likelihood, that I in the Emperors
presence, and before so many, as continually attended his person, would say any
thing otherwise then well of your Majesty? Thus far Athanas. This is sounder
and seemelier doctrine for subjects, then that which Henry Garnet, and Robert
Tesmond, taught some Romish catholic gentlemen of England, who employed Thomas
Winter into Spain, in the month of December, Ann. Dom. 1601. to make request
to the Spanish king, in the behalf and names of the English Pope-catholikes,
L. Cook in his speech at Garnets arraignment.
that he would send an army hither into England, for the advancement of their
Catholic cause; and to promise, that the forces of the Papists here, should
be ready to do him service against the late Queen.

The self same doctrine of sedition, was published in the year after, viz.
ann. Dom. 1602. by Gulielmus Bucanus, a man of no mean esteem among the
Puritans, and that, at the earnest request of Beza and Gonlartius, the chiefest
Ministers of the Chutch of Geneva, (if the author himself belie them not,)
whose words are as follows: Subditis si fit publica and manifesta saevitia,
licet fieri supplices, implorare auxilia ab alijs, (...)
and suscipere little defensionem alijs regibus licet: Subjects, when they
endure public and manifest wrong, may lawfully become suppliants to foraigne
states, and crave their aid against their Princes: and other Kings ought to
take upon them their defense and protection. So far Bucan.

Subjects must square their subjection, according to the rule of Gods word, not
after the affection and fancies of men. ^ Sam 12.^8.
Saul commanded Doeg to murder 85. Priests, to destroy their city, men,
women, and children with the edge of the sword. Did David, for whom they were
slain, when he had Saul in his power, take revenge, or suffer his servants to
do it, when they were ready and offered themselves to slay Saul? David 2.
Sam. 11.4.17.
defiled Vrias his bed, and caused him to be killed: Did Absolon well, to
conspire against him, that was both a murderer and an adulterer? Solomon 1
Reg. 11.8.
brought into the land many strange wives, and as many different religions into
the Church: Did the high Priest, the Peers, the Prophets, or the people, offer
to chastise or depose him? Achab 1 Reg. 11.8.9.
suffered Iezabel to put Naboth to death, and to kill the Lords Prophets: Did
Elias depose him, entice his subjects to rebel against him, or implore
foraigne aid to destroy him? Herod Mar 6.27. Act. 12.24.
beheaded John Baptist, killed James, imprisoned Peter, and would have slain
him also, if he had not been delivered by an Angel: Did Peter take vengeance
on Herod, which he might have done with a word, as well as on Act 5.5.
Ananias? No: he did leave him to the Lord, whose judgment insued in most Act.
12.23.
fearful manner. In a word, wicked Princes have never been lawfully punished
by Prelates, Potentates, or people of their kingdom, as the Papists and
Puritans aver: but must be reserved to the judgment of God, as the
Protestants affirm.

Gregory Nazianzen in his oration at the funeral of S. Basil, reports, that
the Emperors Deputy in Pontus, commanded S. Basil to put out a widow, that
had taken sanctuary to save her self from forced marriage. Basilius magnus.
The Bishop (not willing to violate the Ecclesiastical laws granted by the
Imperial Majesty) refused so to do. The governor called the Bishop before
him, threatened to whip him, and to tear his flesh with iron hooks: the people
hearing that indignity offered to the Bishop, fell to an uproar, and would
have slain the Lieftenant, had not that innocent man of God, with much ado,
stayed that furious tumult, and delivered his persecutor from that peril,
Monodia Nazian, inter opuscula Basilij fol. 95.
to whose pleasure he did afterward submit himself.

The same Nazianzen, for his admirable learning called the divine, writes of
Julian the Apostata-Emperours death: Julian was punished by the mercy of God,
thorough the tears of Christian men: which tears were many, and shed of many,
for that they had no other remedy, against that persecutor. Thus far Nazian.
1. orat. cont. I dian.
This godly father lived under five Emperors, Constantius, Iulianus, Valens,
Valentinianus, and Theodosius, in all which time, he could find no remedy
against the tyranny, heresy, and apostasy of Princes, beside prayers and
tears: The devil of hell had not as yet hatched the distinctions of proprie
and improprie, direct and indirecte, simpliciter and secundum quid, absolute
and in ordine ad spiritualia, wherewith the Jesuits do fill the schools with
clamorous evasions, the Church with erroneous superstition, and many Christian
states with tragical sedition.

Lucifer Calaritanus in sundry books against Constantius, uses many immodest
and disloiall speeches: but he persuaded not the Pope to depose him, the state
to punish him, the people to rebel against him, or foreign aid to suppress
him, but threatened him with the dreadful punishment of God. He that (in the
feruency of zeal) durst call so cruel an Emperor, Thief, Church-robber,
Murderer, Beast, Hangman, Heretic, Apostata, Idolator, the forerunner of
Antichrist, and Antichrist himself, would surely have encouraged the Pope, the
Peers or the people, to have removed that evil king, and placed a better in
his stead: if there had been any such opinion in those days, as our modern
Jesuits and Puritans bear now the world in hand. As this father, in his
writings, kept not the modesty of the other fathers, which lived in that age
under Constantius: so he did not continue in the unity of the catholic
Church. Lucifer (says Ambrose) divided himself from our communion, (...).
though he were banished with us for our religion.

When Ambrose was commanded, to deliver up his Church in Myllaine to Maxentius
an Arrian Bishop, he declared his resolution in a sermon to the people: which
were very sorry for his departure. Quid turbamini? volens nunquam vos deseram:
(...) Ambro i^ ad pop^l^^a ^nter epistol. 32.33
Why are you troubed? I will never willingly depart from you. If I be
compelled, I have no way to resist: I can sorrow, I can weep, I can sigh, my
tears are my weapons against Soldiers, Armor, Goths: such is the munition
of a priest: by any other means, then tears, I neither ought nor can resist:
so far Ambrose. Not disabilitie but duty, not want of strength and martial
forces, but a reverend regard of the Emperors Majesty, commanded by the law
of God, kept this blessed Ambrose from resisting. For he might easily have
wrought the churches liberty, his own saftie, and the Arrians calamity by the
overthrow of the Emperor, through the force of the Garrison in that City,
which refused, to attend the Prince to any other Church, then that wherein
Ambrose was. The stout and peremptory answer of the Captains and soldiers,
is thus reported by Ambrose in an epistle to Marcellina, a religious woman.
Epistol. 33.
Si prodire vellet haberet copiam se presto futuros: The Emperor may go at
his pleasure, they would be ready to attend him, if he would go to the
catholic assemblies: or otherwise, they would keep on their way to that
Congregation, wherein Ambrose was: Thus far the soldiers. They refused (as
you see) to obey, and preferred Gods true service, before the Emperors favor:
they reviled not his sacred person, they resisted not his sovereign power, but
yielded themselves to his mercy and pleasure, to save their souls from Gods
wrath and displeasure, as we find in the same epistle. Vnum Job miraturus
ascenderam, I went to Church to extol the patience of Job, Epist. eadem.
where I found every one of my hearers, a Job, worthy to be extolled. In
every one of you Job is revived, in each of you his patience, and virtue
shined, what could be said better by Christian men, then that which the holy
Ghost this day spoke in you? We beseech (O Emperor,) we offer not to fight, we
fear not to die, we entreat your clemency. Oh it was seemly for Christian
soldiers, to desire the tranquillity of peace and faith, and to be constant in
truth, even unto death: Thus far Ambrose.

S. Augustine relates the same of the Christian soldiers, under Julian the
Apostata-Emperour: Iulianus extitit imperator infidelis, Julian was an
unbelieving Emperor, was he not an Apostata? an oppressor, and an Idolater?
Christian soldiers served that unbelieving Emperor. When they came to the
cause of Christ, they would acknowledge no Lord but him that was in heaven:
when they were commanded to adore Idols, and to offer sacrifice, they
preferred. God before their Prince. But when he called upon them to war, and
bad them invade any nation, they presently obeyed. They did distinguish their
eternal Lord, from the temporal king, yet they submitted themselves to their
temporal Lord, for his sake that was their eternal king: August. in Psalm. 124.
So far he.

Optatus Milevitanus, is another pregnant witness: Cum super Imperatorem nemo
sit nisi solus Deus. Seeing there is no man above the Emperor, beside God
alone, which made the Emperor: Donatus, by advancing himself above the
Emperor, De schism. Donatist. l. 3.
does exceed the bounds of humanity, and makes himself a God rather then
man, in that he fears and reuerenceth him not, whom all men should honor,
next after God. So far Optat.

Com. in evang. Ioh. l. 12. c. 36.
Saint Cyril is of the same judgment. Cui legis preuaericatores liberare licet
nisi legis ipsius authori? Who can acquit them that break the law, from
transgression, beside the lawgiver? as we see by experience, in all humane
states, no man can without danger, break the law, but kings themselves, in
whom the crime of preuarication has no place. For it was wisely said of one,
that it is a wicked presumption, to say to a king, Thou do amiss. So far
he.

In 1. epist. ad Timoth c. 2. ^. 1.
And also Saint Chrysostom. What means the Apostle (says he) to require
prayers and supplications, inintercessions, and thanksgiving, to be made for
all men? he requires this to be done in the daily service of the Church, and
the perpetual rite of divine religion. For all the faithful do know, in what
manner prayers are powered out before the Lord morning and evening, for all the
world: even for kings, and every man in authority. Some man will
(peradventure) say, that, for all, must be understood of all the faithful.
Which cannot be the Apostles meaning, as may appear by the words following,
viz. for Kings: seeing that kings, neither did then, nor in many ages after,
serve the living God: but continued obstinately in infidelity, which by course
of succession they had received: Thus far Chrysostom. Our Modern reformers
teach us that which Paul and Chrysostom neither knew nor believed, See the
preface before Basilic. Dor.
that wicked Princes are not to be prayed for, but to be resisted, etc.

When the faction of Eutiches had prevailed against the Catholics, Leo the
first, had no other remedy then prayers to God, sighs, tears, and petitions
to the Emperor: Omnes partium nostrarum ecclesiae, etc. Epistol. 24. ad
Theodos. Imperat.
All the Churches of these parts, all we Priests, even with sighs, and tears,
beseech your Majesty, to command a general Synod to be held in Italy, that
all offenses being removed, there may remain, neither error in faith, nor
division in love. Favor the catholics, grant liberty to protect the faith
against heretics, defend the state of the Church from ruin, that Christ his
right hand may support your Empire: Thus far Leo.

When Gregory the great was accused for the murder of a Bishop in prison, he
wrote to one Sabinianus, to clear him to the Emperor and Empress. Breuiter
suggeras serenissimis dominis meis: Epist. l. 7. epist. 1.
You may briefly inform my sovereign Lord and Lady, that if I their servant,
would have busied my self with the death of the Lombards, that nation would by
this time have had, neither Kings, nor Dukes, nor Earls, and should have bin
in great confusion and division: but because I stood in awe of God, I was ever
afraid, to meddle with the shedding of any man's blood: so far Gregory. These
Lombards were Pagans, invaders of the country, ransackers of the city,
persecutors of the Saints, robbers of the Church, oppressors of the poor: whom
Gregory the first, might, and would not destroy, quia deum timuit, because he
feared God. It is very like, that his successor Gregory the seventh, feared
neither God nor man, when he erected the papal croisier against the regal
scepter, and read the sentence of deprivation, against the Emperor Henry: Ego
authoritate apostolica, etc. I by my power apostolical, do bereave Henry of
the German kingdom, and do deprive him of all subjection of Christian men,
absoluing all men, from the allegiance, which they have sworn unto him. And
that Rodolph, whom the Peers of the Empire have elected, may govern the
kingdom: I grant all men, that shall serve him against the Emperor,
forgiveness of their sins, in this life and in the life to come. Carol.
Sigon. de Regno Ital. lib. 9. in vita Hen. 3.
As I have for his pride dejected Henry from the royal dignity, so I do
exalt Rodolph for his humility, to that place of authority: Thus far
Gregor. 7.

Benno Card in vit. Greg. 7
It is no wonder, that Gregory his chair claue a sunder, as some writers
affirm, at the giving of this sentence: because the proud Pope, and his wicked
sentence, were too heavy a burden for Peter's stool of humility to bear.

The fourth Chapter prooveth the Immunitie of Kings by the Fathers of the third
300. years.
AFter the death of Gregory the great, which was about the year of our Lord
604. Sabinianus did succeed him, who lived but one year, after whom came
Boniface the 3. which obtained of Phocas to be called Universal Bishop; since
that time, perijt virtus Imperatorum and pietas Pontificum, the Emperors waxed
weak, and the Bishops wicked. What the judgment of those Fathers then was,
concerning subjection to wicked Kings, I will make evident by the testimony of
Gregorius Turonensis, Isidorus, Damascenus, Beda, Fulgentius, Leo 4. and the
Fathers assembled in a Council at Toledo in Spain.

Gregory Turonensis acknowledges such an absolute power in Childericke, a
most wicked king of France, as was free from all control of man. (...). lib 5.
cap. 1.
Si quis de nobis (Rex) iustitiae limits transcendere voluerit, etc. If any
one of us (O King) do pass the bounds of justice, you have power to correct
him, but if you exceed your limit, who shall chastise you? We may speak unto
you; if you list not to harken, who can condemn you, but that Great God, who
has pronounced himself to be righteousness? hactenus ille.

Isidorus says no less for the immunitie of the Kings of Spain. Let all
earthly Princes know, that they shall give account of the Church, which Christ
has committed to their protection. Yea, whether the peace and discipline
Ecclesiastical be advanced, by faithful Kings, or dissolved by the
unfaithful, he will require a reckoning at their hands, which has left his
Church in their power. So far Isidor.

John Damascene pleads not only for the exemption of wicked kings
themselves, but also of their Deputies. Parallel. lib. 1. c. 21.
The governors (says he) which Kings create, though they be wicked, though
they be thieves, though they be unjust, or otherwise tainted with any crime,
must be regarded. We may not contemn them, for their impiety; but must
reverence them, because of their authority, by whom they were appointed our
governors. So far he.

Fulgentius says, that no kind of sedition can stand with religion. Cum pro
nostra fide libere respondemus, etc. When we answer freely for our profession,
we ought not to be taxed with the least suspicion of disobedience or contumely,
seeing we are not unmindful of the Regal dignity, and do know, that we must
fear God, and honor the King, according to the doctrine of the Apostle,
^ulgent. ad Thrasim reg.
Give to each one his due, fear to whom fear, honor to whom honor
appertains. Of the which fear and honor, S. Peter has delivered unto us
the manifest knowledge, 1. Pet. 2.17.
saying, As the servants of God, honor all men, love brotherly fellowship,
fear God, honor the King. Thus far Fulgent.

Our country man Beda, for his great learning called Venerable, is of the same
mind. David (says he) for two causes spared Saul, lib. 4. exposit. in Samuel.
who had persecuted him most maliciously. First, for that he was his Lord,
anointed with holy oil. 1. Sam. 24.^.
And secondly, to instruct us by moral precepts, that we ought not to strike
our governors, (though they unjustly oppress us) with the sword of our lips:
nor presume slanderously, to tear the hemme of their superfluous actions. So
far he.

Leo the fourth about the year 846. agnised all subjection to Lotharius the
Emperor: I do profess and promise (says Leo) to observe and keep
vnuiolably, Cap. de capitulis, did. 15.
as much as lies in me, for the time present and to come, your imperial
ordinances and commandments: together with the decrees of your Bishops, my
predecessors: If any man inform your Majesty otherwise, know certainly, that
he is a lier. So farrre Leo.

The Bishops of Spain assembled in a national council at Toledo, made this
decree against perjury and treason. Quicunque amodo ex nobis: Concill. Tol. 5.
Canon. 2 circa annum Dom. 636.
Whosoever among us shall from this time forward, violate the oath which he
has taken for the safeguard of this country, the state of the Gothish nation,
and the preservation of the Kings Majesty: whosoever shall attempt the Kings
death, or deposition: whosoever shall by tyrannical presumption aspire to the
regal throne; let him be accursed before the holy spirit, before the blessed
Saints, let him be cast out of the catholic Church, which he has polluted by
perjury, let him have no communion with Christian men, nor portion with the
just, but let him be condemned with the devil and his angels eternally,
together with his accomplices, that they may be tied in the bond of damnation,
which were joined in the society of sedition. Thus far the fathers in that
Synod.

I conclude therefore with these learned Fathers, that it is not for the people,
otherwise then with humility and obedience, to control the actions of their
governors: but their duty is only to call upon the God of heaven, and so
submit themselves to his mercy, by whose ordinance the scepter is fallen into
his hand and power, that enjoys the crown, whether he be good or bad. A
right of deposing, must be either in him that has an higher power, which is
only God: or in him, that has better right to the crown: which the Pope
cannot have, because he is a stranger: nor the Peers, or people, because they
are subjects. Be the king for his religion impious, for his government unjust,
for his life licentious, the subject must endure him, the Bishop must reprove
him, the counselor must advise him, all must pray for him, and no mortal man
has authority to disturb or displace him, as may evidently be seen by the
chapter following.

The fifth chapter confirms this Doctrine by the fathers of the fourth 300
years.
IN this age of the Church, the Popes exalted themselves above all that is
called god, and upon private displeasures and quarrels, did curse and ban
Princes, incensing their neighbour-nations, and persuading their own subjects,
to make war against them, as if Christ had ordained his Sacraments, not to be
seals of grace, and helps of our faith, but hooks to catch kingdoms, and
rods to scourge such Potentates as would not, or could not procure the Popes
favor. How far these Popish practices, did displease the godly and learned,
I will show by S. Bernard, Walthramus Bishop of Nanumberg, the epistle
Apolegeticall of the Church of Liege against Paschalis the Pope, and the author
of Henry the fourth his life.

S. Bernard, in one of his sermons upon the words of Christ, I am the vine,
commends the answer of a certain King, Been quidam rex, cum percussus humana
sagitta, etc. It was well said of a King when he was shot into the body with
an arrowe, and they that were about him, desired him to be bound until the
arrows head wear cut out, for that the least motion of his body would
endanger his life: no (quoth he) it does not beseem a King to be bound, let
the kings power be ever safe and at liberty. And the same father in an epistle
to Ludovicus Crassus the king of France teaches subjects, how to rebel and
fight against their Princes; Quicquid vobis de regno vestro de anima and corona
vestra facere placuerit: Been. epist. 221.
Whatsoever you please to do with your kingdom, your soul, or your crown,
we that are the children of the Church cannot endure or dissemble the injuries,
contempt, and conculcation of our mother. Questionless we will stand and fight
even unto death in our mothers behalf, and use such weapons, as we may
lawfully, I mean not swords and spears, but prayers and tears to God.

When Gregory the 7. had deposed Henry the 4. he gave away the Empire to one
Rodolphus duke of Saxony, that was a sworn subject to that distressed
Emperor: which Rodolph, in a battle against his sovereign Lord, lost his
right hand, and gained a deadly wound. After his death, the Pope made one
Hermanus king of Germany, who enjoyed his kingdom but a little time, for he
was slain with a stone, which a woman threw upon him from a turret, as he
made an assault (in sport) against his own castle, to try the valor of his
soldiers. Then did Egbertus, Ex vita Hen. quarti quae habetur in fasciculo
rerum sciendarum Coloniae impresso.
by the Popes encouragement ascend the Imperial throne, whereon he sat but a
while: for as he stepped aside from his army into a mill, to rest himself in
the heat of the day, he was discovered by the miller to the Emperors friends,
and lost his life for his labor. During this hurly-burly in that state,
Walthramus a godly Bishop, wrote to one Ludovicus an Earl of the Empire,
diswading him from partaking with the seditious against that good Emperor,
whom the Pope had deposed. Walthram by the grace of God, that he is, to Jews
the noble Prince, with instance of prayer, offreth himself in all things
serviceable. Concord is profitable to every realm, and justice much to be
desired: these virtues are the mother of devotion, and the consecration of all
honesty. But whosoever seeks after civil dissension, and incenseth other to
the effusion of blood, he is a murderer, and partaketh with him, who gaping
for blood, goes about seeking who^ he may devour: The worthy vessel of
election, that was taken up to the third heaven, protests, saying, Let every
soul submit himself to the higher power, there is no power but from God. He
that resists power, resists the ordinance of God. If that be true (which
some men prate among women and the vulgar sort) that we ought not to be
subdued to the kingly power, Then it is false which the Apostle teaches, that
every soul must submit himself under power and superiority. Epistol. Wall.
quae habetur in appendice Marian Scot.
Can the truth lie? did not Christ the Lord speak by the Apostle? Why do we
provoke the Lord? are we stronger then he? Does not he think himself stronger
then the Lord, that resists the ordinance of God? seeing there is no power
but of God: what says the Prophet? Confounded be they that strive against the
Lord, and they that resist him shall perish. Rodolphus, Hermanus, Egbertus,
with many other Princes, resisted the ordinance of God, in Henry the Emperor,
but lo they are confounded, as though they had never been, for as their end
was ill, their beginning could not be good, etc. Haec ille.

Pope Paschalis seeing the bad success of those seditious subjects, which his
predecessors Gregory and Vrbanus had armed against Henry, that worthy
Emperor: did persuade the Emperors own son, against all law of God,
nature, and nations, to rebel against his Father. The Bishop of Liege took
the Emperors part, against this young Prince, for the which he was
excommunicate, his Church interdicted, and Robert Earl of Flaunders commanded
by the Pope, as he hoped to have the forgiveness of his sins and the favor of
the Church of Rome, to destroy that Bishop and his false priests.

The Churchmen of Liege terrified with the Popes excommunication, and fearing
the Earls oppression, wrote an apology for themselves about the year 1106.
We are excommunicate (say they) because we obey our Bishop, who has taken part
with his Lord the Emperor. Epistol. Leodiensium apud Simonem Scard.
These are the beginnings of sorrow: for Satan being loosed, compasses the
earth, and has made a division between the Prince and the Priest: who can
justly blame the Bishop that takes his Lords part, to whom he has sworn
allegiance? perjury is a great sin, whereof they cannot be ignorant, that by
new schism and novel tradition, do promise to absolve subjects from the
guilt of perjury, that forswear themselves to their Lord the King, etc.

In the progress of their apology they determine three great questions:
first, whether the Pope has power to excommunicate Kings? Secondly, to whom it
belongs to inflict temporal punishment, when Churchmen offend against
faith, unity, or good manners? And thirdly, what remedy subjects have against
their kings, that are impious or tyrannous? Si quis respectu sancti spiritus,
etc. If any man having respect to the spirit of God, shall turn over the old
and new Testament, he shall plainly find that kings, ought not at all or very
hardly be excommunicate, whether we consider the etimologie of their names, or
the nature of their excommunication. Even till this day has this point been
questioned, and never determined. Kings may be admonished and reproved, by
such as be discreet and sober men, for Christ the King of Kings in earth, who
has placed them in his own stead, has reserved them to his own judgment,
etc.

Their answer to the second question, is grounded on the testimony of S.
Augustine, the practice of Princes, and the authority of Paul. Kings (say
they) and Emperors by their public laws, have forbidden heretics, to
enjoy any worldly possession. Wherefore seeing we are no heretics, and that
it belongs not to the Pope, but to kings and Emperors to punish heresies,
why does our Lord Paschalis, send Robert, his armourbearer, to destroy the
possessions and to overthrow the villages of the Churches, which in case they
deserved destruction, ought to be destroyed by the edict of Kings and
Emperors, which carry the sword not without good cause? etc.

For answer to the third question, they show by sundry places of Scripture,
that there is no other help against evil Princes, then prayer and patience.
Nihil modo pro Imperatore nostro dicimus, etc. We will for the present say
nothing in defense of our Emperor, but this we say, though he were as bad as
you report him to be, we would endure his government, because our sins have
deserved such a governor. Be it: we must needs grant against our will, that
the Emperor is an Arch-heretike, an invader of the kingdom, a worshipper of
the Simonaicall Idol, and accursed by the Apostles and Apostolic men, as you
say of him: even such a Prince ought not to be resisted by violence, but
endured by patience and prayer. Moses brought many plagues upon Pharaoh, whose
heart God had hardened, but it was by prayer and the lifting up his hands to
heaven. And S. Paul requires prayers to be made for all men, for Kings and
such as are in authority: which kings were neither Catholics nor Christians.
Baruch also from the mouth of the Prophet Jeremy, wrote unto the Jews, which
were captives unto the king of Babylon, that they must pray for the life of
Nabuchodonoser the king of Babylon, and Balthazar his son, that their days
in earth may be as the days of heaven, etc. Epist. 1. eod.
S. Paul teaches why we ought to pray for evil kings, namely, that under them
we may lead a quiet life. It would become an Apostolic man, to follow the
Apostles doctrine: it were prophetical to follow the Prophet, etc. Thus far
they in their Epistle Apologeticall.

Vi^^ Hen. 4. (...).
He that wrote the life of this Emperor Henry the fourth, aniauncient, a
modest, and an impartial relator of such occurrents as happened in his time,
declares his dislike of the Popes practices, and the Germans tumults against
their said sovereign Lord. Magnum mundo documentum datum est: A great
instruction was given to the world that no man should rise against his master.
For the hand of Rodolph being cut off, showed a most just punishment of
perjury; he feared not to violate his fidelity sworn to the King, and his
right hand was punished, as if other wounds had not been sufficient to bring
him to his death, that by the plague of the rebellious, the fault of rebellion
might be perceived: thus far he.

The sixth Chapter prooveth the same by the testimony of the Writers from the
12. hundred years downward.
I Will for conclusion produce Otho Frisingensis, Thomas Aquinas, Gratianus,
Philip the fair king of France, the Parliament of England in the time of
Edward the 1. Vincentius, and Aeneas Sylvius that afterward was Pope, by the
name of Pius Secundus.

Otho Frising. in his epistle dedicatorie before his Chronicle.
Otho Frisingensis has an excellent saying in his epistle dedicatorie to
Frederick Barbarossa, Cum nulla persona mundialis inveniatur quae mundi legibus
non subiaceat, etc. Although no earthly man can be found, that is not subject
to the laws of the world, and in respect of subjection, liable to correction:
Kings as it were placed over laws, are not restrained by them, but reserved to
the examination of God, according to the words of the King and Prophet, Against
thee only have I sinned. Psalm. 51.5.
It becomes therefore a king, both in respect of the noble disposition of his
mind, and the spiritual illumination of his soul, to have God, the king of
kings, and Lord of lords, ever in his mind, and by all means possible, to
take heed, that he fall not into the hands of God, seeing it is (as the
Apostle says) a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God. It
is more fearful for kings, then for any other; because kings have none but
God himself above them, whom they need fear. It shall be so much more
horrible for them, by how much they may offend more freely, then other men. So
far Otho.

Thomas Aquinas, Aquin. de regimine prin. lib. 1. c. 6.
(if the tractare de regimene principum be his) makes three sorts of kings:
Kings by election, Kings by subordination, and Kings by succession. For the
first, he says, that they which did establish, may abolish: for the second, we
must have our recourse to him that did surrogate the subordinate King: as the
Jews did to Caesar against Herod: for the last, his resolution is, Recurrendum
esse ad omnium regem deum, that we must fly to God, the King of all kings, in
whose only power it is, to mollify the cruel heart of a tyrant. And that
men, may obtain this at the hands of God, they must cease from sin; for
wicked Princes, by divine permission are exalted to punish the sins of the
people, tollenda est igitur ou^pa vt cesset tyrannorum plag^, we must therefore
remove our sins, that God may take away his punishment: Thus far Thomas.

Gratianus, which compiled the decrees, is very peremptory, that the Bishop
of Rome, ought not to meddle with the temporal sword, the state of common
wealths, or the change of Princes. He says nothing indeed de Regni
ordinibus, which in his time, and a 100. years after him, never dreamed of any
such authority. Cum Petrus qui primus apostolorum a domino fuerat electus,
materialem gladium exerceret: When Peter whom the Lord had first chosen of all
the Apostles, drew the material sword, to defend his Master from the injuries
of the Jews, he was commanded to sheath his sword: for all that take the
sword, Matthew. 26.52.
shall perish by the sword. As if Christ should have said, Hitherto it was
lawful for thee and thine ancestors to persecute Gods enemies with the
temporal sword, hereafter thou must put up that sword into his place, Cause.
23. quest. 8. parag. 1.
and draw the sword of the spirit, which is the word of God, to slay the old
man: whosoever beside the Prince, and without his authority, that has lawful
power, and as the Apostle teaches, bears not the sword in vain, Romans 13.4.
to whom every soul must be subject, whosoever (I say) without or beside the
Princes authority, bears the sword, shall perish by the sword: Thus far
Gratian.

About the year a 1300. began a quarrel between Boniface 8. and Philippus
Pulcher the French king, about the collation of benefices, prebends, and other
ecclesiastical promotions. Whereupon the Pope wrote unto the said king, as
follows: Boniface Bishop, the servant of Gods servants, to his wel-beloued
son Philip, by Gods grace king of France, Greeting and blessing Apostolical.
Fear God and keep his law: We give thee to understand that thou art subject
to us both in spiritual things, and temporal, and that no gift of benefices
or prebends belongs to thee. If thou have in thy hand any vacant, keep the
profits of them to the successors, and if thou have bestowed any, we decree the
collation void, and recall it, how far soever it has proceeded. Whosoever
believes otherwise, we account him a fool: Dated at Lateran the fourth of the
Calends of December, and in the 6. year of our Papacy. King Philip returned
his haughtiness, a correspondent answer, viz. Philip by the grace of God,
King of France, to Boniface bearing himself for Pope, Philip. Pulcher.
Salutem modicam sieve nulla^. Sciat tua maxima fatuitas. Little health or none
at all. Let thy great fooleship know, that in temporal things we are subject
to no man. And that the gifts of prebends and ecclesiastical promotions, made
and to be made by us, were and shall be lawful, both in time past and in time
to come. For such collations belong to us in the right of our crown:
wherefore, we will manfully defend the possessours of the said dignities, and
do judge them that think otherwise fools and madmen. Given at Paris the
wednesday after Candlemasse, 1301. Questionless this King that did so
scornefully reject the Popes challenge pretended from Christ, would little
regard the claim of the Nobles, derived but from the people.

The same busy Boniface, of whom some write, that he came in like a fox
craftily, reigned like a lion cruelly, and died like a dog miserably, would
take upon him the decision of a controversy between the Kings of England and
Scotland, and commanded King Edward of England either to cease his claim, or
to send his procurators to the apostolic sea, to show his right, and to
receive such order from the Pope, as justice and equity would require. The
Lords and commons then assembled in Parliament at Lincoln sent Boniface this
answer in the kings behalf. Whereas our most dread Lord Edward by the grace
of God, the Noble King of England, caused your letters to be read openly before
us, touching certain occurrents of state between him and the King of
Scotland, we did not a little marvel at the contents thereof, so strange and
wonderful, as the like has never been heard of. We know (most holy father)
and it is well known in this realm, and also to other nations, that the King
of England ought not to make answer for his right before any judge
ecclesiastical or secular: by reason of the free estate of his royal dignity
and custom, Parliament at Lincoln quoted by M. Bekenshaw.
without breach at all times vnviolably observed: Wherefore after treaty had
and diligent deliberation, this was our resolution, that our said king ought
not to answer in judgment, nor send procurators or messe^gers to your court:
seeing that tends manifestly to the disinheriting of the right of the crown,
the overthrow of the state of the kingdom, and the breach of the liberties,
customs, and laws of our fathers, for the keeping whereof, we are bound by
the duty of an oath, and will (by Gods help) maintain and defend with all
our power and strength, etc. Dated at Lincoln Ann. Dom. 1301. and anno Edvardi
primi 29. This was then the resolution of the state of this land: if our late
sectaries Popish or Puritan, bring in any other doctrine, we may not leave the
cawsey of truth and odience, whereon our forefathers walked to their
commendation, to follow these new guides, in their bypath of pride,
disobedience, and contempt of authority, to our destruction.

Vincentius in his Speculo Historiali has a notable place to dissuade from
sedition and perjury. lib. 15. cap. 1.
Vt pace omnium bonorum dixerim, haec sola nouitas (ne dicam haeresis) nec dum
e mundo emerserat. That I may speak with the favor of all good men, this
mere novelty (if not heresy) was not sprung up in the world, that priests
should teach subjects, that they owe no subjection to wicked kings, and albeit
they have given an oath of fidelity unto them, they are not bound to keep it:
Nay they that obey an evil Prince, are to be held as excommunicated, and all
such as rebel against him, are free from the guilt of the crime of perjury.
So far he.

I will end this chapter with Aeneas Siluius, who died in the year 1464. Sit
tandem finis litium, Pius 2. de ortu and author. imperij cap. 23.
Let there be an end of contention, and one principal head to determine all
temporal matters; let the occasion of perpetual debate be taken away, let men
acknowledge themselves subject to their Prince, and give reverence to him, whom
God has made his vicegerent on earth. As that which God commands must be
obeyed without contradiction, so the temporal commandments of Caesar, may not
be resisted. But let the Kings themselves beware that they oppress no man
unjustly, nor give their people cause to cry to God against them, for the
earth is the Lords and the fullness thereof: he will not forget the cry of the
poor: and for the sin of the Prince he translateth the government from one
nation to another. There is nothing more offensive to the greatest God the king
and creator of heaven and earth, then the neglect of justice, and the
oppression of the poor: as the Psalmist says, The poor shall not always be
forgotten, and the patient abiding of the needy shall not perish for ever. So
far Siluius.

The seventh Chapter shows the concord of Papist and Puritan for the
deposition of Kings, and their discord about the means and persons to be
employed in the execution of their designements.
CHilderick was deposed, and Pipine crowned King of France about the year 750.
The truth of which history is this. Childericke void of all princely
gravity, gave himself over to pleasure and wantonness, leaving the burden
of the state to Pipinus, that was his Lord Marshall: Who conspired with the
Nobles, to advance himself, by the deposition of the king his master. To set a
better color on the matter, Pipine sent his Chaplain to Pope Zachary, to
have his answer to this Question: Whether should be King, he that bare the name
and did nothing, or he that governed the kingdom? The Pope gave sentence with
the Marshall against the King, whereupon, Childerick was made a shorn Monk,
and Pipine a crowned king.

It is a wonder to see how these opposite sectaries, do insist upon this fact
of the Frenchmen, to justify their dangerous doctrine, and seditious
conspiracies against Princes. As Card. Bellarmine de pontif. lib. 2. cap. 17.
Thomas Harding against the Apology of the Church of England fol. 181. Franc.
Feuardentius in his commentaries on Hester page 85. Boucher alias: Raynolds de
iusta abdicatione Henrici. 3. lib. 3. cap. 14. Ficklerus de iure magistratuum
fol. 30. Alexander Carerius patauinus de potestate papae lib. 2. cap. 3. D.
M^rta de temporali and spirituali pontificis potestate lib. 1. cap. 23: and
Doleman in his conference touching succession part. 1. cap. 3. page 48. And
also these Puritans, Christopher Goodman in his treatise of obedience page 53.
George Buchanan de iure Regni apud Scotos p. 47. Danaeus de politia Christiana
lib. 3. cap. 6. page 221. Brutus Celta de iure magistratuum page 286.
Phyladelphus dialogo 2. page 65. Franc. Hottomanus in his Francogallia cap. 12.
and Speculum tyrannidis Philipi Regis page 27. The Papists which ascribe this
deposing power to the pope, endeavor by tooth and nail, to disprooue that
interest which the Puritans grant the peers or the people. First, this example
served Gregory 7. to excuse his presumptuous practices against Henry the
fourth. Quidum Ramanus pontifex. A certain Bishop of Rome deposed a king of
France, lib de vrit. Eccles. apud Scard. page 3.
not so much for his ill life, as for that he was not fit for government, and
placed Pipine, which was father to Charles the great, in his place: absoluing
all the Frenchmen from the oath of allegiance, which they had sworn to their
king. Thus far Gregory in an epistle to one Herimanus, that was Bishop of
Metz in France.

Thomas Harding concludes from this fact, a divine power in the pope. Conf^t.
of the Apol ^. fol. 181.
Can you not see (says Harding) what strength and power is in the pope, which
is able with a word, to place and displace the mightiest King in Europe? with a
word, I say, for I am sure you can show us of no army, that he sent to
execute his will. Is it in the power of a man (think you) to appoint
kingdoms? can the Devil himself, at his pleasure set up and depose Kings? no
surely. Much less can any member of his do the same. Remember you what Christ
said, when the Jews objected, that he did cast out devils in the name of the
prince of devils? beware you sin not against the holy Ghost, who confess
that the Pope has pulled down and set up Kings. Which thing undoubtedly he
could never do profitably and peaceably, but by the great power of God, etc. So
far Harding.

De Pontif. lib. 2. cap. 17.
Cardinal Bellarmine the grand-master of Controversies, cannot endure to hear
that this deposition was done by any other then the papal authority. The Pope
(says he) Iudicauit licere Frauncis, regnum Childerici in Pipinum transfer.
The Pope gave judgment that the Frenchmen might lawfully transfer Childericks
kingdom to Pipin: and did absolve them from the oath which they had sworn
unto him. No man that has his right wit can deny this to be lawful. For the
very event has proved, that change to be most fortunate: seeing the kingdom
of France, was never more potent, nor religion more flourishing, then under
Pipin and Charles his son. Thus far Bellarm.

This Cardinals reason from the success to the approbation of the fact, will
conclude well for the Turk, who has longer continued, more flourished and
enlarged his state, then the house of Pipin. Hear in a word the true succes of
Pipins posterity out of Benuentus Imolensis and Paulus Aemilius. Benventus
Imolensis.
The first of that line was Charles the great, in whose time the Empire was
divided. The second was Ludouicus Pius, against whom Lotharius, an unnatural
son, did conspire: who thrust his father to a cloister, and placed himself
in the throne, where he sat like a tyrant, till he was also deposed. The
fourth was Ludovicus 2. a man unfortunate in all his doings. The fifth was
Ludovicus 3. whom they call Ludovicus nihili, or Jews no-bodie. The 6. Paulus
Aemilius.
was Charles the bald, a very coward. The 7. was Charolus Crassus, as very
fool. Arnulphus the eight of that progeny, was eaten with lice. The 9. was
Ludovicus 4. in whom that race ended.

Alexander Carerius infers the absolute sovereignty of the Pope over all
Kings, even to depose them, and to transpose the Realms, from the
insufficiency of the Nobles and people. Esto quod verum sit Papam, de
potestate Pontif. l. 2. cap. 3. number 6.
non deposuisse regem Francia: Be it true that the Pope did not depose the king
of France, but gave consent to the Peers and people to depose him, this is a
most manifest proof of our intent: that kings have one, if not many
superiors, viz. the Barons and people of their kingdom: and overthrows
their position and conclusion, That Kings have in temporal things no
superior, no, not the Bishop of Rome. But seeing the Barons and people, could
neither judge nor deprive him, because they wanted coactiue power, which
Vassalls or subjects have not over their sovereign, it follows necessarily,
that the Pope by his princely power, as superior to the King in temporalties,
might lawfully depose him. Thus far Carerius.

D. Marta, is as peremptory for the Pope, against the pretended claim of the
Peers or the people. Childericus priuatus est regno Franciae obstupiditatem
and ineptitudinem in administrando: Childerick was deprived of the kingdom of
France, for his stupiditie and unfitness to govern. They that say he was not
deprived by the Pope alone, but by them that desired another king, do not
answer the reasons alleged for the Popes sovereign power in temporalties:
nay they confirm the Popes power. Baldus asks this question, when the
Emperor is unprofitable, or mad, or a drunkard, may the people depose him,
or assign him a coadiutor? No, says he, de temp. and spir. Pontif. potest.
part. 1. cap. 23. nu. 15, 16, 17.
the Pope must do it, for the Pope is the crown and brain of the people. And
we have proved before, that God did give no jurisdiction to the people, but to
Moses and his successors. Wherefore the vassals or Peers which represent the
people, have no power common with the Pope, in the deposing of Princes. And in
that they say, that the Frenchmen desired another king, it is a great
confirmation, that the Pope has right to dispose of kingdoms. He uses to
desire, who has not of his own: or cannot of himself effect that, which he
would have done: Thus far Marta.

They that plead for the state of the Laity, are as confident against the Pope
and clergy. Vt paucis dicam (says Iunius) hoc fecit Zacharias vt dominus aut
vt mandatarius, authoritate, instructus a domino, that I may use sewe words,
the Pope deposed Childericke either as his Lord, or as a mandatarie having
authority from the Lord; but he did it neither way. Not as Lord, how could he
be Lord in France, that in those days had no Lordship in Rome? he did it not
as mandatarie, for then he ought to have showed his authority, which he
neither did, nor could show. Christ would not divide a private inheritance,
shall Zachary then presume to depose kings or transpose kingdoms? Thus far
Iunius.

Caeterum quod monachus iste (says Lambertus Danaeus) whereas this monk
Bellarmine contendeth, that Childericke was lawfully deposed by Pope Zacharias,
a stranger, a Priest, no Magistrate, but (in this respect) a private person,
though he were Bishop of Rome. Resp. Dana^ ad Bellar. l. 2. c. 17. p. ^16.
Will he ever be able to prove or defend his assertion? Can Zachary have
authorie in France, being a stranger? can he depose the public Magistrate,
being but a private person? or transfer that principality to Pipin that he
has no right unto? and commit so many sacriledges and impieties, stealing from
Childericke, and giving to Pipin another man's right? authorizing subjects to
violate their oaths, which they had sworn to their king? transposing kingdoms
from one man to another, whereas it does only belong to God to depose kings,
and dispose of kingdoms? thou may see (Bellarmine) how many outrages this
thy Zachary has committed, beside that he did thrust his sickle into an other
man's harvest, and meddled with the cobbler beyond his last, in that, being but a
Priest he took upon him the decision of the right of kingdoms. Thus far
Danaeus, who is not so violent against the Pope, as he is virulent for the
deposing power of Peers, or states of the kingdom. Danaeus pol. Christian. l.
6. c. 3. page 414.
The kings (says he) of Lacedemonia had the Ephori to control them. The
statesmen of the Roman commonwealth, deposed the Emperors, which were
tyrants, and abused their authority. The French-state has often dethroned
their kings: The Nobles of Spain may do it by their law: And the history of
the Scottish affairs (excellently well written by mulus mulum scabit.
Buchanan) does report that the statesmen of that country, have many times
deprived the kings of Scotland. Finally, natural reason, and the practice of
all nations does confirm, that the statesmen in every kingdom, may depose
kings, that are peccant. So far he. cap. 3.
Hottoman in his Franco Gallia, has a long chapter to prove that this might
be done lawfully, by the Peers, or the people, but in no case by the Pope or
the clergy.

Men cannot say (as it is in the proverb) nimium alter cando veritas
amittitur, seeing that in this opposition, the truth is not lost, but divided
among them. For their premises, brought together, will unavoidably conclude,
that this deposing power, is neither in the Pope, the Peers, nor the people.
Though it were, the reason of the seditious Papists and Puritans, a facto
adius, is sophistical in the schools, where nothing can be concluded ex meris
particularibus, of mere particular instances. Absurd in law, quia legibus non
exemplis vivitur, for men must do as the law requires, not as other men
practice. Erroneous in divinity, non ideo quia factum credimus, August. ad
Consen. de mendacio cap. 9.
faciendum credamus, ne violemus praeceptum dum sectamur exemplum: We may not
do that, which has been done by other men, least we break the law of of
God, in following the example of man. And dangerous in policy, as my Lord of
Northampton, the ornament of learning, observes. The fly (says that noble
Earl) sitting on the cart wheel, might as well wonder at the dust raised in
the way, as Gregory or Zachary, draw counsel to power, and make that fact
their own, which was hammered in the forge of ambition, countenanced with the
color of necessity, and executed by Pipin, a minister, that being weary of
subordination, resolved by this trick, when the means were fitted and
prepared to the plot, to make himself absolute. The case of Kings were
pitiful, if ex factis singularibus, it were lawful to draw leaden rules in
their disgrace. Thus far the Earl.

The eight Chapter shows the danger of this Doctrine, and the original of
the Puritan position, concerning the power of stastesmen to punish and depose
Princes in Monarchies.
THese desperate attempts, suggested by the Devil, executed by the people,
encouraged by the state, and approved by the Pope, must serve as admonitions
to Princes, to humble themselves before God: Qui non dabit sanctos suos in
captionem dentibus eorum, who will not give his Saints for a pray to their
teeth. For it is not heard (as our great King remembers) That any Prince
forgeteth himself in his duty to God, or in his vocation? Law of Monarch. p.
60.
But God with the greatness of the plague reuengeth the greatness of his
ingratitude.

These practices therefore must be no president for Peers, or people to
follow, because God has forbidden Christian subjects to resist, though kings
reign as Tyrants; and commanded them to endure with patience, though they
suffer as Innocents. And also, because that in stead of releeuing the
Commonwealth out of distress, which is ever the pretense of seditions
practitioners, they shall heap mischief on it, and desolation on themselves:
as (Aquinas) if he be the author of the book de regim. principum, shows
manifestly. Esset multitudini periculosum and eius rectoribus: de regim. princ.
l. 1. c. 6.
It were dangerous to subjects and governors, that any should attempt to take
away the life of princes, though they were tyrants: for commonly, not the well
disposed, but the ill affected men, do thrust themselves into that danger. And
the government of good Kings, is as odious to bad men, as the rule of tyrants to
good people. Wherefore the kingdom, by this presumption would be rather in
danger to forgo a good prince, then a wicked tyrant. So far Thomas.

They that are the authors or abettors of sedition, can neither avoid shame in
earth, nor escape eternal damnation. Though God the great Judge do sometime
permit rebels, in his Justice to prevail against Kings, for their contempt of
the law of the highest, and the neglect of their own duty. The reward of
rebellion shall be no better then the recompense of Satan, who is the
instrument of the Lords wrath for the punishment of all disobedience. It is
most true that as sick men, near their death, Chrysostom.
have many idle fancies, so the world before the end thereof shall be troubled
with many errors. In these declining days of the world, many countries,
Cities, and Cantons, renounced their old government, and submitted themselves
to such a new regiment as they best liked: for confirmation of which
practices, there wanted not politic Divines, (what wine is so sour that some
hedge grapes will not yield) to inuest the people and Nobles with the power
over Kings, to dispose of their kingdoms. The heathen Politicians from whom
this politic Divinity is derived, knowing not the true God, and having no
rule to direct them, but natural reason, thought him no murderer, but a
defender of his country that killed tyrants. But this pagan principle, being
a plant, that Christ has not planted, must be plucked up by the roots. I can
find no ground of this lewd learning, beyond 220. years in the Christian
world: the first authors of it being Johannes de Parisiis, Ioh. de Parie de
potest. regia and papali cap. 14.
Iacobus Almain, and Marsilius Patavinus: Vbi peccat rex in temporalibus, says
Johannes de parisiis, papa non habet ipsum corrigere: when the king offends
in the temporal government, the Pope has no authority to correct him, but
the Barons or Peers of the Realm, and if they either cannot, or dare not
meddle with him, they may crave the the Churches aid to suppress him: so
far John of Paris.

Tota communitas (says Jacob Almain) potestatem habet principem deponere. All
the communalty, Jacob Almain de potest. eccles. cap. 1.
has power to depose their Prince, which power the communalty of France used,
when they deprived their king, not so much for his impiety, as for his
disabilitie to manage so great a charge: so far Almain. Regis depositio and
alterius institutio (says Marsilius Patavinus) the deposition of a king,
Marsil. Patav. de translat. imperij cap. 6.
and the institution of another in his place, belongs not to the Bishop of
Rome, to any priest, or to the college of priests, but to the universal
multitude of the subjects. So far he.

From these, the Puritans have learned their error, of the power of Statesmen
over Kings, then which, no opinion can be more dangerous: where the Nobility
are as ready to practice, as the Puritan preachers are to prescribe. What
presumption is it in men, to pass the bounds which God has set them, to
control the wisdom of the Lord, and his unspeakable goodness, when he makes
trial of the patience of his Saints, by the outrage and tyranny of cruel
kings, that they which are found patient in trouble, constant in truth, and
loyal in subjection, may be crowned with glory. Were we persuaded, that the
hearts of Kings are in Gods hand, that the hairs of our head are numbered, and
that no affliction can befall us, which God does not dispose to the exercise of
our faith, the trial of our constancy, or the punishment of our sin, we
would as well admire the justice of God, in permitting tyrants, that our sins
may be judged, and punished in this world, as praise his mercy and favor, in
giving rest to his servants, under the protection of godly and gracious princes.

The ninth Chapter shows the general consent of the Modern Puritans
touching the coercion, deposition, and killing of Kings whom they call tyrants.
THe Citizens of Geneua, changed the government from a Monarchy to a Democratie
in the year of Christ, 1536. In the which year, John Calvin came into that
City, to visit his friend Farellus; And was chosen the public reader of
divinity. At his first coming thither, he published his Theological
institutions. Wherein he does very learnedly, and Christianly entreat of the
authority of princes, and the duty of subjects. One only place is harshe,
and dangerous: delivered in obscure, and doubtful terms, to excuse (as I
conceive) the outrage of the Citizens, against their prince, whom they had not
many weeks before expelled: not to authorize other men to attempt the like
against their sovereign Magistrates. His words are these, Si qui sunt
populares Magistratus, ad moderandam regnum libidinem consttuti. If there be
any popular Magistrates, to restrain the licentiousness of Kings, of which
kind were the Ephori opposed against the Lacedemonian Kings, Iustit. l. 4. 6.
20. sect. 31.
the Tribunes of the people, which curbed the Roman Consuls, and the Demarchie
which brideled the Senate of Athens; And such peradventure as things now stand
are the three states in every kingdom, assembled in Parliament. I do not
deny, but these in regard of their duty, stand bound to repress the
unruliness of licentious kings: Nay, I affirm, that if they do but wink at
at those kings, which peeuishly make hauock of their people, and insult against
their communaltie, that they want not the guilt of heinous treachery, because
they betray the liberty of the people, whose guardians they know themselves to
be appointed. Thus far Calvin. Since which time all Puritans have turned his
conjunction conditional, into an illative, his aduerb of doubting to an
affirmative, and his permissive, non veto, into a verb of the imparative mood,
in their books of regiment secular, and discipline Ecclesiastical.

Christopher Goodman, published a treatise of obedience at Geneva, not without
the very good liking and approbation of the best learned in that city, 1557.
page 119.
wherein he affirms, That if Magistrates transgress Gods law themselves,
and command others to do the like, they loose that honor, and obedience which
otherwise is due unto them: and ought no more to be taken for Magistrates: but
to be examined and punished as private transgressors: so far Goodman.

Much about the same time was Knoxe his appellation printed in the same place,
Geneva, fol. 56.
wherein he fears not to affirm, That it had been the duty of the
Nobility, Judges, Rulers, and people of England not only to have resisted
Marie, that Iezabel whom they call their Queen, but also to have punished her
to the death, with all such as should have assisted her, what time that she
openly began to suppress Christ's Gospel, to shed the blood of the Saints, and
to erect that most deuillish Idolatry, the papisticall abominations, and his
usurped tyranny. Thus far Knox.

Ann. 1560. Theodore Beza printed his Confessions, wherein he avouches, That
there are vices inherent in the persons of Princes, though they be lawfully
established, page 216.
by succession, or election, viz. Ungodliness, covetousness, ambition,
cruelty, luxury, lechery, and such like sins which tyrants delight in.
What shall be done in this case to these Princes I answer (says he) that it
belongs to the superior powers, such as are the 7. electors in the Empire,
and the statesmen of the kingdom almost in every Monarchy, to restrain the
fury of tyrants, which if they do not, they are traitors to their countries,
and shall before the Lord give an account of their treachery. Thus far Beza.

1561. The very year after there was a contention between the Nobility and
Clergy of Scotland about this matter, Renum ^cot. l. 17. p. 590.
(as Buchanan reports:) let him tell his own tale. Calendis Novembribus
regina ad Missam: The Queen upon the feast of All Saints, added to her private
Mass all the solemnities and superstitious ceremonies of the Papists; The
Ministers of the Gospel took it very ill, complained thereof to the people,
in their public congregations, and admonished the nobility of their duty in
that behalf: whereupon rose a controversy in a house of private meeting,
between the Nobles and Preachers, whether the Nobles may restrain Idolatry,
that is like to break out to a general destruction: and by rigor of law,
compel the chief Magistrate to his duty, when he exceeds his bounds? The
Ministers of the Church stood steadfast in opinion, as they had formerly done,
that the chief Magistrate may be compelled even by forcible means to live
according to law: but the Noble men because of the Queens favor, hope of
honor, or love of lucre, Note how basely the Puritans esteem the Nobility
when they thwart them.
did a little waver, and thought otherwise then the Ministers: and so in the end
judgment passed with the Nobles, because they were more in number and of
better esteem and reputation. Thus far Buchanan.

1568. The outlandish Churches in London concluded this Canon in a classical
Synod, ^ezae epist. 24.
Si quisquam repugnantibus legibus patriae: If any man usurp Lordship, or
Magistracy, against the laws and privileges of the country, or if he that
is a lawful Magistrate, do unjustly bereave his subjects of the privileges,
and liberties which he has sworn to perform unto them, or oppress them by
manifest tyranny, the inferior officers must oppose themselves against him,
for they are in duty bound before God, to defend their people, as well from a
domestical, as a foreign tyrant. Thus far they.

1574. We had swarms of caterpillars: namely, fol. 145.
Disciplina Ecclesiastica from Rochel, to teach us, that the senate
Ecclesiastical has the chief moderation of the Christian society, and ought
to provide that no Magistrate be defective in his charge, and by common care,
counsel, and authority to ouersee, that every governor our carry himself
faithfully in his Magistracy. Thus far that author.

page 48.
Franco-Gallia from Colen, wherein we find that the people has power to
dethrone their Princes.

page 300.
Iunius de iure Magistratuum (as some think from Geneva,) wherein it is said,
that the people have the same right to depose kings that are tyrants, which a
general counsel has to displace a Pope that is an heretic.

Eusebius Phyladelphus from Edenbruge, wherein we read, dialogo. 2. page 57.
that it was as lawful for his brethren of France, to defend themselves
against the tyranny of Charles the ninth, King of that name in France, as for
wayfairing men to resist and repel thieves, cutthroats, and wolves: nay
further, I am (says he) of opinion with the old people of Rome, that of all
good actions the murder of a tyrant is most commendable. Thus far he.

page 206.
1577. came forth the Vindicia contra Tyrannos, with this resolution, That
Princes are chosen by God, established by the people: every private man is
subject to the Prince: the Multitude and the officers of state which represent
the Multitude, are superiors to the Prince: yea they may judge his actions,
and if he make resistance, punish him by forcible means. So far he.

1584. Danaeus finished his book of Christian policy, wherein among many
other he propounds, and answers a Noble question, lib. 3. c. 6.
as he terms it. Nobilis quaestio sequitur. A noble question follows,
whether it be lawful for subjects to change and alter their government? Yea
whether it may be done by godly men with a good conscience? his answer is. The
chief Magistrate, that notoriously and wilfully violateth the fundamental
laws of the kingdom, may be displaced by godly subjects, with a good
conscience. And this is his reason, Reges summique Magistratus, Kings and
chief Magistrates are the vassalls of the kingdom, and of the Commonwealth
where they rule: Wherefore, they may be dispossessed and dejected when they
shall obstinatly attempt any thing, against the feudall laws of the kingdom
where they govern, as Kings and chief Magistrates. And it is truly said, that
as a general council, is above the Pope, so the kingdom or the Peers of the
Land, are above the King. Thus far Danaeus.

1585. de iure Reg. page 31.
George Buchanan proclaimed rewards as well for murdering kings as killing
tygres. If I (says he) had power to make a law, I would command tyrants to be
transported from the society of men into some solitary place, or else to be
drowned in the bottom of the sea, that the evil savor of dead tyrants should
not annoy living men. Furthermore I would award recompense to be given for the
slaughter of tyrants, not only of all in general, but of every one in
particular, as men use to reward them for their pains which kill wolves or
bears, and destroy their young ones. haec ille.

The same year Thomas Cartwright commended Dudley Fenners his Sacra Theologia
(as they call his book) to the world, wherein men are warranted by sundry
texts of Scripture, most miserably abused, to destroy tyrants. Therein he
(following the common opinion of the Puritans) makes two sorts of tyrants,
Tyrannus sine titulo, lib. 5. cap. 13. page 185.
and Tyrannus exercitio. For the tyrant without title: He is confident, that
any man may cut his throat. Huic quisque priuatus resistet, etiam si potest e
medio tollat, let every private man resist him, and if he can, take away his
life. For the Tyrant exercent: having described him to be a Prince, that does
wilfully dissolve all, or the chiefest compacts of the commonwealth, he
concludes against him, Hunc tollant, vel Pacifice vel cum Bello, qui ea
potestate donati sunt, vt rgeni Ephori vel omnium ordinum conventus publicus:
The Peers of the kingdom or the public assembly of states, ought to destroy
him, either by peaceable practices, or open war. haec ille.

Anno 1588. Hermanus Renecherus published observations upon the first Psalm,
wherein he investeth the Presbiterie with all the Popes prerogatives.
Concerning the Presbiterian power over kings. This is his notable annotation:
page 72.
God (says he) has ordained the Civil Magistrate for the good of the
ecclesiastical order, therefore the ecclesiastical state is the highest throne
of Gods earthly kingdom, the supreme seat of all excellency, and the
chiefest court wherein God himself is president, to distribute eternal gifts
to his servants. Whereas the political Empire is but as it were an inferior
bench, wherein justice is administered according to the prescription of the
ecclesiastical sovereignty: Thus fatre Renecherus.

Robert Rollocke, a man otherwise very learned, is carried with the current of
this error, and borrowed his assertion of M. Fenner, whose words he expounds
by way of paraphrasis, In Daniel. c. 5. p. 150.
in his commentaries on Daniel printed at Edingburge, 1591. Though the chief
lawful Magistrate (says M. Rollocke) do many things unjustly and
tyrannously, he may not rashly be violated, by them especially which have not
authority: but the Nobles or the public assembly of states, must reduce him
to his duty, by reproof and all other lawful means, 1. Sam. 14.46. If he
do still persist in open and desperate tyranny, wilfully dissoluing all or
the chiefest compacts of the common wealth, private men must not yet meddle with
him, only the Peers, or the public assembly of all states to whom that
charge belongs, must provide that the Church and Commonwealth come not to
desolation: though it cannot otherwise be done, then by the death and
destruction of the tyrant. Better it is that an evil king be destroyed, then
the Church and state together ruined. Thus far Rollocke. For proof he
refers his reader first to the 1. Sam. 14.46. viz. Then Saul came up from
the Philistims, and the Philistims went to their own place: ergo Kings that are
wicked may be reduced to their duty by the Peers, or assembly of states
according to the rules of the new Puritan logique. Secondly, for the killing
and destroying of kings, he refers his readers to the 2. regum c. 11. v.
4.5.6.7. which place I think he never vouchsafed to look upon, but set it
down as he found it quoted in Fenners divinity, from whom he has taken all
the rest.

I will make an end with William Bucanus, whose book was published at the
request, and with the approbation of Beza and Goulartius, maine pillars of the
Church of Geneva. 1602. (...) page (...).
They (says Bucanus) which have any part of office in the public
administration of the Commonwealth, as the Overseers, Senators, Consuls,
Peers, or Tribunes, may restrain the insolency of evil kings. Thus far he.

This Puritan-dangerous error is directly repugnant to the Law, the Gospel, the
precepts of the Apostles, the practice of Martyrs, and the doctrine of the
Fathers, Councels, and other classical Writers, as I have proved in the six
former Chapters: and will more directly show (by the grace of God) in my other
book: wherein the holy texts of Scripture, which the Papists and Puritans do
damnably abuse against the Ecclesiastical and Civil authority of Kings,
shall be answered by the godly Protestants: whose labor God used to reform
his Church since the year of our Lord, 1517. and by the ancient Fathers and
orthodoxall Writers in every age of the Church. This Puritan-position, which
authoriseth Nobles and assemblies of States against wicked kings, is the very
assertion of the most seditious Jesuits, that have lived in our age, as I will
demonstrate by two or three: Johannes Mariana, whose book seems to be
written in defense of Clement the friar, who stabbed Henry the 3. king of
France. The faults and licentiousnes of kings (says Mariana) whether they
reign by consent of the people, de regis in^^^. lib. 1. c. 6.
or right of inheritance, are to be borne and endured, so long as the laws of
shamefastnes and honesty, whereto all men be bound, are not violated: for
Princes should not rashly be disturbed, least the commonwealth fall into
greater misery and calamity. But if the Prince make hauock of the
commonwealth, and expose the private fortunes of his subjects for a pray to
other men, if he despise law, and contemn religion, this course must be taken
against him. Let him be admonished and recalled to his duty: if he repent,
satisfy the Wealepublike, and amend his faults, there ought (as I think) to
be no further proceeding against him. But if there be no hope of his amendment,
the commonwealth may take away his kingdom. And because that cannot be done
(in all likelihoode) without war, they may levy power, brandish their blades
against their king, and exact money of the people, for the maintenance of their
war: for when there is no other help, the Peers of the common wealth,
having proclaimed their king a public enemy, may take away his life. Thus
far Mariana.

The Statesmen of the Kingdom (says Franciscus Fevardentius) have a
sovereign power over their Kings: In Hester. c. 1. page 88.
for Kings are not absolutely established, but stand bound to observe laws,
conditions, and compacts, to their subjects: the which, if they violate, they
are no lawful Kings, but thieves and tyrants, punishable by the states. Thus
far Feuardentius.

Inferior Magistrates (says Johannes Baptista Ficklerus) are the defenders
and protectours of the laws and rightes of the state, de iure magist. fol. 18.
and have authority (if need require) to correct and punish the supreme King.
So far Ficklerus.

An English fugitive, which was the author of the book de iusta abdicatione
Henrici Tertij, affirms, That all the Majesty of the kingdom, is in the
assembly of Statesmen, to whom it belongs to make covenants with God, to
dispose of the affairs of the kingdom, to appoint matters pertaining to war
and peace, l b 3. cap 8.
to bridle the kingly power, and to settle all things that belong to public
government. So far he.

part. 1 c. 4. page 72.
And the most seditious Doleman says, that all humane law and order natural,
National, and positive, does teach, that the commonwealth, which gave Kings
their authority for the common good, may restrain or take the same from them
if they abuse it to the common ill: so far Doleman, and of this opinion are
many other as may appear by D. Morton by whom they are discovered and refuted.

How far this gangrene will extend, I know not. The kings of Christendom
are daily crucified, (as Christ their Lord was) between two thieves; I mean
the Papist and Puritan, which have prepared this deadly poison for Princes,
whom they in their own irreligious and traitorous hearts, shall condemn for
tyranny. I hope neither Peers nor people will be so fond to believe them, or
wicked to follow them, which pretend the reformation of religion, and defend
the subversion of Christian states. If inferior officers, or the public
assembly of all States, will claim this power, it stands them upon, (as they
will avoid everlasting damnation) not to derive a title from Rome, Lacedemon, or
Athens, (as Calvin does, whom the rest follow) but from the hill of Sion, and
to plead their interest from the law or the gospel. August. in quest. mixed.
Si mandatum non est praesumptio est, and ad paenam proficiet, non ad praemium:
quia ad contumeliam pertinet conditoris, vt contempto Domino colantur servi,
and spreto Imperatore, adorentur Comites. If their opposition against Kings be
not commanded of God, it is presumption against God: for it is a contumely
against God the creator of all states, to despise Lords and honor servants, to
contemn the sovereign Emperor, and to reverence the Peers of the Empire. So
far Augustine. My son (says Solomon) fear God and the King, and meddle
not with the seditious: Prou. 24.21.
for their destruction shall come suddenly, and who knows the end of them?
The conclusion of all is, That Kings have supreme and absolute authority
under God on earth, not because all things are subject to their pleasure, which
were plain tyranny, not Christian sovereignty: but because all persons,
within their dominions, stand bound in law, allegiance, and conscience, to
obey their pleasure, or to abide their punishment. And Kings themselves, are no
way subject to the controwle, censure, or punishment, of any earthly man, but
reserved by special prerogative to the most fearful and righteous judgment
of God, with whom there is no respect of persons. He whose servants they are,
will beat them with a rod of iron, and break them in pieces like a potters
vessel, if they abuse that great, and sovereign power, (which God has endued
them withal,) to support error, to suppress truth, and to oppress the
innocent. God, of his great mercy, grant us the spirit of truth, to direct us
in all loyalty, that we being not seduced by these seditious Sectaries, may
grow in grace, stand fast in obedience, embrace love, follow peace, and
increase more and more in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. To whom be
all praise, power, and dominion now and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

