A DIALOGVE OF DYING WELL.

First written in the Italian tongue, by the Reverend father Don Peeter of
Luca, a Chanon regular, a Doctor of Divinity and famous preacher.

VVherin is also contained sundry profitable resolutions, upon some doubtful
questions in Divinity.

Translated first into French, and now into English.

VVatch and pray for you know not when the time is. Mar. 13. Imprinted at
Antwerp, by A.C. 1603.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND, LADY JOAN BARKLEY, ABBESS of the English Monastery of
Nuns of the holy order of S. Benedict, in Bruxels.
RIght Reverend, I here present unto your perusal this dialogue of dying well, a
woork more of worth for the goodness then in value for the greatness.

It was first written in the Italian tongue by a devout Chanon of Luca, and by
M. Peeter Frison a devout Chanon of Rhemes (well known through his piety unto
many of our nation) it was since translated into french.

The remembrance of death as Bishop fisher (of blessed memory) was wont to say,
does never come out of season, and this spoke that good father in regard that
the remembrance of death tends unto a care to endeavor to die well, a matter of
most important consideration unto all that live.

There are sundry serpents and monsters that out of filth and corruption do
take their originals, and so in like manner was that ugly monster, called
death; out of the filth and sin of our first aunceter, first engendered. The
agillitie and art of this most merciless tyrant consists in the continual
casting of deadly darts, and infynit he throws out, even in every moment,
never aiming but at living hearts, never missing those he aymeth at, neither
is there any armor to be found that may withstand his hart-piersing force.
Wherefore seeing to avoid death there is no remedy, the remedy then that
remains, is the learning how to die well: this lesson the ensuing dialogue
teaches, only truants neglect to learn it, but attentive scholars do deeply
imprint it in memory.

To your good Ladyship I dedicate the same: unto you the first Abbess of your
holy order reuyued in our nation, whose posterity by the divine providence may
come to brighten our country with their shyning sanctity as your predecessors
heretofore have done: after that S. Augustyne had brought and taught unto the
English people the first knowledge and belief in the true God and his deer son
and our Savior, Christ Jesus.

A religious man was this first Apostle of ours, and of your order, as also
were those holy Abbesses and religious virgins so much come^ded by the
venerable Bede and other veritable writers, in there relating their holy lives
and wonderful miracles, yea even after their deaths, which were true arguments
of their dying well, the which they well learned to do while they lived, as he
grant we also may to whose holy tuition I leave your Reverend Ladyship. This
3. of April 1603.

Your Ladyships very much devoted R. V.

THE AVTHORS PROHEME.
ACCORDING to the judgment of Aristotle, man of all mortal creatures is most
prudent, for that he alone foreseeith things to come, and therefore differs
from the brute beast, which regards only things that be present.

Man therefore seeing he must die, is by his natural wisdom enclyned to
foresee his death, the cogitation whereof is unto him a thing more terrible,
then any other thing else whatsoever, and it much more does importe him.

He therefore that desires to walk wisely in this miserable life, must in such
sort prepare and dispose himself for dreadful death, that when it approaches
near unto him, he be not taken unprovided, and that for want of due
consideration he lose not the chief felicity, and besides that be assigned for
ever unto the pains of hell. Wherefore being desirous to begin this discourse
of the art or science to die well: for an introduction thereunto I presuppose
such an imagined narration as here ensues.

A DIALOGVE OF DYING WELL.
THERE was a merchant which trauayling into a far country, as he wandered out
of his way, happened to come into a great wilderness, where he chanced to
meet with an old Eremite, who through great age was even ouerspent and worn:
with whom after he had bego^ne to enter into discourse he asked him what he did
their in that solitary place, now so near unto the date of his death. The
Eremite answered and said. Thou shall (my son) understand, that when I was in
the flourishing age of thirty years, I forsook the deceitful world, and
retired my self into this solitary place, here to do some kind of penance for
my former sins, and to learn to die, and here have I continually dwelt in
solitude these threscore and ten years. Then the Marcha^t said to him, it
seems too me a thing very superfluous that thou should seek to learn to
die, seeing thou (being a mortal man and alreaddie an hundred years old) must
needs die, and that very shortly. The Eremite answered, this is that which I
fear and not without great astonishment do every day think upon, considering
that I am not ready for death, and nevertheless I know assuredly that I must die.

To this then quoth the Merchant: what thing is it to know how to die? The old
Ermite answered him: to know how to die, is no other thing, then to fly all
things that may offend our lord God, and with diligence to do all that he
comma^deth, observing obedientlie all his precepts and commandments, and to
be in such wise neat and clean in conscience, that arryuing unto the last end
of our life we may be received into the everlasting rest of the citizens of
heaven. At these words the Marcha^t beginning to feel in his heart some
sudden motion to the change of his life, said unto him again, o dear
father, your talk greatly pleases me. Tell me I beseech you, could you give
me some good instructions touching this most necessary point of dying well?
Hereu^to the Ermite answered that he was very willing to make him partaker of
such gain as already himself had gotten by his study in that science, and
there-withal asked him what trade he lived by, he answered that he was a
Merchant, whereunto the Ermite added: that the art of a Merchant is to sell his
marcha^dise deer; and to buy good cheap: if thou then desire (quoth he) to
make a good market, and to buy a treasure incomparable, and far beyond all
estimation, for a little price, behold heaven which is so great and glorious,
and buy it with thy temporal goods, giving them to the poor for thee love of
God.

Then thee Marcha^t being desirous to be further satisfied, asked him again,
saying, o dear father and my good master, I pray you tell me, if so be that
you had a scholar, whom you loved well, or a son, whom you dearly
affected, what art principally would you teach him? The Ermite answered:
setting a side all secrets, all arts, all experimentes and all sciences in the
world, other art would I not instruct him in then in the art to die well,
because it excels every other science, the same being more necessary, more
profitable and more worthy, then the others, as without the which a man cannot
purchase paradise, nor escape the horrible pains of hell. These other arts do
teach to dispute, to talk, to measure, to number, to sing, and such like
exercises, which are all of little value, and only used of men while they live
in this miserable and transitory life, but the art to die well, teaches thee
to get paradise, where each science, and all kind of knowledge is to be
found: By thee liberal arts, thou shall get wordlie glory and earthly
substance, which most speedely passes a way: but by the art to die well; is
gotten the glory of heaven, which endures for ever, by this art is our soul
saved, and we have this life only to the end, to learn the art to die well.
To this our lord Jesus Christ does inuit us, in many places of the gospel: as
where he says: Math. 25.
Estote parati quia nescitis diem neque horam, that is to say; Be ye in a
reddines, because ye know not the day nor the hour. Again: Luc. 12.
Estote parati quia qua hora non putatis filius hominis veniet, that is: Be ye
prepared because the son of man will come what hour ye think not. To come to
this knowledge the saints and true philosophers have taken great trauail and
pains, because this science alone helps more then all the other together. In
this day and night the holy fathers did exercise themselves, and now every
good religious person and true devout Christian puts all his study to
learn to die well: yea he is not a true christian, neither can be called a
wiseman which does not procur some means to learn this so worthy and so
necessary a science, without which, none can die well, nor consequently be
saved. For as saint Bernard says, venientem mortem nemo been excipit, nisi
qui se ad ipsam dum viueret, bonis operibus preparauit, that is, No man does
well receive death, but he that while he lived, did prepare himself for it, by
good works.

The passage of death being then more perilous then any other thing (for as
much as that therein either is lost the sovereign good, and eternal damnation
purchased, or else the blessed and perpetual felicity is thereby won, and the
ever during pain of hell is thereby avoided) we ought with all carefulnes and
diligence to prepare our selves for that passage, in which the whole conclusion
and end of all our doings consists: because having made this passage as it
requires and with behooful means, we become happy for ever: whereas
contrariwise doing evil we do forever lose the joys of paradise. If a judge
were to give sentence in a case whereon depended thy whole substance, or if
thou wear to yield acco^pte of some administration or office of great
importance, thou would not find repose either night or day, thou would
not sleep one hour soundly, nor eat one morsel of meat with pleasing taste,
thou would never laugh nor use any recreation until such time as thou were
freed from that perilous estate and business. Alas then, how great is the
ignorance of miserable wordlings, which being to make this so painful and
dangerous a passage (whereupon depends all our good) do arryue and come
thereunto like unto brute beasts, without any preparation at all.

When an imprisoned malefactor ^ath received sentence of death and knows he
cannot escape, oh how many waylings, and how many lame^tings makes the wretch
in that time, seeing that assuredly he must forthwith be put to death. In this
case are all men living found to be, against whom as soon as ever they be
borne, in this miserable and transitory life, the severe sentence of death is
pronounced. And so do we all stand in this world, as the malefactor stands
in prison, condemned to death and ready to go unto execution. Of whom as it
is said, that he lies in prison upon his life, so of us all may it truly be
spoken, that we are in this prison of the world, and ly upon our lives, which
being considered: oh how much ought we to weep, and how much ought we to be
careful and diligent to prepare our selves for death.

When the merchant had understood all these things, being then brought into
great perplexity, he said unto the Ermite, o father and master I harte^
desire that you will vouchsafe to instruct me further in this so worthy and
necessary art, of dying well, that I may thereby know by this your charity
that you have chosen me for your son and disciple: and if in this most
healthful science you have any secret or worthy point, I beseech you for the
love of God before you pas from this our mortal life unto the life everlasting,
to discover unto me the same. Then the Ermite answered him, saying: my son
and well-beloved scholar, now do I know that our Lord is he, that makes thee
to speak, and therefore, I will not deny thee thy request. Know thou then that
I being an hundred years old, am assured that the end of my life cannot but
be near, wherefore having studied for the space of seauentie years, to
learn this science of dying well, It has pleased almighty God to reueal unto
me sundry secret and especial points of the same, the which I will communicate
and show unto thee for the common good of all them, that will learn to die well,
to the end that by thy means they may be published unto the world, and
especialy to such godly and devout minds, as above all other things desire to
obtain (through the grace of God) the glory of paradise, if ever then to any
sacred sermon thou did give attentive ear, instantly then I pray thee, that
unto this present discourse, thou wilt more then ever be heedful and
attentive, and for the time not to interrupt my speech. And this being said
the Ermite began his discourse as follows.

THE DIVISION OF HIS NARATION.
THe doctrine of dying well conteyneth three chapters and twelve golden rules.

The first four, in the first chapter, are called rules of health, for that
whiles we are in health they teach the means to dispose our selves for death.

The other four are called in the second chapter rules of infirmity, which
we ought to observe for dying well, in our sickness.

The four last are called in the third chapter rules of extremytie, because
we are by them instructed in four principal points which we ought to
observe at the last end of our life, to the end to pass securely the passage of
death.

The first chapter shows the long preparation that a man is to make during
the time of his health.

The second chapter shows the disposition more nearer which a man is to make
in the time of sickness.

The third conteyneth the last preparation, which a man is to make even at the
very end of his life.

THE FIRST CHAPTER CONTAINING RVLES of health, shows what a man ought to do
about dying well; the while he is in good health.
The first rule.
NO man ought to defer unto the last hour, to prepare himself to die, but very
behooful it is that every one dispose himself during the whole time of his life;
that well he may pass the last passage of death. Therefore then whylest thou
art in good health observe and keep these four fruitful rules. The first
whereof is this, be always myndful of death, because therein is contained a
great secret which of few is understood, and of fewer practiced, for that by
the only meditation of death in due manner often used, sufficient remedy is
found against all our spiritual infirmities. And therefore Kings, Princes,
Prelates, and rich men of the world, who with all industry do put away from
them the remembrance of death, do herein greatly offend, because more then any
other thing they ought to have it in continual consideration, for that to fly
the meditation and remembrance of death is no other thing, then to cast away
from them the grace of the holy ghost, which brings oftentimes into the
minds of sinners, such fearful remembrance, to the end that being thereby
terified, they may more easelie return to good life, and attain to eternal
felicity.

And to the end that this so good and profitable doctrine, may always rest
fixed in thy mind, I will in few words declare unto thee, the marvelous
fruits that proceed of this continual memory of death.

The first fruit that it produces is a profound and entyre humility: The
first fruit of the remembrance of death.
for if thou think often times on death, thou do abase and put down as it
were perforce, all pride arrogancy and insolency, and become gentle humble
and meek. For who is he, that considering in how short a time he is to
return to ashes can wax proud? we read in books of natural philosophy that
the peacock (a most fair bird) beholding the great beauty of his glistering
feathers; he reioyseth greatly, spreading out his marvelous fair tail in sign
of his gladness: but eft-soones beholding thee foulenes of his feet, he then
becomes altogether heavy and his pride is abated, and suddenly he lays
down his wings and tail, and for great sorrow, makes a lamentable cry.
Even so a man made proud either through his riches, beauty of his body, or by
glorying in his parentage, or for other worldly causes exalted, if he shall
consider the misery of his end, and in how short a time all his glory is to
be resolved into smoke, he will be constrained to lay a side all pride of mind,
and to cloth himself with humility and lowlines.

To this end at the triumphant coronation of the Pope a worthy custom is
observed, that a little towe being tied to the end of a staf it is held up and
set on fire, and being in open view suddeynlie burnt, one with a loud voice
cries out saying. Sic transit gloria mundi Pater sancte, that is to say: Even
thus (o holy Father) passes a way the glory of the world, And for this cause
also a holy Patriarch desirous in that high dignity to keep himself humble
and lowly, ordained, that the makers of his tomb (the work where of he would
should continue all the time of his life) every time that he was in any great
pomp should appear before him and tell him how his tomb was still in making,
and that therefore he should prepare himself for death: and this he did that
such remembrance might always in the midst of wordlie honor keep him humble
and lowly.

The other merueylous profit that comes of the meditation of death, The second
fruit.
is a suffic e^t remedy against coueteousnes: for the man that persuades
himself to live ever in this world, can never be content nor satisfied with
heaping up of riches, but becomes wholly insatiable: yet when he reme^breth
that ere it be long he must leave all things, and cannot carry away with him so
much as one half penny, then begins he to despise all the goods of the
world: This is it which S. Jerome writes to Paulinus, saying: Epist. 101.
Facile contemnit omnia, qui semper cogitat se esse morituru, that is: he which
ever has in mind that he shall die, does easelie contemn all things. And
Solomon says that a man living long in abundance and glory of the world,
Ecclesiast. 12
ought to remember the dark and obscure time of death, which being once come,
shall make every man know, how vain and britle have been the things which are
past and gone. And Plato highly commending this meditation of death, says,
more worthy philosophy then this can not be found. Whosoever then desires in
short time, and with ease to become a perfect philosopher, yea a godly man and
beloved of God, let him give himself wholly to thee meditation of death, and
he shall find by sure experience, that my words are neither false nor vain.

The third fruit. Lib. 16. moral. cap. ^^t.
The third fruit of the remembrance of death is, that all desire of carnal lust
is theirby easily extinguished. S. Gregory witnesses this, where he says:
Nothing avails so much to tame the desires of the flesh, then the memory of
death, and to think what this poor flesh shall become, when the soul has left
it.

The saints which wear by nature clothed with frail and wanton flesh, as
we are, through help of this exercise of the mind, did easelie overcome all
fleshly motions, as it is red of many, and specially of an Ermite who being
much assaulted with the temptation of the flesh through an imagination that the
devil presented before him of a young woman that was dead, on whom in the time
of her life he had been enamoured, he dug her dead body stinking and full of
worms out of her grave, and casting himself upon this carcas licked it with
his tongue, and smelling the filthy savor said to his flesh, go to now cruel
and untamed beast, take now thy fill of that which thou haste affected with an
unmeasurable and dissolute love, and so by this means he was freed from this
his fleshly temptation.

The fourth commodity rising of this consideration is, that not only pride
covetousness and leacherie are thereby overcome, but also every other sin may
by it be avoided, as the scripture testifies. In omnibus operibus tuis,
memorare nouissima tua, and in aeternum non peccabis. In all thy works
remember the end, and thou shall never sin. And to the same effect a holy
Abbot said: Semper memor esto exitus tui, and non erit delictu^ in anima tua,
that is, remember always thine end, and their shall never be sin in thy
soul.

But what need I to remember thee of the merueylous fruits of the first rule,
which are almost innumerable? by this thou shall easily get patience in all thy
troubles: for every man in trouble is greatly comforted, when he thinks
that by death all adversity is ended, and that after death great rewards are
prepared for all those that be truly patient. By this; fear is engendered in
the soul of a reasonable creature, which is the beginning of the amendment of
life: for who is so senseless, that considering well and diligently the
circumstances of death, does not from top to toe tremble and quake: And if thou
wilt say unto me, I cannot fear death, then must I answer thee, that it
proceeds of these causes, either that thou art not a reasonable creature, or
that thou art without understanding, or else that thou art ignorant how to
consider and think on it well. It is no sin to fear death, because this fear
is natural, and was in our Savior Christ, in as much as he was man, and we
find that the wise and natural philosophers had an apprehension of death: but
out of doubt, it should be a most grievous and enormous sin, if for such
fear one should desire to continue and always remain in this miserable life,
yea against God almighty his will and pleasure. And the fear of death in this
manner, is reproved in holy scriptures. It is good then to fear death when
such fear induces thee to the fear and love of God: but it is a very il
thing to fear it when thou art thereby disposed to gainsay the holy will of
God. I speak to thee of this laudable and profitable fear, and thereto I
inuit thee* seeing without it holy men have not profited in the perfection of
christian life: I refuse and greatly blame, that other unmeasured fear of
carnal and wicked men.

If thou take a custom to remember death in all thine acts and deeds, thou
wilt become so timorous to displease almighty God, that thou wilt cast from
thee all sloth and sluggishnes, and that this is true, is apparent, because if
thou should think that to morrow thou must needs die, suddeynlie thou
would be made well disposed to all good works. Oh how much alms, how many
prayers, how great contrition, and what number of tears sobbes and sighs
would thou make and power out? Fasting would not be hard for thee, nor to
pardon thine enemies, nor yet to make restitution of evil gotten goods. And
therefore when thou art tempted with sloth, or that well doing grieueth thee,
take this spur (of the remembrance of death) and therewith prick thine ass
forward, driving him on and saying together with Solomon, Eccl cap. 9.
bestirre thee to do good, for thou art to go out of hand where thou can
not woork any more for thy profit and commodity. S. Gregory says, valde se
sollicitat in bone opere, S. Greg.
qui semper cogitat de extremo fine) that is: he makes himself very diligent
in good woorks, that always thinks on his last end. And Seneca not
disagreing from this our purpose says, nothing helps so much to temperance
in all things, as the often thinking upon death: wheer with thou may direct
thy whole life, even as the governor of a ship does direct his vessel, who
desirous to bring it well home into the haven, sets himself at the stern in
the end thereof, so putting thy self by consideration into the end of thy life,
thou shall guide thy soul to the haven of health.

Set thy self then continually to consider the end of thy life, and if their
comes upon thee a desire of worldly riches, say within thy self: I must die
shortly, and I may die even this hour, it stands me upon therefore to take
heed, that for transitory gain I do not lose my soul and everlasting
bliss. If thou be tempted with ambition, and worldly glory, run immediately
to the remembrance of death, and say to thy desire: If I am to die shortly, and
paraduenture to day or to morrow, what need have I to think how to make my self
great in this world, where I am to abide so little and short a time? So in
every other carnal desire, and in every other temptation that may come to
thee, either of hatred, or of envy, or of pride, or of gluttony, always thou
shall help thy self with the remembrance of death.

And their shall be no sinner so great, that with this only remedy well used and
practiced, shall not be able to leave sin, and to do true penance with
perseueration. And note that this remedy although it be profitable to all,
yet is it much more profitable to beginners, and to those that be nouices in
the way of our Lord, then to others that be well forward or come to perfection.
Therefore (as a holy father says) for those that have gotten an habit in
sin, and for the beginners in spiritual life, the remembrance of death is no
less necessary and needful then daily bread unto the life of the body: yea
it is written, that without such remembrance hardly any one can be saved, for
the scripture says: Ecclesiast. ^.2.
without fear no man is justified, which fear is wont to proceed of the
remembrance of death. Seeing then that thou know sufficiently the medecin
for all thy spiritual infirmities, if thou do not put it in practice using it
when thou haste need, the fault shall be thine. And if thou wilt be a diligent
obseruer of this universal remedy, at the last end of thy life, that may be
trewlie said of the, which a bishop called Theophilus, said upon his death bed
unto the abbot Arsenius. Blessed art thou Arsenius, which haste always had
before thine eyes this last hour of death.

The Merchant having with much attension heeded these the Ermites words, and
not without great co^tentation received thereby the aforesaid fruits, being
filled with a kind of spiritual sweetness, he said unto the Eremite: Father, of
two things I do much marvel, the first is, that so few by this so easy way
of the remembrance of death, endeavor themselves to get so many marvelous
spiritual commodities: the second is, how it comes to pass that many think
and remember themselves of their lives last hour, and yet notwithstanding do
not attain to one of the least of these fruits and marvelous commodities.

To this answered the old Ermite, I shall not be able (my son) without tears
to answer thee, if I assoyle thy propounded questions, seeing so great a
multitude of christians to be damned, which so easily might save themselves,
for I am by fraternal charity constrained to this grief and compassion of the
ignorance and negligence of the world.

To the first then I answer, that the world is so full of so great ignorances
and blyndnes, and the health of souls so little or nothing cared for, that one
ducat of gold, or one carnal contentation is more esteemed then a thousand
heavens. The least thought or care, that worldlings have now adays, is of
their salvation. Therefore it is not to be marueyled at that so few be saved,
but it is to be woundered at, and a thing to make every man amassed, that in a
reasonnable humain creature can reign so great blyndnes and so little care of a
thing of so great a weight as his salvation. To the second I say, the cause
thereof is, that they know not how they should think on death, for their
thoughts thereon are superficial and short and not used with due means: and
therefore it is no marvel if of such cogitation they carry a way little or no
fruit at all. Few preachers of this time have care to teach, in what manner a
man ought fruitfullie to meditate and think upon his death. Some because they
neither think upon it themselves, nor take delight in it, as they that be more
seculer and wordlie then holy and religious. Some others disdain to handle a
matter so base, saying they be things for women and simple folks, and
therefore they go aloft by the tops of trees, disputing high things without
fruit, and do not see that the principal intent of a preacher ought to be, to
teach the way to salvation, the which consists in rooting out of vice and
planting of virtue: and to do both the one and the other himself.

Nothing truly is more apt and profitable than the continual remembrance of
death, and the meditation thereof used and practiced as it ought to be. By this
mean all wise men have come to be good Christians. And all Catholyke Doctors
with all their learning, have not found a better way to shonne sin and follow
virtue, then the remembrance of death. Wise Solomon, divine Plato, moral
Seneca, yea and all our holy men of time past, as well learned as unlearned,
have of one accord confirmed and approved this our doctrine of death both with
words and deeds. Only the miserable and ill Christians be those, that make
thereat a jest, and mock and scorn it, but in the end they will find
themselves mocked and deceived.

Then said the Merchant, let us let others go at their peril, that will not seek
to be saved, and let us attend to our own salvation: wherefore with great
desire I look that you vouchsafe to instruct me, in what manner the
remembrance of death ought to be used, that it may bring fourth the fruits
above rehearsed. The Ermite answered, if I yield to thy desire, I doubt I
shall be to long, yet considering that moderate length in a doctrine profitable
and necessary is not reprehensible, especially when the hearer is well
disposed, it shall not be grievous unto me in the first rule to lengthen my
speech more then I thought, Three means to have the remembrance of death with
profit.
for thy greater profit and better contentation. Mark then that by three
means a man may have thee remembrance of death, the which shall bring thee to
taste thereof in such wise, that exercising thy self in them, thou shall reap
the fruits before mentioned.

The first mean.
The first mean is, willingly to hear speaking and preaching of the terrible
conditions and pains of death, and willingly to read spiritual books, where
that matter is handled, and where the stories and examples be written of many
persons, which by fear of death have been converted. For such examples help
much, and not a little move sinners to repentance.

The second mean.
The second mean much more effectual then the first, is willingly and
oftentimes to go to see men when they be in the agony of death, and when they
pass out of this life, and when they be borne unto their graves: and besides
to accustom to visit Churche-yeards and monuments and sepulchers of the dead.

Oh how profitable is such an exercise as this, if it be used with a deep and
discreet consideration: whereupon the wise man says: Eccl. cap. 7.
it is better to go into the house of mourning, then to the house of feasting.
Wheare the dead be lamented, there occasion is given us to remember our selves
of the end of all men.

And the better to print this remembrance in themselves, Beholding causes
remembering.
some have taken a dead man's head, and kept it in a secret place, and
certain times in the week set it before their eyes, and very well and
diligently considered it, and by way of imagination kept long talk with it,
and this not every day but once or twice a week, because it so moves, more
our affection, then it would do if every day we should see the same: for by
long custom being once made familiar unto us, it would move us nothing at all.

A great sinner that some time used the same, asked diverse questions of a dead
man's skul which he kept, as thus, tell me if it please the (o loathsome and
deformed head, whose head haste thou been and what cause has made thee so
ugly? where be thy fine yealow hears? where is thy fair white forehead?
where is thy clear shyning eyes? where is thy tongue that so well could speak?
where be all the lively senses of thy body? where is thy face so goodly and
so fair? where is thy trim delicate skin and flesh? Thou art now without a
nose, without eyes, without ears, thou haste not so much as one hair left
upon thy head: what rasor has been so cruel that it has shaven away all thy
hair and flesh; even to the very bone? who has taken away thy beauty? who
has made thee so monstrous and il favored? whereof comes so great
deformity? Thou art to us that be living so horrible and ugly to behold,
that thou put every one in fear.

The head with lamenting voice and wayling words he imagined to answer him
thus, I was the head of a young man, beautyful, rich and mighty, which in the
short time of my flourishing youth gave my self wholly to carnal lust and
wordlie pleasures. I took no heed of my fathers admonitions, godly talk I
utterly despised, mocking simple and devout people: and believing that I
should have been a long time happy in the world, I never thought upon death. I
was altogether drowned in worldly desires, and so living in iolity, singing,
dancing and laughing, I was sudainly assaulted, with a sudain and deadly
disease, in which seeing my self in so short a time deprived of all my joy, and
in a manner desperate because I had never done good works, I began with my
self not without sore groans and deep sighs to consider mine estate, saying:
alas unhappy that I am, I see my self deprived of all things that did
delight me: o poor yongman whereto am I now brought? I must leave the world
that I did love so much: alas what helps me now my vading goodly beauty, in
this miserable state? o cruel death, how bitter is the remembrance of thee to a
merry heart, which has always flourished in delightful pleasures? o how
horrible is thy presence to a young man healthful, lusty and beauteful, and to
him that takes delight only in worldly pleasures and prosperities: I see
thou come to me like a traitor, with deceytes, laying wayt for my life, I
feel thou byndest me hand and foot, and by thy cruel forces suddaynlie bound
and taken, I see I am drawn as a thief, and malefactor to the miserable
punishment of mine end: seeking aid in so great sorrow and pain I find no
help nor succor, neither of riches, nor of friends, nor yet of kynsfolkes, and
why? the hour appointed of God is comme, I must needs go, and I know not
whether, I depart from this world that I love so well, I leave all my worldly
goods, and my worldly felicity greatly against my will: and so weeping and
howling without hope of Gods help, I was of cruel death prevented and in a
moment lost all my prosperity, the wreched soul was assigned to the
everlasting pains of hell, and my corruptible body lost all his beauty, and
became loath some and stinking, and the food of worms.

This sinner with this head made many other long discourses, and had many
imagined speeches, full of compunction and very profitable to him that desires
to die well, the which did in such wise imprint in his mind the remembrance of
death, as thereby he profited greatly in the way of salvation, for he thought,
that all the miseries above mentioned he might prove in himself, if he should
not against the hour of death be well prepared.

But to be short, I leave this second mean, and come to the third, the which is
yet of much more effect, then either the first or the second. The reason
whereof may easily be comprehended, for in the first the miserable pains and
anguishes of death are heard with the ears, in the second they be as it weer
seen with the eyes, but in the third we feel them in our selves. The hearing
surely does move much, the seeing does yet move more, but the feeling far
more moves then either of the other. If then the first and second mean to
meditate upon death do not move thee, take the third; which is practiced in
this manner, Imagine with all the forces of thy mind, that thou art presently
in that last sickness, in which thou shall be compelled to pass from this life
to another, and thou shall transform into thee all those accidents, which in
that hour may happen thee, and make them with thy mind present unto thee,
intentiuelie considering all the anguishes, sorrows and pains of that heavy
and doleful time, as though now presently thou wearest in the very agony of
death, and think thereon not as it shall come, but as if even now at this
instant thou did feel in thy self the very pains and agony thereof: with
thy thought then and with thine imagination, thou shall suppose that thou art
in thy bed, forsaken of the phisitio^s, as one without all hope of recovering
bodily health, when thy tongue fails thee, the senses of thy body cease to
do their woonted offices, thou seeist no more, nor more shall ever see in this
life, thou speak not, nor ever shall in this world speak more, either well or
il, thou hear no more, thou eatest no more, thy pulse is scarcely to be
perceived, thy body in all parts vexed with pain forsakes thee, thy members
move no more, thou lie in thy bed like an image of wood or stone, thou
sweatest from top to toe for extreme pain and torment, their does remain in
thee but a little breath, and in this manner, sorrowing, gaping, for breath and
striving with death, thou lie for a little time in such horrible and terrible
pains, both of mind and of body, as in this life thou never did feel so
bitter griefs, The synful soul seeing herself forsaken and abandoned of the
body, whom she loved so deerlye, with deep sighs (her estate thorowlie
weighed) knows she can have neither succor nor help of the world in this her
extreme need: and therefore on her own part willing to comfort and help her
self, begins to think on her works, if yet in them she might find some
refuge: but not able to find in her self any other works then weighty and
wicked vices, she makes far greater sorrow then before. Yet searching if on
any side she might find refreshing in this her hard and bitter case, she then
with wayling tourneth her to the mercy of God, but therewithal knowing this
her conversion to rise of servile fear seeith her self not in this last hour
worthy of mercy, but rather of all rigor of justice, forthwith is wholly
confounded, not knowing how to escape this horrible and fearful judgment of
the most great and just judge, before whom the poor and unhappy soul is now
to be called to appear in judgment, and to render a general account of all
her actions eue^ to the least thought; then the sorrowful soul seeing her
self in so great extremity, and not able to satisfy so great a judge: because
so strait an account is demanded of her, as of all her worldly goods, of her
worldly honors, of the members of her body, and of their powers, and how she
has used them to the honor of her creator, and the miserable soul not
knowing what to answer, the eyes of her understanding being opened, she
knows that she is not of her self by the giltinesse of her own conscience
worthy of glory but deserves pain, and therefore utterly desperate, seeing
she can find no relief to ease her vnshunnable pain, but rather the increase,
thereof seeing the devils appear before her with most soul and ugly shapes,
like fires lions watching to devour her, she then more unhappy than any other
creature, in that instant feels such bitter grief and sorrow, that she is
forced for vehemency of her unspeakable passions, to forsake for ever her
miserable and contemptible body. And so suddaynlie taken by those cruel
fiendes of hell, she is with such grief as cannot be uttered bound and brought
against her will, to that unhappy and sorrowful country, where being cast in
burning fire she their remains in everlasting woe and pain: and the dead
carkas now become carrion, and all foul and stinking, with a little sound of
belles, and with weeping tears of kinsfolks is brought unto the grave,
whereafter it is put in the ground, it is soon devoured of worms, and turned
into earth and ashes. And then is verified, the saying of David in the Psalm,
Psalm. 9.
Perijt memoria eius cum sonitu, and iustus in eternum permanet, that is: his
memory has perished with the sound, and the just abides for ever, and thus
is the end of this worlds pomp and glory.

Of how great effect the remembrance of death may be, is showed by many
examples, and chiefly by that which John Climacus recyteth of a most negligent
and keycold religious man, who taken with a grievous sickness, was within a
while rapt in spirit, and when his soul was (as it weer) clean separated from
the body, he saw the just judgments of God, and afterward being returned to
himself, by and by he despatched away all those that then wear with him in his
sell, and their shut himself up, and lived with bread and water xij. years,
never speaking to any person so much as one word, until he was near unto
death, that then the other monks desirous to receive, of him some good
instructions did break open his chamber door and entered in unto him, and prayed
him that it might not be grievous unto him, in this his last hour, to speak
in the way of charity, for the edification of others, and disclose unto them
in what manner so sudaynlie from so great negligence, he was come to so great
perfection, who after much entreaty, made them this answer: pardon me if I
do not use many words, and assure your selves, none can ever sin grievously
which have the true feeling of the remembrance of death. The monks buried him
with great devotion, but the next day following, when his bones were sought by
such as desired to reverence them, they wear not found. Whereby they knew how
much the feeling in deed of the remembrance of death does please God, and what
effect it woorketh, and how expedient it is for them that desire to become
good: since that in one moment it can make even those that be very negligent,
zealously disposed and most fervent to every good woork. And now seeing that
with more prolixitie then I meant I have handled this first rule, the more to
show the utility thereof, the shorter will I now enforce my self to be in the
rules following.

The second rule.
THE second principal rule of the art to die well consists in disposeing of a
man's last will and testament, for a wise man ought not to die without making
his testament. And although he be willing to make it, yet ought he not to
defer it to the last extremity. Therefore said Jacob to Laban, Genes. 3.
Iustum est, vt aliquando domut meae disponam, that is to say: It is meet, that
without any more ado I dispose of my house. And Esaias said to Ezechias king of
Judea: Dispone domut tuae, quia, Regum 20.
morieris and no^ viues, that is: set thy house in order, for thou shall die,
and not live. He that at the beginning of his sickness makes his testament,
may the better provide for himself and his kindred, because he takes the fitter
opportunity to do it with greater foresight and judgment, and is more readdie
afterward at the point of death to attend to the health of his soul.

The devil does his endeavor to make thee defer the making of thy testament, to
the intent that after when thou shall be grieved with thy sickness, thou may
also be troubled with thy children and kindred, who all seek their own
commodity and little care for thy souls health. Therefore if thou be wise,
thou wilt make thy testament so soon as thou can: and to the end thou may
make it as it beheueth and with the more commodity I will teach thee certain
secrets concerning the same.

First then I must put thee in remembrance that thou do not to much trust unto
freindes or kinsfolks, when they promise thee to do good for thy soul after
thy death, for if in thy life time thou wilt be negligent to procure help and
necessary prayers for thy self, far more negligent will they be when thou art
gone. This is so playnlie seen every day by manifest experience, that it
would seem a thing utterly needles to go about to prove it.

Secondly I am to advertise thee* that thou can not make any legacies which
can be more profitable for thy soul, then legacies to have masses said for
thee, the which is proved by all the divines, and chiefly by Gabriel Beele upon
the canon of the Mass, and by the Angelical Doctor S. Thomas Aquinas upon the
fourth of the sentences. Who affirm the Mass to be always auayleable to the
souls that are in purgatory, yea although the priest which said it were in
deadly sin, because he as the minister; says it in the person of the
Church militant, which is ever acceptable unto God.

Thirdly I advise thee, that thou ordeyne and appoint thy legacies in such
wise, as without delay after thou be dead, they may be performed and thy will
executed, as well for the masses, as for the alms which thou shall leave to be
bestowed. For (as John Gerson says) far better it is to have them said out of
hand, then to tarry diverse years, because the sooner they be said, the sooner
the souls be delivered out of the pains of purgatory.

Fourthlie I must put thee in mind to confess thy self, and to communicate
before thou make thy testament. For when thereby thou art the more in the
favor of God, legacies of alms and masses do far more avail thee, then if
thou weert out of the state of grace. This is grounded upon the doctrine of S.
Thomas in the fourth of the sentences, where he says, the satisfaction
enjoined of the confessor made when thou art in deadly sin does not take away
the pain of the sin remitted: although the opinion of Scotus, which holds
the contrary, be more favorable, but yet in our case I judge that of S.
Thomas to be the more sure.

Lastly there is come to my mind an other thing to remember thee of, which I
heard of that noble captain Bartholomew of Bergamo, which is, that if thou
wilt make a singular good testament and a perfect preparation, to die well; then
bear thy self always in such sort whilst thou art a live, and let thy
words be so charitable direct and clear concerning thy last will in thy life
time, that after thy death no man may have just cause to complain of thee. If
thou art a secular man in thus doing thou may leave thy heirs in peace
without stryf, which is the best inheritance that thou may leave unto them,
and moreover thou do therein the better provide for thy salvation and
theirs, and therefore thou ought in any case to observe this good and
profitable lesson in the making of thy testament.

But if thou be a spiritual man not having worldly goods to distribute, thou
may make a spiritual testament, after the example of many saints, which
have spoken in their testaments not of wordlie wealth and earthly possessions,
but of spiritual and heavenly things.

The thir^ rule.
THE third rule of the art to die well, which is to be practiced in health, is
daily prayer, to obtain at Gods hands a good and laudable death. For as
without God his grace no man ca^ do any good or meritorious woork, nor think my
good thought so a good death without his grace we can in no wise look for.
Therefore we ought every day to pray unto God, that he will for his infinite
goodness grant us a good and happy end. In observing the custom so to pray,
S. Augustine, and S. Catherine of Siena were wont to say this verse of the
Psalm, which is very fit for the purpose. Illumina oculos meos, ne vnquam
obdormiam in morte ne quando dicat inimicus meus, praeualui aduersus eum. That
is, lighten mine eyes that I sleep not in death, least that at any time my
enemy say I have prevailed against him. And if thou can say none other, at
least thou shall say a Pater noster and Aue Maria devoutly every day; with
this inte^tio^ that God will give thee grace to die like a true christian. And
although it be a thing very convenient for the obtaining of such singular grace
to have recourse to the glorious mother of God, as also to the apostles,
martirs, co^fessors, virgins and other saints in heaven: yet nevertheless
thou ought particularly to invoke the aid of thy good angel, who for so
much as he has a particular care over thee, will not fail in that so
dangerous and perilous an hour to assist thee with a singular and special
help. Some be accustomed to say this prayer. O Domine Jesus Christ deprec^r te
propter illam amaritudinem, quam pro me misero peccatore sustinuisti in cruce,
maxim quando nobilissima anima tua egressa est de corpore tuo, miserere animae
meae in egressu suo, Amen. That is: O Lord Jesus Christ, I beseech thee for
that bitterness, which for me wretched sinner thou did endure on the cross,
espetialy when thy most noble soul went forth of thy body, have mercy upon
my soul when it shall depart out of my body. A chanon reguler of the order of
S. Augustyne, after his death appearing to a friend of his, told him, that by
means of this prayer, which he had ordinarily in his life time said every
day, there was granted unto him a very good happy and quiet death. If thou
shall then daily use so to recommend thy self to God, to the saints and
angels, thou may hope never to be abandoned of them in that case. And
although in time of pestilence or of war, thou find thy self deprived of all
man's help, do not doubt: For in that hour thy good angel and the saints will
not fail of their desired help in due time, as it is known to have happened
to many that trusted in their aid.

The fourth and last rule.
THE fourth rule, which ought to be observed in health is called mortification.
The devout men that have treated of this doctrine, write, that a man ought
every day to die, that is to say, to mortify his proper passions and senses,
as for example, one does abuse thee in words, thy passion would answer him,
and thou would not suffer him to tread thee (as it weer) under his feet, but
thereby thou should show thy self not to have mortifyed thy affections,
whereas holding thy peace and mortifiyng that violent motion, thou should
show thy self to be dead to the world, and that thy reason comaundeth over
thy inferior affections.

When thine eye would see and behold a beautiful creature, if thou restrain
thy desire, thou shall mortify it, but if thou suffer thy self to be carried
away by sensuality, then can thou not be called dead unto the world but
alive. Therefore it is said of holy men, that if thou desire to die a true
christian, and at the end of thy life to enjoy everlasting bliss, it behooves
thee every day whilst thou live many times to die. And thus oftentimes dying
spiritually, thou shall learn the art to die well, and safely and without
fear come to the end of thy life, with good preparation, and their shall be
verified in thee the saying of blessed S. Gregory the great, when he said:
Non timebit facere, quod se nouerit been didicisse, that is to say: he shall
not fear to do that, which he knows himself to have learned well to do.

And thus haste thou somewhat understood, how thou ought to prepare thy self
for death in time of health, which is practiced beforehand, and in it
consists four rules or principal points, the first is called the remembrance
of death, the second, the making of thy testament: the third prayer: the
fourth, mortification.

And now come we to the second part where we shall speak more briefly of the
preparation a man ought to make; when he begins to be sick, and it
conteyneth four other principal rules.

THE SECOND CHAPTER wherein is principally treated of the preparation which a
man ought to make in the beginning of sickness, and conteyneth four principal
rules.
The first rule.
THE first rule is, that when thou feel thy self deprived of health, thou
do think by and by, that almighty God, who is the chief goodness, is he that
sends thee this sickness for the greater weal of thy soul, and to the end
that thou should leave thy evil life: or else if already thou haest amended
thy evil life, that then thou may be preserved in good life with greater
perfection. The wyseman said: Infirmitas grauis sobriam facit animam, that is
to say: A grievous sickness makes the soul sober. And David says:
Multiplicate sunt infirmitates eorum, postea accelerauerunt: that is, Their
infirmities wear multiplied, and afterward they made haste: Therefore this
sickness without doubt being sent thee of God for thy profit, thou oughest to
receive with great patience, and thank him for his gifts. For although these
strypes and fatherly corrections afflict and grieve the body, yet they cure
the soul: and of this thy prayse-woorthie patience, many good fruits shall
follow. First thou shall greatly merit in the sight of God, being conformable
to his just and holy will and pleasure, and it shall be a satisfaction for thy
sins: and the more, in that thou shall the more easily suffer the sickness it
self, and so if God will that thou amend, thou shall sooner be delivered.
Whereas on the contrary part, if thou should be impatie^t, thou should
sin, and thy sickness should be prolonged, and peradventure also increased:
and thou weakened by thine impatience, should then with more difficulty
bear every little pain or grief. To this purpose S. Augustine said: Si Deum
diligis quod faecit Deus diligis, that is: If thou love God, thou love that
which God does.

And S. Hierome says, Qui cum dolor agritudinem suscipit, signum est quod
Deum non sufficienter diligit, that is to say: It is a sign he does not love
God with all his heart as he ought to do, which receives sickness with greef of
mind.

The second rule.
THE second rule of preparation, that ought to be made in sickness is, so soon
as thou perceyuest thy self to be sick, that thou think thou may die of this
disease, and that thou therefore do dispose thy self to receive the
sacraments of holy Church, as if thou were sure thou should then die in
deed. In this case the devil is wont to lay many stoppes to let a man to do so
great good. First he puts in his mind that he shall not die of that
sickness, and that their is no peril at all. After that he procures the
physician to give him too much hope of life, and likewise all them of the
house. And his fteindes and kinsfolks to comfort him, saying, Sir be of good
cheer, for ye shall amend very shortly. And if any religious man come to
visit him, they warn him or tell him, that for nothing in the world he put any
fear in him, or tell him that he is in peril to die. All these be woorkings of
our ghostelie enemy. Therefore a wyseman so soon as he feels himself sick,
says, I will confess my self and receive the blessed sacrament, and prepare my
self for death, and after let God woork his holy will of me as it pleases him,
for that I am his creature.

But note that when he has made this good determination, the devil does not
yet cease to make him delay so good a deed, and begins to move his wife (if
he be married) and his kinsfolks to leave them some of his worldly
substance, and they talk to him of many hard things, and all worldly. In the
mean while the sickness encteaseth and the sickman says dispatche these
businesses, I will in any wise be confessed. In such case I would advise thee
to have an eye to the principal, which is the health of thy soul, for the
malice of the devil lays many snares to catch thee. Say not I will first
dispatche my worldly business and then confess me, because it is the devil
that makes thee to speak so: but say I will first confess me and prepare for
my soul, and after I will dispose these other things of the world, because this
business of the soul does (to say the truth) importe me much more then a
thousand worlds. And doubt not when thou shall be confessed thou shall have in
thee the grace of God, and be better able then; to dispose of thy worldly
things with more judgment and better means.

Now mark well my son, for in this rule I will discover unto thee some goodly
secrets, which commonly are not set fourth of some devout men which have
entreated of this art to die well. All how should and worldly care being then
set a side, I will have thee after thou haste examined thy conscience, to make
thy confession to a good and learned priest, following the example of S.
Augustine, who in his last sickness, would have none to enter into his chamber
for some days together until he had made a diligent search, and examination of
his conscience. And so he had written before to a nephew of his, and persuaded
him, that putting a side all earthly care in his sickness, he should turn
himself wholly to God almighty, with great contrition: beholding the blessed
wounds of our most mercyful redeemer, and bewayling and detesting al his
faults past. In this time, it should be very good to say the seaue^
penite^tial Psalms, as did the same S. Augustyne, who turning his heavy and
pale face to the wall where the seven Psalms weere written, and being from
all other care sequestered, said them with great abundance of tears,
demanding of almighty God mercy and pardon for his sins.

And after such a contrition and repentance for thy sins thou shall then make
thy confession with an exact examination of thy conscience, and after while
thou art in perfect memory thou shall receive the blessed sacrament, which is
called in latin viaticum, that is to say: a viage provision, because it is
necessary and needful in the way by which we have to pass from this life to
the next. With how great reverence and devotion so great a sacrament is to be
received I will not (for breuities sake) here declare, but will refer thee for
this matter to the examples of the saints, and especially for the passage out
of this life to the glorious doctor S. Hierome, where thou shall find with how
many tears, and with how merueylous great consideration he received the
blessed sacrament, all which is written for our example.

When now thou shall be communicated, immediately thou shall require; that
growing woors, thou may have the sacrament of extreme unction, when it shall
seem good to thy ghostly father. And here I will tell thee, a good note, which
is that if thou take the sacrament of extreme vnctio^ in such manner, as I have
instructed thee, and if thou pray to our Lord as well as thou can, and
oftentimes repeat thy prayer, and persevere in desire until death, asking of
God, that for his infinite mercy, and by the virtue of this holy Sacrament of
extreme unction, he will grant thee plenarie remission in this life of all thy
sins, that is to say, that when thy soul shall be separated from thy body,
immidiatly without touch of the pains of purgatory, thou may fly to the
bliss of everlasting life: John Gerson Chancellor of Paris, and William
Altissiodorensis affirm (with whom agrees also Peter de Palude) that in this
case the sick dying with the disposition and holy preparation before mentioned,
shall not feel the pains of purgatory, but straight way shall ascend to the
eternal joys of heaven. And it seems Cassiobrus was of this opinion touching
the plenary remission in alleging this verse, ^salm. 115.
Dirupisti Domine vincula mea, tibi sacrificabo hostiam laudis, that is: thou
haste broken my bands in sonder o lord, to thee will I yield the sacrifice of
praise, which (as some hold opinion) being said in the end of a man's life does
procure that his sins be remitted, that is, as I expound it, touching the
pain: for as for the fault; perfect contrition suffices. Behold my well-beloved
son how easily a christian may obtain plenarie remission and full pardon of
his sins. See besides how much it imports to know this art of dying well,
and how greatly it profits how to know to make preparation, with the
sacraments of holy Church. And if thou weart at that point that thou could
then not have the sacraments, in this case thy good desire with the
continewance of the said prayer would suffice thee: And so by the opinion of
John Gerson a very Catholic doctor, and William Altissiodorensis thou
should likewise obtain plenarie remission by the virtue of that prayer. Yea
without the sacraments actuallie received. Therefore mark this notable saying,
and keep it in memory, and praise the infinite goodness of God, who for so
short and few words, does deliver us from the pain of so great a fire.

The third rule.
THE third rule for the time of sickness is, that thou prepare thy self to be
constant and strong against the sundry temptations, whear with the devil will
trouble thee. Wherefore it is to be known, according to the doctrine of
diuynes, that the devil is more diligent in tempting at the time of death, then
in the time of health: for he thinking the disease to be mortal; says to
himself, if I lose this soul at this instant, I lose it for ever, wherefore I
will not leave to do what I can to win it. And so calling to him a multitude
of devils in diverse manners they procure his damnation, laying wait even until
the end of his passage. First they temp him with impatience whereunto for sorrow
and pain he is much inclined. When they cannot overcome this way they take an
other and tempt him with his own, pleasing of himself and his proper
reputation, desirous to persuade him that he is one of great perfection, and
constant in his adversities, and that he has done many good works worthy
of great recompense, and with this temptation devout men are specially vexed,
and this temptation is much to be feared, because many have been brought in
peril by it, and many damned. Wherefore it behooves them to have recourse to
humility, and to consider our own faults which in deed be many, and to
acknowledge the mercy and goodness of our Savior, from whom all goodness
proceeds without any proper merit or deserving of ours, more over by diverse
ways and means they endeavor themselves to make him think, that he shall not
die of this infirmity, and this they do to the end he go not about to prepare
and fortify himself against them, and that they may take him at unawares.

But if thou wilt be wise and provident, thou shall prepare thy self in
every least sickness, as if thou weart out of all doubt thou should die of
that disease. And if they see they cannot deceive thee this way, then they set
hand to greater blows, and with false arguments begin to call thee back from
the truth of the christian faith. In this case if thou be not very wary,
thou art like to be catched in their nets: therefore I give thee warning
that thou give not ear to their deceitful arguing, nor dispute with them in
any wise, because so, thou should be sodeynlie bound and taken. The best
remedy in this straight will be, with tongue and heart to say the articles of
our faith, that is the Creed, and to confess thou beleeuest all that our holy
mother the Catholyke Church believes, and so cause the gospels to be red unto
thee, with this temptation the learned are more troubled then the unlearned,
therefore it is good to submit our understanding unto obedience of faith, and
not to search out the truth thereof by reason, but with humility to refer
our selves to the judgment of our forefathers and the Catholyke Church. If
in this temptation of infidelity thou shall make due resistance, then with
their last battle they will tempt thee with desparation, persuading thee that
in this life thou haste not used thy self in such wise as thou deseruest to be
saved: and to put thee beside all hope they will bring to thy memory all thy
defects and wants, and tell thee thy confessions have not been good, nor thy
communications meritorious, and that thou have not done every thing for the
love of God, but for fear of hell and for thine own profit. Then it will be time
to run to the infinite mercy of our loving and sweet lord God, and remember
thy self that his son for our salvation did become man, and as man suffered
hunger, and thirst, pains, and torments, and finally upon the cross for our
salvation, an opprobrious and shameful death. Thou shall answer then to the
enemy: it is true, thou do not deserve paradise, nor did woork in all
thy life by which thou could merit so great bliss, but thy merciful lord is
he, that of his infinite mercy and goodness has merited for thee; and
purchased thee paradise, when he died on the cross for thy redemption. If
thou say this, they shall remain confounded like hellish beasts, not knowing
what more to do against thy salvation: except (God permitting it) they appear
unto thee in very horrible and fearful shapes, to give thee some pain and to
make thee afeard, to the intent they may more easily take thee in their
malicious trappes, whylest thy mind is occupied with such trouble, and greef.
But if thou wilt run for refuge to the help of our blessed Lady, and of
thine angel, and of thy heauenle advocates, they will reddilie give thee
succor, and peradventure appearing unto thee in ^ouing and gracious shapes,
sodeynlie from their presence every deuilish vision will be gonne.

The fourth ^ule.
THE fourth rule of the art to die well, that ought to be observed in time of
sickness, is the election or provision of two or of one faithful and
well-beloved companion or friend, either seculer or religious, which in the end
of thy life may be present with thee, and assist thee; whose office shall be
principally about three things.

The first is, that having committed the charge of thy soul unto such, in this
extremity they will make thee some spiritual exhortations, comforting and
persuading thee to patience and consta^cie, to the end thou may have the
greater reward in heaven for conforming thy self to God his holy will and
pleasure, in this and every other affliction. Also they shall exhort thee, that
all care and all love of transitory things of this world set a side, with all
thy heart thou be attentyue to the health of thy soul, thanking our lord God
continually for his innumerable benefits bestowed upon thee. Secondly that
whilst they assist thee, they do make thee many good and profitable demaundes.
First they ought to demand, if thou firmly believe all the articles of the
christian faith, and that our holy mother the Church believes and holds,
moreover they ought to ask thee if thou have greef and sorrow for all thine
offenses committed against God, asking pardon with an humble and contrite heart,
and if thou purpose never to offend him more, and if for his love thou
willingly pardonest all those that have offended thee. And they shall also put
thee in remembrance, that if thou have taken away the good name or the goods
of any person, that thou actualy if it be in thy power, do without delay
restore it. And after they shall exhort thee to put all thy hope and set all thy
love in our most mylde and loving redeemer, beseeching him with fervent
desire, that he will give thee perfect faith, hope and charity, and that for
the merits of his holy passion, and for his infinite mercy he will give thee
the everlasting glory of heaven. And if the sickman should not to these
demandes answer like a good christian, then his chosen freindes before
mentioned shall with all diligence do their endeavor to remove from him every
il apprehension and disposition of spirit, persuading him with loving and sweet
words, how much it is needful at this time to prepare himself to receive
devoutly all the sacraments of the Church, and wholly and thorowlie to do
according to the demaundes and questions above specified. To the office of this
faithful and devout friend or friends, it shall also belong to provide that the
sick do not die without the sacraments, and that the images of the Crucifix and
of our Lady be their in presence, and stand before the eyes of the sick: also
that their be holy water, with the which let all the chamber and the sick
person be sprinkled, because it avails greatly against the power of the
devil. Also that their be red the gospels of Christ's passion and specially
that of S. John, or some other thing of the bible, and that he be put in mind
of the saints, and principally or his advocates and patro^s to whom in his
life time he has had particular and special devotion, let their also be
warning given, that in the chamber wheare the sick lies their be no reasoning
of worldly matters, nor loud speaking, but only so much as is needful for
behoof of the sick, for then is time to pray, and not to prattle: also that
none weep their, that great silence be kept, and that their be in the chamber
no great multitude of persons: they ought also to prohibit that the sick
person be not much molested with the visitinges of his freindes and kinsfolks,
and specially when his sickness increases, and that there is in him no great
hope of life.

And thus I make an end of this second chapter, in the which I have declared
the preparation called the approaching, which ought to be made in time of
sickness. And it conteyneth 4. rules: the first is called constancy or
patience: the second devout receiving of the sacraments of the Church: the
third a wary and good provision against the devils temptations: the fourth a
good election or choice of one or two faithful friends, that may have diligent
care of the sick.

And now in a few words I will dispatche the last preparation, declaring that
which is to be done, in the passage and very last end of this present life.

THE THIRD CHAPTER, wherein is declared in few words, the last preparation
which he ought to make, that is come unto the very end of his life.
IN this third chapter, we are to speak of the preparation, which ought to be
made when a man is nearest the end of his life, as when he begins to enter
into his agony and draws onward to his last gasp. This chapter conteyneth
four short rules, the which after the example of our lord Jesus Christ we
ought to observe in this last passage of our life, for we ought to know, that
as the life of our Savior has been given us for a rule, and for the
instruction of our life: so also his death has been set before us to teach us
how to die. Therefore S. Gregory says that, Omnis Christi actio nostra est
instructio, that is to say: all the actions of Christ are instructions for us.
As our life then shall be best, when it shall be like to that of our redeemers, who
was very man, and very God: so also our death shall be very laudable and holy
when it shall have those conditions, which that death of our blessed Master
had, who being on the hard wood of the cross near unto death; diligently
observed four rules before his blessed soul departed from his sacred body.

The first ^ule.
THE first rule was, that spoiled and naked he ascended the holy cross,
forsaken almost of all, where he would die poor; reserving no worldly thing
for himself. So we ought at the least, now at the last, after the example of
our Savior to renounce effectually every superfluous and vain possession,
and all worldly and carnal love, leaving that to-great affection which we
weere wont to bear to wife and children, careing no more neither for riches
nor for honors of the world, to the end that we be not troobled by any
thing: but in this last period of our life, to think wholly upon almighty God.

The second rule.
THE second rule observed by our lord on the cross, was, that he prayed for
himself, and for his enemies: repeating as he prayed unto his father, the
words of the Psalm, Deus, Deus meus (respice in me) quare me dereliquisti?
that is to say: O God my God (look upon me) why have thou forsaken me? and
afterward this verse of the Psalm: In manus tuas Domine commendo spiritum
meum, that is: Into thy hands o Lord, I commend my spirit. So ought we to
pray first for our selves and after for enemies. And at that time a man put in
such heaviness and peril of his salvation, ought never to cease to call for help
of our most mercyful lord God, and of his blessed mother, of all the Angels,
Patriarchs, Prophets, Martyrs, Co^fessors, Virgins, and matrons, soliciting
them with great groans and deep sighs, to help him in this perilous battle
and in so great necessity: and to inuit them that they vouchsafe to
accompany his soul and guide it into the eternal tabernacles, to enjoy the
divine essence, and to rejoice with them in everlasting peace:

The third rule.
THE third rule observed of our redeemer Jesus Christ; was, that he with
bowing of his head, and in such manner as he might, took leave of his most
deer mother, and of his most hearty freindes which were their present about
the cross, and recomme^ded his blessed mother to her new son which he gave
her. By this he gave us example; to do the like, to wit, that when the sick
person sees himself to be near death, it is very convenient, that he
recommend his family, as his wel-beloued wife, and his dear children, to some
friend that may counsel and help them. After this, all his servants and how
should called together, let him take leave of them, ask them forgiveness for the
il examples he has given them, and make them some good exhortation. And if
that he be a father let him give his fatherly blessing to his derely beloved
children, saying unto them: my children if ye will be good, and have the fear of
God before your eyes, your principal and heavenly Father will never forsake you.
Be diligent to keep his commandments, The blessing of the Father, of the
Son, and or the holy Ghost, and of our blessed Lady, and of all the Saints
in heaven be with you. Then taking every one of them by the hand, and kissing
them, and embracing his loving wife and children he shall say: O my dear wife I
pray thee honor and fear our Lord God above all things, I leave thee these
our children, have diligent care of them: until this time they have been ours,
now they shall be thine: if thou wilt continue in good life; thou shall never
want the help of God. Be of good cheer, and do not not weep, for our Lord will be
with thee: Then shall he exhort his children, that they be obedient to their
mother, and fear and reverence her as they ought. After this he shall take
leave of them all, causing them to go out of his chamber, that he may remain
alone, with his faithful and chosen freindes which are to have care over him
even to the last end of his life.

The fourth rule. Hebr. 5.
THE fourth and last rule observed of our Savior in his passage, was, that (as
S. Paul says) Cum clamore valido and lachrymis preces offerens exauditus est
pro sua reuerentia, that is to say: offering up his prayers with a loud cry and
tears, he was heard for his reverence sake: And the text of the holy gospel
says; that our lord having cried with a loud voice, and recomended his soul
to his heavenly Father (saying: Luc. 23.
Father into thy hands I commend my spirit) yielded up his ghost, leaving the
body without the soul, whereupon is gathered, that our Savior has done
three things in this last rule.

First he cried with a loud voice: secondly he wept: thirdly he commended
his soul to his Father, and then his blessed soul departed from his precious
and holy body. All these things ought the sick man to do, that is upon his
last passage, and in the agony of death. So that after he has caused his
parents and friends to retire; having taken his leave of them, he shall first
think upon the state of his conscience, and then call upon almighty God, not
with a loud voice, but with deep and profound sighs from the bottom of his
heart, craving pardon with most sorrowful tears and intyre contrition, of his
creator, for all his sins and offenses committed against his divine majesty,
let him repent himself of every sin he has committed, and with sorrowful heart
ask mercy of almighty God for every small negligence, bitterly also
lamenting for every little loss of time, and requiring help of our blessed
Lady and all the saints: oftentimes let him say. In manus tuas Domine
commendo spiritum meum, that is: into thy hands o Lord, I commend my spirit.
The which words the diuynes think to be of very great virtue: And so by
means of thease preparations, being filled with good and holy desires, thou
shall come to a happy passage of death: and finally render thy body to the
earth, and thy soul to thy creator with whom thou shall live eternally.

When the young Mercha^t had heard all these rules, he said to the Ermyte. I
cannot express with my tongue how much your profitable words have been
acceptable unto me. Surely ye have made me know things which I shall never
forget, yea more then that, I shall endeavor my self through the grace of God,
with all possible diligence to put in practice and execution all thease 12.
golden rules of the art to die well, which ye have declared unto me in the
precedent chapters.

But I beseech you seeing we be in this talk of death, that ye will answer to
certain doubts of mine, according to your learning and the opinion of the
sacred diuynes, and as ye shall be illumined by the holy Ghost. The Ermite
answered that he was very well contented, so that he did not seek to know
them of a vain curiosity. The Merchant said: I desire to be resolved of
certain doubts, of which the resolutions and declarations shall be to all men
prontable and pleasing, for their are none which ought not to des re and
understand such doctrine, because death is common to all, and therefore ought
every one willingly to talk and reason there of.

The Ermite then said, my son it is convenient we sit down, because my
great age requires some rest, as also because when we sit and repose our
selves, the spirits will be better disposed to conceive and more apt to
understand the answer and resolution to thy demaundes. Begin then, and
propound in few words thy doubts, the Mercha^t then (they being set down)
began to make his demaundes as follows.

The first ^^estion.
I Demand in the first place, if we be all bound to desire death?

The Ermite answered, that in respect of the appetite or desire sensitive we
be not bound: but contrary it is in respect of the appetite or desire
reasonable voluntary and free, under which the appetite sensitive ought to be
both subject and governed. The reason heerof is for that according to the
opinion of the diuynes, we be bound to leave our own life, and to accept
death for the certain and sure salvation of our neighbor, much more then be
we bound to this charity for our own salvation, the which we know for
certain cannot be had ordinarily, if first we die not. And we being bound to
desire this last and eternal felicity, we are consequently bound to desire all
the means necessary to the attayning thereof. And for not desiring of death
with reason as aforesaid, many Christians are damned, which if they might,
would choose to live in this miserable world for ever, and would say to
almighty God; keep thou thy heaven for thy self, for I care not for it, it
suffices me to live here with my freindes and kindred. Wherefore it is a
thing manifest and plain, that such men love not God. And they have not
charity, seeing they never care to see his face: wherein consists all our
true and chiefest bliss. And thus by this answer the Merchant was thorowlie
satisfied: and he said this was a good point, worthy to be well considered of
many worldlings, which are persuaded they are not bound to desire death,
alleging that the religious and perfect men be they which are bound to desire
death, and in no wise seculer and wordly men. But without all doubt they be
deceived, for we are there unto all bound indifferently.

The second question.
THE second question was whether we ought to have an ill opinion of those that
die unwillingly:

The Ermite answered, saying, my son take heed to my words, for in this
place I will tell thee another point, which as I think is of very few understood.
Assure thy self it is not lawful, to desire long life, except it be to make
some spiritual fruit, either in himself or others: where-fore when-soeuer a
sickman dies unwillingly, and that he desires the prolonging of hi^ life
principally to other end then to do spiritual good, either in himself or in
others, I say that in this case he sins greatly: my reason is, for that if
he had the virtues of hope and charity, he would more desire to be joined
with his God, then any other thing that is not in any sort given or ordained
to that end, that is, the conjunction and union with the sovereign good. It is
needful then to satisfy thy demand with a distinction: wherefore I say unto
thee, when a sick man dies unwillingly, to the end he would abide in this
world to joy and triumph and not to the end to amend his life, nor yet to help
others: of such an one a man cannot but have a sinister and il opinion, because
it is a sign he has not charity toward his creator. But when the sick
person desires his life may be prolonged to do penance for his sins, or to
have time to merit more, or to come more in Gods favor, or else to help others,
after the example of S. Paul, S. Martin, and diverse holy men, of such a man
(so as he be confirmable to God his holy will and pleasure) we ought to have a
good and holy opinion, because he has his desires agreeable unto charity.

Hereunto replied the Merchant; if this be so then are but few saved, because
few they be which desire not to have long life, to triumph here in joy, and to
get worldly riches and honors. Therefore these things ye tell me seem unto
me very strange and difficil. To this answered the good Ermyte, saying, my
son I grant thee, that few are saved, but yet that which I tell thee is
true, and taken out of the doctrine of holy diuynes, which to avoid tediousnes
I name not, nor yet go I about to prove at length this my saying, because it
is a thing very palpable, and well known to devout and holy persons.

The third question.
THE third question was, whether we ought to have an ill opinion of them that
at the last end of their life do lose the use of reason, and many times do utter
vain and il speeches.

The Ermite answered with distinction, saying, that of these we ought to say
as of them which in health become mad, and die in their madness, who if they
wear in state of grace, when they lost the use of reason, and so dyed, they
are saved: but if then they wear in mortal sin and so dyed they be without
all doubt damned in hell. And note for our purpose, that the just judge our Lord
Jesus Christ suffers somtymes some great sinners, in their last sickness to
lose the use of reason in just judgment, to the intent that as in their life
time they have not been myndful of almighty God, so in their death they should
not remember themseluee. This is that which S. Augustine said: Hac
animaduersione percutitur peccator, vt moriens obliuiscatur sui, qui du^
viueret oblitus est Dei, that is to say: with this punishment the sinner is
stricken, that dying he forgets himself, which whilst he lived did forget
almighty God. Such men as these having lived beastly and without reason, for
their worthy punishment ought to die as brute beasts; without any good
preparation, and therefore without confession and communion, and without any
sign of contrition: oftentimes with blasphemies and ill words they pass out
of this miserable life; to the more miserable and everlasting pain of hell. On
the contrary part it happens somtymes to some just and holy persons, that in
the end of his life, through the great mercy of God, being in state of grace,
he loses the use of reason, and becomes frantic, and speaks many soul
and unseemly words, God who is mercyful, suffers this to fall unto him for
his profit, and of compassion to the end he feel not the great pain of his
sickness, and that the devils may not have occasion to afflict him with
temptations, after the loss of the use of reason. God almighty of his
benignity uses this mercy with him that has been good, and is of nature
fearful and frail, delivering him by this mean from the grief of the sickness,
which he does not feel so much when his body is without use of reason: and
making him unable to receive the devils temptations, because he that is without
use of reason does not sin. And say he or do he what he will, yea though
he utter words against God in that time, it is not imputed unto him for
sin, but it is inoughe for him when he had his understanding, that he had
true co^trition for his sins, and was in the grace and favor of God.

The fourth question.
THE fourth question was, whether we ought to think il of them, that die of
sudden or violent death.

The Ermyte answered, that according to the judgment of S. Augustine. Mors
mala dicenda non est, quam bona vita praecessit, that is to say: That death is
not to be esteemed il, which a good life has gonne before. Always when a man
has lived well, and at the point of death is without deadly sin, such a
death ought to be esteemed good: because, Preciosa in conspectu Domini mors
sanctorum eius, that is to say: precious in our Lords sight is the death of his
saints, So as let a man die of what kind of death soever it be, either of
fire, or water, or sword, or pestilence, or poison, or suddenly, or
lingringly, always his death is said to be holy and precious when he dies in
the state of grace. We have example of this in many holy confessors and
martirs, which (in respect of the world) have dyed ignominious and shameful
deaths; and nevertheless they are now happy with God in heaven. And the same
also happened to our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom as if he had been the prince
of thieues, was allotted by the wicked and obstinate Jews, the infamous death
of the cross. And for the contrary he says, that always of wysemen that
death is judged il, when one dies in mortal sin: although he have a quiet
and honorable death, to the sight of the world, and be in disgrace with
almighty God: and always by holy men that death is judged the wurst, because
as David says, Mors peccatorum pessimae, the death of sinners is the most
evil. All deaths then be ill, when men die in deadly sin: and contrariwise
every kind of death is good and holy, when a man dies in the favor of
almighty God.

The fifth question.
THE fifth question was, whether it be lawful to desire a man when he dies,
that after death he will appear unto thee, and tell thee his estate.

The Ermite answered, that he found to this question two contrary answears
given by the Doctors. The one is of the Angelical Doctor S. Thomas, In
quodlibeti.
who says, that when there is not joined withal any curiosity or infidelity,
but only a careful desire to know the state of him that dies, then is it
lawful to require such a thing. The other answer contrary; is of Henry de
Ascia, who says that it is not a thing lawful, because it can hardly come but
of avayne curiosity; and peradventure of infidelity, to be assured of the
life to come, and besides that, he puts himself in peril to be deluded of
the devil, who many times appears in form and shape of the dead, and
reuealeth false things. And therefore we read in the gospel, that Abraham
would not permit that any revelation or apparition should be made unto the
brethren of the wicked rich man, who prayed him to send some one that was dead
unto them (that yet lived) to advertise them of his miserable state. To whom
Abraham answered, Habent Moysen and Prophetas, audiant illos, that is to say:
They have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them. But it seems unto
me that when a man is not moved, neither of infidelity, nor of curiosity,
but only for a spiritual consolation, and to fulfill without offense to God, a
desire to know such a thing, that this is no sin. Notwithstanding hold thou
that opinion which most pleases thee, so that thou have the virtue of
humility, joined with godly and holy desire.

The sixth question.
THE sixth question was, whether he that has always lived il, and never has
made preparation for death, being now at the point of death, may at that
instant sufficiently prepare himself to die. The Ermite answered, saying, son,
so long as a man lives and has the use of reason; he may always dispose and
prepare himself to die well. But in truth I say unto thee, that of ten thousand
men that delay it to the last instant, their is not one saved. This is the
judgment of S. Hierome, and S. Augustine, and very well known and manifest to
other holy doctors, therefore I will not go about to multiply words in vain.

The seventh question.
THE seventh question was, whether the devil do appear to all those that die.
The Ermite answered, saying, that ordinarily the devils appear to all; in the
end of their lives, as may be proved by the authority of diverse holy men. The
ordinary gloss explicating these words of Geneses. Tu insidiaberis calcaneo
eius: that is, Genes. 3.
Thou shall ly in wayt even at his heel, says, that this is to be understood
to be at the end of man's life.

To the same purpose Ecclesiasticus also says, Sunt spiritus qui ad vindictam
creati sunt, and in tempore consummationis effundunt virtutem suam, that is to
say: their be spirits which were created for revenge, and at the time of
consumation they do show their force: which authority S. Vincent and other
Doctors expound of devils that appear at the time of death. And S. Gregory
says, that the devil so much the more diligently tempts a man in the end of
his life, as he knows he has less time to tempt him.

The Same S. Gregory also writes that the devil in the end of life appears
as well to the good as the evil; yea and that he durst appeer to Christ himself
being on the cross. If then this wicked spirit came to Christ on the cross,
how much more boldly will he appear to all other? if it be not that some
through the spetial grace and privilege of almighty God be exempted from such
a devilish apparition, as we read of our blessed Lady, in some books of
small authority, that she asked and obtained of her blessed son, that at
her death she should not see any wicked spirit or devil.

The eight question.
THE eight question was, whether our Savior Christ descend corporally to the
particular judgment of all those that die.

The Ermite answered, that to some it seems he does, and they confirm their
opinion with authority of holy scripture, in the acts of the Apostles: where
it is said of our Lord. Act. 10.
Ipse est qui constitutus est a Deo, iudex viuorum and mortuorum, that is to
say: it is he that is appointed of God the judge of the quick and the dead.
And in S. John the 5. Chap. it is written: Pater omne iudicium dedit filio,
that is to say, God the father gave all judgment to his son. But to some
other this opinion seems not credible, because it happens that in one and
the self same time diverse persons die in diverse places, and it is not conuenable
that Christ's humanity in one instant should be to this end in so many
places, and therefore they say, our blessed Savior does not descend personally
to give this particular judgment, but rather commits that office to the good
Angel that is given us for our guard, giving him authority as judge, to end and
execute the process and sentences to him appointed, and the Angel, so made
judge, condemns or absolueth the soul according to justice: and after
guides it to the place assigned, either in heaven, in hell, or in purgatory,
according as it has deserved. But to the universal judgment, our blessed
Savior himself will descend and judge the quick and the dead. And in this sense
they expound the authority before aleaged.

The nynth question.
THE nynth question was, whether our Savior Christ appear at the hour of
death generally to all men, good and il.

The Ermite answered that some great doctors have said that he does, and to
approve the same they allege the authority of Pope Innocent the third in the
second book, de condition vilitatis humane: that is of the misery of man,
where it is said that all men, as well good as bad do see Jesus Christ before
the soul go out of the body. The good to their great consolation and the evil
to their great confusion, to the end that by such appearance they may be ashamed
to have lost through their negligence the precious fruit of their redemption.
And albeit this be the opinion of very famous doctors yet do I not find it
sufficiently confirmed by authority of holy scripture: and for this reason
there are others that do not concur in this opinion; though yet very Godly and
devout. About this matter then I will make none other resolution, but that I
hold for certain, that our benign and mercyful redeemer appears to many in
the end of their lives as by innumerable examples and approved histories it may
be verefyed, but that he appears to all universally, I neither affirm nor
deny.

The tenth question.
THE tenth was, whether the particular judgment be immediately after the soul
is gone out of the body, or that there be some space of time before the
sentence of the said judgment be given.

The Ermite answered, that ordinarily without delay after the soul be
separated from the body it receives his particular judgment, with the
sentence of damnation or salvation, according to the condition of his merits.
But very true it is, that Omnis regula patitur exceptionem, every rule
suffers exception. Therefore some souls after their separation attend a good
space before their particular judgment be given, as we read of a famous
Doctor, of Paris who was reputed a man of holy life, but being dead, whiles
they made his funeralles in the Church, he lifted up his head as he lay on
the beer, in the presence of many people, and a great number of masters and
Doctors in divinity, and diverse scholars, and said, Ad iudiciam vocatus sum:
that is, I am called to judgment: and then laid himself down again, wherevpo^
it was ordained that he should not be buried until the next day, and so the
day following he did the like, for lifting up his head again he said,
Iudicatus sum: I am judged. And there upon his burial was deferred til the
third day, when as he in like manner (as twyce before) lifting up his head
said aloud, Condemnatus sum: I am condemned, whereby it is manifest, that this
particular judgment continued for the space of three days. Through the which
great miracle sundry doctors and scholars left the world, and went into the
wilderness, where they began the first foundation of the order of the
Carthusians; otherwise called the monks of the Charterhows.

The eleue^th ^^estion.
THE eleventh question was, if when this particular judgment is done, and the
sentence given; the soul be carried by and by to the place appointed.

The Ermite answered, that the holy Catholic Church holds and firmly
believes, that our souls being departed out of our bodies; do after their
particular judgments ordinarily pass unto the place of everlasting joy or
pain, according to their merits or demerits. And the reason hereof is, for
that it is the soul that principally synneth or meriteth, and the body
without it cannot sin nor merit: and therefore it is not against reason, that
the soul without the body, receive either good or evil, until the day of the
universal judgment: it suffices that afterward at the time of the universal
judgment being united with the body it be therewith for ever either saved or
damned. The sacred diuynes in the fourth of the sentences do prove this our
Catholic conclusion with reasons, authorityes, and authentical histories: but
in this place only the authority of the scriptures is sufficient for us, as it
apeereth in the 23. of S. Luke, where our Savior Christ said to the good
thief, Hodie mecum eris in paradiso: This day thou shall be with me in
paradise; he said not at the end of the world, but this day. And Job speaking
of wordlings said, Ducunt in bonis dies suos, and in puncto ad infernum
discendunt, that is to say: they spend their days in pleasures, and in a
moment they descend into hell. Whereby it apeereth that whylest they be in
their triumphs and joys, sodeynlie in the twinkling of an eye they fall into
hell.

The twelfth question.
THE twelfth question was, if all they that die do suffer equal pain and
anguish in the agony of death.

The Ermite answered no: as it appears in some old men which die easily, and
also some that seem to die sleeping, and some whilst they be in an ecstasy or
trance: as S. Augustine declares in his book, De ciuitate Dei. Moreover it
happens somtymes that one alive and in health does endure greater pain, then
an other in the time of his death, and it is judged of Wysemen, that oftentimes
it is a greater difficulty to bear the troubles and miseries of this life,
then dying to loose the life of the body. So as in this respect; there have
been many holy Confessors that have suffered more grievous afflictions then
some martirs.

We may therefore think, that there is no man, who either before his death, or
at the time of his death, or at least after death, does not suffer excessive
grief and great torment.

When the youngman had well understood all these things aforesaid, he would yet
have propounded other questions, but the Ermite feeling himself weary, as well
for his great age as also for his long talk, prayed him, that he would be
content to ask him no more, but rather that he would do his endeavor to put
in execution that, which he had all readdie told him, for words without
deeds are little profitable, and to such as have a good will to do well it is not
needful to use many persuasions; but breefly to tell them their duties.

Then the youngman with great reverence and humility did upon his knees give
thanks unto the good Ermite, for so many his good and holy lessons, and
promised him to make it apeer, that his long discourse should not be
unprofitable and without great fruit, And so having had his blessing took his
leave, and without delay, desirous to give himself wholly to learn to die well,
distributed all his riches to poor orphans, Churches and hospitalles, and
forsaking this miserable and deceyuing world entered into religion, where he
continewed a long time, and diligently observed the aforesaid rules, til at
length having lived long and virtuously, he happily rendered his soul into the
hands of this creator, to whom be all honor and glory world without-end,
Amen.

FINIS.

