A Godly, and pithie Exhortation, made to the Judges and Justices of Sussex,
and the whole County, assembled together, at the general Assizes.

By William Ouerton, Doctor of Divinity, and one of the Queens Majesty's
Justices appointed for the peace within the same County.

PROVERB. 10. Where no Ruler is, there fall the people to ruin and decay.

But where much counsel is, there is health and safety.

Printed by R. Newbery and H. Bynneman.

To the Reader.
Having occasion the last Lent to be at Estgreenestedde, it was my chance
(gentle Reader) to hear a very learned and fruitful Sermon, made the same
present time before the whole assembly of the Sheere. I took such profit and
pleasure of it my self by hearing it, and heard it so generally commended of
others, that I could not but devise how to make common to many, that which was
there uttered but to few, that so the benefit of it might redound also to
many. I may perhaps have blame of the Author to put it forth in printe
without his knowledge and consent, but if he knew how much good he did to
those few that heard him, I trust he will not be offended, if by my means he
do more good to a great number that heard him not, but shall read him, for
the exhortation is so tempered, and the conueyance of it in such sort, that
though ye can specially apply it but to some men, yet ye may use it so
generally, that it will edifye any man. If all therefore shall read it, it
will profit all, because it has matter that serves for all. But if those
read it that are Judges of circuites, and Justices of the peace, or Jury men,
or such other like, that have any calling that way, it will profit such men
most, because to such it most apperteyneth. And surely, I wysh above all
other, that Judges, and Justices, and whosoever they be else, that use to give
charge to the people, yea, and those also that have the charge given them,
should always before they go about such business, read over and peruse
this little piece of work, that thereby they might be stirred up to deal
more earnestly in Gods causes, and in matters of Religion, than commonly they
are wont to do, I doubt not, but like good effect would follow such reading of
it, as did then follow the hearing of it. For this I saw, and heard my self
the same time, when the Judges were come from the Church to the Hall, and were
now set down, and the Country before them, they did not only imparte to
the multitude what great fruit and comfort they had received themselves by
hearing that Sermon (giving it a singular commendation in the ears of all men,
even from the benche where they sat) but also then took occasion thereby, to
give a very quick, and vehemente charge to the graunde Jury, yea, and to the
Justices themselves, and to all others that had any office or authority in
the Sheere, to look more narrowly to matters of Religion, than heretofore
they had done, and to endeauoure themselves by all means possible, to conserve
the peace and unity of Christ's Church, and to search out, and see punished
all that were offenders to the contrary. And to tell you the truth, it did my
heart good to see so grave and wise a man (Judge GAVDIE by name) to give so
carnest and godly a charge, in God and the Gospels behalf, such good fruit
followed in that good Magistrate, by hearing so good and godly a Preacher that
day. And I would all others that be of the same calling that he is of, might
have as good lyking hereafter to read him, as he had then to hear him,
that like fruit may come of it, when opportunity shall serve, for the fruit
that followed was great. Well, I will not commend the Preacher unto thee, (I
should but darken his due praises by mine insufficient praising of him) but I
will commend thee to the reading of this his work, and when thou have read it,
commend him thy self as thou see cause. In the mean time, I will pray unto
God both for him and for thee, and for us al: for him, to increase his tale^t
in preaching: for thee, to enslame thy zeal in hearing: for us all, to amend
our negligence in following. And so I bid thee farewell.

Thy well-beloved brother in Christ. M. M.

Precor vos fratres, vt speculemini eos. etc.
I pray you Breethren have a good eye to those men, Romans 16. verse. 17.
or take heed of those men, which do breed discord and dissension amongst
you, and give occasion of offenses, contrary to the doctrine that you have
received, and eschew them.

THere is nothing more acceptable to God: there is nothing more profitable to
man: there is nothing more answerable to Christian Religion and Faith: there is
nothing more auaylable to virtue and good life: there is nothing more requisite
and necessary for all states, whether they be private or public: there is
nothing more amiable, more delectable, more comfortable, or more commendable in
all respects: at a word, there is nothing that passes all things more, than
this one thing, just peace, grounded upon the true knowledge and fear of GOD.
It is not in vain therefore that the Apostle here exhorts the Romans, and
by them us also, which be now present, yea, and all other Christians
wheresoever, that we should beware and take heed of such men as do breed
discord and dissension amongst us, and give occasion of offenses in the
Church of God: and not only that we should take heed of them, and beware of
them, but also, that we should eschew them, and avoid them, as authoures of
that evil, which of all other euilles is most dangerous, and does most
shake and weaken all states of men, or rather does beat down, destroy, and
overthrow all things wheresoever it comes in place, men, houses, towns,
kingdoms, countries, nations, and peoples, be they never so many, be they
never so great and mighty. Such a marvelous mischief is Discord and
Dissension, whersoeuer it takes root, and therefore good cause (I say) that
the Apostle should earnestly admonish us al to shun it, and avoid it, and
the authors also thereof, which do sow it, and breed it. I pray you brethren
(says he) take heed of those men which breed discord and dissension
amongst you, and give occasion of offenses contrary to the doctrine that you
have received, and eschew them. But what discord, or what dissension is it
that the Apostle here speaks of? for there be two kinds of discord, there is
one kind that is spiritual, there is another kind that is temporal.
Spiritual discord is, when men are dinided amongst themselves, and disagree
one from another, in spiritual matters, in Ecclesiastical causes, in matters
or causes of religion and Faith. This is spiritual discord. Temporal discord
is, when men fall out amongst themselves, and do wrestle, or be at war (as
it were) one with another, about temporal matters, about temporal causes
and quarrels, about inturies or wrongs done, or offered to be done, by one man
to an other, touching their goods, lands, or life, or some such other thing,
pertaining to their temporal state: this is temporal Discord. Which of these
two therefore does the Apostle here speak of? If I should tell you, that he
speaks of spiritual discord, such as rises of spiritual matters, of
Church matters, or of matters concerning Religion and Faith, you would answer
me, yt my text is not for this place and time, nor pertinent to these kind of
businesses and affairs which are now in hand, but does rather belong to
School men and Dimnes, or some other such Ecclesiastical persons, as are to
hear and determine in such cases. If I should tell you, that he speaks of
temporal discord, such as rises of temporal causes and quarrels, or of
temporal injuries and wrongs and so forth, you would answer me, that it is
superfluous at this time, and more than needs, to speak of any such matter
unto you: for why? ye come for that purpose, it is the only or chief cause of
your repair hither at this present, to hear and consider of such
controversies and quarrels amongst men, and therefore I need not waste my
wind any further therein. Honorable and worshipful, which so ever of these
two kinds of discord it be that the Apostle here speaks of, (as in deed
he may seem to speak of them both) you shall perceive, that my text is not
impertinent to the place and time, nor any whyt from the matter ye have now
in hand. I know well enough, that your assembly here together, at this
present Session now to be holden, is only or chieffic for this cause, to end
discord and strife, to conserve Unity and peace, and to reform injuries and
wrongs, whereof the want of peace and the supply of discord does grow. I know
I say ye this is your purpose, and the chief or only cause of your coming
hither, and yet this I know too, that my matter will be no let unto you, but
does and may very well agree with ye your purpose. For first if I shall say any
thing, to the aleying of temporal discord and dissentio^, or to ye furthera^ce
of temporal unity and peace, though it be true in deed, yt you be come for ye
same purpose, and do mean now to sit upon such matters, yet my friendly
admonition ca^ by no means hurt or hinder your good purpose, being toward ye
self same matter you come for, nor will be altogyther needelesse or unprofitable
unto you ye shall hear it, seeing the best and wisest man that is, has need
sometimes of a friendlye and faithful admonitor at his elbow. On the other
side, if I shall say any thing to the abandoning of spiritual discord and
strife, or to the advancement and furtheraunce of spiritual unity and concord,
in this case am I also to be heard willinglye of you, and though in some
respect I will not deny, but ye this kind of discourse does belong rather to
schole me^ and divines, tha^ to you ye are temporal lawiers, te^porall judges
and justices: yet this I must tell you notwtstanding, ye you can not so clean
shifte off this kind of matter from you, as though it were a mere alien to
your other business, but you must also have to do with it as well as with other
matters, and may not estra^ge it from your present affairs. For who^ come you
to serve, come you not to serve Christ? I think you will not say nay. For God
him self so says unto you by his Prophet, Erudimini qui iudicatis terra^,
seruite domino in timore: Be learned ye that are judges of the earth, serve the
Lord in fear. What Lord is it ye you must serve? ye K? ye Q? the prince of ye
country where you dwell, and under who^ you are subjects? surely this lord also
must you serve I deny it not. But what Lord does God here will you to serve,
when he says unto you, serve ye lord in fear. Doubtless he wills you to
serve Christ, ye other lords L. that other masters Master, your Ladies Lord
and your mistress master, even the Queens Lord and master, yea the Lord
and master of all Lords, and of all kings, and of all Queens, and of all
Princes, and of all the Monarchs of the earth, or rather Lord and Master of
all the whole earth it self. For so says God also a little before in the same
Prophet: Postula a me and dabo tibi gentes in hereditatem: etc. ask of me
(says God the father unto his son Christ) and I will give thee the heathen
for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy
possession. Lo here is Christ made Lord of all Lords, and Lord and owner of
the whole earth. The earth, the nations of the earth, and the Kings of the
nations, they are all his, they are given him for his inheritance, they are
given him to be his possession, and he is Lord of them all. Wherefore
whatsoever other Lords you have, whatsoever other masters you have, you must
serve Christ as the chief Lord, and as the graunde Lord and masters over al
other Lords and masters. You must serve him and his Church, and not only
your prince and country, not only the Queen and common wealth: and to say the
truth, I do not see how you can well serve the common wealth, except you first
serve the Church, nor how you can well serve the Prince, except you first serve
Christ: For Christ is a pattern unto the prince, and the Church is a pattern
unto the common wealth to follow. Neither is that common wealth a good common
wealth, or commendable before God, which does not frame and conform it self
after the Church, nor that Prince a good or commendable Prince, which does not
frame and conform himself after Christ. So then ye must have a chief care
and a chief regard of Christ, and of the Church of Christ, and so consequentlye
of all those matters and causes which be insident to Christ and his Church. And
therefore as you are ready when you see your Country or common wealth, the
civil and politic body of the realm, to be rent and torn in pieces, one
member from another by civil discord and dissension, by wars, by strife and
variance, by fraud, by force, by lying in wait one for another goods, or
lands, or life, and so forth, as you are ready in this case to look upon and
lament the afflicted state of your country, and to bind up the wounds of
the common wealth, which it has received, and to heal and make up the hoales
and breaches, yt rents and tearings, which you find in the body politic, as
you are ready to repair and redress with all speed the wrackes and decays
that are in the temporal state, I say, as you are ready to look upon these
temporal matters, and to consider throughlye of them, and are now come hither
for that purpose. Eue^ so much more, and much rather, look you upon the
lamentable sace and countenance of Christ's decayed Church, look upon the
deep and wide wounds of his mystical body, so soar stricken with
spiritual discord and dissension, see how Christ is wounded in his body,
see how the body is maimed in his members, see how the members are rent and
torn one from another, see how they are divided amongst themselves, nay
alas, how they are divided against themselves: see what hoales and breaches
are made in the poor Church of Christ, see what ruin and decay is come upon
the poor flock of Christ, see what numbers of poor souls are carried away
by ravening wolses, to be devoured of them, and are even yet hanging in their
chappes, and in their feeth, and being in ye midst of their teeth do not
feel their own misery, nor see their own danger: see how every thing
almost is (or if you look not the sooner to it) shortly will be turned
vpside down, topsie turuie: black will be white, and white will be black:
truth will be error, and error will be truth: good will be evil, and evil will
be good: right will be wrong, and wrong will be right, and every thing will be
as every man will have it. For we can not abide to draw all one way, be it never
so godly and just, but every man draws his own way, every man follows his
own fancy, every man likes best his own will and wit, and no man likes
another, and so we rent the Church, and tear the Temple of God in sunder with
our continual faction and discord. O miserable state, ye unity of Faith is
divided into variety of opinions, the profession of ye Gospel is drawn into
propriety of sects, the firm and stable word of God is made a flexible nose
of wax, and every man thinks to writh it which way he will himself. And all this (oh ye judges and justices) all this is come to pass by the sleepiness
of Gods servants, and by the watchfulness of Satan and his ministers, the
old and new sectaries and Scismatickes, which are bold to attempt any
thing, which blushe not to say and affirm whatsoever they list (be it never so
false) which contend still for victory though they be overthrown, yea and are
ready with blows to maintain their evil quarrel if they durst, whose hands
you must hold, whose feet you must stay, whose mouths you must stop, whose
rash and malapert enterprises you must in any wise restrain and repress,
that they fight not, ye they go not, ye they speak not any more against God
and his truth with such liberty as they have don. This is your office, this
is your charge, (oh ye Judges and Justices) this is your chief charge, and
therefore this ought to be your chief care, this ought to be your chief
travel, to heal up ye wounds of Christ's mistical bodi, to stop up ye holes and
gappes of his broken decayed Church, to repair and renew the peace and unity
of his house, to beat down and destroy al Schisms and sects with the aucthors
and fautors thereof, to uphold, maintain, and further, with al your diligence, with
al your wit and policy, with all your might and power, ye true, ancient, and
catholic religion of Christ. This (I say) is your chief charge, this therefore
ought to be your chief care and travel. Wherefore bend your wits ernestly about
it, put your hands diligently unto it, use your cunning wisely, exercise your
aucthoritye speedilye, let nothing pass you that may touch you, let nothing
be undone by you, that may lie upon you in that behalf. For you are not come
hither to serve man only, you are not come hither to serve your Prince, your
country, and common wealth only: but are come hither to serve God, you are
come hither to serve Christ, and you are come hither to serve the Lord in fear.
This service god himself bids you to do, and therefore you must do it,
and this service no man nor Prince forbids you to do, and therefore you may
do it and need not doubt to do it: Nay rather, if I miss not my marks, or if
my memory fail me not, it is the very first point or part of your commission
given you from the prince, that you should do it, or at least wise it is the
first thing ye your selves give in charge unto others, to do it, and therefore I
shall not need to stand any longer upon this point, nor to follow it any
further. Only this I will say at ye shutting up of this point, that al
controversies and quarrels are to be anoyded, that al strife and variaunce is
to be cut off, that all discord and dissension is to be rooted up every where
and in all manner of matters, but yet specially in spiritual matters, specially
in Church matters: for that discord is a sore discord in deed: that is a
worm that perceth deeper, that is a cancker that creeps further into a man,
even into the innermost parts and bowels of a man, to the destruction both of
boldie and soul: as for ye other, it annoyeth our temporal state only, but
pearceth not our souls, it hurts us not ye ways, but rather does us good,
if a wise man have ye matter in handling. For by outward affliction we are
inwardly mended, and ar made better to God ward by worldly troubles if we ca^
use the^ wisely and bear the^ patie^tly.

But now because we are to beat down-al discord and dissension, and to build
up and repair godly unity and peace, ye we may ye better aymie at this
mark, whereat we must shoot, let us see whence this discord and dissension
comes; and who be the chief and principal aucthours of it. You heard before
yt there are two kinds of discord, temporal discord, which rises of temporal
matters, and spiritual discord, which comes of spiritual causes. Touching
ye former kind, your selves which are best exercised in civil affairs, ca^
best judge or guess what be ye causes of al sturs and troubles in the civil
state, and who are most likely to be authors and breeders of the same. For mine
own part, as I am now knit in one care with you of the common wealth, and have
the like charge that you have, and therefore would be glad also to further any
thing ye might profit and advantage ye same, so yet being called another way
(as you know I am) and this kind of business being ye less part of my
calling, I profess my self to have less skill in it, and therefore leave the
great and weighty consideration of those matters to your ryper wisdom and
experience. Only I will give you a short view of some of ye chief causes or
causers of temporal discord and dissension, and so will pass from that to the
other point, which touches my calling more properly. Will you hear therefore
in a sum what are the causes of discord and dissension in the civil state? I
will tell you. The extortion yt is in ye mighty, the oppression yt is in the
wealthy, the insatiable desire of having, and unreasonable practice of getting,
which is in both of the^, these are causes of discord and dissension. The
corruption of such as give bribes, ye perjury of those that take bribes, ye
buying of oaths in the one, the selling of conscience yt is in ye other, and
overmuch winking at both of them, these are causes of discord and dissension.
Greedy seeking for law against justice, devilish counsel given for money
against law, envy in the Client, craft in the Counselor, and a covetous
heart reygning in both of them, these are causes of discord and dissension.
The impiety of tale hearers, the impunitie of tale tellers, malice in the one
to seek them, falsehoode and flattery in the other to bring them, and an
evil conscience in both of them, these are causes of discord and dissension.
Pride and disdain in the higher sort, stubbernesse and disobedience in the
lower sort, lack of love in the one, neglect of duty in the other, and a
froward stomach in both of them, these are causes of discord and dissension.
The making and repeling of many laws, the executing and observing of few
laws, boldness unto sin in every state, zeal unto godliness in no state,
looseness in the people, negligence in the magistrates, a number of Justices,
and yet want of Justice, these are causes of discord and dissension. These
vices therefore, or these defects of Virtue, extortion, oppression, bryberie,
perjury, envy in the clyente, craste in the counselor, unpietie of tale
hearers, impunitie of tale bearers, pride in one sort, stubbernesse in an
other sort, many laws made, few laws executed, the licentious life of the
people, the careless security of the governors, with such other like, these
vices (I say) and those men that are frayghted therewith, these vices and those
men in whom these vices do reign, are ye very causes and causers of all
discord and disse^tion, of al strife and variance, of all stirs and troubles,
and finally, of all manner of disorder in the common wealth whatsoever it be.
Here you have a short sum of the whole, I need say no more. Look upon
these few points, and mende them, and you have mended all. Thus much briefly
for discord and dissension in the temporal state, and in temporal causes.

Now let us come to the other kind of discord, which troubles the Church so
much. And here is a great controversy or question amongst men, whence these
troubles of the Church should arise, and who are chief authoures of them.
And the controversy rests specially between the Catholics and us, I mean
the Papists and us. And here, when I speak of Papists, you may not take me
that I mean every one that is not thoroughly resolved in every point of
Religion. For there may be many, whose eyes God has not yet opened, but will
do when it shall please him, and yet in the mean time, are good subjects to
the Queen, and necessary members of the common wealth, whom we must not
despise, but pray for. But under the name of Papists, I comprehend those
which cleave altogether unto the Pope and Papacy, and by open word and
writing, mainteyne the usurped authority of the Bishop of Rome, contrary to
the word of God, and the laws and Statutes of this Realm. Between these
Papists therefore and us is all the question, which of us two should be
disturbers of the Church, we or they. They lay it to our charge, and say, that
we are those that trouble the Church, and their reason is this, that before we
began to decline from the Church of Rome, and to spurn against the Popes
authority, all was well enough, all was quiet at home, all was peaceable
abroad, there were no stirs nor troubles in the common wealth, there was no
discord nor dissension in the Church, but one uniform, and general
agreemente, and consent of all men together in matters of Religion, and Faith:
but after that we had once revolted from that Catholic Church, and had shaken
off from us the obedience which we owe to our holy father the Pope, then
began all this discord and dissension, then began all these stirs and
troubles, then began all this hurly burly to be in the Church, and not
only in the Church, but in all places of the world where the Church is
planted: then began men to fall together by the ears, then nation and nation
began to be at war one with another, yea, and nations within themselves
began to have civil war and bloudshead, to the great disturbance of all
good policy and government, as at this day we see is come to pass in
France, in Fla^ders, in Scotland, and elsewhere, to the great wonder of the
world, and all this by our falling from the Church of Rome, and therefore we that
are fallen from that Church, and have swarued from it, are the only cause of all the stirs and troubles now in the Church, and so consequentlye, of all the
stirs and troubles that be in the whale world. This is their reason that
they bring against us, a great reason doubtless, mark it well, this it is in
fewer words. We are those that have swarued from the Church of Rome, Ergo we
are those that trouble the Church, and the whole world. Do ye not mark their
argument? it is a much like reason, as if the old scribes and Pharisees of the
Jewish Sinagog should come again, and say unto Christ, that before he and his
Apostles began to speak against them, and their authority, and to preach
against their doctrine and traditions, and so to carry the people another way,
all things were very well, all was quiet with them, there were no stirs, no
troubles, no tumultes amongst the people, there was no discord nor dissension
in the Church, nor in Church matters, but all men agreed very well together,
in doctrine, in ceremonies, in traditions, in religion, and so forth, all was
hush and peace, (yea forsooth) the Devil might sleep quietly, there was none
to wake him, none to trouble his Kingdom: but after that he and his Apostles
had once shaken their holy Mother the sinagogue, and had disputed against
their abuses, and defaced their doctrine, and discovered their hypocrisy, and
so by that means had blemished their authority and estimation: why now the
world was changed, the people were not as they were wont to be, they showed
not their accustomed obedience and reverence to their old holy fathers and
guydes the Scribes and Pharisees, but began to fall from them, yea, and to
murmr and grudge against them, as seducers and deceyuers of the people, and
all this came by him and his Apostles speaking against them, therefore he and
his Apostles were the only cause of all stirs and troubles in Iewry. A much
like reason also, as if wicked Acab should come again, and say to the good
Prophet Helias, that before he began to open his mouth against Iezabel and
her Chaplens, and to inueigh so vehemently against Baal, and his sacrificing
Priests, Israel was quiet enough, there was no stir amongst the people, but
after that he had shaken that Idol, and had shamed and confounded his
Idolatrous Priests, then began to be some stirs amongst the people, and
therefore it was he that troubled all Israel. These were the reasons which the
Scribes and Pharisees and wicked Achab brought against Christ and Helias, and I
pray you, are they not all one with that which our adversaries bring against
us? You are those (say they) that speak against the Church of Rome, and have
dissented from it, therefore, you are authors of all stirs and troubles in
the Church, and in the whole world. May they not even with the selfsame reason
conclude as well against Christ, and say, that he was Author of all tumults
in Iewry, and against Helias, that he was Author of all troubles in Israel,
because the one spoke against the Scribes and Pharisees, and dissented from
their corruptions, the other against Baall and his Priests, and would not
assent to their Idolatry. Surely ye reason is all one: but no man (I think)
will say, that Christ indeed was the Author of al tumults in Iewry, though he
dissented from ye Jewish Sinagog: nor that Helias was ye Author of all
troubles in Israel though he dissented from Baals Priests. And eue^ so I
think, no man will say of us, or at leastwise can say justly, that we are
Authors now of all stirs and troubles in the Church though we have
dissented, and do still dissent from the Church of Rome. For it is not our
dissenting from the Church of Rome that breeds these troubles in the Church,
but it is the Church of Rome it self, which would have al men to consent with
her against ye truth of ye Gospel, and against God himself, and al Gods
forbod. I grant indeed we dissent from ye Church of Rome, but why, because ye
Church of Rome dissenteth from Christ and his Church. I grant also that upon
this our dissenting from them; much parts taking does follow, and of parts
taking comes discord, and of discord often times ensues battle and
bloudshead, and much ado. But who are in the fault? we that dissent from them
in their error, or they which will not assent unto us in the truth? we tell
them that they err, and we prove out of Gods word how and wherein they err,
and this forsooth can not they and theirs abide, but are angry with us, and
reply against us, and here of comes all those troubles, and tragical
stirs that be now in the Church. But in the mean time, which side is it
that troubles the Church? do we trouble the Church which tell them of these
things, or do they trouble the Church, which can not abide to hear of these
things? in deed, if telling them truth, or Preaching the Gospel unto them,
do trouble them and the world, I must needs say, that we are those men that
trouble them, and that trouble the world. But yet how? not properly of our
selves, nor of set purpose, but (as the Logitians say) Peraccidens,
accidentallye, and by occasion, because they can not abide to hear the truth.
For it is not the proper effect and work of the Gospel, to bring trouble
with it unto men, but rather to bring joy and peace of conscience unto those
that hear it, and embrace it. And if it happen to fall out otherwise, as often
times we see it does, the fault is not to be imputed to the Preaching of the
Gospel, nor to the Gospel it self, but to the evil disposition of such men,
as can not brook it, nor abide to hear it. And so we may say that Christ also
troubled Jury, and all the world, because he preached the Gospel amongst the
Jews which could not abide to hear it, and because he sent his Apostles
abroad into the world to preach the same amongst the Gentiles, which
likewise could not abide to hear it. For the preaching of the Gospel which
is called of Saint Paul Sermo crucis, the Preaching of Christ crucified, was
unto the Jews a stumbling block or offense, and unto the Greeks or Gentiles
it was foolishness, and a very unsavory thing. It was offensive to ye Jews,
and vnsaucrie to the Gentiles, and therefore they could not abide to hear it,
and if they heard it at any time (as sometimes they did against their will) it
seemed unto them not only to be mere discord and dissension, but also it
seemed to be a very sword unto them, and a kind of war against their state,
as in deed after a sort it was. For the Preaching of the Gospel was a
spiritual discord and dissension against their worldly unity, the
preaching of the Gospel was a spiritual war against their carnal peace:
the preaching of the Gospel was a spiritual sword against their humane
doctrine and traditions, it was a sword to cut away their blindness and
ignorance: to cut away their hypocrisy and dissimulation: to cut away
their error, superstition, and idolatry: to cut away their vain
worshipping of God, and false worshipping of Idols. It was a sword to rippe
the^ up, and lay the^ open to ye world, that all me^ might see them, and
discern them of what spirit they were, how contrary to ye spirit of God, and
of Christ. And as ye Preaching of the Gospel was then unto ye Jews and
Gentiles, even so is it still at this day to all carnal and worldly minded
men, ye can not abide to hear it, it is a kind of war unto them, and a very
sword to their hearts. And in this respect is it, and to this sense, that our
savior Christ, though he were ye Prince of peace, yet thus says of himself in
ye Gospel: Non veni in mundum vt pacem afferam. etc. I am not come (says he)
into the World to bring peace with me to the world, but rather to send a
sword into it. Meaning thereby, ye he came not to rock men asleep, and to cry
peace peace, where was no peace: he came not to cry peace unto me^ in their
wickedness: he came not to cry peace unto the^ in their blindness, in their
ignorance, in their error, in their superstition, in their idolatry. etc: he
came not thus to rock men asseepe, nor to cry peace to the world in these
things, wherein could be no peace, but he came rather with a sword into the
world to sight against these things, and to fight against ye world, because
of these things, he came to sight (as Saina Paul says) against rule and
power, against worldly rulers of the darkness of this world, and against
spiritual craftiness in heavenly things, that is to say, against the
Devil, and his subtle illusions: against these things came he to fight, and
not only to fight himself against these things, but also to muster his
Souldioures and Captains, his Apostles, his Evangelists, his Prophets, his
Martirs, and all other good Ministers and members of his Church, he came to
muster them (I say) and to put them in readiness, that they together with him,
yea, and after him also, when he was gone, might be ready to make war, and to
fight, not against God and his people, but against the hipocriticall Scribes
and Pharisees, and the whole Iewishe Sinagog, which seduced Gods people, against
the arrogante and vayneglorious Philosophers, which seduced the Heathen and
Gentiles, against Antechrist and his ministers, which seduced the whole
world: against these (I say) and such other like, came he and his Apostles to
fight. But with what sword? not with a temporal sword, not with that sword
which the Pope gives so lively in his Scutchion, where he crosses the key
with the sword, and joins them together in his arms, signifying thereby,
that not only spiritual jurisdiction is committed unto him, but also that he
has the power of the temporal sword in his hand. Christ and his Apostles
came not to fight with this sword, nor with fire, nor with faggot, nor with
hatchet, nor with halter, wherewith the Pope has murdered a great number of
the good Saints and servants of God, nor to make any civil war or tumults
amongst the nations, whereof the Pope has always bin a great author: Christ (I
say) and his Apostles came not to fight with any such sword, nor after any such
sort, but he came to fight with a spiritual sword, with preaching of the
Gospel, and with the word of God, which of Saint Paul is called the sword of
the spirit, Take unto you (says he) the sword of the spirit, which is the
word of God. This therefore is the sword that Christ brought into the world,
this is the sword that he fought withal against the world. So then you see
now, that Christ also him self troubled the world after a sort, but yet you
hear how he troubled it, you see that he used the sword, and fought with the
sword, but you hear what sword it was that he fought withal: you see that he
himself brought discord and dissension with him into the world, but you
bear against whom, and against what he brought it. And eue^ so we
likewise, whom they accuse, to be troublers of the world, we confess of our
selves indeed, that we trouble the world after a sort, but yet so as Christ
troubled it: we consesse that we use the sword, and fight with it, but such a
sword as Christ himself used and fought withal: we confess that we bring
discord and dissension amongst men, but yet against such as we should bring
it, and against such as we ought to bring it. We bring not discord and
dissension against God, nor against Christ, nor against the Gospel, nor
against the word of God, nor against the doctrine of the Apostles and
Prophets, we bring no such discord and dissension into the world, but we
bring discord and dissension against palpable blindness and ignorance: we
bring discord and dissension against error, superstition, and Idolatry: we
bring discord and dissension against men's doctrines and traditions which are
contrary to gods word: we bring discord and dissentio^ against Papistrie and
Atheism: we bring discord and dissension against Antechrist and his Kingdom:
we bring discord and dissentio^ against ye devilish unity of Gods conspired
eminies which disagree from us in the truth, but ca^ agree amongst themselves
too well in all falschoode and wickedness, if it may serve to their own
filthy gain and advantage. Against these is it that we bring discord and
dissension, if it may be called discord that is against the eninnies of God.
But in deed, it is no discord at all, or at leastwise, no such kind of
discord, as the Apostle here gives us warning to beware of and avoid, and
therefore consequently, the discord which we are charged with, being either no
discord at all, or no such discord as is here reproved by the Apostle, it
must needs follow, that either we are no authoures at all of discord (as
they accuse us) or if we be authoures of discord, it is of such as is good
and commendable, and so yet we are good authoures and commendable authors of
good and commendable discord, and authors of such discord, as is necessary for
the Church to have, and of such discord, as without which ye doctrine of ye
Gospel can not take place, or if it do, cannot long hold and continue. For, if
there be no dissenting from falshoode and lies, which have been, and are, and
will be to the worlds end, so long as the Devil has to do with the world,
if there be no dissenting (I say) from them, doubtless the truth of the
Gospel can never take sure root, nor be thoroughly settled, but will be soon
ouer-growne, or rather overthrown and weyed down with the stinking weeds of
mants wit, which the Devil does still heepe occupied, with odd toys and
devises of their own, contrary to the word of God, only to shake or shadow
the truth withal. So then our Discord you see is no discord, or if it be,
it is good and necessarre Discord: and thus are we delivered of that infamy
and slander which they bring upon us, and are not to be charged in deed
with those sturs and troubles of the Church, which they name us to be Fathers
of.

Well, then what shall we say to the matter? sturres and troubles there are in
ye Church, great discord and dissension there is amongst us, whence shall we
search for the cause hereof? or whom shall we make to be authors of it,
that the world may know them and eschew them? we will go no further, but to
the rule that the Apostle here sets down, for trial of the matter:

I pray you brethren (says he) have an eye unto those men, which cause
Discord and dissension amongst you, and give occasion of offenses contrane to
the doctrine that you have received, and eschew them. Here is the rule set
down.

Now therefore let us look about, and see whether we can espy where any
discord is raised, or where any occasion of offense is given, against the
doctrine which we have receyned of the Apostles. And if we find any matter
that breeds any such Discord, or any manne, that ministers any such
matter to breed Discord withal against the doctrine of the Apostles, let
us be bold to say that the same matter breeding such Discord, and the same
man ministering such matter, are the very causes and causers of al sturres and
troubles that be now in the Church.

And here will it please our gentle friends the Catholics to give us leave
now another while, to be bold with them, as they have been with us, and to
tell them in their ear, that all this matter will light upon their own
necks? I will not hold you long, the time is some what paste, and I desire of
my self to be short, and I will be the shorter, because I go not now about
so much to prove matters unto you which you know not, as to move you to the
diligente consideration of those things which be already known unto you
and there fore need no proof. For I will refer it to your own knowledge and
conscience, (if you know any thing at all, or have heard any thing of God, and
of his word) I will refer it to your own knowledge, whether it be not
mamfestly true that I will say of them. And this it is that I say, that they
and their matters, that is to say: they, and the doctrine which they teach:
they, and the books which they write, do breed and engender discord and
dissension, do breed and engender occasions of offenses against the doctrine
of the Aposeles, and therefore they and their matters do cause all those sturs
and troubles that be now in the Church, and are the very things in deed
which the Apostle here in this place exhorts us to beware of, and to
eschew. And now judge your selves whether this be not true that I say, For
(as I told you) I will say nothing but within your own kenning. Have they
not I pray you brought an infinite number of traditions into the Church of
Christ, clean contrary to the doctrine of Christ, and of his Apostles? of
whose device was private Mass, and the propiciatorie sacrifice of ye same? of
whose device was invocation of saints? of whose device was adoration of
Images? who brought in Purgatory, prayer for the dead, Pilgrimage, or
Peregrmation to dumb stocks or stones, auriculer Confession, Church
chastity, Monkish vows, and a thousand such other, if it were worthy the time
to rehearse them? Of al which notwithstanding, there is not so much as one,
that is once named or spoken of by the Apostles, much less commanded or
commended unto us by any doctrine of theirs. And yet all these things do they
teach, all these things do they preach, and write great volumes of them, and
by preaching and writing do maintain them to the vttermoste, though directly
against the doctrine of the Apostles. Which thing, as it is a snare to the
simple, and does meruailously entangle their consciences, that they cannot tell
which way to turn them, so it is a great offense unto the godly to see it,
and in deed can not abide it, but reprove them for it: and hereof co^mes the
Discord and dissension that is between us and them, and all the whole sturres
and troubles that are in the Church. But now judge you (as I say) who be the
authors of all this, whether we which profess the Gospel and cleave to the
only written word of GOD, and receive and allow the dactrine of the Apostles,
or they, which besides the Gospel, and besides Gods word, and clean against
the Apostles doctrine, do bring fancies and devices of their own, and
stablishe the same most diuellishly in the Church of Christ, to the great
hurt of the simple (as I said before) and the grievous offense of all that
be godly. Sure I am, that by the rule here of Saint Paul, you must needs
judge them to be the authors and workers of all this Discord and dissension,
and of all stirs and troubles that are in the Church. I will omit to show
you that they are authors also of all other troubles abroad in the world, of
Discord and dissension between Princes, of civil wars and tumults, of
bloodshed and murder, of privy mutinies and open insurrections against the
state: although I might lay before your eyes manifold examples and manifest
proves hereof, even amongst our selves here in England of late days, both by
their Bulls which they sent hither to discharge men of they loyalty and
obedience unto their sovereign, and also by most spiteful and contumelious
books, which SAVNDERS and such others his companions have written and sent
over into the Realm most traytorouslye, to stir up the Queens subjects,
and even with open words to animate them to rebel against her own person.
Oh, these be fit guydes to govern the Church. But I will omit (I say) to
speak of these things unto you, I will refer you over to the Cronographers
which have noted the facts and gests of every age and tune, and specially to
those which have written of the practices of Popish Prelates, either by
Ecciesiasticall history or otherwise: although what need you to seek any
further for the things which you are der your own eyes, and which you are
already by daily experience welacquainted with, and too well in deed, if it
were Gods will. Let them go, you see well enough what they are.

But now there be other sects besides these which do very much trouble and
disturb the Church, and civil state, as Anabaptists, Libertines, and such
other like, which would have no common wealth at al, but yet all things common,
whithe would have no Rule nor Maiestracie amongst the people, but yet would
rule and reign above Magistrates, which would have no laws, but yet woulddo
what wrong they list contrary to law, of which sort are those that stick
not to teach out of open Pulpits, and to bear me^ fondly in hand, that it
can not be found within the two claspes of the Bible, that Christian men may
go to law, or sue one an other. And what else is this I pray you, but to
ouerturne all policy and government, and to have no common wealth at all? For
if we may not use the laws, we must have no laws, if no laws, then no
Magistrates, if no Magistrates, then no obedience, if no obedience, then no
order, if no order, then (as I said) no common wealth at all, but every manne
may live after his own common will, as he list himself, and as his own
spirit shall move him, which is the stinking opinion and derie sink in
deed of al Anabaptistrie. Such men therefore must be looked upon. And I am
afraid least the Puritans also (as you call them) an other sects lately sprung
up amongst us, do smell shrewdly of this ill favored smoke. Of whom, and
of others I thought to have spoken more, but the time cuttes me off. And of
some of these sects, there be amongst your selves that knows somewhat more than
I do, and therefore you shall not need mine instruction therein. I will
therefore draw now to an end. You have heard sufficiently (as I trust)
whence all Discord and dissension comes, and who be the Authors of all
stirs and troubles both in civil matters touching the civil state: And also
in matters of the Church, touching the state Ecclesiastical. The former kind I
delivered unto you in a sum, and gave you only a short view of it, but yet
such as does imply in it self a sufficient consideration of your whole
charge in that behalf. The other kind I handled somewhat more at length, and
declared unto you plainlye and perticularly who be the chief Authors of
Discord and dissension, and of all sturres and trobles in the Church, namely,
the Papists, the Anabaptists, the Lybertines, the Puritanes, and such other
like sects, the several discourses whereof, I think I shall not need to
recommende unto your memories by any new repeticion neither does the time
suffer it.

This only now rests (O ye judges and Justices and the residue that are here
assembled together to this present Session) ye you have a good care, as I doubt
not but you have, for ye speedy redress of al things that are amiss, but
specially of discord and dissension, which wheresoever it be there can be
nothing but amiss. For it is the root of all evil, and the spring of all
mischief. Wherefore apply your selves, (I beseech you) every manne in your
order and degree, to the appeasing of controversies and strife, labor what
you can to alley Discord and Dissension in all manner of matters and amongst
all manner of states, Discord and Dissension amongst Temporal men,
Discord and dissension amongst Spiritual men, discord in your policy,
discord in our ministry, discord in the common wealth, discord in the
Church, and specially the discord that is in the Church. For ye other te^deth
to the annoyance of your temporal state, but this exte^deth to ye loss of
eternal life, there is a great odds therefore between these two, both are to
be regarded, but yet the one is to be preferred above the other, so much as
Gold is to be preferred above Silver, so much as the soul above the body, as
Heaven above Earth, as everlasting things above things momentanie and
corruptible. Wherefore have a care in Gods name for your civil state, and for
the common wealth, and for your Country, but have a special care for your
Spiritual state, which is the health of your souls, and for your
Spiritual common wealth, which is the Church of Christ, and for your
Spiritual Country which is Heaven above. For you are but Pilgrims here in
Earth, and strangers in this vale of duste and claye, neither have you any
permanent house or city here in this world, as the Apostle says: but your
city is the Celestial Jerusalem on high, and there must you build your
habitation, there must you build your houses, if you think to dwell and
inhabit for ever. Despise not your houses here on earth, nor your goods, nor
your lands, nor your living, nor your life, for these are the temporal
gifts of God, yea, and good gifts of God to, if they be not ill used: Despise
them not therefore (I say) build these things unto your selves, in the name
of God, build you houses, build you cities here on earth, build goods,
build lands, build livings unto your selves, build your temporal state
here, yea, and build civil peace and unity amongst your selves for the
conservation and continuance of your temporal state, no man says you nay,
they are things lawful to be done, yea, and they are well done of you, so
that you do them iustlye and truly and in the fear of God and without injury
or wrong unto others: but yet let your chief buylding be in heaven and of
heavenly things, build upon the true religion of GOD, buyld upon the broken
body of Christ, build upon the peace and unity of his Church, build upon
your selves into his Church and into his body, whereof your selves are
members, as well and as much as any others, who so ever they be that bear
the greatest names and titles of the Church, build these things (I say) and
lay your heads and hands together unfeignedly to pluck up by the roots
all Discord and Dissension, which is a let unto this buylding. And for as
much as the effect can never cease except the cause be first taken away,
first therefore take away the causes of Discord and Dissension out of both
states civil and Ecclesiastical, and the thing it self will soon vanishe
away. Remove from the common wealth, extortion, oppression, briberie,
perjury, with such other like vices, and punish those persons that offend
therein, according to the laws and statures of this Realm, and you shall see
all Discord and dissension in the civil state will soon come to an end.
Remove from the Church Papistry, Anabastistry, Atheism, Puritanisme, with
such other Heretical sects, and punish those persons that offend therein
according to the laws and statutes of the realm, and you shall see all
Discord and dissension in the Church and in Church matters will soon come
to an end. And because every man has his office and authority from GOD by
measure and limitation, some more, some less, some one way, some another way,
let every manne have a special eye unto that charge which is principallye
incidente to his his office and calling, let him enquire that should inquire,
let him present that should present, let him speak that should speak, let
him hear that should hear, let him judge that should judge, let him
execute, that should execute, and so forth, let every manne do that which
speciallys apperteyneth to his office, and let him do it in the fear of GOD
and with an upright heart, diligently and faithfullye, and we shall see all
that is amiss will soon be amended. But I fear there is many a one comes
hither pro forma tantum (as they say) for fashion sake only, and to fill up the
Sessions, but how to discharge their conscience is the furthest part of their
thought, yea they think not once of it at al. Do ye not think that you might
find many nestes of shrewd stinging waspes lurking in corners about you, if
you would seek for them. Nay rather do not we think that you know already
where they are if you would utter them? Ah remember whom you come here to
serve? not man only, from whose eyes you may hide many things, but God, who
sees into the secrets of your hearts, and from whom you can conceal
nothing. Look therefore well about you, dally not with God, he will not be
playde withal, go through with the matters ye take in hand, and hault not
for any respect, either of pleasing, or displeasing of man, but study to
please God by your true and faithful service at this time, as you will think
to clear your selves in that day, when you shall stand before the tribunal
seat of Christ, to render account of your doings. Look therefore more
narrowly to Gods matters, and to Gods causes, search out, present, and punish
such ercesses and defaultes, as be committed against the stablishmente of Gods
true Religion, and the quiet state of his Church. Iwis Iwis there are many
cursed Calves of Basin abroad, which since they suckte the Bull that came from
Rome, have given over all obedience and allegiance both to God and the Queen.
For before that time, they could be content to come to the Church and to
hear Sermons, and to receive the Sacraments, and to use common Prayer with
the rest of the congregation of Christ, and so forth. They were conformable
in all respects, and content to do any thing that beseemed good Christians
to do, but since they suckte that mad Bull, they are become even as
braynesicke Calves, froward, stubborn, disobediente in word and deed, not
to be led nor ordered by any reason, and I would it were no worse. And yet
these forsooth can not be seen nor heard of when time of reformation is: they
can not be heard of at the quarter Sessions, nor now at these general
Sessions, nor when any commission is sit upon for the redress of such
matters, they can not be espied, or heard of at any such time: but when the
Sessions are past, we can both hear and see that they have their open meetings
and solemn feastings together, sometimes at one house, sometimes at another
house amongst themselves with all freedom, and liberty, yea, with all
ioylitie and lustiness, talking and jesting at their pleasures, of the state
and of Religion, and so forth, whatsoever they list, to no good end I warrante
you, nor without unhappy meaning: As of late you had some experience of it
Westwarde, I pray God ere it be long, we have not like experience here
Eastwarde, and all through our own siacknesse and negligence, in looking to
these matters.

Well, now I conclude: Scrue GOD, serve his Church, and have an eye to those
men that be enemies and disturbers of it, and so serving God and his Church,
you shall scrue your Prince and Country never a whitte the less, but rather
you shall serve them a great deal more, and a great deal the better. For to
serve God and his Church, is the very head and beginning of your whole
service that you now come for, and without that, whatsoever otherwise you do,
it is but headless service, yea, it is no service, neither can you serve your
Prince and Country at all, except you first serve the Church. And your selves
as you are Christian men, are this Church, and the Queen as she is a
Christian Queen, is the head of this Church next under Christ. And therefore
marvel not, that I say unto you, you can not serve your Prince and Country,
except you first serve the Church, whereof she is the head, and you the
members.

The God of all grace and of all mercies, so dispose our hearts, so direct
our counsels, so govern our actions, so further our attemptes, so bless
and prosper all our doings at this time, and finallye, so finishe the good
work that we have now taken in hand, and begun in his name, that we may
justly and truly serve him, that we may justly and truly serve his Church,
that we may serve the Queen, that we may serve the common wealth, that we
may serve one another furne in such singleness of heart, and true brotherly
affection, that there may be long peace amongst us, and one godly unity and
uniformity both of Religion and life, to the glory of his holy name, and the
common comfort and joy of us all. God our heavenly father grant this mercy
unto us for his son our savior Jesus Christ's sake, to whom with the father
and the holy Ghost be all honor and glory now and for ever. AMEN.

Imprinted at London by Ralph Newberie, and Henry Bynneman.




