Ruths Recompense: OR A COMMENTARY UPON THE BOOK OF RVTH: WHEREIN IS SHOWED
HER HAPPY CALLING OVT OF HER OWN Country and People, into the fellowship and
society of the Lords Inheritance: HER VIRTUOUS LIFE AND holy Carriage amongst
them: AND THEN, HER REWARD IN GODS mercy, being by an honorable Marriage made
a Mother in Israel: Delivered in several Sermons, the brief sum whereof is
now published for the benefit of the Church of God.

By Richard Bernard, Preacher of Gods Word at Batcombe in Sommerset-shire.

LONDON Printed by Felix Kyngston, and are to be sold by Simon Waterson. 1628.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND VERY VIRTUOUS LADY, the Lady FRANCIS, Countess of
Warwick, Dowager, the increase of all saving Graces, and the fruition of that
eternal bliss with the Saints in glory, is heartily wished.
Right Honorable Lady,
THough a Woman was the Mother of all man's misery; yet of a Woman came
salvation, to bring us out of that estate unto Grace and Glory, and for women's
comfort, God of his mercy has been pleased to make their Sex renowned in
many examples. To some he has given supernatural knowledge, by enduing them
with the Spirit of Prophecy, as Miriam, Deborah, Huldah a^^ Annah. Upon other
some he has bestow^d singular wisdom, as upon the woman of ^ekoah, and h^w
se woman of Abel, in Bethmaacah. Rare was the faith of many, as the faith of
Sarah, of Rahab, of the widow of Sarepta, and of the Canaanitish woman; who
have put on better resolutions, and greater courage for the Church in the time
of peril, then some men have done. Did not Deborah encourage Barak to the
wars, aduenturing her self with him, when otherwise he without her was
afraid to go? Did not Iael, the wife of Heber, kill the great Captain and
General Sisera? And who more resolved to icopard her life for Gods people,
then beautiful Ester, with her If I perish, I perish?

Have there not been of them famous in many other things? For attention to the
Word, as the Virgin Marie and Lydia. For going far for knowledge, as the
Queen of Sheba to hear the wisdom of Solomon. For works of charity, as
Dorcas. For works of piety, helping forward the building of the Exodus 35. 21,
22, 29.
Tabernacle, as were many women. For feruency in prayer, as Hannah. For daily
devotion in fasting and prayer, as Anna. For entertainment of Gods Messengers,
as the Shunamite, as Lydia, and one Mary. For the fear of God, as the Mid
wives of Romans 16. 6.
Egypt. For courtesy to a mere stranger, as Rebecca. For humility and
patience, as old Naomi. Who can outstrip Ruth in love? Are there not recorded
not mean ones only, but also honorable personages for Religion and Grace? as
we may read in the Acts 17. 4, 12. Will a Dionysius become a believer in an
University, from among the Athenians? You shall find a Damaris to second him.

In what have men been renowned, wherein some women (according, yea, and beyond
the nature of their Sex) have not been remarkable? in Wisdom, Faith,
Charity, love of the Word, love to Gods Messengers, fervent affection, and
desire of heavenly things? If men have suffered imprisonment, cruel
persecution, and Bands for Christ, were women behind? No verily, Acts 8. 3. and
9. 2.

Nay, have they not in somewhat excelled men sometimes? Who entertained Christ
so much, and so often as Martha and Mary? Who are noted to contribute to
Christ's necessities, but women? Luke 8. 3. Who (saving John the Apostle)
followed Christ to his Cross, lamenting and weeping, but women? Who of Luke
24. 24.
all the ordinary followers of Christ observed where Christ was buried, but
women? Who first went to his Mark. 16. 1, 2.
Sepulcher with sweet spices to anoint Christ's body, but women? We may read of
a Congregation of women, Acts 16. 13.
to whom Saint Paul preached, being gathered together to the accustomed place
of prayer, as more forward, as it may seem at that time, then men.

It would be tedious to repeat by name all the notable women in the holy
Scriptures, and their excellent graces; yet can I not let pass Priscilla her
knowledge with her husband A quila in the ministry of the Gospel, able to
teach an eloquent A pollos; nor Loys and Eunice, Trayners up of the famous
Evangelist Timothy in the holy Scriptures; nor Persis, which Phil. 4. 3.
labored much in the Lord, as many other women did. Not to stand upon more
instances, one thing for their more worthy praises, is to be observed, and not
to be forgotten; I have read of men well esteemed of to have been Apostates,
as Demas, Alexander, Phyletus, and others; but of never a woman by name, once
reckoned among the Saints in all the new Testament; this is singular glory.

But the Lord has not thought it enough to honor women thus, by endowing them
with excellent gifts, and by their praiseworthy works, but also he has
graced them otherwise. To whom did Christ first manifest himself after his
resurrection, but unto women? Of what act did ever Christ so speak, to make it
perpetually famous, as that of the woman, that powered upon Mat. 26. 7, 17.
him an Alabaster box of ointment, promising that wheresoever the Gospel
should be preached in the whole world, there should her work be remembered?
Has not also the Lord directed his Penmen, and by name his beloved Apostle, to
write an Epistle unto an Elect Lady? And are there not whole books of Scripture
dedicated to their names, as this of Ruth, and the other of Ester, for an
eternal remembrance of them?

I hope (Right Honorable Lady) therefore, that I may be bold to present your
Honor with this my Commentary upon Ruth, which you may challenge of right
before all others, for your bountiful and liberal contribution toward my
maintenance in the University of Cambridge, by the which I am now that I am;
and for which, as also for your Honors euer-continuing favors to me and
mine, I remain everlastingly a debtor.

Accept therefore, I humbly beseech your Honor, this my best testimony of all
dutiful services, and of the acknowledgement of my most thankful remembrance
of the same. And my hearty and daily prayer is, that the Lord would bless your
Honor, that as both you have intended, and also begun good works, so you may
go on with increase therein to the end; it being the greatest honor before
God and men, to be great and rich in good works, for which you shall have, for
the present, many peoples prayers; for the time to come, of mindful
posterities, also great praises; and with all in heaven (which is the best of
all) reward with God; who ever preserve your Honor in all happy peace and
prosperity.

Your Honors ever bounden to be commanded, Richard Bernard.
Batcombe, March 22.
RVTHS Recompense: OR, A COMMENTARY UPON THE BOOK OF RVTH.
THe book of RVTH.] This is the title of this part of Scripture: and hereby is
showed of whom it chiefly entreats, even of Ruth, the virtuous and godly
young woman and widow, a Heathen and Idolater by her country and birth, but by
the Lords call a gracious Saint at length, a mother in Israel, and one of whom
Christ came. The titles of the Books of holy Writ, show either the principal
matter thereof, as Genesis, Exodus, Leuiticus, Numbers, Psalms, Proverbs, and
many other, or who were the Penmen, as the Books of Samuel, Esdras, or what
person chiefly is there spoken of, as Job, Ester, Nehemiah, and Ruth here; who
though but a woman, and of that weak sex, yet being truly religious, see how
the Lord does her honor to all posterities: a singular encouragement unto
virtue and godliness.

Who penned this, is not certain: but certain it is by the Genealogy, Chap.
4. 18, 22. that the Scribe lived in David's time, and therefore is it held to be
Samuels by some. But it is not necessary ever to know the Penners of every
book of Scripture, especially of Historical and Dogmaticall, whose truth and
authority depend not upon the writer or speaker, as Prophetical books do,
but upon the verity of the things spoken, and written. The Scribes name is
concealed, the Lords pleasure was not to have it mentioned, and therefore after
hidden things we will not make further inquiry, especially in a matter of no
more moment.

The book is divided into four Chapters, being, as it were, the parts of the
book: the first shows Ruths iournying to Judah, with the occasions thereto,
and causes thereof: the second, her entertainment, and her carriage and pains
there: the third, her contract with Boaz, a Noble man of Bethlehem, and how it
was procured: and the fourth, her solemn marriage, with the joyful issue
thereof.

CHAP. I.
THis chapter tells us how Ruth came to Bethlehem, who being married to a
man's son of Judah, in her own country, for the grace of Religion in her
heart, and the love she bare to her mother in law, after the death of her
husband and father in law, forsook her people, country, and idolatry, and
went into the Land of Judah, to dwell with Gods people, and came thither with
her mother in law, in the beginning of Barley harvest.

Verse 1. And it came to pass in the days when the Judges ruled, that there
was a famine in the Land, and a certain man of Bethlehem Judah went to
soiourne in the Country of Moab, he, and his wife, and his two sons.
THis verse is an entrance into the Story, and is the description of a journey:
and therein note, when, upon what occasion, from whence, whither, and who took
it in hand, and with what company he finished it.

And it came to pass.] To wit, by the hand and providence of God. Thus he
begins this History, to note a special hand of God in all this business,
beyond man's purpose and thought, in bringing a famine, and in Elimelechs going
into Moab, to take a wife for his son, even this Ruth, to make her a mother
in Israel: and therefore are we diligently to mark the providence of God in
reading this Story.

In the days when the Judges ruled.] This tells us, when this happened; In
historical narrations the time with other circumstances are set down, for
more credit to the Story, Judge. 1. 1. 2. Sam. 1. 1. 1. King. 1. 1. As in humane
Stories this is observed, so here in Divine. Thus God in mercy descends to
us, for the better confirmation of our weak faith, for which he is to be
praised. We may note out of these words:

I. That the Israelites were ever under government, under Moses, Joshua, the
Judges, and then Kings: this was needful, to prevent disorder and confusion
of State, when men are not under rule and government: for then will every one
do what he lists, Judge. 18. and 20. Which condemns Anarchie and all loose
liberty, destruction to Church and Commonwealth.

II. That their government was first by Judges, Josephus in Antiq. lib. 4.
cap. 8. de Aristocratia.
that they might see the Lords extraordinary hand in this governing of them,
1. Sam. 8. 6, 7. and that they might not be as other Nations, 1. Sam. 8. 5.
nor in bondage, 1. Sam. 8. 9, 18. These Judges were raised up for the most part
extraordinarily, to show more fully the Lords care of his people, they were
worthy and excellent men, not all of the same Tribe and Family, but sometime of
one, then of another: they ruled not by tyranny, or the advice of man, but by
the counsel and guidance of God; They loaded not the people with heavy
burdens to mainetaine great State: In their days, they sought the welfare of
the people, the glory of God, not their own wills and pleasures to rule after
their own lusts. They would not reign themselves, but the Judge. 8. 23.
Lord, as Gideon said, should reign over the people. Thus happily did the Lord
provide for his people, till they did shake off his yoke, and brought
themselves into bondage: for so it falls out, if men like not of Gods choice,
he leaves them to their own, of which they shall be sure to repent.

III. That such as be set over a people, are to rule them, but yet in
judgment: for the Hebrew word translated Ruled, is Judged, and Rulers were to
judge, 1. Sam. 7. 15. And this must they do, even labor wisely to rule and
govern in judgment. They are to rule, to maintain their authority, which
else will lie, through contempt, in the dust, and they must do it in
judgment, that equity may be vpheld, and nothing be done rashly, partially,
and to the hurt of innocence.

That there was a famine.] This might happen many ways by the incursion of
Foreign enemies, by civil wars among themselves, or by restraint of
seasonable showers from heaven: howsoever it came, sin was the cause thereof:
for we may read in the time of these Judges, howsoever they themselves did
valiantly, and right worthily in Israel, yet the people would run into many
mischiefs, so as we by searching, may find these evils among them: A
toleration of Idolaters, and public Monuments of Idolatry, Iud. 1. 21, 27,
29, 30. and 3. 5. and 2. 2. contrary to Gods express Commandment by the hand
of Moses. They fell themselves unto idolatry, Chapter 2. 11, 12, 13, 17. and 8. 27.
for but tolerate it in others first, then we like it at length in our selves,
as many examples witness. They would defend it, and that with bloodshed, Chap.
6. 30. for Idolaters are of a murtherous disposition, as their god-Deuill is,
whom they worship, as Manasses, Ioash, Iehoram, and other Kings do manifestly
declare, and as we have experimentally found at the hands of Papists. See
here a toleration first, then an approbation, then an open defense of an
idolatrous worship; and when this is once on foot, what darkness does not
ouerspread? They did what themselves listed, Chap. 17. 6. and 18. 1. and 21.
25. They fell to adultery, and filthy Sodomitry, Chap. 19. Thus they forgot the
Lords mercies, and therefore he severely punished them, as the story of the
Judges show, in giving them into the hands of their enemies, grievously to
oppress them; and here by famine to plague them. From whence we may observe:

I. That sins, especially these aforenamed, deserve the Judgments of God,
Deuteronomy. 28. 1. King. 8. 35, 36, 37. because sins provoke and incense the
wrathful indignation of the Lord against men, as appears by his terrible
threatenings, Ps. 11. 6. Romans 2. and his inflicted punishments upon evil doers,
of which there want not examples in the Scripture: as the old world, Sodom,
Israelites in Wilderness, in Canaan; and therefore to escape plagues, let us
take heed of sin, Ezech. 18. 31. Reu. 18.

II. That famine and dearth is a punishment for sin, and that a great plague,
Ezech. 5. 16. Deuteronomy. 28. 23, 24. Leuit. 26. 19, 20. Amos 4. Therefore to avoid
it, either prevent sin, that it be not committed, or if we be overtaken,
repent of sin, and that sincerely, and speedily. And when this hand of God
comes upon us, let us search our ways, and let us humble our selves, 2.
Chro. 7. 14. that the Lord may heal our Land: for it is a terrible judgment,
1. Sam. 24. 14. and without mercy, 2. King. 6. 10, 29. Ezech. 4. 10. This
famine men do know: yet there is another Famine, which few know, or if they
know it, they fear it not, the famine of the Word, Amos 8. 11. which the Lord
threatens by that Prophet, as a greater plague, than the famine of bread and
water, the food for the body: and yet alas, who fears it? who are touched
with the terror of this plague?

III. We may hereby see how God made his word good upon them, and that he
dallyeth not with his people, in denouncing judgments against them: for Moses
had told them, Deuteronomy. 28. that God would thus afflict them, if they would be
rebellious against hm: and here the story tells us, that in the days of the
Judges, this plague of famine came upon them. This Ezechiel verifieth in Chap.
6. 10. and the punishments inflicted, as the Lord denounced them, show the
truth hereof, that the Lord speaks seriously; he does not jest with sinners;
he will certainly make good upon them what he threatens, as may be seen upon
Iezabel, Ely's sons, and upon his house, upon I^roboam, Ioachin, Zedechiah, and
on Jerusalem. For the Lord is the God that hates iniquity, and is just in his
Word, even the God of Truth, as well in threats, as in promises: And therefore
let us fear the Lions roaring, and not be like him that blesses himself, and
dreadeth not the curse, Deu. 29. 18. but presumes of mercy, as if God were not
also just to punish offenders. But such must know, they deceive themselves,
they harden their own hearts, they abuse Gods mercy, which is to work fear,
Psalm. 130. 4. Ier. 33. 9. and obedience, Romans 12. 1. They spoil God of his
Justice and Truth in his threats, and incense the Lords wrath to plague them in
a high degree, as he threatens in Deuteronomie 29. 19.

In the Land.] In the Land of Canaan, the Kingdom of Israel, where God had
placed them, planted them, and promised to them his blessings plentifully: yet
see now, for their sins, in a Land once flowing with Milk and Honey, Ezech.
20. 6. they find scarcity. Hence note:

I. That people deprive themselves, by their sins, of that which God had
given, and they enjoyed, according to his promise. For sin will deprive
Angels of heaven, Adam of Paradise, Cain of his honor, Ruben of his
birthright, thousands of the Land of Canaan, though they came out of Egypt:
Jerusalem of her Kings, her Temple, Peace and prosperity; men of their honors,
as Jeroboam, Haman; of their liberty, as Manasses; of health, as Vzziah; of
their lives, as Corah with his company. Let us then blame our selves for our
miseries, and not the Lord for punishing us, as we deserve. And if we would
hold the blessings which we do enjoy, beware of sin, which will rob us of
all we have.

II. That a fruitful Land is made barraine for the sins of the inhabitants
thereof, Psalm. 107. Leu. 26. 19, 20. And these sins in particular procure this
plague; The abuse of Gods mercies, Luke 15. 14. Idolatry, 1. King. 17. 1. 2.
King. 4. 36. The murdering of innocents, 2. Sam. 21. 1. and the oppression of
the poor, Amos 4. 1, 6. Know then how to prevent hereby scarcity: and in the
time of want, turn from sin by repentance, and blame not the heavens, or
earth: murmr not against unseasonable weather, but be displeased with our
sinful selves.

III. Judgment begins at the house of the Lord, 1. Pet. 4. Ezech. 9. he will
show his hatred of sin upon the land of the living: for he cannot suffer
evil in his people; if a Moses, an Aaron, a David, a Josias sin, they shall
feel the smart of it. Now therefore if judgment begin at Gods House, what
shall become of Gods enemies? If the Church feel wrath, what may the
Adversaries expect?

A certain man of Bethlehem Judah.] Judah the Royal Tribe: And this is added
for distinction, because there was another Bethlehem in Zebulon, Josh. 19. 15.
This Bethlehem was called Ephrata, Genesis 35. 13. six miles from Jerusalem, as
some say: here Jacob fed his sheep, Genesis 31. here Rachel died, David was
borne, and Jesus Christ our Lord; It had the name from Plenty, and signifies
the House of bread; So as we see, the noble Tribe of Judah, and this honorable
place of Bethlehem felt this scourge of God. No place is exempt from the
punishment, where sin is suffered to reign: It brings famine upon
Bethlehem Judah, and on the Land of Israel, it brings the sword and famine
into Jerusalem. There is then no place to keep us free from feeling the
punishment, if sin be not removed: chase out this, and call home again the
Lords blessings.

Went to soiourne.] As a stranger in another Country from his own home. We
here see, how God can remove by one means or another, men out of there homes
and harbor. David, through just fear of Absalom out of Jerusalem; Manasses by
force out of his Kingdom into prison: other by unthriftiness cast out
themselves: some voluntarily leave their habitation and place of abode, and
return not again. All which came about by the hand of God, who has all
things at his disposing, that no man may think himself securely settled;
especially if he be a Shebnah, the Lord Esaias. 22. 15, 16, 17.
will drive such out, Amos 4. 2, 3. Note again, how fear of corporal wants
will make men leave their home, their native soil, their friends and kindred,
to go into a strange country. So forcible is nature for preservation of
bodily life, which man so much esteems and loves. This should then make men
care to keep the blessings prouidently, and frugally, also to avoid the
occasions and means of wastfull misspending, seeing sear of want will thus
work. And if the love of corporal life be so forcible, how much more the love
of eternal life, for which we should be willing to forsake all? But alas, the
least worldly gain, or carnal pleasure banisheth this love out of many men's
hearts, who rather follow here Elimelech, to leave the people of God, to go
into Moab for the world, than Abraham, to forsake his Country, at the
commandment of God.

In the Country of Moab.] This Moab was inhabited by those which came of Lots
eldest son Genesis 19. 37. Number. 22. 6.
incestuously begotten; of this was Balak King, who hired Balaam to curse
Israel, who committed fornication with the Daughters thereof, to the
destruction of thousands; over this Land reigned Eglon, who smote Israel, and
possessed some Judge. 3. 12. 13, 14,
part of the Land, and kept them in bondage eighteen years; some think that
Elimelech iournied to Moab in his days: howsoever, by this we may learn,
that wicked Idolaters may have sometime plenty, when the people of God are in
want. Here Moab had plenty, when Israel was under a famine. Of the prosperity
of the wicked, read Psalm. 73. 4. and 17. 14. and 37. 15. Job 21. 7, 13. and of
the troubles of the godly, Heb. 11. 37. And this comes to pass, because the
wicked are at home here; here their heaven and time of rejoicing: but the godly
are not here at home, the Lord looks for their coming to him, and therefore
prepares them by crosses, he loves them, and therefore does he correct them,
that they might not be damned. Hence then it follows, that we are not to
judge men's spiritual estates by outward prosperity or adversity; for the
wicked have the greatest portion of the things of this life: See it in the
parable of the Rich man and Lazarus. Why do men then bless themselves for
their wealth and honor, and despise their poor brethren, in a far better
estate before God than they?

Quest. Whether did Elimelech well to go from Bethlehem, into such an
idolatrous country?

Answ. It may seem not, because he went of distrust, rather than of present
want, verse 21. and for that he left the place of Gods true worship, and where
the Lord promised his blessing, Canaan also being a type of the Kingdom of
heaven, to go among the wicked Idolaters, whom the Lord by name also had
forbidden to be received unto his people, Deuteronomy. 23. 3. Neh. 13. 1. Further,
hereby he could not but endanger his family, to be defiled by idolatry, if the
Lord had not been more merciful. And to conclude this: We see how the Lords
taking both him and his sons away, may somewhat persuade, that he did not
well, seeing the Lord suffered him not to return home again. True it is, that
David went out of Judah, unto Idolaters, for fear of Saul, but it was against
his will, and with much sorrow of heart. Abraham, he traueled into Egypt, but
it was at Gods bidding: and the Shunamite might by the Prophets warrant go
into some place out of Israel, to prevent the misery of famine, 2. Kings 8. 1,
2. But what is this to such as have no such warrant, but such moving causes, as
here?

He, and his wife, and his two sons.] This is praiseworthy in him: For an
honest man cares for his wife and children, as well as for himself. Abraham
took his wife with him into Egypt, Genesis 12. 18. Jacob all his with him, Genesis
42. for the wife is as himself, Genesis 2. and so to be loved, Ephesians. 5. and the
children are bone of his bone. Reason and nature tied Elimelech to this: an
example of a loving husband and of a natural parent to be imitated; and which
condemns those which run away from wise and children, and are worse than
Infidels, 1. Tim. 5. 8. yea than the bruit beasts. This man led them, they
followed him: so wines and children are to be companions with their husbands
and parents in adversity. Sarah will follow Abraham, Rachel and Lea Jacob from
their country and fathers house; and Mary the mother of Jesus will follow
Joseph; for the husband is the head, and the bond of law binds the^ thereto:
which checketh the contrary; if husbands and parents do command to be
followed and obeyed in things lawful. If Elimelech, as it may seem, did not
well to go, it may be questioned whether these did well to follow him? He
might do amiss, and not they being under his government, so long as he led
them not to do evil, and to commit idolatry, but for sustentation of life,
and in that country where they were not outwardly compelled to idolatry, but
might serve God, as they had learned at home. If any think otherwise either of
Elimelechs going, or of his company, I contend not.

Verse 2. And the name of the man was Elimelech, and the name of his wife
Naomi, and the name of his two sons, Mahlon and Chilion, Ephrathites of
Bethlehem Judah: and they came into the country of Moah, and continued there.
THe Historiographer goes on with the former narration of the iourneying:
first expressing by name the man, the wife and the sons, showing plainly who
they were: then the finishing of their journey: and thirdly, their aboade
there. Into these three things this verse divides it self, the declaration of
their persons what they were called, both in respect of their names, and place
whence they came; the perfecting of their journey, and their stay there.

And the name of the man was Elimelech.] By naming the parties, and not
speaking in general, as before, the holy Ghost would have notice taken of
them, the better either to see their graces, or to discern their wants, and so
to have a more certain knowledge what to follow, or what to take heed of; for
the knowledge of persons makes the things which they do, either more or less
apparent to us. Elimelech signifies The Lord my King: a man well descended, he
was of the chiefest Tribe, to wit, of Judah, a nigh kinsman unto Boaz the Lord
of Bethlehem, and one of note, as appears by the article in the Hebrew, and
in the Greek Septuagint also, as likewise by the notice taken of Naomi his
wife at her return, ver. 19. yea he went out of Judah without want, as may be
noted from verse 21. and as learned men from thence do collect. And if so* his
going away was more of fear to want, than present necessity; which shows
his great weakness, worthy reproof. See here a man well borne, of good
means, of good note, and carrying a name of trust in God, yet slipped through
distrust of Gods providence, and too much relying upon his own devised course,
which yet failed him in the end. Great birth, good means, high name and fame
save not from falling either into sin, or outward misery, if a better
blessing than all these be not given men from God: and therefore not to rest
upon them.

And the name of his wife, Naomi.] Whose daughter this was, the Scripture
records not her name signifies My pleasantness, or sweetness: as wives
should be such to their husbands, and so husbands should account them. She was
fair, a wise woman, of great note in the City, and a very godly and meek
spirited woman, full of true love, patient in want, thankful and humble: all
which to be true, her words and deeds in this history do plainly show: So
she was fair inward and outward; an example and Lookingglasse for women, the
gallant Dames, which would be Naomies for outward beauty, and bravery; but are
foul Marahs for want of grace and true goodness. Naomi is named before her
children, both in the former, as a wife to Elimelech, and here as a Mother to
them: and this reckoning of her name in this order, declares her dignity and
place before them. She as a wife is to have place next Elimelech the husband,
who is to prefer wife before children, for she is himself, and as a mother
to go before them that be her children, who are to honor their parents.

And the name of his two sons.] Why not her sons? for she was not their
mother in law, but they were sons borne of her body, verse 11. But they are
called his, for the more honor: For the father chefely gives honor to the
child.

Mahlon, and Chilion.] The former signifies infirmity, the latter finished.
Why so called, is not showed, but they answer the event of things; the first,
his fathers infirmity, in going from among Gods people, to live with Idolaters
for preservation of his outward estate; and the other, his fathers death, being
taken away in Moab, verse 3. He was Mahlon in his leaving of Bethlehem, and
Chilion in abiding in Moab. And here note in all these names, how significant
they be, which the Hebrews did ever observe in naming their children, yea the
Lord himself in giving a name to any one; as in calling Abram, Abraham, Sarai,
Sarah: which is of us to be imitated, thereby expressing our faith and grace
toward God, and admonishing them of some duty. True it is, that good names
have no virtue in them to make men better, nor names without signification, to
make any worse; yet for reverence to our holy profession, and that blessed
Sacrament of Baptism, at which time names be given, and in imitation of the
godly in Scripture, yea of God himself, who called his first Son of men,
Adam, and his blessed holy One, Jesus, by the Message of an Angel; let us give
our children good names, significant, and comely, not absurd, ridiculous and
impious, as some have done, out of the spirit of profaneness.

Ephrathites of Bethlehem Judah.] So termed, because Bethlehem was called
Ephrate, Genesis 35. 19. or for that the Country where Bethlehem stood, was so
called, as may appear in Mich. 5. 2. and Judah is added not only for a
distinction of this Bethlehem, from the other in Zabulon, but for to make a
difference of the Ephrathites here, from other in the tribe of Ephraim; for
Jeroboam is called an Ephrathite, 1. King. 11. 26. By which we see how
careful the holy Ghost is to make clear the History, and to free it from
ambiguity of speech that the truth might better appear, and not be mistaken.
The Penmen of this and other divine Histories are Faithful Historians: and
such should others be, and not full of fables, falsehood and deceit, written
through fear, or favor, or ill will.

And they came into the Country of Moah.] So they finished their journey.
Howsoever the Man might do amiss in leaving Israel for Moab, the Land of the
living, for a dead Nation; yet it pleased the Lord to speed his journey, to
bring to pass, what he had intended for the conversion of Ruth, to make her a
mother in Israel: whence we see, that God intending good to some, in his secret
counsel, may prosper that, which others undertake, with no good warrant. Thus
shall Nebuchadnezzar prosper against Jerusalem; Jacobs sons act, in selling
Joseph their brother; yea the enemies of Christ to put him to death, as God had
determined, Act. 4. For the Lord can work good out of evil, and can use ill
instruments to good purposes: And therefore simply for the good issue, which
God makes, we are not to approve of either the matter in hand, or the minds
of men, which God uses therein, as is apparent in the former examples: for
Gods will and work was one thing, but theirs another: he is to be praised,
but they are to be reproved. The word Country, (...) Genesis 2. 5. Number. 20. 17.
Pro. 24. 3. Septu. (...).
may be also transalted, the field, as in the Original it is often used; and
hence some conjecture that Elimelech went not into the Cities of the Moabites,
but dwelt in Tents, as did Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and not in the Cities of
the Canaanites. If men live where Idolaters be, it is good to avoid the
occasion of infection as much as may be. For much conuersing breeds
familiarity: this, love of their persons, and so a liking of their ways, with
neglect of true Religion at the first, but it falls into contempt at last. It
is rare to be a righteous hearted Lot in Sodom, he was but one, and one alone;
Israelites became Idolaters in Egypt. This is it which made the Lord forbid
communion and marriages to them, with the Canaanites, lest they should learn
their ways. Let us therefore take heed of conuersing with the wicked, and
with idolatrous people: It is good that idle Travelers should consider well
hereof.

And continued there.] So then they had no repulse, but were allowed to dwell
there, and that for a long time, as the words in verse 4. do show: yet these
Moabites were formerly hard-hearted enough, Deuteronomy. 23. 3. but by this we see,
that none are so churlish and unkind at one time to some, but God can incline
their hearts at another time to other some. The History of Heathen Emperors
manifests the truth of this toward Christians; and the Story of the
Israelites, coming forth of Egypt: for men's hearts, yea the hearts of Kings,
are in the Lords hands, to turn them toward whom he pleases, as Nehemiah
knew well, which Nehemiah 1.
made him to pray: and Jacob also, when he feared the coming of Esau. When we
have to do with ill and dogged natured men, let us go to God, who can turn
Esaus bloody heart, in his coming forth, into a kind welcomming of his
brother at their meeting; he can incline Assuerus heart toward Ester, to make
him hold out to her the golden Scepter. Consider the promise, Ier. 15 11. and
42. 12. and let us seek to please God, and he will work us favor in the
eyes of men, Pro. 16. 7. and Job 5. 23. let this be our comfort. It may further
seem by the course of this Story, that these Bethlehemites were not only
suffered to dwell among the Moabites, but also that they were kindly used, in
that they would be content to marry with them, which is a commendation to them,
that would thus welcome such, as came among them for succor. It is a matter
praiseworthy to be harbersome to strangers; for this were the Barbarians
commended, Act. 28. 2, 7, 10. who received the Apostle and the rest into their
houses, made them fires because of the cold and rain in Winter, courteously
lodged them, and when they departed, being such as had suffered shipwreck, and
were thereby in want, those Barbarians helped them with necessaries. This was
humanity and mercy; For this, Abraham, and Lot, and Job are commended; and this
goodness we must learn to practice, for so are we exhorted, Heb. 13. 2 and
these former examples lead us to it. This qutie is to be done, not only to our
kindred, to our friends, to our known countrymen, but to strangers, Heb. 13.
2. yea and to our enemies in their need, 2. Kings 6. 23. Romans 12. 20.

Verse. 3. And Elimelech Naomies husband dyed, and she was left, and her two
sons.
THis tells us of the heavy cross which befell Naomi, which was in the
death of her husband, and that, as it may seem, very shortly after they were
come into Moab, before the sons did marry: so she was left a widow, with two
fatherless children, to take care for them in a strange country. This verse
is a narration of an event, what it was, and upon whom it fell, to the great
heaviness of Naomi: the event was death, and here is showed whom it took, and
whom it left.

And Elimelech dyed.] His age is not reckoned, he could not be very old, if
we may gasse his years by his sons marrying so young women after his death,
yet he dies, yea and there also, wither he went for food to preserve* life: He
went first from Israel, the Land of the living, and led them thence, and so he
now goes out of the world before them; from whence note:

I. That death is the end of all, and it spares none, Josh. 23. 14. Job 21.
33. Eccles. 7. 2. and 6. 6. 1. Cor. 15. 51. Heb. 9. 27. for all have sinned,
Romans 5. and death is the reward of sin, Romans 6. And therefore let all prepare
to die.

II. That a full supply of bodily wants cannot prevent death: The man must die
in Moab, where was food enough: the rich Glutton must die also, and the Rich
man with his barn full: for the sentence of death is irreuocable, and man's
life depends not upon the outward means of life, for then the rich and
mighty would never die.

Let not men in their abundance think to escape death: let them therefore not
set their hearts on their wealth, for they must leave it. It is folly to trust
in riches, for they cannot deliver from death, either ordinary, or
extraordinary, lingering* or sudden, natural, or violent, as examples and
experience it self teaches.

III. That where men think to preserve life, there they may lose it, as
Elimelech does here, fleeing from the famine in Israel, yet dyed where plenty
was, in Moab: for no place is free from death, and when the appointed time is
come, man cannot pass it, Job 14. 5. we cannot think therefore our selves
safe any where from death, nay, many times, where we may think our selves
secure, there death may take us away.

Naomies husband.] It is not said her husband, which might well have been
spoken, by way of relation to her, without her name, because she was named
before, and no other woman; but this woman was a very virtuous woman, and this
was a great cross to her, and therefore, both to express her excellency, and
her begun misery, it is said, Naomies husband dyed, the husband of so rare a
wife died. Note hence,

I. That it is a grace for some, to be called the husbands of some women; their
name is a grace to them, if they be virtuous: for such a one is a crown to her
husband, Pro. 12. 4. Now, a crown is high glory to a man: and her husband is
known in the gates, Pro. 31. 23. Such wives are to be made much of, as rare
Birds; for too many may sit down with shame, and blush to be named the
husbands of some wives: Foolish, though fair: fair, but perhaps filthy: rich,
but withal retchlesse: wives, but without government, husbands named the head,
but they must be masters: sometime painful, but Peacok-like proud; often
more mad, or fullen sad, than merry; if merry, it keeps not in with modesty;
if she speak, it is loud, often heard farther, then seen, and yet oftener
seen by a quiet husband, then well liked of. In a word, a wicked foolish
woman, is shame to his person, and rottenness to his bones, Pro. 12. 4.

II. That grace in one, preuents not death in another; Naomies husband must
die, so Abraham's wife also: Jacob must bid his Rachel adieu, and Ezech. 24. 16.
Ezechiel the desire of eyes: for no man's grace can free himself, much less
another from death: Psalm. 49. 7, 9. and married persons are not appointed the
same length of days; No, we come not together, and we go not together. Let
none hope for life by the grace of another; let the nearest, and dearest look
to part by death; Ruth loved Naomi most dearly, and says, that nothing should
separate them, but only death, verse 17. because she knew, that that must
needs be yielded unto.

III. That it is a great cross for a woman to lose a good husband. This is
implied, as I said, in naming her by name; for in him the wife loses her head,
her guide, her stay, and comfort, if he be a virtuous man, and a good husband.
I need not entreat good and loving wives to mourn for such; sure enough they
have cause: and wives cannot but mourn, except they conceit a new comfort very
quickly, as some do, for fear the old grief should lie too long at the heart
for him that is dead, and cannot be recalled; so with them, the living is
better to be liked of, than the dead: for they know their husbands would,
perhaps, have so dealt with them.

And she was left and her two sons.] Death seized only upon Elimelech, and
left Naomi, and also her sons, that she might not be utterly comfortless in
a strange country. From this may we note these two things:

I. That albeit death is due to all (in as much as all have sinned) yet it
seazeth not upon all at once; but one dies now, and another hereafter, as we
see in all ages, which comes not to pass for any good in one, more than in
another; but God will have mankind upon earth till the last day; he forbeareth
some, and repriueth them for their amendment; for the lengthning of life, is
for our further repentance, if we be the Lords, or for the greater
condemnation of such, as shall perish. For this mercy God is to be praised,
for we deserve death, and it might seize upon every one at once, and take us
away, because we are borne in sin, brought up therein, and none so free
ever, but in his highest pitch of well-doing, he may be tainted of sin, 1.
Ioh. 1.

II. That the Lord in afflicting his children, sweeteneth the same with some
comforts: he wholly leaves not them without some taste of his mercy and
goodness, as we may see in his dealing with Naomi: he took away her husband,
and left two sons; and after took them away, but gave her an excellent
daughter in Law. Elisha had an 2. King. 6. 10.
earthly power coming against him, but he then saw a great help from heaven.
It was a bitter affliction for Joseph to be sold of his brethren, but it was
sweetened with Potiphars favor; This at length imprisoned him vniusty, but the
Lord gave him favor in the eyes of the Keeper of the Prison, to sugar this
bitter pill with. And this the Lord does in mercy, that his children might not
be overwhelmed with grief, and swallowed up of sorrow: therefore by one means
he casts them down, but by another sustaineth them. Let not therefore men,
which fear God, be ouer-sad when afflictions come; God will lay no more then
they can bear: he lays on them a burden, but he puts under his hand. If
we look upon the affliction, let us also consider, what cause of comfort we
have; mark when, for what, how long or short, what it is allayed with, that we
be not wholly cast down.

Verse. 4. And they took them wives of the women of Moab, the name of the one
was Orpha, and the name of the other Ruth, and they dwelled there about ten
years.
THis shows what course the sons took after their fathers death, they
returned not home: this cross brought them not to think of leaving that
idolatrous Country, but they settled themselves to marry there; so as this
verse tells us of two things; the first is, of a marriage, and herein who
they were, the men, Elimelechs sons, the women, who are set out by their
Country, then by their names: the second is, of their abode in Moab, and time
how long.

Note (before I come to the words) that every cross brings not men home
again: their fathers death made them not resolve to go back unto Gods people
again: Lot was taken prisoner, yet would he still abide in Sodom, after his
deliverance. Iehosaphats danger with Achab, made him not wholly to forsake that
house, but he must have more afflictions, and the Prophet openly to rebuke him.
And this comes for want of waighing the true cause of afflictions, when they
happen, or desire to please other, or the love of this world, or some such
corruption of our heart. To bewail this our perverse nature not easily
reformed, a great affliction must work on Manasses, great distress must
press the prodigal son, before they will come to themselves, and turn to
the Lord, yea some are worse for afflictions, as may be seen in Achaz, 2.
Chron. 28. 22. in Amon, Chap. 33. 23. in the Antichristians, Reave. 16. 11. and
in the Jews, Ier. 5. 3.

And they took them.] This may seem an act of their own, as that of Lamech,
Genesis 4. 19. and that of the sons of God, 6. 2. and not their mothers deed,
as is said of Hagar, Gene. 21. 21. If they did this with her consent, it was as
godly children should do, to marry with consent of parents: For parents have
authority in this case, 1. Cor. 7. children owe this honor to them. Examples
of the godly, as in Isaac, and Jacob, and Samson, move to it: and the contrary
is found fault with, Genesis 6. 2. and in Esau; our laws require it, godly men
and learned Divines so teach out of the Word. Let children therefore herein
take advice of their parents; they shall thrive the better: if they do well,
their parents will rejoice: if otherwise, then children may more boldly seek
to parents for comfort, and expect help at their hands.

Wives.] So women be called, when they be married unto men, or betrothed. It is
as if it had been said, They took young women for wives to live in Gods
ordinance, and not for wantons, to live in uncleanness. Though they were not
in Israel, yet they let not loose the unbridled lust of nature, but used
marriage the ordinance of God. So men are to take women as wives, to live
together in Gods holy ordinance; as the godly have ever made conscience to do;
and not to live as brute beasts, to defile themselves; as Hamor did Dinah, and
Zimri did Cozbi, in the sin of fornication. From this must we fly, as the
Apostle exhorts, and from other degrees of uncleanness, as adultery which
God seuerly punished, 2. Sam. 22. 10. Job 31. 9, 11. so incest, Genesis 19. 36. 1
Cor. 5. 1. 2. Sam. 13. 14. and other unnatural pollutions not to be named,
Romans 1. which God gives reprobate minds over unto.

Of the women of Moab.] With these they were not to marry, Deuteronomy. 7. 3. and 23.
3. Esdras 9. 1, 2. Neh. 13. 23, 25, 26. Young persons in their choice soon
err, if they suffer lust to rule, and follow not the Law of God, Genesis 6. 2.
Herein wise Solomon was overtaken, Neh. 13. 26. 1. King. 11. 1. Therefore men
are to bridle appetite and lust; and let the Lord rule them, Religion and
reason guide them herein. The children of God are not to marry with the
daughters of men: it is condemned, Genesis 6. 2. the contrary commanded, Deuteronomy. 7.
3, 4. See there the reason, and equity thereof ever, such marriages are not made
in the Lord, as they ought, 1. Cor. 7. 36, and God has punished such matches:
see in Solomon, 1. King. 11. and in Iehosaphat, in marrying his son to
Athaliah, 2. Chro. 21. 6. If Rahab be a believer, Solomon may take her to
wife, and so Boaz may marry Ruth: and if there were none other to match with in
the world, Abraham may take one out of another country for Isaac; and Jacob
may marry Labans daughter: but there is no such want, but that the sons of
Abraham may match with the daughters of Abraham now.

The name of the one was Orpha, and the name of the other Ruth.] This was the
wife of Mahlon, Cha. 4. 10. the elder brother, and Orpha the wife of Chilion
the younger: whether sisters or no, or of what parents these came, is not
mentioned. These Heathen people refused not in those days to match with
strangers; Iethro gives his daughter to Moses, which must be for his virtue,
and not for his wealth; for he had none, he was brought up like a Prince, but
he humbled himself to keep Sheep, and so obtained his wife. Men's manhood,
virtues, and painfulness in those days got them wives. Caleb will marry his
daughter for the man's virtue sake, and valorous spirit; Saul will pretend as
much toward David* but that was pretended in policy, not in truth; Laban the
worldling will marry his daughters for the world, and sell them for gain: but
a godly man prefers grace before goods, and wisdom before the world;
though where grace is, if goods may come with it, it is a blessing, and the
better to be liked of, for help to uphold the burden of marriage.

And they dwelt there about ten years.] Whether this time begins at their
first coming, or after this marriage, is not certain, but it is ten years
before Naomi hears of the Lords visiting of Israel with plenty. It is a long
time for a godly woman to be kept from Gods people, and public service of his
name. David lamented it much, Psalm. 120. 5. and desired the presence of God and
his Tabernacle, Psalm. 84. 1, 4. In Moab was corporal plenty, but not
spiritual; for the one, the other was neglected. Such is our corruption; a
common sin now, I wish it had not taken possession of the best. But besides
this, we may further note, how a heavy calamity may long rest upon Gods people:
we may read of a famine, three years and a half in Achabs days: three years
in David's time, 2. Sam. 21. 1. 1. King. 17. 1. Luke 4. 25. and seven years at
another time, 2. King. 1. and here also, for a great many of years. And this
comes through men's obstinacy in sin, and for that such things are not
reformed, as God commands, or for that some evils are not punished, as they
ought to be; as for innocent bloodshed, 1. Sam. 21. 1. for open idolatry,
and murdering of the Saints, as in Achabs days. We are in such continuing
judgments, to look to our ways, and bewail our sins: also seeing thus
Gods hand against his people so long, we may learn patience in the years of
scarcity, and bless God that never thus afflicted us in any of our
remembrances; for such a famine would in these Northern parts be most
intolerable, far more insufferable, than in hot countries, where people
could humble themselves with fasting, many days together.

Verse 5. And Mahlon and Chilion dyed also both of them, and the woman was left
of her two sons, and of her husband.
THis verse shows a further grief which befell good Naomi, which was the
death of both her sons, and so to be left a heavy soul in solitariness in
a strange country, where she could have no spiritual comfort, and where now
she had lost her chiefest corporal comfort.

And Mahlon and Chilion dyed also both of them.] These inioyed their young wives
for some space, and had time to have returned home to the Lords people, but
they for bodily maintenance, and new friends gotten by their marriages, would
not; the Lord therefore took them away in this strange Land. Many things may
be noted.

I. That the Lord gave them time to marry, and to enjoy their marriage for some
space, though they made no better use of their fathers death: thus good and
patient is God unto men, for their bettering, if it would be, for which praise
him.

II. That when God has proved men in patience, and they will not make right
use thereof; then will he take them away; for he will not always strive in
mercy: here the abusers of Gods goodness may learn to take heed.

III. That God can and will cut off sometime young men in the flower of their
youth. Thus he took away Nadab and Abihu, Hophni and Phinees, Amnon and
Absalom, two gallant young Princes: so here these two, though some by violent
death, and other by natural death. And this is sometime a punishment for
sin, Psalm 55. 23. 1. Sa. 2. 31. but not ever: for God in mercy will take
some from the evils of the world, as he did Josias. Let none because of youth
put far off the day of death. Death respects no age, no strength, no
beauty: Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth, Ecclesiastes 12. 1.
Thy own sin may cut thee off in youth, as it did Absalom, and so the rest:
or thy fathers sin, as David's child was taken away, 2. Sam. 12. 14. and the
ten 1. King. 11. 12. and 21. 6.
Tribes from Rehoboam, and the sons of Saul.

And the woman was left of her two sons, and her husband.] This is added, to
aggrauate the affliction of Naomi; and does teach, that neither few nor light
afflictions sometime befall the godly. Naomi lost her husband, then not one,
but both her sons, and left their widows without children, so as Naomi had
none of his blood remaining in Moab. And as she was thus afflicted, so was
David, who had proud and scornful brethren, a bloudily-minded father in law,
a mocking Michal to his wife, lewd and unnatural children; besides many other
great trialls. What shall I speak of Jobs trialls, Ieremies troubles, and
Paul's persecutions? Yet God thus suffers his to be tried, to make them know
themselves, to show them their graces, and their imperfections, which in
affliction they will manifest; to weane them from the world, to the love of a
better life, to whip them from their sins, and to make our vile natures tame,
to submit to his yoke. Let us look therefore for them, let us be contented and
patient under them, and consider the troubles of others of old, and in the
primitive Church, and of later times. Let us not think our condition the worse
before God, but rather the better, if instruction be with correction; for God
loves us then. It is a fault to murmr at him, it is an error to think our
estate to be evil before God, because of sundry and great crosses; for many
are the afflictions of the righteous: he says not, of the wicked, yet then
righteous, when they be afflicted: this is comfort against despair.

Note again, that he says, the woman was left: he says not now, Naomi, as
before and after, to express her dejected condition; for a widow, poor,
alone, without friends, and in a strange country, is in an afflicted estate,
and contemptible: it is the, not Naomi, but the woman in distress and misery.
And lastly observe, that when death calls, friends must part, and one leave
another, husbands their wives, children their parents, and parents their
children; as here, no band of love can keep them then together, death must be
welcome, and unto dearest friends we must bid farewell.

Verse. 6. Then she arose with her daughters in law, that she might return
from the Country of Moab: for she had heard in the Country of Moab, how that
the Lord had visited his people in giving them bread.
HEre is at the length the return of Naomi, with whom, from whence, and the
reason drawing her mind homeward.

Then she arose.] She had long abode in Moab: now after such crosses, she
arises to go thence, unto the Church and people of God: when the Lord thus
afflicted her, when she saw her self destitute of her husband and children,
and had none to go unto and to converse with but Idolaters, the Moabites, then
she arose to leave those coasts. Note, how affliction shall follow affliction,
to bring home such as be the Lords: if one cross will not do it, another
shall, as we see in the prodigal son, and Gods dealing with Manasses; for the
Lord is loath to lose his own: And therefore if one affliction happen, make
good use thereof, else another shall follow, yea and another after that, till
we return home. Again mark, that it is then time to leave the place of our
abode, when the Godly are taken away, and none left but wicked to converse
with. Thus and for this cause many left Israel in Ieroboams days, 2. Chr. 11
13, 16. for the godly should delight in the fellowship of the godly: David's
delight was in the Saints. It is also dangerous for the Godly to frequent the
company of the wicked, as a Lamb to be among Wolves. David will not dwell in
the tents of the wicked, neither sit among them, Psalm 26. and it is a good
man's property to avoid them, Psalm 1. 1. And therefore let us flee the
fellowship of Idolaters, 1. John 5. 2 Cor. 6. and the society of evil
persons. For such as can live with delight among them, are like them, are no
true Conuerts to God: and yet not a few, which will be held religious, can make
themselves merry with vain persons, and condemn others for too Stoicall, too
censorious, for that they cannot away with fleshly and carnal delights.

With her daughters in law.] It appears that these two did voluntarily
accompany her, of their own minds, and not by Naomies entreaty; this
appears out of verse 8. and 11. What moved them hereto, but Naomies virtues?
So as we may see, that the truly virtuous are of an attractiue power, even as
the lodestone, to draw others unto them, partly by instruction, partly by
their godly conversation. Both which means we may think she used toward
these, while she aboade in Moab: for the religious cannot but incyte others
unto piety. This is worthy imitation in Naomi. If practice show our Religion,
it will win others, 1. Pet. 3. 1. without which, even the most glorious
profession in words, has no operation, no power to persuade. And here also was
a mercy of God to this poor old woman, that she lost not all outward comfort,
she had some to keep her company in her adversity. It is a good grace, to be
content to bear the poor company in a miserable estate; they be true friends,
which will sit down upon a dunghill with Job, to mourn with him. Well, here
were two daughters of Moab, which would accompany Naomi, poor and afflicted
Naomi. A reproof to counterfeit friends, of which now the world is full, never
more.

That she might return from the country of Moab.] This is the end why she
arose, that is, left the particular place of her dwelling, not to go into some
other place in Moab, as hoping of better success there, but quite to forsake
the country. The kindness received there, could not hold her, when she
perceived the Lord to call her home, partly by afflictions in Moab, and partly
by mercies now in Israel. Outward kindness of Worldlings cannot keep the
godly with them, when God calls them away from them, either by afflictions,
or by check of conscience, or by falling into sin by them, or by feeling the
want of the godly, and the use of Gods public service, or else by seeing or
hearing of Gods favor to his people. When these or such like do call upon the
godly to come away, they cannot by any worldly pleasure, profit, or familiar
acquaintance, or kind intertainement stay with such men; they be like Abraham's
servant, which could not be held with Genesis 24.
rest and good cheer, to stay in Bethuels house; nor David in Ziklag, when he
had liberty to go 2. Sam. 2. 2.
into Judah. For their spirits differ, so as they cannot truly affect one
another, and the godly find crosses among the wicked, to hunt them out from
their society, and they cannot but fear, in a godly jealousy, to be made the
worse by them, for that they know their own weakness. And therefore let us
labor for this grace, to leave the society of the ungodly, lest we be
ensnared by them: and if we be with them, let it be by warrant of our calling,
or of necessity, and only so long as we have hope to do them good, and to win
them; but if they be found obstinate, forsake them, Ierem. 51. 9.

For she had heard in the country of Moab.] That is, while she did stay in
that country, news was brought of plenty in Israel. As the famine did drive
her from thence, so now food being there, and the crosses she found in Moab,
moved her to return back again. As adversity makes many to leave the
Church, so the prosperity thereof brings many unto it; some in truth and
love, as Naomi here, others for the world, or for fear, Ester 8. 17. Let us
then pray for the Churches prosperity: yet not then are we to trust all that
come within her lap. Note again, how Naomi in her greatest distress heard
of comfort to her Country, to bring her home again. God is often the nearest
in mercy to help, when in man's reason he seems to be furthest off. Thus was
God with Jonah in the Whales belly, and with the three Children in the Furnace,
with Daniel in the Den, with David to help against most present danger, 1.
Sam. 23. 26, 27. Peter, the very night before his intended death by Herod, must
be delivered: and so the Gun powder plot here be discovered. And God thus
suffers his so long, and to come to so narrow a strait, before he set them
free, and show himself; to humble them, to beat them out of confidence in
themselves, to show his power and mercy the more, that they may see more fully
his goodness to them, to make them thankful, obedient, and the more in
utmost perils to rely upon him. We are not to despair in the greatest dangers,
nor to think our selves forgotten in great extremities, but then seek to God,
trust in him, and doubt not of comfort. God will have Lazarus in the grave,
before Christ restore him to life; and Isaac bo^nd upon the Altar, before he
forbid Abraham to slay him: Till the ship be ready to sink, Christ will not
awake, Mat. 8. 25, 26. for so the Lord is more seen in his power, and mercy
toward his.

How the Lord had visited his people in giving them bread.] By bread is meant
all necessary food, but especially corn, of which bread is made. Here the Lord
is made the giver thereof to the Israelites called his people, whom in mercy
be visited, to bestow his blessings upon: for so is visited here taken, and in
Genesis 21. 1. Luke 1. 68. Ier. 29. 10. Note from hence these things.

I. That God sees his people in adversity and want, and comes in his due
time to help them, Exodus 3. 7, 8. which is from his mere mercy, and the
stability of his love and promise to his people: And therefore we may learn
patience in affliction, and not be impatient, as if God had forgotten; Psalm.
13. 1. 1. Cor. 10.
nor murmr, lest the Lord punish us.

II. That God has ever had more specially a people for his own, called his
people. Thus were certain called the sons of God, Genesis 6. Thus after were
the Israelites his, Deuteronomy. 7. 6. and 26. 18. and such be now true Christians, 1.
Pet. 2. 9. Reu. 18. 4. These he chose not for any merit in them, but of his
mere love, Deuteronomy. 7. 8. Ephe. 1. 4. This should make us to examine our selves,
how we be Gods people, whether, according to Creation, or after the work of
Regeneration: for these differ from the other greatly, in the graces of Gods
Spirit, and holy conversation, Ezech. 11. 19. and 36. 26, 27. Psalm. 15. in
glorious titles, Deuteronomy. 26. 19. Exo. 19. 6. 1. Pet. 2. 9. Reu. 1. 6. and in
heavenly prerogatives; as in peace with God, Romans 5. 1. in free access, with a
holy boldness to God in Christ, Heb. 4. in having God ever with them, Mat. 18.
20. in this blessing, that all things work together for the best to them, Romans
8. and in being a Communion of Saints, to whom is belonging the forgiveness of
sins, the resurrection of the body, and life everlasting. We are therefore
to labor to be of this sort of Gods people.

III. That corporal food, and the necessaries of this life are Gods gift,
Leuit. 26. 4, 5. Deuteronomy. 11. 14, 15. Hos. 2. 8, 9. Joel 2. 19. It is he that
makes the earth fruitful, he gives rain, and withholds it, Osea 2. 8, 9.
Amos 4. 7. and man without him can do nothing, Psalm. 127. 2. Hag. 1. 6. Deuteronomy.
8. 1^. Praise him for these blessings, Joel 2. 26. in the want of them
acknowledge it from God, and go to him, pray to him, Mat. 6. and this must be
done in an humiliation of our selves, for the affliction, 2. Chron. 7. 14. Joel
2. 16, 17, 19. If we look for these blessings, we are to serve him, because
they be his gift, and to such has he promised them, Leuit. 26. 3. Deuteronomy. 11.
13, 16. Let this reprove such as forget God, do not praise him, nor serve him
for these blessings, and let it confute such as ascribe them to the heavens, or
to the industry of man, never remembering the precept of Moses, Deuteronomy. 8. 18. and
that saying in Job 31. 26, 27.

Verse 7. Wherefore she went forth out of the place where she was, and her
two daughters in law with her; and they went on their way to return unto the
Land of Judah.
IN the former verse, was Naomi her preparation for her journey; here is her
setting forward: noting from whence, with whom, and whither.

Wherefore.] That is, because she heard of plenty in her country: which gives
us this to understand, which before I noted, that the Churches welfare
procures friends, and draws her old acquaintance to her: for prosperity is
of an attractiue virtue, and men are affected with it; this will make Abimelech
to seek to Isaac, Genesis 26. 26. and Jobs friends gather unto him, Job. 42. 11.
This should make us seek the Churches prosperity; yea and make men frugall to
preserve their estates: for prosperity gets friends (though not a few
counterfeit:) and adversity makes men to be forsaken; and yet many which
might live well, bring themselves by prodigality and lewd courses unto misery:
unworthy they be of pity.

She departed out of the place where she was.] In what particular place of
Moab she was in, is not named, though here to be understood by the name
place. There was food here, as well as in Judah, yet she would not stay though
she was an old woman, having poor and weak attendance, the journey somewhat
long for her, her estate wasted, and therefore was she to return in a base
estate, which other perhaps might cast in her teeth for leaving Judah, and
going into that idolatrous Moab; but all these things did not withhold her from
her godly purpose. And two reasons may be given for this; the love of her own
Country, and her piety, esteeming highly of the means of salvation. Whence may
be noted:

I. That there is a love naturally in every one to their own Country; See it
in Iethro, Exo. 18. 27. Number. 10. 29, 30. and Barzillai, 2. Sam. 19. 27. Jacob
would return into Canaan out of Mesopotamia where he had gotten great riches.
And this love unto their Country, made men to adventure their lives in defense
thereof, 2. Sam. 10. 12. Therefore such are unnatural, who will seek the
destruction thereof.

II. That corporal means cannot keep the truly religious from the place
where God is worshipped, if they may enjoy the means of life in a poor
measure. Naomi would not stay in Moab, though she in Judah had nothing to
maintain her, but her hands, and that Ruth must gleane for bread, when they
came thither. What a change Moses made, we all do know: a crust of bread for
the body is better with the food of the soul, than all carnal abundance
without it. And therefore if the choice of our dwelling be, either where bodily
plenty is, whithout the Word, or a poor estate for the body, and plentiful
instructions for the souls safety, let us choose this, rather then the other.
Seek, says our Savior, for the food John 5.
which endures unto eternal life, which perishes not.

And her two daughters in law with her.] This their accompanying of her,
argues Naomi her singular good carriage toward them, while her sons lived:
for if she had been proud, froward and unkind, as some mothers in law have
been, they would have despised her, and shaken her off; but we see: first, how
good carriage procures love: and secondly, how true love shows it self in
the adversity of a friend, Pro. 17. 17. for these 2. forsake not poor and old
Naomi in this her contemptible estate. Thus Jonathan showed his love in David's
trouble, and Jobs friends, when they sat down by him; for true love is not
tied to outward respects: such love is false and hollowhearted; the love of
these times. We must imitate God in love, to love ever, and chiefly in
adversity; for either love them, or not at all. Be not as the Shadow which
shows it self only in sunshine; nor as the Swallow which chatters, and
sings over thy chimney in warm Summer, but cannot be seen in Winter. Friends
only in appearance, shape their love like to the Devil, who only makes a
show of love to man, and is ever sinister in the intendement.

And they went on their way to return to Judah.] It seems by this, that the
two women came out to return with Naomi, who only is properly said to
return, because she came out of Judah, and they had a purpose to go through
with her to the end, and to leave their own native soil, their parents and
friends, which was a great degree of love, but yet we may read that Orpha
afterward gave over. To begin well, and to make an onset to goodness, is
easy to many, but to go on to the end, is of special grace. Cain began and
made an onset to godliness, so did Ioash King of Judah. Iehu did valiantly for
a while. Judas seemed to be approved by his fellows, and to live without
suspicion for a time. The same may be said of Ananias and Saphira, of Simon
Magus, of Demas, Hymeneus, Alexander, and Philetus, with many more; but their
calling was not effectual: called they were, but not elected: their hearts
were full of hypocrisy, which will at length break out. Therefore let none
think well of themselves for fair beginnings, because they that continue to
the end, shall only be saved.

Verse 8. And Naomi said unto her two daughters in law, Go, return each to
her mothers house: the Lord deal kindly with you, as you have dealt with the
dead and with me.
NAomi sees their kindness, and weighing aforehand all circumstances,
begins to make trial of the soundness of their love, and to know upon what
ground it stands, as appears out of the verses 11, 12, 13. The words
consist of an exhortation, and a petition to God for them, rendering a reason
thereof.

And Naomi said unto her two daughters in law.] To this place, there is no
mention of any speech of Naomi, but only what she did: First, in following
her husband into Moab, verse. 1, 2. and then, of his leaving that Country to
return into Judah, verse. 6, 7. Hitherto her Story is of her walking, and not
of her words and talking: it seems her tongue did not hang loose, to be upon
every touch tolling, as some women's be. And this her silence commends her
virtue therein, and also gives us to know, that she did not solicit her
daughters to go with her, but that they voluntarily undertook the journey: for
if she had requested them, their love had not so appeared, neither could she
have tried them, by entreating them to return back.

Go and return.] How far on the way they were come, is not noted; but on
the way they were, before she spoke thus to them; which she did not, as
careless of their souls, or of any doubt, whether God would provide for them,
who would forsake their country, and become proselytes; but two reasons may be
alleged why she exhorts them to return home again. First was her love to
them, for their kindnesses formerly to her and hers, as appears by her
prayer, and therefore she might now seem to be loath to trouble them, though
their company in the way might have been comfortable, except she had known
certainly how to have recompensed their love. Taking this for one, we learn,
that a true Lover is loath to disadvantage a friend or friends for private
respects to himself: for true love seeks also the good of a friend beloved;
and a found-harted friend will follow the Apostles advice, 1. Cor. 10. 24. not
seek his own, but his friends welfare. But this alas is contrary to our
times, when now men are all for themselves; which self-love is contrary to
Christ's commandment, to love our neighbor as our selves; it is against the
communion and fellowship of Christians as members one of another; it is
contrary to the end of our labor in our callings, 2. Cor. 12. 14. Ephesians. 4. 28.
which is, to do good to others; contrary to that care which God commands,
for the preservation of other men's estate, Deuteronomy. 22. 2, 4. Exodus 23. 4, 5.
contrary to Abraham's practice, Gene. 23. 9. whose children we must be, and
whose works we must do. This self-love is the original of all bribery,
extortion, usury, deceit, fraud, oppression, and unjust dealings among men;
this makes men envious, that they cannot rejoice in other men's welfare, and
this makes men without compassion in another man's misery, if they themselves
live at ease: this root of bitterness must be rooted out. The second reason
was her want of means, to give them comfort in the world, to provide for them
necessaries, or convenient matches, as her words imply in verses 12, 13: she
knew them to have friends and parents in Moab, but none in Judah, and therefore
she was loath to make them worse, and to carry them to an unknown place,
except she could better have provided for them with some certainty. True love
will not make worse, where it cannot make better. But here it may be demanded,
Whether Naomi did well, to persuade them to return? I answer, If she had done
it in carelessness of their souls, or in a coldness of religion, she had
offended: but it was partly in her love to the^ for their outward estate, not
knowing how to pleasure them, if they should take such pains to go with her,
and leave their own country, and partly out of her wisdom to try them,
whether indeed they fully resolved to go with her, let fall out, what might
fall out. And this was praiseworthy in her, thus to try their soundness: for
hereby she found one rotten at the core, and the other most sound. And thus
should we also do in these deceitful days, try before we trust such as
offer themselves to come among the godly, as also did our Savior, Luke 9. 57,
58. lest when they hastily intertaine Religion, they as suddenly fall back
to the reproach of the Gospel, and blemish of such as admitted them without
trial. If any ask why she persuaded them not to stay at home whilst they
were there, but to let them go on the way, and then to will them to return
back? I answer, It may be that she took their coming forth to be of
courtesy to take leave of her, after she had gone somewhat on her journey;
which kindness there was no reason to refuse; but perceiving that they would
go on, she then fell to make trial of them, and to understand what might
lead them thereto. And this was better done in the way, than at home, to
discern more fully of their resolution. In the trial of others it is then
best done, when the same may most appear; this is wisdom.

Each to her mothers house.] Here is an argument to move them to return back,
because they had natural parents alive, and she but a mother in law. She
tries them with this first, to see whether nature wrought more then grace.
This she knew to be a strong pull-backe, and that nature must first be subdued
to follow soundly the course of godliness. We must forsake father and mother
for the Gospel, says Christ, yea and deny our selves. If thus we can do,
then are we to be admitted into the fellowship of the faithful. These words
show, they were not natural sisters, because Naomi wills each of the^ to go
to her mothers house, as having either of them a mother. In that Naomi thus
speaks, we may further note:

I. That of either parent, children are drawn with most affection to their
mothers; because all children have most of their mothers, being conceived in
them, long borne of them, and nursed by them; also, for that mothers are more
tender-harted toward them: and most familiar with them: therefore here is
their mothers house named, though afterward Ruths father, Chap. 2. 11. And yet
some children we see ready enough to despise their mothers, which is contrary
to nature, contrary to the commandment, Exodus 20. Prou. 1. 8. Yea, it is great
ingratitude to requite so the great pains in conception, in bearing, in
nursing, which a child can never recompense: and therefore a curse is
pronounced against such children, Deuteronomy. 27. 16. Pro. 20. 20. and of this the
Prophet Ezekiel complains, Chap. 22. 7.

II. That poor widows are to be maintained of their able parents, when they
be left alone, and cannot maintain themselves, Leuit. 22. 13. 1 Timothy 5. 16.
The law of nature, and we see, the Law of God leads thereto; and Naomi knew
not whither else to send them: And whither should children go, but unto their
parents? If this be so, then let parents see to the well matching of their
children, to prevent their poverty if it may be, and a second charge of them.
Let children be then ruled of their parents in taking marriage upon them,
seeing parents are to be troubled again with them, if need require. Yea and
let husbands have care, when they have received their wives portions, so to
husband the same, that they may leave them to live after them, and not to be
again chargeable to their friends.

The Lord deal kindly with you.] Her prayer for them, which was her best
recompense for their love, being now poor, and not otherwise able to requite
them their kindness. Note hence,

I. That it is a duty to pray for those which do either us, or ours good: So
does Naomi here; so Boaz for Ruth, Chap. 2. 12. David for Abigails good
counsel, 1. Sam. 25. 33. and Saul for David's sparing his life, 1. Sam. 24. 19.
And this duty let us perform, as Christ in the form of Prayer has taught
us, Mat. 6. and not pray only for our selves, as worldlings do, nor to think
a favor done, is requited with I thank you only, and that prayer for a
blessing upon them is not required, especially if they be superiors: and yet
we see here the practice of superiors to inferiors.

II. That at parting, friends are to pray one for another; as we may see the
practice of it in Isaac, Genesis 28. 1, 3. Laban, Genesis 31. 55. Jacob, Genesis 43. 14.
and in Paul, Act. 20. 36. It is very Christian like, an argument of love, and
desire of their own welfare, which cannot be without Gods protection: put this
therefore into practice. True it is, that men now do it, but it is not with
that reverence, nor expressed with that earnest desire, as is meet and
befitting in such a case.

III. That the godly are persuaded, that the Lord is a merciful Rewarder of
the duties of love, which one does toward another. This Naomi her prayer to
God for them here teaches: for the godly know, that the Lord has commanded
such duties; and what he commands to be done, that will he reward in the
doer. And hereof let us be well persuaded, this will make us do our duties
cheerfully, though men requite not our pains, because God will. By this
reason Saint Paul encourages servants to their duties, and to do what they
ought heartily, Col. 3. 24.

IV. That children should so well deserve of parents, yea though but parents in
law, as they may be moved heartily to pray for them: as Naomi does in this
place. A good carriage is a duty toward all, then much more to parents; and
the prayers of parents is a means to put a blessing upon their children. But
some children are so far from doing their duties to their parents to procure
a blessing, as they with Cham deserve a curse; such a one was rebellious
Absalom, bloody Cain: such a one was Ruben Simeon and Leui, whom the Lord
punished.

V. That God will not only barely reward, but so deal with us, as we deal
with others. This Naomi begges for, this the Lord in mercy will do, Mat. 7. 2.
for our encouragement to well doing, he will reward us according to our works.
This should stir us up to do our duties unto our brethren, knowing that as
we do, we shall be done unto.

As ye have dealt with the dead and with me.] Here Naomi acknowledges their
loving obedience and good carriage toward their husbands when they were alive,
and now to her, they being dead: and this makes her to pray thus for them.

Note here, first, that daughters of a bad race, may prove good wives, and
good children in law sometime: as these daughters of Idolaters did; when God
restrains nature, and gives grace withal. For many times there are
tr^ctable and gentle natures, where Religion is not grafted, these by good
instruction, and Gods blessing, may prove excellent wives. Children therefore
are not ever to be censured according to their parents; though it is dangerous
to graft in a bad stock: for an hundred to one, but a Michol will make a David
know that she is a Saul's daughter. But here, women Christians are taught to
show themselves good wives and children, or else these daughters of the Heathen
will condemn them, whom Naomi commends for good wives. Now, to be a good
wife, a woman must know her duty, and be very desirous to do it, which stands
in love unfeigned, in fear to offend, Ephe. 5. 22. Col. 3. 18. 1. Pet. 3.
in cheerful obedience, in meekness of spirit, and in sympathizing with her
husband in prosperity and adversity. But where is the woman? where is this
Sarah, this Rebeccah? She will answer perhaps, Where there is an Abraham, and
an Isaac; for a good husband will make a good wife; a good John, a good Ioane:
the body will obey, where the head knows how to rule well.

II. That good and truly loving wives love their husbands parents for their
husbands sake, as these did Naomi. For the wife and husband are one, and should
be of one heart, and the one love, where the other likes: and a good wife
strives to please and content her husband, in shevving love to his friends.
She will not be like such lewd vviues, women not worthy to be vviues,
which hate their husbands kindred, and brovv-beate them out of their houses.

Verse 9. The Lord grant you, that you may find rest each of you in the house
of her husband. Then she kissed them, and they lift up their voice and wept.
NAomi her continuing in prayer for them, as before in general, now in
particular for a special blessing. This verse contains a petition, an act of
a valediction, and the passion which is wrought.

The Lord grant you, that you may find rest each of you in the house of her
husband. She prays here for their second marriage, and that the same might
be blessed of the Lord, the chief Marriagemaker, so as it might procure them
rest, and be a quiet contented marriage to their comfort. Note hence:

I. That godly and wise friends pray not only in general, but in particular,
as they know them to stand in need, for whom they do pray: as here Naomi for
good husbands for her daughters in law; for we should take notice of our
friends wants, and so pray for them, and not rest in generals.

II. Godly mothers in law are hearty well-wishers to their children in law,
whether they be such by a former husband departed, or by another husband
living, or by the marriage of their children, as Naomi is here mother to these:
for the love they bear to their husbands, and because godly women know
themselves to be Stepmothers, stepped in to be in stead of natural mothers, and
therefore do make conscience to supply their want: which if it be so, or ought
to be so, it reproves those Stepdames, which are unkind and cruel to their
children in law, and cannot endure the sight of them.

III. That second Marriages be lawful, 1. Tim. 5. 11, 14. The reason is given
by the Apostle, 1. Cor. 7. 9, 36. Which confuteth such heretics as in former
times have denied this, contrary to the Apostles Doctrine, and the example of
Abraham, in marrying Keturah.

IV. That husbands are to be their wives rest, Chap. 3. 1. and they are so
called, because of the desire of women to marry, and because they seek rest in
their marriage, and for that loving wives take rest and contentment in their
own husbands, who ought therefore to be rest unto them, which shall be if
they do love them, as they ought, Ephe. 5. 22. if they wisely govern them, 1.
Pet. 3. 7. if they provide and allow them what is meet, according to their
ability, in all decency and honest contentment; if they keep their faith
plight, and rejoice in them, and with them, they cannot but find rest. But
unloving and fierce natures, Lamech-like husbands, a word and a blow, or
terrible threats: miserable and niggardly Nabals, so prodigal and unthrifty,
drunken or adulterous husbands are so far from being poor women's rest, as
they make them weary of their lives. But now if husbands must be their wives
rest, and that they look for it, then wives must care to make their husbands
so to them, by willing obedience, by meekness of spirit, very acceptable to
God, 1. Pet. 3. 4. by seeking to please them, by speaking to them in a loving
reverence, and to keep silence, when words may offend, or not do good, as
wise Abigail did, by a wise frugall course, and good huswisery, as the woman in
the Proverbs, Chap. 31. Speak not foolishly, as Jobs wife, to thy husband in
his grief, nor mock him not, like a barren Michol, nor abuse him not, as
Potiphars wife would have done her husband, nor be impatient for not having
thine own will, as Rachel was, but rest in his will, and thou shall find him
thy rest. Here is also an use for parents to match so their daughters, as they
may get husbands as rests for them; and this will be, when they marry their
daughters betime, to men of wisdom, fit for years, not unfit for birth and
estate, well agreeing in qualities and good conditions, and in religion.

V. That it is Gods blessing to be peaceably married, Pro. 18. 22. and 19. 14.
He is the Marriage-maker, whosoever are the means; and he is the disposer and
framer of their hearts one to another: therefore let God herein be sought unto,
and let him receive praises and thanks for such a blessing, the greatest
corporal comfort in this world.

Then she kissed them.] This action we may find, fourfold; Carnal, as in
fleshly lust, Hypocritical, as was Ioahs and Judas kiss; Holy, of which the
Apostle speaks, 1. Cor. 16. 20. or Civil, as here. This was used at the
meeting of friends, Genesis 29. 11. and 33. 4. at their departing, Genesis 31. 55. 2.
Sam. 19. 39. Act. 20. 37. This was used between men, and men, Genesis 45. 15.
Exodus 4. 27. 2. Sam. 19. 39. between women and women, as here in this place,
and between some men, and some sort of women, as between husband and wife in
meeting and departing, parents and children, and nigh kinsfolk, Genesis 29. 11.
but not strangers, nor others not of kindred, to avoid the suspicion of
wantonness. It was honestly used, to testify love and unity, as Isaac did to
Jacob, Genesis 27. 26. and therefore in the Primitive Church, before they received
the Sacrament, they thus saluted Just Apol. 2. Bez^ ^^ 2. Cor. 13.
one another.

And they lift up their voice and wept.] Here was an answerable affection to
the kindness of her action; her sign of love, was not without love again to
her: for it was not a few silent tears from the eyes, but a passion of the
heart, breaking forth into wailing and weeping; so as their voice of mourning
was heard. An argument of love and true affection toward her. This is rare
love between mothers in law, and daughters in law, in these days. But
concerning weeping, it is used in Scripture:

I. To express sorrow, as at the parting of friends, Joseph at his fathers
departing, Abraham at Sarahs, Ioash at Elishas, 2. King. 13. 14. and when
friends must leave one another, though death separate them not; as when
Jonathan and David parted, 1. Sam. 20. 41. And who can but weep, if true love
be there, when friends must bid adieu one to another, and especially for ever,
as we may see in Acts 20. 37?

II. For very joy, as Joseph's sight of his brethren, Genesis 45. 14. and so Jacob
at Joseph's coming to him, Genesis 46. 29. so did Jacob in meeting with Rachel,
Genesis 29. 11. Such true loving natures have been in the godly in former times;
but now men are lovers of themselves, without natural affection, 1. Tim. 3.

III. In pity and compassion, from a merciful heart, to behold the miseries
of others, as Job did for the poor, Chap. 30. 25. Esaias for the people, Chap.
22. 4. so Jeremy, Chap. 4. 19. and 9. 1. and 13. 17. Christ Jesus for the
Jews, Luke 19. 41. This is a charitable and a holy weeping, when men can weep
for the miseries of other, corporal, but chiefly spiritual as David did,
because men kept not Gods Law, Psalm. 119.

IV. Sometime some will weep in the apprehension of the kindness showed to
them, where none but utmost extremity is deserved, 1. Sam. 24. 16. Now, if
David's forbearing of Saul, wroght in Saul this passion: how should we be moved
to consider of Christ's love to us, and our cruelty against him?

Verse 10. And they said unto her, Surely we will return with thee unto thy
people.
BEfore was noted their affection; here is set down their resolution, which
was to accompany her, and also how far.

And they said unto her.] All this while they heard her, they accompanied her,
but no mention of any speech hitherto made unto her: but now necessity
compels them to break silence. Which though it be a special jewel in
women, who are too tonugue-ripe, yet sometime necessity enforces them. If this
might be the only key to make them speak, they then speaking, were worthy
attention, if with all they would speak in wisdom, and within compass,
knowing when again to keep silence.

Surely we will return.] That is, dissuade us not thus to leave thee; for we
are resolved to go with thee in this thy return home. Where note, that an
earnest affection suffers not easily a separation from the party affected.
For the truth of this, see it in any sort of love, as in carnal love, between
Samson and Dalilah, Judge. 16. In natural, between David and Absalom. In
friendly love, between Jonathan and David: and Mephibosheth to David also. In
Christian love, as in Paul to the Jews, Romans 9. 13. and in Moses to the
Israelites: and in Divine love, as of Gods to us, and of blessed Martyrs
toward God again. In all these what prouocations were there to break off,
except it be in Gods behalf toward us, who offers no occasion to make us
leave him? yet where affection is settled, there will hardly be a separation:
for true love lives in the party beloved, and can no more forsake him, then
himself. It is also full of patience to put up wrongs, and takes every thing
in the best part, and hops of better in the worst things. Let us hereby try
our love, which is ever with peace and unity; for where discord is, there is no
love. Such then are hollow-hearted friends, which profess love, and yet upon
every trifle break out into manifest signs of hatred.

With thee.] As if they had said, Though thou be our mother in law, and art
but one, and a poor woman, yet thy grace and virtue is such, as we are
content to forsake our country, and carnal kindred for thee; with thee: will
we therefore go. And indeed it is better to have the company of one sound
Christian, than to enjoy the fellowship of a world of worldlings. Good Jonathan
took more delight in one David, than in the society of all his fathers house:
for the fellowship of the godly is comfortable, and very joyous to the soul of
such as be godly; but the company of worldlings vain and unfruitful to
Godward. The godly are worthy to be affected, and loved, they be the children
of the most High, and the world is not worthy of them, no not when they be in
the most basest condition in the judgment of men, Heb. 11. 38. And the godly
are such as with whom God is for ever, who go the way to eternal life, which
whosoever looks for, must keep them company thither. And therefore let us
join our selves to them, sit down with them, delight in them, Psalm. 101. 6.
and 16. 3. and 119. 63, 79. and avoid others, Prou. 23. 1. Psalm. 26. 4, 5. and
101. 3, 4, 7, 8.

Unto thy people.] Thus they call the people of Israel, Gods people, and Gods
Church, to show, that there is a right in every particular member to the
Church, as in the Church to every member, and all to Christ, and Christ to
them, 1. Cor. 12. 12. For the Church is as a body, whereof Christ is the head,
and every one, one another members. We may therefore claim a right in one
another, to care for, and watch over one another; we may claim a right in all
the Churches Rites and divine Ordinances of God belonging thereto, for our
salvation: and therefore should every member care for the preservation of the
whole, and the whole for every member, and take their wrongs to heart. Lastly,
note out of this Verse, that both the women, in their passion, speak the same
thing; but yet, upon more deliberation, one of them calls back her word. By
which we may see, that in passionate affection more will be spoken than acted:
as we may here see in Orpha her promise; in Saul also, 1. Sam. 24. 16, 17. and
26. 21. and in David's heat of spirit, 1. Sam. 25. 32. For passion causes men
to speak unadvisedly, and more than they would, if they did consider thereof;
yea, in passion men are not themselves, neither can the hypocrisy of the heart
be discerned, no, not of the parties themselves at the present instant of time,
which makes such to speak better than they either can or will do afterward;
as appears here in Orpha, and in Saul. We are not to value words uttered in
passion, nor to regard them, either to advantage our selves, or to harm the
speaker, as many do, who catch men in their sudden speeches, sometime to gain
by them, sometime to trouble them. This ought not to be; Charity would teach
better things.

Verse 11. And Naomi said, Turn again, my daughters: Why will you go with
me? Are there yet more sons in my womb, that they may be your husbands?
NAomies reply unto their speech, and second trial of them: wherein is an
Exhortation, and a double Interrogation; the first moving to a more serious
examination of their resolution; and the second, a reason of her continued
Exhortation.

And Naomi said.] She makes a second essay upon them, though she saw their
passion, and heard their resolution; for she knew, that a sound trial is not
made at once. We see Orpha withstood the first, and made as good a show as
Ruth, both in her tears and talk: yet soon after she gave over. With these
fair onsets Satan was well acquainted; and therefore both with Job and Christ,
though he prevailed not at the first, yet hoped to overcome at the last.
Constancy stands not in one act, neither is therein to be discerned: And
therefore let none think they have sufficient trial of any, because they have
made once an essay with them, in any matter; neither let any man think that he
has done valiantly, because he has resisted a temptation once, and could not
be overcome: for thou may be set upon again and again; and if after many,
thou be overcome, thou have lost thy glory in the rest.

Turn again, my daughters.] Of the exhortation before in the 8. verse. Here
Naomi kindly calls them her Daughters, which she might do, both for her
ancientnesse in years, and also for that she was their mother by marriage.
This is a term of love, which here she does express, to show that her
exhortation came not for want of love, but even in love she did it, as before
is noted, and as appears plainly in the last words of the verse 13. And
herein is a point of Godly discretion, which is, that in giving counsel to or
fro, it is good so to speak, as may declare love and respect to the parties,
as she does here: Abigail to David, Iethro to Moses, yea and Lot to the very
abominable Sodomites: because the manifesting of love in aduising, exhorting,
admonishing, or reproving, does make way in the heart of the party advised and
reproved; and the contrary shuts up men's hearts and ears, as experience does
show. And therefore in such cases let us show love, by using good and loving
terms, by protesting our true affection, if so need require, by giving good
reasons thereof, that may fully show it, and by being ready to do them good,
offering them to do it, if there shall be occasion of it. Note more, that it
was a custom among the Jews, for parents and children to speak most commonly
one to another in the nearest and dearest terms of love, by the name of
father, mother, son, daughter, and not by calling them only by their names,
as parents do children now. See this in Genesis 22. 7. and 27. 1. and 48. 19. and
in many other places, which argued meekness of spirit, intyre affection, and
a loving natural kindness, worthy imitation.

Why will you go with me? This question is propounded to draw them to a
consideration of some reasons within themselves, why they should resolve to go
with her; as if she had said, I love you, as a mother her daughters, therefore
I advise you to consider seriously of your resolution aforehand, and weigh with
your selves, what may so lead you; for I can see no reason in wordly respects
(for such only she urged both here and in the verses following) why you
should go with me. And by this, as she taught them, so we may learn, that it
is a point of wisdom to ask our selves, Why we will do this or that thing,
before we undertake it, or resolve upon it? And hereunto our Savior advised,
Luke 14. 28. for that is well begun, which is laid upon good grounds and sound
reasons; it is a wise proceeding, it will prevent the after Had I w^st, and
future repentance. Let us therefore learn this wisdom, and not be foolishly
rash in our attempts.

Are there yet any sons in my womb, that they may be your husbands?] Naomi
now begins to bring in her reasons, why she would have them to return, all
drawn from the world: in which respect, she gives them no comfort to follow
her; and it is, as if she had said, If you will go with me for any vvorldly
respect, alas, I cannot pleasure you, I am old, I have no sons to marry you
again unto; and as for an outward estate, you see me very poor. In thus
speaking plainly, and dissuading only by worldly reasons to try them, we may
learn,

I. That the true honest-hearted, and such as fear God, in the kind offers of
their friends, deal truly with them, and will not lead them into vain hopes.
Thus Naomi deals; thus did our Savior, Mat. 8. 20. for they would not
deceive them. We must labor for this plain dealing; and not only look to
our selves, and what present benefit we may get to our selves, as most do in
these deceitful times, which is contrary to our Christianity, 1. These. 4. 6.
to true love, 1. Cor. 13. and to the comfort of our own consciences. Men now
a days gladly make gain of all proffers of love, without any respect to
their friends; because men are false-hearted, and like such as David was
troubled with, Psalm. 41. 6.

II. That worldly respects are not the motives which should induce any to join
themselves with Gods people; for they want these things often. Of this our
Savior tells the Lawyer, Luke 9. 57. The Godly here have their least share
in the things of this life, because they have a better portion provided for
them in the life to come. We are not then to become professors of Religion
with others for these worldly things. Naomi tells thee, this is not a good
reason. Christ tells thee he is poor, and such as follow him, must take up
their cross; must suffer affliction, says Paul, 2. Tim. 3. 12. for to the
godly it is given to suffer for him, Phil. 2. 29. Beware of a Judas mind, to
come for the bag; or a Demas* like disposition, to come before thou have
shaken off the love of the world: for if thou do not, thou will sell Christ
for the world, and bid the Gospel adieu for goods.

Quest. Why is it said that she had no sons more for them to marry? why
should she thus speak to them? We must know that it was a Law among the
Jews, that a brother should raise up seed to a brother, who left a wife, and
dyed childlesse, Deuteronomy. 25. 5. Genesis 38. 8, 11. To which Law and practice her
speech alludeth. And by this we may think it very likely, that these women
were taught in the Law of God, and made acquainted with the practice of Gods
people. This is very probable, because Naomi was so godly a Matrone; and it
appears by Ruths virtues: which being so, it commends the care of Naomi and
her sons, for the souls of these young women, borne of Idolaters out of the
Church, to teach them the Law of the true God. A good example for parents to
follow, and for husbands; for fathers and mothers; See Pro. 4. 3, 4. Deuteronomy. 6.
7. Ephe. 6. 4. Deuteronomy. 11. 19. Pro. 31. 1. 2. Tim. 1. 5. and 3. 15. and for
husbands read 1. Cor. 14. 35. But alas, many are so ignorant, as they cannot
teach them, and many so careless, as they neglect them, many so wretched, as
they will not, and some so profane, as they mock at it, and hold it no duty
for them, but for the Priest (as in scorn they call the Minister of Christ) to
perform.

Verse 12. Turn again, my daughters, go your way, for I am too old to have
an husband: if I should say, I have hope, if I should have an husband also to
night, and should also bear sons:
NAomies third motion to have them to return, using still the same
exhortation, with the like kind terms of love, and adding another reason to
move them to return.

Turn again, my daughters, go your way.] Naomi cease not to urge them
still, to try them to the utmost, not in want of zeal to gain them to God,
but in a godly jealousy fearing their constancy, if they should go on with
her; of this before at large, and therefore here I omit the instructions.

For I am too old to have an husband.] This reason is a preventing of an
objection to her former reason: for they might say, Though, mother, you be not
with child now, yet you may marry and have children; to this Naomi answers,
that she is too old to have an husband. From this we learn, that there is a
time when women are too old to marry, by the opinion of godly Naomi. Now if any
ask when that is? I answer, as I suppose, when a woman is above sixty years
of age; and therefore Saint Paul allows such a one for a widow, but not
under, giving leave to others to marry: for under sixty women have had
children, but none above, but Sarahs extraordinary blessing. And it is fit for
women after sixty, to follow the praise of blessed Annah, Luke 1. 37. We read
not in the Scripture of the marriage of such: and if they be poor among us,
and do marry, we dislike it, and speak against it: if they allege the ends
of marriage, they are easily answered: For the first is for procreation of
children, which in the^ is past; the other is to avoid fornication, which they
should be far from; seeing the body is dead, the heart should not grow rank
with filthy lust: the lecherous old person is hated of God. If they allege to
marry for mutual comfort: I ask, With whom will she marry for such comfort?
If with a young man, she may perhaps comfort her self in him, but not he
himself with her: for young men marry old women's goods and lands, but not their
persons; there is in nature no accord between them, her wanton heart may seek
her pleasure in matching with him, but he will take no contentment in her, but
for what she has. If with an old man: where is comfort, when two froward old
persons meet together? old age, all know, is hard to please, and therefore old
persons can hardly afford kind comforts one to another. Lastly, marriage
brings cares and troubles, 1. Cor. 7. says Saint Paul. Now it is time for
old women to lay aside the cares of this world, and to give themselves to
fasting and prayer, and to do good works, and so to show their care for the
world to come. And therefore let such widows continue widows, and betake
themselves to God and his divine worship, as best befitteth them.

If I should say, I have hope:] to wit, to have children, and so might take an
husband; implying thus much, that while a woman has hope of children, she may
marry; for the first and chiefest end of marriage such a one is not deprived
of: And therefore let childbearing women use their liberty and marry, if they
cannot abstain, 1. Cor. 7. 1. Tim. 5. 28. yea though they be poor, neither
may any be offended thereat.

If I should have an husband also to night.] This circumstance of time is
noted, that these women had gone nigh one days journey with Naomi at the
least. So they showed herein great kindness to travel so far with her, or
that it was far on the day before they came forth, if this was the first
night: or else she speaks thus, for that marriage was consummated at night.
Here some may ask, why needed Naomi thus to speak of her having an husband
and bearing of children, seeing she knew that the next kinsman was to do the
office for the dead? Chap. 3. 1, 2. She might have said, Your husbands have
kinsmen, which by our Law are to marry you, if you will go with me, though I
have no sons my self. Naomi knew this well enough, as it appears
afterward, but first she will not draw them to the Lords people with such
carnal reasons; again, she knew not, perhaps, now, whether such were dead or
alive; if alive, yet they might be married, and so could not take them for
wives: if unmarried, she yet knew not whether they would submit to the Law in
that case. For we see that what God commanded, was not ever obeyed, and the
Story tells us that one kinsman, Chap. 4. refused her; and why not another?
And therefore, because she could not speak any thing of certainty on which
they might depend, she mentions no such thing: showing this, that the wise
will not make promises rashly for others, nor persuade to more then they well
know, lest they be deceived, and so also deceive others relying upon their
word. This reproves all rash undertakers for others, though reason and
Religion should bind those, for whom they so undertake, to perform the same.

And should also bear sons.] Naomi speaks first of having a husband, and
then of bearing children; for childbirth is to be the fruit of lawful marriage
only. God first joined man and woman, and made them man and wife, and then
said, Increase and multiply. Naomi was not of that mind to make her self a
mother out of marriage, as many wantons and Light-skirts do; making themselves
whores, and their children bastards, and all for satisfying the rage of present
lust, though after they repent with grief and shame.

Verse 13. Would ye tarry for them, till they were grown? would ye stay for
them from having husbands? nay, my daughters: for it grieueth me much for your
sakes, that the hand of the Lord is gone out against me.
NAomi here disswadeth them from staying for husbands by her, if it were
granted that now she had borne sons; and having thus spoken, she breaks
forth into a sorrowful complaint of her inabilitie to do them good, for their
sakes. The disswasion is set out by a double interrogation, for more vehemency
of speech, and by an answer made thereto. In the complaint she shows her
grief, and that for whose sake chiefly, and how it came upon her.

Would ye tarry for them, till they were grown? As if she had said, If I had
now young sons, you could not marry them till they were of sufficient years,
they must be grown up to marriage before they do marry: Marriage is for them
that are grown up for it, and are marriageable. God, when he made our first
parents, made them of years fit for procreation of children before he married
them. And this is to be observed for the due accomplishment of marriage, and
for reverence to Gods ordinance; which checketh those parents, who for other
ends then the ends of marriage, do match their children together before they
be marriageable. Here parents abuse marriage; for this is no conjunction for
procreation of children, nor to avoid fornication: these parents take away
their childrens liberty, which is to marry, or not to marry when they come to
years of discretion: they are cruel and merciless parents, who bind their
children in an inseperable knot and indissoluble bond, before they understand
what they do: such matches are commonly cursed of God, one forsaking another
when they come to years, or hating one another, living in the gall of
bitterness all their days, and so parents expectation is frustrate, and
children undone, with sorrow to friends on all sides. A just punishment of God,
and reward of their sin.

Would ye stay for them from having husbands?] As if she had said, You are
young women, and there are men now fit husbands for you, it is not meet you
should therefore stay so long for little children, and so be unfitly matched
with them so young, and you so old. It is not good for such as intend to marry,
to defer off too long. This is it which Naomi here teaches her daughters,
and this counsel is good, if the parties cannot abstain, and that fit matches
be offered; let them yield to the good hand of Gods providence, and not refuse
an honest offer, either of pride, or of foolish fantasy, or of some nicety, or
other light and idle womanish reason, against good reason and sound persuasion
of godly and wise friends.

Nay, my daughters.] This answer shows Naomi her meaning in the former
interrogations, that she could not approve of their deferring off to marry, but
that being young, they should not refuse to marry again, when God should send
them fit husbands. A godly and wise mother in law; like Naomi, cannot only be
willing, but also will persuade her children in law should marry again. For
they know, this liberty is granted them of God, and in their own conscience
they know it reasonable, and perhaps in others of necessity. She was not like
those mothers in law, which after the death of their own children, cannot
endure to hear of the second marriage of their children in law, whether sons
or daughters.

For it grieueth me much.] Here is the reason given, why she wills them to
return, and to take husbands again, even for the grief of her heart; for
that seeing them as poor widows as her self, and remembering her sons, and
how little she could do for them, she heavily sustained the grief, and
therefore persuaded them to take husbands again, in whom they might have
comfort. Note here, how the most godly sometime do take their afflictions very
heavily: as Naomi here, so Job, Chap. 3. Jeremy, Chap. 20. 9, 12. which comes
through weakness of faith, want of patience, want of humility, through also
the strength of corruption and the aggravating of the affliction, ever looking
upon it, but not weighing the will of God, the necessity of the cross, and the
good which might come thereby. Well, yet if the best may be much cast down,
then let not such as be free, not under the cross, not knowing how they can
bear it, censure others for their weakness under the burden: but rather
take notice thereof, and be a staff of comfort unto them, help to bear the
burden with them, and pray for their patience.

For your sakes.] Afflictions are the more grievous for friends wrapped
therein, so as one cannot well help another. Naomi was greatly afflicted, but
the more (she says) for her daughters misery with her, who losing her
sons, made also them poor widows. Abimelechs destruction increased David's
Psalm 52. 1. King. 17. 20, 21.
sorrows and troubles. Eliah not a little grieved for the widows sorrow with
whom he soiourned: Acts and Mon. page 77 5. a.
and so was Luther for the Duke of Saxony: and the reason hereof is true love,
which takes to heart a friends affliction in their own troubles, as David did
Abiathars, 1. Sam. 22. 22. This grace of true friendship is much to be wished:
for men now a days care not much for their friends misery, if they be in
prosperity, or if in adversity with them, how they themselves may get out,
though they leave their friends, as a pawn for themselves: yea such villainy
is in some men, that they will purposely bring their friends into misery, to
do themselves a pleasure; coozen them, to enrich themselves; overthrow them,
to set up themselves.

That the hand of the Lord.] Thus she calls her affliction, the hand of the
Lord, because all afflictions come by the power and providence of God, as by an
hand upon us, Job, 1. 21. and 16. 12. Lam. 1. 12 17. Amos. 3. 6. and 4. 6, 7,
11. 2. Chro. 15. 6. Esaias 45, 6, 7. For afflictions come not out of the dust,
neither do troubles spring out of the ground, Job 5. 6. Let then all
afflictions be acknowledged to be Gods hand, not as chance with the
Philistims, not of the Devil, witches, and ill instruments. If we acknowledge
them with Job from God, we will go to him, humble our selves before him, pray
for pardon, and deliverance by him, as who only can deliver us: yea, this will
make us patient under the cross, this will work some contentment, and say, It
is the Lord, let him do what seems him good; This will make us quiet toward
the ill instruments, as David was toward Saul and toward Shemei: This will
comfort us under the affliction, when we know it to be Gods hand, and that out
of his fatherly mercy he will lay no more upon us, then we shall be able to
bear.

Is gone out against me. This good woman applies the whole cross to her
self. The godly in common calamities take themselves to be especially
chastised; they put not off the cause to others, but take it to themselves, as
David did, 1. Chr. 21. 17. 2. Sam. 24. 27. They think upon their own sins,
and not on other men's misdeeds. This is that which humbles them, and this is
it which would humble us: which grace we must labor for.

Verse 14. And they lift up their voice and wept again: and Orpha kissed her
mother in law, but Ruth claue unto her.
HEre is the event and effect of Naomies speech again; first, jointly in both,
which was again their passion, and then distinctly, showed in contraries, in
Orphaes valediction, and Ruth remaining still with her mother in law.

And they lift up their voice and wept again.] Again their passion of tears
is recorded; both alike in passion of affection, but far differing in the
truth of the action, the best demonstration of the heart: for in both was a
like show of love in their weeping, yet not the like constant conjunction of
heart toward Naomi; for the one forsook her, and the other abode and went on
with her. Whence we may see, that all outward sorrow gives not certain
witness of the soundness of the heart; this is plain by this example, and by
Saul's weeping to David. As this is true in men, so more in women, who have
tears at command. Do we not read how the Israelites would weep on one day,
and be in rebellion another? Was not Ishmael in his very weeping, a very deep
disembler, the like never heard of? We are not easily therefore to be persuaded
of inward hearty affection, from weeping and sheading of tears. This deceived
the fourscore men which met Ishmael, and were most of them slain by him. Some
can shead tears at will; and all weeping does not come from the like cause,
though many weep together, and in appearance have the same reason: there be
that will weep for company, because they see others to weep, never inwardly
moved from the cause, but most from the outward passion of the parties; yet
though there be a weeping not commendable, as that which is counterfeit, that
which is upon every light occasion, or which is upon just cause, but in
excess: yet it is sometime a matter praiseworthy, when it is from a natural
affection, as in Joseph to his brethren and father; from sound love to a
friend, as Ionathans and David's weeping; and when it is from a gracious heart,
for a man's own sins, as Peter's weeping was; or for the sins of others, as
David's, Psalm. 1 19. Ieremies, Chap. 13. And Jesus Christ his weeping over
Jerusalem, Luke 19. 41. Blessed are these mourners, for they shall be
comforted, these tears are put into the Lords bottle, Psalm. 56. 8. And such as
be so doggedly hard-hearted, and want natural affection, and sound love, so as
neither for friend, nor kinsman, nor the nighest of blood, they can weep for,
are very unnatural, and worse then brute beasts, which bleate and loow for
their own kind: so also they which can perhaps weep for the world, for
departure of friends, for loss of parents, children, husband, or wise, yet not
for sin, not for Gods dishonor, not for the affliction of Joseph, not for want
of the Word, and the taking away of the righteous; are worldlings, are
destitute of divine grace, of the true love of God and goodness; for men can
and will mourn for such things as be ever near and dear unto them, and which
they, indeed, take to heart.

And Orpha kissed her mother in law.] As Naomi did by this act, in verse 9.
take her farewell of Orpha with Ruth, so now, Orpha departing, thus takes
leave of her. She wept in love, and kissed her in token of love, and as loath to
depart, yet voluntarily leaves her, because she perceived by Naomi her words,
that she could not receive worldly contentment, if she should go with her. So
here were signs of love only, but not the truth of it. It is easy to make
signs of love, but not to show the true fruits of love. These be chargeable,
the other cost nothing, therefore they are afforded very cheap: and where
only outward signs of love be, and not a hearty union, there worldly losses,
or the fear of such losses, or not the hope to gain the things of this life,
will soon separate such friends, as we see in this woman. Note further,

I. That worldly respects are great hindrances in the course of Godliness:
the world keeps from the entertaining of the Truth, Mat. 22. 5. It hinders
in the receiving of it, Mat. 13. It pulls men from it, which have somewhat
gone forward in it, as we may see here in Orpha, in Iehu, Judas, Demas, and
Henry the 4. the last King of France: and this comes from the exceeding love
of it, and our chiefest care for the body, and the things of this life. But let
us take heed of this world, for such as love it, the love of God 1. John 2. 15.
the Father is not in them: and many for love of the world, forsaking Religion,
have felt the woe thereof, and have lost that which they loved. Remember Judas,
he had the money, but what was he the better? it did not comfort him, neither
did it continue with him, neither he long in the world. And yet wretched
Caitifes that we be, like Gadarens, we will lose Christ, rather then our
swine; and with Eve, lose Paradise for an Apple.

II. That an unsound heart may for a time make a fair show in the way to
Canaan, but yet turn back at the last, as Orpha does here; and as we may see
in Iehu, Judas, Demas, Hymeneus, Alexander, Philetus, and many other in all
ages, falling back from the Truth, which they indeed did never soundly love,
and yet will such make so fair an entrance. And this is by reason, first, of
certain general motions of Religion, which makes them in general to approve
of the same; again, the general esteem of the very name of Religion? all
holding this, that it is a good thing to be religious, and that none can find
fault with a man for that. Further, the working of the Word, moving the heart
in some sort, to intertaine it: and lastly, the desire of praise and good
esteem with men. These will make hollow hearts to set on a while to
heauenward, but shall not be able to enter. Therefore we are not easily to
entertain men for sincere, because they have made and do make fair shows in
Religion for a time, seeing they may be unsound, and after fall away. And this
should make us to examine our own hearts, lest secret hypocrisy lurk
therein, and it break out at the length to our shame.

III. That such as want soundness toward God for Religion, may yet have
otherwise commendable parts in them. For Orpha is commended for a kind wife, as
well as Ruth by Naomi, and for a kind daughter in law, verse 8. and she showed
good humanity ^^ going on the way with her mother in law, ye^^ good natural
affection in weeping, so at parting. What shall I speak of Ioahs valiant and
hardy spirit, of the great wisdom of Achitophel in all worldly affairs, and
of moral men among the Heathen? Many, which had no part nor portion in Christ,
have done vvorthily in the things praise-vvorthy among men, by a restrained
nature by the power of conscience, from the law of nature, written in their
hearts, and by the common gifts of the Spirit: And therefore not to judge our
selves or others soundly religious, and regenerate by Gods Spirit, for our
co^mendations in mere moral virtues, or common gifts of the Spirit; for the
Heathen have surpassed many true Christian hearts herein; and many by a mere
civil education, and orderly bringing up in the lavvdable fashions of men, and
good carriage of themselves, as men among men, attain to great commendations
in and for their courtesy, affability, discretion, and many qualities, in
learning and Arts, which they affect for praise with men, for their private
profit, for advancement in the world, and not that they do good things for
goodness sake, from the power of grace and godliness in their hearts, which
was as yet never ingrafted in them, as appears by their little knowledge in
the Word of God, by their demeaning of themselves like Statists, indifferently
between two religions, by neglecting the examination of their ways by the
Word, but keeping company with all sorts alike, so far as worldly disgrace
come no^ hereby, by never caring for the growth of Religion in themselves, or
in others, to make the least opposition for it against the common stream. By
all which, and by many good things wanting in them, as a holy zeal, feruency
in prayer, the love of the truth for the truths sake, and such as love it,
delight in meditating of Gods Word, and conferring thereof, sorrow for the
afflictions of Gods people, and joy in the overthrow of the enemies thereof,
(which graces mere moralists are quite destitute of) we may see that the life
of Religion, and that heavenly light of true grace is not ingrafted in them;
which is more worth than all the rest, which yet are commendable: but these
ought chiefly to be our praises, and yet not leave the other undone: for the
one makes a man, but the other a Christian: and these together, I mean, good
carriage, and civil behavior, Learning, Arts and other good qualities, make
an excellent Christian man.

But Ruth claue unto her.] Though Orpha gave occasion for Ruth to fall off from
Naomi, yet her example moved not. A well-grounded affection is not removed by
the inconstancy of others, Ioh. 6. 68. for true love is fixed upon the thing
beloved, and is not tied to any by-respects. Their love then is to be reproved,
who fall off for company; their affections were never well settled: but Ruths
love was most firm, her person was as it were glewed unto Naomi, as the force
of the Hebrew word is, to be knit as man and wife inseparably. So the word is
used, Genesis 2. 24. Mat. 19. 5. Thus should the love of Gods people be one to
another, hearty and constant.

Verse 15. And she said, Behold, thy sister in law is gone back unto her
people, and unto her gods: return thou after thy sister in law.
THis is Naomi her last trial of Ruth; and these words show plainly, all was
to try her, because she tells Ruth of Orphaes going back, not only to her
people, but also to her gods, which Naomi a good woman could not but hate, and
could not so ill respect Ruth, and show so great coldness in Religion, and
honor of the true God, as to dissuade Ruth from the same God of truth, to
return unto Idols.

This verse is an exhortation pretended then, but not intended, with the motive
thereto propounded, which was the Apostasy of Orpha, showing what she was to
Ruth, and whither she returned back.

And she said.] Naomi upon Orphaes departure, for further trial of Ruth,
takes her example, and propounds the same to her: for as she now saw Orphaes
inconstancy for all her former resolution and tears, so she had hereby some
cause to make further trial of Ruth, this one time. The falls of some may
justly bring others into the trial, though not wholly to doubt of their
constancy; as if none could be good, because some are bad: for some may fall
from grace, when other may, through Gods mercy, continue to the end.

Behold, thy sister in law is gone back.] These words show, as soon as Orpha
had kissed her mother-in law, she went back, with whom, or with what company
is not mentioned; of her sister in law Ruth, she takes no leave, as
supposing she would come after; for we commonly judge others by our selves,
though we be deceived, as Orpha was of Ruth. In Orphaees leaving Naomi upon
such light reasons, we see, that a feeble heart, not truly settled, with weak
reasons of worldly wants, is soon drawn from a right way of well-doing. Silly
were the reasons which Naomi used to put her to the proof: which shows that
all her former words in verse 10. were but a floorish, and were uttered more of
a sudden passion, than out of any settled resolution: yet this was not her
only weakness, but she left it to posterity. For we may find her
followers, such as upon light motions will soon turn from goodness, which
show that they are not settled truly in their affections before they begin, but
lightly undertake the way toward heaven, as did Orpha to Canaan, and as easily
give it over. A misery to be bewailed; and by a well-grounded resolution
aforehand to be prevented. Again, in this, that Naomi tries Ruth with this
her sisters example, saying, Behold, she is gone back; it teaches, that
Examples of kindred, friends and old acquaintance declining from goodness, are
trials of others, to see whether they will abide; and indeed no small
inducements to pull others after them. Adam was soon drawn by Eve; Rehoboams
heart was easily led after the advice of his familiars; the women of Judah by
their husbands easily fell to Idolatry; which often is done upon Ier. 44. 19.
foolish affection to those whom they follow, and not of judgment; sometime of
fear to offend, sometime in flattery, sometime through an ignorant persuasion
that others do well, in that they do; especially if the example before them,
be of persons of place, learning, honor, and great for outward estate: for
they fondly think, that such cannot do amiss. Well, seeing Examples are so
forcible, let them be well examined before they be imitated, be the persons
whatsoever; for precepts and not examples are rules to live by; very excellent
persons have often done amiss, and gone out of the way; and as for kindred and
Luke 10. 52, 53. and 14. 26.
acquaintance, we are not to love them before Religion, which should make a
division between them, and us, if they take not the right way, and make us
forsake them; remembering that one day God will divide acquaintances, Math. 24.
40, 41. Luke 17. 34. And if yet men will here stick to them in evil, and not
willingly separate themselves, they shall then perish all together, and too
late vvilt thou then repent, which vvast led away with their company,
complaining of thy folly, and curse the time that ever thou did know them.

Unto her people.] That is, to the Moabites, of whom she was, and among whom
she was borne. She was going to Gods people, but she runeth back to
Idolaters, because she was of them, there borne, as I say, and acquainted with
them. It is hard to forsake our native Country, where we are borne and brought
up. This may we see in Orpha, and in the mixed company which came out of Egypt;
thither would they have returned again, though there they had lived in
bondage; and this is first from a natural instinct in every one, even as the
Heathen man witnesses. Again, there is Ovid. lib. 1. de Ponto: Nescio qua
natale solum dulcedine cunctos Ducit, and immemores non sinit esse sui.
better hope, as is supposed, in wants to be relieved among friends, kindred,
and acquaintance in their own country, then elsewhere in a strange place. And
lastly, the very thorow-acquaintance and knowledge of the country, the people,
their nature and conditions, and their own bringing up there like unto them,
is a great means to keep the affection and heart toward the same. But from
this in case of Religion we must labor to weane our selves, and follow
Abraham, Heb. 11. 8. and religious Proselytes, Ittai, and Vriah, with many
others, yea and of later times blessed Exiles from their Native countries for
the Gospels sake, considering that one day we must bid farewell to all the
World.

And to her gods.] This is a check unto Orpha: in which Naomi does closely show
unto Ruth, her sisters misery in going back, which was, to worship Idols, and
Devils, with the people of her country, seeing she now had none to keep her
back from the same. Hence note briefly,

I. That to leave Gods people, to go to dwell among Idolaters, is even to
become an Idolater; For the love of Idolaters will bring to the love of their
Idols: see it in Solomon, and in Iehoram Iehosaphats son: for such have daily
prouocations to that, which indeed they be of their own natures prone unto:
and therefore the Lord did forbid his people to have any fellowship with the
Nations, lest they should become Idolaters. Therefore let us not come among
Idolaters, if we would not be like them: we may not presume of our own
strength, nor think by our grou^dednes in Religion, to take our liberty to
marry with them, to dwell with them, or long to travel among them; for we see
daily by experience, the vanity of this confidence.

II. That what the Idolaters worship, that they take to be God, and so offer
divine worship to it. This is plain by Naomi her speech, calling the Idols of
the Moabites, Gods; and we find that all Idolaters gave to their Idols the name
of God. See this in wicked Jeroboam, 1. King. 12. 28. and in the Israelites,
Exodus 32. 8. And therefore we may here see the palpable blindness with which
God strikes such, to make us avoid them, and yet bemoane them, as also to
fear where such be, lest Gods wrath seize upon us, for their so robbing the
true God of his honor.

III. That Idolaters have more gods than one, as these Moabites had, Baal Peor,
Number. 25. and Chemosh, 1 Kin. 11. The Grecians had thousands of gods; and the
Heathen Romans not a few: for leaving or not knowing the true God, they wander
they know not whither, they have no certainty whereon to rest, they follow what
they either imagine, or other do devise, or what by others examples are
practiced before them; see it in the Israelites forsaking the Lord, and in the
idolatrous Papists at this day. For idolatry is as whoredom, which makes the
Adulterer to range abroad in insatiable lust, not content with one, no nor with
many: no more do the spiritual Adulterers rest with one false god, but are
mad upon all they see, Ezech. 16. 24, 25, 28. O therefore let us praise our
God, who has opened our eyes to see and know him, and has delivered us from
this miserable slavery of Idolaters, who serve so many! they must needs be in
great fear: for they be as servants serving many masters, all tyrants and all
of several qualities; how should they then ever rest in peace? Note before I
conclude, how these Moabites, filthy Idolaters, were the children of Lot,
begotten in incest upon one of his own daughters in his drunkenness. Whence
we may see, that the ill begotten children of the godly are rather left under
the curse of their fathers sin, then made partakers of any of their virtues,
as appears both in Moabites and Ammonites, and in Abimelech the bastard son
of Gideon; to show the Lords hatred of all filthiness in his people, and to
strike fear into their hearts for offending this way. Let Parents note this,
to take heed they be not fathers of an unlawful issue, if it be not for their
own sakes, yet for those they shall beget, whom they bring under a curse, for
their sin. Let bastards here learn to bewail their birth, and labor by a
new birth according to the Spirit, to wipe out the stain of their parentage
according to the flesh.

Turn thee after thy sister in law.] This exhortation cannot be taken as
seriously meant: for would Naomi persuade Ruth to idolatry, and turn her from
going to Gods people and the true God, to go to the society of Idolaters and
to devils? We may not possibly think so uncharitably of her, and the 18. verse
puts it out of controversy, where it is said, When she saw Ruth steadfastly
minded, she left off to speak, as having found out what she sought for, and
till then she ceased not to make trial. For where just suspicion of
unsoundness is, there trial may be made to the utmost, till the doubt be
removed: For this is not to beat the parties from goodness, but to see their
unfeigned love of goodness, that they being tried, may be well approved of.
Let not any be offended then at such trials; for if thou be sound, the
oftener thou art brought to the touchstone, the more purer gold thou will
appear to be.

Verse 16. And Ruth said, Entreat me not to leave thee, or to return from
following after thee: for whither thou go, I will go, and where thou
lodgest, I will lodge: thy people shall be my people, and thy God, my God.
RVths answer unto Naomi: wherein is her request unto her, and a reason
expressing her full resolution, partly in this verse, and partly in the next
verse following.

And Ruth said.] In this answer following, Ruth shows most plainly that she
was of a very constant resolution, and not a whit moved with the scandal of
her sister in laws departure, and leaving of her alone. For the well settled
souls are not to be removed from their resolution to good, for any lets, which
Satan and his instruments may cast before them, and in their way. The wrath of
Nebuchadnezzar cannot make the three Children start back; the Plots of Princes
against Daniel cannot make his heart to faint, neither to neglect to pray unto
his God three times a day. Neither four hundred flatterers, nor fear of
Achabs wrath can make Michaiah dissemble, nor hault in the message of the Lord.
A world of wicked ones cannot make a righteous Noah the worse, nor corrupt
righteous Lot in the midst of Sodom: They may vex him, but never gain him to
their wickedness. What can afflictions work upon Saint Paul? Surely nothing:
they may draw him nearer to God, but never pull such a one from God. Lastly,
let back-slyders revolt; will Orphaes example move Ruth? will the falling away
of some from Christ, make the Disciples to leave him? No, no; they are built on
the Rock, and not on the sand. Therefore we are not to fear their fall; they
make God their strength, and he vpholdeth them, so as none can pluck them out
of Ioh. 10. 27, 28.
his hands.

Entreat me not to leave thee.] These words may Trem. Iunius, Montan. So in the
margent of the new Translation.
be read two ways: first thus, Be not against me: and so reading, we learn,
that they are against us, who use reasons, or do exhort us to turn back from
well-doing; therefore Christ called Peter, Satan, that is, Adversary, one that
was against him, when he gave him counsel to do otherwise then his Father had
appointed, and otherwise then according to the end he came for: and so should
Eve have thought of the Serpents counsel; and Israel of Ieroboams: for such
withold men from pleasing God, from the comfort of conscience, which is only
gotten by well-doing, and from the hope of the blessed reward which is promised
to well-doing. Let us then hold such for our Adversaries; and not think as the
men of the world do, who hold all their kind friends which any way pleasure the
body, though they be Adversaries to their souls, in hindering them in the way
to life and salvation, by persuading them to pleasures unlawful, to unjust
gain, to a false religion and idolatrous worship, as Popery is: But in these
harm, things, because they be blind and see not their harm, they therefore
think not that such be against the^, when yet there be no greater Adversaries
then these. The second reading is as it is translated, Entreat me not to leave
thee. And thus taking the words, we learn from this godly young woman, that the
godly have a desire not to be hindered in a good course. Ruth was going from
Idolaters to the Church of God, and was in love with Naomi, whom she would
accompany thither, and would not be entreated to forsake her; no more would
Elisha leave Eliah. The godly are like to Ahimaaz, who would not be let for
running to David: for, indeed, they set their hearts on the Lords ways, and
have a full resolution to do well, by Gods help, and do rejoice in the way
of well-doing; and finding therein comfort, like Abraham's servant, will not be
stayed, but do hasten home to their Heavenly Country. This grace let us labor
for, to have a desire not to be hindered in a good course, nor to be withdrawn
from good purposes, but stand fast in our honest resolutions; which if indeed
we do, then will we show it: will pray to God to further us, and to remove all
lets that may hinder; we will check such as are against Mat. 16. 23.
us; we will prevent all hindrances, and betimes avoid the occasions which
might draw us back, as did Saint Paul; we will withstand the Gal. 1. 15.
letts, as Paul also did: and as David did when he Act. 21. 13.
had a mind to encounter Goliath, his brethrens contempt of himself, the
Israelites fear of Goliath, the words of Saul, nor the Philistims greatness
nor brags, could hinder him, he would follow his resolution: so should we in
all good things.

Or to turn from following after thee.] As if she had said, Use no more words
to hinder my honest intendement, but go on that I may follow thee: let my
sister in law go to her people and gods too; her example moves me not one
whit, I will go with thee to thy people and to thy God: I have tasted by thee
of true Religion, the power whereof and thy virtues so bind me, as I can leave
all, country, kindred, and friends, and old acquaintance, to follow thee, my
mother. See here,

I. How Religion and grace makes such as be of several nations, to love one
another; to love forrainers being religious, better then friends, kindred and
old acquaintance not religious. Ruth is in love with Naomi a Jew, and esteems
not of Orpha her country woman; for, indeed, Religion makes a more sure
conjunction, in a more blessed kindred then nature, having God for our Father,
the Church for our Mother, the Saints for our Brethren, the Spirit of God for
the bond of our union, which makes us to desire to live and die together.
Labor for this love, the love of the brethren, before natural love of friends
not religious; for this is a true sign of our eternal salvation, and that we
1. John 3.
be translated from death to life.

II. A heart truly in love with the godly, will not easily be removed to
forsake them, by the falling away of others; as we may see by this example: By
Ionathans cleaving to David, and the Disciples continuing John 6.
with Christ, though others forsook him. And this is, because their love is
well grounded: for they know the godly to be in their persons honorable; how
basely soever the slaves of Satan esteem of them, they know them to be Kings,
and Priests unto God. They discern of their graces, and are in love with them
for the same, yea, they having the same Spirit, do by the force thereof knit
themselves to them: and do know Psalm. 37. 37.
that their end is happiness, whatsoever their present estate be in this vale
of misery. Let us cleave then to these, though others do fall away; and that
we may so do, let us not take offense at their weaknesses and frailties, but
consider of their love with God, of their excellent graces, and how that holy
Spirit of God dwells in them, that they be such as be Coheires with Christ,
and shall reign with him in glory.

For whither thou go, I will go, and where thou lodgest, I will lodge.]
This is the reason of Ruths request to Naomi from her resolution, which is, not
to forsake her company, but to go with her, and to lodge with her, wheresoever
she shall lodge; this is her resolution, which made her continue with Ruth,
and not start back. Whence note, That the putting on of a strong resolution,
will make one withstand all oppositions and hindrances, which may lie in the
way, to be lets from well-doing. This made Michaiah to do faithfully the Lords
message, 2. Kin. 22. This made S. Paul to go on to Jerusalem without daunt of
Spirit, Acts 20. 24. with 21. 31. for a grounded resolution is such a settling
of thy heart, as it cannot easily be removed. Let us therefore put on this
resolution, in making an onset to goodness, and in every good action, seeing
there may be many hindrances in the way: and to do this, that our hearts
start not back, we must make our resolution strong by these things; we must
see that the thing we take in hand, be good and lawful; then, whether lawful
to us, and what calling we have thereto: thirdly, to weigh the circumstances of
time and place, so that it may be done seasonably and fitly. This is prudence,
which will much commend the deed. Fourthly, note with our selves the end, Gods
glory, public good, discharge of our duty, and beware of sinister respects.
Lastly, forecast all rubbes which may happen in the way; for such foresight
fore-warneth, and he which is forewarned, is half armed, and will not repent
with an Had I wist; neither will be moved with such lets, Acts 20. 24. Note
again from hence, that Ruth excepteth not against any condition which may
befall Naomi; but will go with her, and take such part as she takes, whether
the lodging be good or bad; whether the place be comfortable, or otherwise,
whither Naomi shall go. Which example tells us, that such as truly love the
godly, both can and will give themselves to them, to accompany them in every
estate, not only in prosperity, but in adversity, as did Moses, because they
know that God is with them, Zach. 8. 23. they account themselves one, and are
of one heart, and having given themselves to the Lord, they cannot but give
themselves to his people, 2. Cor. 8. 5. And therefore if we do love the
godly, keep them company, and forsake them not in their adversity.

Thy people shall be my people.] She loves a good woman, her mother in law
Naomi; and thereby gives her self to the love of all Gods people: for they
that love one godly person for godliness sake, cannot but affect all the Lords
flock: for there is the like reason to all, as to one in that respect: and the
same Spirit that unites the heart of one godly person to another, unites the
same to all the rest, as being together members of Christ's mystical body. This
may try our true love to every godly person, by our true love upon the some
ground to all the rest: for else that particular love will not be found to be
other then sinister. David's delight was not in one Saint, but in the Saints,
that dwell upon the earth. True it is, that by a private familiarity, and
particular acquaintance with one more than another, the love may more show it
self, as in reason it must and will: yet such a love upon occasion will truly
show it self to all others, which are united in the profession of the same
truth, and will be ready to do them good when such are known, as it ever does
wish you well, before there be any acquaintance at all. And if one godly person
by a virtuous life may not only procure love to him or her self, but also to
all other of Gods people, this should make us so to demean our selves every
one of us, as we may so win others to us, as also the same persons unto the
rest which fear God, for the increase of Gods Kingdom, and so the hastening
of Christ's appearing.

And thy God, my God.] As she leaves her own people being Idolaters, for
Gods people, so she renounceth her Idols for the true God: for they which
truly for godliness sake embrace Gods people, cannot but then intertaine the
true God, and leave their Idols, 1. These. 1. 6, 9. As Ruth did here, and Rahab
also: because the love of godliness in men, arises from the love of God
himself, the Author of that goodness in his people. The Corinthians gave
first themselves to the Lord, 2. Cor. 8. 5. Zach. 8. 23.
then to his Servants: and Zachary foretells that the Heathen having heard
of the Lord to be among the Jews, they will then come and desire to be with
them. Try our love to the godly by a sound intertainement of their Religion,
else the love is but carnal, worldly, or counterfeit; for in 2. Cor. 6. 14.
differing religions, there neither is nor can be any true concord: and
therefore let us not think that either Idolaters, Atheists, or irreligious
persons can be any faithful lovers of the truth. Note again, that godly
persons may by their godliness draw Mat. 5. 16. 1. Pet. 3. 1. and 2. 11.
others unto the embracing of the true God; either by instruction, or by a holy
conversation, or rather both together; And therefore let us labor by our
godliness in doctrine and life, so to set forth the Lords praises, as we may
gain others unto him. This is our duty, Mat. 5. 16. this is Christian-like
carriage, which becomes well the Saints; this will win souls to God, and
so cover the multitude of sins, be an advancement to the Lords name, and
bring comfort to our own souls in the Day of Jesus Christ. It may be, some
will ask, Whether for mere love to the person of any, if one intertaine
Religion, he may be justified in so doing? Surely no: One may occasion another,
or be a motive thereto, and so perform a good office on his part; but Religion
is to be beloved and embraced for it self, and not for man's sake; the person
on whom a man relieth, may die, or turn back from the truth, and become such
a ground as the sand, on which an house being built, soon decays, and the
fall thereof is great.

Verse 17. Where thou die, will I die, and there will I be buried; the Lord
do so to me and more also, if ought but death part thee and me.
RVTH continues her speech to Naomi, touching her resolution, which she had
begun to show in the former verse; and in this confirms it with an oath, so
that Naomi need not to doubt of her constancy.

Where thou die.] Ruth speaks of her mothers death, and also of her own.
It is a principle in nature, to know and to be persuaded that all shall die,
Job 21. 33. Heb. 9. 27. 1. King. 2. 1. Josh. 23. 14. 1. Cor. 15. 51. Eccles. 7.
2. and 6. 6. for death goes over all, in as much as all have sinned, Romans 5.
Then let all prepare to die, at one time, or at another: which stands in
seeking reconciliation with God in Christ, and in endeavoring to keep a good
conscience before God and man, Act. 24. 16. waiting the time of dissolution,
which the men of pleasures, as Dives; the vvorldly-minded, as the rich man; the
drowsy protestant* like the five foolish Virgins, and such as go on securely,
as those in the old world, and in Sodom, Mat. 24. 37, 38, 39. do not. All
know they must die, yet most neglect to prepare to die, and to provide for
themselves a better habitation: which men on earth will do, when they know
they must out of their dwellings: they will not be to seek to the very day, in
which they know they shall be put out.

I will die.] I mean to end my days with thee, my mother, I will not
return again into my Country, but will make my end, in what place soever
thou shall die. The true love of the godly one toward another, is a continuing
and enduring love to death. So was the love of these two, and the love of
Jonathan and David, because their love is 2. Sam. 1. 26.
not grounded upon temporary and mere vvorldly respects, as the love of
others be; nor upon mere nature, as that of parents and Children; but upon
such reasons, as the alteration of outvvard estate here cannot disanull, or
make void. They love one another for their graces in heavenly respects, and
therefore by a spiritual bond they are united in heart, and made one. Thus
should we love, and thus settle it, that it may abide to death: and that we
may so love, let us remember, that we be Children of one Father, we be
brethren, we be very members of the same body, and Christ Jesus our Head,
we also are here strangers; and if we love not one another, who will love
us? for the world hates us, Ioh. 15. 19.
There be which would be held Christians, and yet cannot love such as be so
indeed. Cain cannot love Abel, though his brother; nor Esau a Jacob. Some
profess to love the godly, but it is sinisterly, not simply for their graces
and virtues, as Ruth here loved Naomi, for no other cause of love could there
be; for Ruth was young, and Naomi old, and very poor. What power in nature,
and worldly reason could then lead Ruth thus to love Naomi? Other some love
them for their virtues, but their virtues must be such, as must make their
persons without exception, every way pleasing to them, else they will fall off
from their love; they cannot, forsooth, bear with infirmities, all must be in
perfection. But such do not look into themselves with a single eye, or else
with too much self-love behold themselves: for otherwise they would love a
godly Christian, as such a one, though accompanied with some infirmities, from
which in this life none can be wholly freed.

And there will I be buried.] Ruth spoken before of their death, and now of
their burial together: so as neither in life nor death, she would be
separated from her mother. By this it appears,

I. That burial was a duty performed to the dead then, as now, and therefore
she speaks of it, as hoping that it would be performed to them, as me^
always have done one for another successively. Abraham for Sarah; Isaac and
Ismael for Abraham their father: so Esau and Jacob for Isaac. Yea we read how
God himself buried Moses: and with what solemnities burials were performed,
we may see by the embalming of Jacob, and his carrying into Canaan with such
troops, and the mourning there made for him diverse days. The godly would not
neglect this to John Baptist beheaded, to Christ crucified, and to Steven
stoned. It is humanity, it is an honest and good respect unto the dead, and
done by believers also in the hope of the resurrection. It was esteemed a mercy
to be buried, and the contrary was threatened as a punishment, as we may see in
1. King. 13. 14. 2. King. 9. 22. and 22. 20. Deuteronomy. 28. 26. Ier. 18. Yet we must
know, that a Dives may be buried with pomp, and yet go to hell; and a poor
Lazarus be exalted to heaven; yea many Saints and Martyrs drowned, torn of
beasts, and burnt to ashes, yet received the crown of glory: which I speak to
show, that although the godly should want burial, yet that hindeteth not their
happiness.

II. We may see hence, that the godly and loving friends have an affection to
be buried together. Jacob would lie where Abraham was buried: and the old 2.
Sam. 19. 37. 1. King. 13. 31.
Prophet would have his bones laid by the other Prophet. And it was in former
times an honor, to be buried in the Sepulcher of their fathers: And therefore
the loving affection of such is not to be blamed as altogether idle and
foolish, which desire to be buried by their beloved friends, especially if they
were godly and virtuous.

The Lord do so to me, and more also.] When Ruth saw Naomi so earnest to have
her to return back, as she thought; for her better satisfaction and
assurance, she thus breaks forth into this speech, ascertaining her, that
her words came from a true affection a and constant resolution of her heart.
This is a form of an oath among the Hebrews: for so it is said, that Solomon
swore, 1. Ki. 2. 23. And thus swore Saul, 1. Sam. 14. 44. Jonathan, 1. Sam. 20.
13. and Abner, 2. Sa^. 3. 9. and David, 2. Sam. 19. 13. but it is not a bare
oath, but an execration withal, 1. Sa^. 3. 17. Yet is not the curse
particularly named, but left unto God. Hence we learn,

I. That it is lawful to take an oath, Heb. 6. 13. Reave. 10. 6. it is
warranted, Deuteronomy. 6. and a part of Gods worship which he will give to none
other: it is necessary sometime to decide a controversy, as Exo. 22. 11. and
to give satisfaction and assurance to the mind of others, in great and
necessary matters which otherwise would not be credited, as here; Therefore
the Anabaptists err, which hold it altogether unlawful: for it is lawful to
swear, being thereto called before a Magistrate; so Abraham made his servant
to swear, Genesis 24. and Asa made his subjects to take an oath, 2. Chro. 15. so
Ezra, Chap. 10. and Nehemiah, Chap. 13. It is lawful to swear for
confirmation of a truth in weighty matters one to another, as the spies swore
to Rahab; David and Jonathan, one to another; David to Bethsheba, Ruth here to
Naomi: and Saint Paul did often call God to witness for the glory of God, and
the furtherance of the Gospel. We may therefore lawfully take an oath, so it
be in truth, not a lie, not with an equivocation, or mental reservation to
deceive; in righteousness, that the matter be just, and in judgment, knowing
well the thing, and upon mature deliberation and settled persuasion of the
truth. Beware of common and usual swearing, the custom thereof makes it
worse, and proclaims the man to be unreformed in his heart, yea though the
thing be true, which he swears. A man should be so honest, and his word in
such esteem, as his oath should not need in ordinary matters; And as we must
take heed of common swearing, so when we are to swear, let it be in truth,
righteousness and judgment: take heed of perjury, which God will revenge,
Ezech. 5. Yea he swears to revenge it, Ezech. 17. 16, 19.

II. That the godly when they swear, they swear by God: if they do
otherwise, it is their fault. When the Angel swear, Reu. 10. 6. it was by God:
so was the oath of David, Jonathan, and others: we are taught by God himself,
to swear by himself, Heb. 6. and this will give satisfaction, for that God
can bear witness, and the calling of him to witness, works a credit in the
party to whom another does swear: such is the reverence of Gods name in men's
hearts. He can revenge perjury, and it is his will that we should swear
only by him, Deuteronomy. 4. and 10. Exo. 23. We are not therefore to swear by false
gods, as did Iezabel by her gods, 1. King 19. Ios. 23. 7. Psalm. 16. 4. Zeph. 1.
5. nor by them that are no Gods, Ier. 5. 7. Amos 8. 14. nor by the creatures,
Mat. 5. 35, 36. for such swearers take Gods honor from him, and make these
things by which they swear, Idols: they break the Lords Commandment, and
provoke Gods wrath against them. Ruth a new Convert, would not swear by the
Idols of her country: for if she had, it would not have satisfied Naomi, and
she had showed, that she had not been converted to the true God; whereas now
she declared, that she worshipped the true God.

III. That every oath is with an execration, either understood, or expressed,
as here in general terms, and else where they are conjoined, Neh. 10. 29.
for an oath is a calling of God to witness in a matter so, as to bless him,
if he speak truth; or to plague him, if he speak the contrary. This should
make men take heed how they do swear, lest they bring a curse upon
themselves, as did Zedekiah; and Vladislaus, King of Hungary, and Rodolphus,
D. of Sueuia, when he rebelled against Henry the Emperor his Lord and master,
by the instigation of Pope Gregory the seventh.

IV. That in imprecations and forms of cursing, it is best to pass over with
silence the special kind of the judgment, and not to name it, but to leave
that to God, as Ruth does here, and Solomon, 1. King. 2. 23. 1. Sam. 14. 44.
and 20. 3. and 3. 17. 2. Sam. 3. 9.
Saul, Jonathan, Abner, Eli, and others; and not to say, as now many will, I
pray God I may never stir; That I may be hanged; That this bread and drink
may never go through me; That I may be damned; That the Devil may fetch me:
and a thousand of such fearful wishes, too boldly uttered, from a
presumptuous spirit, not fearing the terror of God, especially when we do
consider what dreadful examples there have been of this kind, that even as
men have wished, so has the judgment fallen out; and therefore let us not be
See the book called the Theater of Gods judgments.
rash with our mouths herein, lest the Lord make us examples of his justice.

If ought but death part thee and me.] This is that which she seals with an
oath, even to be constant to death; and this is the praise of her action. Many
can begin well; but they hold not on to death, as did this Ruth. Of constant
love I have spoken before. Note further, that though nothing else can, yet
death will divide friends asunder: therefore Ruth does not except against any
thing but death, which cannot be avoided. This will separate Abraham and Sarah,
Jacob and Rachel, Aaron and Moses, Jonathan and David, and this Ruth from
Naomi, but nothing else shall: so firmly are faithful friends united, and
made one. I will not complain here of the leuitie of this age, of the
inconstancy of men's hearts, and how for every trifle, they that seemed to be
one, become two of a sudden, they will prevent death, and sever themselves
before. But so much shall suffice for this verse, and the constant resolution
of Ruth.

Verse. 18. When she saw that she was steadfastly minded to go with her, then
she left off speaking unto her.
HEre is the force and effect of Ruths resolution upon Naomi, and withal the
very drift of Naomi her speeches to Ruth, concerning her going back, only for
trial of her constancy; which when she saw, she ceased to speak thereof
any more unto Ruth. So as here is to be noted: First, the silence of Naomi.
Secondly, the cause thereof. This is in the first place, the other follows in
the last words of the verse.

When she saw.] That is, when she perceived her full resolution, then she
admitted of her fellowship, but not before; whence, and from whose wisdom we
learn, That the godly wise are wary in their admittance of others into their
company, till they well know them. We see the wisdom of Nehemiah, Chap. 6. 2,
11, 12. of Jacob, when Esau offered him kindness, and of David toward Saul;
though he both wept, and spoke him fair, he kept off from him; neither would
our Savior commit himself to all his followers, Ioh. 2. 24. for man's heart is
deceitful, and a show may be made of that, which is not in the heart indeed:
therefore should we learn Christ's counsel, to be as wise as Serpents, with a
Doves innocence, lest like a well-meaning Gedaliah without suspicion of evil
in others, because we intend none evil in our selves, we perish by
hypocritical Ishmaels, Ier. 41. 6. Let us in these fraudulent times, try,
know, and so approve and admit, or dislike and leave men.

That she was steadfastly minded to go with her.] This is it which held Ruths
steadfast spirit; she was not of a light and unstable heart. But how savv Naomi
this in her? By Ruths constant abiding by her promise expressing her mind, and
by her solemn oath confirming the same promise. So then, words with an oath,
and actions agreeing, sufficiently may persuade us of the steadfastness of the
heart, and the inward disposition of the mind of such as show themseules
virtuous. And with this should we rest satiffied, as Naomi does here, as it
follows in the next words; for charity binds us to think the best of such
testimonies, of promises, oaths and actions concurring. True it is, that all
these may be feigned: for wicked men will promise, swear, and in some sort
do, but yet not so, as they be free from guile therein: they will promise
what they truly intend not; they will swear, to be the better credited, and
less distrusted, even when they mean to deceive, because they fear not God;
and in some things they will be doing, in such things as may rather delude,
than indeed effect what they pretend, but not what they secretly intend. Such
Machiauellians, or rather matchless villains there be in the world. But I
spoke before of such as fear God, who are to be believed, when they take an
oath to show the truth of the heart, in that which they do speak. But that we
may rest satisfied with an oath, we must observe these things in the party:
first, see to his life, whether such a one fear God; then, whether he make
conscience of an oath, or be an ordinary swearer, not regarding an oath: and
thirdly, what does make him to swear, whether it be hope of gain, some
coming toward him, or fear, or some sudden passion, and not a religious
ground: as these concur, so may we believe, or doubt. The words translated (
was steadfastly minded) are in Hebrew, She strengthened her self, to wit, by
her oath. By which we may learn, that an oath is the strengthening of the mind
of him that swears to do that which he has sworn to do; if it be
lawful, and that the oath was not rashly taken. Thus Elisha strengthened
himself not to leave Eliah till he was taken up; and Michaiah to perform
faithfully his ministry, before and unto Ahab, when he came thither, where he
was. And this is lawful sometime in great and weighty affairs. Wherein we
may fear the fainting of our hearts, then with prayer to God to vow our
obedience, and if just cause require, to witness by oath our resolution, as
Ruth does here, and the rest before named. But when we have sworn lawfully,
then let us look to it, that we do not break it, Psalm. 15. Josh. 9. 19. for
God will require it at our hands, except it be like Herod's oath; it is then
better broken, and to be repented of, rather than kept.

Then she left speaking unto her.] To wit, of her returning back again, and
of willing her to go after Orpha unto her own Country and people; and she
left off, because she saw that Ruth was resolved to go with her, without
sinister and by-respects, for that Ruth could not by such reasons as she had
laid before her, be made to depart from her, being an old poor woman and
stranger, albeit Orpha did leave her. So then hence note, that there is no
reason to make further trial, where an honest, resolution is, or may be well
discerned: for this were folly, and also uncharitableness, to call still into
question that which is out of question, and to suspect an honest mind, which
fully shows it self, as far as it can for the present. Let us then learn
this wisdom, so to try before we trust, and then to trust after sound trial;
for this is the end thereof. Again, where we see the mind settled to
well-doing, let us not put it to further trial then need is, lest we do
weaken the parties faith, and bring the mind into wavering, but leave him to
his honest resolution, Act. 21. 14. 1. Cor. 16. 12.

Verse 19. So they two went until they came to Bethlehem: and it came to
pass, when they were come to Bethlehem, that all the City was moved about
them, and they said, Is this Naomi?
IN the sixth verse they took their journey, and after stood parleying by the
way; now they go forward till they came to the end thereof; so as here is
showed how long they did journey, and whither, and then what was the event when
they came there.

So they two went until they came to Bethlehem.] When Naomi had tried her, she
took her to her, and so she poor woman returns into her Country, left of
all except this one; she was forsaken, but not of all; one goes with her, and
they two poor women go together, and left not off, till they did come unto
Bethlehem. Whence observe,

I. That they are to be admitted into our fellowship, whom we find to be
constant in a good course, and true lovers of goodness, whatsoever they were
before. Naomi thus admits of Ruth no doubt, with great comfort. Thus Paul
allows of Mark, 2. Tim. 4. 11. though before he had refused him, Act. 15.
38. and wills others to entertain him, Col. 4. 10, 11. For thus Gods Angels
deal with us; they will account us their fellow-seruants when we turn to God,
though before we were never so lewd, yea they will rejoice over us, and will
lovingly attend us: let us then admit of such, as God also himself does accept
of us.

II. That God leaves not his in distress, or altogether comfortless. Naomi
went out with husband and children, and lost them: she returns not alone,
but God sent her one to accompany her, and to comfort her. And where man's
company to help and comfort fails, there God will send his Angels, as with
Jacob in his travel to Mesopotamia, and with the three children in the
Furnace; Yea God will stand by Paul, when all men forsake him, 2. Tim. 4.
because he knows our frailty and weakness, and therefore will not leave
his altogether comfortless, that their faith should not fail: which to think
upon, is not a small comfort unto Gods people in their affliction and troubles.

III. That a true resolution will show it self in a full execution. She
resolved to go with Naomi, and so she did, till she came to Bethlehem. Jacob
vowed, and so resolved in his return from Mesopotamia, to build an Altar to
God at Bethel, and so he did, Genesis 18, and 35. Yet this is so to be understood,
if forcible impediments hinder not, as we may see in Paul's will to go to the
Thessalonians, which yet he did not then, because Satan hindered him, 1. These.
2. 18. By this may we learn to know the difference between solid resolutions
and sudden flashes, raw and undigested purposes, between true resolutions,
and such as be made in show, but in substance prove nothing so, never seen in
the effects.

IV. In this their travel to Canaan, and therein to Bethlehem, note three
things: their unity, feruencie, and constancy; they went together lovingly,
they ceased not to go on, they did not linger, they took no bypath, neither
forgate they whither they were going, till they came unto Bethlehem in Canaan.
As these thus went to Canaan, so should we unto the spiritual Canaan, and
heavenly Bethlehem: we must go in unity, 1. Cor. 1. 10. and be of one heart,
Act. 1. 14. and 2. 1, 46. and 4. 24. in a godly feruency, Romans 12. 11. Tit. 2.
14. Ezech. 3. 14. as Eliah, Nehemiah, the Angel of Ephesus, Revel. 2. 1, 2. and
as our Savior, whom the zeal of Gods house had eaten up. And we must go in a
constant Spirit, and not be weary of well-doing, Gal. 6. for he that continues
to the end, shall be saved. To conclude the observations from these words, note
how Bethlehem, the house of bread, yea Canaan, a land flowing with milk and
honey, and no lack in it, Deuteronomy. 7. 8, 9. and 11. 9, 11, 12. and 27. 3. was made
so barren, as Naomi was feign to go into Moab for relief, and yet now is made
fruitful again, answerable to the name. Whence see, how the Lord can make a
fruitful land barren, Psalm. 107. 33, 34. for the sins of the people, and
again can turn barrenness into plenty, of his mercy and goodness, Psalm.
107. 35, 36. Therefore to have the continuance of Gods mercies, take heed of
sin: when we enjoy them, praise him for them; and when we be in scarcity,
seek to him, because God can help, Psalm. 65. 10, 11, 12. and he has promised
to give a blessing, Esaias 41. 17, 18. 2. Chron. 7. 14. and beware of murmuring
in want, 1. Cor. 10. remember there the judgment: yet is this a common thing
amongst us now a days, upon any unseasonable weather, or worldly crosses, to
repine, which yet eases us nothing, but does the more provoke God to punish us.

And it came to pass, when they were come to Bethlehem.] These words are a
repetition of the former words immediately before. Thus plainly speaks the
Holy Ghost, declaring the matter not in curiousness of speech, but in evidence
of the truth.

That all the city was moved about them.] That is, All the Inhabitants of the
City. A figurative speech, as in Mat. 2. 3. There was a general coming
together to see them. Such a moving is sometime for fear, Mat. 2. 3. sometime
for joy, 1. King. 1. 45. Mat. 21. 10. and of a wonderment, Act. 2. 6. All this
notes, that Naomi was not an obscure person before, but a woman of fame before
she went; and therefore was this observation of her return, when she now was
come to Bethlehem. By which we may understand, that the more renowned any be in
prosperity, the more remarkable are they in a downfall and in adversity. This
experience shows to be true among our selves, by very late instances; for the
eminency of such in prosperity have the eyes of many upon them, friends,
enemies, equals; one sort looks on with love, another with hatred, the last
with envy and disdain; and as they be affected in a man's days of prosperity,
so will they speak and show fully themselves in adversity. This should make
such as be set out so to the view of men, to behave themselves wisely in every
estate, seeing they be so obseruable.

Is this Naomi?] There be three opinions of this, and it may be, that the
company being mixed and of all sorts, they might speak the same words, but with
differing minds. Some think the words spoken in contempt, Is this Naomi?] She
that was so fair and full, is she now brought down? If this may stand, we
see, that poverty brings contempt even upon the best. So was Job contemned by
base fellows, Chap. 30. 1, 11. So was David of Nabal, of Shemei, yea our
Savior upon the cross. Solomon speaks of the poor as subject to scorn and
contempt, Prou. 17. 5. and 19. 4. which comes through the want of heavenly
wisdom, Prou. 11. 12. the want of Gods fear, Job 6. 14. and because men in
prosperity are proud, and do sinisterly interpret of such as be in adversity.
Does adversity bring contempt? Then let us take heed how by our own
prodigality, folly, and wickedness, we bring evil upon our selves; if it be
the immediate hand of God, and not thy fault, thou shall be censured, as Job
was; how much more, when the cause is apparently from thy self? Again, let
men in adversity prepare to bear contempt; and not be impatient, nor take it
to heart; for Job, David, Christ Jesus suffered it patiently. If men learn not
patience in this, it will make them lay violent hands upon themselves, as Saul,
who could not 1. Sam. 31. 14.
endure contempt, and therefore would prevent it by killing himself: for
impatient proud hearts take contempt in adversity, to be worse to them then
death it self. Indeed to mock or despise the miserable, is an argument of the
want of Gods fear, and that such are uncharitable, cruel, and void of mercy,
for whom there remains judgment merciless; yet howsoever the wickedly proud
behave themselves we must in adversity be content. Some think the words to be
spoken with admiration, Is this Naomi! as if it had been said, Oh what an
alteration is here! And so taking the words, we learn, that strange
alterations in men's estates, make people to wonder whether it be in prosperity
or adversity, for good or evil in any quality. The wise and learned friends of
Job were astonished at the change of his estate. Saul's conversion was wondered
at, 1. Sam. 10. 11. So the gifts of the Apostles and miracles, Act. 2. 7. and
4. 13. and Christ's wisdom and learning being but twelve years old; for men
are more carried away with the consideration of the outward means how things
came to pass, then of the power and pleasure of God to make such an
alteration. Therefore in great alterations look for wonderings, and take no
offense thereat; for it is man's nature so to do at unusual things: yea it is
a certain corruption and folly in the vulgar sort, who consider not the causes
of things. It could not but somewhat move Naomi, to see such a concourse of
people to come to wonder and gaze upon them, as people do at strangers, or at
others in a changeable estate, even among our selves. But these follies of
people we must pass by. Some think the words to be uttered from pity and
commiseration toward her, as if it had been said, Is this Naomi? Alas, what a
change is in her? This is that good woman Naomi, whom we cannot yet forget,
though in her estate she be much altered. And it is most like they spoke in
love and compassion, rather than in contempt, because she was the kinswoman of
the chiefest man among them, who, it seems, esteemed much of her: for he
entertained Ruth kindly for her sake, Chap. 2. 6, 11. and sent her corn, Chap.
3. 17. likewise the women spoke after very comfortably to her, Chap. 4. 14, 16.
neither does Naomi tax them for contemning her, but rather answers to their
esteem of her name from her former estate: and therefore this being uttered
from their love, and pity, and good respect toward her, as being a grace fit
for Gods people to show to them which are in adversity, we learn: That good
and godly people do nothing less esteem of the virtuous, for their outward
low estate and poverty. These call her still Naomi, and so acknowledge her; and
Boaz esteemed-vvell of her, even in this poor estate: Jonathan did nothing
less esteem of David, because he was out of the Kings favor: neither did
Joseph of Arimathea less reverence or honor Jesus Christ, because he was
condemned and executed as a malefactor among thieves: for outward crostes,
afflictions and miseries of this life, are no stain to true piety, when the
crosses fall upon good men for righteousness sake, or for the trial of their
faith and patience. Let us not then, for outward adversity, like the godly
worse, when we have loved them, or made show of love in their prosperity, but
in adversity show greater tokens of love; and do not as Jobs friends, sit
down and censure him; nor as Christ's friends, and Saint Paul's, which forsook
them in their troubles. An healthful member of the body is beloved, but when
it is in distress, then love of all the rest of the members most shows it
self: and should not our love appear to the godly in adversity, which be
members with us of the same body in Christ?

Verse 20. And she said unto them, Call me not Naomi; call me Marah: for the
Almighty has dealt very bitterly with me.
THis is Naomi her answer unto the multitude, flocking about her, calling her
Naomi, continuing a disswasion for so calling her, and showing what name they
should give her, with the reason thereof, drawn from her present poor estate;
which she sets out partly in this verse, and partly in the next.

And she said unto them, Call me not Naomi.] This name signifies pleasant
and merry, which in her adversity she thought did not befit her, and therefore
she did not rejoice in it. Adversity makes the afflicted nothing to regard
worldly names and titles of a better condition and estate; while they be in
misery, and have lost their former outward comforts, if they be wise and
truly humbled; for such as be humbled indeed, are not vainly in love with
goodly names and titles, to which their estate is not answerable. Which
checketh the foolish pride of such, as being in a base beggarly condition,
living almost of alms, hanging upon this and that friend, yet forsooth, will
brag of their name, their house, and Gentility, or rather indeed, to call it,
as they make it, Gentilisme, through their lewd and vain conversation.

Call me Marah.] That is, bitter, one in a heavy and distressed estate. The
truly humbled desire to be accounted as they be, and not as they be not; as
Naomi here is willing to be called Marah, because her estate was answerable.
She was not proud, she submitted her self to Gods hand, and therefore she
refused not a name according to the nature of her present condition. Whose
humility may check the pride of such as would have better names then they
deserve, seeking the name of Goodman, when goodness is far from them; of
Master, when their Gentlemanship did hardly creep out of a dunghill; of
worshipful Esquire, right worshipful, and many such vain titles, which every
Vpstart now in these days do eagerly affect, not for any desert of virtue,
but for that they have gotten some money to put to usury, or procured some
office basely by their money, or a little better outward estate by illiberall
and base scraping, pinching, and niggardly sparing, or by depending upon some
person in authority, by whose countenance they may domineere over their poor
neighbors, or by some such way and means, whereof this now present age
affords instances enough; yet are such far enough off from the true causes of
Gentry, worship, and due honor. This good woman's humility and patience, may
also check the pride and impatiencie of such as cannot endure a name like
their nature; they can be content to be Usurers, but not so to be called; they
can live as Misers, but will not so be accounted; the denomination from their
sinful practices is worse to them, then the sins which they do commit;
for that they more are touched with the shame of the evil before men, then
with the offense thereby committed against God. Here it may be demanded,
Whether any may be called by any other name then formerly they have been
called by? We see here that Naomi would be called Marah; Jacob was after called
Israel; Abram, Abraham; Sarah Sarai; and many such instances in Scripture; as
Saul called after Paul, and Joseph called Barsabas: Act. 1. 23.
which may be to express some grace in them, for which they be praiseworthy;
as Jacob being called Israel, because he wrastled and prevailed with God, so
Ioses called Barnabas, the son of Act. 4. 36.
consolation, for his rare love to the Church, and for giving such an example
thereof to the Apostles: Simon must be called Peter for his constancy. So to
express some notorious evil, on the other Act. 13. 6, 8. Ier. 20. 3.
side Bariesus was called Elymas, and Pashur must be named Magor-Missabib. And
we see by ancient practice, for greater honor men were called As with the
Romans: Cato Censorinus, Scipio africanus, Aenilius Macedonicus, Antoninus
Pius, etc.
by other names, then from their fathers families, which they purchased as a
title of their honor, and for the reward of virtue, to encourage men to noble
atchiuements worthy of honor, being by others put upon them for the praise of
their virtues, without flattery and vaineglory; and some names also were
invented for disgrace of vice, in such as deserved the same, but they also
without scorn, derision, malice, and evil will to the party, otherwise then
to beat him out from his sin, which may not be for such sin as he
commits of infirmity, but for open and notorious enormities, and from which
he will not be hardly reclaymed without some note of infamy.

For the Almighty has dealt very bitterly with me.] The reason why she would
be called Marah, because of her bitter affliction which the Lord Almighty has
laid upon her. Whence we may learn these lessons,

I. That the Lord is Almighty, Genesis 17. 1. for he can do what he will in
heaven and in earth, Psa. 115. 3. This should work confidence in his Word, for
what he says, he will do, he can do, his power can effect it. This must make
us humble our selves under his mighty hand, 1. Pet. 5. 6. he is able to
destroy and cast into Hell, Mat. 10. 28. By this let us be encouraged to do
what he commands: for he can bear us out in it, and can supply our wants, 2.
Cor. 9. 7, 8. Hence may we gather comfort against all that rise up against us
for the Lords cause: for he is greater then all, John 10. 29. And we may, to
conclude, learn to hope well of others, though they have long gone astray: for
God is able to save them, Romans 11. 23.

II. That the Almighty can alter an estate into the clean contrary; as Naomi
into Marah, mirth into mourning, sweet into sour, honor into dishonor; and
contrarily, heaviness into joy, disgrace into high esteem, and so forth; as
we may see in Jobs downfall, and also raising up again; in Hamans honor,
into extreme contempt; in Mordecai^s base estate, into great dignity; so in
Joseph's exaltation likewise and in many others: for every man's estate is in the
Lords hand to alter it at his will, 1. Sa^. 2. 7, 8. Let none be proud in their
prosperity, for God can cast the^ down. See it in Haman, Nebuchadnezer,
Balthazar, and Herod, whom God made spectacles of his displeasure for abusing
their prosperity, as we have examples of late among our selves. And as
prosperity should not make us proud, because God can cast us down: so
adversity should not make us despair, because God can raise us up, as he did
Job, Joseph, and Mordecai.

III. That the godly feel a bitter taste in their afflictions, they are
distasteful unto the^; for no affliction 1. Pet. 1. 7. Heb. 12. 11.
is joyous for the present, which makes infirmities appear in the best in
time of their troubles, as we may see in Job, Jeremy, and Hannah. For none,
Ier. 20. 12, 14, 15. 1. Sam. 1.
even of the Saints of God, are perfect in faith, love, patience, and other
virtues, which might make us endure afflictions quietly: And therefore we are
not to marvel when we hear words of impatiencie come from weak men, nor sit
down and censure them, but to judge charitably, though they cannot bear
afflictions altogether with cheerfulness, quietly and without struggling: For
though the Spirit be willing, yet flesh and blood are weak, and even the best
manifest their weakness, and the bitter taste which they have of affliction.

Verse 21. I went out full, and the Lord has brought me home again empty: Why
then call ye me Naomi, seeing the Lord has testified against me, and the
Almighty has afflicted me?
NAOMI goes on in her speech to the people, so speaking of her, as is before
noted: first showing how the Lord had dealt bitterly with her, and then why
they should not call her Naomi, for that the Lord had testified against her,
and afflicted her: thus she complains and amplifieth the same by contraries.

I went out full.] She here speaks of her former estate, when she went from
among Gods people. The word is taken from a full vessel; and this is to be
understood of her outward estate, in which she felt no want, no more then
there is want in a full vessel; for she had an husband and two sons, and no
doubt other things sufficient: for the words imply she went not for want, but
for fear of want. If the words be understood of her fullness in her husband
and children, it notes, that a good woman feels no want, while she has a
loving husband and obedient children; for she takes such contentment in them,
as she cannot feel want; neither will such an husband and children see her to
want. When women are thus happy, let them bless God for their full estate. If
the words be understood of fullness for outward things withal, and yet could
not abide at home, we may learn, that in present fullness and plenty Eccles.
4. 8.
there may want contentment, either through a greedy desire which never has
enough, or through a distrustful heart fearing to want, with which these were
so troubled, as it made the^ leave Gods people for saving of their goods, and
to go among heathen Idolaters: For whither will not distrust of God, and love
of riches, lead men? They err therefore, which being in a poor estate,
think contentment to be found in riches, and fulness of these earthly
things, when Solomon Eccles. 5. 10.
tells us the contrary, and daily experience from the Rich and wealthy of
the world does apparently show it.

And the Lord has brought me home again empty.] It is not said that the Lord
sent her out full, but she went out of her self, and he brought her home
again, but yet empty, she lost what she hoped to keep. This good woman in
this speech gives us to know, that she took notice of a fault in voluntarily
leaving Gods people, to save her goods, for which the Lord corrected her, yet
in-mercy brought her home again, though with loss. Note hence these things:

I. That it is a fault, voluntarily for safety of goods through distrust, to
leave Gods people, and go to live among Idolaters; for such love their bodies
better then their souls, they expose themselves to great dangers, and deprive
themselves of the public and ordinary means of life and salvation. If such
have warrant, as the woman had by Elisha; they 2. King. 8. 1, 2.
may have hope: but if they, voluntarily distrusting God, take such a course,
they may rather look for a curse, then expect a blessing.

II. That there is no certainty in worldly wealth: For here is mention of
fullness and emptiness in Naomi; and this may we see in the former examples of
Job, of Haman: so in Solomon and his Esaias 23. 9. Ezec. 27. 2, 27.
son Rehoboam, in Babylon and Tire; for the preservation of outward estates,
is not in the hands of the possessours, nor within their power, but in God who
is the Giver: and again, man in his abundance does forget God, and so causes
the Lord to take it from them, as he did the Kingdom from Saul; the ten
Tribes from Salomons house, the government from Jeroboam, and the Empire from
Belshazzar. We are not then to set Ier. 9. 23.
our hearts on our outward prosperity, Psalm. 62. 10. neither to glory in our
riches: for outward glory is but as a fading flower, and as the warm
sunneshine in a cold winter day, soon gone, and all the delight thereof.

III. That oftentimes the way and means which men take to prevent want, by the
same they bring it upon them, as it fell out here with Naomi, whose husband
left Gods people, to go into Moab, to save their estate, and there lost all,
so as Naomi returns home in very great want, who went out full. The like
befell Lot in leaving Abraham for this worldly goods, and going to dwell in
Sodom, where he left and lost all, and was glad to escape with his life: for if
the means we use be not good, it is far from helping or preserving us, as by
Gods cursing thereof, it turns to our ruin; for Jeroboam by his policy lost
his kingdom. Therefore in seeking to uphold, or to get an estate, look to the
means whether good or evil, lest we come short of that we do look for. It
is ill to leave the means of the souls safety, for these worldly commodities;
after which we must Prou. 21. 5. and 28. 22.
not make haste, lest we come to want; neither may we use unlawful courses to
get them: for the treasures of wickedness profit not, but shall Pro. 21. 6, 7.
and 10. 2.
come to an ill end; as they are gotten, so in time commonly are they spent.

IV. That such of Gods children as go astray, he will bring home again, but
yet with correction, as he here does Naomi; and as he did the Prodigal son:
which he does in mercy, to make them to know their error, and to walk
afterward more warily. It is comfort that God will in mercy seek up his
children, and not lose one of them; Luke 15. 4. John 17.
but yet fear to go astray: for surely he will scourge them for their
outroads, when he brings them home, though it be a David, a Iehosaphat, or a
Josias.

Why then call ye me Naomi?] Hence learn, that the humbled and afflicted take
no pleasure to be remembered of their former prosperity by names and titles; for
it but increases sorrow, and affords no comfort. What comfort might it be to
tell Haman of his former honor, when he was going to hanging? What joy to Herod
to hear of his glory and the applauding of him before, when now the judgment
was upon him, and he eaten with worms, for his vain glory and pride? The
afflicted are not hereby comforted, for Naomi takes no pleasure in that name,
whilst she is by her estate Marah. It is in vain to mention to the
heauie-hearted what they have been, except upon certain hope of recovery to
the same again; but their sorrow must be eased by better means of comfort, by
showing them the cause, the end, and benefit of Gods Fatherly chastisements,
and so forth.

Seeing the Lord has testified against me.] Note hence:

I. That man's comfort is nothing able to allay the bitterness of Gods
discomforts upon us. Their calling her Naomi could do her no good, while she
knew her self called by the Lord, Marah, and whilst he did witness against
her. What can it profit a woman of place, whilst she is in the bitterness of
her soul, and afflicted by some grievous cross, to be called Lady, Madame,
and to be spoken unto with terms of honor, whilst under Gods hand? This
should make the greatest therefore take more delight in seeking to please God,
and to enjoy his favor and countenance, than to be dignified with the most
highest titles: for these will afford no comfort, when God will not afford it.

II. That afflictions are commonly the Lords witnesses against us, for some
thing amiss in us: for the first cause of them is sin, and the Lord
threatens them for sin, which the godly in affliction apply unto themselves.
In affliction let us search out our ways and repent of our sins, as did
David, Rehoboam, and as the Parable of the prodigal son teaches, and the
exhortations to repentance upon the Lords afflicting of his people. We may not
be like those in Ezechiels days, who murmured against the Lords hand upon
them, as not being the guilty parties, but that others had sinned, and they
unjustly punished. Ezech. 18. 2.


And the Almighty has afflicted me.] This shows how God did witness against
her, even by afflicting her. He witnesses against us by his Word written, by
his Messengers expounding and applying the Word, by our own consciences
accusing, and by his corrections, and rod punishing. By all which wai^es God
speaks actually unto us, for our amendment; and the godly hear him speak
unto them; they together with the correction, applying the Word unto themselves
for their instruction, do make the affliction profitable unto them. The
conclusion which hence I will note, is this: That the godly do ascribe all
their afflictions to the Lord, as Naomi does here, and as Job did, Chap. 1. and
6. 4. and 30. 11. because they know that nothing is by chance, but by his
providence, Amos 3. 6. 2. Chro. 15. 6. Esaias. 45. 7. Things fall not out by
mere natural causes, Job 5. 6. but as the Lord will. And therefore should we
learn patience, seeing that afflictions come from God. This did work patience
in Joseph, in Genesis 45. 7. Job. 1. 2. Sam. 16. 11.
Job, and in David; and so it will in all such as fear the Lord, and submit
themselves to his good will and pleasure, as our Savior did in the Garden,
saying to his Father; Not as I will, but as thou Mat. 26. 39.
wilt.

Verse 22. So Naomi returned; and Ruth the Moabitesse her daughter in law with
her, which returned out of the Country of Moab: and they came to Bethlehem in
the beginning of Barley harvest.
THe conclusion of this Chapter, and an introduction into that which follows.
This is a brief sum of their journey, showing who, from whence, whither, and
at what time of the year it was.

So Naomi returned, and Ruth the Moabitesse her daughter in law with her, which
returned out of the Country of Moab, and they came to Bethlehem.] Of Naomi and
Ruth, and their loving iourneying together before has been spoken. Yet note
how the holy Ghost, in naming Ruth, omitteth not to show again her Country,
and that she was a Moabitesse, and not an Israelitesse by birth, and but
daughter in law to Naomi, yet she came with her to Bethlehem, and that in
safety. Whence note,

I. That grace can unite, where all outward means are rather hindrances than
furtherances thereto, as country education, and age. Ruth was of Moab, she was
otherwise brought up than Israelites were, as a Moabitesse woman; she was
young, and Naomi old, and but daughter in law to Naomi, yet she held on to
the end. Labor we for grace, which can make us good, and acceptable to God,
what otherwise shall be wanting unto us in worldly respects.

II. That they travel safely, whom God conducteth; for Naomi says before,
that the Lord brought her home; and here is showed their Country. So Jacob
passed well on to Mesopotamia, and returned Genesis 28. 15.
with safety, because God was with him. So did Israel journey to Canaan, in
which they were safely seated, because the Lord was with them. For he
loves those whom he takes care of, he never slumbreth nor sleeps, and he
is almighty, ever present also to help them. Let us then get him for our
Guide. And this we shall do, if we undertake a lawful journey, if we pray
with Moses, that the Lords presence would go with us, and believe, as he has
promised, that he will neither fail us, nor forsake us.

III. That such as be attent to their journey, and desire to come to the end,
make no outroads. These came from Moab to Bethlehem, they had no idle vagaries
that we read of. Old Naomi desired to see her country, and young Ruth was not
wantonly disposed, but constantly kept her company. These two may be types of
the believers, Jew and Gentile traveling to heaven, and may teach us to attend
our journey, and beware of bypath, and idle outgoings, but to keep on
straight, turning neither to the right hand nor to the left, but to remove our
feet from evil.

In the beginning of barley harvest.] This circumstance of the time and season,
does argue the truth of the Story, for showing the certainty of that, which
Naomi had heard before, verse 6. and also to be an introduction to that which
follows in the next chapter. This harvest was in part of March, and part of
April: for so much sooner is harvest there than here. This harvest time is
that, which is the time promised to all the earth, Genesis 8. but yet not at one
time to all. Now note here this with verse. 6. and we may see that harvest is
called Gods visiting his people with bread. Whence we learn, That harvest is
Gods blessing, in his mercy giving bread to sustain man's life. This is his
common blessing, Genesis 8. 22. and promised to the obedient with plenty, Leu. 26.
5, 10. for times and seasons are in the Lords hand; and this time is the
appointed time to reap and gather in the corn for food, by which man lives.
Therefore first, let us acknowledge God, to be the Lord of Mat. 9.
the harvest, as he calls himself, and confess this blessing to be from
him. Secondly, to pray to Psalm. 147. 14. Psalm. 144. 13. Exo. 23. 16. and 34.
22. Deuteronomy. 16. 16, 17. Pro. 10. 5. and 6 8.
him for it, seeing it is from him. Thirdly, to be thankful when we enjoy
this blessing, and to pay the due allotted for the Lords service in testimony
of thanks. In old time none appeared before the Lord empty. Fourthly, to
labor diligently at this time, seeing it is the appointed time to gather in
Gods blessings: and be not slothful, the Ant will teach thee diligence.
Fifthly, to take it as a punishment from God, when this harvest is taken from
us, which is done diverse ways, as by cursing the fruit that it prosper not, or
by Deuteronomy. 28. Joel. 1. 11, 12. 2. Sam. 12. 17. Pro. 26. 1.
sending unseasonable weather to destroy the fruits. Lastly, note hence, that
it was in the very beginning of Barley harvest, which was before their Wheat
harvest, for they had both wheat harvest, as Genesis 30. 14. and 15. 1. and here
Barley harvest, and this also first, as 2. Sam. 21. 9, 10. So that Naomi
neglected no time, but took the very beginnning, as soon as ever she heard
of the Lords gracious visitation and mercy toward her people. Thus can we
provide for the body; let us care also for the soul, that it want not the
food which endures to eternal life. And thus much for this first chapter.

CHAP. II.
THis Chapter sets out how Ruth was entertained after she came among God
people, how she behaved her self, and what favor she found at the hands of
the chiefest man of the place, where she abode with her mother in law.

Verse 1. And Naomi had a kinsman of her husbands, a mighty man of wealth, of
the family of Elimelech, and his name was Boaz.
HEre is the party set out, whom God in his secret counsel had provided for
Ruth, who is described by his affinity with Naomi, and how that was, then by
his wealth, next, by his family, and lastly, by his name; the drift is, to
declare, what moved so great a man to show such kindness to Ruth a stranger,
and a poor woman.

And Naomi had a kinsman of her husbands.] Naomi was not basely married, but to
one of an honorable stock, though now grown poor; yet this her affinity
brought Boaz to have a good respect unto Ruth, even for kindred sake, and
therefore are these words set down, as is before noted. Here observe,

I. That rich and poor may be nigh of kin. Naomi had a great wealthy man to
her kinsman, by her husband, and that very nigh too, Chap. 3. 1. for diversity
of outward estates does not alter blood and kindred, though it make a change in
their persons. Let not therefore the rich disdain their poor kindred: for
poverty is no disgrace where there is not want of honesty: Christ was poor,
and very poor, living of the alms of others. God chooses his people of such,
Iam. 2. None but have poor kindred, and the best have in some of their
forefathers been mean enough.

II. That even kindred either is, or should be of force to move kinsfolk to
respect one another. This is gathered hence, for that the scope of these words
is to show how Boaz came to respect Ruth, which was for Kindred sake, yet
chiefly for her virtues, as after shall be showed; and for love of kindred, see
it in Rahab, Josh. 2. 13. and in the Sichemites, Judge. 9. 3. though in other
respects, in their choosing of Abimelech, they were not to be commended. See
this also in Samsons friends, Judge. 16. in Cornelius to his friends, Act. 10.
24. For kindred are bone of bone, as the Israelites spoke of David, 2. Sam. 5.
1.
and are as the branches from one root, and as members of one body, and
therefore must love one another; which reproves this age, which cares not
for their kindred, except they be rich, which is the sin of unnaturalness,
2. Tim. 3.

A mighty man of wealth.] Yet also a godly man, as appears by his godly
behauior, his speeches, his works of mercy, his praising virtue in others,
and his obedience unto Gods Law, in taking Ruth to wise. We see then, that a
wealthy man may be a godly man sometime. Such a vvealthy man was Abraham: so
Isaac, Jacob, Job, and Joseph of Arimathea: for goods and graces are not in
themselves opposite, being both the gifts of God; the one may help the other,
grace to guide and dispose well of goods, and goods well used, to declare and
set forth the graces of the heart in almesdeeds, in maintenance of Gods Word,
and in doing other Christian duties: grace humbles, where riches would puff
up, yet riches well used bring grace in estimation before men, for they enable
men to show forth godliness, and to pass on Eccles. 5. 20.
their time with the more comfort, and to countenance and defend their poor
Christian brethren in well-doing. Therefore if grace and goods go together,
thou have great cause to bless God: for it is a most happy estate, to be rich
toward the world, and to God too, to be rich body and soul: But although
this is a very rare estate, yet we see that they may meet together; and
therefore we may not think, that he which is rich, cannot be religious. True
it is, that it is hard for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of heaven;
Luke 18, 24. 25.
but it is not impossible. If any ask me why so few are rich which be godly?
I answer, Because the Lord chooses most of such as be poor, for his people;
these make conscience of getting goods, and will not follow the way of evil
men and worldlings, to enrich themselves, neither will the Lord make many of
them rich, lest they should wax in their wealth proud, and forgetful of God,
as men in their abundance do. Why, will some say, are most rich men hardly
religious? Because 1. Cor. 1. 26.
God chooses few of them, they be taken up with the cares of this life, which
choaketh the Mat. 13.
seed of the Word in them; they set their hearts upon their riches, as they
see them increase, and are wholly taken up therewith, so as they cannot set
their minds on better things. Lastly, they Mark. 10. 17.
make riches their God, so as they cannot serve God, because they serve Mammon.

And of the family of Elimelech.] So as Boaz and he were both of one house and
stock, and very nobly borne both of them, Chap. 4. 20, 21. yet Elimelech
poor, and his wife in a very mean estate: so as we hence may see, That
parents may provide for posterity, but which of their children shall be rich,
which poor, is of Gods disposing, and not of man's forecast; as we may see in
these two, whose Ancestor Nahshon was the Prince of Judah, the Number. 1. 7, 16.
and 2. 3, 27. Eccles. 5. 14.
Royal Tribe, and ruled over 74000. men of war, or was fit for it. Thus
parents may have a goodly portion, when some of theirs may have nothing left
them. For riches are Gods gift, he can bestow them, and he can take them away
again, which Job acknowledged. If parents cannot make their children rich,
then let them not with too much care vex themselves for them: let them not
think that by their scraping together, they can make them wealthy after them;
that is Gods blessing; that is his mercy; for if he bless it not, Oh how soon
is that consumed by children, which parents got with great labor and care, and
perhaps with an ill conscience too, which procured the curse, besides much
infamy and hatred of men in their life time! Is it not madness in parents to
damn themselves, in hope to make their children great, seeing they cannot
effect what they strive for, except God be so pleased to have it? And then
here let children look up to God, and learn to fear him, and rest not in
their parents gettings, but rather let them set themselves to honest callings,
and learn how to be able honestly and frugally to manage that which shall be
given to them, that when they shall have such goods and lands in their hands,
which their parents shall leave them, they may the better be able to employ
them, and so preserve vvisely that which is befallen unto them: For let parents
get what they can, if they leave their children without callings, idly
brought up, to go bravely, and to follow the loose ways of most rich men's
children in these days, as not knowing any thing, but how to play the
Gentlemen, as they call it; a consumption will soon sease upon all, and turn
them out of all, and they become beggars, as daily experience shows.

And his name was Boaz.] This is added for more certain knowledge of the party
her kinsman; circumstances make Histories more credible, and therefore are they
expressed. This name signifies [ strength or fortitude] whose son he was,
and of what house he came, is noted afterward in the end of the fourth chapter.

Verse 2. And Ruth the Moabitesse said unto Naomi, Let me now go to the field,
and gleane ears of corn after him, in whose sight I shall find grace. And
she said unto her, Go, my daughter.
THis verse is a request made, and shows, first, of whom it is made: then, to
whom, and for what, with the grant thereunto, as is apparent by the words: The
scope is to show how great things come to pass by poor and unlikely
beginnings; as we may see in this of Ruth, of Joseph coming to be a Prince in
Egypt: the like may be seen in Moses, yea in the glorious advancement of
Christ's Gospel. By all which Gods power and wisdom is showed, man's wisdom
cast down, and our selves encouraged to have faith and confidence in God.

And Ruth the Moabitesse said unto Naomi.] When Ruth was come into Judah, she
and Naomi dwelt together, but yet in poor estate, and now time serving to
help themselves by labor, Ruth bethinketh her self what to do in this case;
she murmureth not against the God of Israel, as his own people the Israelites
did in the wilderness, and were ready to return into Egypt; she minded not
Moab; she was not offended with Naomi her poverty, nor with the rest for not
affording her plenty; but she resolves to use her own labor for her help,
while the time did serve. From which we may learn, That honest hearts truly
intertaining Religion, do not forsake it or the godly for worldly wants. Ruth
could not for these things be made to start back; nor Saint Paul for all his
afflictions; for sincere hearts love Religion for it self, and the godly for
their virtues, not for their outward estate; they also do know a reward of
eternal happiness to be in the life to come, which they set before them, and
therefore do not take offense from the outward things of this life, which they
least esteem of, and look to have the least share in them; which reproves
those that for the wants of the world bid farewell to the Word, like Demasses:
but the Apostles for Christ forsook all; and Moses chose the poor estate of
the godly to live religiously, before the Court of Pharaoh to live viciously.
Let this check also those which upon every want murmur against God, and are
ready with the rebellious company in the Wilderness, to return into Egyptian
bondage of sin and Satan, for to enjoy some outward and worldly contentment.

Let me now go to the field.] Though it was honest, good, and necessary which
Ruth intended, yet would she not go abroad without her mother in laws leave
and good liking: For godly children hold themselves bound to be at the
disposing of their parents, yea in all lawful and necessary things, though
their pareuts also be poor; because such children make conscience of the
Commandment of honoring their parents. Let children follow this example: Ruth
was but a daughter in law, yet see her grace and humility, which the Lord
rewarded unto her. Which justly condemns the sauciness of children in law in
these days, who think no duty to be due to father or mother in law,
especially if they be poor, as was Naomi here. But what speak I of children
in law? I wish that a just complaint might not be taken up against such as by
nature owe themselves unto their parents. Are there not Dinah-like daughters,
which will follow their delights till they return home with shame? Do not
many marry as their lust does lead, without any respect to their parents, like
the wanton sons before the flood? I wish the Genesis 6.
seed of Esaus were not among us, which vex their parents. Children will seek
to be nourished of their parents when they are young, or when they be in need:
But if parents have need of them, Ah how unnatural be they! Will they like a
Ruth willingly labor for them? Or will they not rather despise them, and get
from them, and labor for others? A strange Masters commandment shall be
obeyed, when a word from poor parents will make stubborn children the more
disobedient: But let children know and remember the Law against a stubborn
son, Deuteronomy. 21. 18. and the curse which is threatened against such as despise
Deuteronomy. 27. 16. Pro. 30. 17.
their parents, that they may fear and tremble, and do no more so wickedly.

And gleane ears of corn after him.] Ruth asks not leave to run abroad to
see others, or to be seen, to see the country, to get acquaintance, to go to
Wakes, Revels, May-games, Morrisdauncings, and such heathenish vanities
practiced too commonly here, but not known among the ancient people of God.
No, no, Ruth desires to go to labor for her living, and to help also her
poor old mother in law, yea she was not ashamed to go to gleane; though she
had been the wife of one so well descended, she scorneth not honest labor:
For honest minds will stoop to base means (in proud persons conceits) so they
be honest to relieve their wants in their poor estate. Moses will not stand
upon his education, the gifts of his mind, and singular learning in all the
wisdom of the Egyptians, but will be content to keep Iethroes sheep in his
need; so will Paul work with his hands, and make tents to maintain himself,
though he was brought up as a Scholar under learned Gamaliel. The humility of
these is to be followed, as praiseworthy for their virtue and piety herein.
It is no shame to labor when men are brought low, whatsoever they be by birth,
as they call it, and by their first education: The godly never stood upon these
terms, as many now do, who brag of their Gentry, and yet are not ashamed to
go a begging, or hang upon their richer kindred, till they be weary of them,
or will run into dishonest courses, and all this forsooth because they hold
labor a disgrace; work they cannot, they will not; but it is no shame for
them to live dishonestly, and idly, contrary to nature, contrary to Gods
iniunction, that men should labor, contrary to the practice of all the godly,
and the example of Christ himself, who wrought in a handie-craft, as may be
gathered by the words out of the Evangelist, and in that it Mark. 6.
was said, He went home and was obedient unto his parents. Note further how the
truly-religious will not live idly. This we may see in Ruth here, and in Jacob,
and others; for they make conscience of the loss of time. Let him or they
whosoever, which think themselves religious indeed, make conscience to take
pains in some calling, and beware of living idly. What if they can say, they
have outward means enough for themselves to live upon? Yet they are not to
live idly, because idleness is a great sin, the nurse of all vice, as we
see in those that live idly, they are made the devils instruments to all
villainy; neither is it enough that a man can maintain himself, and be
chargeable to none, but he must live to do good Ephe. 4. 28.
to others, as the Apostle teaches.

Lastly, observe that gleaning, as now, so then, Leuit. 19 9. and 23. 22. Deuteronomy.
24. 19.
was a lawful means for the poor to get corn for food; as we may read in
the Books of Moses. And thus the Lord showed his care for the poor, and also
taught the rich in the midst of Gods mercy, and bounty toward them, to be
mindful of the needy brethren, and not to forget them. The rich therefore
must give the poor leave to gleane; Leuit. 19. 9.
they may not drive them out of the field, neither may they gleane up their
lands themselves, and so rob the poor of their due, which is the scatterings
of Gods mercy toward them. And here let the poor honestly take this liberty
to gleane, but first let them ask leave of the owner, as Ruth did, verse 7.
then also to acknowledge it a favor, as she did. Thirdly, to gather the
scattered ears, and not to cut off the ears of standing corn, nor Deuteronomy. 23.
24, 25.
to steal whole sheaues, or out of shockes, as many theeuish people do, to
the hurt of their own souls, and the hardening of men's hearts against
themselves, and other poor people more honest then they.

In whose sight I shall find favor.] So she went, but as unacquainted: She
had liberty to gleane by Law; yet she speaks as one that would gleane with
leave, and as she that had hope to find favor somewhere, though she knew not
of whom to expect it in particular. Thus she goes, as we say, at random, or
at adventure, but God, as he had decreed, so he directed her by the hand of his
providence, whither she should go.

One thing note here, that the godly, in using lawful means to live, hope to
find favor with one or other for their relief; this Ruths words here do show
as much. For they trust in God, who has the hearts of men in his hand to
incline them, as he pleases, as he did Boaz toward Ruth, and who also has
promised his help to those, which using Psalm. 37. 3.
lawful means, do depend upon him. And therefore in doing our part, and using
the means, let us in our wants hope well: let us not doubt, but that he will
bless our labors.

And she said unto her, Go, my daughter.] See here how meekely and lovingly
this good old Naomi answers: no doubt but it rejoiced her heart, to see her
so willing to take pains, whom she, perhaps, would have been loath to have
pressed to such a mean business. We may note, that requests are to be
granted of parents, unto children, when they be lawful and fit. As Job did to
his children to feast together; David to Amnon his request 2. Sam. 13.
to have Tamar sent to dress meat for him, though yet villainy was in Amnons
heart; but the request was reasonable, and therefore yielded unto of David: so
was Absaloms desiring to go to Hebron (as he pretended) to pay his vow, which
he had made unto God. Caleb also granted his Ios. 15. 19.
daughter her request; and Naomi Ruths here; which is to be followed of loving
parents; but yet withal with deliberate consideration of the reasons, upon
which the request is made; lest a David be deluded, and wickedness be
committed, by an outrageous Amnon. Another thing may be observed, which is
this, that a meek and loving spirit gives a meek and a loving answer. Naomi
says not, Go, as a sturdy speech; but, Go, my Daughter, for she was not of
a sturdy, proud and impatient spirit, of which a rough and churlish speech is a
sign. And therefore let us learn to answer meekely and lovingly, that we may
not be justly censured for churlish natures, proud and impatient: good speech
is very graceful to others, and procures love to our selves, as the contrary
does provoke unto wrath, as we see Nabals answer did unto David.

Verse 3. And she went, and came and gleaned in the field after the Reapers;
and her hap was to light on a part of the field belonging to Boaz, who was of
the kindred of Elimelech.
AS Ruth craved leave and obtained it, so she now goes abroad, and by Gods
good providence lights on the field of Boaz. So as here is showed what she
did abroad; she gleaned: then how; after the Reapers: where it was; in Boaz
field, who is here again said to be Elimelechs kinsman, that so the
providence of God might herein more clearly appear.

And she went, and came and gleaned in the field.] She craved leave to go,
and when it was granted her, she accordingly went. Honest motions and
intendments to well-doing are to be put into practice: else they be nothing
worth. Paul had a Act. 14.
mind to visit the brethren, and so he did; the prodigal son had a purpose
to return home, and he returned; Moses thought of going out Exo. 2.
to visit his brethren, and so he did. If motions be good, it is good to put
them in execution, and that speedily, if cause so require, as Ruth does here;
and not to mind, purpose, and will to do well, and yet never to do as they so
purpose, losing the fruit of good thoughts. Again, note from this, her bold
adventure, and going forth in such perilous times, that whom necessity moves
and confidence in God encourages, they do fear no danger. Ruth went abroad
among strangers, she was a stranger and a young woman, yet trusting in God,
and being urged of necessity to use honest means to live, she feared no
peril, though in those days every one did what they listed, because there was
then no King in Israel. Of such an Judge. 18.
undaunted spirit was Ehud, in setting upon Eglon; Gideon, in destroying Baals
altar; Eliah, in seeing the face of Achab; and Michaiab, in telling the truth
before 2. Kings, contrary to the word of 400. false prophets. For when men have
faith in God, when the duty of their calling warranteth them, they grow
courageous and bold, and do put on a resolution without fear. Therefore in
our affairs to remove fear, let us have an honest calling to that which we
go about, and have confidence in God, who is able and will stand by to help
us.

After the Reapers.] She followed such as cut up the standing corn; she
thrust not her self in before, or among them, as an impudent bold housewife;
but followed after the^, to gather up the scattered ears, which they did
leave, and neither this did she, neither without leave, see verse 7. all
making to the commendation of the honesty, modesty, humility, and good
behavior of this virtuous young woman, that her example might be for others to
imitate.

And her hap was.] That is, though she went at unawares, making choice of no
place, but where she should find favor, yet she light well, by Gods good
providence; which is here to be understood in her good hap: which word is
spoken according to men; when things fall out besides a man's purpose, or
otherwise than was intended, and whereof a man is ignorant, before the thing
come to pass, then it is counted hap, Deuteronomy. 19. 4.
or luck, or as the Heathen used to speak, fortune. It is not unlawful to
speak according to men Luke 10. 31.
thus, It happened, It chanced, It was my luck, so it be we understand thereby,
that which happens beyond our purpose and expectation, but yet guided by Gods
hand and providence, and also that Mat. 10. 29, 30. Act. 27. 34.
we know and hold no mere chance, and fortune, as the Heathen have imagined,
without the hand of God acknowledged therein, as the idolatrous priests, and
diuiners of the Philistims 1. Sam. 6. 9.
once spoke; if we understanding our selves in this wise, there is no scruple
to be made of speaking, as aforesaid; always excepting in clear case, where
the apparent hand of God is seen: for thus offended the Philistines.

To light on a part of the field belonging unto Boaz.] God does so govern men's
actions, as things fall out beyond expectation as they were to be wished. See
it in the success of Abraham's servant, sent to fetch a wife for Genesis 24.
Isaac: in Eliah his coming to the poor widow of Sarepta in a most fit
hour; and in Saul's coming into the Cave where David and his men were; by
which, David took occasion to clear his innocence to Saul, which otherwise
could never have been so well demonstrated. And this God does, as
foreknovving, and determining every thing, and ruling the same by the hand of
his providence, as himself has determined to bring things to pass. This
should make us to rely upon Gods providence, as Abraham did in that Genesis 24. 7.
thing, which was to his servant uncertain, and also to acknovvledge his
providence in every thing, in a work of mercy to be thankful, and in any
other trial to learn patience. Note again hence, that God will prosperously
direct the wellminded, which will use honest means to relieve themselves. So
has he promised, Psalm. 37. 3. for their way is well pleasing to God, in such
a course and case. Let us therefore depend on God, and use honest means to
sustain our wants: so shall we assuredly have experience of Gods goodness
toward us.

Who was of the kindred of Elimelech.] These words are again mentioned, to
show that it was the same Boaz, mentioned before, and also to show why Ruth
had so quickly obtained leave to gleane there, and why Boaz did so much respect
her afterward, and that of a sudden, upon so small acquaintance, and to give
us to know, what a way hereby was made to further the Lords intendment in
matching Boaz with this Ruth, Elimelechs daughter in law, and the wife once of
Mahlon, one of his sons, which being dead, the next kinsman was to raise up
the name of the dead, and to take the widow for his wife, so that Elimelech
might not want one for his inheritance amongst Gods people.

Verse. 4. And behold, Boaz came from Bethlehem, and said unto the Reapers, The
Lord be with you. And they answered him, The Lord bless thee.
GOD brings Ruth by his hand into Boaz field, and then he by the same hand
draws Boaz to come thither while she was there, that so the one might be
known to the other; that by seeing and liking, the match might be made, which
God in his mercy intended for his daughter, this young woman. Here in this
verse is Boaz going into the field to his Reapers; then his saluting of them,
and their re-saluting of him.

And behold.] This is used to set out a remarkable Chap. 4. 1.
thing, and is here, as if it had been said, Take notice of Gods providence
herein, as a thing worthy observation, that Boaz should now come into the
field, at this time, unto his Reapers, and in willing the Reader to behold
this, we may learn, That the provident hand of God is in all things to be
diligently marked and observed. For hereby we shall see God in every thing, and
so acknowledge his ruling hand in and over all; we shall see his favor and
help in delivering his children and servants, as he did David from Saul; in 1.
Sam. 23. 26, 27. Ester. 6.
furthering them to their honor and welfare, as here Ruth; and so Mordecai,
when the King must, in reading, light upon that place in his Chronicles, which
concerned him. We shall then hereby see his wrath against the wicked, in
bringing Iezabel to Iezreel, with Iehoram and Ahaziah, 2. King. 8. 29. and 9.
15, 16.
to cut off at once the house of Ahab, as he had threatened. Let us then observe
wisely the hand of Gods providence, that he may have the glory in all things,
when we see his rule and power either in his works of mercy, or works of
judgment.

Boaz came from Bethlehem,] unto his Reapers, who were reaping in his field,
and so like a good husband would have an eye unto them: for good householders do
ouersee the affairs of their house and family, and such also as they set on
work. 2. King. 4. 8, 18. The Shunamite would be with his Reapers, as Boaz was
here. This is Salomons counsel, Pro. 27. 23. And the praise of a good
housewife also is, to look well to the ways of her household, because riches
are uncertain, Pro. 27. 24. they abide Pro. 31. 27. Non minor est virtus, quam
quaerere, parta tueri.
not for ever: and it is no less a virtue to keep what we have gotten, then
to get what we had not. Careful vigilance over our family is a good means to
preserve our estate: by this shall we see, who is faithful and painful, to
commend and reward them, and who is negligent and faithless to reprove and
correct them, or else to remove them. Let us therefore learn to play the good
husbands, as men say; for it is no fault for a man to be thriuing, or for the
greatest to look well to their charge: if any fault be, it is in covetousness,
and niggardliness, and not in provident circumspection, and in a watchful eye
over the family, to keep them in honest labor, and to prevent wastfulnesse.
Negligent masters in this point are worthy reproof, they spoil their
servants, they undo themselves. And here such must know themselves to be in
an error, who think it a disgrace for me^ of vvorth, to see to their
servants; and to be among their workmen. Indeed, if servants were like unto
Jacob, faithful and painful, Genesis 31, 38, 39, 40. and 39. 23. 2. King. 12.
15. and 22. 7.
or like Joseph to be trusted with all that men have, or like the faithful
workmen in Ioash, and Josias days; the eye of the master might be spared: but
many servants be rather like false Zibah, filching Onesimus, before his
conversion; riotous, like those in Mat. 24. 49. or Run-avvaies, like Shemeies
servants, so that masters had need to see to them: yet must masters bevvare of
a greedy mind, as thinking that servants never do enough: they must take heed
of distrustful minds, without just cause, charity thinks no ill; neither
must they keep their servants to work so hardly, as that they cannot afford
them any time to serve God: for such masters are more like Turks than
Christians, and use their servants rather like beasts, than like men, endued
with reason, and having souls to save. If Masters take time also for the
soul, and for the service of God, and then be prouide^t for the world, it is
praiseworthy, and the fruit thereof will appear in Gods blessing falling upon
the work of their hands.

And said unto the Reapers, The Lord be with you.] Thus Boaz speaks to them,
when he comes into the field; this was his manner of saluting Iud. 6. 12.
them, and likewise of their resaluting him again; so that the form of
saluting is not one and the same, as we may see in Psalm. 129. 8. Mat. 26. 49.
Josh. 20. 26. Now, salutations are not only words of courteous and civil
behavior, but prayers made unto God one for another; and therefore we may
hence learn,

I. That it is a commendable thing for one to salute another when they meet.
This our God and Ioh. 20. 26. Iud. 6. 12. Luke 1. 28.
Savior did: this Angels have done, and this we see good men have done. It is
among men ciuility and courtesy, especially of the superior to the inferior,
as here: it also procures love; as we may see in Absaloms courteous saluting
the people, by which he stole away their hearts after him; but this was the
abuse of this commendable practice: we must beware of hypocrisy Mat. 26. 49.
2. Sam. 20. 10.
therein: we must not salute like Judas; not like Ioab, with fair words, and
foul hearts and hands; neither must any neglect this, of pride and contempt of
others, as too many now do. If this be commendable, then surely the
Anabaptists do err, who hold it unlawful to salute such as they meet,
obeicting certain places of Scripture, as 2. King. 4. 29. where the Prophet
commands his servant not to salute, or resalute any that he met. But this
place is to be understood, only to express the haste he should make, as the
commandment to gird up his loins, does show: It does not simply forbid to
salute any, at all other occasions, or times. Another place is in Luke 10. 4.
where our Savior Christ forbids his Apostles to salute any man by the way.
Neither is here forbidden to salute any: for in verse 5. he teaches them to
salute others. But this speech was, to show that they should make speed in
that whereabout they were sent, and to avoid the least hinderance that might
stay them from performance of their duty: for by saluting one another,
sometimes occasions are taken of staying, which here he seems to have
relation unto, and not that he would have them neglect common, and commendable
courtesies. The third place is 2. John verse 10. where he forbids to bid God
speed to some: which is to be understood, of not allowing of such as were
Heretics and false teachers, as far forth as they were such, and therein
not to wish them prosperity; which is nothing to ordinary salutations.

II. That Masters are to pray that God may be with their household, family, and
workmen. So does Boaz here pray; and there is good reason for it: for if God
be with them, they shall prosper, as did Jacob, and Joseph in their services,
and Abraham's servant in his business. It is he that gives them strength to
labor, and without his blessing Psalm. 127. 2. Deuteronomy. 8. 18.
nothing can go forward: for he gives power to get wealth. And therefore let
Masters remember this duty to God for their family and servants.

And they answered him, The Lord bless thee.] Thus they religiously salute him
again: So as they which do salute, are to be re-saluted. The Scripture
teaches humanity, and commends the same to us in godly men's practice; as
here in saluting one another, so in comely gesture in reuerencing our betters,
as Abigail, did David, and Joseph Jacob. Indeed the Scripture, besides other
Genesis 48. 12.
things is a school of good manners, and therefore checketh such as be
uncivil in their carriage and behavior, when ciuility and good manners are a
grace to a Christian profession. Again note, that servants are to pray for a
blessing upon their Masters. It is a rare grace to play the part of an Abraham's
servant. But thus to do, argues Genesis 24.
true love in a Servant: and if a Master be blessed, he is the better enabled
to do for a good servant. But where are such servants now to be found?

Verse 5. Then said Boaz unto his servant, that was set over the Reapers, Whose
Damsel is this?
THis is an enquiry after the young woman. Wherein is to be observed, who
makes the demand, of whom he enquireth, and concerning whom the demand was
made.

Then said Boaz.] He no sooner came into the field, and had saluted his
Reapers, but his eye was upon Ruth, of her he took special notice, and
demanded who she was, and to whom she did belong. Which shows a guiding
power of God herein, and also that before this time he had not seen her. Old
Naomi had not sent her, it may seem, to his house, nor abroad to be gazed
upon, and yet was she famous for her virtues, Chap. 3. 11. which will spread
themselves abroad well enough, though the party in person be known to few.

Unto his servant that was set over the reapers.] Boaz had placed one as
Ouerseer to the rest, and of this man does he demand the question. Hence note,
That it is a point of wisdom in great families, to appoint an Ouerseer over
the rest in the Masters absence. Thus Abraham had Eleazar his Steward; so had
Ahab his Obadiah; and here Boaz the Bailiffe of his husbandry: for Masters
cannot always be with their servants, and therefore it is necessary to have such
a one, to set every one to their task, to see what is done, to be done with
diligence, and also well and orderly, and to prevent falsehood and deceit, as
well as they can, and further to acquaint their Master with his affairs, with
the pains and labor of such as be diligent, and contrarily to give notice of
such as be not for his service, that so the one sort may be rewarded as they
deserve, and the other put off, after their wages be paid them; for the hyre
must not be kept back, which a good Steward must have care of for his Masters
credit, and his own discharge. But yet here let masters in setting one over
the rest, make a good choice, and see that the man be, First, wise and skillful
in that he undertakes. Secondly, one diligent and painful in his own
person. Thirdly, a man fearing God, as was Abraham's servant and Ahabs Steward:
For such a one will be honest toward his Master, careful to make others
religious, and so procure a blessing to the whole house. Such an one may be
trusted, as Potiphar did Joseph; and to such an one authority may be committed
to command others, and to order matters among servants: but yet ever so, as
that he be ready to give an account of his stewardship. Now also hence we may
infer, that if one may be set over another in a family, then also in a
Commonwealth; for without order of superiority 1. Chro. 27.
and inferiority, no Commonwealth can stand; which being true, overthrows
the Anabaptisticall Anarchie. Moreover, in that the Ouerseer is asked
concerning this damsel by Boaz, and not the rest, we learn, That servants,
who are betrusted with the care and charge of business, are to give account
touching any thing or person within their charge: to them the question is to be
made, which will make such to look to their charge, to be ready to answer
according to the trust committed into their hands.

Whose damsel is this?] This shows that Ruth was yet but young, and
therefore the more commendation to her, that came to be so famous for virtue:
And in that Boaz asks not what, but whose damosel she is; it gives us to
know, that he thought her to belong to some, as one of the maids of Israel, and
that she was not (as now vain young women desire to be) at their own hand,
which is the next way to lewdness and all loosnesse. Such Mistrislesse maids
were not then, as now too common, which makes them also to become common. An
evil not sufferable in a well governed state, to have Masterlesse men or
Mistrislesse women. It is fit to ask young people till they be married, Whose
they be? to whom they belong? and whom they do serve? Before I conclude this
verse, another thing may be noted from Boaz: That it is a wise part of a
householder, to know who they be which come to his house, or into his grounds
or field, to take commodity by him: as he does here, finding her in his field
with his reapers; lest a man give countenance to the unworthy: 2. These. 3.
for men are to be merciful, but yet in wisdom, because some are not to be
relieved: Therefore let men well know to whom to give. In former times amongst
us, men have been commended for good housekeepers: but if their housekeeping
were examined by Gods Word, we should find it nothing less then good
housekeeping, but rather such houses were houses of riot, excess, prodigality,
gluttony, and drunkenness, suffering all sorts of idle lewd, and licencious
Mates to come in to eat, drink, card, dice, riot, and revel under a Lord of
misrule, especially at Christmasse, a time pretended to be spent in joy and
rejoicing in the honor of Christ, but was indeed abused to his great dishonor,
to the increase of sin, and the pleasing of Satan.

Verse 6. And the servant that was set over the Reapers, answered and said, It
is the Moabitesse damsel that came back with Naomi out of the country of
Moab.
THe servants answer unto his Master briefly and fully. In which he here and
in the next verse prayseth Ruth also. He tells here what she was, whence
she came, and with whom, and so shows whose she was, and to whom she did
belong.

And the servant that was set over the Reapers, answered and said.] By this
servants ready answer unto his Masters demand, it appears that he had made
inquiry of her what she was. Faithful servants which have charge committed to
them, should be able to answer to their Lord or Master, concerning any person
or thing which fall within their charge, when the question is asked. This does
argue the care and diligent circumspection which is to be used of all such as
be put in trust, and it will commend their faithfulness and honesty: and the
contrary shows faithlessenesse and dishonestie.

It is the Moabitesse damsel that came back with Naomi out of the country
of Moab.] This servant very briefly tells to the full what she was; and
here it is not a bare declaration, but also a commendation of her, who being
but a young woman, would come with an old poor woman from her own country,
into a strange land; which indeed was a great praise to her, as I have before
noted: and if the servant spoke this, as some Learned think, in the way of
commendation, we may learn,

I. That as the Master was a Lover of virtue, so was the man: so like happy
Master, like happy man. For as this praised her to the Master, as it better
appears in the next verse; so the Master greatly commends her, after he
took notice of her; by which the love of goodness in them both appears.
Which may set out their happiness: and on the contrary it is unhappiness to
an Obadiah to dwell with a wicked Ahab; or a Jacob with a Laban; so to an
Hezekiah to have his Shebnah; or an honest Mephibosheth, his wicked Zibah.

II. We may see, That the godly and well-disposed will praise virtue in
whomsoever they see it, whether in strangers or home-borne, in poor or rich,
noble or base persons, friend or foe, as David did in both Saul and Abner:
because honest and virtuous minds love virtue truly in every one; they are not
transported with an ill-disposed heart, either through pride or envy, to
disdain, or malign graces in other, but to speak the truth, and to praise
them for whatsoever is good in them. This mark of true love let us show forth:
this will preserve goodness and virtue in others, procure respect to our
selves, and good favor to such of them as be poor, as we may see here from
Boaz toward Ruth. This condemns such First, as cannot praise other for
well-doing: which argues pride, or envy, or malice, or all of the^, and by
which they show too much self-love in themselves, and little love or none at
all to their neighbor. Secondly, those which are so far from praising men,
as they lessen their virtues, and blazon their infirmities, and so seek to
disgrace them, contrary to true love and charity; and yet a common evil in
these days in most. Thirdly, those that will commend perhaps others, but not
before better then themselves, not to the full, but with their Iffs and Ands,
with words of exceptions, showing plainly they be loath to give men their due,
falsely supposing, the praises of other should derogate from themselves, and
from their own worth; so vainly jealous are we of our own reputation.

III. We may observe, that in praises, Religion is to have the first place: for
here is Ruth set out, as one forsaking her heathenish acquaintance, to keep
company with a virtuous woman, and leaving her idolatrous country, for to
dwell in Judah amongst Gods people; and thus is Job set Job 1. Act. 10. 2.
forth and Cornelius: For Religion and Virtue is that which is in man most
excellent, making him more then a man, for as much as he becomes a spiritual
man of a carnal. Therefore here let our commendations begin, and not dispraise
men for profession of Religion: an argument of the want of Religion: nor judge
them worthy commendations, which are altogether without Religion. True it is,
that many may have such gifts of nature and art, as may much set them out with
men: but if they want Religion and virtue, their praise is more heathenish then
Christian: and therefore they have no cause to rejoice in abilities of nature
or art, seeing Satan the enemy of al mankind, may therein be preferred before
them: and in nothing can man be said to be more excellent or happy then a very
Devil, except in the right use of true Religion: in nothing else can he go
beyond him, nay, in no other thing can he equal him. Let therefore true
Religion and undefiled before God the Father, which is, to visit the
fatherless and widows in their adversity, and to keep our selves unspotted
of the world, be our chiefest praise.

Verse 7. And she said, I pray you, let me gleane and gather after the
Reapers, amongst the sheaues: so she came, and has continued even from the
morning, until now, that she tarried a little in the house.
THe Bayliffe proceeds still on in the commendations of Ruth, from her
humility and modesty in not presuming without leave: and then, from her
diligence and constancy in her labor and paines-taking.

And she said, I pray you, let me gleane, and gather after the Reapers,
amongst the sheaues.] That is, the ears of corn which lie scattered by the
sheaues, which yet lay abroad; and not that she did desire to be meddling with
the sheaues. This she desired, and Boaz allows, verse 15. which seems
therefore to be a special favor to her. It was lawful for strangers,
fatherless, and widows, to gleane, Deuteronomy. 24. 19.
by Gods allowance and commandment unto his people; yet she enters not
boldly upon that liberty, but asks leave humbly and modestly. Whence we may
learn, That although God do bid the rich to relieve the poor, and to give
leave in this case for them to gather scattered ears, yet is the same to be
obtained by leave, and the good will of the Owners: as Ruth here has leave.
For though the rich be commanded to give by Gods Precept, yet before men they
have right to all they have, and it is at their liberty to dispose thereof in
that respect, and they may make choice of their poor, as they see them to
need, and to be worthy of relief: and therefore albeit a man be poor, he may
not (because God commands the rich to relieve him) be his own Caruer; he may
not take from the rich any thing, but as it shall be bestowed upon him. Let the
poor learn humility and modesty; and not be insolently bold and unthankful,
or false and deceitful, as many be, who make no conscience to filch and
steal, and think their poverty a reason sufficient to excuse them, especially
if it be but in trifling things as they account them, as is the picking now and
then ears out of sheaues, or shockes of corn; or breaking hedges for
firewood; or robbing of Orchards; or the like. But let them know that poverty
excuses not their sin; it is theft in them, and the Thief is Zach. 5. 1.
Cor. 6.
cursed; and thieves shall not inherit the Kingdom of God.

So she came, and has continued, even from the morning until now.] After
leave, she set her self to work, but before, as it may seem, she went home
again and stayed a little; so as her first coming was, but to know where to
get leave, and then forthwith after, to fall to her labor, yet she made not
her mother acquainted with any thing till night, as appears by verse 19. The
chief point commended here to us, is, That painfulness in our labor with
constancy, is prais-worthy: so is it here in Ruth, as it was in Jacob, and
blessed in them both: for this is commanded, Eccles. 9. 10. and the contrary
forbidden, Romans 12. Let us then be diligent in our labor, and be constantly
painful: So shall God be obeyed, Eccles. 9. 10. Prou. 27. 23. who has
promised to bless such, Pro. 28. 19. and 20. 13. So it is gainefull, to the
body healthful, it does procure favor, Prou. 11. 27. and honor, Pro. 12. 24.
and makes rich, Prou. 10. 4. with Gods blessing, Prou. 10. 22. Beware then of
sloth, which is forbidden, Romans 12. it brings men to follow vain company,
Prou. 28. 19. gaming, Prou. 21. 17. as experience shows, and so hasteneth
poverty, Prou. 10. 4. as being the punishment thereof: for God threatens such
with scarcity, Prou. 19. 15. and 12. 24. and 6. 6. and we see that such become
wastfull, Prou. 18. 9. and their house decaieth, Eccles. 10. 18. There be which
labor, but not cherefully, not constantly; and therefore these may here learn
to amend, by the example of this Ruth, and the good houswife in the Proverbs,
which puts her hands willingly Prou. 31. 13.
to work: for it is a hateful thing to be slothful in our business, and
forbidden, as before Prou. 10. 26. Prou. 28. 9.
is showed: In this the servant, or day-tale-man may rob their Master; they are
brethren to great wasters, says Solomon, and are a consumption to the estate
of such as keep them: yet such make no conscience of this deceitful working,
though perhaps they have a good measure of knowledge, and would be held more
conscionable then some others be. But here it will be asked, perhaps, Who may
be called slothful? Solomon will tell the^ that such be slothful, First,
which refuse to work, Pro. 21. 25, 26. Secondly, which make idle excuses to
keep them from daily labor, Prou. 22. 13. and 26. 13. Thirdly, which be
subject to much sleep: for sloth causes sleep, Prou. 19. 15. Fourthly, which
love their beds too well, Prou. 26. 14. and 24. 33. Fifthly, which suffer their
ground to lie unhusbanded, and their house to decay, Pro. 24. 30, 31. Eccles.
10. 18. Sixthly, which for a little cold will neglect their profit, and doing of
their duty, Prou. 19. 4. Seventhly and lastly, which go lazily, as if they
went upon thorns, and loath to hurt themselves, Prou. 15. 19. These be Salomons
marks of the slothful.

Save that she tarried a little while in the house.] Thus this servant is
careful to speak the truth in his relation to a small circumstance of time,
that he might not be disproued. Honest minds and lovers of the truth, are
careful to speak truly every Nehem. 4. 23.
way, in every circumstance, that they may not be taxed in the least degree of
untruth. For he has an high esteem of the truth, whereupon he weighs his
words, and is careful in speaking only the truth. Oh that this care were in
every Ephesians. 4. 25.
one now a days, as it should be! We are commanded to speak truth, and not to
lie one to another; Romans 3. 4.
and God, whom we worship, is the God of truth: Christ is truth, and the Holy
Ghost is Matthew. 22. 16. Ioh. 14. 17.
the Spirit of truth, leading into all truth: the Gospel, by which we believe,
is the Word of truth: and lastly, it is a mark of one that shall dwell in Gods
Tabernacle, and rest on his holy Hill, to speak the truth, and that from his
heart too. If we have such motives to press us to this duty, then first,
justly are they reprouable, which do make no conscience of speaking truth; but
are notorious liars: such be of the Devil, they live Ioh. 8. 44.
in one of those sins, which made the Lord to have a controversy with the
Inhabitants of the Osea 4. 2.
land in the days of Osea, and the liar shall be cast Reu. 21. 8.
into everlasting destruction. There are such as seem to make conscience of
common lying, but yet will slip in the tongue now and then, as, First, to
flatter others: so did the four hundred false prophets lie to Ahab; so did
Doeg to Saul. Secondly, they that utter an untruth to do another a pleasure,
which is called an officious lie, as the Midwiues in Egypt did, and Michol when
she preserved David: but we may not do evil, that good may come thereof: we
may not lie for God Job 13. 7, 10.
himself. Thirdly, they that by lying make others merry. In all the Scripture
I find not an example hereof. It may be, though many then were wicked, yet it
seems, not one was so lewd, as to abuse his tongue with lying, to make others
sport; it is wickedness to make a sport of sin. Fourthly, they that lie for
gain now and then, like Gehezi; or as Ananias and Saphira, whom the Lord
fearfully punished: and yet it is too common for men now to lie for gain, it
is almost a mark of a tradesman. Fifthly, such as lie of ill will, maliciously,
and of envy, as Haman against the Jews; Scribes and Pharisees against Christ;
and Potiphars wife against Joseph. Hence arise slander and backebiting, which
Christians must carefully avoid; and not only the hateful kinds of lying, but
the other also, and every untrue speaking in any degree; and to do this,
Speak ever with understanding, deliberately, without hasty passion, without
by-respects, also avoid leuity, and beware of too many words.

Verse 8. Then said Boaz unto Ruth, Hear thou not, my daughter? Go not to
gleane in another field, neither go from hence, but abide here fast by my
maidens.
BOaz having heard of his servant who she was, and then also taking notice of
her, from that which he also before had heard of her, as it appears in verse
11. he now turns his speech unto her. Wherenote, who, to whom, how he
speaks, and what; even words of love and kindness, forbidding her to go any
whither else, but to abide by his maidens.

Then said Boaz unto Ruth.] This noble rich man shows great kindness unto
the poor woman and stranger: when he knew what she was, he vouchsafed to
speak to her, and to comfort her in her poor estate. The rich and the mighty
are to show themselves respective to the poor, which be godly, though
strangers, when they be rightly informed of them, as Boaz shows himself to
Ruth here. It is a sign that they are godly, which love godliness in others,
especially the poor, themselves being rich. It greatly comfort the
afflicted spirit, and lifts up the heart of such poor, and does in some sort
strengthen them in their well-doing. Those rich men do not well then, who do
in their high esteem of themselves despise the poor, and hold them very
dissemblers in their profession; supposing without charity, that the poor
cannot be religious, when yet of the poor, for the most part, God chooses his
Iam. 2.
people.

Hear thou not, my daughter?] Thus lovingly he speaks unto her. And we
find in Scripture, that two sorts of persons thus spoke unto others: the elder
unto the younger, as Eli to Samuel; Boaz here to Ruth; and men of authority to
inferiors. So spoke Joshua unto Achan; and Ioab Ios. 7. 2. Sam. 18. 22.
unto Ahimaaz. From this courteous speech of Boaz both as an old man, and also
indeed as a man of authority, as appears in verse 1. and Chap. 4. 1. we
learn,

I. That an humble and merciful man speaks kindly where he wishes well, as
also Joseph did to his brethren; Jonathan to David in distress; and Job to the
poor. Humility is not highminded, Job 31. 18.
and mercy is compassionate, love cannot be rough-hewed, and therefore such as
have these graces, will be courteous, and cannot but use good terms,
especially to the poor and needy. Which condemns those as void of humility,
mercy, and love, which are like churlish Nabals, and not like blessed Boaz unto
the honest and painful poor.

II. That the ancient in years, and men in authority, are to behave themselves
as Fathers unto others; for so are they called, 1. Sam. 3. 6. Ios. 7. 19. 1.
Sam. 24. 11. 2. King. 5. 12. and this must be in instruction, and good example;
and the Magistrate in correcting, not with rigor, but as a father with mercy
and compassion punishing the sin, but loving the person, as a father does. It
is a soul fault for the gray headed to be more child-like, then father-like:
and for a Magistrate to show rather cruelty, then compassion. It were good for
such to remember, That they are as Fathers, That the world is unstable, That
their turn may come to stand in need of mercy; and they should think that God
made the one as well as the other. This made Job to carry himself gently and
Job 31. 15.
humbly toward his inferiors. And here let such as be in authority, be
reverenced and loved as fathers, and beware that the ancient in years be not
despised, but rather do them honor, Leuit. 19. 32. for old age is a Crown of
glory, Prou. 16. 31.
when it is found in the way of righteousness. Let the children devoured,
which mocked the old Prophet Elisha, be a warning to all such to take heed, and
remember Corah his rebellion against authority, and how the Lord punished it.

Go not to gleane in another field, neither go from hence; but abide here
fast by my maidens.] In harvest all work that can; men and women are here sent
into the field, and continued working: It is the time of reaping and carrying
in Gods blessings given, and therefore may none be idle. To come to the matter
between Boaz and Ruth, we see how before he in a loving term spoke to her;
here he expresses his love in deeds, both in these, and the words following in
the next verse. Note, That the goodness of a merciful good man stands not
only in loving terms, nor in fair words, without good deeds: both words and
deeds are necessary to comfort the afflicted; with both which Boaz declares
his love to Ruth: he allows her to gleane amongst the sheaues; he warns her
not to go any whither else; he wills her to keep with his maidens, and to
follow his Reapers, to eat victuals with them. Thus let men show 1. Ioh. 3. 18.
mercy in word and deed: we may not do well, and speak uncomfortably, neither
may we give good words, and neglect good deeds, as some in Saint James time
did, and too many now do. Iam. 2.
Another thing may we hence note, That women are to keep with women; this is
Boaz advice to her: and it is most fit for sex, for safety, for preservation
of chastity, and a note of woman-like modesty, from which such be far, as
delight rather in men's company: a note of wantonness, and of an unchaste
heart. Women must company with women; and yet some not with any of that sex.
Ruth must keep with Boaz maidens, the servants of a godly man. It is dangerous
for a Dinah to go to the daughters of the land; a chaste maiden to go amongst
wanton idolatrous women, or a virtuous woman amongst vicious wantons, and
unchaste persons. Therefore let her, which loves her honesty, walk wisely
toward both; avoid altogether the one, and be wise to judge of the other.

Verse 9. Let thine eyes be on the field that they do reap, and go thou
after them: Have not I charged the young men, that they should not touch thee?
And when thou art a thirst, go unto the vessels, and drink of that which the
young men have drawn.
BOaz goes on expressing his love to Ruth more and more: and this is here
showed in three things. First, in willing her to follow the Reapers into every
field. Secondly, in his care for her safety, in charging them not to touch her.
Thirdly, in allowing to drink when she was dry, of that which was drawn for
them.

Let thine eyes be on the field that they do reap, and go thou after them.]
Boaz had, it seems hereby, a great harvest: for this implies, they were to
pass from field to field, and he wills her to go after whithersoeuer, and
not to lose their company, as desirous to do her good this way, and so to be
beholden to him, as she should not need to go to any other place to gleane. See
here how bountiful a merciful and loving man is: So is true love in
whomsoever it is, 1. Cor. 13. 4. and Mercy is not miserly, as appears in Job,
Chap. 31. and in Cornelius, Act. 10. 2. See this also in the Lords love toward
his beloved, his Church, fetched from the love of a Lover to his beloved,
Ezech. 16. 8, 10, 11, 12. Let then our love and kindness appear by our Genesis
43. 34. and 45. 17. 18.
bounty and mercy, as Joseph showed to his brethren and father; and Pharaoh did
to them for his love to Joseph. Love where it is, cannot possibly be barren;
they therefore which show it not in works of love and mercy, as need is, and
their ability will give leave, they are no true Lovers of their brethren.
People are now most in saying, nothing in doing; they are like the Adamant,
drawing all to them, and as the Lions den, admitting in all, but suffering
nothing to go out. It is rare to hear of a Macedonian-like bounty, freely to
give beyond ability; or of any like a poor widow, which gave her two mites,
all she had. If men would give of their superfluities, it were well. Oh that
we loved as well the works of mercy, and our poor brethren, and the
Ministry, yea but half so well, as we do dainties for our bellies, brave
clothes for our backs, and titles to bring our persons into reverence with men!
But thus much for this.

Have not I charged the young men that they should not touch thee?] To touch, is
any way to wrong another, Genesis 26. 11. Psalm. 105. 15. Zach. 1. 8. By which kind
of speaking used by the Lord, we are taught, that the least wrong is not to be
offered to any* not so much as to touch them, as by way of offering thereby
injury. This care had Boaz for Ruth, who not only does her good, but
preuenteth evil from her, in laying his command upon them not to touch her.
And in speaking by an interrogation, it is not only to assure her of the
truth, but it implies his authority over them, so as they durst not offer her
any wrong, but would quietly suffer her to be amongst them. Whence note, I.
Young poor women and strangers even then were subject to abuse; and young men
too wantonly given toward such. This Boaz knew, and therefore gave them this
charge: For youth is vanity, as Solomon speaks, and lust is as a commanding
law over their hearts, except they have grace to restrain the same, and that
must be by ordering themselves Psalm. 119. 9.
according to Gods Word. Let youth take notice hereof. II. That Boaz had a
command over his servants, so as they stood in awe of his word; else what had
this been for Ruths safety? Neither would he have thus spoken, Have not I
charged them? but that he knew his word to be a law to them. And such
authority should Masters have over servants, who should be subject to their
Masters, and not stubborn and gainsaying, without care to show obedience, as
too many be. III. That Boaz takes care of her safety; for love does not only
good, but seeks to prevent ill from such as they do love and intertaine.
Such care was in Lot toward his Guests; and in the old Genesis 19. Iud. 19. 16,
23.
man of Gibeah toward the Leuite: for this is a fruit of love, and also of
faithfulness, when any one has taken another into his protection, and
admitted among such as he has authority over. This is an use for Magistrates;
they should Job 29. 12, 17. Psalm. 82. 3, 4. Pro. 31. 8, 9.
care for the preservation of others by their authority, for therefore are
they set in such a Prou. 24. 11.
place: and if they have not this care, it is their sin; and as they must see
to all, so especially to the Fatherless, Widows, and Strangers, and Exodus 22.
Mal. 3. 5.
poor Laborers; for wrong offered to these, greatly displeases God, which
he threatens to revenge. And this should teach Governors of families, so to
rule and order their families, as they suffer not one to wrong another; that
their eyes be upon them so, as they should not dare to offend against honesty
and chastity, by sitting among, and dallying with young women, by filthy and
wanton songs, by any other allurements to sin, which young women are to
avoid, as they have a care to preserve their chastity; and young men's vanity
and wickedness herein must be restrained by their Parents and Masters: yet are
there some so far from this, as they can take pleasure in the light behavior
and wanton speeches of servants and others, especially in reaping their
harvest, allowing them thus, as they account it, to be merry with their
tongues, to make their hands to work the faster: but this is in comparison a
light fault, (though also a foul sin, Ephesians. 5.) for some Masters are
authors of uncleanness, and deflowre Heb. 13. Prou. 6. Mal. 3. 5.
maidens themselves, like lustful and foul adulterers; but let such remember
the wrath of God against them.

And when thou art a thirst, go unto the vessels, and drink of that which the
young men have drawn.] Thirst will come upon the painful labourer, and it
must be quenched: Boaz therefore had provided for his servants vessels for
water, which the young men drew; of this he gives Ruth leave to drink. It
may seem a very small kindness to vouchsafe her liberty to drink of the
water; but we must know that it was common drink for the best, as well as the
worst: Saul drunk 1. Sam. 26, 11. Judge. 4. Genesis 21. 14. and 24.
water; Sisera called for water; Abraham gave a bottle to Hagar for Ishmael his
son: and his servant drank water at Rebeccaes hand. It was not easy neither
to come by, in such an hot and high country, water was not every where so
plentiful, as appears by the strife of Abimelechs and Genesis 26. 19, 20. and
21.
Isaaks servants; by Hagars lamenting for want of water; by the Miracle wrought
for Samson: Judge. 15.
for the country was hot, and the waters above the earth soon dried up, the
springs were hard to be found, and wells were very deep; so as this was a very
good favor of Boaz to Ruth; Ioh. 4.
and Ruth, we see in the next verse, took it to be a great kindness, and was
very thankful in all humility. By this we see, that a work of mercy and love
may be showed in a small matter, as in a cup Mat. 10. 42.
of cold water sometime, which shall not lose the reward: for it is mercy to
supply the want of others for an hearty compassion, how little soever the
thing be. This may teach men to be thankful for supply of their want, though
the matter be but little, and not to think mercy and kindness to consist in
great gifts, and good turns to be done in things of weight only.

Verse 10. Then she fell on her face, and bowed her self to the ground, and
said unto him, Why have I found grace in thine eyes, that thou should take
knowledge of me, seeing I am a stranger?
RVths thankfulness to Boaz set out by action and speech: the action was a
most humble and lowly gesture; the speech was an acknowledgement of favor with
admiration, with a reason thereof, for that she was a woman of another nation.

Then she fell on her face, and bowed her self to the ground.] Thus Ruth
begins to show her thankfulness in a most respective fashion; which
commends to us her good manners to so great a person. This manner of
behavior was much used in those Eastern parts; as we may see in Jacob to
Esau; Abraham to the Hittites; David to Jonathan; Genesis 33. 3. and 23. 7. 12. 1.
Sam. 20. 41. Matthew. 18. 26.
Abigail to David; and the servant to his Lord. The Scripture often notes the
civil gesture and comely behavior of his Servants, as worthy imitation, and
as a just reproof to the rude and uncivil. But yet here is a caveat first to
them which use such outward courtesies, that the same be done in humility of
heart; that it be not a foolish affection, an apish imitation, or mere courtly
complementing, being but all shadows of humility, and yet indeed nothing
less, as appears in the lively colors and public Ensigns of pride in such
persons, if they be observed aright: Then next, that such as have these
reverent gestures given them, do consider whether they deserve them, for their
place and person; if they do not, receive them not; if they do, yet not to
wax proud in heart thereby.

It may be, some will here make some questions; as first, Whether it be
lawful to give honor thus unto man, in such an adoring manner? This is
answered before: for the holy Ghost records it as commendable. Secondly, then
what difference between this which is done to men, and that which is done to
God Almighty? Surely, in respect of the outward act, no difference is there at
all, but of the mind, which does conceive of God herein as God, and so this
outward humiliation becomes divine adoration; and of man, but as man, worthy
of reverence and honor for his place, his age and gifts, and so the worship
and reverence done him, is only civil. Thirdly, some perhaps will ask,
Whether this may be given unto wicked men? Yes without doubt, as we see Jacobs
reverence to profane Esau; David's, to wicked Saul; and Abraham's bowing of
himself to the idolatrous Hittites: for men and their places are to be
distinguished. True it is, that Elisha showed little respect unto Iehoram; and
Mordecai would do no reverence to proud Haman: but these had (no doubt) some
extraordinary warrant so to do, and are not therefore for ordinary imitation;
the reasons alleged for Mordecai are known, and therefore I will not trouble
here the Reader with them, because they be but weak conjectures.

Why have I found grace in thine eyes, that thou should take knowledge of
me, seeing I am a stranger?] This humble soul wondreth at his so great
kindness, though it was but to have leave to gleane, and to drink water out
of the vessels: She thought it strange, that so great a personage should speak
thus respectively to her that was but a stranger. From hence may we observe,
first, that the virtuous and thankful persons take most kindly such favors
as be showed them, and do wonder rather thereat, then make light thereof,
though but in common and mean things, especially if the favors be done with
cheerfulness, as this virtuous woman Ruth does here; for such do look into
themselves, and their unworthiness, thinking with themselves what might rather
withdraw men's affections from them, than win them to them. They also look up
to God, and do behold him in the Giver, she being as Gods hand offering his
mercies to them. These things make them to be very thankful, and to express
it fully. This example of thankfulness is to be imitated of every one beholden
unto others, and justly reproves the ungrateful; of which there be these
sorts, First, such as receive favors, and will not acknowledge them like the
nine Lepers. Secondly, such as scornefully Luke 17. 18.
refuse kindnesses offered, as they that will not be beholden unto others,
because they think they can live of themselves. Thirdly, which will not
requite a good turn done them, but rather churlishly reproach the party, as
Nabal did David. Fourthly, which will not help in need such as put their very
lives in their hands for them and for others; thus dealt the men of Sucoth with
Gideon. Fifthly, which in prosperity forget their friends, and what pleasure
was done them in their Genesis 40. 23.
adversity; as did Pharaoes Cup Bearer. Sixthly, Eccles. 9. 15.
which recompense evil for good; as Ioash did to Iehoiada his son; Hanun to
David's Messengers; 2. Sam. 10. 4.
or which love a man less, because of his love to them: and so the Corinthians
to Paul; the more 2. Cor. 12. 15.
he loved them, the less was he beloved. All these are ungrateful. Now,
ingratitude is a foul sin, it is a stoppage to all favors, and dries up
the affection of men's hearts; and God punished it in 2. Chro. 24. 25. Judge. 9.
16, 20, 56, 57.
Ioash, and revenged it upon the Sechemites: and therefore let us not be
guilty of a sin so hateful to God and man. II. We learn, that it is a
great favor and grace for a rich Inhabitant, to take knowledge of one poor
and a stranger too. This Ruth in her words here confesses and admireth. For
indeed, nothing but goodness in a man makes him kind to strangers, especially
poor ones: it is not nature, nor worldly reason. And therefore when strangers
find favor where they come, let them acknowledge it a great kindness, and a
mercy of God, and a work of his grace. III. That a godly man, as Boaz, will be
good unto the godly poor, though a stranger. And so should we; as the Apostle
commends it to us; and our Savior in the Heb. 13. 2.
Parable of the Samaritane: And we must consider, that we may come into strange
places our selves, and need favor; remembering moreover this, that if such
strangers be Christians, they be our brethren and sisters in Christ, for in him
there Col. 3. 11. Gal. 3. 28.
is neither Jew nor Greek, but we are all one. Which condemns the ill
disposition of such as cannot abide that strangers should come among them, and
that not such as Ruth, of another nation, but such as be borne in the same
kingdom, yea in the same country, if they fear any charge to come to them
thereby. Oh how would they take on in our uncharitable days, if a poor Naomi
should, after many years, return to the place of her former abode, and bring
a poor woman with her, to charge the parish! Well, good Boaz did not so,
neither the Inhabitants of Bethlehem. IV. Note, how shamefastness, wisdom
and humility are excellent ornaments of praise in a woman, as they are here in
Ruth; she cast down her eyes, not looking impudently upon him, she bowed to
the ground, and showed humility, and her words were effectual and few, and
therein was her wisdom. These three, shamefast countenance, humble gesture,
and fewness of words, do grace a woman highly, and do win her honor,
though never so poor. And therefore let women labor for them, more then for a
fair face, gay clothes, and a great portion; these make them saleable with
wantons and worldlings: but the other with the wise and virtuous. This
reproves such as be of a proud and hawtie carriage, Esai. 3. 18.
which are costly Dames, commanding Mistresses, but hardly obedient wives: such
also as be great talkers, reproved by the Apostle: these be 1. Tim. 5. 13.
shrewd Dames, often they breed contention abroad, and some disquietnesse at
home, for want of the government of the tongue; such women as be bold without
blushing, impudent Dames, which will not cover their faces with Rebecca for
modesty sake, but will go naked so far as modesty cries shame upon. But
they which have to sell, think they may be allowed to set open their
shop-windowes. But chaste minds seeing the deformity thereof, will frame
themselves to a more decent and modest behavior: such as would hold the name
of the virtuous, will not so much labor in the outward show, neither go after
the fashion of vain persons. Chaste Penelope, a Heathen, will stand covered
before her Suitors. And will Christian women show themselves so naked, as some
do, to the view of all? O impudency! O immodest show of lightness and
vanity!

Verse 11. And Boaz answered and said unto her, It has fully been showed me,
all that thou have done unto thy mother in law, since the death of thine
husband; and how thou have left thy father and thy mother, and the land of thy
nativity, and art come unto a people, which thou knew not heretofore.
BOaz his reply unto Ruth, giving her the reasons of his kindness toward her
a stranger; which was by relation made to him before this, of her virtues
showed in her love to her mother in law, and in her grace and godliness,
leaving her own country, to come and dwell amongst Gods people, though unknown
to her aforetime.

And Boaz answered and said unto her, It has fully been showed me, all that
thou have done. A good report, and that to the full, was spread abroad of Ruth:
of which Boaz had taken notice, and for which he was so kind to her, as he
here acknowledges. Whence note, I. That virtue shall not want Trumpeters to
sound out her praises to the full, Psalm. 37. 6. Ruth was made renowned among
all the people, and Joseph at length throughout all the land of Egypt: which is
Gods mercy for encouragement to virtue; and this will those do which love
virtue in others. Therefore let such as would be renowned, strive to be
virtuous: It is the worthiest matter of praise and commendation. It procures
love, and that true love of such as never see us, as did Salomons fame, and so
Christ's; It causes an honorable remembrance -- Viuit post funera virtus. Bias,
Omnia mea mecum porto.
after death: It is such goods as cannot be lost; but beauty may with
sickness and age be defaced, strength also may decay: So Haman may lose his
honor, and Job may be dispossessed of all his riches in a moment, but virtue
abides for ever. Lastly, this is pleasing to God, to all good men, yea and
makes the Angels to attend upon us, as the Lord has put the charge upon them.
And yet the praise hereof is least respected, but men seek praises which be
after man's wisdom, earthly and sensual: as Absaloms for beauty; Hamans for
favor with a King; Achitophels for worldly policy; others for riches and
authority over their brethren; which yet they are no lasting Pro. 4. 18.
praises, soon lost, and never afford true love in the hearts of men, as
virtue does: which may minister comfort to such as be virtuous, who deserve
true praises, and they shall not want them; they shall not need to brag, as
the proud hypocritical Pharise, of their well-doing. Grant that many now will
not give them their due, some of pride, other through envy, and a third sort
of ill will cannot speak well: yet when they be dead, even such as did
dispraise them, will then praise them: but howsoever, they shall at the last
Day receive praises of Jesus Christ before the Angels and all the world, and be
everlastingly rewarded for the same. II. That well-doing procures favor to
the poor, though strangers, at the hands of the virtuous: for this was the
cause of Boaz love to Ruth, as here he acknowledges: and this is true
godliness, to love others for their goodness. Would you poor find favor?
Labor to be virtuous: for God will procure the liking of others, and move them
to do you good, as God did Boaz heart toward Ruth. This is the way to do you
good, and not to live idly, levvdly, and by flattery and talebearing, to
think to prosper, which is the trade of too many poor ones. With some for a
while they may find favor, but in the mean space they procure hatred of some
others, and at length will be abhorred of all. And here let the rich learn
upon whom to bestow freely their kindness, and whom to love and respect, even
the godly poor, such as be Gal. 6. 10. Mat. 25. and 10.
of the household of faith, for in them Christ is relieved, and such shall not
lose their reward. If you ask, Who are these godly poor? I answer, Even such
as Ruth, which get a good name by their virtuous lives, their duty done to
their betters, their painfulness in labor; their conscience of Religion:
These be the godly poor, and not the stubborn, the idle, the irreligious,
swearing, fighting, railing, drunken poor, who are more worthy of punishment,
than relief.

Unto thy mother in law since the death of thine husband.] Thus Boaz begins
to particularize her virtues; and the first here is her loving carriage, and
praiseworthy behavior unto her mother in law, not only while her husband
lived, but ever after, not ceasing to love because he was dead, for whose sake
she first was occasioned to love her. Due praises can be showed in particular
virtues. See it in the praises of Job, Cornelius, the Job. 1. Act. 10. 2. Reu.
2. 1, 2.
Angel of Ephesus. And therefore in praising any, we must be able to
instance in those things which deserve such praises, else it is sottish
ignorance, or gross flattery, or both. Again note, That whom we love for our
friends sake being alive, if love be unfeigned, it will appear, when they be
dead. This is Ruths love unto Naomi, David's to Mephibosheth for Ionathans sake.
True love is a fountain that never can be drawn dry. This reproves the
loose love of many, who can love, and lightly turn it into hatred of the same
person upon small occasions; such also as can love their friend for his time,
but when he is dead, will neglect all respect to every one of his, whom in his
days they pretended to love.

And how thou have left thy father and thy mother, and the land of thy
nativity, and art come unto a people which thou knew not heretofore. This
was rare love, and a very great measure of grace, for Religon sake, to forsake
natural parents; for a mother in Law, her own country, for a strange nation
and people: she must needs be endued with a strong faith, and an
extraordinary measure of love to Religion, and the worship of the true God. By
which we see, that faith and fervent love overcome all difficulties; even
nature it self, as here in her, so in Abraham, when leaving his Heb. 11. Genesis
12. Genesis 22. and 21. Gal. 1. 10.
country, he traveled he knew not whither, and did offer up Isaac at Gods
bidding, and put away Ismael, and al three without gainsaying, cherefully.
These overcame carnal reason, and this desire of pleasing God, made Saint Paul
a zealous Professor. Faith made Gideon to leave thousands Iud. 7. 7, 12. and 8.
10. 13 5000. Josh. 6.
behind him, and to be content to enter the battle whith 300. against many
thousands; so did Joshua by Gods direction command seven Priests to go seven
times about the walls of Jericho, to beat them down with sound of Rams
horns. This faith and love made many proselytes and Heathen to become
Christians, and Christians in the time of bloody persecutions, to forsake all
for Christ's sake, and his Gospel, as the Apostles spoke of themselves unto
Christ. This faith and love of God will vanquish the world, 1. Ioh. 5. 4, 5.
and will make (...) leave the Court of Pharaoh, to be with Gods people in
affliction, and will make Amaziah to separate himself from the 2. Chro. 25. 6,
9, 10.
wicked, and make light of an 100. talents of silver; Yea so powerful is faith
and love of God, as they will overcome our selves, even to make light of our
selves, and our lives, for the Lords sake, as we see in the blessed Martyrs,
suffering cruel torments for the truth sake; for the power of faith and
spiritual love is supernatural, and is wrought and so assisted by Gods
Spirit, as no worldly, or fleshly impediments can hinder them in the way to
eternal life. Therefore must we labor for these graces above all things, if
we would be masters over our selves; if we would prevail against all
hindrances of our salvation. These will bridle lusts, contemn vain honors,
resist Satan and his temptations: and seeing they are so powerful, hence may
we see whether we have this faith and true love, if we can overcome our
corrupt nature, carnal reason, and this evil world: but if these ouermaster
us, then want we this faith and love, from which those be far off, who are
led like beasts by nature, like sensual men by lusts, corrupt reason, and by
this unconstant world, and the vanities thereof. Though they do bear the name
of Christians, yet Christ's power is far from them. Note further hence, why
he speaks thus to Ruth: even to give her to know the true cause of his
kindness, and good respect toward her, even her godliness and grace; which
may teach, That virtue and grace are the greatest motives to incite great men,
which be also good men, unto the works of mercy and bounty to the poor: as we
here see by Boaz speeches; for virtue is lovely to them which are virtuous,
though the parties be never so poor. Let the^ the poor labor for grace and
godliness, that they may find mercy at the hands of the wealthy, for if they
fear God, he will be their spokes-man, he will move the hearts of others to
do them good. Though this be the way to procure favor, yet commonly we see
the poor idle, and too lewd of life; and yet they murmr, curse, and rage, if
they be not relieved: for they think they ought to be relieved, even because
they be poor, though never so wicked, though they will hardly labor to take
any pains to live, when of such the Apostle speaks, that they should not be
relieved. He that will not labor, let him not eat, 2. These. 3.
says the Apostle. As this is for instruction to the poor: so the rich from
Boaz may learn, on whom to bestow their favors, and works of mercy, even
upon the godly, the household of Gal. 6. 10. Mat. 25 and 10. Pro. 19. 17. Psalm.
41. 1, 2, 3.
faith: for in them Christ is relieved, in them they do lend unto the Lord,
who will repay them to the full, and greatly reward them. But of this a little
before in the beginning of this verse.

Verse 12. The Lord recompense thy work, and a full reward be given thee of
the Lord God of Israel, under whose wings thou art come to trust.
THese words are a prayer and blessing pronounced out of the mouth of Boaz upon
poor Ruth. which does maruailously set out the piety of this man. Here may be
noted, who makes this request, to whom, for what, for whom, and why.

The Lord recompense thy work.] This rich Boaz prays for poor Ruth. Whence
note, I. That there is a recompense of reward from God, even to the poor for
well-doing: this the prayer of Boaz shows, who else would not have begged it
at Gods hand; and we must know, that the Lord in promising to reward
well-doing, excepts against none, rich nor poor, but will recompense the
weldoer, be he whosoever; with him is no respect of persons, but he that
works righteousness, is accepted Act. 10.
of him; and godliness (in whomsoever it be) has the Promise of this life and
of the life to 1. Tim. 4. 8.
come. Let this comfort the poor in their welldoing, and in their works of
virtue and godliness.

Quest. Here it may be demanded, what good works can the poor do, to expect
reward from God, seeing they have no riches?

Answ. A good work is not, nor stands not only in giving alms, and such like
things, for then should only the rich be doers of good works: but many other
things are good works, and approved of God, and which he will recompense,
which the poor, that have not one penny, may do; as to do the duty of love
and obedience to their parents, or to others to whom they owe it; to forsake
idolatry for the true worship of God; to leave their country for the Lords
sake and for his people; to forsake their old heathenish acquaintance and
kindred. All which Ruth did: and these may the poor do, which works God will
recompense; and all other duties which one owes to another, in any sort,
being done in faith, in love, and in obedience to God, they are good works,
and the Lord will reward Col. 3. 24.
the same; even the honest and painful service of a poor servant, as the
Apostle teaches. We see then, that the poorest may do good works, though
not such, as commonly are so called, to the doing whereof the worlds wealth is
required; and yet herein a poor souls two mites are more acceptable to God,
then the superfluities of the rich. II. The rich, from the example of Boaz, may
not think scorn to pray, and that very heartily for the poor. It is a very
rare example to see so mighty a man of wealth, and so high in authority, to be
so much taken up in his affection, in considering the poor woman's virtue, as
to break forth into so vehement a prayer as this was, as appears by the
doubling of the words: and yet this ought rich men to do, if they think that
the poor are not excluded out of the communion of Saints, and that they be the
children of God with them, as they are taught in the Lords Prayer. This would
show a great measure of grace, this would encourage much the poor to go on in
well-doing. But, alas, this comes not once into the thought of a rich man; he
thinks the poor bound to pray for him, but himself not at all, upon any
occasion for them, because he thinks he can pleasure them, but they can no way
pleasure him; so he considers only outward and personal benefit, and not
the excellency of virtue, and fruit thereof to them and others, as Boaz did.

And a full reward be given thee.] A good man thinks his mercies and kindness
are not enough to recompense and reward the virtue, and works of welldoint in
others: for he valueth virtue above wealth, and above the price of all these
transitory things. Again note, that there is to be expected a full reward for
a good work; I say, first a reward, yet so, that it be looked for in mercy,
and not in merit; for God has promised a reward, and that in many places of
Scripture; and then it shall be a full reward, which Boaz prays for here, to
be given to Ruth: which shall be certainly accomplished in the life to come,
and here sometime in a great measure, as it was to Ruth, in giving her Boaz for
an husband, which he little thought of in this prayer, that he should be the
reward of her godliness and grace. This is an excellent encouragement to
virtue and good works.

Of the Lord God of Israel.] Israel was Jacobs name, and now applied to all his
posterity the people of God: Thus was the true God called, by the name of God,
noting the persons in the Trinity; and of Lord, noting his substance, and being
of himself, as the original words to the Learned do show; and he is the Lord
God of Israel, because Deuteronomy. 7. 6.
he chose the Israelites to be his people before all other nations of the
Earth, a type of the Elect number, called The Israel of God. To this Gal. 6.
true and everliving God, does Boaz make request for a full and perfect reward,
showing, that it is not in man, but it must be God that can make a full payment
to godliness; the full reward is to be given of him, and therefore from him it
is to be expected, who has the recompense in his hand, in full perfection.

Under whose wings.] A figurative speech usual in Psalms to express the love
of God, and the Psalm. 17. 8. and 57. and 36. 7. and 61
protection of such as be his; for as a Hen nourishes and defends her young
ones under her wings, from the Kite and other ravenous birds: so does the Lord
care for his people, to keep them in safety from dangers. They are safely
protected, Deuteronomy. 33. 29.
who come to the Lord and trust in him: for Psalm. 91.
God has undertaken to protect such, and he is Zach. 2. 8.
able to desend them, and he will do it, because he loves them. Oh then, let
us labor to be of the Lords people, to go unto him, and to trust in him! Men
being in danger here, get into great men's service for protection; and we being
in greater danger, yea in such dangers every day, on the right and left hand,
from which none can deliver us, but God, should not we seek his service for
protection? And being in it, let us be comforted, as sure of his aid; let us
trust in him, as did David; for he saves all them that put their Psalm. 61 4.
Psalm. 17. 7 and 57. 1. Psalm. 17. 8. and 119. 94. Psalm. 63. 7. Psalm. 34. and 91.
Job. 1.
trust in him. Let us in need run to him for aid, as did David, and desired
to be saved by him, and let us rejoice under the shadow of his wings: for his
Angels shall guard us, and pitch their Tents about us: he will make a hedge
about us also: and if this will not be defense enough, then Zach. 2. 5.
will he be a wall of fire, so sure and safe shall we be from all our enemies.

Thou art come to trust.] Boaz takes it for granted, that she had faith: for
they that come to Heb. 11.
God, must believe that he is. This draws us to God, this keeps us with
him, when we be come unto him. Now, that we may know what is here meant by
faith, we must understand that there be degrees hereof: as to believe there is
a God, against all the Atheists, which deny this principle in nature. II. That
that which we believe to be God, be the true God, even God by nature, and none
other, and that he is not many, but one God only, against all Idolaters and
worshippers of false gods. III. That he be such a one as he reuealeth
himself in his Word, and so conceived of, and no otherwise, a Spirit, True,
Just, Merciful, Almighty and so forth, against all carnal conceits and
fleshly apprehensions of God, as is in the ignorant multitude, and the blind
Papists our Adversaries. IV. That we have sure confidence in him, wholly relying
upon him, and commending our selves so to his protection, as unto a safe place,
where we think to be sure: and so the (...) recepit se in locum, vbi sit
tectus ab iniuria.
word in the original is here used. The knowledge hereof should make us to
examine our faith, whether we thus trust in him, and have the saving faith,
which makes not ashamed. Such a faith is, First, without hypocrisy, being
faith 1. Tim. 1. 5. Gal. 3. 14. Romans 5. 1. Heb. 4. Ephe. 3. 12.
unfeigned. Secondly, It is accompanied with the Spirit of God. Thirdly, Where
it is, there is inward peace of conscience, and freedom to draw nigh to God
with boldness. Fourthly, It shows Act. 15. 9. 1. Tim. 1. 5. Gal. 5. 6. Iam.
2. 7.
it self in a godly conversation; for the heart is purged, and pure, and a
good conscience is joined with it: it works also by love, and shows it
self by works, and so causes obedience to the good pleasure and will of God,
as we may see in Noah building the Arc, and in Abraham offering Heb. 11. Act.
13. 48. and 4. 32.
up Isaac. Fifthly, and lastly, it makes us to rejoice in the means of
salvation, and to be of one heart and soul with the Believers, and such as
we perceive to fear God. By all which, our faith may be examined; and by
these may we know how little there is in men in these days, where and when
there is such hypocrisy, so little true love of the Word, or of them that love
it, and so much wickedness and lewdness* they make open proclamation, that
this grace of true saving faith was never grafted in their hearts.

Verse 13. Then she said, Let me find favor in thy sight, my Lord, for thou
have comforted me, and for that thou have spoken friendly unto thine
handmaid, though I be not like unto one of thine hand-maidens.
RVTHS speech unto Boaz, acknowledging his favor with great humility, showing
what it wrought in her, and the reason also thereof, with a debasing of her
self as inferior to his servants.

Then she said, Let me find favor in thy sight.] These words may be read two
ways, either thus as here, and then they show Ruths desire of the countenance
of his favor. For the poor do not 1. Sam. 1. 18. 2. Sam. 16. 4.
only desire to get the rich man's good will, but would gladly have it
continued. And a thankful mind seeks the continuance of undeserved favors,
and not Hanuns part, 2. Sam. 10. Or the words may be read thus, I do find
favor in thy sight. And it is then, as if she had said, It is enough that I a
poor stranger find this favor in thine eyes; so are the words to be taken,
Genesis 33. 15. and so in 2. Sam. 16. 4. She did not expect so much at his hands:
and therefore knowing her self to have deserved nothing at his hands, she
rests very thankful for this so great a kindness: For where nothing is
deserved, and nothing owing, there to find special favor, deserves great
thanks: Which here she acknowledges; and in the like case so must we. The
choice of the reading I leave to men's will; either may stand, and the Learned
in the tongue use either; and our last Translation in the margent leaves it
free. The thing she either asks, or acknowledges, is favor, or mercy,
compassion and good will (all (...) Misericordia, compassio, beneuolentia,
gratia, favor, etc.
which the word signifies) in his eyes: By which word she confesses all his
kindnesses in word and deed showed to her, to be of his mere goodness and
good will; and so should works of mercy come from the rich to the poor: the
eye of the rich looking upon the poor, should work compassion in the heart;
then do such find favor in their eyes, when they are beheld and looked upon
with respect to do them good. This favor in the eyes, is not in every rich
man, when he beholds the needy; it must be a good Boaz that has such eyes,
for a Nabal wants them.

My Lord.] A title of reverence she gives him. The word signifies such a one
as bears up (...)
the family or Commonwealth as a Pillar: thus the name Lord imports. I wish
this title to be remembered of the great Ones, that they may show themselves
Pillars and vpholders of the Commonwealth and of their houses, and not
destroyers of them. The thing I note, is this; It is lawful to give honorable
titles unto men, as befitteth their place; So did Aaron to Moses; Hannah to
Number. 12. 11. 1. Sam. 2. 1. King. 18. 7. 2. King. 8. 12. Genesis 23. 6.
Samuel; Obadiah to Eliah; and Hazael to Elisha; and so did the Hittites to
Abraham; so as both such as were in, and such as were out of the Church used
such terms of reverence; and therefore may they be used, as Saint Luke did,
and Luke 1. 3. Act. 26. 25.
also Saint Paul; herein taking heed of unjust titles, of base flattery, and
the excess in giving even just titles. Note again another thing, that the
more humble men of good place and wealth show themselves to be, the more honor
they get, as we see here: She did him reverence before, verse 10. in a most
humble gesture, when she saw his worldly kindness: but now perceiving the
ground to be the love of her virtues, and so himself to be a lover of virtue,
she calls him Lord, increasing in her honoring of him, as she took
knowledge of his worthiness, the more for his love of virtue and godliness,
then for the outward and worldly kindness. Here is wisdom, and an excellent
example teaching how to honor men truly, how far, and especially for what.
This instructs men to carry themselves lowly, which are of place, and to
express their love of virtue: it shall not make them be less, but more
esteemed by much of those that be godly and wise; else were they reprouable.
Ionathans humility and goodness lost 1. Sam. 20. 41.
him no reverence with David. They be counted clownishly base, or foolishly
proud, or ill-manered, which will give less honor to a man for his virtues
and humility, when as he is to be esteemed for that cause more worthy of
increase of honor with men of wisdom and understanding.

For that thou have comforted me:] to wit, a stranger, a widow, and poor,
even me have thou comforted by such gracious speeches, so full of mercy and
piety. The word comforted, by an Antiphrasis (...) Genesis 24. 64.
signifies a freedom from grief: which implies, that before, she was not
without heaviness in this her poor estate: for a widow poor and a stranger
in the place of her abode, how can she not be sad and pensive? Afflictions are
not joyous to any for the present, they will make sad the heart of the best for
a while, so long as we carry about this corrupt heart and nature of ours; and
therefore let men look upon the afflicted with compassion, to comfort them.
Many ways did Boaz comfort poor Ruth: First, by a loving appellation, calling
her his daughter, verse 8. Secondly, by allowing her to gleane in his fields,
and willing herso to continue with his maidens, verse. 8, 9. Thirdly, by
charging his servants in her hearing, not to touch her, verse 9. Fourthly, by
granting her freedom to drink with his servants when she should be
thirsty. Fifthly, by commending her virtues, and making mention of her former
well-doing. And sixthly, in heartily praying for her. Thus may the poor
afflicted be comforted by the wealthy and persons of authority, and especially
in praising their virtues and praying for them: for the godly esteem highly of
the prayers of the godly: for they know that God hears them. The prayer of
faith and feruency Iam. 5. 16.
of spirit avails much, and God has promised Genesis 20. 7. Job 42. 8.
to hear one for another, and it is a sign of the Lords great displeasure,
when he will not 1. Sam. 16. 1. Ier. 7. 16 and 11. 14. and 14. 11.
have one to pray for others. Therefore let us make much of the prayers of the
godly, for they are comfortable. Saint Paul besought the Saints to pray for
him, and that very often: and this he does almost in every Epistle, he
entreats the Romans, Ephesians, Philippians, Corinthians, Romans 15. 30. Ephe.
6. 18. 2. Cor. 1. 11. 2. These. 3. 1. 1. These. 5. 25. Heb. 13. 18, 19. Phil. 1.
19. Col. 4. 3.
Thessalonians, Colossians, the Hebrews, all but the backsliding Galatians: a
thing worthy of note.

And for that thou have spoken friendly unto thine handmaid.] This shows
wherein she took the greatest comfort, even in his last words, in praising
her virtues, and praying for her: which shows, what it is wherein the godly
poor take special comfort, even in their good name for well-doing, and in the
prayers of such as be godly. To be praised of the godly for well-doing, is
great comfort: for they be the best Judges thereof, and they be the best men;
and their prayers, as before is noted, are available with God. Let us then
strive to get a good name with them, and to have their prayers, and requests to
God for us; and when we get these, let us be comforted therein. The word
translated friendly, is in the Hebrew, to the (...)
heart, and so the Septuagints translate it: The heart is affected with
comfortable words. Thus Joseph Genesis 50. 21.
also spoke to the heart of his brethren: for the heart in adversity wishes
comfort, and when the same is offered, it rejoices therein. Therefore must we
so speak to the afflicted, as we may Osea 2. 14.
make glad the heart of the oppressed. So does the Lord speak to his people:
and so commands Esai. 40. 2.
he his Prophets to speak unto them. Now, to speak to the heart of another,
is thus: First, when we speak with a feeling of their afflictions from our
own hearts: thus the Jews comforted Mary John 11. 19.
and Martha. The Syriach there is, They spoke with their heart; and so spoke
Saint Paul to the Thessalonians: 1. These. 2. 11.
And secondly, to speak such things as tend to their comfort, and what we know
in their case may comfort them, as Joseph did to his brethren; Genesis 50. 21.
and as the Prophet Esaias shows in Cha. 40. 2. If this be our duty and our
mercy to the distressed, then they offend against mercy and charity, who speak
uncomfortably unto the afflicted, as the Jews did to our Savior upon the
cross; and the friends of Job unto Job, which much displeased the Lord, and
kindled his wrath against them. Boaz before called her his daughter, but she
names her self to be his handmaid: a term of humility, and a note of
modesty in her self, who was nothing lifted up with a proud conceit of her
self, for all his favor and commendations: For godly and humble persons are
in themselves no whit the higher minded for the good that is spoken of them,
nor for the countenance of great persons toward them: for they truly know
themselves to be nothing, and that all is from God, the Fountain of goodness.
Therefore there is no danger to praise these upon just cause to their faces for
their comfort, as Boaz does Ruth here, especially being in a low estate, and in
affliction.

Though I be not like one of thine handmaidens.] Thus does Ruth debase her
self: for such as be truly religious, have a low esteem of themselves: The
examples are pregnant in Moses, Gideon, Abigail, Exodus 3. 13. (...). 6. ^5. 1.
Sam. 25. 24.
and the Centurion, who held himself no^ worthy that Christ should come under
the roof of his house: so lowly thought he of himself. Because they know and
feel their infirmities, they have ouermastered pride and self-love, they
acknowledge that in themselves, that is, in their flesh, dwells no good, and
therefore they think and speak of themselves very humbly. Which grace we must
labor for: for it will procure Prou. ^2. 4. and 15. 33.
love, yea honor: for he that humbles himself, shall be exalted. Now, the
true signs of such as be lowly in their own eyes, are these. First, they
think better of others than of themselves, Phil. 2. 3.
as Ruth does here, and as men should do. Secondly, they be loath to undertake
great and high matters, as Moses to go to Pharaoh, and Exodus 3. 11. 1. Sam.
18. 23.
to bring Israel out of Egypt; and David to be Saul's son in law. Thirdly, if
they be advanced, they receive honor with great humility, as Abigail did.
Fourthly, in their high place and prosperity 1. Sam. 25. 41.
they be not of a proud and hautie spirit, as we may see in Joseph, Moses,
David, Ester ruled by Mordecai, and in the Apostle Saint Paul. Fifthly, they
scorn no duty, though mean, if it Genesis 13. 8.
be a duty for them to do. Abraham the Uncle will entreat peace at the hands
of his Nephew Lot; If Dathan and Abiram scorn to come to Moses, Number. 16. 12,
25.
he will go out to them: they stand not upon their place, so as they neglect
what is fit to be done. Which justly reproves those which have too high an
esteem of themselves: which pride arises, First, of an ouerweaning of
themselves of their own gifts, or what they think to be good in them.
Secondly, by only looking upon the good in them, and what by their place and
birth they may claim, but not at all of the evils in themselves, by which they
have cause to be cast down. And thirdly, by comparing themselves either with
their inferiors, or with their equals, upon whom yet they cannot look with an
equal eye, but with some better esteem of themselves, by some one thing or
other, wherein they would find themselves to excel them; but they never look
upon their superiors, except with the eye of envy, nor upon any in that
wherein they be ouermatched, which makes them so proud: the true signs
whereof are these; First, they highly esteem of themselves, and very meanly
of others, and that often of their betters, as did Gaal. Judge. 9. 28, 29.
Secondly, they have aspiring spirits, and think themselves worthy of higher
places, as Adam and Eve; Absalom; with Corah and his company. Thirdly, they are
in prosperity impatient, and cannot endure the neglect of duty toward them,
which they look for, as Haman. Lastly, Ester 3. 5. and 5. 9. Number. 16. 12. Genesis
16.
they disdain to be at command of their betters, as did Dathan and Abiram, and
Hagar to be in subjection to her Mistress: for they think themselves, as good
as others.

Quest. Here it may be asked how Ruth was unlike to Boaz handmaidens?

Answ. It is thought she so spoke, because she was not an Israelitish borne,
one within the Covenant and of Gods people, but a Moabitish woman, of an
idolatrous kindred, and incestuous race. In which respect she might well think
her self inferior to them: for the children of the Church are more excellent
than any other people whatsoever. David therefore held it better to be a
dorekeeper in Gods house, than to dwell in the Tents of the ungodly; and Moses
judged the Israelites in affliction more happy, then the Egyptians and himself
in Pharaoes court; for the Churches children are Gods Children, when all other
are but his servants; they are in the covenant of God, the other strangers;
they have spiritual gifts communicated to them, the other enjoy but temporal
favors: they are highly esteemed of God, and bought with a price, when the
other are accounted but as whelps, as Christ spoke to the Canaanitish woman,
and are left in their spiritual captivity; they have Angels for their guard,
and commanded to attend upon them, the other have not so: Lastly, they have
inheritance in Heaven, but the wicked shall go into Hell, and all the people
which forget God. And therefore in this respect Ruth might speak truly,
though now she was become a Proselyte, and so was to be held as one of the
Lords people.

Verse 14. And Boaz said unto her, At meal time come thou hither, and eat of
the bread, and dip thy morsel in the vinegar. And she sat besides the
Reapers: and he reached her parched corn, and she did eat, and was sufficed,
and left.
THe last words of Boaz in this first conference with Ruth, still expressing
more and more his love unto her. First, in calling her to their victuals. Then,
in giving her some himself, even so much, as was sufficient for the present,
and more also: for she left thereof. So here Boaz inuiteth her to dine with
them; then she sits down, he welcommeth her, and she eats and is
sufficed.

And Boaz said unto her.] The more thankful she showed her self, the more
favor she found: for thankfulness and humility increase favor, as we see
here: Which two virtues are so lovely, as they draw the liking of all men unto
them: humility graceth a man's person, and another thinks himself honored
by a humble carriage toward him, and thanks is the praising of his goodness,
and an acknowledgement of being beholden, which do much move men's hearts unto
kindness and favor: very thankful was Saint Paul, and so was David to them
which did Phil. 4. 15. 1. Sam. 30. 26.
them good: whose examples we must follow.

At meal time come thou hither.] Boaz knew her to be poor, and therefore he
helps every way to supply her wants; in the field for the present, but he
leaves her to her labor, to provide for afterward. And thus the poor are to
be sustained in their present wants so, as they may yet follow their calling,
and labor therein. In saying at Meal time, it notes that there were set
times to eat, and preparation made for it. And so indeed do good householders,
as we see in the commendations of the good huswife: Prou. 31. 15.
for this argues a care and love to servants, and also preue^teth their
lingering in their labor, when they need not murmr for their diet, nor long
wait for it. This care should be in the Governors of families, which
reproves, First, such as can call upon their servants to set them to work,
but are too negligent in preparing food for them, wholesome and sufficient.
Secondly, such as do provide, but not in due season. Thirdly, such as will
provide in time, but will hardly allow them time to eat, for hastening them to
their work. But these cause servants to pocket, to steal, to have their
secret meetings to the great damage of the family, and so make good that which
Solomon says, There is that withholds Prou. 11. 24.
more then is meet, but it tends to poverty. This also is contrary to that
precept in some sort, Thou shall not muzzell the mouth of the Ox, which Deuteronomy.
25. 4.
treads out the corn. And it is contrary to the condition of such as be
godly: for such a one is merciful to his beast, then much more to his servant.
Prou. 12. 10.


And eat of the bread, and dip thy morfell in the vinegar.] Here is their
household fare and harvest men's feeding: they had bread of wheat, but the 1.
King. 5. 11.
usual was of barley, being most commonly mentioned, Judge. 7. 13. 2. King. 4.
42. Iosu. 6. 9. as the ordinary bread. Vinegar was used in hot countries, both
to stir up appetite, and to quench thirst; they used also oil, 1. King. 5.
11. In Italy Lauater in hunc locum.
they used in harvest to mingle vinegar and wine and water together; this fare,
provided for Boaz family, he allowed Ruth to eat of. For a merciful man will
not only relieve the poor abroad, but sometimes at home with the food of his
family, as Job Job 31. 17, 18. Nehe. 5. 18.
did. He limits not his goodness, but is ready to help as he sees occasion,
and as the poor shall stand in need. Let the rich then this way Luke 14. 13,
14. 1. Sam. 25. 11.
relieve the poor, (and not play the Nabals part) if reason so require. Note
again here, what homely and plain fare the godly in former times were
contented to live with usually. See this in Abraham his intertainement, Bread,
Butter, Milk and Veale; he runs to fetch the Calfe himself; Sarah bakes
the Cakes, and the man dresseth the Calfe, for which the strangers stay. Poor
2. King. 4. 38.
feeding had the Prophets; though Elisha bade set on the great pot, it was but
homely fare. They were not so dainty-toothed as now men be, which can eat
nothing but what is finely cookt. The first sweet tooth that in Scripture I do
read of, Genesis 27. 4.
was old Isaac; he loved sauourie meat, which Esau provided for him; in whom
he took such pleasure for his venison and sweet meats, that he would have
turned the blessing due to Jacob, upon him, which that profane Esau had
formerly sold for a mess of pottage, in the sale of his birthright. The godly
should not eat for the palate, and to please appetite, but to preserve nature,
which is contented with a little, and wholesome, though it want the dainty
cooking. Hungry stomachs, and bodies well labored, will not much care for
sauce; this daintiness arises of idleness, and too much plenty, which do
breed diseases, and shorten life in many. Let these nice stomakes know, that
Esau; who no doubt fed daintily, that could provide so well for his father; yet
when he came once home hungry, could be glad of hunters fare, and sup up a
mess a pottage: such a delicate Cook is Hunger, which can season and make
sauourie very homely cheer. They that despise plain feeding, and love to fare
delicately every day, must remember, that it was the Luke 16. 1.
practice of him that went to hell, he fared deliciously every day. This
hardens the heart of such, not to regard the poor, as it did his. This is
chargeable, and brings unto poverty, and Prou. 21. 16.
withholds men from doing good works: for three things have destroyed
charity among us in rich men and Gentlemen, as they be called, to wit, costly
buildings, costly raiment, and costly fare. Lastly, this engenders lust,
whence follow many enormities in them which follow idleness, one of the sins
of Sodom. This moderate feeding, Ezech. 16.
and homely wholesome fare, which formerly men were content to feed upon, may
reprove the daintiness of servants, which now adays will hardly be content
with such fare in their Masters service, as when after coming to their own
hand, they would be glad of the worst bit thereof: but thus it is when men
know not when they be well, neither understand what it is to be maintained of
others, till they come to find themselves.

And she sat besides the reapers.] She did not impudently thrust in her self
amongst them, but modestly took place somewhere besides them. Whose example
teaches, that free favors are to be modestly received of the poor. It is
civility, it is a virtue praise worthy. And therefore let the poor learn
modesty, learn to carry themselves as they ought, they shall procure more
favor then the impudent, and the unmannerly beggars.

And he reached her parched corn:] That is, corn steept and dried, and made
for to eat; this we read of elsewhere also, as a common food, Josh. 5. 11.
1. Sam. 17. 17. and 2. Sam. 17. 28. Leuit. 23. 14. This was of the best food
at the table; this kind 2. Sam. 17. 28.
of food was presented to David and his followers; 1. Sam. 17. 17.
and the same carried by him from his father to his brethren, an Ephah of it:
so Abigail 1. Sam. 25. 18.
brought to David five measures hereof, and of this Boaz gives to Ruth, noting
his kind courtesy to her: for it is a note of respect, when the Master of the
table reaches of that which is before him unto 1. Sam. 1. 4.
others. So did Elkanah to Hannah, whom he specially loved; yea, sometime thus
did our Savior Luke 24. 30. Ioh. 21. 30.
to his Disciples, which men do now follow, but oftener therein showing their
own good manners, as it is accounted, then making it the token of love; which
by these things now in this complementing age cannot be discerned. Observe
hence further, that a godly rich man can be content, that the godly poor taste
of the best of that which is before him: for such he knows are near to him
in Christ, and dear to God his Father. He gave not to Ruth what he would have
given to his dogs, or what is hardly fit for dogs, or good for none but for
dogs. Many indeed give to their dogs what might be fit for the poor: (an evil
sin under the Sun, which may cause them or theirs to want:) and other give
only to the poor, what else they would give their dogs, by a too base
estimation of their poor brethren; such gifts are not esteemed of God, though
he say, that what is given to them, is lent to him: but it must be an Alms
beseeming them, and fit for a Christian to give to a man, and not unto a dog.

And she did eat, and was satisfied, and left.] As she sat down to eat,
being bidden, so she did eat as much as did suffice, and left. Which shows,
first, her plenty, which is a blessing of God, to have Deuteronomy. 11. 15. Leuit.
25. 5. Psalm. 37. 3.
enough to suffice nature; for so God promises to his. Now, this blessing
stands in three things; first, in health with a good stomach, that nature may
receive food for nourishment: secondly, in competencie of food, and wholesome
withal: thirdly, in Gods blessing of the same received, that it may strengthen
us: none of these can be wanting to the necessary preservation of life: for
stomach without food, food without health and stomach, and both without Gods
blessing, are not able to save life; where therefore they concur, men have
cause to bless God: so much for the plenty. In the next is showed her
moderation: she ate not to satietie, but what was sufficient: for moderate
feeders eat only to content nature; and that is sufficient which refreshes
the body, and keeps it apt for labor, and not that which satisfies the
unruly appetite, but ouer-chargeth nature. This teaches us to eat what may
suffice, and be thankful to God; two extremes are to be avoided: the one is
such abstinence, whereby sufficient food is not received to sustain life;
either of a foolish devotion, as some formerly have done; or else of a
desperate neglect of life, which is the murdering of a man's self. The other
is excess, which is the sin of gluttony, ouercharging nature, which sin is
forbidden in Scripture: it breeds security in the heart, and Luke 21. 34.
Romans 13. 13. Phil. 3.
diseases in the body, and so shortneth life. Such a one as is so given to this
sin, is a belly-god; he is like the Horse-leech, which sucks till it can draw
blood no longer, but is ready to burst: He is like the Fish called Onos, or the
Asse-fish, which has the heart in the belly; so is this man set all on his
panch. He is like the beast called Gulon, a name answerable to his nature,
which Gesner.
eats that which he preyeth upon, if it be a horse, till all be devoured,
ever filling his belly, and then emptying it, and then falling to it again,
till all be consumed: such a delight has he in his appetite. And such
beast-like men there have been, who having filled their belly, have for the
greedy desire and insatiableness of their appetite, in variety of dishes and
delicacies, wished their back a belly. Such Gulons may from this beast behold
themselves, now like him they be; but I may say, how worse they be; for he is
a beast, and does but like himself; but these be men having reason to guide,
and should have Religion to bridle their devouring nature, and brutish
appetite. Lastly, note that Ruth left of that which was given her, which she
also reserved to give unto her Mother in law, as it follows after in verse. 18.

Verse. 15. And when she was risen up to gleane, Boaz commanded his young men,
saying, Let her gleane even among the sheaues, and reproach her not.
RVTHS return to her labor is here set down, and her encouragement in the
same by Boaz his love, who charged his servants to give her leave to gleane,
and that among the sheaues, and not reproach her for so doing.

Before I come to the words, here it may be demanded, Whether there was giving
of thanks, seeing there sitting down, and there arising up to labor is
mentioned, but not this duty of thanksgiving, and prayer to God for a blessing
upon their food?

Answ. We are to think they did, though not here noted: for every thing is not
written which there was done; as Ruths thanks for her food, which we cannot
think she omitted, who before did show her self every way so thankful. And
there are such reasons to persuade us that Boaz would not neglect this duty,
as we may easily admit his giving of thanks. First, his own godliness and
knowledge of his duty; and then the commandment of God, Deuteronomy. 8. 10. which he
could not be ignorant of, and of which no doubt he made conscience. Therefore
let not any from hence gather a loose liberty to neglect this duty, because
the holy Writer mentions it not, but learn from other places to know it to
be their 1. Cor. 10. 30.
duty. It was a custom among Christians, as at this day with us; there is a
commandment to 1. Cor. 10. 31.
glorify God in eating and drinking. The creatures of God are to be received
with thanksgiving, 1. Tim. 4. 3, 5.
and are sanctified by the Word of God and prayer. And holy men have used it;
Samuel, Saint 1. Sam. 9. 13.
Paul: yea when he and the people had long fasted, Act. 27. 35.
yet ate he not before grace. Our blessed Savior, the innocent Lamb of God,
spotless and Ioh. 6. 11, 23.
sinlesse, yet ate not, but first gave thanks. It therefore is our duty, and
befitting all, before they receive food, to give thanks: For what can our
meat do without Gods blessing? How soon have some been choked, and have
ended their days suddenly? And do we not remember, that the Israelites
perished with meat in their mouths? Neither let this duty be put off to
children, as if it were too mean a duty for the Master of the table. Were it
not grossly ridiculous, and a very scornful part, for a man to receive a
favor from a King, and then call his child to give him thanks? Our Savior
put not this off to another, nor Samuel, nor Paul: are they not worthy
imitation?

And when she was risen up to gleane.] The History turns again to Ruth, and
shows what she did after her repast, and the liberal feeding allowed her by
Boaz: she betook her self to gleaning again, and returned to her former
labor. Whence we may learn, I. That the godly poor, by their favors
received, and helps in their need, are not the more negligent, but the rather
the more painful in their labors, as may be seen here in Ruth. For they
know that such helps are for to stir them up to well-doing, which use they
make of them, and not to live idly, as many do, who are not 2. These. 3.
worthy to eat. The poor are to follow Ruths steps, and learn for the
mercies of men toward them, to continue painful in their calling. II. That
the true use and end of receiving food, is to Eccles. ^0. 17.
strengthen our bodies to preserve them in labor. Ruth eats to suffice
nature to return to work. The Apostle joins eating and labor together,
neither 2. These. 3. 10. 2. These. 3 8.
would he eat the bread of idleness; nor the good woman, commended in the
Proverbs. Prou. 31. 27.
God would not allow the sole Monarch of all the whole earth, no not in
innocence, when the Earth brought forth without labor, to eat without
paines-taking; he must dress the Garden. Food is the reward of labor of such
as be able, and it is a blessing to eat the labor of our Psalm. 128. 2.
hands. Therefore such are here reproved, which rise up to eat and drink, and
do eat and drink to rise up and play, or prate, or sleep, or to run to
plays, to fulfill their lust; to deck themselves like wantons, the sons and
daughters of Belial, of Iezabel: some be Cains race, and eat to be vagabonds,
going up and down begging: some of Esaus race, and eat to hunt and hawke,
till they have sold their inheritance for a mess of pottage, and themselves be
less worth than one meal, which they before bestowed upon their dogs; these
should know that they are borne to labor, and that godly men and women have so
bestowed their time; yea Jesus Christ himself lived in a calling painefully.

Boaz commanded his young men, saying, Let her gleane even among the sheaues.]
What Ruth desired, verse the seventh, here Boaz allows her, when he saw her
so well given and so painful. So we see how the godly diligent hand obteineth
favor and Prou. 13. 4. Genesis 31.
a blessing: as appears in Ruth here; and in Jacob, whose pains the Lord
rewarded abundantly. Mat. 25.
This is taught in the Parable of the talent, in which the stock of the
diligent is increased. For Prou. 13. 4.
God has thus promised to do; and labor is a means appointed of God to get
his blessings, who also opens the heart of the rich to do good to the poor
which labor painefully. Would we have supply of our wants? Would we have
earthly blessings? Then must we labor and take pains. Of gathering among the
sheaues, see verse the seventh. Boaz here is not only content that she should
gather, by, or besides, but between the sheaues, where more plentiful
gathering was of ears and scattered corn; it was more then a common favor,
an argument of his special love. The rich are to be merciful, yet may they
extend their bounty, as they shall like, to one more than to another, as they
shall think fitting. Of which before on verse 7.

And reproach her not;] or as the marginall reading is, shame her not. From
these words note, I. Young men are apt to offer injury, and to reproach the
poor women, widows, and strangers; else Boaz would not have given them this
charge, but that he knew their wanton behavior by nature, and how the Jews
took liberty to use their speeches against such strangers, especially,
perhaps, when they saw her better respected then their own country women. II.
That reproching is to put shame upon one, therefore is such a word here used,
(...)
as may be translated either way. III. That goodness and mercy stands not
only in doing good, but also in preventing evil, as much as lies in us: both
is here done by Boaz, as is also before noted out of verse. 9.

Verse. 16. And let fall also some of the handfuls of purpose for her, and leave
them, that she may gleane them, and rebuke her not.
BOaz speech continued to his servants, touching his liberality toward Ruth,
who thought it not enough to let her gleane among the sheaues (for that he knew
she would not filch nor steal out of them,) but he commands his servants,
that they should of purpose let fall handfuls for her to gather, and not rebuke
her for so doing. So here is Boaz charge, with the end why, and also a
forbidding of them to rebuke her.

And let fall also some of the handfuls of purpose for her.] As they reaped,
they cut by handfuls, and thereof made sheaues, of which handfuls they should
let some fall, as they were reaping, or else some of them, as they were binding
up the sheaues, which is the more likely. Howsoever it was, we may note, I.
That a merciful man and a godly man is frank-hearted to the godly poor, such
as be painful and deserve love. This is evident in Boaz, whose merciful
kindness is many ways set forth; he spoke to her in a loving appellation,
calling her, Daughter; he admitted her to his table, as one of his family; he
praised her virtues, and prayed for her; he bound his servants to the good
behavior toward her, to prevent injury which might be offered to her; and
he also did give to her, and that both freely without asking, and largely
without niggardly sparing. Now a good man is moved, as Boaz to this, because
he conceiueth the misery of another with a fellow-feeling; he places
himself in their stead, and considers his own frailty, the worlds
mutabilitie, and that he may stand in need, if God should lay his hand upon
him: lastly, he knows that God loves a cheerful giver. Therefore here let
us in our charity toward the godly, imitate this blessed Boaz, show our love
in words, in deeds, in doing good, in preventing evil every way; and what we
do, to do it freely, and bountifully. Many will not give, as being altogether
merciless: but let them remember the threatening of James. Many will give, James
2. 13.
but not largely, nor freely without importuning, though they be able, and
their brethren stand in need. II. Note, that servants are not to give what is
their Masters, without his warrant: for Boaz here allows them to give her;
and without this warrant, it had not been lawful for them to have thus left
her handfuls of corn: for servants are but trusted with, or amongst their
Masters goods; they are not disposers of them; the disposing is at the pleasure
of the Owner, and not of the servants, which have no right in them at all.
Those servants therefore which will take upon them to give of their Masters
goods, under pretense of charity, or what else, are to be reproved: for it is
theft so to do, without the will of the Genesis 31. 33.
Owner; and the gift so given, under what show soever, is not acceptable to
God: for men must give of their own, and not be liberal upon other men's
estates.

And leave them that she may gleane them.] Here it may be asked, Why did not
Boaz rather give her a quantity of corn, and so send her home, rather then to
let her abide in the fields to gleane? Because he would so relieve her, as yet
he would keep her in labor, and not maintain her in idleness. And this is
the best charity, so to relieve the poor, as we keep them in labor. It
benefits the giver, to have them labor; it benefits the commonweal, to
suffer no Droanes, nor to nourish any in idleness; and it benefits the poor
themselves, it keeps them in health, it discouers them to be idle or
painful; if painful, it procures them favor: and lastly, it keeps them
from idleness, and so from a sea of wickedness, which the lazy persons are
subject to, and run into, as the vagrant poor gives us sufficiently to know,
which dwell among us, or rather rogue up and down without dwelling, or
certain abode. Let therefore men thus relieve the poor with Boaz; and if men
would spare from excess of apparel, dainty fare, idle expenses in keeping
Hawks and Hounds, in following unthrifty gaming, and such like, and lay up
that to charitable uses, to set the poor on work, what singular good might be
done! the poor would cease to complain, and the rich themselves would be
better for it.

And rebuke her not.] This caveat he adds, that they might not think his
command, To let fall handfuls, was for trial of her; but that she should
carry away what they should so let fall, without check. Before, he warned them
not to reproach her, by giving her ill language; and here he will not have her
to suffer rebuke at their hands, for taking what he shall allow her: for the
servant is not to find fault with any person, for receiving his Masters
kindness: he may dispose of his own, and the servant is not to dislike with
it, in checking the receiver, in whom there is no cause of rebuke, but rather
in the evil eye of the servant, Matthew. 02. 15.
as our Savior shows in the parable of the Vineyard.

Verse. 17. So she gleaned in the field until even, and beat out that she had
gleaned; and it was about an Epha of Barley.
THis shows the continuance of Ruth in her labor, till the end of the day:
then, her beating out the corn, and what it by measure came unto: the scope to
set out Gods blessing, her painful travel, and Boaz furtherance thereof, as
is noted in the former verses, by allowing her to gleane amongst the sheaues,
and commanding his servants to let fall handfuls for her to gather up.

So she gleaned in the field until Even.] Ruth abode in that same field, as
Boaz advised; there she found kindness. It is good abiding there, where we do
well. It is wantonness to be removing from thence, and not being in want, as
many light servants do, who as rolling stones, which can never gather moss,
feel want ere they be aware. Ruth kept her self there where she was well; and
so should others do, and reap the fruit of wisdom and constancy: both
which appeared in Ruth herein. Note again from her example of sedulitie, that
such as love labor, take pains so long as they may; all the day till night:
for the day is the time of labor till the evening, as the Psalmist speaks;
Man goes out to his labor until the Evening. Ruth rested not till the time
of rest: for they that love labor, do strengthen themselves to it, as Solomon
speaks Prou. 31. 17.
of the good hous-wife. And this strengthening is thus; when they labor to
come with a good will to work; when they force their own consciences thereto
from the Commandment of God to labor; when they do consider labor as the
ordinary means appointed, both to get an outward estate, and to preserve the
same: and lastly, when they joy in Prou. 31. 18.
the fruit of their labor, and reap the profit of their hands. Thus should
we strengthen our selves to take pains, as Ruth here did. So shall we eat
the bread of our own hands, as the 1. These. 4. 11.
Apostle exhorts: which, as before I have noted, 2. These. 3. 12. Psalm. 128.
1. Prou. 31. 27.
is a blessed thing, and we shall not eat the bread of idleness, the bread
which the good woman would not taste of: it is unsavory to all that truly
fear God, and walk as they should, in an honest calling. This diligence and
constant labor of Ruth, checketh those which will not work on the day, to
have the sweet laboring man's rest in the night; not in health, to relieve
themselves in sickness; not in youth, to maintain old age; not in summer,
for heat; not in winter, for cold: but rather as Droanes desire to live upon
the sweat of other men's brows, not upon the labor of their own hands, as God
spoke to Adam. They also are here reproved, Genesis 3.
which will not be constant in labor, but work only by fits to supply
present wants, and to have money to spend, not setting hand to labor while
they have one penny, never providing for the time to come, but do rest upon
their present strength, to labor for supply of present wants, and no farther;
whereby it comes to pass, that in sickness and old age they must either
be relieved of others, or perish for hunger.

And beat out that she had gleaned.] She was both the Gleaner and the
Thresher. Corn was beat out sometime by oxen, or horses treading, or by a
wheel running upon it, or by a staff, as here, or by the flaile, as now every
where with us. It was a mean course to gleane, but a meaner for her self to
sit down to beat out what she had gleaned; and yet this she did: before she
went home to her mother in law, whose house she would not cumber, nor trouble
her old head with the noise of the beating, she would bring home all ready
with her. She labored more like a servant then a daughter in law, and yet she
in love was more then a daughter in law; her service was beyond a servant in
labor and travel, with diligence and faithfulness, and her love surpassed and
exceeded the love of many natural children. The thing principally here to be
noted is, that the godly, which indeed be truly humble, and painful, refuse
no honest kind of labor. Abel will keep sheep; Jacob will do the like; Sarah
will bake cakes, even ordinary bread, not like the Apothecarie stuff, such as
our Ladies perhaps will put their hands unto, if their fingers be yet not too
fine; Rebecca will take a pitcher and fetch water, yea more, will draw for the
Camels of a stranger out of courtesy; Yea, Gideon will thrash; Boaz will lie
by his corn heap; Ruth will beat out her corn; and the honorable woman will
put her hand to the distaffe. The reasons are, because such have put on
humility, which will refuse to do nothing that is honest and lawful; they
know no dishonestie therein, and that it was held a virtue aforetimes to labor
in such things, as the pride of our times judge base and contemptible, and
themselves disgraced therein. By no Vide Mar. Buc. de Regno Christi. lib. 2.
cap. 48, 49.
means many in our age will labor, upon any occasion in any common thing:
they have (forsooth) their reasons: They allege birth. But who better borne
then Gain and Abel the sons of the sole Monarch of the whole world? Christ
Jesus by birth, as man, descended of Kings, and the King of Judah, yet was a
Carpenter: he had Mark. 6. 3.
birth to have boasted on, and he had power divine to have exempted him from
labor, yet he would not do so. King Alpho^sus doing something with his hands,
and laboring so, as some which beheld him found fault, smiled and said, Has
God given hands to Kings in vain? Yea the Grand Segnior by his law, as I take
it, is to The great Lord of the Turkish Empire.
do daily some bodily work with his own hands, and that law they do
observe, to grace labor, and that laboring men should not become
contemptible. They will allege, I mean our Gentlemen Idlers, that they have
rich parents to maintain them, that they need not work. Yes, if not for
maintenance, yet to prevent a world of wickedness which comes by their idle
life. For who set out the ensigns of pride in apparel, but these? Who prove
so prodigal? Who live so much in filthy lusts of uncleanness? Who maintain
play, and play houses? Who are the Tabacconists, the drunkards, the ryotous
persons? Who of the roaring boys, and damned crew, but commonly these? Behold,
you rich parents, the goodly fruit of the idle education of your children! But
grant they prove not ever such as be here named: may they yet live without
callings, and only live idly, and do nothing, because their parents can
maintain them? Did rich Abraham so bring up Isaac, or he so Jacob; and this
man so his children; or did less thus train up David? If he had, surely he
had never been King of Israel: for God never made choice of any man to advance
him, but such as were in their callings. God calls Moses keeping See what
David was when he yet kept sheep. 1. Sam. 16. 12, 18, ^9. and 17. 40, 42.
sheep; so David; and Gideon when he was threshing; and Elisha when he was
plowing; Amos when he was with his cattle. What shall I speak of the Apostles
when Christ did call them? Was not some mending their nets, other fishing,
another sitting at the receipt of custom? none idle or out of a calling. So
long as the prodigal son lived out of a calling, yea till he kept swine, as
base as it was, he never came to himself, he never had grace to repent. These
Idlers and loose livers yet say for themselves, that it is a disgrace for them
to mind so mean things, as the men of old time did. Disgrace! Who can hold
that to be a disgrace, which better me^ have done? Better for piety to God,
better before men, for nobleness of birth, for greatness of state, and for
name of renown in the world. Again, who do make that a disgrace now, which
God in his Word shows to have been their praise? This conceit of disgrace
arises from the spirit of pride and vanity, in the sons of Belial. But if
conceit of disgrace make them avoid labor in some calling, whether of the mind
or body; then would I feign know, why they avoid not those things wherein
disgrace is indeed? and why they shame not to live idly, prodigally,
lasciuiously, in riot and excess, in foolish pride, and vanity, and lewd
courses unbeseeming the name of Christianity? Lastly, these unprofitable
members will say, they have better been brought up, than to take pains. What
is this better bringing up? It is to follow fashions, or to drink and whiffe
the Tobacco pipe, or to congie and complement, or to hunt and hawke, and then
curse and swear as the furies of Hell; or else to handle a weapon to strike
and stab, and upon a word to challenge, and so into the field to play the
Devils companion, or to play at dice and cards, or to read amorous books, to
court a Curtisan, I should say a Gentlewoman or a young Gallant, to vanity and
wantonness. How much more commendable were it, and profitable to be employed
in some good literature, as in the knowledge of tongues, and arts? And will
their bringing up allow them to live idly? Was not Paul brought up at the feet
of Gam^liel a great Statesman among the Jews, and yet he labored with his
hands, and never lived out of a particular calling? And was not Moses brought
up in Pharaoes Court, and in all the learning of the Egyptians? Yet did he live
in a calling, and would be a Shepherd, rather then live idly, or in Pharaoes
Court wickedly: he pleaded not his birth, his gentry, his better education, as
these do. It is enough to be a Gentleman, as they speak now adays, to
countenance him in sin, in sloth, in bravery, in contempt of a strict life,
to live out of a calling, saving the calling of a Gentleman, a profession so
abused to advance sin and Satan's kingdom, as nothing more: yet never read I,
nor heard I of in holy Writ, or elsewhere, that the title and name of a
Gentleman should be a calling, to exempt men from all callings, from all honest
labors, and to leave them loose, as wild Colts without bit or bridle, to their
own lusts and licentious liberty, and finally, to their ruin and
destruction. This is not Gentry, but rather Gentilisme, to be hated of a
Christian. The practice whereof was odious even in the Commonwealths of
Heathen men.

And it was about an Epha of Barley.] Thus much Exodus 16. 36.
her days labor came unto, which was almost a bushel after our measure. An
Epha was ten times as much as an Omer, which was the measure for gathering
Mannah; and this was as much Exodus 16. 16.
as would serve one man bread for a day. So Ruth had gathered so much in one
day, as might serve her many days: thus the Lord blessed her labor. Whence we
may learn this, that the Lord can and will give sometime a plentiful blessing
to the diligent hand. Thus he blessed Jacob in his painful service so, as he
was able to give to Esau a Genesis 32. 13, 14.
present of five hundred fifty head of beasts, and cattle, of one sort and
other; for all things are in his hand, and at his disposing. How soon did he
enrich again Job? It is nothing with the Lord to make a poor man rich. And
therefore in our labors let us have recourse unto God, because Deuteronomy. 8. 18.
he gives power to get wealth; without Psalm. 127. 2. Haggai 1. 6.
his blessing our labor is in vain; but with his blessing our labor shall
take good effect. John 21. 6.


Verse. 18. And she took it up, and went into the city; and her mother in law
saw what she had gleaned; and she brought forth, and gave to her that she had
reserved, after she was sufficed.
RVthes comfortable return out of the field, with what, whither, to whom, with
her kindness in giving what she had reserved at mealetime from Boaz table; so
as she had a double witness to show her mother his kindness; the Epha of
barley, and the food of his table: both which did (no doubt) greatly comfort
the heart of Naomi, as appears by her hearty prayers in the next verse.

And she took it up, and went into the City. She bears the burden her
self. And this is noted, to show how the Lord takes notice of the burdens of
his children; which are of two sorts, either such as be voluntarily
undertaken, and willingly for discharge of their duty, as Jacob in his service
to Laban, or Ruth here for her honest maintenance, or else imposed upon them,
as the burdens of Genesis 31. 12. Exodus 3. 7.
Pharaoh upon the Israelites: on both the Lord looks, approouing the one, and
pitying the other. Which may give comfort unto the painful, in bearing the
burden of their calling, or of oppression; for the Lord knows their
troubles, their labor and travel, and will do them good in the end, if they
wait with patience.

And her mother in law saw what she had gleaned.] By this it appears, that
Ruth did hide none of her gleaning from Naomi, but showed her all, and this for
three causes; to manifest Gods mercy toward her, that she might praise God
with her; to show that she had been painful in her absence, and not spent her
time idly; and to show her faithfulness, that she kept nothing from her. And
thus should children and servants do to such as depend upon their labor,
approve their labor by the fruits thereof, and their faithfulness unto their
Parents and Masters. They may not be faithless as some servants be, nor
careless and idle as be too many children, who under their Parents take
liberty to be lazy, when yet they have more reason to be painful and
careful then servants, as nature, better maintenance, and the hope of portions
and inheritance bind them.

And she brought forth, and gave her.] After that Ruth had showed what she had
gleaned, she took out some victuals, and gave to her mother in law also. Godly
children are kind and loving to their Parents. If this be in a daughter in
law, to a mother See chap. 4. verse. 15.
in law; much greater is the bond of duty of natural children to their
natural Parents, if they be truly religious: as may be seen in David to 1.
Sam. 22. 3. Genesis 45. 11.
his Parents, and Joseph to his. And good reason is there why they should do
their Parents all good: nature binds them, also the commandment Exodus 20.
of God to honor them; which comprehends love, reverence, obedience, and
relief; and the example of godly children, yea, of Christ himself unto his
mother, moves them. There be Ioh. 19. 26, 27.
also rare examples for this among the Heathen, See Val. Max. lib. 5. cap. 4.
the rather to persuade Christians hereunto, lest they rise up in judgment
against them. Let children therefore learn to be kind and merciful to their
poor Parents, and not be like the unnatural Impes, whereof there be these
sorts, such as care not to provide for them, but to get all they can from them;
they are not willing to do them good, but grudge to relieve them, and are sick
of their lives, wishing their death, to be eased of the burden. Other there be
which will rob their Parents, and steal from them what they can get, yea, and
think it no sin, as Solomon tells Prou. 28. 24.
us; yet are they the companions of a destroyer. The third sort are those
hellish monsters, who rise up to murder their Parents, but the Lord reuengeth
it, as we see in the example of Absalom.

That she had reserved, after she was sufficed.] It is meet to eat to
suffice nature, for the preservation of life, and the better inabling of us to
walk painefully in our calling, of which before in verse 14. Note farther
hence, I. That such as have true love, will spare from themselves to relieve
others, yea though they themselves be but poor, and have nothing but from hand
to mouth, as we say. Of this we have here an example, and in the poor Luke 21.
2.
widow, which gave her two mites; yea our Savior, who was relieved by others,
yet kept a bag for the poor; he spared of his gifts, to give unto others. For
true love cannot but pity the want of others: and such as so love, will not
hoard up for themselves, and let their poor brethren remain in want, when for
the present they have sufficient; they live in hope of supply, and doubt not of
Gods providence for the time to come, when they give charitably what they may
spare for the present. This condemns the cursed covetousness of such as have
laid up in store for many years, and yet will not bestow any thing upon such
as do need; and also it checketh such as excuse and exempt themselves wholly
and always for giving any thing, because they be poor. If this plea had
stuck in the heart of the poor widow, which cast her mites into the
treasury, she would have reserved them to her self: but so should she have
lost her eternal praises. II. Such as would thrive, spend not all at once, but
reserve somewhat both for themselves and for others. Ruth ate, she was
sufficed, and reserved some for afterward, for her mother and her self: she
was not ryotous and wastfull, because she had more then did suffice for the
present. For such as be painful, know how they come by that which they have;
they also know it to be a virtue to spare and keep, what necessity causes not
to be laid out, neither charity, nor piety to be spent; they know, that what
they have, is so their own before men, as yet before God they are but Stewards
thereof. Therefore from this, and Ruths example, we must learn frugality, to
use Gods blessings to do our selves good; but we must beware of waste, and not
let any thing be lost, as our Savior commanded, when he had fed so John 6. 12,
13.
many thousands. They then here are worthy of just reprehension, who wastfully
consume Gods blessings; some on their belly, as do Drunkards and Gluttons;
some on their fleshly delights, bringing themselves to a morsel of bread;
others upon play and gaming, idle and prodigal unthrifts, such as this our
nation now is too much burdened with; others upon too costly and often
fantastic attire, the ensign of pride and vanity; to whom if any speak for
their reformation, they reply with words of contempt of others, and careless
neglect of their own estate, saying, They spend but their own, what have any
to do with it? But these must remember, that they must give an account unto
God, whose blessings they waste; they must also know, that Gods gifts are not
given them to consume wholely upon themselves after their lusts, but to be
Stewards thereof for God, and in his stead to do good to others, as need shall
require. This prodigality the Lord often punishes with poverty Luke 15.
and sometime with imprisonment, yea with shameful deaths in some, whom God
gives over to fall into the hand of the Magistrate for some evil committed
and deserving death.

Verse 19. And her mother in law said unto her, Where have thou gleaned to day?
and where wroughtest thou? Blessed be he that did take knowledge of thee. And
she showed her mother in law, with whom she had wrought, and said, The man's
name with whom I wrought to day, is Boaz.
HEre is Naomi her question to Ruth, with her hearty prayer to God for him
that had so mercifully dealt with Ruth; and Ruths answer to her again, showing
with whom she had gleaned, and naming the name, even Boaz her kinsman.

And her mother in law said, Where have thou gleaned to day, and where
wroughtest thou?] When Ruth went out in the morning, she asked leave of Naomi
to go to gleane, but whither she knew not; therefore now being returned with
so much corn, and such food, she asks Ruth where she had been; not
doubting of Ruths honest dealing, but in admiration of Gods mercy, and in
desire to know who was the instrument of that hand of God upon her. For favors
bestowed, do win affections, and cause a longing after the party to know who
he is, if we know not his person, as here; and also what his name is, and of
what kindred, though we look upon the man, as Saul did; that 1. Sam. 17. 55,
56, 57, 58.
so we might see the reason thereof, and might show particularly our love unto
such a one, praise God, and pray also for him. Now, if this be the force of
benefits from man, how much more from God, from whom we receive so many and
daily blessings! These should win our affections to him, and work in us a
desire to know him, who he is, and why we should receive such kindness, that
so we might love him, praise him, and in all thankfulness yield him all
obedience. But, alas, upon whom do his blessings thus work? I wish that his
mercies made us not forget him, and to forsake him, when we have known him. In
this that Naomi suspecteth not Ruth, but rather admireth Gods mercy toward
her, we may also note, that the godly are not uncharitably suspicious of them
that be poor, when they know them to be godly. Naomi did not think of any
unjust dealing of Ruth, as if she had stolen this corn, nor that she had
gone a begging to get it, or this other food; for she asks where she had
gleaned and wrought? not where she had stolen and begged? For love is not
suspicious, it thinks 1. Cor. 13. 5.
no ill. Naomi was persuaded that some had bestowed this favor upon Ruth
gleaning and working in the field. This grace of charity must we labor for,
even in thinking not amiss of others in getting goods, though much in a small
time, so there be not apparent tokens of the ill means used in getting the
same: for God can suddenly enrich a man; as he did Abraham, and Lot; so Jacob
in the service of Laban: For the blessing Prou. 10. 22.
of the Lord makes rich. Yet if the man be wicked, and hastily is made rich,
except an apparent cause be seen, and the means also, he may be suspected:
for of such Solomon speaks in the Proverbs, that they shall not be innocent,
and Pro. 28. 20. and 20. 21.
goods so gotten, shall not be blessed in the end. Some from hence teach,
because Naomi asks Ruth, where she had gleaned, and wrought that day? that
Parents are to take an account of their children, how they spend their time,
where they have been, and with whom? Indeed this will make children to take
more heed to their ways, it will discover to parents their nature and
conditions the better, and it may prevent many evils through fear to be called
to an account for the same. As on the contrary, this neglect in parents gives
children the reine, and so they take liberty to sin, presuming of parents
indulgencie, as did Adoniah, to 1. King. 1. 6.
whom David never said, Why have thou done so? Which made him proud and
presumptuous to his own destruction.

Blessed be he that did take knowledge of thee;] to wit, to show thee this
mercy and kindness; for he takes knowledge of another, who considers so of
him, as his estate and condition requires, and thereafter does him good, as
Boaz did to Ruth, when he knew what she was, as is before noted out of verses
8. and 9. For which here Naomi is thankful, before she knew the name of the
man, and here heartily prays for him. Hence teaching, that benefits received,
provoke the godly to be thankful, though they know not the parties, and also
to pray for them; as Naomi does here. Which serves to encourage men to do good
to the godly, though their persons be not known: they shall not lose with them
the fruit of their well-doing; for such will be thankful, and will pray for
them, that God may bless them. And this teaches such as receive favors, to
show themselves thankful to them which bestow them. Now thankfulness
appears, First, in acknowledging of benefits received: the contrary is
ingratitude, and a note of pride withal. Secondly, in praying for them, as
Naomi does here; and Saint Paul, for his friends. Thirdly, in 2. Tim. 1. 16.
requiting the kindnesses, as we shall be able, and 1. King. 2. 7. Ios. 6. 23.
2. King. 4. 13. Ester 6. 3.
occasion offered, as David to Barzillai; the Spies to Rahab; Elisha to the
Shunamite; and the great Emperor Assuerus to poor Mordecai. Which is a
reproof to the ungrateful, such as will not acknowledge a benefit, or lessen
it when they confess it; they that never care to requite it, though it be in
their power so to do it, yea and need on the other side require it. Lastly,
such as do requite evil for good. Here we may farther note, that a good heart
rejoices in the welfare of another. For Naomi blesses God for Boaz taking
knowledge of Ruth, and for doing this kindness unto her; so do the Macedonians
for the Corinthians kindness unto the Saints at Jerusalem. For such have
loving hearts, and are void of envy, therefore can they rejoice and bless
God, yea and pray for a blessing upon those which do good unto others: which
grace we must strive for.

And she showed her mother in law, with whom she had wrought, and said, The
man's name with whom I wrought to day, is Boaz. As Naomi did demand of her where
and with whom she had been, so Ruth answers plainly, telling her that the
man's name, in whose field she gleaned that day, was Boaz: by which Naomi
perceived the good hand of Gods providence conducting her into the kinsmans
field, whose favor made her afterward to counsel Ruth to go into the
threshing floor to Boaz, as it follows in the next chapter. Ruth calls
gleaning, working, as Naomi did before: for the diligent hand works even in
that, which otherwise may seem to require no great labor. She says, she
wrought with him, not that he labored with her, neither that she did work
for him, as the Phrase in our speech does intimate, but her meaning is, that
she wrought in his field with his leave and good liking. In telling his name
to her mother in law, it seems she learned it in the field; no doubt, she did
ask after it, that so she might speak of his goodness unto her mother in
law, when she came home. And we must know, that it is our duty to take
special notice of such as do us good, to know them by name, that so they may
be acknowledged, as occasion shall be to meet with them, that they may in
particular pray for them, and to give them their due praises to others. For
either to neglect to know them, or easily to forget our Benefactors, is a fault.

Verse 20. And Naomi said unto her daughter in law, Blessed be he of the Lord,
who has not left off his kindness to the living and to the dead. And Naomi
said unto her, The man is near of kin unto us, one of our next kinsmen.
THis is Naomi her speech again unto Ruth: wherein she first earnestly
prays for Boaz, with the reason why she was so moved thereto, and then
shows her what he was to them, even a very near kinsman.

And Naomi said unto her daughter in law, etc.] When she heard who it was, and
calling to remembrance what he was to them, and what mercy he had formerly
showed unto her husband and children, she breaks forth into prayer for him.
Whence we may learn, that new kindnesses added to the old, do the more
inflame the affections to love and hearty well-wishing, as may appear here by
Naomi: For new favors call the old to remembrance, and testifies the
continuance of love. This is an encouragement to such as have been kind, still
to continue so to the thankful; the latter favors shall keep up the affection
of love, and be the remembrancer of what is past, and to bind the parties the
more unto them. Now, if this be so with men, how should we be inflamed in love
toward our good God and Father, who daily renews his blessings upon us?
Ought we not to increase in love according to his mercies? But oh ungrateful
man: What stupiditie possesses thine heart! Do we not receive his blessings
with one hand, and show our vnmindfulnesse of him by the other? If the keeping
of his commandment be the mark of our love, as it 1. John 5. 2.
is, then surely our waxing wanton against him, by abusing of his blessings,
openly proclaim rather hatred than love unto him. This is our
unthankfulness, of which we must repent.

Blessed be he of the Lord.] This is her prayer made to the Lord to bless
him. From this note many things. I. That Prayer in and by every true member of
the Church, has been only made unto God. This the examples of all the godly
do confirm, and thus are we commanded to do, and therefore the prayers made
to Sants, Angels, yea, or to the Virgin Mary, are abominable, and cursed
idolatry. II. That it is the Lord that does bless and make happy: for what is
begged of God, that is acknowledged to be his gift. And what happiness
corporal or spiritual can man attain unto, but by the Lord? Therefore if we
want blessings, let us beg them of him, if we have them, acknowledge him the
Author, and be thankful in cheerful obedience for the same, as we be
exhorted in the Word of God: For who can Deuteronomy. 10. 12. Romans 12. 1.
think himself blessed of God, and not be thankful and obedient unto him, but
such as be void of all grace? III. That the Lord will bless the merciful. For
she prays for that which she had warrant to ask: and we find that the Lord
has so promised Psalm. 41. 1, 3. Mat. 5. 7.
to do. And therefore let the merciful look for a blessing, and let us pray
for that blessing upon their heads, which show mercy unto the poor and needy,
that they may be encouraged in such works of charity. And to move them
hereto, let them consider Gods promise to them, how they be under Gods
protection, Deuteronomy. 24. 13.
how others pray for them, when they do little think thereof, and do bless
them, as Naomi does Boaz here; and if the poor fail of their duty, yet the
almesdeed ascends up to God, and Act. 10. 4.
the work done shall bless them, even the back and belly of the poor. Let
these things move Job 31. 20.
the rich to do works of mercy, and to rejoice therein. IV. That the poores
reward unto the rich for their works of charity, is only their prayer to God
for them. Naomi had no other recompense for Boaz, but this; and this is a great
requital, when it is a fervent prayer from faith; for such the Lord does
hear, and will himself reward their works, he becomes bound for them, to
make good what on their behalf is wanting. Which may greatly comfort such as
be merciful. And seeing the poor have nothing else to repay back, but their
prayers; let them not fail in this, not only when and while the benefit is in
receiving, but even when for time the favor may seem to be forgotten, so
often as their Benefactors come to their remembrance, not to fail to lift up a
thought to God for them.

Who has not left off his kindness to the living and to the dead.] The reason
which moved Naomi to pray so fervently for a blessing upon Boaz, was his
constant favor toward them alive, as before to her husband and children then
dead: and it is as if Naomi had said, He continues still in his former
kindness to us that be now alive, to thee and me, which he showed to my
husband and children now departed this life. The Papists prattle, Feuardentius
in hunc locum.
I know not what, of benefiting the dead by works of charity, out of this
place, by wresting the sense thereof to maintain their error: which I leave
as idle and unprofitable, and come to more sound and profitable instructions
for our selves. Hence may we observe, That true love in good men, dies not with
the dead, but is showed to those they leave behind them, as Boaz does here to
Ruth and Naomi for their husbands sake; so did David to Mephibosheth for
Ionathans sake: 2 Samuel 9. 1. Prou. 17. 17. 1. Sam. 22. 4.
for a true friend loves at all times. David received kindness of the King of
Moab, and being dead, he sent to comfort his son Hanun, if it 2. Sam. 10. 2.
had been so taken. For a true friend sees his friend alive in his children,
and posterity. Let us then, if we love one truly, not bury our love with him
in his grave, as the manner of the world is now, which is full of counterfeit
love. But let us imitate our heavenly Father, who loved Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, and their seed after them, and promises mercy unto thousands of the
posterity Exodus 20.
of such as love him, and keep his commandments. This reproves such which
let their love die with their friends; also such as love their friends
posterity, if they be rich, but not if they be poor, as Boaz does here: But
true friendship makes no difference of a friend by riches and poverty: for if
this make the difference, the friendship is certainly counterfeit. Thirdly,
this condemns such friends as love such as remain of their friends departed
so, as under color of kindness, they rob their children committed by the will
of their dead friend to their custody; such villainy there is in the world,
and falsehood masked under the shadow of love. Besides instruction, here is
also matter of consolation, if we consider how God raises up constant friends
to poor posterities; though this be rare, yet we have in this place an
example, that God is the same in power and mercy to do the like still for his
children: but be it that men fail to be faithful in their love, let us be
comforted in this, that the Lord is faithful: if he love Abraham his friend,
his posterity in Egypt after four hundred years shall reap benefit thereby;
if the Lord chose a David, he will for a long time for his sake show kindness
to his posterity. Let this, this I say, settle the hearts of careful parents
for their posterity: for if the Lord love them, he will not fail them; nor
forsake their posterity that shall depend upon him, he is the sure and
constant friend, and will not leave off his kindness to the living and to the
dead, as Naomi speaks here of Boaz.

And Naomi said unto her, The man is near of kin unto us, one of our next
kinsmen.] It may seem by this, that before now Naomi had not told Ruth of Boaz
her rich kinseman, but at this present, as occasion had now offered it self,
now she tells her that he was a very near kinsman, one of her Redeemers,
which had a right to redeem the inheritance, and so to marry her, and to raise
up seed unto the dead, as the Law required; and this Deuteronomy. 25.
Naomi tells her of, to show how natural affection did in some sort bind him
to this kindness which he had showed her, and also to comfort Ruth in this
poor estate, in hope of a better condition, as it afterward fell out. Observe
hence, I. That the godly wise poor are not vainglorious boasters of their rich
friends and kindred. Naomi made not him known before this to Ruth, both for
that she would not entice Ruth to come and embrace her company for any outward
respect of worldly friendship, and also because she knew it to be folly to
boast of rich friends, except they were sure to find them good and kind. Naomi
was not as some poor be, which foolishly brag of rich kinsfolk, while yet
they find them not true friends, such as will hardly acknowledge them to be of
their kindred, either do them almost any good at all. II. That it is then a
comfort to the poor to speak of rich kindred, when they show themselves kind,
as kindred ought to do; for kindred may so be called from kindness in them,
and by showing themselves kind to their kinsfolk, as Boaz does here; and
therefore Naomi now, but not before, tells Ruth of him, what he was to them.
The poor may hence learn when fitly to speak of such kinsfolk: and the rich
may see how to open the mouths of their poor friends to speak of them, and
to pray for them, even by showing the true tokens of love and kindred. III.
That near kinsfolk are to be kind to their poor kindred: for Naomi gives
this as some reason of Boaz his so great favor toward them: and this natural
bond of love has both reason and Religion to strengthen the same: and
therefore such as be so bound and will not be kind, do against nature,
reason, and Religion: as when parents neglect children; these, their parents;
so brethren and sisters one another: and yet this unnatural affection is
common in these our days, which the Apostle condemns, and also Romans 1. 31.
1. Tim. 3. 3.
foretells it to be a sin in the last days. Lastly, in calling Boaz one of
the Redeemers, as the word translated kinsmen shows, it may put us in mind of
this, that the Lord has great care over the poor, who appointed by his Law
the redemption Leuit. 25. 25.
of lands to the family again, from Deuteronomy. 25. 5. 6.
which it was fold. And this care has ever the Lord had, as may appear by
commanding to relieve them, by promising to reward the good done unto them, by
blessing such as have been merciful, and leaving their praises in the
Scripture, by publishing their reward at the last day, and by ordaining a Law
for the redemption of their estate among the Israelites. The consideration
whereof may move the poor to be thankful, and rest in God; and the rich to
be good unto the poor, and herein to imitate the Lord, who so cares for
them, as we see.

Verse 21. And Ruth the Moabitesse said, He said unto me also, Thou shall keep
fast by my young men, until they have ended all my harvest.
RVTH here relates Boaz further kindness, both what, and how long, to gleane
in his field after his Reapers, as in the eighth verse, and that unto the end
of harvest.

And Ruth the Moabitesse said, He said unto me also, Thou shall keep fast by
my young men.] When Ruth perceived the joy of Naomi for this kindness of Boaz,
she goes on to relate further testimony of his love, and it is as if she had
said, Boaz did not only thus with me, as thou my mother have heard and seen,
but which is more, He willed me to continue with his servants till harvest be
ended. Where we see, that where praises of others are well taken, it makes the
Relater to express more fully their goodness. And therefore to encourage men
to give others their due praises, let us receive willingly the relation of
their virtues and graces. For such is our corruption, that we can attend to ill
reports, which makes many so ready to speak ill of others. I wish our ears
open in the other respect, but in this I would we were more dull of hearing.
Three reasons may be given of the relation of this kindness to Naomi. One may
be this, to set out Boaz praises, and to show his kindness to the full, even
as she found it. If so, then we learn, that thankful persons conceal
nothing of others kindnesses either in word or deed that may tend to their just
commendations: and thus thankful should we be. This thankfulness is an
excellent virtue commended in Scripture, and practiced of the godly, as before
is noted: and on the contrary, ingratitude is odious, and causes
uncharitableness in giving, because the poor take not thankfully their alms;
in lending also, and that either not at all, for that men be so dishonest, that
they will not repay what they owe, or defer to pay in due time, or not
freely, but for gain, because men would benefit themselves by other men's
money, but will not willingly requite it without compact aforehand. And thus we
see the evil of ingratitude. The other reason may be, to know her mothers
pleasure therein, and how she liked of it to go still into Boaz fields. If
this, then we may learn, that children are to take advice of their parents in
their courses, so servants of their masters: for, this is to give them honor;
also an acknowledging themselves to be at their disposing, and not their own
men, and it will free them from blame, when things, perhaps, fall out crossely.
It is a fault for such to run on an head, as best pleases themselves: this
is disorder, and unruliness not sufferable: this is headiness condemned by
the Apostle, and much 2. Tim. 3. 4. Genesis 26. 35. and 34. 1. and 21. 25, 26.
evil has come hereby; see it in Esau his marriages; in Dinah her wandering;
in Simeon and Leui their cruelty; in Abimelechs contentious servants, and Lots
servants; those might have bred heartburning between Abimelech and Abraham, as
these divided Abraham and Lot asunder: heady and unruly children and servants
may do a great deal of mischief; they are therefore to be advised, and to
follow advice. The third reason may be, to show her mother in law, where she
might with good profit continue to gleane, and also of her willingness
therefore to continue in that labor. If so, then we see that the fruit of our
labor, gain and commodity, does spur on the diligent to continue therein.
Therefore pray for a blessing to be encouraged in paines-taking; and feeling
the fruit, continue therein.

Until they have ended all my harvest.] They had a barley and wheat harvest,
both here meant, as is plain in verse the 23. These words until they have
made an end,] show some length of his harvest, and his conceit of Ruths
painfulnesse, that she would continue to the end, and not give off after a day
or two: they note also his love and mercy to the poor widows. And lastly,
they set forth his equity and true liberality, that granted her freedom in
his own, and not in other men's fields. What further may be observed from
hence, see before in the eighth verse, where the matter is handled; here only
is the relation of her liberty unto her mother in law. In all which speech it
is worthy the noting, that she speaks not a word of Boaz great commendations
of her own self, verse the 11. Which commends to us in her, modesty, that
is, to pass over our own praises: which is an example for our imitation, that
we might not be condemned of vainglory, and to be such as be in love with
themselves, as those be, which love to tell of their own virtues.

Verse 22. And Naomi said unto Ruth her daughter in law, It is good, my
daughter, that thou go out with his maidens, that they meet thee not in
another field.
NAomi her good counsel, with the reason drawn from peril and danger, if
Ruth should not follow it.

And Naomi said unto Ruth her daughter in law.] Here note once for all, that
plainly the Writer of this History sets down this conference, repeating
again and again Naomi, and mother in law, and Ruth the Moabitesse, and
daughter in law, which I note to tax curious ears in these times, who can
away neither with speech nor writing, except all be very sententious, brief,
without repetitions, or one word more then they conceit to be needful. Gods
Spirit the author of every good gift, be it never so excellent, taught not
this Penman to be so curious, not that he would have holy things carelessly and
rudely set down, as men censure it, but to humble proud Albeit what humane
eloquence could ever attain to the sublimitie of style used in the Prophetical
Books of sacred Scripture* as in Esaias, Jeremy, and other^?
wits, given over to a light esteem of holy Writ, not caring to read therein
for the plainness of style, that so through their own pride they might
perish, as, alas, many of our high wits do, who cannot in the hautines of
their own hearts descend to so low a pitch; nor vouchsafe to spend any time in
such homely Histories as be in the Scripture because, as they profanely judge,
the style is not stately enough for their carnal hearts. And as this taxes
these proud and profane persons, so also does it such as do despise or
carelessly neglect many good men's labors, only for the plainness of the
speech, as if all writings were weak, which are void of strong lines. These
dainty palates can away with nothing but what is finely cookt, because they
come not with hunger after good things, but are carried away more with the
manner than with the matter, and so more with shadows, than substances, as in
likelihood it would appear, if they should come to the trial of Religion, and
suffering for the name of Christ.

It is good, my daughter, that thou go out with his maidens.] This is Naomi
her advice to Ruth. From whence note, I. That Parents are not to be wanting in
giving good counsel to their children; as here a mother in law to Ruth; and
Iethro a father in Exodus 18. 1. King. 2. 1. Sam. 2. 23, 24, 25.
law to Moses; David to Solomon; and Eli to his sons: It is their duty so to
do, and the younger years need it, wanting the experience of the aged. Let
parents perform then this duty, showing their children what is good, what
duties they owe to God and man, and how they should demean themselves well
every way. Contrary to these do they, which take no care to advise their
children, but do let them follow their own swinge. Such also as counsel for
the body, as the Heathen may do; but not for the soul, Ephe. 6. 4. Deuteronomy. 6. 7.
as Christians should do. Thirdly, those wicked parents which counsel their
children not to do well, but to do ill, to lie, swear, steal, as many poor
do; or to dice, card, drink, or to do worse, as men desiring to be counted
of another rank, wickedly teach their children by their lewd examples, to
their shame, and their childrens ruin, the infecting of the Commonwealth, and
the destruction of their house many times. Whereas such parents as do advise
well their children, Titus 2. 3, 4.
do discharge their duty toward God, and their country, and acquit their
souls from the blood of their children. II. That it is good for women going
abroad, to associate themselves to those of their own sex: For they are
subject to be tempted, to be deceived, and abused, being weak in temptation,
and easily overcome. Let women learn here of Naomi her advice to Ruth, and
follow it; let them beware of being alone as Dinah, or in suspected places with
lewd women, or in light and wanton company. It is no good sign of a maidens
chastity, to seek to be in men's company, as many do, till shame come upon
them.

That they meet thee not in another field:] meaning some lewd and lustful men,
whom Naomi will not so much as make mention of: though Ruth named in verse 21.
young men, yet her mother in law will not name them; she auoids the mentioning
of men to her, as teaching her, and so all others, that women should avoid in
their private conferences, unnecessary talk of men. Note moreover, that it is
wisdom to prevent dangers, and Number. 14. 42, 43.
not expose our selves into peril, when we may avoid it. Naomi knew the danger
of those times, and how wickedly many were bent, and ready to abuse a poor
young woman, and a stranger, and therefore she teaches Ruth to be wise to
prevent the same: for if we unnecessarily cast our selves into danger, we do
tempt God, which we may not Mat. 4. 7. Deuteronomy. 6. 16. Psalm. 91. 11. Number. 14. 42,
45. 2. Chron. 35. 22, 23.
do: It is not our way: and therefore we have no promise of protection, and
God has punished his own people for so doing, as we may see in the
Israelites, and in good Josias, who escaped not correction. And therefore let
us learn to be wise to prevent dangers, and not carelessly expose our selves
thereinto. Nature teaches this to beasts, much more reason should persuade man
unto it, and Religion allows it, and commends that prudent man, that sees
the evil, and Prou. 22. 3.
auoids it, when they have no just cause to the contrary; I mean the evils of
trouble, crosses, and such like: for the evil of sin is ever to be avoided, of
which it may be Solomon does speak; yet is it wisdom to avoid unnecessary
crosses, and troubles of this life, and such dangers as may procure our hurt,
as Iehoram did by the advice of 2. King. 6.
Elisha, discovering the armies of the Syrians unto him, that he might not be
endangered by them. If here any object the certain danger that Micaiah
willingly did run into, when he went to prophecy before Achab who hated him,
and such like: I answer, that men cast themselves into danger two ways, first,
by the virtue of their calling, either ordinary, or extraordinary, as did
Micaiah, which men may not forsake for any trouble or danger whatsoever. The
other is without a calling; such foole-hardinesse has no assurance of a
blessing; if they escape the peril, it is Gods great mercy, and not their
deserving, and if trouble come upon them, they can have no comfort in it, but
must take is as a Rod of correction, to teach them to be more wise afterward.

Verse 23. So she kept fast by the maidens of Boaz to gleane, unto the end of
Barley harvest and of Wheat harvest, and dwelt with her mother in law.
THe obedience of Ruth, in following Naomi her advice, and her constant love
unto her, in not departing from her.

So she kept fast by the maidens of Boaz to gleane.] Concerning Ruth here we
may learn, that Children are to take the good counsel of their parents, and
to follow the same: as Ruth does here, and as did Jacob, yea Moses the advice
of Iethro. It is the note Prou. 13. 1. and 1. 8, 9. and 23. 22.
of a wise child, and a child's duty, if the counsel be who lesome and good.
And it is a reproof to rebellious children, which will not learn nor obey,
like the sons of Eli, and of Samuel: but they paid for it, as ever such shall
do.

Unto the end of Barley harvest and of Wheat harvest.] All this time Ruth
applied her self for profit, as being the time of gathering food for winter:
she played the Ant, and not the Grasshopper: Prou. 6. 8.
For it is good thrift, not to stack the time of our profit, which God in mercy
affords to us: this may we learn of the Ant, to which the Lord sends the
Sluggard: for riches are not for ever, nor the like Prou. 27. 24.
time to get them, and therefore must we take the season offered, especially in
harvest which calls forth every one to take pains, to gather in Gods
blessings for their life and maintenance. Perhaps some will say, That Christ
wills us not to take Mat. 6. 31, 34.
care. But does he will ever any man not to labor? The care which Christ
speaks of, is immoderate care, care without faith, or care full of Verse ^0.
doubting, and little faith, and that which is without care of Religion, the
mind being taken up Verse 33.
wholly with the world; else men may, yea and ought to labor for the things of
this life, to be provident for the time to come, and frugall in expenses for
the time present.

And she dwelt with her mother in law.] That is, all that time of harvest and
after. This is noted, to show Ruths love and constant affection toward Naomi,
that no favor abroad or gain reaped by the labor of her hands, could make
her forsake her mother in law. Hence rises a good lesson, that childrens
favor abroad and good gettings should not draw them from their poor parents,
so long as they stand in need of their help. For how can children ever show
themselves thankful better than in such a case, where what they get, they can
willingly bestow it upon their poor parents, so maintaining them, who were
the authors of their being, and instruments of God for their education? But,
alas, the case is otherwise now. This Ruth the Moabitesse a heathen by birth,
may rise up in judgment against such as should be natural children, who having
gotten from under their Parents, when they see they can live of themselves,
they make no reckoning of them, being altogether unwilling to live with them,
and most of all to relieve them.

CHAP. III.
IN this Chapter is Naomi her care, to provide a match for Ruth, to requite her
labor and love toward her: wherein may be observed her advice, the execution
thereof, and the good event of the same.

Verse 1. Then Naomi, her mother in law, said unto her, My daughter, shall I
not seek rest for thee, that it may be well with thee?
THis is Naomi her resolution to provide a marriage for her daughter in law: it
is propounded with an interrogation, to show her full determination. Here note
who resolves, for whom, and what it is, and the end why.

Then Naomi, her mother in law, said unto her, My daughter.] Here Naomi
deuiseth how to requite Ruth her love and labor, which is by resolving to get
a match for her; and this she does, as a mother does for her daughter, after
that Ruth had so labored, and now was at rest with her in the house. Of the
term daughter before, and also of thankfulness, how good turns should be
requited, (which here is Naomies purpose) I have spoken at large.

Shall I not seek?] As if she had said; Know it, my daughter, that I am
resolved to seek rest for thee. It is the Parents duty to provide matches for
1. Cor. 7. 36. Genesis 2. and 24. and 28.
their children. So did God the general Father, for his son Adam, Abraham
for Isaac, and Isaac for Jacob; for children want judgment to make their
choice, and are led more by fond affection, or by strength of lust, which is
worse, then by reason and good discretion: but yield they were wise in their
choice, yet are they not so to do it without consent of Parents, but should
do as Samson did, who entreated his father and Judge. 14. 1, 2.
mother to get him for a wife, the maid which he liked. Let therefore Parents
have a care of this duty, and betimes provide for their children, as they
shall see just cause, and so make choice, as one may be a mutual help to
another; for this end let them observe their natures, like somewhat in years,
in conditions, and body in some sort, that one may be pleased with the other:
then know their religion and virtues, that they may be of one heart toward
God; so shall they love one another much better, pray for one another, and have
a fellow-feeling in every condition; yea, this will sweeten their estate unto
them. When they have noted well these two, if with good natures and graces they
can procure goods, it shall not be amiss to help to bear the burden of
marriage. Such Parents are here to be reproved, which neglect this duty,
either of carelessness, wanting true love; or of wicked covetousness, for that
they are not willing to spare any thing from themselves, though yet they have
sufficient.

Rest for thee?] So she calls the married estate. (...) of (...) placide
quicuit.
The word is, a place of rest to settle in: Marriage estate is an estate of
rest: so here called, and in chap. 1. 9. in respect of the mind of all such as
desire marriage, and have not the gift of continency, they are restless. It
is called therefore p^rtum in^entutis, because youth are tossed by lustful
thoughts, as the ship with the waves of the Sea, till they be married. Mulieri
(says one) nulla est requies, donec nupserit; It may also be called rest, for
the contentment and delight which one ought to have in the other, and in the
blessing of posterity, by the mercy of God. Seeing it is so called, let the
married parties labor to make it an estate of rest and peace: and the means
be these: First, to love one another entirely: to work this, see the good
things in one another, and cover the evil, and wink at defects, and be as
blind that way after marriage, as they be before. Secondly, to perform duties
of love one to another chearefully: so they have promised, so God commands
them, and so the mutual good of both requires it, and true love will do it.
Thirdly, to bear one another infirmities patiently, for they be one; else
this will make them two, if they cannot bear with one another, and forbear
too, to keep peace. Fourthly, to take their outward estate of God thankfully,
and live in this respect contentedly; let them not think how better they might
have bin; for such discontented thoughts breed but sorrows, and help nothing
at all to quietness, but rather to increase discord. Fifthly, to pray daily
one for another, and that fervently, that God would remove the hindrances of
love, or give wisdom and patience to bear the same. Sixthly, and lastly, in
every coffeehouse to lay the fault rather upon our self, then to cast it
upon the other; let the husband think rather the cause to be in himself,
then in his wife; so the wife is rather to blame her self, then her husband.
If thus the married would do, faults would be soon amended, and iarres
prevented: and the failing in these things, is the cause that marriage is not
the estate of rest, but a miserable restless condition, and that through their
own sins and corruptions.

That it may be well with thee.] Marriage is for the well-being of such as
enter into that holy: estate. The husband is for a guide to the woman, and the
woman is ordained for a meet help for the Genesis 2. 18.
man. And therefore this is for confutation of those, which simply prefer
single life before marriage; nay, does not God say, It is not good for man to
be alone? Marriage is called an honorable estate, and is commended far before
the other life in Scripture. It makes two one, it is the holy means of a
lawful posterity, and it is the estate in which the most holiest have lived,
and in which Christ himself would be borne, though conceived by the holy
Ghost, and borne of his Mother a Virgin. Saint Paul indeed commends single
life; but not simply, but with respect unto the then present times, full of
troubles and persecutions. If Marriage be then for wellbeing, let Parents take
care to provide for their children matches, fit and commodious for Religion,
for conditions and means of maintenance, for so shall it be well with them.
And let such as be married, so make a right use of marriage, that it may be for
their well-being, and the bettring of themselves; which stands in three things:
First, in the mutual society and near fellowship of one another; for two are
better then one. Secondly, in preventing thereby incontinencie, and the sinful
lusts of the flesh. Thirdly, in begetting an holy posterity, training them up
in the instruction and information of the Lord, in whom their Parents do live,
after they be dead.

Verse 2. And now is not Boaz of our kindred, with whose maidens thou wast?
Behold, he winnoweth barley to night in the threshing-floore.
NAomi propounds to Ruth, the party whom she desires to match her with;
giving a reason, and showing the opportunity of time and place where to break
the matter unto him.

As Naomi affected to do Ruth good, so she devised the means; for, A true
friend is not in show only, or in wel-wishes, but in devising how to bring to
pass what they desire, and to effect what truly they do affect. Jonathan
wished well to David, and 1. Sam. 19. 2, 3. and 20. 12, 13
he devised means for his safety. Abraham wished Genesis 14.
well to Lot, and therefore endeavored to do him good, and to recover him,
when he was led away captive. Where we then wish well, let us show it, in
counsel, in help, in countenance, and not be as such, which will not advise
their friends of their own accord, nor help them in adversity, hardly
countenance them, when any of note frown upon them. Some are friends like
Peter, in the time of his weakness, who followed his Master in trouble affare
off. Some like Paul's friends, who forsook him wholly in peril. Some like
Iehosaphat, who can speak well a word or two for a Michaiah, but not stand out
for him, when he is sent by Achab to prison most unjustly. Many friends there
be, but yet few friends indeed.

And now is not Boaz of our kindred?] How a kin to them, see chap. 1. 1. and 2.
1. This kindred she names, because of the Law in Deuteronomy. 25. 5, 6. of which
afterward in chap. 4. Here we do see what ground she had to seek this match
for Ruth, even the Law of God, as she thought. Her ground in thus making
choice was from God, and therefore there was more hope to speed, though in man's
reason most unlikely. Note, that Godly Parents seek to match their children
where God allows. Abraham will not match with the Genesis 24.
Canaanites, but sends into his own country, and thither Isaac and Rebecca
send Jacob; for as in other things, so in this they set God before them,
looking to his liking and approbation, that they may expect his blessing.
Therefore let such as intend to marry, marry in the Lord, have his consent, 1.
Cor. 7. 36.
and pray for his presence at the marriagemaking, at which he will be, if it be
after his will; that is, when parties marry lawfully, and in the fear of his
Name. Other marriages he will not countenance, as these; first, such as be
made within degrees forbidden, though allowed by the usurped authority of the
Popes forged Vicarship. Secondly, with Infidels, as did the Jews, Neh. 13. 25,
26. 1. King. 11. 1.
and into which sin fell Solomon. Thirdly, with Idolaters, though they
profess the true God, and yet worship Idols, as did Achab; and therefore
Iehosaphat his marrying of Iehoram his son with Athaliah, was unlawful, and
punished heavily by God: such is the marriage of a Protestant with a Papist.
Fourthly, with wretched worldlings, and 1. Cor. 5. 10, 11.
such as be without Religion in truth and sincerity; for if we have not
ordinary familiarity with the wicked, with such as be fornicators, covetous,
1. Cor. 5. 11. 2. These. 3. 6, 14.
extortioners, railers, drunkards, inordinate livers, idle without callings,
and disobedient to the Word, blasphemers, ungodly, despisers of 2. Tim. 3. 2.
those that be good, lovers of pleasures more then lovers of God, and such
like; if, I say, we may not keep familiar company with such, then certainly
we may not marry with them; their birth, wealth, and conceited hope to win
them, cannot make way for such marriages to them which fear God, and love
their own souls. Fifthly, with such as be unjustly divorced: for that is to
marry another man's wife, and to commit adultery. These marriages are made
after the flesh, where the devil danceth, but God is displeased, and good
Angels, and good men offended.

With whose maidens thou wast.] These words are added, to show what Boaz she
meant, and also to give Ruth some hope of good success. For Ruth might object
three things, which Naomi in this verse preuenteth. She might have said: Alas,
I am poor, what hope of one so rich? To which Naomi answers, He is thy
Kinsman, and therefore by law bound to marry with thee; though herein she did
somewhat err. Again, if Ruth had said, I am not known well to him, and I
fear his dislike: Naomi here puts her in mind with whom she had been, even
with Boaz, who had taken notice of her, and had been kind to her, and had
spoken well of her; yea, in this she calls a particular kindness of Boaz to
her remembrance, who willed her to abide with his maidens. Thirdly, if Ruth had
objected the want of opportunity and fit occasion to speak to him; Behold
(says Naomi) he winnoweth this night barley in the threshing-floore. So then
note, That warrant from God, experience of the love of man, and fit occasion to
effect a matter, are strong inducements to attempt the same. These made Ester
to adventure to go unto Ahasuerus, her calling from God, her experience of
former favor, and the present cause requiring, and occasion offered to make
trial. And where these concur, let us boldly do our endeavor, with hope to
effect what we go about.

Behold.] That is, See and consider the providence of God, it is as one would
wish, it falls out opportunely, as if God had decreed to bring it to pass:
so Naomi observed Gods providence plainly: for it appears manifestly, where
and when he decrees to bring things to pass, so as we may say, Behold, the
hand of the Lord! And this either for good, as in preventing Mordecaies Ester
6. 1, 3.
destruction, the Widow of Sarepta her famishment, 1. King. 17. 10, 11, 12, 13,
14. 1. Sam. 23. 27. Exodus 2. 5. Genesis 37. 24, 28.
David from the hand of Saul, Moses from drowning, and Joseph from perishing in
the pit: or for evil, to bring judgment upon the wicked; as upon Iezabel and
Iehoram, as God had 2. King 9. 15, 21, 25, 30, 36.
threatened, catching them as it were in a trap, the one in the portion of
Naboth, and the other in Iezreel. For the Lord sees all things, and his Job
28. 24. and 3^. 21.
eyes are upon the ways of men, to bring his decree to pass by his power and
providence.

Let us then cast our eyes about us, and observe Gods providence: for so shall
we see both his mercy and justice to praise him; it will make us patient and
contented under every cross, and carefully to rely upon him, when we see how
his providence waits upon his promise, good will and pleasure. Yea, this will
comfort us, and make us not to fear what man can do unto us, seeing his hand
is ready to help.

He winnoweth barley to night in the threshing floor.] For the threshing
floores in those times, Judge. 6. 37. Genesis 50. 10. Numb. 18. 30. 2. Sam. 6. 6.
and 24. 16. 1. Ch^o. 21. 24.
it scemeth, from the first of Samuel, chap. 23. and other places, that they
were abroad in the fields, as the wine-presses were: and this place shows,
that Ruth went out of the city thither. In such a place, David built an Altar
to the Lord in the 2. Chron. 3. 1.
threshing floor of Ornan. Of the manner how it was made, is not expressed in
the Scripture. It may also seem, that the winnowing was toward the evening in
those hot countries, when the wind did arise, called, The wind of the day; or
as in Genesis it is translated, the cool of the day. Boaz, Genesis 3. 8.
though he winnowed not himself in person, yet he may be so said to do, in
commanding his servants, he there being a diligent ouer-seer, and a helper
forward of the work with his presence. Howsoever, this may we learn, that It
is no unseemliness for men of birth, of place and wealth, sometime to follow
in their own persons mean labors of their calling: as he does here
winnowing of corn, Gideon his threshing, Judah his sheepshearing, Elisha his
plough. This they did not of base niggardliness, as loath to keep servants to
do it, but to exercise themselves in labor, which is healthful, to prevent
idleness and ill fruits thereof, to be an example to others, as was Julius
Sueton.
Caesar, who would go bare-headed, and on foot, both in hot Sunshine, and in
foul weather often before his Soldiers; and as the Lord Lacie, Irish. Chron.
chief Justice in Ireland, who took up stones to bear them to the building
he had in hand, to provoke the lazy Irish to take pains. Which reproves
those which do condemn them that so take pains, being persons of worth, as
if it were discredit to them, and to be basely accounted of for so doing; when
yet we see out of the Scripture, men (as these proud fellows hold them) of
mean callings, chosen to high places; as Moses from keeping sheep, to be Ruler
of Gods people; so David to be King; Gideon from threshing, to be Captain over
the host of Israel; Elisha from the plough, to be the Lords Prophet; so Amos
from the herd; Peter from a poor fisher-mans estate, to be an Apostle: and the
like we find in heathen history of one L. Q. Cincinnatus, who was fetched
Eutrop. Val. Max.
from the plow, to be made Dictator in Rome, and after returned to husbandry
again. Thus we see how great men did set themselves to callings, (now held
base and mean by proud and riotous spirits) and also many highly advanced from
mean places and low estate of life, for their worthiness and virtuous
industry for which they were honored, how mean soever by birth or education:
such were these Emperors, Pertinax an Artificers son; Dioclesian a
Scriueners sone; Valentian the son of a Shoemaker and of a Gardener came
Pro^us. Let our lazy and lewd Roysters, vpstart Gentry, or such as come of
worthy Ancestors, yet having no worthiness in themselves, behold these, and
learn to do as Maximinus Senior did, who when he was General did take such
pains in mean matters, as others found fault with him. But he answered them,
The greater I am, the greater pains will Quo mayor sue^o, tanto plus laborabo.
I take. If our Yongsters would think hereof, they would not scorn to take
pains as they do, and yet scorn not to live in a more base course, unworthy
their Gentilitie of which they so much stand, and most unworthy their
Christianity, which they too little regard. Whatsoever men's birth and estate
be, yet ought they to labor in a calling, because God so commands, to avoid
Genesis 3. 19.
idleness, to prevent much evil, which comes from idleness, to live not as
Caterpillars, but as profitable members in the Commonwealth, to be an example
of well-doing to others, and to be the better able to maintain their estate and
place, both to themselves and to their succeeding posterity also.

Verse 3. Wash thy self therefore, and anoint thee, and put thy raiment upon
thee, and get thee down to the floor: but make not thy self known to the
man, until he shall have done eating and drinking.
NAomi her counsel to her daughter in law, Ruth, showing whither she should
go, what to do before, in preparing to go thither, and how warily she should
carry her self, for being known till after supper.

Wash thy self therefore;] That is, because I would have thee to go to him,
make thy self ready, and first wash thy self. Washing is double, 2. Cor. 7.
1. Titus 3. 5. Psalm. 51.
first inward, which the Apostle exhorts unto, and this is it David prayed
for, and without which none can enter into the Kingdom of Ioh. 3.
God; with this washing are we to approach nigh unto God, as Ruth by her
washing went unto Boaz. The second is outward, and this is three fold: First,
typical under the Law, commanded to Exo. 40. 31, 32. and 19. 10. Titus 3. 5.
the Priests and people, when they drew near to God, which was a type of
sanctification and holiness. Psalm. 26. 6. Mat. 15. 2. Mat. 7. 3, 4.
Secondly, superstitious, as that of the Jews taken up of themselves, and
condemned by Christ. Thirdly, civil cleanlines, the washing of the body from
all bodily uncleanness, and this is here meant, and here commended unto us.
This outward civil cleanliness is praise worthy. And this 2. Sam. 11. 2. and
12. 20. Exodus 2. 19. Eus. histo. eccles.
washing was used among the Jews, and among the Heathen; Eusebius speaks of
John's bathing himself. To be cleanly, is healthful to us, delightsome to
others, and commendable. God required Deuteronomy. 23. 13.
of his people cleanliness. Our Christian profession is pure and holy, which
outward cleannes well befitteth, and seeing it is of good report, Phil. 4. 8.
we are to observe it. This reproves two sorts: the first are such as be
sluttish, nasty, and beastlike persons, who hereby show themselves careless of
their credit, slothful, or covetous, they Read Calu. on Deuteronomy. 23. 13.
be offensive, uncivil, and unwholesome. The other sort are they which will be
cleanely, but yet spend too much time in trimming, washing, and starching, and
are so curiously neat, and so careful to be fine and fare outwardly, as they
spend their days almost in doing nothing else; and so live a proud idle life,
like the hautie Dames of Israel, in their bravery, walking with stretched forth
necks, with wanton eyes, with tinkling feet, walking and mincing as they go,
wanting humility, and often modesty in gesture, countenance, and gate: but let
them read and remember what the Prophet Esaias threatens against such
lascivious wantons and luxurious minions, in the end of his third Chapter.

And anoint thee.] Anointing had a religious use, as we may see in Exodus 40.
Leuit. 7. Number. 7. 1. 1. Sam. 9. 16. which did type out the graces of Gods
Spirit, Ezekiel. 16. 9. 1. John 2. 27. This is the best anointing, and to be
labored for. It had also a common use, as here, so in 2. Sam. 12. 20. it was
usual, Mat. 6. 17. for Gods blessings may be used not only for mere
necessity, but also for outward comeliness and moderate delight. The Creatures
of God may be used not only for preservation of bodily life, but for
beautifying of the body, and the better setting forth thereof, as it is in
truth, and not counterfeited. Thus wine is Psalm. 104. 1^.
given to glad the heart, and oil to make the face to shine. And therefore may
Christians lawfully use Gods creatures for outward comelines, and to preserve
that outward seemlinesse which is Gods own work in us, by washing, and by
anointing. But here beware of excess, that it be also seasonable, that it be
to a good end; beware of pride, of wantonness, and learn to know the time of
humiliation.

Quest. Here it may be questioned, Whether it be lawful to paint the face, for
it is but and oil?

Answ. Surely no. First, because this is not to preserve thy natural beauty,
by oil to make it shine, but to make a counterfeit face: which is deceit and
hypocrisy, which God hates. We must lay aside all manner of hypocrisy; and
this is one 1. Pet. 2. 1.
of them. Secondly, this is vanity of vanities: for Prou. 31. 30.
if beauty be vanity, then much more the filthy counterfeit of it. It is
great folly: for such spoil their natural comeliness at length, as experience
tells, and the Prophet Jeremy speaks of rending Ier. 4. 30.
the face with painting. Thirdly, this is great pride; for they dislike the
Lords workmanship, and adulterate it, and would be held fairer then God ever
made them, and do proudly glory before men, of a counterfeit visage. Fourthly,
it is not held a matter of good report and honesty, Phil. 4. 8.
which godly persons should follow after: but of dishonesty, such being judged
to be light and lewd; in the Scripture it is the mark of a whore; and a
whorish woman is described, Ierem. 4. 30. Ezech. 23. 40. and an ungodly woman
so practiced it; even that Harlot and murdresse Iezabel painted 2. King. 9. 30.
her self: and we find by experience such to be wantons and lewdly given.
Fifthly, the godly and learned Fathers have utterly condemned it. De habitu
virgin. Est opus diaboli, and manus inferunt Deo, etc.
Saint Cyprian says, It is the work of the Devil: and they offer wrong to
God, in despising his work, and framing another of their own. D^ cultu foem.
Negotium diaboli, indignum Christiano.
Tertullian calls it the Devils business, unworthy a Christian. Ignis
iuuentutis, somentum libidinis, and impudicae m^ntis iudicium: Epist. ad Marcel.
Saint Jerome says, that it is the fire of youth, the fuel of lust, and the
sign of an unchaste mind. De adulterio vulius meditantur adulterium castitatis,
etc.
Saint Ambrose says, They which muse or set their minds upon the adultery of
the countenance, do so also upon the adulterating of chastity. So as these
godly men think of them but as of whores, the Devils servants, betrayers of
chastity, and unworthy to be accounted Christians. Let such therefore as never
used it, beware of it, and such as have, repent, and such as do, abandon and
forsake it: for as verbal lying is forbidden, so actual also; such cannot
look upon God as his Creatures, but as counterfeits, and such as be of the
Devils making; they see not their own natural face in a glass, but the
counterfeit of another, one perhaps damned in hell for whoredom already. Such
as have used this sinful practice, and have turned to God, have repented of
this, as of an accursed work of the flesh, and as proceeding from Satan's
instigation. Lastly, no modest Matron ever used it, but chaste hearts have
always detested it, and therefore is it carefully to be avoided.

And put thy raiment upon thee;] That is, thy best apparel, or such as thou
have put upon thee handsomely. Concerning apparel I will speak somewhat at
large. In innocence there was no need of raiment: Adam and Eve in that estate
lived naked, and were not ashamed, neither was there cause, for that they had
not sinned; but after the fall, it was of necessity to put on apparel, to
cover our nakedness, for preservation of our bodies, and to defend them from
extreme cold, heat, and from hurts which they are subject unto in going naked.
So then, now we should have care for raiment, for our selves, for such as
depend Prou. 31. 21.
upon us, and for the poor, as Job had. Job 31. 19.
Touching this necessity of wearing apparel, it is agreed upon on all hands,
nature teaches it, and need inforceth it, and herein to have not only one
suit, but change also for shift, if we be able; for it is lawful to have
change of raiment, yea to wear costly apparel, so it be comely. Of which I
will speak in order. We may have change of raiment, there is a necessity in
it, a cleanliness also, and Joseph in love gave to Benjamin five Genesis 45. 22.
changes of raiment, for him to wear. If any object Mat. 10. 10.
our Savior his forbidding two coats: We must know, it was no absolute
forbidding: for there he also forbids providing of money for their journey, and
other things else. But this was to show, that they were to make speed, and also
to teach them to depend upon his providence; for he undertook to provide for
them in this journey. And by this experience of Christ's mercy toward them, he
would teach them how to trust in God, when he was to send them abroad into all
the world after his Ascension. And therefore the begging Friars have hence no
ground for their idle life, and for their having but one coat. True it is,
that to have changes of raiment, and to see our brother naked, having no
clothes to put on, and yet we not supply his want, were an unmercifulness, if
so by our neglect of him, he should perish: otherwise we may wear change of
raiment, yea and put on costly also, with changeable colors, and ornaments
upon. Solomon wore costly attire: so his wife, Joseph, Psalm. 45. Genesis 41. 42.
Ester 8. 15. Genesis 27. 29. Genesis 37. 7. 2. Sam. 13. 18. Ester 8.
Mordecai, and Esau in Isaacs house: they wore also garments of diverse colors:
so did Joseph in Jacobs house, and Tamar David's daughter; and Mordecai was clad
in white, blue, and purple. And as for ornaments, as eareings, bracelets,
chains, rings, Jewels of gold and silver, the Lord allowed them to his people,
and to wear them upon them; Exodus 32 2. Genesis 24. 22, 23.
and so did Rebecca wear such, sent by Abraham for Isaacs wife: they be made
for man's use; and therefore the godly using the^, and God allowing them, we may
use now our Christian liberty therein. But here we must observe decency,
which is a comelines befitting the person of every one. And here must be
considered first, age, young or old: for the same color and fashion befit not
both alike. Secondly, the sex, man and woman; for these must be distinguished,
as God ordained in Moses Law: nature it self, reason, and laws of well
governed Commonweals do so ordain also. Thirdly, Vide Kick. de politeta,
lib. 1. cap. 10.
the profession and calling of persons, and the difference in place; for some
be public, some be private, which must be looked unto. It is therefore
reproueable for public persons out of baseness, not to go as their place
requires; and for private persons to go beyond their calling, and their
condition of life, although it be not above their ability; for this breeds
confusion and discord: when such also as by profession should be grave, as
Scholars, and Ministers, yet do go Ruffian like, it is worthy of reproof,
and punishment also. Fourthly, the manner of wearing must be observed; it must
be comely, with shamefastness 1. Tim. 2. 9.
and modesty, both in men and women; we must so wear our apparel, as grace
and virtue, and not corruption of heart and vice should appear to be in us.
The virtues which must appear in us by our attire, are these: First, is
modesty; for raiment was to cover our shame, and therefore that whorish
fashion of going with naked breasts, and so low uncovered, as some do, is to be
abhorred of modest women, and chaste virgins. Sulpitius Gallus, a Heathen
Roman, fell out with his wife, because she went abroad with her face
uncovered, and said to her, The law limits my sight unto thee, to which thou
art to approve thy beauty, and to become fair and lovely: but to be willing
to be seen beautiful to others, must needs bring suspicion of an ill mind,
and a stain withal. I wish husbands to be Sulpitiuslike to such wives as go
thus wantonly barebrested, showing how naked their hearts be unto lustful
practices. But some foolish and harlotrie husbands do delight to see their
wives and daughters to go so; they be like Assuerus, who will have Vashti to
come forth to show her self; but I wish the wives in this thing like Vashti,
and not to yield to their drunken humoured husbands to go so immodestly: but
they are, perhaps, rewarded as they justly deserve sometime: for can the
shop-windows always stand open, and no customers come at any time to buy?
Secondly, is gravity according to years, and therefore all fantastic, light,
vain and daily strange fashions, now in one, then in another, is folly and
vanity, apish toying, and argues great leuitie of Zeph. 1. 8.
mind, condemned by the Word, and by all sober and grave persons. Thirdly, is
frugalitie, for excessive cost is unthriftiness, and herein a great
consumption to a man's estate, and an argument of idleness, if men commonly go
costly. The rich Glutton is taxed for going costly, and fairing Luke 15.
daintily every day, which brought him to hell at last. Fourthly, is humility:
for indeed our raiment from the first cause, is a sign of our rebellion
against God, and that we have lost our innocence; and therefore we have no
more cause to be proud thereof, then a malefactor, of his halter, though it be
golden. It is reproved as a fault in the daughters of Judah, to be so proud of
their attire: Isai. 3.
and we have more reason to weep, then to wax high-minded by this covering of
our shame and nakedness. I wish we were like one Pambo a godly man being at
Alexandria, and there seeing Pet. de Natalib. Eccles. hist. lib. 8. cap. 1.
a woman proud of her attire, fell a weeping; and being asked why he so wept,
said thus, Two causes move me; the one, to consider the perdition of this
woman; and the other, for that I being a Christian, cannot study so much to
please Christ by innocence of life, as she does hereby desire to please
filthy and dishonest men. Fifthly, is Piety: when in time of humiliation and
days of abstinence, we go as such should, who feel the hand of God, and
apprehend his displeasure against sin; and when we so array our selves daily,
as that modesty, gravity, frugality, and humility may appear therein; for why
should we not even in our clothing set forth our profession, and thereby grace
our Religion? And this piety shall appear, if when we garnish the body, we
neglect not to beautify the soul with learning and Religion; for a man in
rich clothes, without other better qualities and endowments of mind, is, as
Diogenes said, a sheep in a golden fleece; and yet such sheep have we in our
English pasture, for want of grace, and better education, having nothing to set
them out withal, but the bravery of their clothing, which Augustus Caesar
called, The Ensign of pride, and the nest of luxury; Vexillum superbiae, and
nidu^ luxuriae.
which we find in these days to be young men's overthrow, a let to good
housekeeping, an enforcing to enhaunsing of rents in Landlords, and in others
to fall to ill shifts, when their own means of lands and revenues fail
them. And thus much for this point.

And get thee down to the floor.] Take the opportunity offered, to procure
thy welfare: so she is made by Naomi her advice, to go to Boaz, and to demand
marriage of him; which might seem not fitting, but by Moses law it was allowed
to the Deuteronomy. 25.
woman widow without children, to claim marriage of the next kinsman, if he
neglected to take her: and it was no more immodestie for women to claim that
right then, then now for one betrothed to challenge the man for her husband:
for where God allows the thing, it takes away the scandal and offense,
which otherwise might justly be given, and so others justly be offended
therewith. Which is not a small comfort against the uncharitable censure of
unadvised persons.

But make not thy self known to the man, until he shall have done eating and
drinking.] Go she must, but so warily is she to behave her self, as she
should not discover her self, nor make her mind known, until he had supped,
and was laid down to rest: so as her mind must be showed in private, and to
him alone. The night, and in private, make modest persons utter more freely
their thoughts, then otherwise they would in the light, and before company. The
phrase of eating and drinking, implies feasting, Matthew. 24. Isai. 22. 13.
Exodus 32. 6. 1. King. 4. 20.
as appears hence from verse 7. and from other Scriptures: so then at such a
time as this, it may seem, the Israelites feasted and made merry, as a sign
of gladness and rejoicing in the Lords blessings. Of feasting, I will speak
afterward in verse 7. Here note, that Naomi held it the best time to speak of
marriage, when Boaz had well eaten and drunken; for then are men more apt to
speak freely, and to promise their good will, then at other times; this Naomi
knew well, and therefore advised Ruth to make use of it. Which being so, it
should make men at such times more silent, and more obseruant of their speeches.

Verse 4. And it shall be when he lies down, thou shall mark the place where
he shall lie, and thou shall go in, and uncover his feet, and lay thee down,
and he will tell thee what thou shall do.
THe rest of Naomi her advice to Ruth, what she was to do, when she came to
the threshing floor, observe where Boaz lay, then she her self to lie down;
and the end, to know his mind, and what she should do.

And it shall be when he lies down.] After labor follows rest, and the
night is appointed for the same, to refresh the wearied limbs: so the Psalmist
teaches, Psalm. 104 23. Genesis 28. 11.
and Jacob practiced; and this is the right use of time. Let us spend the day
in labor, and take the benefit of the night for rest, with thanks to God, and
prayer for a blessing; and not be as wild beasts, as some men be, who make
the day their time of rest, and the night their walking time, as fit to go
abroad to raven for their prey: or to spend it in unlawful and lewd courses,
as ill as theft.

That thou shall mark the place where he shall lie.] This is advised, lest she
should in the night mistake: for wary observation preuenteth error. This
shows also, that Boaz had not any certain set place to lie down in, but to
lie, as best liked himself, in the floor. In those times they had no care of
stately lodging; they were not effeminate and slothful, which make us now to
seek for soft bedding, which breeds lust, increases sloth, and makes the
body more tender, and so less able to endure pains.

And thou shall go in, and uncover his feet.] Though Naomi aimed to make Ruth
Boaz his yoke fellow, yet she teaches her to proceed in humility, to go to
his feet, and to lie down there: For humility is not any let, but the way to
advancement, Prou. 15 33. and 18. 20. and 22. 4.
and the reward thereof is riches, and glory, and life. Let all them which hope
for preferment, labor for humility: for God gives such grace Prou. ^ 34. and
20. 22. Luke 1. 48.
and favor, the humble in spi^^ shall enjoy glory: upon Marie her lowlines
did the Lord look: David was humble in his own eyes, and obtained great
glory: and Abigail by so wise and humble behavior, purchased favor in David's
eyes. On the contrary, by pride comes confusion, as may appear in Absalom
and Adoniahs attempt to the Kingdom; for shame accompanies it; and Prou. 11.
2. and 16. 18.
pride goes before destruction, and a high mind before the fall.

And lay thee down, and he shall tell thee what thou shall do.] Naomi was
well persuaded of Boaz his honesty, and that he would well advise Ruth: for
good counsel may be looked for of those that be truly religious, and wise
withal, as Boaz was. And there is no doubt of their readiness, whom
experience has made known to be loving and kind. This is it which made Naomi
to speak thus confidently, that Boaz would tell Ruth what she should do. But
here it may be demanded, Whether Naomi did well to advise Ruth to use this
means, to try Boaz his mind? The manner seems not to be good nor
approoueable, and my reasons be these: First, Naomi her counsel and advice to
have Ruth Verse 12.
to go to Boaz to claim the marriage, was erroneous; for he was not the next
kinsman, and therefore she should not have come thus first to him. Secondly,
Boaz his speech implies, that it Verse 14.
was not a matter of good report for them two to be thus alone together, if
they had been seen so. Thirdly, there was some show and appearance of 1. These.
5.
evil, which should be avoided. Fourthly, because here was an occasion of
sinning offered, though not taken, nor intended; because fleshlinesse is that
sin to which most are apt, and the most excellent have fallen into it; as
appears in righteous Lot, strong Samson, wise Solomon, and zealous David: Yet
for all this ill advice and manner of doing, the Lord turned the same to good.
For this is his goodness and mercy, that matters ill begun, the Lord both can
and will turn unto good. Thus he did with Rebecca and Jacobs dissembling to
get the blessing, and with the selling of Joseph by Jacobs sons his
unnatural brethren. This example therefore of Ruth is not imitable. It gives
no warrant for mothers to teach their daughters to play the harlots, and to be
bawdes to them; nor to allow young women to go to young men, and to give their
bodies to be abused, in hope of marriage; nor to make nightmatches and meetings
to procure husbands, whilst they hereby often make themselves whores, to their
own shame, and grief of friends. If it be not imitable, will some say, why is
it recorded? To answer this, we must know that the actions of the godly are of
diverse sorts: either extraordinary; as Abraham's offering Isaac; Moses his
killing of the Egyptian; Israelites borrowing and carrying away the goods of
the Egyptians; Phinees killing Zimri and Cozbi; Ehud, Eglon King of Moab, and
such like: these are not for imitation, but to show, that God can dispense with
his Law, and is not tied to ordinary courses. Or ordinary, and this is
manifold, First, good and allowed of God, as Abraham's teaching his household,
Jobs patience, praying for his children, and works of mercy and justice;
Cornelius devotion; Paul's labor in the ministry, and a thousand such like,
left written for instruction to acknowledge the strength of grace, and are for
our godly imitation. Secondly, bad and unlawful, as Aarons consenting to the
Israelites idolatry, Lots incest, David's adultery and murder; Peter's
perjury, and such like: these are not to be imitated, but to be avoided as
evil, and are written to make us to behold man's corruption, and so his desert,
that thereby we may set our selves to bewail the same, to watch over our
selves, and that none Heb. 3. 12, 13.
may boast of their own righteousness, but acknowledge it Gods mercy, that
we are not confounded, and that it is his mere goodness that saves us.
Thirdly, mixed, partly good and partly bad: so was Rebecca her seeking the
blessing for Jacob, which God had promised; and here Naomi a marriage for Ruth,
but the manner in both faulty. These are written to let us see our
imperfections in doing a good thing, and to teach us to examine the ways of
the best, to know how far they be imitable. Fourthly, merely indifferent in
themselves, neither commanded nor forbidden, as Samson his feasting of the young
men at his marriage; David's delight and playing upon the harp, and such like:
which are written to show our liberty in things indifferent, and that we may
use the same, so we be moderate therein. Thus we see the difference of
actions, and why tecorded. And these are we to mark, and examine, that we be
not mistaken, whether extraordinary, or ordinary, whether good, or bad, or
mixed, or indifferent, and even in these, how lawful to us, how expedient also,
that we may not give offense.

Verse 5. And she said unto her, All that thou say unto me, I will do.
RVths readiness to obey her mother in law, and that in all things without
exception.

And she said unto her.] In this conference between them two here, is no
interrupting of one another: Ruth hears Naomi her counsel, and answers
when she has heard it; which commends her modesty and wisdom; for it is
folly to answer a matter, before it be heard.

All that thou say unto me, I will do.] Ruth is as ready to obey, as the
other to command: and that in respect, first, of her reverence toward Naomi,
and persuasion of her good mind toward her: for whom we think well of and
reverence, their counsel we easily embrace, and willingly obey: and yet herein
may we do amiss, if we examine not well the matter; for counsel may be
sometime from error of the judgment, and sometime from corrupt affection.
Secondly, of her own inclination to the thing, being young, and poor, to get
a rich husband: for we readily obey in that whereto we incline our mind of
our own accord, there needs little incitation.

Verse 6. And she went down unto the floor, and did according to all that
her mother in law bade her.
RVths performance of her promise, both in going down to the floor, and in
doing there, what her mother advised her.

And she went down unto the floor.] The City was then higher from whence
she went, though we may read of a floor up on high, 2. Sam. 24. 18. It may
seem strange how Ruth durst attempt this, being a stranger, and fearful by
nature, as women be: yet see, where desire is, there nothing can hinder, or
amate the spirit, or daunt the heart.

And did according to all that her mother in law bade her.] As it is in verses
3, and 4. so she very exactly followed her mothers advice, and in nothing
followed her own mind, lest perhaps, if things had not fallen out well, she
might have had the fault put upon her self. Here is an example of strict
obedience unto Parents, which is required at the hands of children. Ruth does
according to all that which she was bidden to do. And thus in all lawful
things should children do to Col. 3. 20. Ephe. 6. 2.
parents; for so God would have it, it pleases him. It is the duty of
children, and in so doing Col. 3. 20. Ephe. 6. 1, 3.
they shall be blessed. Let children learn obedience to Parents, as Isaac
obeyed Abraham; Genesis 22. 6. Iud. 11. 36, 37. Luke 1. 51. Exodus 20.
Iephtes daughter her father, and as our blessed Savior did his Parents: which
they will do, if they fear God, Leuit. 19. 3. and hold their parents worthy
of honor, as God commands.

Verse 7. And when Boaz had eaten and drunken, and his heart was merry, he went
to lie down at the end of the heap of corn: and she came softly, and
uncovered his feet, and laid her down.
THis verse shows how she did as her mother bade her, both for the time
when, and the manner how.

And when Boaz had eaten and drunk;] meaning largely and freely, as the words
following intimate, which it may seem they used at such times as this. We may
note, that it is lawful to eat and drink more largely at one time than at
another; as in times of feasting, which the Israelites kept in old time, in
reaping the fruits of the 2. Sam. 13. 1. Sam. 25. Genesis 21. Nehe. 8. Genesis 29.
22. Iud. 14. 10. Mat. 22. 2. John 2. 1. King. 3. 15. Este^ 9. Genesis 26. 30. and
43. 34. Job 1.
Earth, as here; so at sheep-shearing they feasted, at the weaning of children,
as we at christ'nings, at solemn times of reioicing, at marriages, at such
times as God bestowed blessings and special favors, or did graciously deliver
his people; at the intertainment of friends, and loving meetings of brethren
and kindred; at such times and upon such occasions may we eat and drink, and
rejoice our hearts. But yet with these Ca^eats: First, to take heed of excess,
by falling either into gluttony or drunkenness, or wanton songs, or wanton
behavior, or by foolish jesting and mocking of the godly, as the Philistims
did Iud. 16. 25.
Samson. Secondly, to keep such feasting seasonably, not in time of Gods
judgments, nor in the time of the affliction of the Church; for then Esai. 22.
13, 14, 15.
it befitteth us rather to fast then to feast. Thirdly, Amos 6. 6.
that we behave our selves Christian-like. First, 1. Cor. 10. 31.
to praise and bless the Lord and glorify him: And here is worth the
remembrance, the behavior of the ancient Christians in their feastings Tertul.
apol. cha. 36.
together: they sat not down before thanksgiving, they ate and drank
moderately, so as they would not hinder their devotion to God afterward; their
communication such, as they that knew they spoke in the Lords hearing: when
they had sufficed themselves, they provoked one another to speak somewhat out
of the Scripture, or otherwise good things to the praise of God; by which was
trial made how much every one had drunk; and finally they ended their meeting
with prayer; this was a religious and Christian feasting. Secondly, in all our
mirth to remember, and not forget, as David says, Jerusalem, Psalm. 137. 5, 6.
Neh. 8. 11.
the Church of God. Thirdly, to remember the poor which want: we must not be
Nabal-like, to feast like a King, and be without mercy to David and his
company needing our relief; nor as the rich Dives, faring diliciously, and
suffering the poor to perish at our gates. These caueats observed, we may
eat and be merry.

And his heart was merry.] Eating and drinking Psa. 104. 14, 15.
make the heart merry. Thus were Joseph's brethren Genesis 43. 34.
made merry; for the spirits of men hereby are refreshed, and let loose, as it
were, from cares; and this benefit we may have by the Lords creatures, Prou.
31. 6, 7.
and praise God for the same, so we keep a moderation, and use sobriety, as
Boaz here, and not become as drunken sots, like Nabal.

He went to lie down at the end of the heap of corn.] After his labor and
repast, he went to take his rest, not in any dainty bedding, but even in the
floor, at the end of the heap: and this did he for the safety of Gods
blessings, and the better keeping of the corn winnowed, from pilfering. Note
hence, I. That painful labor makes man not curious of his lodging. Boaz
here can lie hard; Jacob a Princes son, brought up daintily at his mothers
lap, can take a stone and lay it under his head for a pillow, and sleep
soundly, being wearied with travel, which makes rest and hard lodging very
pleasant to him: and howsoever Jacob might lie better before, yet did he never
rest more blessedly than in this hard bed: for now the Lord spoke to him, and
he saw Gods Angels ascending and descending upon him: for it falls out, the
more the body is pampered, the less spiritual comfort; and the less the body
is cehrished, the more is the soul made glad, and the nigher we be to God.
Would we therefore not be nice, nor curious of our lying. Let us labor our
bodies till we be weary, and we shall take hard lodging without dislike,
hunger makes poor fare sweet; so does labor make hard lying pleasant. II.
That it is good husbandry to Prou. 27. 23.
seek to save, as well as to get. Boaz was noble, wise, rich, and also
thriuing, yet merciful, and therefore not base, but yet would, as need
required, see to his own estate and Gods blessings bestowed upon him, that
they might not be diminished by purloining hands. This honest care of this
great man, and good man too, checketh such spendthrifts, as do waste Gods
blessings; they be thieves to themselves, and such as depend upon them; they
work their own overthrow and destruction, and in adversity they shall be
without comfort: for their consciences will tell them, that they have justly
brought upon themselves that evil.

And she came softly and uncovered his feet, and laid her down.] A great show
of evil: for she went to a wrong man, it was also in the night, and alone, to
him alone, and after his feasting too; a too bold adventure, upon her mothers
weak advice in this manner of doing. True it is, the success was good; but
this more of Gods mercy, then the fact deserved. Boaz also commended her, verse.
10. but it was not for thus coming, not for the manner, but for the thing
intended, to wit, to match with him, she following the rule of the Word, and
not lust to seek to young men, whether poor or rich. Here we see what Naomi
contrived, she did with as much cunning; as care, act it; for it is said, she
came softly, secretly, and without any stir or noise to awake him, and so
laid her down at his feet, waiting when he should of his own accord awake. We
warily act a thing, where we be loath to offend; and there are we contented to
wait patiently, where we fear to do amiss, as Ruth does here. This wisdom
can we show in attaining our desires in things of the world; Oh that we thus
could behave our selves toward God! and that we might say with the Prophet, My
soul does wait for the Lord, and in his Word do I hope, Psalm. 13 1. 5, 6.

Verse 8. And it came to pass at midnight, that the man was afraid, and
turned himself; and behold, a woman lay at his feet.
THe event of Ruths thus secretly coming in, and lying at Boaz feet unawares
to him. Where note the time when; the event it self; the effect of it; and the
occasion of both in the last words.

And it came to pass at midnight.] Thus long Boaz slept after his labor and
paines-taking, before he did awake. Note, that the wearied body Eccles. 5. 12.
and quiet mind sleeps soundly: (so Solomon tells us) eat he little or
much. If therefore we would soundly sleep, being in bodily health, let us
labor our bodies; weariness is the best physic to cast any one asleep: the
idle cannot sleep, they be troubled with dreams, and foolish fantasies: We
must also get a quiet spirit, so shall we sleep without fear: and this is to
be gotten, first, by seeking reconciliation with God in Christ, so may we lie
down in peace with David, Psalm. 4. 8. and 3. 5 Job 11. 14, 19. Acts 12.
and not be afraid: this made Peter sleep soundly in great bodily danger; and
the Martyrs, some of them, the night before they went to execution. Secondly,
by shaking off the cares of the world, which makes the worldling that he
cannot Eccles. 5. 12.
rest. Thirdly, by suffering no evil to reign in our hearts, as envy,
malice, lust, covetousness: for these things will not suffer us to take rest.
Prou. 4. 16.
Fourthly, to keep ever a good conscience toward God and man; this is a
continual feast, and gives us rest.

That the man was afraid.] The best are subject to fear, upon conceit of
peril, and that suddenly: So was Gideon afraid, and the Apostles on a sudden;
and likewise Boaz here, and that upon these reasons: First, his natural
frailty and weakness of faith, which also is in every one. Secondly, his
ignorance, not knowing what it was, because she came in unknown to him, when
he was asleep: and in such cases we be more apt to conceit evil toward us,
men good, because our hearts tell us, that we be wicked by nature, and
deserve evil. Thirdly, the dark and dead time of the night, which is to man
fearful: the Psalmist speaks Psalm. 91. 5.
of the terror of the night. We all by experience know, how easily man's heart
is made fearful in the dark; except in the sons of Belial, and the
children of the kingdom of darkness, hardened in evil, and which make the
night the time of their lewd practices; yet even these also will soon be
stricken into sudden fear. Fourthly, this fear may more suddenly possess one
in the night, as here it did Boaz being alone: for that Spirits have taken at
such times bodily shapes upon them, and showed themselves: for the night is
their time chiefly, as may be seen in their coming then most commonly to
Witches, known by their own confession. Let us therefore hence take notice of
this weakness, which so shows it self from the love we bear to our bodies
safety, and natural life. Now, if we fear so much for this cause bodily
dangers, Oh how much more should we fear to commit sin, and the wrath of God
for sin, which bring destruction to body and soul, without timely repentance!

And turned himself.] He gathered himself together shrinking, as the manner
is of such as in bed being in sleep, fall into a sudden fear, and turn to
and fro; such a forcible operation has this fear upon the whole body, for to
decline from, and avoid the danger conceived, nature seeking to save it self,
in apprehension of peril, and that of a sudden. This natural fear is more
quick and sudden to seize upon the heart, then the spiritual fear to avoid
sin, or the displeasure of God, and so the danger of the ruin of our souls:
for this danger is not so soon apprehended; here is required the grace of
illumination, and of faith, before this can be wrought in us.

And behold, a woman lay at his feet.] The fear possessed him without cause.
And thus it falls out often, Man often fears without just cause: the Matthew.
8. 26.
godly through the weakness of their faith, reproved by Christ: the wicked
by their accusing Prou. 28. 1.
conscience, which makes them to fly, when none pursue them; they think that
evil does Job 15. 21.
haunt them, and peril sounds in their ears. Therefore let the godly labor
for strength of faith, and the wicked repent, and seek for the peace of a good
conscience, that they need not to fear.

Verse 9. And he said, Who art thou? And she answered, I am Ruth thine
handmaid; spread therefore thy skirt over thine handmaid, for thou art a near
kinsman.
THis is Boaz his questioning with Ruth, her answer, with a request to him, and
the reason thereof.

And he said, Who art thou?] Boaz coming to himself, moderateth his fear,
and contains himself from unchaste touching, and demands what she was. We
may note, first, that though fear possess wise and godly men upon a sudden,
yet they moderate it, and are not wholly over come therewith: for Boaz here
cries not out to servants for help, neither speaks to her, as one amazed,
neither falls he into a rage with her, that she should be occasion of such
fear: for howsoever the fear suddenly seized upon him being fast in sleep
before, yet was it not childish, nor womanish, he soon shook it off, as a man
of courage, having confidence in God. He mastered his natural fear: and so
should we, and not be ouerswayed therewith, as women and children be.
Secondly, That raging lust should not seize suddenly upon honest hearts, and
such as fear God. Boaz was with her alone, yet does he not in a filthy
affection seek to dishonest her, as Judah did Thamar, being inflamed with lust
at the sight of her; he did it on the day time, he asked not what she was, as
Boaz does here, lust would not afford him that leisure. This continency is
praise worthy Genesis 19.
in old Boaz, as it was before in young Joseph: a virtue as in these commended,
so commanded by God, and much praised in some Heathen, who may rise up in
judgment against our wanton Youth, and some lecherous old men, whom God does
hate.

And she answered, I am Ruth thine handmaid.] Thus Ruth calls her self
showing her humility, as before in chap. 2. 13. and here, by professing what a
one she would be unto him, humble and serviceable, as an handmaiden, if she
might obtain her suit. So said Abigail, when David sent 2. Sam. 25. 41.
to her, to take her to wife; and so humble and serviceable was Sarah: for she
called Abraham Genesis 18. 6.
Lord, and in what he commanded, she readily obeyed. And so should good and
virtuous wives do still, when husbands command but what is honest and just:
not that wives should be counted in condition as servants: for as that is more
then they will grant, so is it more then husbands of right ought to expect from
them that be their yoke-fellowes: but what maid-seruants and handmaidens do of
fear, and servile duty, wives should do of love with chearefulnes such
offices, as they ought to perform unto their husbands, who have authority to
command. Therefore let wives learn to obey, as God commands them Ephesians. 5.
22, 33
to do in all things, and that with reverence, as unto the Lord, and as it is
sit in the Lord, as the Col. 3. 18.
Apostle teaches. And doubtless there would be more such, then we find in
these days, if they might have Abraham's to their husbands, loving, wise in
instructing them, and giving them honor as the weaker vessels. Note farther,
how this worthy woman does humble and debase her self: for the Godly think
lowly and meanly of themselves; 1. Sam. 24. 14.
as did Abigail, also David, that worthy Centurion, who said, That he was not
worthy that Christ should come under his roof. Abraham likewise did call
himself dust and ashes; Genesis 18.
Saint Paul did greatly humble and vilify himself: 1. Tim. ^. 13. 1. Cor. 15.
9.
for the godly are not selfe-louing, they see and know what they be by nature;
they are not like the Angel of the Church of Laodicea, which thought highly of
himself, and that he wanted Revel. 3.
nothing, when yet he was poor, and blind, and naked, and miserable. They
know, if they have any thing, that the same is from God, that the more they
have, whether gifts of body, or mind, or of the world, or the graces of the
soul spiritual and heavenly, the more they be indebted, and the more they are
to answer for. These things considered, make them lowly in their own eyes, and
to behave themselves so unto others, as all that fear God ought to do, and
should go one before another in giving of honor; and not in taking it, as the
world now does.

Spread therefore thy skirt over thine handmaid.] In this phrase of speech she
modestly claims marriage of him: for some do write, that it was a custom when
they were contracted, that the man did throw over the woman, the lap or wing of
his garment, in token that he took her into his protection. The word is taken
from Fowls, which cover under their wings their young from danger. By which,
husbands are to learn, that they either are, or should be a protection to
their wives; for the woman Genesis 20. 16.
bestows her self upon the man, forsaking for his love, father and mother,
to be under his covert as his wife; she is then as himself, and he is to love
her as being become one flesh; and as the head, he is to care for her as well as
to rule and govern her. And therefore let husbands show themselves to be such:
and this shall they do, if they do give their wives countenance, and do grace
them with all their credit; if they upon all just occasions stand for them,
defend their persons, honesty and credit against others; if they love,
cherish, and nourish them, as their own bodies, affoording them all honest
contentment, then are they good protectors. And if husbands be the wives
protection, and that they look to have them so, let them depend upon their
husbands, let them keep close to them, and by a loving obedience procure
protection thus from them: from which some husbands are so far, as some wish
them dead, and so in heart are murderers, some expose them to all misery by
their unthriftiness; some run from them, and leave them to the wide world;
some offer them, or at least bawd-like, are willing to have them give their
bodies unto the lusts of others, that they may live thereby; others there be
which murder them, to be rid of them. All these are false and faithless
husbands, breaking promise to their wives made to them before God and his
Church, cursed caitifes, running headlong to destruction, without honesty,
love, or natural kindness to their own posterity.

For thou art a near kinsman.] Here is the reason of her request grounded upon
Gods Law, as Deuteronomy. 25.
she had learned by her mother in law. This is her only reason which she uses
to Boaz, for that he was a good and a godly man, with whom the strongest
argument to prevail, is the Word of God: for the Word has authority in godly
men's hearts; it binds their consciences, and forces them to yield, it
commands them more, then all other reasons besides. And therefore in having
to do with such, gather arguments soundly from the Word of God; for these will
work upon good men's hearts, and in using such reasons aright, the Lord, and
not man, may be said to speak unto them: which course, though worldlings
mock at, yet such as fear the Lord, will weigh and consider of, for that they
do desire to square and frame their whole life after the Word and Law of God.

Verse 10. And he said, Blessed be thou of the Lord, my daughter: for thou
have showed more kindness in the latter end, then at the beginning, in as much
as thou followest not young men, whether poor or rich.
Boaz his reply unto Ruth, when he knew who she was; wherein he blesses
her, commends her, and gives the reason of such his commendation of her.

And he said.] His answer is full of kindness and love, neither does he
reprove her any thing at all, though he justly might for her thus coming in
this manner: but Boaz being a good man, considered rather the lawfulness of
the matter which she came for, then of the manner of seeking it: then also her
ground, and the reason moving her to come to him, which was the Law of God.
Thirdly, the estimation of her person, being held a virtuous woman generally of
all. And lastly, his fullness of charity, which takes things in the best
part, and is not easily offended, made him not to reprove her: For a good man
full of mercy and love, does not lightly condemn the virtuous for some shows
of evil, for missing in the manner, where the matter intended is good. For
here the matter was lawful, the ground and inducement just, the person honest
and generally well spoken of, and her intendement not ill. When these things
concur, we are not to take exceptions against the manner, or failing in some
light circumstance. Herein let us imitate good and godly Boaz: and let us not
be like such rigide Censurors, as those be which condemn the best things, if
they be not every way as they ought. Those also which make a small fault a
great offense; rejecting the whole matter for the manner; the person for a
little mistake. Oh how would a proud and churlish Nabal have taken up this
poor woman, a widow and a stranger, if she had come to him for marriage,
especially if she had mistaken him, as Ruth here did Boaz in some sort! What
shame, what impudency would he have laid upon her, and so have rejected her?
And those likewise which take things indifferent in ill part, as Hanun the King
of the 2. Sam. 10.
Ammonites did David's Ambassadors, which is greatly against charity, and an
argument of an envious, 1. Cor. 13.
malicious and proud nature, as may be seen in David's brethren against him,
misinterpreting 1. Sam. 17. 17, 18, 28.
his coming, being sent by his Father to them.

Blessed be thou of the Lord.] These words show how well he took her coming
and request made touching marriage; he scorneth her not, he puts her not
off, but accepts her, as appears afterward, and even in these words, when
he says to so poor a woman relieved by his Alms, Blessed be thou of the
Lord.] Which words may be taken either as a petition, or as an affirmation. If
as a petition, that the Lord would bless her, then are the lessons the same
with those in Chap. 2. 20. where the same words are used by Naomi for him, as
he does here for Ruth: excepting this circumstance, that there Naomi a poor
woman prays for the rich, and here the rich prays for the poor; of which
also before in Chap. 2. 12. If, as an affirmation of that which he judged her
to be: as if he had said, Blessed art thou of the Lord: thou art an happy and
blessed woman, as in Luke 1. 28. for in Hebrew the word be, or art is not
expressed, but only thus, Blessed thou of the Lord, and so may be understood
either be, to make it a petition; or art, to make it an affirmation: and then
we learn, That the godly, Luke 1. 28. with 11. 28.
though poor, yet are blessed, and so accounted of Boaz, that is, of a godly
man, who can judge of true blessedness: for the godly have those things
wherein true blessedness consists: As first, Gods favor in Christ, and
through him are the Mat. 25.
Children of his Father, therefore called blessed. Secondly, they have the
fruits of the Spirit, and the practice of virtue, and for this they be
pronounced Psalm. 119. 1, 2. and 128. 1.
blessed. Thirdly, they have the pardon of sin, and their sins put away in
Christ, and Psalm. 32. 1, 2.
shall not be imputed to them, and therefore are blessed. Fourthly, they have
the assurance of eternal life, which is promised only to such, and cannot be
taken from them; and therefore most Ioh. 10. 27, 28.
blessed, though they want these outward things, as their Master Jesus Christ
himself did, whilst he lived here on Earth. Let this comfort the godly
poor, and make them to rejoice more in their godliness, then the worldlings
in their earthly treasure; the carnal man in his pleasure; or the vain
glorious in his honor. This should make men esteem of the godly, as David
did, Psalm. 101.
and as Abimelech did of Isaac: also to endeavor Genesis 26. 28.
to be like them, if we account them blessed, and to esteem their reproach for
righteousness sake, to be more honor, then the glory of Pharaos Heb. 11.
court, as Moses did; to have them to dwell with us, to have our delight in
them, as David had in Psalm. 101.
the Saints, for they are blessed. And if so, then this confuteth the carnal
conceit of worldlings, who think not so of them, especially if poor: yet let
such consider our Master Christ how poor he was; also the afflicted state of
the Saints mentioned in Heb. 13. 37. yet pronounced to be such as the world
was not worthy of. And lastly, how Joseph a Prince in Egypt, did rather choose
to put his sons into Jacobs family, and to be called his children, than into
Pharaos court, to be accounted mighty among the Egyptians.

My daughter.] See Chap. 2. 8. Thus he might call her, as being old: for the
ancient are to be as Fathers, and old women as Mothers unto the younger sort, in
teaching them good things by word and Tit. 2. 1, 2, 3.
by example. So as a Magistrate he might so speak to her, as Iosuah spoke to
Achan; for magistrates Joshua 7.
are to be as Fathers to the people, and to tender them as their children: but
of this before. Note how she called her self his handmaid, but he is pleased
to term her by the name of daughter, though she so had debased and humbled
her self. For the humbling of our selves makes our esteem to be nothing
less, but rather greater, with such as be godly and wise; see Chap. 2. 10, 11,
12. where the more Ruth did humble her self, the more account did Boaz make of
her: for such as humble themselves, shall be exalted. Let none then think by
humbling themselves, that they shall lose credit and honor, as foolishly the
base borne, and new start-vp does imagine: for they cannot but be suspicious of
contempt, who know themselves unworthy of honor and esteem.

For thou have showed more kindness in the latter end, then at the beginning.]
This is the reason of his blessing of her, or accounting of her blessed,
because she increased and did not decay in goodness. The truly virtuous and
heartily religious are better at last than at the first. As the Angel of the
Church of Thyatira; and as it is said of Ruth here in her kindness and love:
for goodness, grace, and virtue where it is truly planted, will increase
rather then decay: for the Lord husbands John 15. 2.
such Trees, by his Word, his Spirit, and afflictions. We must therefore
labor for this 1. These. 4. 1.
commendation, if we will be held truly virtuous, truly honest, kind, just,
merciful, and gracious. but some are far from this praise, growing worse and
worse, till they be stark naught, whether it be in respect of Religion, as we
see in Iehu, Demas, Alexander the Copper-smith, and Judas, who were worst at
last, because they were never truly good at the first: or in respect of love
and kindness, as here spoken of Ruth, which love some turn into hatred, and
kindness into cankred malice, and show more ill will at the last, then love at
the first; like Amon to his sister Tamar, and Saul to David: for that love was
neither good nor sound in them, as Ionathans was to David, and Ruths to Naomi,
and hers to Ruth again.

In as much as thou followest not young men, whether poor or rich.] Boaz in
the other words gave a reason of his blessing of her; here he gives a reason
of his so commending her kindness: which appears to be more at the last
now, than at the first, to wit, to her husband deceased, and to her now mother
in law Naomi, because she married him in her own country, and him rather
then any of her own nation, which was kindness; then, for Naomi her sake to
leave her own country, and to come and dwell with her in Judah in a poor
estate; this was great kindness: but now to be ruled by Naomi, being so young
a woman, to seek to match with an old man, and not to follow nature, in
desiring young men; but the Law of God, for to raise up a name again unto her
dead husband, whom by this means she makes to live again in Israel; this is
it which makes her kindness to be more at last then at the first, in loving
an old man rather than any young, and him also for the dead sake, to revive his
name among the people of God. See here in Ruth, how true love, obedience to
good counsel, and grace, do overcome nature, and the law of lust: for she
loved her husband, she was obedient to Naomi, and in her self virtuous, and
therefore reason and Religion did take place, and neither nature, nor lust
prevailed with her. A good example for youth to follow. Note out of these words
farther these lessons: First, that as now, so then, and ever before, there have
been two sorts, rich and poor in the world. First, to show in one, what all
might have been; and in the other the poor, what all deserve to be.
Secondly, that the rich may have occasion to show works of mercy, and the
poor laboring painefully and honestly, may have to whom to go unto for
relief: for the rich are Gods Stewards for the poor. Let both seek to live
together lovingly, and to help one another; the poor, to lend their labor to
the rich, and the rich to supply their wants; for the one cannot live without
the other: all cannot be rich, neither must all be poor. Let us rest
contented with our estates; let not the poor murmur with envy at the rich;
neither let these despise the poor: for God has made them both, and one to
stand in need of the other. Secondly, that young persons in nature affect to
marry with young persons like themselves; which is employed by Boaz speech. So
did Isaac marry, and Jacob; and so in ancient time were matches made. If ever
old and young married together, it was the old man with a young woman, but
never an old woman with a young man, as the wanton and lecherous often do with
wanton young fellows in these days, to the stain of their sex, and reproach
to themselves and often their utter undoing. For youth cannot affect old age,
and therefore it is fittest that marriage be made between such as may most
likely agree together; other matches prove for the most part untoward. Thirdly,
The truly religious will be ruled by the Law of God, and will not be led after
their natural disposition. For here Ruth leaves the young men, and takes an
old man, because the Law so bound her, as she conceived, taking Boaz for the
nearest Kinsman: because such as be truly religious, have denied themselves,
and do resign themselves wholly to Gods good pleasure and will, saying as
Christ said, Not my will, O Father, but thy will be Matthew. 26. 39.
done. Hence was it that Joseph did abstain from his Mistress; David from
smiting Saul, when twice he might have done it, to get the kingdom; he rather
would wait, and endure much affliction; for he that believes, says Isaiah,
makes not haste. And hence is it, that such as fear God, dare not follow the
course of the world, but do restrain their nature, and their desires, and do
endeavor to please God in all things. If this be the grace of the religious,
let men hereby try themselves, and be as God wishes them to be, and as
Religion and Deuteronomy. 5. 29. Psalm. 86. 11. and 119. 5. James 1. 27. Tit. 2. 11, 12.
Grace it self requires them to be, as David promised and prayed to be. They
are surely then far from being religious, which live according to their lusts;
those that will follow the world with Demas, and Judas, and Nabal, but not
forsake it, as Barnabas, Acts 4. 37. Luke 19.
and Zacheus did; those that will follow the flesh, as the young men did their
eyes in the old world, and as Potiphars wife, who was inamoured with Genesis 6.
fair Joseph; few Joseph's among the vainly and idly up bred Youths of the
Gentry in our days. And yet such will hung after honors, and vain titles;
and if they cannot merit the^, they will pay money for them: the insolency and
pride of Haman, the aspiring arrogancy of Absalom and Adoniah, are reigning in
many. And have we not Scribes and Pharisees which love the highest places? Is
there a Jonathan among thousands? Where is a Heb. 11.
Moses, that will be no more a Courtier for fear of sinning? Will a Saul become
a Paul, so well trained up? Or can there be found a Manaen, a Princes foster
brother, to join to the Church, and to Acts 13. 1.
become a Teacher, in mere love to Religion? Do they not rather scorn the
Calling? And yet to call these worldlings, these fleshly livers, and these
vainglorious spirits, profane, irreligious, lovers of pleasures more then
lovers of God, Oh how would they take on! How enraged would they be! so they
love to be held religious, or not to be without Religion; and yet in works deny
God, Titus 1. 16.
being abominable, and disobedient, and unto every good work reprobate, as the
Apostle speaks.

Verse 11. And now, my daughter, fear not, I will do to thee all thou
requirest: for all the City of my people does know, that thou art a virtuous
woman.
BOaz gave her before due commendation, here is now his consolation, and
comforting of her, first, by a dehortation, willing her not to fear, then by a
faithful promise to satisfy her request, yielding a reason of the same.

And now, my daughter.] Boaz still uses this term, both for that he loved
her, and desired to comfort her. We may here see in Boaz, that a loving and
merciful heart is not rough in terms; as an unloving and merciless Nabal
is. This we may see to be so between loving Parents and children, Genesis 22. 7,
8.
in Abraham and Isaac; between kind married couples, as in Isaac and Rebecca,
Elkanah and 1. Sam. 1. 8.
Hannah; and between loving friends, and godly disposed, as in Elizabeth and
Marie, S. Paul Luke 1. 43.
and other Christians, or Laborers with him in the Gospel, and also in Eli
and Samuel: for loving natures, whether they be high and honorable, speaking
to mean persons, as Boaz to Ruth here; or old and in authority, to such as
be young, as Eli to Samuel; or such as sit in judgment, 1. Sam. 3. 16.
speaking to Malefactors, as Joshua to Achan; Ios. 7. 19.
or a Master unto his servants, as Job to his; or one Job 31. 13. Chap. 2. 8.
giving an alms to the poor, as Boaz to Ruth: it is all one, they are not
rough nor churlish; for they be neither proud nor impatient. And therefore, if
we would be held loving and merciful, let us use loving and kind speeches.
Note again, that loving and kind speeches of great and rich persons, Chap. 2.
13.
are comfortable unto the poor, as Ruth before confesses; and therefore Boaz
does here use them, to cheer up the spirit of this poor woman: for kind
words witness a kind heart, if the speakers be not dissemblers. Now, the
apprehension of hearty love in the mighty, gladdeth much the heart of such as
be poor, and in a low estate. Let therefore the mighty and rich learn to show
forth kindness, and to speak lovingly. By it David so speaking to Amasa,
passing by his fault with Absalom, bowed the heart of the Tribe of Judah, 2.
Sam. 19. 13, 14.
as one man. How did Absalom win the hearts of the people? was it not by loving
speeches, and courteous behavior, which be of an attractiue virtue to gain
men's affections? How singularly beloved was our late Queen Elizabeth of most
blessed memory, for this virtue, of all her true subjects, in that she was so
affable, and full of loving speeches, and of a gracious carriage toward them?
The contrary we may see in Rehoboam, who by rough and contemptible speeches
alienated the hearts of ten Tribes from him for ever. The mighty therefore
shall do wisely to speak with mildness, to use terms of love and respect;
whereby they shall procure love, reputation and due honor unto themselves.

Fear not.] That is, fear not to be deceived of thy hope: though thou be
poor, and I rich, let no such thought trouble thee, that I should therefore
make light account of thee: for I am well disposed in my affection to thee;
therefore fear not: thus Boaz speaks unto Ruth. For he knew, and so do we,
that it is a common thing to fear the issue, where earnest desire is to
obtain the thing; especially where it may in some respects seem unlikely to
come to pass, as Ruth might here so conceive, when she should consider what
they two were, and the great difference between them. For in such a case there
cannot be a full persuasion of the event; the poorer and meaner party may
justly fear contempt, and usually such a one fears the alterabilitie of man's
nature, though hapely good words may pass between them for the present. And
therefore in such a case it is good and fitting for the party, of whom kindness
is expected, to give to the other some tokens of assurance, not to doubt, nor
fear, as Boaz does in this place, and in the words following.

I will do thee all that thou requirest. By this Boaz takes away her fear
and doubt, in that he promises her marriage. For, where a godly and honest man
makes a promise, there is no fear of performance; because he makes
conscience of his word, and knows himself in equity bound to the
performance of the same. And therefore may we rest upon an honest man's word,
though in these days many would be held honest, which make no conscience of
breach of promise. In that Boaz here makes her a promise of marriage, and so
contracteth himself unto her, but yet de futur^, as it is said, and
conditionally, as the two next verses show, we may note, that it is lawful to
betroth Exodus 21. 9. Deuteronomy. 20. 7. Mat. 1. 18.
and contract our selves one to another before marriage. It was an usual thing
among Gods people in former times; which betrothing is either lawful or
unlawful: lawful, which is made by parties that may lawfully marry, which be
free in their choice, of years of disctetion to make their choice: and
therefore contracts made of such as be within degrees forbidden, of contrary
religions, betrothed already to others, or defective in nature, or wanting
judgment what they do, or being under government of Parents and not free, are
not to be allowed. Now further, this lawful contracting is either
conditional, or absolute, and the same de praesenti, or de futuro, I take
thee, or I will take thee to be my wife. If conditional, then it binds no
farther then the observing of the condition binds; for if that be not kept,
the parties be free, unless they give their bodies in the mean space one to
another. If it be absolutely made, and by such as may so contract themselves,
they be man and wife before God, and may not be sundred one from another. These
things are to be therefore considered of in contracts, used before marriage, for
the parties better settling of their affections one upon another, for the
better acquainting themselves with the conditions and qualities of each other,
and to fit themselves for housekeeping, and more convenient living together,
having made some honest provision before hand.

For all the city of my people does know, that thou art a virtuous woman.] The
reason why he yields to take her to wife: her portion was her virtues, for
which she was generally commended of all. This reason did the more confirm
her, and easily removed away fear, when she might perceive upon what ground he
was induced to marry with her. Hence may arise many lessons: first, that
virtue makes even the poor and strangers too to become famous, as may appear
in this poor widow a Moabitesse woman. So it made David famous in the days
of Saul, though he sought to obscure his name; and likewise Barnabas in the
Primitive Church: for virtue will not be hid, neither can it. And therefore
such as desire renown, labor for virtue. Is not Abigail famous for her
wisdom? Joseph for his chastity? Moses for his meekness? Samuel for his
justice? David for his zeal? Ehud, Gideon, and Iephte for their fortitude, and
so the seven and thirty Worthies of David for their valiant acts? Ester for
her humility? the sinful woman for her penitencie? the sons of Ionadab the
son of Rechab for their temperance? This is the way, and the best way to get
same and true honor for ever; and yet few tread aright in this path, but
rather they will make themselves so notorious by villainy, that all may know
them to be vicious persons, without shame, without blushing, like those which
Esai and Isai. 3. 9. Ier. 6. 15.
Jeremy speak of, which would not hide their sins, neither be ashamed for
them. Secondly, that the godly and virtuous will take notice of such as be
virtuous among them: for so do here all the people of Bethlehem, the people of
God; because they love virtue, having it in themselves, they desire to
encourage others that be so, and rejoice therein, and therefore do they speak
thereof, and spread abroad the name of it, to make the parties which be
virtuous, to be honored. This is comfort to such as live well, though they do
not, nor may thereby seek praises, yet shall they be taken notice of. And by
this may men consider of themselves whether they be virtuous, if they will take
notice of graces in others, and reioycingly speak thereof, to the honor and
praise of the virtuous. Thirdly, that a godly man will take a wife for her
virtues, as Boaz does here Ruth; so did David for her virtues choose Abigail:
for a Pro. 31. 10, 11.
virtuous woman is lovely, and her price, as Solomon says, is far above the
Rubies: the heart of her husband may safely trust in her, so that he shall
have no need of spoil. Let men therefore in marrying make this choice; for
such a woman Prou. 12. 4. and 11. 16.
is a crown to her husband, and she retains honor. And yet this is the
least reckoned of in these days: but now beauty, wealth, honor and friends,
are the motives to make marriages. Fourthly, that a good report for virtue in a
woman, is a good portion, and a means of preferment: Thus came poor Ruth to
so honorable and rich an husband, having neither wealth, nor friends. For such
a woman has the best and most durable help of true love, even virtue; she
has the Lord to speak for her, and to procure her favor, and to cause her to
be beloved. This should make women to strive for virtue, and to get a good
name from it, and not for beauty and brave attire: for a good name is better
then riches, then Eccles. 7. 1. Prou. 22. 1.
precious ointment, and rather to be chosen then great riches. Let Parents
hence learn to bring up their daughters virtuously, it is a good portion and
means of preferment. This may comfort poor maidens which be virtuous, and
want friends and goods, by a good report yet may they match well; let them
strive therefore, though they want goods, yet to get grace and good conditions,
as piety and Religion in heart; and modesty in countenance, apparel, and
gesture; let them preserve chastity, and not be given to youthful company;
let them be skillful in good huswifrie, painful also and industrious, and
having power to govern the tongue; if thus they be beautified and enriched,
they have a better portion then many pounds, and fair enough to the wise in
heart, so as they will give a good man contentment: for beauty is fading, Prou.
31. 30.
and favor deceitful and vain, but a woman that fears the Lord, shall be
praised.

Verse 12. And now it is true, that I am thy near kinsman: howbeit, there is a
kinsman nearer then I.
BOaz his information of Ruth, wherein she was somewhat mistaken, granting the
truth that he was a near kinsman, but not the nearest: so as here he
preuenteth her apprehension of the promise made, for taking it absolutely, but
conditionally, as in the next verse more at large he declares his mind. So
that here is a concession of that which she had spoken of him in verse. 9. and
withal an instruction touching another nearer then himself, which she knew
not of.

And now it is true.] Boaz will not deny a truth, for a godly man is a lover of
the truth, and will yield to it, when he hears it: for it swayeth with him,
which if it so did with every one, it would prevent tedious disputes and
contentions among the Learned; prevent long suites of law; put Lawyers to
silence in corrupt pleading, and save many pounds contentiously misspent,
prevent deceit in buying and selling, and many other mischiefs, which
miserably fall out for want of acknowledging the truth, which men should and
would do, if they hated falsehood and lying, if they had a hearty love of the
truth, if they would cast off pride and the desire of vain praises, and
covetousness, and the greedy desire of gain; for these hinder the truth; and
where these reign, hardly will truth be acknowledged as it ought, or reign
among men as it should.

That I am thy near kinsman.] Four things might move him thus ingeniously to
confess himself so nigh a kinsman to those poor women. First, his love to
the truth, so to speak as the thing was. Secondly, his holy and religious
respect unto the Law of God, by authority whereof she made claim to him.
Thirdly, his humility and uprightness of heart, not disdaining his godly poor
kindred. Fourthly, her own virtues, and his love which he bare to her for the
same. (Of rich and poor kinsfolks I have spoken before in Chap. 2. 20.) Here
observe, that a loving, godly, humble, and vpright-hearted rich man will
readily confess himself of near kindred to his poor kinsfolk, if they be
virtuous: for virtue makes them honorable with the virtuous, though poverty
make them contemptible to the world. And therefore for the poor to get an
acknowledgement of them from their rich kindred, let them be virtuous, that
whereas they want goods, grace may procure them favor and respect: for poor
and lewd are not worthy the acknowledging, being contemptible both in body and
soul.

Howbeit there is a kinsman nearer than I.] So that the nighest to a right, are
first to be preferred thereto: this is here implied; and this reason and
equity will yield. Therefore Boaz honestly makes here mention of this other
kinsman, to whom Ruth should first have gone: for both Naomi and she were
mistaken in this, to come first to Boaz for the right of marrying her: yet see
how courteously and lovingly he answers her, teaching, that such as demand
in simple ignorance a matter at our hands as due, and yet in some sort not so,
we are meekely to inform them, and not scornefully to reject them, as great
Ones now will do: for a simple error is pardonable, and it is a fruit of
goodness to inform them in the right: and this would prevent contention and
strife, which otherwise might grow thereupon for want of better information.
Let this then reprove those which gladly take occasion from such mistakes, to
laugh at and jest away the parties, making themselves very merry with the
parties simplicity, though their meaning be both good and honest.

Verse 13. Tarry this night, and it shall be in the morning, that if he will
perform unto thee the part of a kinsman, well, let him do the kinsmans part:
but if he will not do the part of a kinsman to thee, then will I do the part
of a kinsman to thee, as the Lord lives: lie down until the morning.
BOaz his confirmation of his promise before, concerning his marrying of Ruth:
wherein is noted the time when he will go about it, upon what condition he
will do it, the confirmation it self by solemn oath, and his advice to rest
for that night till the morning.

Tarry this night.] Boaz deferreth to perform the kinsmans part for a space,
though very short: and seeing it was night and now dangerous for her to go
alone from thence, he advises her to tarry there that night in the floor.
Note first, that upon reasonable cause, that may be deferred, which cannot
absolutely be denied to be done. Which may be of use to check the impatient
of delay, when there may be good reason and just cause of delaying the matter.
Secondly, that a true and loving friend cares for the safety of such as he
loves. Thus Lot took care for his guests; Michol for David's escaping from the
hand of Saul: so Jonathan in this respect showed his care and love to David,
and H^sh^^ his friend likewise. So did the Disciple care for Paul's safety: for
true love is not Act. 9.
only to do favors, but to expel injuries, and to prevent dangers from
friends. Which reproves the ill friendship of men in these days; for some
will see their friends running into evil, yet will not care by good counsel
to prevent it, much less being in trouble to seek their deliverance, if it
should happily prove either troublesome or costly: for neither of these will
these counterfeit friends bestow upon those they pretend to love, when they
stand in need of them. Some are worse, even Iudas-like, who for gain will
betray their friend; or play Achitophels part, turn his counsel against him
for hope of favor, when he thinks his friend down the wind, and another like
to arise: such false and faithless hearts may now be found more than enough, who
also will expose their friend into any danger or loss, so they may get or save
thereby. Let men therefore learn soundly to try, before they too hastily trust
the pretended, rather then truly intended love in these days: for now is
falsehood in friendship, for that commonly every man loves another for
himself only, as experience shows: for otherwise true friends will be as
Jonathan, who valued nothing of a Kingdom for his friend David's sake; they
will be like Hushai in aduising for David's welfare; as Barzillai in relieuing
him in distress, and in showing him kindness when most were against him, as
Abishai in exposing himself into imminent danger for his safety. What friends
can be found like the Heathen Mariners to Jonah, who in a tempest strove with
all their powers to save him, with danger of all their lives? or like the Nurse
of Mauricius the Emperors child, who offered her own to be slain by that
bloody Phocas, to preserve her foster child's life, the son of the Emperor?
Rare examples worthy imitation, but not to be paralelled in these days. But to
return to Boaz, it may be asked, Why he would suffer her to be within alone in
the floor all night? I answer, his care of her safety: for he would rather
admit of an inconvenience to himself, then the danger of a mischief to her,
knowing the wickedness of the times then. Again, it may be, he felt in
himself strength by Gods grace, and also a resolution to withstand the
temptation, because he was a man of years (though yet some old are wanton
enough:) because he was a just man (as it is said of Mat. 1.
Joseph, the husband of Mary) and would preserve right to his neighbor. And
thirdly, for that he had an honest and true intent to marry her, if so he
might, and therefore he would not offer her dishonesty; though many of
unbridled affections make such oportunities, ready motives to themselves of
abasing themselves one with another: because (forsooth) they mind to marry: Of
which evil in this Book elsewhere I have spoken. See Verse 14.


And it shall be in the morning.] So Boaz, though he deferred it, yet it was
but a very little while; he would not long, as Naomi says after, delay Verse
18.
the matter: for a wise man will not be ouer-hastie, yet will he not neglect,
but hasten the business which he takes in hand: For the one is the property
of Prou. 14. 15.
a fool, but the other of a man of understanding, if so be the matter do
require haste: for there be two extremes in businesses to be avoided: the one
is too great haste, where need is not: and this is rashness, punished in good
Josias, and in 2. Chro. 35. 22. Numb. 14. 40.
the heady Israelites: the other is too great remissness and slackenesse, when
the matter requires haste, which was Amasa his fault. And therefore 2. Sam.
20. 5.
the matter is to be considered of, and thereby we may judge when to make
haste, and when to take more time and deliberation: for that is not rashly
attempted, which is first undertaken with good advice, though with speed
executed. Secondly, done seasonably, as the circumstances of the time, place,
and persons require. Thirdly, when it is done by our calling warrantably. When
a man fails in these, though he take time enough, he is but a rash
Aduenturer.

That if he will perform to thee the part of a kinsman;] That is, if he will
marry thee, and raise up the name of the dead: for he is before me by right to
take or refuse thee; so as if he will have thee, thou can not refuse him:
then take him, and so an end hereof between us. Though it appears many
ways, that Boaz had an earnest affection to Ruth, yet would he not wrong the
kinsman, if he would have her: for a good and a just man, even in what he
desires, will not wrong another: because the Law of righteousness binds Ier.
22. 3.
him to just dealing, of which he makes conscience. So requires the Law of
love, which possesses his heart, which is, to love another as himself, Matthew.
22. 37. Mat. 7. 12.
and to do as he would be done unto. And thus should every man learn to do,
and not to withhold any good from the owner thereof, and Prou. 3. 27.
to whom it is due. In this kind owe nothing to any man, neither wrong any: for
God is an Auenger 1. These. 4. 6.
of all such things. Here then come justly to be reproved such as make no
conscience of wronging others; of which sort are all these: First, Thieves and
Robbers, against which the Prophet and Apostle Zach. 5. 1. Cor. 6. 10.
speaks. 2. Partakers with such, by counsel, command, consent, provoking,
flattery, concealing, receiving, defending, or (if it be in our power,) by not
punishing such: for such be wicked Psalm. 50. 18.
persons, and such do hate their own souls. Thirdly, fraudule^t persons, of
which there be these: first, 1. These. 4. 6. Leuit. 19. 13. and 25. 27.
such as pretend law, to do wrong, as the Judge in giving wrong sentence for
by-respects, who by the Prophet are called thieves. So Lawyers, in Esai. 1. 23.
crafty pleading to overthrow justice and innocence; the Sheriffs in
panelling partial Iuries to pleasure men; and all such as be false witnesses,
or procure their unjust cause to pass, by giving bribes. To these may be added
deceitful buyers Prou. 20. 14. Deuteronomy. 25. 13, 16.
and sellers, in praising or dispraising overmuch for advantage, in counterfeit
wares, in false weights and measures. So likewise those Villains, counterfeit
Bankrupts, damnable Thieves, Cony-Catchers, cheating Gamesters, and
Gnathonicall Knaves, who soothe and flatter, to gain by others simplicity and
folly. Fourthly and lastly, such as withhold goods from the owners, and will
not Leuit. 6. 1.
make restitution, as in conscience they are bound: for so God commands and
promises Ezech. 18. 7, 12.
mercy to them that restore, and threatens the punishment for not restoring.
It is a Rule of equity and justice that requires it, which is, to give every
one his own; and the Law of nature, to do as we would be done unto. Yea, we
have the practice of the godly to move us; the sons of Jacob: Zacheus, and
Samuel offer it; If they had Genesis 43. 21. Luke 19. 8. 1. Sam. 12. 3. St. Aug.
in Epi. ad Mac. Danaeus in Eth. lib. 2. cap. 15. Perkins in the pract. of Rep.
Prou. 3. 28. Mat. 5. 23. Leuit. 6. 5. Joseph. antiq. lib. 4. cap. 8.
done wrong to any. Lastly, this is the judgment of the godly Learned, that
restitution should be made, affirming the sin not to be remitted, except the
thing taken away be restored: and also that Repentance is not sound without it,
if there be ability to restore. Neither may this be deferred, when it is in
our hand, and when we come to worship before God: But we must restore the thing
found, borrowed, or otherwise gotten, and not justly being our own, unto the
true owner himself, if we know him, or to his children, executors, or next
kinsman; and if these be not to be found, then to God, for some public use
to Numb. 5. 7, 8. Read Exodus 21. 19, 29, 30. Leuit. 24. 19. Exodus 21. 33, 34,
36. and 22. 1. 2. Sam. 12 6. Deuteronomy. 22. 2. Exodus 22. 5, 6, 14. Psalm. 37. 21. 2.
King. 6. 5. Leuit. 6. 4. Deuteronomy. 22. 2, 3. Leuit. 5. 16. Deuteronomy. 14. 22. Prou. 20.
25. Leuit. 27. 33. Mal. 1. 8, 13, 14.
the Church, or relief of the poor. And this restitution must be made by me
for every wrong done to my brother, in body, either by my self, or by my
beast; in his goods in like manner, by stealing, by eating their ground with my
beasts, by burning, by borrowing and not repaying, by withholding what was
delivered to be kept of fidelity, by hiding cattle going astray, or keeping
things found. Herein also may justly be reckoned sacrilege, robbing of
Churches, or Churchmen of their maintenance allowed by God, and the good Laws
of our Land, by not tything, or tything deceitfully. The labourer is worthy of
his hire: let him enjoy such maintenance as by Law is given him, and godly
Ancestors truly intended him; and be not guilty of this spiritual theft,
which the very heathen would not do to their priests: for in the great famine
of Egypt all the Egyptians lands and goods were bought and Genesis 47. 22.
sold, but the lands of the Priests were not, but they did eat the portion
which Pharaoh gave them: but with us men are of so greedy and more then
heathenish appetite, that they can devour up both land, and living, and
tything, the whole Portion of Christ's Ministers; so as these heathen shall rise
up in judgment against these deuourers, which eat up from the Lords
Messengers what has bin dedicated for the maintenance of his Service and
Worship.

Well, Let him do the kinsmans part.] That is, I yield him his right in thee,
because he is before me, as I have said, neither will I take thee, except he
renounce his right in thee. Boaz, we see, seeks not to gain her to himself
without consent, neither will abuse her, but honestly behaueth himself in the
night with her alone, as in the eyes of men, and open view of the world: for a
godly man is not good because of men, but for that he fears God which looks
upon him, and upon whom he looks: and therefore every where behaueth
himself as he ought. Boaz here loves her, but lusts not after her to defile
her, as some would, making it a sport to commit fornication, with those whom
they think do belong unto others, either betroathed maids, or married wives:
but whoremongers and adulterers God will judge. Heb. 13. 4.


But if he will not do the part of a kinsman to thee.] These words Boaz
utters as the ground of his promise to marry with Ruth, to wit, if he the
kinsman refuse her: for when one renounceth his right, it is then free for
another: for the release made, is a setting free of that which before was tied,
which is for direction to such as take houses, or grounds. It is a common
complaint to say, He has taken my house and my grounds from me: But often
unjustly, as when the Lord lets not lands or houses, but to a limited time,
which being expired, the same is free to let to another, except either custom
bind to let the present possessor to have the refusal, or that some promise be
made, which binds an honest man to keep it. Beside this, there is indeed a
friendly courtesy in the Landlord to offer to the present Inioyer that which
he has, before any other; but he is not simply bound so to do, but only of
good will. Yet must I needs acknowledge, that it is not a neighbourly part for
any one out of a greedy covetousness, to vnder-myne the possessour, or by any
indirect means to procure from him at the Landlords hands, his house or
lands: for this is against the Law of love, to do as we would be done unto,
and not to do to others, what we would not that they should do unto us, as
the Law and Prophets teach, and our Master Christ commands; and yet this is a
common practice now for want of love. Note again how wary Boaz is in making
her a promise to marry with her, it is done cautelously, with condition of
upright dealing between him and another. For, as every promise is to be made
of an honest man with due consideration, (because once made, it binds, except
there be a release) so especially the promise of marrying one another; both for
the weightines of the matter (nothing being so much concerning the welfare, or
downfall of man in this life) as also for the indissolublenesse of the knot;
for here is no releasing one of another, but they must live together till
death. And therefore let us learn to be wary in making this match: and to do
this, first, consider these two things before mentioned, and weigh them well to
prevent haste and rashness herein. Secondly, how fit or unfit the marriage is,
and what good reasons there be to persuade to it, or dissuade from it. Thirdly,
what is required before the marriage to further it, or else which might hinder
the same. We may not rashly, and unadvisedly run into this holy ordinance, as
many do, first, upon foolish, light, and unadvised love. Secondly, upon strong
and unbridled lust, violently pressing them to sudden contracts, and often to
filthy uncleanness, like bruit beasts, which have no understanding. Thirdly,
upon a fear to lose the opportunity of enjoying one another, if friends
should know it, therefore they will contract themselves, and give themselves
one to another, and that dishonestly, to force friends to consent. Fourthly,
covetousness, when men are carried away, not with the love of the party, but
with the greatness of a portion. These, and such like, make hasty matches, at
leisure to be repented of. Here it may be demanded, Why Boaz made an (if) of
the other Kinsmans mind and good will, seeing first he was the nighest Kinsman,
and had secondly, the Law of God to move him thereto; was it not
uncharitableness? I answer, No: for he knew not his kinsmans mind, as it
appears by his trial of him the next day. Again, he knew well, that albeit
nature and Religion tie men to do a thing; yet worldlings will not do their
duty. Cain had Nature, Reason, and Religion, to love his brother Abel; so had
Saul to respect David; but these prevailed with neither of them, no more then
the Law here was of force to move this worldling; for such a one he was, as
shall be showed in the next Chapter.

Then will I do the part of a Kinsman to thee.] Boaz having laid down the
condition, he renews his promise made in verse. 11. yea, though the other
refuse her, he will take her: for one man's dislike, makes not true love to
decay in another man's heart: for true love is fixed upon the thing beloved,
without respect to other men's affections to the same; their liking may the more
increase love, but dislike cannot utterly remove it, where it is firmly
settled: this, experience tells us to be true, in the love of young persons
affecting marriage. And it were to be wished, that our love were so strong,
that our souls were so glued to Religion, that though others dislike, we may
not therefore cease to love it, but be as Ruth to Naomi, and so say, as she to
her, though she saw Chap. 1. 16.
Orpha depart from her. Note again, that albeit Boaz made this promise to her
alone, and without other witnesses, but God only; yet having promised, and
sworn to keep it, he after honestly and faithfully performs the same, as in
the next Chapter is plain: For, an honest man will Numb. 32. 27. Josh. 4. 12.
and 22. 3. Judge 1. 3, 7, 12, 13. Genesis 50. 21. Josh. 6. 23. Judge. 1. 25.
keep his oath and his word; as may be seen in the Reubenites, Gadites, and
half Tribe of Manasseh, in Jonathan and David, in Judah with Simeon, in Joseph
to his brethren after acobs death, Caleb to Othniel, the Spies to Rahab, and to
the man of Bethel: for an honest man has a binding conscience, when the word
is passed out of his mouth, he cares for his honest name and credit, which to
him is more then riches, and better then ointment. If therefore we be of
upright and honest dealing, and so would be accounted, let us keep our words
and our oaths: for this is common honesty, justice, and a thing of good report,
Phil. 4. 8. Psalm. 15. 4.
which we are commanded to have care of. It is a mark of a good Christian,
though it be to our own hinderance; we shall be like the children of our
heavenly Father, who fails not of any thing which he speaks. Without
keeping promise, Josh. 21. 45. 1. King. 8. 56.
men cannot be trusted; it cutteth off all commerce and traffic with men.
Godly men have ever made conscience of their word; and very heathen men have
been worthy of admiration in this point. And yet these things move nothing a
number of base-minded, false-hearted, and dishonest Christians, unworthy the
name of such, when they lose their common honesty.

As the Lord lives.] This is an oath, Ier. 4. 2. This oath he takes, because
it was a matter of great importance, and for that he would put the poor woman
out of all doubt, and that she should not fear the accomplishment, though he
was rich, and she poor; he noble, she mean; he an Israelite, and she a
stranger of Moab. From this note; First, that it is lawful to take an oath,
against the Anabaptists assertion, of which see Chap. 1. 17. Secondly, That the
godly use to swear by God, when they swear, and by none other; of this more
at large also in chap. 1. 17. Thirdly, that the form of an oath is diversely
expressed, and not one manner of way; as thus, I speak it before God; God is
my witness; The Lord knows; As the Lord lives; I protest before the Lord; I
call God to record, and diverse such like, besides the common form, By God, and
so forth; which I note, to tax the usual swearing of many, who seem to hate
swearing in the common form, and yet they themselves swear too often in
another form: so subtle is Satan to beguile them in that, and therein to make
them guilty of that, from which they take themselves to be most free: but they
be deceived, for when God, or his name and attributes are at any time
mentioned, for this end, to confirm the truth of that which a man speaks, it
is an oath. Let men take notice hereof, and cease to be common swearers.
Fourthly, that it is lawful to swear in private cases, as Jonathan did to
David, and he to Jonathan; the spies to Rahab, and Boaz here to Ruth, in case
of necessity, and in weighty matters. In such cases we may use our lawful
liberty, but yet with great wariness, with great reverence of the high
Majesty of God, not suddenly, not in passion, not without due aduisement.
Fifthly, that an oath is the confirming of Heb. 6. 16.
the mind of another in the truth of that which is spoken, whether of things
past, spoken, or done, or of things present, or of things to come, and promised
to be done. This is the end of Boaz swearing here. If this be so, then let men
rest satisfied with an oath, as Ruth does here, and as in some cases God would
have men so to do, for it is the greatest Exodus 22. 11.
confirmation of a truth that may be, except the party swearing either has
been convinced, or is at that present conuincible, by good probabilities of
falsehood. If this be the end of an oath, then also let men care to swear
truly, that the mind of others may trust them, and rely upon their faithful
oath taken. But we have cause to bewail these times, in which there be such,
as professing Christianity, yet will use oaths, yea, and fearful
execrations to coozen with, to make their lies and secret villainies intended,
to be the less suspected, as by miserable experience some simple and plain
meaning men may speak, being deluded by fair shows of godliness, zeal of
goodness, words confirmed by oaths, fearful execrations, and counterfeit
letters, that wicked hypocrites and Satanicall deceivers might attain to their
unlawful desires. Let men therefore take heed of men, and beware whom they
trust, seeing men dare with pretense of godliness, go so far in detestable
villainies: but I wish him or them that practice it, to leave it betimes, else
let them look for deserved doom, without serious Repentance.

Lie down until the morning.] With these words he ends his conference, not
spending the night in vain or unnecessary prattling, as idle lovers and wanton
suitors will do: but having answered her request, and showed to her his love
and honest resolution, he wills her to lie down until the morning. By
which words it seems she was risen up, as ready to depart, but that he would
not permit her so to do, for the reasons before mentioned: and because the
night is ordained for rest, as the Psalmist says: At night man goes to his
rest. Neither is it safe for young women to be abroad in the night; it
sauoureth not well, it befitteth not their sex, and may endanger their
chastity. We must beware of being Night-walkers: for Satan the prince of
darkness will then be the most busy. Such also as hate the Light, love to be
in darkness, as the thief, and the adulterer. Again, the night imboldeneth
Job. 24. 15.
to al villainy and wickedness, which in the day time they will not dare to do,
as may be seen in the Sodomites, and Gibeonites. Lastly, Genesis 19. Iud. 19.
22, 25.
Night-walkers have ever been suspected for illdisposed persons.

Verse 14. And she lay at his feet until the morning: and she rose up before
one could know another: for he said, Let it not be known, that a woman came
into the floor.
THis verse shows how Ruth rested till the morning: then, her rising ready to
depart; with the moving cause from Boaz speech, being a wary Caveat unto her.

And she lay at his feet until the morning.] This is added, to show their
chaste and contine^t behavior: for if they had offended, the holy Ghost, who
spared not Noah's drunkenness, Lots incest, David's adultery, would not have
concealed this fact, if so they had thereof been guilty: They were both honest
and feared God: and therefore they would not commit such wickedness, albeit
they had occasion offered. Whereby we may learn, that where the fear of God
and honesty bears sway, there chastity may be preserved, though occasion be
offered to the contrary. Behold this here in old Boaz, and elsewhere in young
Joseph; there was neither lechery in the one, nor strength of lust, nor
youthful wantonness in the other: for there lust is bridled, where the fear
of God possesses the heart, and honesty lodges. To be kept therefore from
this evil, let these virtuous examples guide us, that lust ouer-beare us not,
as it does in such as seek occasions to sin in this kind: neighing, as
Jeremy speaks, after their neighbors wives. And such also, though they
seek not occasion, like the former; yet they easily take occasion to offend
this way, with virgins, with married wives, and with those whom they think to
marry with; and this last is held no offense at all by them: because they
think that marriage amendeth all. But first it is an argument of a strong and
unbridled lust, which should not bear rule in Christians. Secondly, if the man
hap to die before marriage, (as who is certain of life?) the woman being with
child, becomes infamous, and she that should have been a wife, is left as
an harlot. Thirdly, it is an offense to the Church, being known, and
punishable by the same, which offense the godly must avoid: Give no offense, 1.
Cor. 10. 32.
(says the Apostle) to Jew, nor Gentile, nor to the Church of God. Fourthly
and lastly, it beseems not the holiness of the public solemnization of
marriage, to which the parties should come undefiled, as the Assembly and
Congregation of God do in charity judge of them. Note besides, that these two
godly persons kept themselves chaste, and how others accounted also godly, and
that so were, yet were very fowly overtaken in this sin of the flesh, as we
have example in Lot in a cave with his daughters; Judah with Tamar; and David
with Bathshebah. From whence observe, that Gods own dear Children have not
all the like measure of grace, nor power to resist temptations, and to subdue
their own corruptions. In the holy Word of God we shall find three sorts of
the godly: some hardly found fault with, their infirmities passed over with
silence; such a one was Isaac, Boaz here, so Joshua, Samuel, Daniel,
Mephibosheth, Jonathan, Zachary and Elizabeth, Simeon, Anna, the Virgin Mary,
and others. Some are noted with their frailties and light infirmities, being
most excellent Saints of God, as Moses, Job, Jeremy, Hezechias, and Josias,
and some others. A third sort are stained with foul offenses, as David with
adultery and murder; Judah with incest, and so Lot; Aaron with Idolatry; and
Peter with perjury: for the Lord affords not the like grace in equal
measure unto all. All are sanctified: yet corruptions more sway in one then in
another, as these instances show, and as experience daily teaches. Therefore
let us not think to find the like grace in all, and the like mortification of
corruption: for God distributeth his gifts and the measure, as it pleases him.
None are then to be condemned simply for bad persons, as if they were not in
the number of Gods Saints; because they be not in all things like their
brothren: for they, even both sorts of them may be the Lords, and yet in some
thing be very much unlike. Joseph enticed by his mistress, preserved his
chastity: but David enticed another man's wife, and lay with her. Boaz alone
with Ruth would not sin in fornication: but Lot alone with his daughters
committed incest. Nathaniel was a true Israelite without guile: but Jacob first
called Israel, of whom came all the Israelites, dissembled, and lied to his own
father: Moses a meek man, but Jonah of a very froward spirit: and yet al of
them good men, and the blessed Saints of God. This therefore justly reproves
those, who seeing men professing Religion, and yet to differ in their courses,
some to live vnreprouably, and others to give great offense in their falls,
though of infirmity, do utterly condemn them all as hypocrites, and as
dissemblers. Yea, this checketh them themselves for deadly censuring one
another, when if any man be overtaken in any fault: they which be spiritual,
should Gal. 6. 1.
restore such an one in the spirit of meekness, considering themselves, lest
they also be tempted. If any man here ask, Why does not God make all his
Children to be alike religiously minded one as well as another? I answer, the
Lord may do it for these reasons. First, for the good many times of the godly
themselves: for they are suffered to fall for their greater humiliation, the
more to let them see their own weakness, to show that they stand not of
themselves; to make them the more to deny themselves, not to be lifted up with
any conceit of their own goodness, or merit; but to magnify Gods mercy for
their daily preservation, and for his goodness toward them: and after their
fall returning to God, and feeling peace in their renewed Repentance, they will
the more closely stick to God, more earnestly pray, and more fervently love
him: for so great good the Lord works in his Children after their falls; yea
such humiliation will be wrought thereby in them; and such comfort, joy, and
love in God after their recovery, as no outward crosses, nor outward
deliverances can ever do the like. Secondly, for the further damnation of the
wicked, who at the falls of the godly do harden their hearts the more against
all Religion, thinking it to be a vain thing, and that such as follow and
embrace it, are no better than others, and that the best be but hypocrites:
because they see some grievously overtaken; when these miserable souls should
hereby be moved the more to fear their own damnation, except they repent and
take a better course: for if the righteous scarcely be saved; if they so
hardly get out of their corruptions; if they be so fearfully overtaken, who
read, meditate, hear the Word, confer thereof, pray much, and humble
themselves with tears; where shall the wicked and sinner 1. Pet. 4. 18.
appear? How can the common and careless Christian be saved? Thus should
they reason, to rowze up their spirits to make them to seek God, and fear
damnation, and not take occasion by the falls of some, to condemn the
profession of Religion it self in others, and so to make no account thereof in
themselves to the hardening of their own hearts, and so heaping upon themselves
the just deserved vengeance.

And she rose up, before one could know another.] That she might be gone away
out of the floor before the light, or at the dawning of the day, very early,
ere others should be stirring. This she did perhaps out of a joy of heart,
and desire to be with Naomi, to tell her the success of her counsel, which
she carefully followed, as it may seem by her hasty relation of the matter
unto her mother in law, when she came unto her, as shall be showed in the 16.
verse. Note here, that they be not drowzie-headed, whose hearts are taken up
with their business: they can rise betimes, and prevent the day, whether it
be the desire of getting goods, or enjoying pleasure, or to do mischief,
which makes some not to rest: or that it be such joy as was here in Ruth; or
a good will to do a thing, as in Abraham to obey God, Genesis 22. 3. and 28. 18.
he arose up early; so Jacob to get to his Uncles; Joshua to find out the
transgressour in the excommunicate Joshua 7. 16.
thing, to put evil away from Israel; David to go with that which his father
sent unto 1. Sam. 17. 20.
the host. So that let the heart be taken up with love, care, joy, desire, it
will do any thing; the spirit of drowzinesse will be shaken off: for it is
the careless mind which makes slothful. To be therefore stirring, and to
raise up our selves out of the bed of idleness, we must set our hearts upon
our affairs. I might also note, how darkness keeps us from the knowledge of
one another: therefore in darkness man fears not the face of man, and so is
bold to do evil; because he is hid from the sight of others: and as it is in
bodily darkness, so in spiritual; the ignorant and blind in soul dare do
any thing, they blush not, neither be they ashamed, which others enlightened
are afraid to commit; neither can they discern one another: for the light of
Truth they have not. But yet though men can be hid in darkness from men,
they cannot be so from God.

For he said, (or as others read) And he said, Let it not be known that a
woman came into the floor.] If you read For, it is a reason from Boaz his
speech of her so soon rising; if And, then it is his admonition to her, that
being risen, she should so get her into the city, that others might not know
that they were alone together in the floor that night. Howsoever it be read,
Boaz herein shows his care of his and her honest name and credit, which might
hereby be brought into suspicion, albeit their consciences had told them, that
they had done nothing worthy blame, for any act of dishonestie. From hence let
us note, First, that it never was, neither yet is a matter of good report, but
a suspicion rather of evil, for a man and a woman to be taken together alone
in places unfit, unusual, and at times unseasonable. This the words of Boaz
do plainly here give us to understand: for man is so apt to this sin of
the flesh; yea the best, without especial grace, as light occasions breed
suspicions: because also men are not so charitable as they should be, if any
least show of evil may seem to be given this way. Therefore let such as
would not be suspected, beware how they be in company alone together, when and
where suspicions may arise. Secondly, that it is not enough to have our
consciences clear before God, but our selves clear of giving just suspicion
of evil, before men. This was Boaz his care, and Saint Paul's: for it is not
enough to have a good Acts 24. 16. 2. Cor. 8. 21.
conscience within, but we must have care of our good name, to be well reported
of abroad; which is an excellent thing, better then riches, then Prou. 22. 1.
Eccles. 7. 1. Hebr. 11. 2, 39. 3. John 12.
ointment. And this the godly will endeavor to obtain, to stop the mouths of
adversaries, that they may be put to rebuke, and to procure glory 1. Pet. 2.
12.
to the Gospel which they do profess. This being our duty, then are they
reproueable which make no conscience of offense before men: because, say they,
our hearts condemn not us, we know we do not what men suspect: when yet the
Apostle forbids offenses, and to 1. Cor. 10. 3^. and 12* 13.
look to expediencie, and not simply to the lawfulness of a thing, and to
avoid all appearances of evil. There are another sort worse than these, who
are so far from avoiding suspicion of evil, as they are not ashamed of the
evil it self, being past shame, and dare openly boast of their lewdness,
without blushing, of which both Esai and Esai. 3. 9. Ier. 6. 15. and 8. 12.
Jeremy do complain.

Verse 15. Also he said, Bring the veil that thou have upon thee, and hold
it. And when she held it, he measured six measures of Barley, and laid it on
her: and she went into the City.
HEre is Boaz his liberality and testimony of love, nothing wherein it was
received, what and how much he gave, his helping her up with it to convey and
carry it away. And lastly, his and her departure into the city.

Also he said.] Boaz his former speech was for her credit, but this is for her
comfort; the former stood in words, but this in a good work of mercy. A good
man's love appears in word and in deed, in good counsel, and in good works of
comfort also This shows love to be perfect, not feigned; this is to follow
the Apostle John his exhortation, 1. John 3. 18.
not to love in word and tongue only, but in deed and in truth: so loved Boaz,
and so do all blessed men love. If therefore the love of work be wanting,
and only the love of word, it is counterfeit love, and Saint James rejects
it, as Iam. 2.
no love.

Bring the veil that thou have upon thee, and hold it.] He took occasion from
this loose veil, to bestow corn upon her: for a good man, in his willingness
to do good, will take the smallest occasion to show it. This word veil in
another place is translated Esai. 3. 22.
mantle. It was a loose garment cast upon her, to keep her warm, and to cover
her in the night. There was used also among them another veil for the day, to
throw over their heads and faces for modesty sake: such an one had fair
Rebecca, Genesis 24. 65.
whose modesty may condemn the wanton going of our women, who yet come short
of Rebecca for beauty. I wish also they were not more short of her for honesty.
The Arabian women, yea and so the heathen Roman women went covered, as do now
the women in Spain, not half naked, as many harlotries do now in England, to
the shame of Religion, and disgrace of the Gospel, having both heathen and
Papists to condemn them. But what care such for the Gospel, which want grace?
or for Religion, which are of none at all, and never yet had their consciences
bound to the obedience thereof, but live as Libertines, doing what they list,
walking after the lust of their own hearts.

And when she held it.] This implies some stay till she had folded it, to
receive his kindness: for he that minds truly to do the poor good, can
be content to stay till they can be ready to receive it. Boaz was not like
such as seem to be willing to give the poor a penny, and yet will be gone
before he can open his purse to change the niggards silver: so they blame his
not readiness to receive what they only pretended, but never from heart
intended: so lewdly deluding the poor. Boaz had showed her great kindness
before, which she received, and now he offers her this mercy again, which
she refuses not. For it is no unmannerliness, nor disgrace, to take
kindness offered of friends, though the parties before have been chargeable,
and have often received of their bounty; so long as the one sort be able, and
voluntarily do give, and the other be poor, and not importunate yet standing
in need to receive: for poverty is a heavy burden, and may justly make excuse
for them. And therefore such are not to be blamed, which do not refuse the
often offered bounties of friends: but indeed, such as need not, and will be
chargeable to frank-hearted friends, such are basely covetous, and deserve
reproof, rather then to have their desire.

He measured six measures of Barley.] Boaz had given much before by his
servants: now, by his own hand: yet not at random, taking out of the heap,
he knew not what; but he measured that to her which he gave her. Whence note
from his person still giving unto Ruth, and in her to Naomi: that a liberal
and merciful heart is not weary of well-doing. Cornelius a good and devout
man, gave daily much alms unto the poor: for his soul delights in mercy
and works of charity, and desiring to be rich in good works, as 1. Tim. 6.
the Apostle exhorts. These examples let us imitate and follow, we must not
be weary of 2. These. 3. 13. Gal. 6. 9, 10. Iam. 2.
well-doing; and if we have faith, we will show forth good works, if it be
lively and not dead faith. They are therefore reproueable, who be weary of
well-doing; they would give once, but not often, neither at any time much: and
yet we beg bread at Gods hands daily, and repine if we have it not, and not
only for the present, but for the time to come. It is noted of Titus Sueton.
Tit.
Vespasian, that he thought he had lost that day, in which he had not
performed some office of beneficence. Few Christians think as this Heathen
thought: for then would our great men give more, and spend less vainly, that
the poor might fare the better. Another sort are here faulty, who continue
to give now and then, but are loath to increase their liberality, as God
increases Deuteronomy. 8. 18. Os^a 2. 8.
his bounty in mercy toward them: for if they grow rich, it is he that gives
them power to get riches. The third sort are such as turn their love wholely
to themselves, and think all little enough for themselves, and that through
base covetousness, being never satisfied, so as they live of usury and
oppression, getting from others what they can; or through an aspyring spirit,
getting goods to grow great in the world; or else of a vain unthrifty humor
of spending, can spare nothing to give to the poor; because his consuming
guests, (which ever lodge with him) whoredom, drunkenness, pride, and love of
play, do keep him still so bare of money. Another lesson may we learn hence,
from Boaz his manner of giving by measure, and not hand over head, as we say,
without discretion, that Liberality is not lavish of Gods blessings, giving in
judgment, and not without consideration: for every virtue either is, or should
be guided with prudence. This discretion in Boaz is commendable; and they that
will consider what they give, before they give, in so doing, are not to be
reproved.

And laid it on her.] See how a willing Giver does not only bestow a benefit,
but helps the party if need be, to receive the same: and so does Boaz here;
and so does also our gracious God in giving his blessings to us. If we then
be willing to do a good turn, and to bestow a favor upon any, let us not
be wanting in any needful thing, to further our own liberality toward
them: for this will show, that what we give, we give with all our hearts unto
them.

And she went into the city.] Our last Translation is, she went: but it
should be he, as the Hebrew word will make good, and the testimony of the
Learned in that tongue: both went into the city, Junius. Drusius. Lauater.
she to her mother, as the next words in the Story do show, which by reason of
the continuation and series of the narration, makes it seem most likely that
she went into the city, as it is commonly translated; and he likewise went
into the city to dispatch the business, and to do what he had promised to
Ruth, as it is clear in the next Chapter. By thus reading it, and by
considering how Boaz before could lie down by the corn, but now out of his
affection to marry with Ruth, can leave all, to finish that business, we may
learn, that love is impatient of delay, and makes a man to lay aside other
cares, to enjoy his beloved. Concerning the force of this affection, see it in
Samson to the maiden of Timnah; in Jacob to Rachel; Iud. 14. 2, 3. Genesis 29. 20,
30. and 34. 3. 8, 12, 19.
and in Sichem to Dinah: for love wins the whole man, and captiuateth his
thoughts to the party beloved, as may also be seen in Samsons Iud. 16. 4, 16.
2. Sam. 13. 2, 4.
inordinate love to Delilah; and in Amnon to Tamar. Seeing this affection is so
strong, let us labor to bridle it, that it rule not over us for the world or
the flesh; and for this end let us set it upon better things worthy our love to
the utmost, even on spiritual and heavenly things, upon Col. 3. 1. Cant. 1. 2,
3, 7, and 2. 14. Psalm. 119. Heb. 11. 2. Tim. 4. 8.
Christ, as the Spouse in the Canticles did, and Saint Paul; on his Word, as
David; on his Church, as Moses did; and on the appearing of Jesus Christ for
our final deliverance, as all should: thus to fix our love, will make it
holy, and our selves happy.

Verse 16. And when she came to her mother in law, she said, Who art thou, my
daughter? And she told her all that the man had done unto her.
RVths return from the floor to Naomi, where a question is asked and
answered, with a full relation of all that which had happened.

And when she came to her mother in law.] Ruth having sped, as you hear, and
received such kindness for the present, and such hope for the time to come,
home she goes with a glad heart, and that without delay; she has not her
bywalkes, but having done what she went about, according to the advice of
Naomi, she, as I said, returns home again. Three things might move Ruth to
hasten home: the danger of the way, being so early before day; the burden
which she bare upon her back, to be eased thereof; and her joy to impart to
her mother her happy success. As these made her hie home, and to desire to be
with her mother: so should the like make us desirous to be at our home in
Heaven: first, the danger we be in, while here we live in this dark world;
then, the burden of sin, which we do bear, of which we should be weary,
and groan till we be delivered: and thirdly, our inward joy conceived of our
future happiness for ever and for ever.

Who art thou, my daughter?] So Naomi speaks, because it was not yet day,
that she might know her, and therefore asks who she was. It may seem by
this, that Naomi her house was neither bolted nor barred, Ruth coming in so
easily, and Naomi not knowing, who it was at the first: for poor folks need
fear no robbing.

And she told her all that the man had done unto her.] That is, she related
all his kind speeches, and his promise of marrying of her, if the other kinsman
did refuse her, as appears by Naomi her speech in the 18. verse: so that done
is here put for his word and promise which should be done: which argues her
persuasion that he would do it. And it is an excellent promise of a man to be
held so faithful, that his promise may be said to be done, for the
certainty thereof before it be done. A rare virtue in these days, even among
those that would be held no common Protestants. Where almost is he, of whom it
might be said, when he has promised, that it is done? where is man's
faithfulness become? Mint, Annise, and Cummine is stood upon; but judgment,
mercy, and faith, the weightier matters of the Law are omitted. Naomi asks
Ruth who she was? Who answers not to that, but forthwith relates Boaz his
kindness with which her mind was taken up: for we speedily relate such things
as our hearts be delighted in, and much taken up with: for of the abundance of
the heart the mouth speaks, whether it be cause of joy or sorrow. If then we
would speak of a matter, let our hearts be affected therewith; that will make
us speak readily, and neglect other conference: many cannot speak of God nor
Religion; and some that can, will not, desire not: the reason is, their hearts
are not affected therewith; for if they were, they would be very ready to
speak thereof.

Verse 17. And she said, These six measures of Barley gave he me: for he
said to me, Go not empty unto thy mother in law.
THe last words of Ruth in this Book, as here to Naomi also, showing who it
was that gave the corn, and for whose sake.

And she said, These six measures of Barley gave he me.] Before, Ruth tells
of his good words; and here she shows his good works: for good words and
good works ever concur where true love is, else it is feigned: of which I
have spoken before. In that Ruth does bring home all that which was given to
her mother, and kept nothing back, to buy her self any necessaries, by making
sale thereof, it teaches children honesty: for honest children will not rob
their parents of any thing, as Micah did, who stole eleven hundred shekles of
Iud. 17. 1, 2.
silver from his mother, which caused her bitterly to curse him, till it was
restored to her again. Good children will not do so wickedly, though other
think it no transgression, as Solomon Prou. 28. 24.
speaks.

For he said to me, Go not empty unto thy mother in law.] Ruth tells why
Boaz was so liberal, not for her sake only, but for Naomi her sake also, and
that chiefly in this kindness to her. Ruth takes not this to her self,
concealing Boaz his loving respect to Naomi, as if all had been done in favor
of her own self, bringing it to Naomi as a token of her love to her, thereby
thinking to bind her the more unto her by that office: but presenting it as a
favor from Boaz unto her also, relates the truth of the thing as it passed.
By which we may observe, that true and honest minds are just in all their
relations, in that which they do know, without color, without deceit: for
they love truth, and do speak it from simplicity of heart, which is the
property of the Psalm. 15. 2.
godly, and which we must labor for. Again, the true and honest-minded seek
not to procure favor and thanks by that which is the bounty of another, as
many do in distributing the alms and benevolence of others, as if it were
from themselves, seeking to reap that which they sowed not, and to receive,
which they deserve not. Thirdly note, that Boaz forgets not Naomi absent: for a
faithful friend is mindful of such as he loves, though absent. Ebedmelech
the Morian loved Jeremy, he therefore forgot him not, though out of sight, out
of the Court, and now in a miserable prison, but went boldly to the King for
him, and reproved the Lords and Princes openly Ier. 38. 9. Dan. 6.
for doing that wrong to Jeremy. Darius affected Daniel, and therefore could
not be unmindful of him. This is true friendship, and not like the love of
such, of whom it may be said, Out of sight, out of mind, like the unkind and
forgetful Butler of Pharaoh, who for a long space forgot innocent Joseph, who
interpreted to him his dream in prison, and that to his great comfort: of whom
he also prayed to be remembered, when he came to his place again; but the
Butler was so glad of his own prosperity, that he had no mind to think of
Joseph's adversity. Such is the love of men, too common in these days; much
kindness in show to men's faces, but if the back be once turned, love is
likewise turned, and quite vanished away.

Verse 18. Then said she, Sit still, my daughter, until thou know how the
matter will fall: for the man will not be in rest, until he have finished
the thing this day.
NAomi her last words to Ruth, noted in this Story, being an exhortation: in
which is to be observed, to what, how long, and the reason why.

Then said she, Sit still, my daughter.] Naomi having heard and seen such
testimony of Boaz his love, and knowing his honest nature and true affection,
she exhorts Ruth to sit still, that is, to be of a quiet mind, waiting with
patience the issue. The words are figurative, and translated from the action of
the body, to the action of the mind. By this that Naomi wills her to be
quiet in mind, and without fear, and restlesnesse of spirit; we may learn,
that there is an unquietness of mind in every one naturally to have that
affected, which the heart longs after, as may be seen in Boaz, as before is
noted; so in Jacob to see Genesis 45. 4, 28.
Joseph, when he heard that he was alive; in Abraham's Genesis 24. 12, 56.
servant, in procuring and bringing home a wife to Isaac; in the Israelites,
seeking to punish Iud. 20. 1, 18. 19, 24, 28.
the Gibeonites, for the villainy committed upon the Levites wife: and as in
good, so also is the heart restles in seeking to bring evil to pass: for the
wicked cannot rest, till they have done evil. See this in Delilah, in hope of
money, to betray Judge. 16.
Samson into the hands of the Philistims; and in Judas, to deliver Christ to
his Enemies; and in Absalom, to get the Kingdom from his father. Which
earnestness arises sometime of fear, as Ruths here fearing to fail of her
desire; sometime of covetousness and desire of gain, as in Judas and Delilah;
of malice and desire of revenge, as in the Scribes and Pharisees, Enemies of
Christ; of joy and gladness, as in Abraham's servant; of an aspyring and
vainglorious humor, as in Absalom; of love and affection to one, as in
Sichem to Dinah. By this then may we see, whence it is that men pursue their
pleasures, profits, honors, and their desires in that which they go about so
eagerly, even because they have their hearts fixed thereupon: and on the
contrary, why people so little follow after godliness, so much neglect it,
even for that their hearts are far from it. Thus may we learn to judge of
our selves, and thus we lay open our selves to be judged of others.

Until thou know how the matter will fall.] As if she had said, Thou have
done thy part, the issue is in Gods hands, which thou must wait for with
patience: for when we have done, what on our behalf is to be done, then are
we to rest in the expectation of the issue, as Naomi advises Ruth here. So
must we wait on God, trust in him, and commit Esai. 28. 16. Psalm. 37. ^.
our ways unto him, as we be exhorted: but yet in well-doing, and in the
exercise of Prayer, as Psalm. 37. 3.
Isaac did for good success to his fathers servant, Genesis 24.
when he went to get a wife for him; and as Moses did for the victory, when
the Israelites Exo. 17. 11, 12.
fought against the Amalekites.

For the man will not be in rest, till he have finished the thing.] Naomi her
reason to persuade Ruth to rest, and not to let her thoughts trouble her, nor
to fear by delay to be deceived of her expectation; because Boaz would not
rest, till he himself had done what she desires. An approved truth of a man
in one thing, may make certain the truth of his word in another. It is equity
and charity to hope well, where we have good proof of a man's faithfulness:
and this is true credit, when a man's word is become of that force and
validity, as it makes another to believe him without doubting. Such was Boaz
his credit with Naomi: and this is it which likewise she would, and does
persuade Ruth unto. This is the credit which we must labor for, and which we
may attain unto, if we fear God, and be faithful to him (for false to God,
will prove faithless to man) if we be discreet and wise in our words, to know
what we promise, before we make it; if we care to keep ever our word in the
least thing; if we hate lying, and such as do make lies, we shall procure
credit to our word. And here let such as find men careful of their word, be
like Naomi, in trusting and not wronging them, by calling their word into
question without cause at any time, when they are known to have ever approved
themselves for honest men: for what greater injury can be offered to an honest
man ever meaning well, and careful to keep his word, then to be suspected of
the breach of his word unjustly? A true-hearted man takes that injury very
tenderly: and therefore let men beware of giving offense in this kind, by
entertaining unjust and uncharitable thoughts toward such as deserve it not.

CHAP. IIII.
THis Chapter is the last of the Book, and the last part of the History: for
the first shows how Ruth came to Bethlehem; the second, how she behaved
herself when she came there: the third, her contract with Boaz. And this, the
solemnization of the marriage: where is declared what went before, and how it
was effected; then the marriage it self, and the great applause of the people
and Elders thereto. Thirdly, the happy issue thereof in the conception and
birth of Obed. And lastly, a Genealogy from Pharez unto David, the King and
Prophet of Israel, and the type of Jesus Christ, who according to the flesh
sprung from his loins.

Verse 1. Then Boaz went up to the gate, and sat him down there: and behold,
the kinsman of whom Boaz spoke, came by, unto whom he said, Ho, such a one:
turn aside, sit down here. And he turned aside and sat down.
BOaz prosecuteth the matter intended: and here is showed, when, where, how,
and with whom he had to do about it. Before I come to the words, note
generally, that though both Naomi and Ruth had tasted of a poor and low
estate, yet were they now exalted and greatly comforted, so as now no more
Marah, but, as before, Naomi: for after humiliation, in time follows
exaltation, after sour sweet, and after mourning joy. Psalm. 126. 5, 6.
Many are the troubles of the righteous, but the Lord delivers them out of
all. Israel may go into bondage in Egypt, but they shall return triumphing.
Joseph shall be tried, before he stand before Pharaoh; and David, before he be
settled in his Throne; and Moses, before he be the Princely Leader of the
Israelites: and when thus they have tasted of the sour, assure themselves they
shall feel the sweet with joy, as both Naomi and Ruth do here: for the Lord
will at length set up on high Job 5. 11.
those that be low, that those which mourn, may be exalted in safety. The Lord
will humble his, to make them see themselves, to try their love, their patience
and faith, and to fit them for his blessings, that they may know how well to
use them, before they enjoy them; and then will he afford them their hearts
desire, and make them merry and glad with the joy of his countenance. Therefore
after humiliation look for exaltation: this will work comfort under the
cross, and make us patiently awaite the time of our deliverance.

Then went Boaz.] That is, that morning, not deferring what he had promised,
Chap. 3. 11, 13. where I spoke of the keeping of his word, which here he
accomplished. See there this truth, that an honest man will be careful to
keep his word: which here I will no farther insist upon. Note further, that
what is done with the heart, is done cheerfully and speedily. Boaz goes about
this without delay; yea so did Abraham in a matter of rare Genesis 22.
obedience, yea he rose up betimes early in the morning to sacrifice his
son: for what the heart is won unto, there the whole man is set on work;
if Sichems heart cleave to Dinah, he will Genesis 34. 3. 19.
not defer the matter, to be circumcized, that he may enjoy the desire of
the heart. By this may we discover whether the heart go with a business; if
it be done cheerfully and speedily, the heart is with it; if but slowly, and
without alacrity, the heart is absent, as in many which come so a Genesis 34. 20.
Deuteronomy. 17. 5. and 21. 19. and 22. 15, 24. and 25. 7. Prou. 31. 23. Ios 20. 4.
Job 29. 7.
to the Church, and being come, sit as dead, without any liuelynesse, because
their hearts are elsewhere.

Unto the gate.] The Gate was the place of judgment, as a many places in
Scripture show. Now why it was there, these may be the reasons. First, for
easy access of all sorts, as well strangers as Inhabitants to the place of
justice, from which none are to be kept back. In open places is the more
room. Secondly, for the better manifestation of justice in the sight and
hearing of all, which takes away suspicion of injustice. Thirdly, for the
preventing of thronging by the concourse of of people, not wholesome, and
sometime dangerous in those hot countries. Fourthly, that such as passed to
and fro, might be called into the business, either as witnesses, or parties
sometime, as it fell out in this Session here with the kinsman coming at
unawares. Fifthly, because the gates be the strength and munition of the City:
now, there for Magistrates to sit, does more grace their authority, who sit
there as Commanders in the place, able to command the whole Town. Sixthly and
lastly, to put all that enter into the City, in mind of well-doing, and to take
heed of evil. These be my conjectures: but whatsoever the reason was, this
may we learn, that public causes are for public places, and there to be
determined of: for in such cases the Deuteronomy. 21. 19. and 22. 15. and 17. 5. and
25. 7. Genesis 34. 20.
Lord commands to go up to the gate of the City; as also it was the manner
of the Heathen thereabouts, so to do. It befitteth the cause, it preuenteth
suspicion of sinister dealing in private; and public places do grace more
authority, then private meetings. And therefore this course is to be approved,
and the private hearing of public businesses, as in criminal causes, is
against the Apostles Canon: and hereby great evils fall out; justice is
preuerted, and sin often unpunished, the offenders let go for gain, who
should be made examples, that other might Deuteronomy. 21. 21.
hear and fear.

And sat him down there.] Seats were prepared before, for him and the rest,
as the common place of justice: which sitting down of him in the public
place of justice, shows that he was a Judge and a man of authority, and the
best also in the Assembly, because he took the first place. Note briefly,
First, that sitting is the grauest gesture for Judges and Magistrates in places
of judgment; so ever set out, Prou. 31. 23. Mat. 19. 28. Reu. 20. 4. and so
ever used in those parts, and likewise with us: which therefore is to be
observed for the better setting forth of their authority, which they should
mind to grace by all means in the peoples eyes, for more reverence sake.
Secondly, that God so guides by his providence these worldly estates, that
ever some are better men in place and dignity then other some: such a one was
Job, Job 1. 1. and 29. 7, 8, 9.
and so Boaz here, for the preservation of peace in Church and Commonwealth:
which hand of God we are to praise him for, and to pray unto him to uphold
this inequality of persons: for else what would follow but disorder and
confusion, and every man would do what he list. Iud. 17. 6. and 18. 1.
See this with our selves, when men of equality meet, and have light occasions
offered: Oh how do they scornefully behave themselves one to another! Thirdly,
that men of place according to their dignity, may take their place, without
stain of pride: for Boaz does it: it is also their right, and it preserves
order, and that dignity which God has given them. Therefore may they take
their place, yet so, as they be humble, and not hautilyminded, neither proudly
contend for it, and so disturb public peace, which should ever be most
dear to every one, especially to men in authority. If men may take their
place, then such are blameworthy, which with an envious eye find fault with
any for so doing: and they also do amiss, which out of too great humility (to
speak but so of it) do lose their due place, and there withal so much of due
respect unto their person and degree, yielding their place to the less worthy,
and so lift up the other in pride, and make themselves of less esteem. But as
there be some such so lowly-minded, so are there others too highly-conceited of
themselves, who will take place of their betters, assuming to themselves more
then they deserve: this is pride and hateful arrogancy.

And behold, the kinsman of whom Boaz spoke, Chap. 3. 12, 13.
came by.] This word of attention, Behold, calls the Reader to a remarkable
thing, and to an especial providence of God, in bringing this kinsman thus
hither; not as yet called, or sent for. If he had been sent for, or called,
and so come of purpose, it seems, the Holy Ghost would not have said, Behold.
This then was the guiding hand of God, to further this match. Whence we do
learn, that when God will prosper a business, his providence will apparently
be seen in that business, and in the success thereof, as you may see before
in Chap. 2.
Boaz his coming into the field, and Ruths lighting upon his Reapers; so in
Abraham's servant Genesis 24.
guided to Labans house, and in Rebecca, her coming out whilst he prayed
standing by the Well, and she performing every thing according as he had
prayed immediately before. Such a providence was seen in the Midianites coming
Genesis 37.
by, to go into Egypt, while Joseph lay in the pit that he might be sold to
them, that they might carry him into Egypt, as God had determined; the like
providence in Moses preservation Exodus 2.
by Pharaohs daughter, is very apparent: for Gods providence is his guiding
hand to effect what he has decreed; he wills, and then his providence
works the same. Which if we will observe, we may easily see in our courses,
and say, Behold, the providence of God, and by well marking the same, we would
be moved greatly to praise God, we would not murmr against crosses, we
would commit our ways unto him, and wait on his good pleasure with patience
in all our affairs, knowing this certainly, that if he has determined a
thing, it shall come to pass, though in man's reason most unlikely.

Unto whom he said, Ho, such a one, etc.] This kinsman was of worth, it
appears by this, that he sat next Boaz, before the ten Elders; that he was
able to redeem land so soon after ten years dearth; that he regarded so
much the marring of his own inheritance; and lastly, because he was of the
same family of Elimelech, and in birth before Boaz, yet by place it may seem
that Boaz was his better; though Boaz would not stand upon his greatness and
power with him, but he would proceed in this business according to equity and
right, respecting so himself, as yet he would not wrong another, but do what
was most meet to be done; teaching this, that a godly man, a just man, will not
do what he may by his power, but what he ought by right. Such a Nehem. ^. 15.
Genesis 14. 2^, 23.
one was Nehemiah and Abraham: who would not do according to that which was in
their hand, but what was agreeable to justice, and fit for them to do:
Nehemiah gives the reason, because he feared God. This was it also that made
Joseph so to deal with his brethren, and not according to his power and their
deserts. This is it which made Job not to contemn his servant; for he knew his
servant, as well as himself to be the Lords. Oh then let men of power imitate
these men of might! it will argue that they also fear Prou. 14 2.
God: and upright and just dealing is more acceptable Prou. 21. 3.
to God, than sacrifices. Men must not be like Nimrods nor Saul's, to make their
lusts a law, and their power the bounds of their practice. Remember Iezabel,
who took by force and fraud 1. King. 21. 7.
Naboths Vineyard, but she at length dearly paid for the same. Note hence
again, that one not before another by birth, may be his better by authority,
as Boaz was here; so Moses before Aaron; Joseph before his brethren, and David
before his: for God aduanceth not men as they be in birth, but as his good
pleasure is. And therefore let the Elder submit to the younger, if God please to
have it so; and men descended of Nobles, submit to mean men advanced by God,
and that without 2. Sam. 2.
envy or disdain: for God fetches beggars from the dunghill, to set them
among Princes: promotion is not from East or West, but from his hand: therefore
must we rest contented. Thirdly note, that a man according to his authority,
may speak to another with authority, though in some respect the same be his
better, as the kinsman is here by birth, to whom Boaz yet thus speaks. But
why did he not name him? Boaz did name, as these words ( Such a one) do show:
but the Penman of the* Spirit passes him by, either as not material, or
rather for that he was a worldling, loving land better than Gods Law; desiring
the Verse 4, 6.
one, but not caring to obey the other. Hereby giving us to know, that he
which loves more the world, and his own outward estate, than the Law and Word
of God, is worthy to have no name in Gods Book, in the Book of Life.
Therefore take heed and beware of covetousness; Old Father Latimers Text.

Turn aside, sit down here.] Boaz wills him to set aside his private
business for this public work, and to sit down to hear the matter: the matter
concerned them both, and Boaz does call him into the Court and place of
judgment about it. Whence note, that it is lawful upon just cause, for one
man to call another into public places of justice, to clear men's rights: fot
this cause God himself appointed amongst his people public Courts of
justice, gave them Laws to judge by, and allowed Exodus 22. 8.
men to take the benefit thereof: and godly men have sat as Judges, as Moses,
David and Exodus 18 1^. 1. Chro. 18. 14.
others for without this, some controversies cannot be ended, so perverse and
partial are many in their own cause. Which confuteth the Anabaptists, who
allow not of Magistrates, and this course of justice in ending controversies:
yet on the other side albeit men may sue one another, it must not be for every
trifle; it must not be in revenge, malice, and with desire to hurt my
neighbor: it must be the last remedy: and when men go to Law, they must do
it in love, use the Law as a Judge and Moderator, and therefore must they choose
the most honest Lawyers, which will not sell their tongues, and abuse their
wits for gain: they are to beware of bribing any, they must not use
circumuentions, but be content peaceably and lovingly to let the equity of the
Law decyde the matter, and therein quietly rest.

And he turned aside, and sat down.] Though this man was one of some worth
among them, and a worldly man too, yet he for this public business, and for
to show his obedience to authority, turns aside from his private affairs,
and does sit down, as Boaz did will him. Whence note, First, that when any are
called to public businesses, private are to be laid aside for the time, to
further the public, as this man does here, and as all good members of a
Commonwealth should do, for that public actions, and public causes should
be more near and dear to us than private: for in public things there is a
respect unto the private, which is more safe in the safety of that which is
public. Therefore such as do neglect wholely public welfare, and attend
only to the private good of their own estate, they do amiss, and even so,
as if a member of the body should see to it self, and neglect the body, which
is the way at length to bring ruin upon it self, which it seeks to prevent.
This reproves such as being able and fit men for public businesses, do
labor yet by all means to avoid them. As also much more such as being called
to public authority, yea and bound by oath to the same, do nevertheless
live as if no such duty were imposed upon them, and are wholely taken up with
the thoughts of their own private and household affairs. This so great neglect
of that which is public, is no small detriment to to the Commonweal; this
great care of every man for himself and for his own private, and little or
rather none for the public, is the cause of so great, and so many evils every
where among men. Secondly, that men are to yield readily to lawful authority
commanding, whatsoever worth they be of, which are so commanded. Men must be
like the Israelites, and do as they said they would do to Joshua, even to obey
readily in all things, Ios. 1. 16, 17, 18.
and so to uphold his authority, as also they would oppose themselves against
such as would not obey. David was very obedient unto Saul, albeit he was
anointed himself, he stood not upon his right, but waited the Lords time, and
was willingly obedient. Thus should we be to lawful authority, as the Apostle
exhorts, and that by Rom 13. 1, 4. Tit. 3. 1.
many reasons, in the Epistle to the Romans, though in those times the Kings
and Governors were Heathen and bloody persecutours. This condemns those which
are like Corah and his Company; and like Absalom and his associats in
conspiracy, which are so far from obedience, as they rise up in open
Rebellion against lawful authority. Such were the counterfeit Catholics; and
such be they ever in heart, though not always in action, in this our Sovereigns
Dominions. This also checketh those, which, though they hate treason and
rebellion, and will not disobey supreme authority, yet will despise inferior
officers: but they are commanded the contrary, as the Apostle Peter teaches:
for not only 1. Pet. 2. 13.
the King, as Supreme, but also such as be sent of him, are to be obeyed of
conscience for the Lords sake.

Verse 2. And he took ten men of the Elders of the City, and said, Sit ye
down here. And they sat down.
HEre is set down the Assistants in this business: how many, what they were,
whence taken, and their sitting down in the place of Judgment with Boaz and
the Kinsman, after that Boaz had willed them so to do.

And he took ten men.] The Elders and people were gathered together, it may
seem, before unto the Gate: whether it was that they were especially sent for;
or that they hearing that Boaz was gone up to the Gate of the City, and so
came voluntarily (as it was perhaps their manner so to do, when they heard of
any to go up to the place of Judgment) it is not certain; but the Elders
were there, and the people also, verse the 11. and of the Elders he chose
only ten, to sit in the place of Judgment: why only ten is no reason given;
it may be, the number was chosen according to the ten years of Naomi her
absence Chap. 1. 4.
in Moab, or according to the number of the ten Commandments, to put them in
mind of their duty; or for what else, I will not further conjecture: it was a
number thought fit in this case, for the hearing and determining of the matter.
This we note, in Boaz taking of these men, men of authority, that public
causes are to be handled Deuteronomy. 25. 7. Ios. 20. 4.
before public persons, and of them a competent number for the determining
thereof: for therefore are such appointed, public persons for public
causes; and by such as have authority to end matters, the thing in hand is more
firmly established: and if there have been before, or might after contention
arise, the same hereby is cut off and prevented. And therefore in such cases
let such fit persons and so many be Judges, as may by their authority end
businesses between one anther.

Of the Elders.] Here I will note, First, what Elders were. Secondly, of whom
chosen. Thirdly, of what sort of persons. Fourthly, why set over the people.
And lastly, why called Elders. For the first, Elders were men of authority,
distinguished 1. King 20. 7, 8.
from the people, and joined with others, so as it is said, the Princes and
Elders, Esdra. 10. 8. Judge. 8. 6, 14, 16. Judges and Elders, Deuteronomy. 21. 2.
Elders and Officers, Number. 11. 16. under this name were the chief in the
Commonwealth comprehended, both out of Israel, Ios. 9. 11. Number. 22. 7. and in
Israel, as in many places it fully appears: and 2. Chro. 5. 2. Esdra. 5. 9,
10. 1. Sam. 15. 30. 2. Sam. 3. 17. and 5. 3. and 17. 15. Exodus 4. 29 and 17. 5.
and 24. 1.
therefore Princes are included in Elders, Judge. 8. 6, 14, 16. and Rulers and
Elders made one, Esdra. 5. 9, 10. and 6. 7, 8. The chief of the Kings house
were called Elders, 2. Sam. 12. 17. and such as in every city bare rule, Deuteronomy.
21. 3, 19, 20. for those which were appointed in every city to be Judges and
Officers in Deuteronomy. 16. 18. are every where after called by the name of the
Elders of the city, Deuteronomy. 21. 20. and 22. 15, 18. Thus the Lord ordained
Gouerners to rule his people. For the second, they were chosen by the people,
and admitted by Moses, as himself in a place witnesses, Deuteronomy. 1. 13.
which was to them a great liberty and freedom. For the third, they were of
the best, able and fittest men, thus to be qualified, first, to be men of
Exodus 18. 21. See Zipper. de Lege Mos. ^^. 3. ca. 9. Deuteronomy. 1. 13. Esai. 3. 4.
2. Chro. 19. 11. 2. Sam. 23. ^. 2. Chro. 19. 7. Exodus 18. 21.
wisdom and understanding, and not childish and simple persons; for that is a
punishment upon the people, to have such over them. Secondly, to be good men,
religious, and fearing God: for such should rule over men, as have conscience
toward God, under whom, and for whose glory they are to rule, and with those
the Lord will be, 2. Chron. 19. 11. Thirdly, to be men of truth, as Exodus 18.
21. Gen 42. 11.
Iethro advises, that is, true men, as Joseph's brethren call themselves; such
as are that which they seem to be, not pretending one thing, and intending
another, but in the course of justice do follow the truth of the cause, as the
truth thereof shall appear unto them. Fourthly, to be men Deuteronomy. 16. 19. Prou.
1. 19. Ezech 2^. 27. 1. Sam. ^. 3.
hating covetousness; else will they take bribes, and love dishonest gain,
and pervert justice. Fifthly, to be known men in these things, Deuteronomy. 1. 13.
When such are set over a people, let us praise God and rejoice: where such be
wanting, pray to God to send them: and where the contrary be, lament and
bewail the estate of such a people. Touching the fourth, why they be set over
a people? For the praise of the good, and the punishment 1. Pet. 2. 15, 14. 2.
Chron. 9. 8.
of the bad, and to rule in justice and in judgment, and to govern the
people: for that we be all of a rebellious nature, since the fall of Adam.
Now, to govern well, Magistrates and men in authority must do two things:
First, they Deuteronomy. 13. 12. Job 29. 16. Deuteronomy. 17. 4.
must find out offenses, they must enquire, and search out the same diligently:
for one rebellious Jonah may hazard many men's lives, and the sinking Jonah 1.
Ios. 7.
of the ship; so one Achan may weaken a whole Army: and therefore it is
necessary to seek them out, that sin may be punished, and Gods wrath
appeased. Secondly, they must justly proceed against offenses, and that thus:
first, they must set Gods fear before them, as Iehoshaphat 2. Chron. 19. 7.
exhorts. Secondly, they must do it in the spirit of courage, not fearing the
face of any, though Deuteronomy. 1. 17. 2. Chro. 19. 11. Job 29. 17. and 31. 34. Deuteronomy.
1. 17. and 16. 18, 19.
many, though mighty. Thirdly, they must deal equally without respect of
person, hearing the small, as well as the great, not wresting judgment, but
judge the people with just judgment. For the last, why called Elders? It may
be, they were chosen of the ancient of the people, or for the most part of
such: for the Hebrew word here (...)
comes of the Verb which signifies to be waxen old: and the Assembly of
the Elders is called the Synedrion of the old men, by the Grecians; (...).
and of these is it most meet that Judges and Magistrates be chosen: first, for
their wisdom and experience, though wisdom does not always Job 32. 9.
abide with the aged. Secondly, for that such give counsel with more mature
deliberation, and have not the force of affection to ouer-sway them as youth
has, which therefore is rash, and gives often ill counsel; of which Rehoboam
tasted and repented. Thirdly, for the gravity of their countenance, which
gives grace and credit to their authority, and so are not so subject to
contempt, as the young in years be: for the hoarie head is Leuit. 19. 32.
Prou. 16. 31.
to be honored, and age is a Crown of glory, if it be found in the way of
righteousness. Fourthly, because they have a strong motive to persuade them to
upright dealing, even their old age and the nighnesse of death. This made some
Heathen to be upright and stout against the mighty, as Solon against
Pisistratus; and Cecilius against Caesar: ^^t. lib. Anseni sit gerenda Resp.
L^^rt. Tul. de senect. Val. Max.
the former said, his old age made him so to withstand the attempts of the
Tyrant; and the latter told his friends, that his old age, and being also
childlesse, made him dare to speak so roundly and freely against Caesar. We
see then what reason there is, that the Governors should be ancient men, such
as well might be called Elders, not only for authority, but for their years
and gravity.

Of the City.] To wit, of Bethlehem: for in every City by Gods appointment
there were Officers Deuteronomy. 16 18. Esdra. 10. 14. 2. Chron. 19. 5.
and Judges, the Elders of the people: how many were in every city is not
certain: in this, besides Boaz and the Kinsman, were ten. And it is said ten
of them, implying more. In Succoth Iud. 8.
were Princes and Elders threescore and seventeen. It may seem, that the
number of them was either greater or lesser, according to the populousness of
the Inhabitants, and largeness of the Cities: only in Jerusalem was the great
Synedrion consisting of the Seventy two Elders constantly. In every City were
Courts of justice, and every matter came before those Elders; as matters
concerning idolatry, rebellion, and obstinacy Deuteronomy. 17. 3, 5. and 21. 18. and
19. 11. and 22. 21, ^4. Exo. 22. Deuteronomy. 22. 14, 18
of children given to ryotousnesse; also murder, adultery, theft, and
injuries offered, and slander; so matters of marriage, and sale of land, as
here in this place. The punishments which they inflicted, were pecuniarie
sometime, sometime Deuteronomy. 22. 19. and 25. 2. Leuit. 19. 20. Deuteronomy. 13. 10. and
17. 5. and 22. 21, 24. Ios. 7.
beating and whipping, and sometime death it self; likewise to this death were
put inticers to idolatry, and such as committed it; also a young woman that
should play the whore in her fathers house; and those that committed adultery;
likewise the sacrilegious person, the Leuit. 24. 14. and 21. 9. and 20 14.
blasphemer, the wizzard, and the obstinate gluttonous and drunken son, all
were stoned. Some were to be burnt, as the Priests daughter playing the whore,
and the incestuous person; and this death may seem to be before the Law for
Deuteronomy. 21. 22.
whoredom. Some were hanged for some offenses: but before the punishment was
inflicted, and before sentence was pronunced, there was Deuteronomy. 17. 4. and 19.
15, 19.
diligent enquiry of the fact, and also competent witnesses to justify the
same: for not one, but two or three witnesses were to establish a matter; and
if any false witnesses were found, that was done to them, which they had
thought to have done to another. Thus we see, how these Elders proceeded in
justice, from whom there was no appeal in any matter, but in that which was
too hard, and then were the parties to go to Jerusalem unto the Priests, the
Levites and Judges there, and abide that Sentence without gaine-saying, and
that upon peril of their life. From the consideration of these things before
delivered, touching superiority, and Courts of justice every where, and such a
Court from which could be no appeal; we may observe; First, that
superiority of some above the rest, is the ordinance of God, for the well
governing of a Commonwealth; the chief and best is that which is
Monarchical, when a King rules over the people, so he be as Deu. 17. 19, 20.
1. Sa^. 8. 11, 18.
Moses describes, and not as Samuel: for God set first one, even King Moses,
as he is called over Deuteronomy. 33. 5.
the people, and Moses prays that one might be set over the people, lest that
the Israelites should be as Sheep without a Shepherd, yea though then there
were Captains over thousands, hundreds, and tens, and the seventy Elders upon
whom the Lord had put his Spirit. Again, we read that the Lord saved his
people by Judges Iud. 3. and 4. and 6.
or Princes, raised up to lead them and to be Judges over them. Futhermore,
when the Israelites were seated in Canaan, and that there were the seventy two
Elders, also in every city Elders, yet is it said, That every one did what
seemed him good, because Judge. 17 and 18. and 22.
there was no King in Israel. Moreover, Israel never came to be renowned,
freeing themselves from all their Enemies, and subduing them which were round
about them, till they had a King over them. Lastly, it is the wisdom of 1.
Sam. 8. 5.
nations both civil and barbarous Heathen, besides the Church of God, to allow
of this kind of government, such as the Lord has now placed over us, that so
every man may not do what he lists: and therefore are we to rest thankful
therewith, and praise the Name of our God. Secondly, that in well governed
Commonwealths (like that of Israel, ordered by the wisdom of God himself)
there shoud be many Courts of justice, and so many, and so ^^^re the towns and
villages, that the people might have speedy recourse thither to end any cause,
which might fall out among them. In every Deuteronomy. 16. 16.
city in Israel, in every Tribe and city thereof, were Courts of justice. In
Judah were an hundred and twelve Cities, which was but a little Circuit, even
so many Courts for justice and judgment, to which the towns and villages
resorted which belonged to them, and in them, as is before noted, were all
matters handled, without going any farther. This would prevent long iourneyes,
and so great expenses of subjects; this would sooner bring causes to the
hearing, and matters to an end: this were the way to have sin more easily and
sooner punished. The Israelites did not stay till quarter Sessions, till
Assizes every half year; till which time causes must rest, prisoners lie and
dye in prison, or else learn such villainies there, as they will be ever the
worse for, when they be delivered. The Israelites were not constrained to take
long iourneyes every Term to the chief City of their Kingdom to try matters,
as we do, and as we were wont to do, even to go much farther, to Rome from
England heretofore; but all had Courts for every matter, for all offenses, for
controversies of every nature, hard at hand, and daily kept for any to have
access unto. Which I thus speak of, only not to condemn utterly our
courses, but to set out the political estate of the Jews; a plat-forme of
government devised by God himself, and therefore worthy imitation of all
nations, and that before any other whatsoever: for the wisdom of no lawgiuer
can be compared to the wisdom of this Heavenly Lawgiuer. Thirdly, that it is
meet, that such a Court of justice be in every well ordered state, whose
sentence should be definitive, and with which men should rest. So was it in
Israel; Deuteronomy. 17. 11, 12
from which none might decline upon pain of death. This would curb
contentions and unquiet spirits, which be full of molestations, when by their
purse they can maintain their will, bringing causes from Court to Court, and
about again, only to make the weaker party weary, and so to wring from him
his right, or else to be utterly undone in following the suit: a grievous sin,
and that which cries alowd in the ears of the Lord, though Lawyers fill their
purses by such deuilish devices. Their money perish with them, which make
themselves rich by such iniquities.

And he said, Sit ye down here.] Thus spoke he to the ten Elders, when the
kinsman was set down. Which shows, that as Boaz was a great man, so also the
kinsman was of greater place than they, seeing he was placed before them: yet
they did not of themselves do any thing, neither did enter upon the business,
before these were set: so did he esteem of them and their authority. Whence
may be noted, that wise men in government do so behave themselves, as they
will take heed to do nothing that might weaken the authority of such as be
fellows in office, Judges, Justices, and Officers with them: for they know,
that what they derogate from them, they take from themselves, as they be
Magistrates. And therefore must Magistrates uphold such as be in authority with
them; though some perhaps for their person be unworthy, yet must they be
regarded for the place they bear: and this shall they do, if, as Boaz here,
they give them place with them, then not presume to handle matters apart
without them, equally belonging to all: and thirdly, to be content to have
their own causes heard and judged by them: the contrary hereto does argue
light esteem of fellows in commission, if not contempt.

And they sat down.] Here was no exception taken against Boaz in any thing:
he commanded in a sort, and they obeyed: for the spirit of envy and pride were
banished; else the matter had not thus been done in such peace and quietness:
for where one takes no more upon him than he may; and other yield what they
ought, being humble and not hauty, there every thing is done peaceably, as we
see here: but where a Moses meets with a rebellious-spirited proud Corah and
his company, there all things fall out contrarily. The word to sit, is used
sometime to consider of, to advise, to take care of; and the gesture of
sitting, which was the gesture of Kings and Judges, is a gesture of 1. King. 1.
46. Prou. 20. 8. Mat. 19. 28. 2. Sam. 7. 1.
rest, quietness and peace: to teach this, that men in the seat of Judgment
should be advised, considerate, careful what they do, and of a quiet spirit
without perturbation. Such a one was Joshua in his proceeding against Achan,
he spoke mildly, lovingly, Ios. 7. 19, 25.
without passion, without words of bitterness, or contempt, yet did he not
neglect to execute justice upon him, as he well deserved, and the cause
required: he derided not the prisoner, he railed not upon him; but with a
fatherly gravity and words of like authority he spoke unto him: his example is
for imitation, and a check to some deriding and scoffing spirits, sitting as
Judges upon life and death.

Verse 3. And he said unto the kinsman, Naomi that is come again out of the
country of Moab, sells a parcel of land which was our brother Elimelechs.
THus Boaz begins his speech of the sale of land, who it was that would sell
it, how much, a parcel, and to whom it did belong before, as thereby showing
her right unto it, not as an Inheritrix, but as a dowry to her, as his wife.

And he said unto the kinsman.] Before Boaz uttered the cause of his coming
into that Session, he saw all settled, and audience given: for though he
earnestly affected the business, as may appear by that which has been
delivered of him in the former chapter, yet would he carry the matter wisely
and discretly: hereby teaching this, that the wisdom of a wise man keeps
him so, as he is not carried beyond discretion: for wisdom Prou. 14. 8. and
13. 10. and 13. 16.
makes him to understand his way, to be also well advised, to work by
understanding, and to order his ways with discretion. Such therefore as be
ouer-swayed with any passion either of love, or anger, or what else exceeding
discretion, want wisdom at that time to bridle their disordred affection, and
unruly passion, which is often brutish, without reason, without Religion, and
therefore unbefitting a godly man. Note farther, that Boaz having a cause, he
in this great Session of ten Elders, besides the rest, declares the matter
himself, it being a happy liberty in that Commonwealth. It was not like
those places, where men cannot be allowed to speak in their own cause,
though they be never so able, but they must hire others to speak for them: by
which it comes to pass, that causes are spunne out to an exceeding length,
and not often faithfully handled: for men hired to set their wits and tongues
on sale, what will they not do? Does not our age produce enough evil,
lamentable and cursed fruits hereof? And have we not cause to bewail the
manifold mischiefs and ensuing miseries, which this generation of evil men
brings forth daily among us?

Naomi that is come again out of the country of Moab.] Of her person, and
return from that place, see before, Chap. 1. 6. Here she is propounded as the
sales-woman: the land she had by Elimelech her husband, as the last words of
this verse show, as her ioynture or dowry: for wives had land among the Jews
and Israelites: and good 2. King. 8. 6.
reason there is that wives should be provided for by them, which have lands to
leave them, because they are one with the husband, they have labored together,
and love binds the husband to have care for her after death; for her comfort,
her better esteem even with her own children: for if they have any thing,
then children will love and honor them, and glad will they seem to be which
of them may have her company, and may please her best: but if she have
nothing, they will be as glad, which may be rid of her. Therefore let husbands
have a care to provide for them, and not be like some husbands, which give all
or most to children, and little or nothing to wives, but what Law will give
them: and that he may so do, let the wife labor to deserve well of the
husband; and yet though she deserve well, let him not give all to her, and
little to children, as some do, and so undo both her self and children with
an after-choise of a bad husband.

Sells a parcel of land.] That is, determines to sell a portion or piece of
land left her by Elimelech. She was grown poor, and therefore might sell her
land: for so we do read, that the Leuit. 25. 25, 29.
poor might sell land or houses: and this selling and buying is lawful, as
we may see by Gods approbation, Genesis 23.
and the practice of the godly in buying and selling. The manner of purchase,
and sale, and conueyance is showed in the Prophecy of Ier. 32. 6, 44.
Jeremy: it must be without oppression: and this Leuit. 25. 14.
will be avoided, if men fear God. But the Lord allowed not the sale but upon
necessity; he must Leuit. 25 25.
become poor first. The Jewish Interpreters upon that place of Leuiticus say,
that no man but the poor might sell his inheritance; other might not sell to
put money in their purses, to make merchandise, or other things, save only for
food and necessary liuelihood. How justly then are here condemned among us,
such as sell their lands for to spend at play, to run a whoring, to go
gayly, and in costly raiment, to keep Hawks and Hounds, to travel into
Idolatrous countries to see fashions, and to learn, not good manners, but bad
conditions with Apish co^plements? Others also which sell their possessions,
because they would live idly, to put the money out to usury, and so live
lazily, but yet cursedly, upon the sweat of other men's brows. These and the
other should say with Nbaoth, God forbid that I should sell my fathers
inheritance, especially selling as these do, to bestow and lay out the money so
accursedly. But let such Vnthrists know, which sell their land to waste upon
their lust, that they do wickedly rob their posterity, they weaken their
present estate, they bring upon themselves beggary, and so contempt and misery,
and that very justly, and do (as much as lies in them) root out their names
from the places, where their Ancestors, by Gods blessing, had planted them;
and when all is spent, they expose themselves to many temptations, to take lewd
courses to help themselves, which bring many to a shameful end. Let them
remember, that if they cannot live with their estates, how can they live
without them? Pains they cannot take, they have idly been brought up; which
often is the cause of this prodigality: to beg they be ashamed, because of
reproach justly to light upon them; therefore must they fall to stealing, and
so come that way into the Magistrates hands, that they may be punished for
their former villainies, which the Magistrate took no notice of, or made no
conscience to punish.

Which was our brother Elimelechs.] Thus Boaz calls him, who was but his
kinsman, though near. This was usual among the Jews and Israelites so to
call one another; yea, it is obseruable, that Gods people in all ages have
called one another brethren; before the Law, under the Law, Genesis 14. 14. Exodus
2. 11. Leuit. 19. 17. Deuteronomy. 13. 19. Romans 1. 13. Mat. 6. Gal. 4. 26. 1. Pet. 2.
17. Romans 12. 10. Heb. 13. 1. 1. These. 4. 9. 1. Ioh. 3. 14.
and in the time of the Gospel; and good reason so to do: for they have all
one Father, and all one Mother: Which should teach us brotherly love one
toward another; to love as brethren, that is, with respect to our Father, and
we his adopted Children: for whosoever after this manner loves, is translated
from death to life. Also such as love like brethren, are familiar, they have a
feeling of each others estate both in prosperity and adversity, rejoicing or
sorrowing, as it falls out, and that because they be brethren; they do also
show readiness to help one another, as brethren should do, and they hold it
a shame to do them wrong. Therefore let us love, and love as brethren, and try
it by these true brother-like marks of love: which if a man do, he shall
find little brotherly love among men: for few love a man in this respect, as he
is the Child of God: few are familiar with the virtuous for their virtues sake:
And who mourns with them in the true cause of their mourning, or rejoices
with them in their joy? If men so do, where is their helping hand to further
their joy, or to help them when they be troubled for righteousness sake?

Verse 4. And I thought to advertise thee, saying, Buy it before the
Inhabitants, and before the Elders of my people. If thou will redeem it,
redeem it; but if thou will not redeem it, then tell me that I may know: for
there is none to redeem it, besides thee, and I am after thee. And he said, I
will redeem it.
BOaz here shows why he tells the kinsman of Naomi her selling of land, to
offer him the sale first. In which offer note, First, what the offer is, to buy
it; then, before whom. Thirdly, the manner of propounding it, as left free to
his choice, to redeem or not to redeem. Fourthly, the reason why offered to
him in the first place, and that by Boaz. Lastly, the kinsmans answer, taking
the offer.

And I thought to advertise thee.] To wit, of the sale of the land: and this
Boaz does, for that he had to deal with a worldling, with whom he would
deal plainly, in telling him first of that which most affected him, and of
the earthly commodity, before he spoke of marrying Ruth. Whence we may learn,
First, that worldlings are carried away most with worldly respects: therefore
Boaz does thus begin with the kinsman: for worldlings savor only of the
Earth, like Moales which live in it; and though they now and then come up out
of the Earth, they by and by run again into it; they are like the Serpent,
whose seed they be, living upon the dust of the Earth, gold, silver, and
transitory goods, the sight and enjoying whereof is to them as food and life;
their wisdom also is from below, which is Earthly, making men covetous; and
Sensual, James 3. 15.
making men delight in beastly pleasures; and Deuilish, full of craft, fraud,
wicked policy, and subtle devices. This wisdom below follows the things
of this world, even the lusts of the eyes, which are earthly; the lusts of the
flesh, which are sensual; and pride of life, which is deuilish. Therefore let
us hereby try our worldliness, and whether we be such as worldlings be, the
signs whereof be these: First, when we are more moved to do any thing for
profit and again, then for the Commandment of God, or charity, or any other
motive by which the godly are drawn on to do that which they should do.
Secondly, when our hearts are wholly set upon the world, minding altogether
earthly things, which shows that there is our treasure, because our hearts be
there. Thirdly, when we grow more covetous, as riches increase, setting our
hearts upon them. Esai. 32. 6.
Fourthly, when we speak like worldlings, who can utter their thoughts freely
in these earthly matters; but are in spiritual matters very blockish, if not
senseless. Fifthly, when we be not liberall-minded; for a liberal person is
set against Esai. 32.
the niggard and churl, who is called in Hebrew, Nabal, a fool: for so is the
covetous worldling: also Kelai, of a word which signifies (...)
to consume, for that he wastes himself in the world, and for the world: by
circumlocution he is said to be one greedy of gain, one that loves Prou. 1.
19. Eccles. ^. 10.
silver, and abundance, and is not satisfied. The Grecians calls him
Philarguros, one that loves (...) Luke 16. 14. (...).
money; and Pleonectes, one that would have more, never contented: and
therefore to be covetous and contented, are put as contraries, the one being
forbidden, and the other commanded: this is the worldling. Secondly, note, that
an honest man deals plainly, and not covertly with others in these worldly
businesses. Boaz concealeth not the commodity, which the kinsman might reap
in marrying of Ruth; he propounds not her, and co^cealeth this: for an honest
man hates fraud and deceit; he does to others, as he would that they should
do to him. If therefore we would be held honest, let us deal uprightly and
plainly with others, with whom we have to do: for it is sincerity, it makes
a man's word of credit, and brings him into the reputation of an honest man:
and let this be remembered, that fraud and 1. These. 4.
deceit God will certainly avenge. Thirdly, note, that albeit man may not
deceive his brother, yet is he to proceed wisely, to use prudence and
discretion in his affairs: as knowing what to speak first, what next: for
there is time for all things, as Solomon says, so in this also. And it is no
fraud to utter one thing before another, and so to speak truly to further the
matter in hand; to conceal also a thing for a time, so it be with no ill
intent, not to deceive, or hurt my brother any way, it is not to be condemned,
but rather to be allowed, as a point of wisdom and prudence in a man: and
therefore may it be observed honestly and justly, without stain or crack of
credit.

Saying, Buy it before the Inhabitants, and before the Elders of my people.]
Both the Elders and people were gathered together, as we may here see, and in
verses 9. 11. Here the Inhabitants are named before the Elders; in the 9. verse
the Elders before them; and in verse 11. these before the Elders again, as
showing how one depends upon the other, the Elders upon the people, and the
people on them by mutual relation, one assisting another; the Officers, the
people, by their power and authority; and the people these by aid and help, as
they should be commanded: which is peaceable happiness in a Commonwealth. In
that they be called Boaz his people, it shows the greatness of this man's
power in Bethlehem, as Lord and chief Governor there; of whose greatness I
have spoken before. He does here bring this matter thus into the public
Assembly; for that it was public* for more peaceable proceeding; for better
assurance, ratification, and confirmation of the business, when it should be
concluded there before such Elders, and so great Assembly of people. Lastly,
because it was to be finished in the gate of the City, by the Law of Moses;
Deuteronomy. 25. 7, 8.
so it was not done in vainglory, or from an high spirit, but for that reason
and necessity so required. Matters of importance are so to be handled for
place and person, as may best serve to end the same peaceably without farther
ado, if it may be.

If thou will redeem it redeem it.] Boaz does not urge him, but leaves him
to his choice; he tells him of the land, but urges him not with the Law;
because he did not much care, whether the kinsman would redeem it or no,
having a desire to match with Ruth himself. Whence we may observe, that there
a thing is rather propounded, then heartily urged, where the mind is not bent
to have it effected: that we usually leave to men's choice, which we are very
indifferent in, not much caring whether it be, or be not. So do many preach,
propounding the Doctrine of godliness, rather than earnestly urging the same;
because they be indifferent toward their hearers, not much caring whether
they serve God or no. By this may the hearty affection or coldness in a cause
be judged of. Here note by the way, how the Kinsman the Redeemer was a type of
Christ, who Esai. 59. 20.
became, by taking our nature upon him, our Brother and Redeemer, who redeemeth
us, First, Tit. 2. 14. 1. Pet. 1. 18.
from sin, from a vain conversation, that we might be a peculiar people to
God, zealous of good works. Secondly, from our Enemies, that Luke 1. 74, 75.
we might serve him in holiness and righteousness Ga. 4. 5.
all the days of our life. Thirdly, from under the Law, that we might receive
the adoption Gal. 3. 13, 14.
of sons. Fourthly, from the curse of the Law, that the blessing of Abraham
might come upon us, and that we might receive the promise of the Spirit.
Fifthly, from the wrath to come, and 1. These. 1. 10.
so to give us the Inheritance of Life and Glory.

But if thou will not redeem it, then tell me, that I may know.] Note, First,
that a man is either to perform his duty, or to render up his right to
another that will: for else he is as the tree, which keeps Luke 13.
the ground barren, and good for nothing, but to be cut down, and cast into
the fire. A good lesson to idle and negligent Ministers, who should either take
pains to teach, or yield up their places to such as would; else let them look
for the end of the unfruitful tree, and the reward of the unprofitable, wicked
and slothful servant, which was cast into utter darkness, where is Mat. 25.
30.
weeping and gnashing of teeth. Secondly, that one man knows not the mind of
another, till it be revealed and made known unto him, as Boaz acknowledges
here, and as the Apostle teaches, 1. Cor. 2 11. Prou. 20. 17.
and Solomon also: and therefore are we to be charitable in censuring men's
hearts, when we know not the intent thereof, till it be revealed, as by words:
for of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks: or by works: for, as our
Savior says, By their works you shall know them; or by signs and tokens; by
looks and gesture: for where the eyes be lofty, the heart is hautie; Psalm.
131. 1. and 101. 5.
and the gesture stately, the mind is great. Thus may we judge of the mind
and heart: for by words, works, and gesture may they be known, and their
countenance, says Esaias, does witness against Esai. 3. 9, 16.
them. And therefore should we look to these, and strive to have an outward
carriage comely and decent as befitteth Christians, if we would not have the
inward man censured and thought evil of.

For there is none to redeem it besides thee.] The reason why he aduertiseth
the kinsman: for that he was the next, if the other refused, and the other had
the right before him. An honest and just dealing man will not enter upon
another man's right without his leave, and first acquainting him therewith: for
otherwise wrong should be offered to him, which an honest man is loath to do,
love binding him to do better unto his neighbor, as we see by Boaz here;
whose example let us be willing to follow, as we would be accounted just and
honest. Again note, that in the sale of land, he is to have the first offer,
who has a right thereto after the present possessour, before another: if such
a one be able and willing to buy the same; if either the Law would make him
herre, or the bond of natural love should persuade thereto. In so doing, an
even course is kept, love is observed, houses and families are vpheld, when
that which belonged to a family or kindred, is kept among themselves, and not
alienated unto another house or stock: which therefore for men's outward name
and better strengthening of their family, is fit to be observed.

And I am after thee.] As if he had said, I rather than any other propound this
unto thee, because if thou will not do thy duty, I will, being the next
kinsman. They are most fit to put others in mind of their duty, which have a
more special reason and calling thereto than others, and a mind and ability
to perform what others do neglect: for where these concur, as they did in
Boaz, the party admonishing cannot justly be excepted against. And therefore
let us look whether we, in going to urge others to their duties, have a
calling by special reason so to do, else may we be condemned for too
busy-bodies; likewise whether we have a conscience in our selves, that we be
not guilty of unwillingness to do our duty in that which we press others
unto, lest it be said to us, Physician, heal thy self.

And he said, I will redeem it.] This shows that he was a worldling: for
this kinsman, after so long a famine, had ready money to purchase, but not a
penny to give to poor Naomi and Ruth, as Boaz did. Boaz was rich, and had
wherewith to redeem the inheritance, but he was merciful; so he was a rich
man in the world, but not of it, as a worldling is: for a worldling is one of
the world, loving it, seeking it with greediness, hoarding up, and ready ever
to be buying, but without mercy to the poor, as this Kinsman seemed to be. By
this, learn to behold a worldling, and a godly rich man; both getters, both
full of coin, both ready to purchase, herein they differ not: but the one has
regard to the Law of God, so not the other, one has a merciful heart to be
liberal to the poor, and so has not the other; the one in his purchase has
respect to the good of his brother, the other regards wholly and only his own
commodity; for he is insatiable, being like the dry sandy ground, which drinks
up rain; like the Dropsy, the Horse-leech, the Grave, and barraine Womb,
which be never satisfied; no more is the covetous worldling, his increasing and
getting satisfies him not; but rather makes him the more greedy of gain.
Which miserable corruption is much to be bewailed, and happy contentment is to
be sought after, as the Apostle exhorts. Heb. 13. ^.


Verse 5. Then said Boaz, What day thou buyest the field of the hand of Naomi,
thou must buy it also of Ruth the Moabitesse, the wife of the dead, to raise up
the name of the dead upon his inheritance.
BOaz propounds now the thing principally intended. In which may be noted,
when it was spoken of, what, and the end why.

Then said Boaz.] When he saw him forward to buy the land, and as one prepared
thereby, in his understanding, to have the offer of Ruth made to him, then he
propounded her, teaching this, that then a matter is fit to be spoken of, when
the party may seem to be prepared thereunto* and this is wisdom both
concerning spiritual and corporal things. Thus may we see how Boaz did here;
so the wise woman of Tekoa did to David; and 2. Sam. 14. 1. King. 20. 39, 40,
42.
in like sort Nathan to David; the Prophet to Ahab; and thus did Joseph prepare
his brethren, before he discovered himself to them. And in this manner does
God in showing his will to us; he prepared his people in giving the Law: and
Exodus 19.
John Baptist must prepare the way before Christ come with the Gospel: and so
must Paul be prepared with humiliation, before the Lord tell him his good
pleasure, and put him into his function to carry his Name unto the Gentiles.
And thus Act. 9. Acts 1. and 2.
did Peter, before he propounded the choosing of Mathias, and the Word of glad
tidings to the Jews: for in doing this, we may greatly further what we do
intend. And therefore let us learn this wisdom to put it also into practice.

What day thou buyest the field of the hand of Naomi, thou must buy it also of
Ruth the Moabitesse.] The reason of this speech of buying first of Naomi, then
of Ruth, is this: Naomi was Elimelechs widow, to whom the land did belong, and
whom the kinsman should have married; but seeing she was too old to marry, and
to bear children; and now Ruth young, and the widow of one of Naomi her
sons, she was to supply Naomi her defect; and she, when the land was to be
redeemed, must also be married to the Kinsman, albeit she was a Moabitesse:
for Gods Law was not partial, but extended in Israel, in that case, for which
the Law was given to the woman, whether she were an Israelitesse, or of
another nation, and married to an Israelite. Note here, that Boaz at the first
propounded not so much as he intended: yea, what is principally intended, is
often last propounded, as here, or wholely concealed, usual with Statists: as
we may see in 1. Sam. 18. 9, 17, 21, 25.
Saul, who propounded the marriage of his daughter to David, as if he honored
and loved him, when the end of his policy was to destroy him. Jeroboam
propounds tranquillity and rest to Israel, and that he had care to save them
from so great cost and trouble, as to go up to Jerusalem, there to worship; he
would for their ease, have them worship at Dan and Bethel the golden Calves:
but this their fleshly ease, effected by this deuilish policy, was not
intended, but the safety of himself, and the confirming of the Kingdom 1.
King. 12. 26, 27.
to himself, of which yet in the end he was deceived. Seeing that less is at
first propounded sometime then intended, and the maine thing now and then
concealed, as these examples show, and as we may see it in the Serpent that
Grand Politician unto Eve; let men learn to be wise to sift the drift, if they
have to do with men of wisdom, and of a deep reach; else avoid them, if
their own apprehension be too shallow to conceive them, lest by credulity
they be overthrown. But it may here be asked, seeing Boaz did propound not
that which at the first he chiefly aimed at, whether it be lawful so to do?
I answer, Yes: for to propound one thing before another, is not evil, neither
to conceal sometime part of our mind, as we may see in Samuel, so advised by
1. Sam. 16. 2.
God himself to speak: yea that may be sometime spoken, and in some case,
which may seem to further a thing in hand, and yet be the way to prevent, and
tend to the welfare of another, as the counsel of Hushai to Absalom; which
counsel 2. Sam. 17.
was not to overthrow Absalom, though by Gods hand it fell out so, but to
provide for the safety of David, and to cross the counsel of Achitophel,
which tended to the utter destruction of David, the Lords Anointed; which was
honest and godly policy, in which no evil, but good was intended of Hushai
his part, which differs much from the damnable policy of Saul and Jeroboam:
which subtle men most commonly follow and put in practice. We may also observe
here maintenance for Naomi, and marriage for Ruth, so as both the widows were
cared for: for of widows Exo. 22. 22, 23.
God has ever had an especial care. To a widow must Eliah go to preserve
both his own and 1. King. 17.
her life: for a widow must Elisha work a miracle 2. King. 4. 1.
to discharge her debts, that she and her children also may live: for widows
left childlesse, a Deuteronomy. 25.
Law was made for their marriage, and maintenance allowed for such, if she
were a Priests Leuit. 22. 13.
daughter, when she returned to her fathers house. And therefore let men have
respect to the widows, as James exhorts, who makes it a James 1. 27.
chief sign, or character of our Religion before God.

The wife of the dead.] This shows how Ruth came to have a right in an
Israelite to marry with him, because her husband was an Israelite, and the Law
was, that the widow of such a one, the next kinsman should marry, if he died
without issue. But yet this is not all: for Orpha was the wife of the dead too;
she was married to Chillion brother to Mahlon: but Ruths Religion and coming
with Naomi to dwell among Gods people, give her this benefit of Gods Law. By
which we may learn, that Religion, and not any earthly privilege, does
interest us into the Law of God and the benefit thereof: for otherwise Orpha
had as much right by the Law to the Kinsman and to Boaz as Ruth had. If
therefore we claim a benefit by the Word, let us be religious: for godliness
has the promise of this life, and the life to come: but unto the wicked no
hope, so long as they so remain, but to them the threatenings and curses be due.

To raise up the name of the dead upon his inheritance.] This was Moses Law,
and ordained Deuteronomy. 25. 5.
for diverse causes: first, to show that by death, the right of inheritance was
not lost: for it is called his inheritance, which figured out this, that by
death we lose not our right of Heaven, which is called our inheritance.
Secondly, to provide that the widow should not be without children; thereby
typing, or figuring unto us, that the Church should not be left barren.
Thirdly, to make the dead to live again, and his name to remain among such as
were in the land of the living: so teaching, that the dead should rise, and
enjoy Life everlasting. Fourthly, to preserve the Deuteronomy. 25. 6.
name of the dead, that it should not be put out: so giving us to know, that
God keeps our names in remembrance, and we shall not perish. Fifthly and
lastly, to preserve the honor of the first borne; when he that was begotten
by the kinsman, was to bear the name of the dead, and not his name which begot
him: so God would teach us, that Christ, the first begotten, should be
honored; and such as were begotten by spiritual Fathers, the Ministers of the
Word, should carry Christ's Name, and from him be called Christians, and not by
the name of their Teachers, as if they begot people to themselves, but only to
Christ, to keep up his Name amongst his Saints for ever. Besides these ends,
and this typical and figurative meaning, we may observe, that by Moses Law,
kindred were to uphold the name of their house, that it perished not: for it
Psalm. 109. 13. Ier. 22. 30.
was a great curse to have a man's name rooted out. And though that Law do not
bind us, yet the Law of natural love, and loving respect to our own kindred,
the name and credit of those which we come of, yea, and the honor which our
family may come unto by obtaining antiquity, should make us uphold it: for
ancient families have a certain honor upon them for antiquity sake, though
otherwise but poor and mean. Now, to keep up a name, and that in See Verse
12.
good credit, we must observe and fulfill these things first, plant Religion,
and keep that among us: for so God will uphold and strengthen us, and bless us
and ours: the godly shall be had in an everlasting remembrance, but the name of
the wicked shall rot. Secondly, bring up our children, and so teach them to
bring up theirs, in honest courses and callings, and not to let them live idly
and vainly: for nothing preuents evil more, nor vpholds a man's estate better,
than to live with industry and diligence in a calling: and what overthrows
houses, and brings men to ruin, making Gallants to sell away their
inheritances, but that they have been idly brought up, without callings,
without honest employments? Thirdly, keep our Genealogies, from our
Ancestors, and the increase of our posterities, to behold therein the Lords
blessing, and to rejoice in our increasing the Lords Church. Fourthly, we must
help them up again, which by Gods hand fall into decay: common charity, and
natural love do persuade hereunto, and our own credit also, in keeping our
name from contempt, if that respect may move us: for the more poor, the less
esteem, and the greater contempt. Fifthly, we must labor to prefer our
kindred to good marriages, to good places, as they shall be fit, and occasions
offered, as far forth as we shall be able to the utmost. Sixthly, we must love
one another entirely. Which shall appear: first, by our enquiring after one
another, when we be separated. Secondly, by visiting one another near, and
sending one to another farther off. Thirdly, by being glad to see any of them,
though descended many degrees from us: for the further off, the better
appears the antiquity of our kindred, and the greater increase of our house.
Fourthly, by being desirous that one should make use of another, before any
other whatsoever: for this combineth them very nearly in affection. Fifthly
and lastly, to defend them in their just causes, and to be as one man to
preserve them from wrongs and injuries offered them unjustly: this do, but yet
only as far as may stand with public peace; for that must be preferred
before kindred, yea and our own estate and lives, lest we run into factions
and partakings, and so cause civil dissension, which must be most carefully
avoided: but otherwise, being no breach of public peace, no wrecke of
conscience, nothing against justice and legal proceedings, we must defend
them, and in their good courses uphold them in love and charity. If every house
and family would do thus, should not men be happy? should not every one rest
in peace under his own vine? The rich friends would supply the want of their
poor kindred, and the poor would honor them, and lay down their lives for
them. Charity would rule as Queen; and justice would sit in peace; Religion
would flourish, and the Land would be blessed, and people made renowned,
admired and feared. Before I end this verse, here it may be asked, Whether the
Law of Moses, mentioning a Deuteronomy. 25. ^.
brother, be to be understood of natural brethren, or only, as the Hebrews
use to understand brother, a near kinsman, and not a natural brother?

Answer. It is to be understood of a natural brother: for the Law was in use
before it was Genesis 38. 17, 18.
written, and so then understood by Judah and Thamar, God dispensing therewith:
and Naomi Chap. 1. 13.
thus understood it also: though, if there be no brother, the nighest kinsman
then must marry the widow; therefore Ruth claimed it of Boaz, and Boaz did
propound it to the nearer kinsman: besides these, Learned men do take the Law
to be so meant.

Verse 6. And the Kinsman said, I cannot redeem it for my self; lest I mar
mine own inheritance: redeem thou my right to thy self: for I cannot redeem
it.
THe Kinsmans answer to Boaz concerning his propounding of Ruth to him. He
refuses her, and gives his reason: then, he resigneth his right to Boaz, and
repeateth again the words of refusal, as a reason of his resignation.

And the Kinsman said, I cannot redeem it for my self.] He could before
redeem it, but now, he says he cannot, he loved the land, and in that respect
he was ready to fulfill the Law, but he cared not for the woman, the poor
widow; and in this regard the Law was not respected of him. So we see, how
that Worldlings are partial obseruers of Gods Law: some part they take, and
some part they leave, even as it likes them; they look to the bare Letter,
but not the spiritual meaning; they shun the act, but for words and thoughts
they do take no care; the sins in the grossest kind they avoid, but the
lesser, as they account them, they make little or no conscience of; that which
concerns their pleasure, and their profit according to the Law, they are
ready to do, but on the contrary, where the Law crosses them, that they cast
behind them, as this Kinsman here; they hate popish fasts, but love drunken
feasts; they abhor superstitious worship and cost about it, but they can be
content to live of sacrilege, and the maintenance due to Ministers, though
given by Ancestors to the Church with an execration or curse upon such as
shall change them to any other use; other men's duties they can hear of, and
urge the Law to them: but to be told of their own, and pressed to the
performance thereof, they cannot endure. The reasons of this partiality are
these: First, the want of the true love of God, and reverent fear of the power
and authority of the Lawgiuer: for where this love and fear is, there will be
respect had to all the Commandments, Psalm. 119. 6.
without partiality, as we may see in David, and in other holy men of God.
Secondly, the unbridled lust of man unsubdued, and not brought into the
obedience of Christ by the power of the Word, as Saint Paul speaks: for if
the Word 2. Cor. 10. 5.
ruled in their hearts, they would not be thus partial in obeying Gods will,
but be like Zachary Luke 1. 6.
and Elizabeth, walking in all the Commandments of God unblameable. Thirdly,
their love of pleasure and worldly profit more than God himself, which
appears by this, that they will lose neither of these for Religion sake.
Herod will do many things, but his pleasure with Herodias he will not forgo.
Ananias and Saphira will give much, sell all to give to the Church, but not
give all, they will think more of the matter, than give away all at once,
though still they will pretend it: such Herod-like, and such Ananiasses there
be, which have not denied their pleasures, nor their profits for Religion
sake: which therefore makes them partial in their obedience to God. Fourthly,
the love of praises of men, and fear of them, Ioh. 12. 42, 43.
make them to make balkes in their service to God, now omitting this, then
that, and here trespassing, and there offending against the Law; to get this
man's praise, and not to displease that; being bound only to man, but loose in
their hearts to follow their own wills, in respect of any conscience toward
God. Fifthly, the deadness and benummednes of their consciences (for want of
looking into Gods Law, and the searching out of their ways by the same) which
never troubles them for neglect of their duties, nor for the breach of any
part of the Law. Sixthly, a carnal persuasion of their good estate, and that in
thus doing, they be not so much to blame; because they thrive in the world,
they get many friends, and they see others also to be their companions with
them herein of the best rank in the world, and such as profess to be better,
yet are taken tardie in foul faults; and therefore are they hartened hereby in
this their halting service and partial obedience to God. Let us take knowledge
of this to bewail it, then to remove these causes, and to labor for the
contrary graces, that we may serve God with all our hearts. Note again, how
he says, I cannot, when he might have said, I will not: but hence we see,
that what man will not do, that he excuses with, I cannot do. So did the
high Priests and Elders answer our Savior, saying, they could not tell, when
indeed they would Mat. 21. 27.
not tell him what they thought of John's Baptism: for I cannot is a more modest
speech than I will not, and it carries a reasonable excuse with it: for in
reason we think, that what a man cannot do, he should not be urged to do;
and therefore do men use to say they cannot do that, which they have no will
to do; either of a froward spirit, which is to be condemned; or upon respect
of some inconveniences, which may in some sort be excused with I cannot do, to
wit, with conueniencie: but this must not excuse or hinder our duty of
charity, to neglect the helping of our brother in this his necessity, or to
omit to do what we ought, or may well do: for so to say, I cannot, is
untruth, and an evil excuse.

Lest I mar mine own inheritance.] Thus this Kinsman excuses his refusal
of Ruth. He might think, perhaps, being a worldling, that he might mar it,
if he married a young woman, and so be ouercharged with children, or that in
marrying Ruth, he should be burdened with poor Naomi: or he having children
by another, should by this bring a new charge upon him, and occasion discord by
children of diverse women, which seldom agree, as may be seen in Ishmael and
Isaas, and Jacobs sons: or he might have another wife (as upon this place
some do note) and so by taking this, the house might be filled with
contention, as we may see when Abraham took Hagar to Sarah, also in the wives
of Jacob, Elkanah his two wives, and as is very like between the wives of
Lamech, the first Bigamist. Or lastly, he might think, having a good
inheritance of his own, by taking Ruth, and be getting a son to the dead,
and so perhaps having no more, should thereby raise up the name of the dead
upon his inheritance, and want one for his own, which he would not so mar,
as he says, whatsoever his thought was, thus to move him to speak. We may
learn, that a Worldling is careful to preserve his outward estate, that it be
not marred, as he here speaks: for such a one is wise in his generation: he
loves his riches and wealth, and he fears want: and it is not amiss to care
to get honestly, and to preserve our lands and goods, when we have them: for
they are Gods gift, and we are made his Stewards over them, to keep them
carefully, and to employ them according to his will, and not after our lusts:
yea, this we are commanded to do, and urged by Pro. 27. 23, 24, 25, 26, 27.
Genesis 33. 13, 14. 1. King. 21. 1. Tim. 5. 8. Prou. 31. 1. Cor. 12.
Solomon thereto by many reasons: this care had Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and
Naboth; and the Apostle tells us, that every one is to provide for his
family, as the good Huswife does; and parents are to lay up for their
children, which they cannot do, except they be painful, frugall, and do care
to uphold their estates: and therefore thus far a worldling is not to be
reproved; but as far forth as he cares for the world with neglect of
Religion in himself, and in his family, (when as first we must seek Gods
Kingdom, as Christ Mat. 6. 33.
commands, and that in the first, and not in the last place) and as far as
he keeps it with ship-wracke of conscience, upholding it by ill means, and
having no care to do good works: which two, that is, the neglect of Gods
service, and of keeping of a good conscience, if they be avoided, men may in
the care of their outward estate, be well warranted to keep and preserve Gods
blessings bestowed upon them, ever in faith to God, and love to our brethren:
for, with all care we ought most of all to uphold our spiritual estate, that
we mar not that, and lose our hope of Heaven; but let the care of the one put
us in mind of the care of the other, as every way more excellent. Note farther
from this man, that Worldlings think by obeying Gods Law, they shall mar
their earthly estate; that Religion will overthrow them: and thus they imagine,
first, because they see Gods Word to cross their worldly courses whereby they
do use to get and uphold their estate, which indeed, cannot stand with
Religion, pure, and undefiled before God. Secondly, because they are persuaded
that they must do, as men of the world do, else they shall not thrive,
howsoever Religion it self binds them to the contrary. Thirdly, because they
trust not God, nor rely upon his Word. Fourthly, for that they see many, which
go for religious men, to be poor, and not to thrive, as they do, or desire
to do in the world; which they impute to their ouerstrictnesse in Religion;
and therefore do conclude with themselves, that to live after the Rule of Gods
Word, is the next way to beggary, which they will by their worldly courses
prevent, if they can. But let us beware of such Atheistical thoughts, and be
far from these imaginations of Worldlings, first, because riches Deuteronomy. 8. 18.
are from God, and not by man; man cannot make himself rich by any means, if
Gods common blessing be not assistant thereto; experience also teaches us
this; when we see men industrious, yea, provident and wise, as others, yet can
they not attain the half that others come to. Secondly, because these outward
blessings, even these are promised to such, as do live well and Deuteronomy. 28.
obey God. Thirdly, for that many men in living carefully to please God, and to
serve him, have come to great wealth, as we may read of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob,
Joseph, Job, Boaz here, David, Iehoshaphat, and many others. Fourthly and
lastly, for that men by their rebellion against God, have lost great estates,
and deprived themselves thereof, and their posterity by their wickedness, as
is evident in the example of Saul, Jeroboam, and others. And therefore let us
not think our worldly estate to become worse, by careful living after Gods
Laws, but rather better and more sure, as Jobs was, about whom the Lord made a
Hedge for his safety. And remember for a conclusion, that such as fear the
Lord, shall want nothing that is good. O taste, and see, says Psalm. 34. 8, 9,
10.
David, that the Lord is good! blessed is the man that trusts in him. O fear
the Lord, ye his Saints: for there is no want to the^ that fear him. The young
Lions lack and suffer hunger: but they that seek the Lord, shall not want any
good thing. Note thirdly hence from these words of the kinsman, that the fear
of worldly loss in a man's outward estate, makes him neglect the Law of God,
as this man does here: for Gods Word prevails not, it has not a commanding
power over the conscience of a covetous man; because his heart is glewed to his
Luke 18. 22, 23.
riches, a base fear through unbelief possesses him, that he himself may
come to want; and the love of riches so bewitcheth him, as he valueth them
above the Lords Precepts, contrary to David's Psalm. 119. 72. 103, 111. and 19. 9.
account of Gods Word. That we may become therefore obedient to Gods Law, let
us cast off this Atheistical and Heathenish fear.

Redeem thou my right to thy self.] The kinsman is here willing that Boaz
should take his right: that, which before he said he would redeem himself,
now he is contented that another should redeem it. So Worldlings are content
to yield sometimes their right unto others, as namely that which they cannot
come by, that which they cannot keep, that which they cannot have, but with
more cost then the thing is worth; or when by getting a little, there is
hazard to lose much; and likewise that which for present fear they yield
unto, as Benhadad did restore Cities unto 1. King. 20. 34.
Ahab, because he was in his hand, and in peril of his life, which he would
by that means redeem. Otherwise Worldlings willingly forgo nothing.
Therefore their yielding of their right at any time upon the foresaid by*
respect, is not thankes-worthy.

For I cannot redeem it.] None but can pretend some excuse or other why they
do not what they ought. In this man may we observe two things: inconstancy,
and want of charity: for before, he would redeem it, now he will not; before
yea, now nay. Three things make men inconstant: first, leuity of mind: this is
a natural infirmity, and to be pardoned. Secondly, ignorance, and want of
foresight of the incoueniences, which makes him rash at first, and to repent
afterward, and so to change his mind, as this kinsman does: this is somewhat
excusable, though not altogether without blame: for a man is to do that which
is gone out of his mouth, though it be to his own Psalm. 15.
hinderance, if nothing else hinder the performance. Thirdly, dishonesty, which
is, when a man makes no conscience of any thing he says or does, but as he
sees advantage therein to himself; saying and gaine-saying, doing and undoing
as he sees it to tend to his own profit: this is flat knauerie, and justly to
be condemned. Of this we must take serious knowledge, and bewail the first in
us, prevent the second by good consideration and deliberation, and hate the
last, as detestable falsehood and dishonestie, not to be practiced among
Christians. Uncharitableness in this kinsman herein appears, that he has no
care of the name of the dead, nor respect unto the two poor widows, Naomi
and Ruth; the land he loved and liked well, but the women he would have nothing
to do with; he had a mind to enrich himself in worldly substance, but he had
no will to show mercy to the poor: for a worldling thinks himself borne for
himself, seeking his own good, but not the good of another, contrary to the
true property of charity. 1. Cor. 13.
This uncharitableness must we take heed of, and abandon self-love the true
cause thereof; and labor for Charity, the Evidence of our Faith in God, and
true Union with our Brethren in Christ.

Verse 7. Now this was the manner in former time in Israel, concerning
redeeming and concerning changing, for to confirm all things: a man plucked
off his shoo, and gave it to his neighbor: and this was a testimony in Israel.
THese words are a declaration of a Custom in Israel, and brought in here to
show the reason of the Kinsman his drawing off his shoo in the verse following.
In this, note the antiquity of this Custom, also where, about what, to what
end, what it was, and the ratification.

Now this was the manner in former time.] It was no new device, but an old
custom, though no where in Scripture mentioned before. In commending this
Custom from antiquity, we see, that Antiquity has ever been of credit to
commend a thing unto us: by this the Prophet commends Ier. 6. 16.
Religion and Worship of God to the people; and by this prevailed the Scribes
and Pharisees Mat. 6. Mat. 15.
with their traditions, by saying it was said of old, and done by the
Forefathers. Thus the Papists seek to grace their superstition and
will worship: for that which is of old, has many Approuers of al sorts, which
makes it to be of such estimation. Seeing this is so, let us learn to know
true Antiquity from counterfeit; the antiquity of truth, which is of God, and
that of error, which is of the Devil: and that which we find to be antiquity
of truth, that to uphold, and to reject the other: so shall we approve of the
truth of our Religion, as most ancient; and renounce Popery, as a new nouelty,
and a religion sprung up but of late. This should also make us to be wary, and
to take good heed that we ascribe not the name of antiquity to any thing, but
that which may be proved to be sound and orthodoxe, yea, albeit being a thing
but indifferent: lest if it be evil, we, by attributing antiquity thereunto,
do credit and add confirmation unto it, by speaking thereof as being ancient;
and when we so inform others, when we approve of it, and practice it, and
instruct, teach, and allow our children so to think and do, if the thing be
good and of approved antiquity, it is well done so to speak and practice; but
if evil, we do amiss in misleading others, by graceing any way such a thing
with the credit of antiquity, when as we rather should use all means to
disanull and cancel the same.

In Israel.] Old customs have prevailed amongst John. 18. 39.
Gods people, both civil and religious customs, and that both good and bad.
Good the godly have observed, as did Joseph and Marie. Bad the Luke 2. 27, 42.
people have followed, such as were and be addicted to the will of men, and to
the examples of their forefathers, to great and learned men's Ier. 44. 1. King.
17, 34. 40.
practices, being led by their own bringing up to follow the opinion of the
most, and not to be guided by the Law and Precepts of God. Thus were the high
places kept up in Judea; the golden calves worshipped in Dan and Bethel: so
popish customs having taken place, we find hard to be removed; and heathenish
customs sometimes among the ignorant and vulgar people are kept and observed
in diverse things at some seasons of the year: of which in this clear Light of
the Gospel Christians should be ashamed. Some customs are not to be
condemned simply, but only in regard of the abuse: as for friends to meet Iud.
14. 16.
and feast, to make a feast at weddings, to rejoice, to sing, to play on
instruments; yea, sometime to Ier. 31. 4. Esai. 58. 13.
dance, so it be that the Lords Day be not profaned, nor made the appointed
day for these things, as most commonly it has been: for that day is set apart
for better ends and holy purposes: also so that moderation be used herein, as
in feasting, to avoid drunkenness and gluttony; in mirth, wanton songs,
lascivious speeches, abuse of Gods Name and his Word; and in dancing, the mixed
companying of men and women: for in Iud. 11. 34 and 21. 21 1. Sam. 18. 6. Ier.
31. 13.
Israel the women daunced together, and the men alone: as for the other, it is
an allurement to vanity and folly, as daily experience may teach them that
impudently will gainsay the same. So then let us distinguish customs, and as
they be good, so use them; if otherwise, cut them off, and suffer not an
ungodly custom to have any authority, or to be a law in thine heart: for
ofttimes evil customs do ouermaster good customs. Wherefore let Hagar be
expelled, that the promised seed may have his right and place.

Concerning redeeming, and concerning changing.] Of redeeming Land, buying and
selling, before has been spoken; here is mention of the exchange of one for
another, as Ahab offered unto Naboth; in which, as in the other, equity is to
be observed. These words brought in here, show about what matters this ancient
custom was observed, namely, in and about matters of the world. In which they
had their liberty, as we have now in these things, and not to be found fault
with or disallowed; neither need men to have any scruple in using them, not to
call them into question, when they see not therein any apparent impiety, or
gross superstition.

For to confirm all things.] to wit, which was done or spoken touching the
redemption or change. So here is the end of the Ceremony, for civil use, not
for superstition; it was for confirmation and establishing of the right of one
upon another: for Custom is as a Law, binding one to another, in that which is
done according to that custom. It is good therefore to take heed how we settle
a custom.

A man plucked off his shoo, and gave it to his neighbor.] This was the
custom, or the ceremony used according to the custom then in Israel about
such things. Several countries have several customs. We deliver up our
right, by taking up a piece of Earth, and do lay it upon the deed or writing,
when we give up our right in freehold; in some places by a straw in
copie-hold land; some pull off a glove* here is plucking off a shoo, to
signify by the shoe, his right to the land; by plucking off, his will to
forgo it; by giving it to his Neighbor, the resigning of his right: so as the
ceremony lively sets out the thing. But it will be asked, Why was a shoo
used in this? It may be, to note that the man acknowledges hereby, that now
he had no right to set his foot upon it without the leave of the other;
according to that with us, no man having a right, without the Owners good will,
so much as to walk over another man's ground; but if he will, he may commence
a suit against him de pedibus ambulandis: but such extremity is utterly void of
charity, and to be hated among Christians.

And this was a testimony in Israel.] This act made good the bargain of sale
or exchange in Israel: for a common custom makes sure a thing delivered
according to that custom, where it is of force and use. The practice of that
custom shall testify against them, and confirm their deed, where that
custom is in use: for many customs are in many places, and do differ. Let
therefore such a custom be carefully observed, and beware of the breach
thereof.

Verse 8. Therefore the kinsman said unto Boaz, Buy it for thee. So he drew off
his shoo.
THis is a conclusion of the bargain between them. Showing what the kinsman
both spoke and did, granting Boaz liberty to buy it, and observing the
custom then amongst them, to ratify the same, in the resigning of his right.

Therefore the kinsman said unto Boaz.] That is, because he said he could not
redeem it, he says to Boaz, Buy thou it: and because the custom was so, he
drew off his shoo: for this word therefore has reference to both clauses.
Here is a worldly man, yet he deals in the resigning of his right very
honestly, and so, as by Law and custom, the same might be confirmed and made
good to Boaz. Hereby we see, that some men out of common honesty being
worldlings, will so pass away their right to another, as it shall stand good
by Law to them: for they will observe in such things moral honesty; they love
their credit before men, they care to preserve such just dealing for their more
free commerce with others, and to prevent future troubles, which they might
occasion otherwise by any trick of dishonesty, when it should appear. This we
find true by experience among our selves, which is very praiseworthy; and a
condemning of such as pretend a greater show of piety, but have not half the
honesty, which some civil worldly men have: for if we pass an estate to any,
why should we not make the purchase good to the utmost according to Law?
Honesty and equity requre it at our hands, if we be not deceivers, as some
be, who make sale of that which secretly they have conveyed to others before:
which practice, yea and every such like deceitful dealing, is very theft and
damned villainy.

Buy it for thee.] Before, the kinsman in verse 6. wills Boaz to redeem it
to himself; here he says, Buy it: so that to redeem, was to buy the Ier.
32.
inheritance; of which somewhat in the next verse.

So he drew off his shoo.] Thus he observed the custom, to confirm the
right unto Boaz. Two things are here done to put over his right, first, his
word, and then his deed: one was not enough to convey it over unto Boaz,
therefore both are conjoined. So does the Lord deal with us in giving us a
right in the eternal Inheritance; he gives first his Word, then, his Deed,
setting to his Hand and Seal, to confirm his Word, which internally is the
Spirit and heanenly graces thereof, externally the Sacraments: so that which is
bought by Christ, is conveyed unto us. God gives us good assurance, as here
the kinsman to Boaz. Good assurance is to be given and taken Genesis 23. 18. Ier.
32. 6, 7, 8.
in passing of right from one to another. It is honesty on the one side, and
wisdom on the other. And therefore herein let us be both honest and wise.
But now for plucking off the shoo, we must know that we find it two ways
used, religiously and ciuilly. Religiously, in reverence to God, as did Mosis
and Joshua in drawing near Exodus 3. 5. Josh. 5. 15.
unto him: which signifies the putting off of foul and carnal affections,
and to draw near with a pure heart unto God: and in witness of great
humility, as David did, acknowledging a 2. Sam. 15. 30.
sensible feeling of the heavy hand of God, and his afflicted estate then,
which by sin he had Esai. 20. 2.
justly brought upon himself. Ciuilly: this plucking or putting off the shoo
was first, for conueniencie to wash the feet* next, for confirmation of sale
of land* as here: and thirdly, for disgrace, when the kinsman would not
perform the part of a kinsman, according to the Law of Moses. Deuteronomy. 25. 9.
This is not here meant* for by the Law, the woman, after she had claimed
marriage of the kinsman privately, then also she complained to the Magistrate;
if the kinsman should refuse to do the office of a kinsma^, then is she to
pluck off his shoo, and spit in his face; which some expound, to spit before
his face. But here is a voluntary plucking off of his own shoo: and also the
former verse shows it to be a custom touching redeeming and changing; and
thereupon the kinsman uses it to resign his right, and to confirm it unto
Boaz: and not as an act of disgrace to himself, for not yielding to do the
kinsmans part, which was not claimed at his hands by Ruth either privately or
before authority: and therefore I take that this putting off the shoo, and that
spoken of in the Law of Moses, are not one and the same. Deuteronomy. 25.


Verse 9. And Boaz said unto the Elders, and unto all the people, Ye are
witnesses this day* that I have bought all that was Elimelechs, and all that
was Chilions and Mahlons, of the hand of Naomi.
BOaz here takes witness of that which is done: the witnesses are the Elders
and the people; the matter which they are to be witnesses of, is the sale of
all the land of Elimelech, Chilion and Mahlon; and the purchase thereof at
Naomi her hand; the Kinsman resigning his right to him, that he might buy it
to himself.

And Boaz said unto the Elders, and unto all the people.] Boaz esteems of the
Elders, as men in authority: but yet he neglects not the people, whom also
he calls upon to be witnesses also; this was his wisdom to proo^^e love of
all, as appears by their prayer made for him afterward, verse the 11. Here
in this verse and the rest following, we may see the happy success of that
which Boaz took in hand: for it was a good matter, for a good end, and done in
a right manner. Now, when a thing which is lawful, is taken in hand, and done
well, to a right end, there may be expected a good issue: as may be seen in
David's setting upon Goliath; it was an honorable attempt, the manner of his
proceeding was lawful, he waited for it, and had public authority to set
him forward, and the end was Gods glory, and safety of Israel: for God is with
such, and his power shall assist them, and his favor shall give them good
success, as he promises unto such. And therefore if we would prosper, let
us observe these things in our attempts: for if the end be good in thy
intendment, and the thing unlawful, the act is sinful; if the matter be
good, and the end sinister, this marreth the matter: but if the matter and end
be as they should be, yet if the manner be amiss, we may for this miscarry,
as we see in David's removing of the Arc. This 2. Sam. 6. 6. 1. Chro. 15. 13.
1. Cor. 11.
let us observe in coming to the Word and Sacrament.

Ye are witnesses this day.] Boaz says, that they are witnesses, for that
they saw and heard what was done at that time, in that assembly between him
and the kinsman; so as we see, that what men come for, and are called to see
and hear, that are they witnesses of: so says he, and they also confess it,
in verse the 11. By this may we know who to produce for fit witnesses in a
matter: such as personally are seers and hearers of that which they testify;
and as they be fit witnesses, so then are they sound and faithful, if they
will truly and without respect of person affirm that for truth, which they
know to be so: for it is one thing to be a fit witness, in respect of a man's
knowledge; and another thing to be a faithful witness, to speak truly what
he knows. Seeing what we see and hear, makes us fit to be produced for
witnesses, when occasion shall serve, let us in matters of moment, for
upholding of truth, justice, and peace, observe well, what we do see, and
hear, that we may be true and faithful witnesses, to maintain truth,
justice, and peace, without all partiality.

That I have bought all that was Elimelechs, and all that was Chilions and
Mahlons.] Here is showed whereof they were witnesses: one thing is here
specified, the other in the next verse. This here is of the purchase of land,
whereunto he calls them to be witnesses, for better confirmation of the
land, and the right thereof to himself: for Deuteronomy. 19. 15.
witnesses are for to establish a matter. So we see in Boaz a care to make
sure the estate. A wise man will seek to make sure that which he purchases,
as Abraham also did, and Jeremy, who had for confirmation Genesis 23. Ier. 32.
10, 11, 25.
of the land, first, the evidence drawn, then, the same sealed; thirdly, the
same done according to Law and custom: and lastly, before witnesses. Thus the
Scripture commends unto us a care herein from these examples: it is wisdom
and prudence to secure our estates in the best manner, so it be just and
honest: for so shall we prevent future contentions, which after might rise
about it. And if ever men had cause to look about them in any age, now they
have: for it may be said, as Jeremy said in his time, Take Ier. ^. 4.
ye heed every one of his Neighbor, and trust ye not in any brother: for
every brother will utterly supplant. Here may be noted Boaz his uprightness
also, who desires to have others to take notice of his doings, and to have
that public, which should be public: for an honest mind is desirous to be
public, where the matter requires it, as in buying and selling of land, in
the course of justice, in the Ministry of the Word, in solemnizing of
marriage, and such like. It argues an honest intention, not caring who sees
it; it will clear him of the slander or suspicion of fraud and circumuention.
And therefore in such cases labor to be public: for only they which do
evil, or intend it, hate the light: honest minds care not who sees them. It
is no good sign of a good intent, when buyers will mark in secret to buy
lands of others, of such as be young prodigals, or old Spendthrifts, or such
as must sell for need; for those hope to make a prey, and to get that for a
little, which is worth much: but such gain is unjust: and where fraud and
oppression is, there will 1. These. 4.
God be an Auenger. Lastly, note hence, that it is lawful for a rich man to
buy land of others, when it is offered, as here, when as also need is of some
parcel for a special use, as Abraham did buy a Genesis 23.
burying place, and Omri the hill of Samaria: and 1. King. 16. 24.
when it is for good uses, as for the maintenance Leuit. 27. 22.
of Gods public Worship, to build an Altar, as Jacob and David did: so now to
buy land for Genesis 33. 19. 2. Sam. 24.
maintenance of the Word, for Schools of learning, for Hospitals, and to set
poor on work. Again, he may buy, to help a poor man, that for need must
make sale to supply his want with money: but such a purchase must be made in
Leuit. 25. 14, 15, 16, 17, 25.
mercy, in great equity, and without oppression, in the fear of God. And
thirdly, when the salesman is his kinsman, then to buy, as a friend and
kinsman, to preserve the land in their name, but especially to do the kinsman
good, and that in two things: in giving to the utmost what it is worth, and in
being ready at all times to let him redeem it again, if ever he shall be
able. Thus may a rich-landed man buy land: but here he must take heed, first,
that he entice not others to make sale of their estates, which be not willing
thereto, as Ahab did, which wrought that mischief 1. King. 21. 2, 4.
which afterward insued. Secondly, that he make not a prey of a poor man,
not of any Leuit. 25. 14.
other, which stands in need to sell. Thirdly, that he buy not upon a greedy
desire, and an insatiable covetousness, to have all about him: for Esai. 5. 8,
9, 10.
the Prophet denounces a woe and judgments against such. Fourthly, that he
buy not in the days of a general calamity, but rather employ his money in
works of mercy: this was a virtue Nehem. 5. 16.
in Nehemiah. They therefore err, who think they may buy as much as they can,
if they have money, conceiving no other use thereof, but to buy and purchase
therewith only for themselves, to make themselves great. And this reproves
those, which are so greedy of buying land, as they run into the Usurers
books, and borrow what they may, to purchase, till the use of the money eat
up a good part of the land, and themselves at the last become beggars, and so
leave their children poor, their friends in bonds, and not a few lenders,
perhaps, in the lurch: such is the fruit of greedy covetousness. But, we may
say, as it is lawful to buy, so is it lawful to sell. True, of which before
somewhat is spoken already, yet here a little more of the same matter. A man
may sell, to sustain his poverty happening by Gods hand, as did the Egyptians;
to recover Genesis 47. 18, 20.
their liuelihood and health, as did the diseased Mark. 5. 25.
woman; to pay debts, as did the poor widow, 2. King. 4. 7.
to be free from bondage, and to save her life: for goods and lands are for our
use: and liberty, life, health, and credit are more to be esteemed then any
lands or possessions. A man may also sell to others for their need, as Ephron
sold to Abraham Genesis 23. and 33. 2. Sam. 24.
a field, Hamor to Jacob, and Araunah to David. And thirdly, for to relieve the
want of their brethren, as they did in the Primitive Church. In Act. 2. 45. and
4. 36, 37. and 5. 1.
such cases may men sell, but not to uphold prodigality, whoredom, idleness,
pride and vanity.

Of the hand of Naomi.] The right, it may seem, of all the lands of these
three, was in Naomi her hands, when they dyed childlesse. Thus the Law left her
well, as our Law does many widows now, and the love of kind husbands. But
that too many widows wax wanton, and do, in following their lust and
fantasy, overthrow themselves, and their estates too; they follow not this
holy and modest Matron, who sought no marriage for her self in her old age (as
some with us do, to their shame) but she had care for her beloved daughter in
law, Ruth. If she had such lands to sell, may some say, why lived she so
poorly, and suffered Ruth to go and gleane, and live upon the alms of Boaz?
Naomi had not the possession of these lands, being sold away before, but the
right first to redeem, if she had been able, which she put over to Boaz,
when the Kinsman refused to redeem them, and so to help Ruth in her marriage.

Verse 10. Moreover, Ruth the Moabitesse, the wife of Mahlon, have I purchased
to be^ my wife, to raise up the name of the dead upon his inheritance, that the
name of the dead be not cut off from among his brethren, and from the gate of
his place: ye are witnesses this day.
BOaz relates the second thing of which they were to be witnesses, which was
concerning his marriage: where note, first, with whom. Secondly, how obtained.
Thirdly, to what end, is double. And fourthly, the calling of them again to
witness it.

Moreover, Ruth the Moabitesse.] This was she whom he had promised to marry,
and whom he now went about to make sure to him, though she were a Moabitesse.
Here it may be demanded, whether persons of diverse religions may marry
together? Answ. If they be converted, they may: so Moses married Iethroes
daughter, Solomon Rahab, and Boaz Ruth here, and Sheshan married his 1. Chron.
2. 34. See Zipper. de Lege Mos. li. 4. cap. 18. Deuteronomy. 7. 3. Esd. 10. Nehem. 13.
2. Cor. 6. 14. Genesis 27.
daughter to his servant an Egyptian: but otherwise they may not; God forbad it
his people; such matches were condemned; the Yoke is unequal, as Saint Paul
speaks: it was reproved in Esau, and herein was he a grief unto his
parents. This is not to marry in the Lord; it is dangerous to the soul, if the
heart should be drawn from God, as was Salomons; and such matches has 1.
King. 11. 1. Nehe. 13. 26. Deuteronomy. 4. 7. 2. Chro. 19. 2. and 21. 6, 13.
God cursed, as we may see in Iehoshaphat matching his son with Ahabs
daughter; it had almost rooted out his whole House. Fathers and Councils do
condemn it, and therefore beware of making such matches.

The wife of Mahlon.] See for this before, Chap. 1. 4. and in this Chapter
verse the 5. where Ruth is called the wife of the dead, and here showed to be
Mahlon the Elder brother to Chilion the husband of Orpha, who by her apostasy
lost her blessing in Israel, which Ruth obtained by her constancy.

Have I purchased to be my wife.] We see hence, a good man will be at cost to
obtain a good wife: Abraham Genesis 24.
will send far a messenger to this purpose with Camels laden, and with
Jewels of silver and gold: Jacob will serve seven years and seven Hos. 12. 12.
Genesis 28. and 29.
too, but he will have Rachel; Boaz here will purchase a poor Ruth for her
virtues: for indeed a virtuous woman's price is above Rubies, she Prou. 31.
will do her husband good all his days, she is worthy therefore the getting,
and worthy to be honestly maintained: and yet we see most care least for such
an one, but they will labor and spare no cost to get one that is fair, though
beauty be deceitful vanity, and sometime such Pro. 31. 30.
a one not ouer-honest; or one rich, loving the portion better than the party,
marrying basely, and after living discon^e^^dly* or for birth and friends, when
the one lifts up the heart with pride, and the other becomes chargeable.
Beauty makes not blessed, but virtue; not goods, but grace; not natural
generation, but spiritual regeneration; not friends here, but the sweet
favor of God, which he only affords unto the virtuous. See further from
hence the love of Naomi to Ruth, who gives her right to Boaz to redeem the
land for advancement of Ruth: for loving parents will do much for the
preferment of their children. Naomi here lives unmarried, she does all she
may to get Ruth a good match, for her own sake, and in love to the dead, that
of her may be gotten one to bear the name of the dead, as Boaz speaks in the
words following. Which honest and loving care of Naomi checketh such widows,
as being well left by the dead, do, either of covetousness and carelessness
neglect to marry their children, living only for themselves; or else of a
wanton lust do cast themselves away upon such as will both undo them and
their children.

To raise up the name of the dead upon his inheritance.] Of these words
somewhat is spoken before on verse the 5. which I will not repeat. Here Boaz
alleges these words as a reason of his marrying this young woman; they are
the words of the Law in Deuteronomie, and so are the next Deuteronomy. 25. 6, 7.
following; to which Law Boaz had respect in thus matching with Ruth: from whom
we learn these things; First, that a wise man will prevent an offense, which
by others might be taken at him, when he considers the occasion thereof: for
Boaz tells them the true ends of his marrying thus, lest the Beholders and
Hearers should have censured ill of him, as of lechery, he being old, and she
young; or of folly, she being poor, and he rich; she base, and he honorable;
or of an inclining in her to idolatry, he being an Israelite, and she a
daughter of Moab, of that race, which enticed Israel to sin, and brought a
great judgment upon the Number. 25.
people. And this he did for the care and credit Eccles. 7. 1. Prou. 22. 1.
of his name, which is highly to be esteemed, and in love unto those there
gathered before him, in whom he would prevent the offense, which on their
behalf might be taken, though not on his part given. And thus must we learn
to do: 1. Cor. 10. 32. Mat. 18.
both to beware of offenses to all sorts; and also where we perceive that any
might take an offense, there wisely to prevent it in them, if we can, and not
be like such as give themselves to all licentious liberty to live as they
list, as almost every one does in these days, not caring for a good name of a
grave and sober Christian, or of adorning their holy profession, or of
displeasing the godly minds of others; but to live only like Libertines after
their own lusts, opening the mouths of the Adversaries to speak ill of the
Gospel of God. Secondly, from Boaz we may learn, that a godly man in his
marrying is guided by Gods Law, and has respect unto Gods good pleasure
therein: so had Abraham in matching his son Isaac, and Isaac in marrying of
his son Jacob: for such as be godly, make the Lords Will and Word their Rule
in all things, much more in a matter of this weight and consequence; they know
it to be Gods ordinance, and therefore will advise with God about it: yea, they
know that God has not left men herein to their liberty and lust, to marry as
they like best; but has limited them, and in his Word has taught them with
whom, how, and to what end to marry. And therefore in marrying we must be ruled
by the Lord, which will appear by these things: If we see what calling we
have to marry, before we enter into this troublesome estate, as Reason and
Religion should persuade us; If we see that we have a just cause to marry,
then to consider with whom God allows us to marry; If we seek out such a
one, as not only with whom we may marry lawfully, but also fitly: and
therefore to pray earnestly to God for such a one: for God makes fit matches;
Genesis 2.
and a virtuous woman is his gift. It is a happy thing to match fitly, and more
hard then to match lawfully. If lastly, we use marriage Genesis 2.
as God has appointed, for increase of posterity, and to avoid fornication,
the first end was before 1. Cor. 7.
the fall, the latter after; and withal for mutual society, help and
comfort, which one ought to have with another: which cannot be, except there
be fitness, grace, true love, humility and patience. But who are thus led by
the Lord in their marrying? Men seek wives now without any respect to Gods
will and pleasure: they follow the lusts of the eyes, the lusts of the flesh,
and pride of life. Thirdly, we may observe how the virtuous are to match so, as
they may raise up a seed of the righteous among Gods people: for the
preservation of the Church and Religion, as Boaz here had a care to raise up
the name of the dead upon his inheritance. But this cannot the married do,
except they themselves be true Lovers of goodness, and have a special care to
train up their children religiously, first, in knowledge of God, else are they
Atheists; of the true God, else Heathenish Idolaters; and of the true worship
of this God, else but will-worshippers: then to inform them in the Doctrine of
faith, without Heb. 4. 2. and 11. 6.
which grace they can never profit by the Word, nor ever please God; the sum
of which belief is set down in the Articles of our Creed. Next, to teach them
how to pray aright; which is the means to confer with God, to speak to him,
to obtain blessings from him, and without the practice whereof men are but as
beasts, and a mark of such as think there is no God. The Psalm. 14.
sum of our prayer, and the perfect rule of direction for matter, and manner,
and end, is set down by our Savior Christ. Lastly, to teach them obedience,
and to walk in Gods Commandments, without which, all knowledge and 1. John 2.
4. James 2.
faith is vain: the fumme of what we are to obey, is in the ten Commandments,
which children must be taught and instructed in. Here may be noted this also
from the words, that the dead do live again, as it were in their posterity,
which keep their inheritance: for children and the preservation of their
fathers inheritance, do keep alive the name of the dead. Therefore let
children have a care hereof, lest they destroy the name of the dead, as many
prodigal children do.

That the name of the dead be not cut off from among his brethren.] This is
another end, the other being the means to prevent this: for the raising up of
the name of the dead, preuenteth the cutting of it off from among the brethren.
Concerning the word brethren, hereby is meant others than very natural
brethren: for the people of God before and under the Law, as in the Primitive
Church under the Gospel, were wont to call one another brethren, of which I
have spoken before out of the third verse. For cutting off: this may be when
one will not marry to have children, or marrying, are not blessed of God with
children, or having children, are cut off by Gods just judgment, and so the
name perishes, 1. King. 14. 10. 2. King. 9. 8. Ier. 22. 30. and 36. 30. Deu.
29. 18. 19. Deuteronomy. 25. 6.
as it befell Jeroboam, Ahab, Iehoiakim, and as God does threaten the obstinate
sinner in Deuteronomie. Howsoever this cutting off be of posterity, we may
learn hence, that the decay of posterity, is a cutting off of a man's name
from among his brethren, as the words here and in the Law imply. And therefore
let people pray for this blessing of marriage, and thank God for their
posterity and fruit of the womb. Abraham most highly Genesis 15. 2. Psalm. 127. 3.
and 128. 3.
esteemed hereof; and the Psalmist makes it a reward to such as fear God:
yea, children are a crown to the old men; and it was a heavy curse upon
Iehoiakim to be made childlesse; and it was Ier. 36. 30. and 22. 30. Leuit. 20.
20.
threatened in the Law as a punishment for sin. They be much to blame then,
which do marry of purpose with such as they think are past bearing of
children, or with others apt for children, but yet in heart desire to have
none, or perhaps but one or two, rather to dally with, than to be troubled
with: but such children often prove a scourge to these parents, through their
foolish affection and too great indulgencie, because they have no more.

And from the gate of his place.] These words show that Elimelech was a man of
authority among them, an Elder and Judge in the Gate, which honor Boaz would
uphold in marrying with Ruth, that his name might not be cut off from the
place of authority, here understood by the Gate. Good men seek to uphold the
honor, and to preserve the dignity of one another, as the fifth Commandment
teaches: which being our duty, we must care to observe, both to the dead and
to the living. To the dead, as Boaz does here: now their honor we preserve,
when we speak of them with honor, as David did of Abner; when 2. Sam. 3.
we maintain their good name against calumnies and slanderous reports; and
when we imitate their virtues, and seek to uphold their posterity, especially
when they shall deserve well, and follow the steps of the dead in well-doing.
Thus shall we truly and with praise preserve their honor, though we do not
as the Papists dedicate days in honor of them, and make them Intercessours to
God for us, to the great dishonor of Christ. And as we should maintain the
honor of the dead, so should we the honor of the living, by acknowledging
their dignity, in age, place and gifts; by speaking thereof as is meet, without
envy or disdain, and by doing reverence in our outward behavior according to
their dignity. Here may also be noted, that men of place and authority may
soon leave their family in a low estate: for Elimelechs wife was poor Naomi,
and glad of the help of her daughter in laws gleanings. How poor was the
widow left, for whose relief the Prophet Elisha wrought 2. King. 4. 1. King.
18. 3.
a miracle, being, as is supposed by some, the wife of an honorable man,
Obadiah, Ahabs Steward, who did feed an hundred Prophets of God in Caves, in
the time of famine? This may fall out sometime by Gods hand in punishing the
fathers, that they can leave nothing to children; sometime for trial, as in
Jobs case, who was brought to great misery; and sometime a man's own doings may
bring him under the power of authority, which may justly deprive him of his
honor and estate, as it befell Abiathar in the days 1. King. 2. 26, 27.
of Solomon. Let not men be therefore proud of their parents present glory; an
alteration may soon come, as we see in Jeroboam and Baasha, in Ahab, Iehoram,
and Iezabel; in Haman also, Athaliah, and others: for Gods power, Princes
authority, Psalm. 75. 6, 7.
and a man's own way, may soon bring down his greatness, and also a ruin
upon his whole house.

Ye are witnesses.] That is, as if Boaz had said, not only of the sale and
purchase of the land, but also of this my marriage with this young woman, Ruth:
which here we see to be public, and in the Gate of the City, in a civil
Court and place of justice. Whence uote, First, that marriages are to be made
publicly before sufficient witnesses, as was Jacobs, this here, and that to
which our Savior John 2.
was bidden. This is fit for the honor of marriage, for the better
ratification thereof, and to prevent pretenses of marriages: for if marriages
were not public, but privately huddled up, some might pretend marriage, and
live together as man and wife in show, and yet be but lewd livers: so others
weary of one another, might say they were not married, and so unlawfully
separate themselves. Therefore let marriages be public, and in a public
place, as here it was, and as now by our Laws we be bound thereto; and avoid
private making of marriages, and in corners, for they are often made in haste,
and end unhappily. Secondly, that marriage in old time was only a civil
action: there was no need of a Minister to make it, it was lawfully and
sufficiently done, when it was made openly, by such as might marry, among the
people, as we may see in the marriage of Isaac, of Jacob, Esau, Samson. Which
confuteth the Papists that make marriage a Sacrament, as if marriage were only
lawful in the Church, and not among the very heathen: when yet from the
beginning it is common to all mankind, and allowed to all sorts. True it is,
that we do make such marriages lawful only when ministers make them, but
this is not with a papisticall opinion of a Sacrament, nor for that our Church
condemns marriages otherwise made in other nations, as unlawful, but the
Church and State have so ordained, for the greater reverence to Gods ordinance,
when his Ministers shall bless the same, in the public Congregation, with the
prayers of the Church; and when they shall teach them their duties, which do
marry: Thus gracing Gods holy ordinance by their praying and preaching, the one
for benediction, the other for instruction, and therefore worthily ordained,
and so of us to be religiously observed.

Verse 11. And all the people that were in the Gate, and the Elders said, We
are witnesses: The Lord make the woman that is come into thine house, like
Rachel and like Leah, which two did build the house of Israel: And do thou
worthily in Ephratah, and be famous in Bethlehem.
THe Assembly make answer unto Boaz: first, acknowledging themselves to be
witnesses; and then praying for a blessing upon the woman, and then upon him:
that she may be lovely and fruitful, and he to do so worthily, that he may
come to be renowned.

And all the people that were in the Gate, and the Elders said.] In so great a
company (no doubt) differing in nature and conditions, yet we see here how
they do all agree before Boaz to applaud him; may it be imagined, that none
had a by-thought to see an old man to marry a young woman, one rich and noble,
to take a poor and mean maiden? Yet before him all say well unto it: for
great men have to their faces great countenance and applause of the people, in
that they take in hand. The people will like all that David does: 2. Sam. 3. 36.
so will four hundred prophets allow of Ahabs purpose to go to battle
against the Syrians to recover Ramoth-Gilead: for people fear to offend, they
desire to please their betters. And therefore this should teach those of place
and wealth, upon whom many do depend, to take heed what they do: for they may
set others on to godliness, and they may move others unto wickedness; they
cannot fall themselves alone, but be like the great Dragon, with their tail
pulling Reave. 12.
many down with them. Let David set up Religion, multitudes will follow him to
the House of God. Let Jeroboam set up Idols and Devils, the Israelites will
worship them. Let Ahab worship Baal, all will do so; and let Iehu destroy him,
and they will help him to do it. People are like a shadow, following
authority; like wax also, which will take any print. In themselves are
nothing, but allow and disallow, as they see great Ones do before them. And
therefore let no men of place regard their applause, thinking that well done,
which the Vulgars approve or flattering dependants: for they will not speak as
the truth is, but to humor persons; not what they think to be right, but what
they know another likes of, and would have them say.

We are witnesses.] That is, we acknowledge our selves to be so as thou
say, we are witnesses, and will upon any lust occasion be ready to show
our selves so. Whence note, that what men are called to witness, being either
eye or ear witnesses thereof, or both, that should they be ready to testify,
as these here profess themselves to be, and as did the Israelites, in the
behalf of Samuel, before the Lords Anointed. A faithful witness, faith 1.
Sam. 12. 45.
Solomon, will not lie. And therefore let us in such a case be ready and
faithful witnesses, for the truth sake, for justice and peace sake among our
brethren. Many times ready and faithful witnesses prouent suites, and keep
peace, where otherwise there would be strife and contention. This reproves
those, which being able sufficiently to bear witness, yet for fear of
displeasing will not; these want fervent love of the truth, and offend against
the Commandments, which bind men to preserve the dignity, life, chastity,
goods and good name of our Neighbors. Now, if any of these be endangered, and
we by our witness might set them he, and will not, we are guilty thereof.
Again, this checketh, or rather condemns those that for favor will either
add or detract in their witnesse-bearing, so seeking to please man, and to
displease God, giving a deadly wound to their own consciences. Thirdly, such
as do speak only what is done and said, but yet to another end and meaning
than was intended, as Doeg dealt with Ahimelech, and the false witnesses
against Christ. These wicked persons sin against the Commandment, Exodus 20.
they trespass in one of the se(...) sins, which Prou. 6. 19. and 12. 22.
GOD heteth, and are an (...) to the LORD; who ordained in the Law a punishment
Deu. 19. 16, 19.
answerable to that, which by their false witness should have been inflicted
upon another. Such God threatens to punish: for they Prou. 19. 9.
offend greatly, they hinder the true course of justice, they deceive the
Judge, they hurt their Neighbor, and they abuse the holy Name of God, which
they call to witness falsely. Let men therefore take heed hereof.

The Lord make the woman.] Here they begin to pray for them, and all jointly
together. Of praying to God I have before spoken; here further may be observed,
First, that marriage is to be solemnized with prayer, and others are to pray
for the married parties: as these do here, and Bethuel, Genesis 24. 60.
Loban and her mother did for Rebecca and as our Church ordains now at
marriages; and that for these three causes: First for the holiness of the
action, being Gods holy ordinance, and an honorable estate institutes in
Paradise, and in the time of innocence, and to be therefore undertaken holily
and reverently with supplication and prayer unto God. Next, for the unholiness
of our persons in our selves, who by our corruption pollute the ordinance of
God, and as we be of Adams race, so have we our children conceived in sin,
and brought forth in iniquity, and beget such as be after our own likeness:
we have Genesis 5.
cause then to pray, and that seruently to God to bless and show mercy unto
us. And thirdly, for the troublesomenesse, of the estate of marriage, which may
cause us to pray heartily for it is full of temptations and trials. And
therefore let it move us to pray for them, after the example of the people here
and these Elders; and not be like such, as at the time of marriage only stand
staring and looking on, or through vain thoughts, do laugh and make a sport
thereof, or else spend their thoughts upon the delight of future vanities,
dancing, drinking, lewd songs and ribaldrie, more heathenish than
Christian-like. And if others are to pray for the married parties, then much
more should they pray for themselves: but alas, how far are most from it,
having their thoughts spent upon vanities? Secondly note, that in public
prayer the Assembly should be of one 2. Chron. 5. 13. Nehem. 8. Acts 1. 14.
and 2. 46. and 4. 24*
accord: as all these were here, both the Elders and people, as also
elsewhere. This is un(...), (...) the other confusion, when people are
otherwise exercised than in giving their assent to that which is publicly
performed.

That is come into thine house.] That is either already come, or that
certainly shall come, as if she were already in the house. This shows the
cohabitation of man and wise, and that they are 1. Pet. 3. 7. 1. Cor. 7. 5.
to dwell together, as Peter speaks and God placed the first man and wife
together in Paradise; and Abraham and Sarah lived together; so did Isaac and
Rebecca, Jacob and his wives; and so did (...). (...) 2. Sam. 6. 20. 1. Cor. 9.
5.
David with his. And this is fit and necessary for mutual comfort and society,
therefore the Apostles took their wives with them: and it is for this cause
altogether a fault, when any wilfully live separated from their wives, or any
unnecessarily without a calling, out of an idle leuity, will become Travelers
into other countries after they be married: when the Apostle warns them not
to defraud one another, except with consent, and that but for a time, and for
this end, to give themselves to fasting and prayer, and then come together
again, lest Satan tempt them to incontinencie.

Like Rachel and Leah.] Rachel is first named, because she was Jacobs wife
first by covenant, and his best beloved. Two wives he had: and it was and i^
lawful to have one wife after another: as Abraham had Keturch after Sarah: for
they that cannot abstain, it is better to marry, than to 1. Cor. 7. 9, 36.
burn; and when the one is departed, the other is free to marry again in the
Lord. And therefore it is an heretical opinion to forbid second marriages,
which the godly practiced, and the Apostle allows upon good reasons. But to
have two wives at once is not lawful: for it is contrary to the Lords first
institution of marriage, who joined together but one man and one woman: it is
Genesis 2.
against the Apostles Doctrine, who teaches every 1. Cor. 7.
man to have his own wife, and every woman her own husband. And we may read
of the first offenders, how one was out of the Church a blasphemous Lamech, and
the other in Ge^. 4. and 26. 34.
the Church a profane Esau. And albeit holy me^ had many wives, it was their
fault; God only being pleased to pass it over in his mercy: but allow
thereof he did not, as appears by the Malac. 2. 15.
Prophet Malachies words: And therefore are they not herein to be followed. It
is a blessed Law, which of late time has been enacted in this Nation, against
marrying two wives at once. In praying that Ruth might be first like Rachel,
who was amiable and lovely to Jacob; and then like Leah, who was fruitful;
they may seem to pray for two things of the Lord: the first was, that there
might be true love and good liking between Boaz and Ruth: for true love and
Ephe. 5. 25. Col. 3. 19. Genesis 24. 67. 1. Sam. 1. 5.
good liking ought to be between husband and wife specially: so commanded, so
practiced by Isaac, and by Elkanah, and other godly men; and it is that which
makes marriage comfortable, and the parties to live quietly together with
mutual contentment. Oh therefore let us pray for this love, and not only
pray, but endeavor to use the best means to procure and hold it! And to effect
this, the married persons are to take heed of strange affections, which might
alienate their minds one from another, then to behold rather the good qualities
and virtues of one another, than the infirmities, and things to be found fault
with: for love covers a multitude of offenses. Young persons before marriage
cannot see one another faults, and if they do see them, yet their love is
such as they can pass them by. Why, is not love in marriage as strong: nay,
stronger, seeing now two are made one? Isaac took Rebecca, and she was his
wife, and he then loved her: but now men love their Rebeccaes before marriage,
and then taking them for wives, they hate them, or not love them as before.
Moreover, the married parties are to be ready to perform mutual duties
cheerfully: yea, they are to strive which should be most loving in their
duties of love, and should also provoke one another thereto. Lastly, they
should often think of the solemn covenant made betwixt them, and by that and
other godly reasons press themselves, the husband himself, and the wife her
self, to their duties: yea, they should bewail their own, and one another
corruptions before God, and pray against them, and for Gods good graces to make
them duetifully loving one to another: thus doing shall they, by Cods blessing,
both procure and keep love. The second thing they prayed for, was the increase
of children, which was Genesis 1. 28. Zach. 8. 5. Genesis 9. 1.
the first blessing to man and woman, when God had made them; and the first and
principal end of marriage, and which God promised unto his people. In old time
it was held. a reproach for Luke 1. 25. 1. Sam. 1. 26. Leuit. 20. 20. Ier. 22.
30. Genesis 20. 18. 2. Sam. 6. 23. Psalm. 127. and 128.
women to be barraine; and the Lord did threaten it as a punishment: yea, and
inflicted it upon some. Surely it is the want of a blessing, as the Psalmist
teaches. And therefore let us pray for this blessing, as Abraham did, Isaac,
Manoah, and Hannah: from which these are far, who so marry, as they might be
without hope of children; such also as murmr at Gods blessing, through
unbelief, fearing not to have to maintain them, unlike Leah, who comforted
her self and praised Genesis 29. 32, 35.
God for children. Some would have some one or two, as it were to play withal,
or to inherit that they have, but many they cannot away with: but these are
most to be condemned, who use means and medicines to prevent children, or sin
in the sin of Onan, whom the Lord slew: for it is Genesis 38. 9.
murder before the Lord. Lastly, from the prayer made to the Lord for love
between them, and the increase of children, we may observe two other things:
First, that love between man and wife comes of God, and is his gift: for as
the Psamist says, it is God that makes them that are in one house, to be of
one mind: and therefore we ought to pray to him for it, and where it is, to
praise him heartily for the same. Then, that Children are the gift of God: as
may appear by many Scriptures, and by the prayers made to Psalm. 107. 38. and
127. and 128. Genesis 20. 18. and 29. 31. and 4. 1. and 29. 3^.
God for them. And therefore must we acknowledge them from God, as Eve did, and
Leah; if we want them, pray to him for them, as Hannah and others did, and
then care to bring them up well, and dedicate them to Gods service in some
lawful calling, in thankfulness for his so great a mercy.

Which two did build the house of Israel.] That is, God made them fruitful to
bring forth to Jacob a family, of whom came the Israelites the peculiar people
of God. They two are only mentioned, their maids are left out, but understood
in them: for that they were the wives gift unto Jacob to bear children for
them, when they bare not. They are said to build the house, when they brought
forth children; which Metaphore is used, because in Hebrew the name of a son
(...)
comes from a word which signifies to build: so as the bringing forth of
children, is as the building up of an house, by which a family is named for
the cohabitation of man and wife together: so we call our kindred and stock,
our house. Note here howsoever men have the name of the house, and by them
comes the posterity to be honorable, yet are women the builders up of the
house, and are the especial instruments of the increase of posterity: for when
men had no children, it is said, The women were barraine, and their wombs shut
up; and when men had any, it is said, The Lord gave the women to conceive. In
them therefore is either the increase or decay of posterity, yet both from God,
as he either pleases to bless or to deny the blessing. By Israel is meant
Jacob; touching which name of Israel, note these three things: the change of
the name Genesis 32. 28. and 35. 10.
by God himself, to comfort Jacob in great fear for his brothers coming
against him, and to show his more excellent estate then before: for the change
of a name, was to express a more happy condition, as may appear in a new name
Esai. 62. 2. Genesis 17. 5, 15.
promised to the Church, and given also to Abraham: and here before Jacobs name
was called Israel, it is said, The Lord blessed him, and gave him Genesis 32. 26,
27, 28.
the name, so as with the change of the name, was the change of his estate
foretold. The signification of this name, which is the next thing, is,
prevailing with God: whence we in Christ are Genesis 32. 28. Gal. 6.
called, The Israel of God: for that we prevail with him through Christ. The
third thing is the event according to the name, for he prevailed against Esau
by Gods mercy: for though he Genesis 33. 4. and 36. 6.
came against him with four hundred men, yet was his heart so mollified at the
sight of his brother, as he with tears embraced him for joy of their meeting;
and afterward when Jacob was in Canaan, Esau gave way unto him, and went into
Edom, and left him the Land. Thus God made good his Promise to Jacob, and made
him Israel, a true Preuailer: for God gives no signs to his children, but he
makes the same good in the effects, and the event answerable thereunto. So
much for the words: but in this that these Elders and people do pray for a
blessing of children, from the consideration of Gods former mercies to others;
and also do take their example from such as did build up Israel, Gods Church;
and not Babel; Bethel, and not Bethauen, we may learn; First, that Gods
blessings to others before us, are a motive to us that come after, to beg the
like blessings in the like case from God, reserving to himself his good
pleasure and will, which, in asking the common blessings of the world, is ever
the condition either to be expressed or understood: for Gods mercies showed to
others, are not only for their present good which receive them, but to show
how ready the Lord is to show the like mercy to others, if they themselves by
their sins hinder not the same. Therefore let us consider of Gods mercies to
others, to be thereby encouraged to ask the like of God for our selves in the
like case, with submission to Gods good will and pleasure. Secondly, that such
children are to be desired, as may be to build up Israel, that is, Gods
Church: such these pray for here. This is the most happy blessing of the
womb; thus shall the wife be as the pleasant Vine, and the children like
Olive branches, which a man may behold with comfort: for by them God is
glorified in his mercy, the Church increased, parents comforted, and children
made happy, sons being as Plants growing up, and Psalm. 144. 12.
the daughters as corner stones polished: these be the arrows which make the
man blessed that has his quiver full of them. But alas, how few Psalm. 127. 5.
desire such children? Most desire them for their name, for to possess their
inheritance after them, but not for the enlargement of Gods Church: for if so,
we would not marry for mere pleasure, as many do; or for the world, as not a
few do: but in the Lord with such as fear God, and so for Religion sake, and
have a care to bring up our children in the knowledge of God, and not in the
corrupt manners of the world, and fashions of the times, as most do unto
vanity; or but unto mere ciuility, as many do, which are well accounted of,
yet never bent their thoughts to true piety in the education of their children.

And do thou worthily in Ephrata.] This Ephata Genesis 35. 19. and 4^. 7.
is said to be Bethlehem; yet some distinguish them thus, as Ephratah to be
the country, and Bethlehem the City; the one signifying increase, the other
the house of bread; which being so, it notes that where the country is
fruitfall, and Ephrata increasing, there the towns and cities are Bethlehem,
storehouses, and houses of bread. So was it in Egypt in the days of Joseph:
for the increase of the field by Gods blessing in man's husbandry, makes
plenty of food in the places of our dwellings. Our meditation upon this should
make us thankful to God, who has for a long time made our country and
fields Ephrata, and our cities and towns Bethlehem. And let us take heed of
sin, which will cause the Lord to turn our plenty into scarcity, and make a
barren wilderness Psalm. 107. 33, 34.
of our fruitful Land, for the wickedness of us the Inhabitants which dwell in
it: for we do greatly provoke him to wrath, in abusing his blessings to
pride, idleness, gluttony, drunkenness, whoredom, and want of mercy to the
poor, as did wicked Sodom in her fullness. But let us take heed: for the Lord
will not ever strive with us thus in mercy; his justice cannot ever suffer it.

The words, do thou worthily, are read also thus, get thee riches; which may
well stand, and may be a fit request for Boaz and Ruth after they be married
and have increase of Children, teaching this, that marriage needs
maintenance, as we all know; for it is chargeable, and that in these respects,
in housekeeping, in bringing up of Children, and in being liable to rates and
seisments, according to the ability of the parties married. And therefore let
such as inte^d to marry, provide honestly aforehand for the maintenance of
marriage, as Abraham did for Isaac his son, and not Genesis 24.
rush, through unbridled lust, as many young lads and lasses, poor and
beggarly do in these days, to their own hurt, and the putting of a burden
upon their neighbors, when they cannot maintain their charge. If any have
improuidently married, and now do feel the smart thereof, let them lay their
hands to labor, and be the more painful to get, to uphold their family, as
Jacob Genesis 30.
did; and if they be godly and faithful in their labor and service, God will
bless them, as he did him, in their measure, and as he in his divine wisdom
shall think meet for them. If we take the words as they be in the translation,
do thou worthily, let us note that a man may be said to do worthily in a
double respect, either in respect of his person, when he does that which well
befits him, according to his birth, his education, his age, his place, and his
holy profession of a Christian, as men do expect from such a one; or in
respect of the deed done, when it is so done, as the virtues, which should
concur to the doing thereof, do lively appear, and show themselves in it.
To apply this to riches, in the getting, keeping, and employment of them, a man
does worthily, first, in the getting, when these virtues appear; industry,
painefully laboring, as Jacob did, equity, in using only lawful means
lawfully, avoiding all fraud, deceit, and unjust courses to get riches: then
piety, which is a holy depending upon God for a blessing upon the lawful
means, which he daily begges at his hands, not resting upon his own wit, or
paines-taking: and lastly, Heb. 13. 5.
contentation, not eagerly pursuing after riches, as most do, who fall into
temptation, and a snare, 1. Tim. 6. 9.
and into many foolish and noisome lusts, which drown men in destruction and
perdition. Secondly, in keeping, a man does worthily, when therein is showed
frugalitie, a virtuous sparing, and not a niggardly keeping in, unbefitting his
ability, his place and person; so also equity even in this, when he will not
withhold from another, that which is not his own to keep; for injustice may
be as well in keeping, as in getting; and thirdly piety, which is, when he
sets not his heart on riches, trusts not in them, nor is lifted up above his
brethren, but knovveth himself under God, in the midst of his wealth,
vvalking therefore religiously and humbly, this man so doing, does vvorthily.
Thirdly, in employing or laying out, he does worthily, when he is liberal to
good uses, for the good of Gods Church, as was David, and his Princes; and
Solomon for the Temple; the Israelites before for the Tabernacle; and Hezechias
and the people for the Priests and Levites: 2. Chro. 31. 4, 5, 6, 8.
so for the Commonwealth, and place of his dwelling, and withal to lay out
for his own family, to maintain himself, wife and children, as befitteth his
place and after his ability; so to take care, and freely to give to nourish his
whole family with food sufficient, not neglecting the poor, but to be ready to
lend to some, and to give to other some, as their needful estates shall
require. Thus shall he by liberality and charity do worthily in laying out.

And be famous.] This well follows after the other: They pray that he may
do worthily, and then become famous. It is a duty to pray one for another,
especially for men of authority, that they Psalm. 20. 1. King. 1. 37.
may do worthily, and become renowned thereby: for their greater authority,
and because their example of well-doing and fame therein will be a great means
to persuade others to well-doing, or else a bridle to curb them for fear of
offending: Let us then pray for men in place to do worthily, and to become
thereby renowned, to provoke others to follow them, and that virtue may be
countenanced by them, as it will be by those, which be famous for virtue. Note
again, that to do worthily, procures fame, and renown, and good report: so
David became famous, and Solomon by his 2. Sam. 8. 13. 1. King. 10. 1 2. Chron.
9. 5. Heb. 11. 2.
wisdom and acts, and likewise others obtained good report; and the fame of
our Savior was spread abroad by his Life, Doctrine, and miracles; and even Ruth
a poor woman and stranger, by Chap. 3. 11.
her virtues was made known in Bethlehem. And this comes to pass by the
excellency of well-doing in the minds of such as love it themselves, who
cannot but in heart approve, and in tongue extol it, and set forth the due
praises of such as do worthily. The Lord also puts this blessing upon
well-doing, that the Doers shall receive honor and praise of men: so got David
praises even above Saul, and was honored 1. Sam. 18. 7.
by the commendations of his fact, before the King. Therefore when we see men
to do worthily, let us set out their praises: for their encouragement, and to
prick forward others to welldoing, and not be like the envious Scribes and
Pharisees seeking to diminish the honor of Christ; nor like Saul, who sought
the life of David; and the Ephraimites, the destruction of Iud. 11. and 12.
Iephte, for their worthy deeds: such a black poison is envy, as it
bedarkeneth the name of welldoers, as much as it can, rather than to make it
famous.

In Bethlehem.] Here is the place where they desire to have him famous, where
he was brought up, where he had his means to live, and place of authority;
teaching hereby, that it is there chiefly required for a man to do worthily,
where he owes that duty: as where he has been brought up, where he has his
estate to live by, and where God has seated him. So did our Savior worthily
Luke 4. 16, 17, 18.
in Nazareth, Iephte among the Gileadites: for their good and the welfare of
all Israel, if Ephraim had so taken it. This is a memorandum to Ministers,
there to do worthily, where God places them, and were they have their living,
and not be like some that can do worthily abroad sometimes, but at home will
take little or no pains to teach their people. This also should put Gentlemen
and men of place, in mind to do worthily in the country in good housekeeping
among their Tenants, from whence they have their revenues; and not get up to
Cities, there to keep a private table, to increase their estate, or else to
uphold their pride. Neither yet is it enough for men to dwell in the country,
as diverse do, but do not worthily, their Neighbors being never a whit the
better for them, but are either so niggardly, as they benefit none, living
only to themselves, or else so prodigal, as they rob their Tenants with
borrowing, and diverse other ways, both sorts ouercharging them.

Verse 12. And let thy house be like the house of Pharez (whom Tamar bare unto
Judah) of the seed, which the Lord shall give thee, of this young woman.
THese words be the third part of their prayer. They did first pray for the
woman, as the builder of the house, as before it is said of Rachel and Leah.
Next, for the man, because he is the glory of the house; now for the
posterity, because they do continue it. Here note what is prayed for, for an
honorable posterity, set out by the house of Pharez, whose father and mother
are mentioned; then, of whom it must come, and by whose gift and goodness.

And let thy house.] That is, thy children and posterity: so as they praying
before for the parents, and now for the children, do teach this, that they
which truly wish well in love to the parents, 1. Ioh. 5. 1.
cannot but be well-minded to their children and posterity: so did David to
Mephibosheth the son of 2. Sa^. 19. and 10.
Jonathan, to Chimham the son of Barzillai, and to Hanun the son of the
King of Ammon: for how can we love the fountain, and not the stream? the
root, and not that which springs from it? Let us try hereby true love to
parents, by the love we bear to their children.

Be like the house of Pharez.] Pharez signifies a breach, because in the womb
he strove for the birthright, and brake out before his brother Zarah, who had
put out his hand to come first forth, to be the first borne, but plucked back
his hand again. Zarah may set out the Jews, who were the first of Gods
people, but by apostasy lost their birthright; Pharez may set out the
Gentiles, who made a breach upon them, and got the birthright and the honor,
to be called now the people of God. There be two sorts of Pharez, one
heavenly, which strive for to be of the first borne of God: this is a blessed
striving which few contend for. There is another earthly, when brethren contend
for to get the elder brothers inheritance from him, and do labor to get him
disinherited: the neglect of the former, is unholiness; and the pursuing of
the latter, is too great worldliness. These words, To be like the house of
Pharez, give us to know, that he was greatly blessed and honorable in his
posterity, seeing they desire that Boaz house might be like his. Now men wish
not such a thing to great persons, but where there is an estate answerable to
their greatness, and may well befit them, and be held a blessing unto them:
and yet this Pharez was base gotten, and that in incest also. Whence we may
see, that basely begotten may become very honorable, so as it may be happy
with others to be blessed like them for worldly respects. Thus also was Iephte
honorable, a man of valor, made Iud. 11.
the head over all the inhabitants of Gilead, and yet the son of an Harlot.
Thus it pleases God to show mercy on whom he will show mercy: which may
comfort such as be base borne, that if they bewail their birth, and repent and
believe, the Lord will have mercy likewise on them, and register them in the
beadroll of the Saints, as Iephtah is. Again, this may teach from these Elders
Heb. 11.
and people, that they are to be esteemed honorable, whom God does make
honorable; for these speak highly of Pharez for all his birth; and the
Gileadites thought worthily of Iephoah, and did him honor: yea, the holy Ghost
has vouchsafed to honor him, and to put him among the faithful, though he
was by birth a bastard. They therefore do amiss, who despise men for their
birth, when otherwise they be worthily qualified, and better conditioned, then
those perhaps which be more lawfully begotten. True it is, that a Bastard was
not to come into the congregation for ten generations, but God can dispense
with his Law, and where he so does, let us do them honor, and not debase whom
the Lord exalts.

Whom Tamar bare unto Judah.] Judah was one of Jacobs sons, and one of the
twelve Patriarks, and begot this Pharez on this woman Tamar, who was his
daughter in law: the history is in Genesis 38. Whence we may note briefly, That
great were the falls of many of the holy Patriarks: as nine of them in the
conspiracy against innocent taseph, Ge^. 37. 2, 3, 11.
whose death they intended, because he told his father their ill report; for
that also Jacob loved him more then all of them, and because he told them his
dream, for which they the more eniued him, and were the more bent against him.
But more particularly Ruben fell into that foul sin, to lie with his Fathers
Concubine: Simeon and Leur, brethren in evil, who under color of religion
sought to revenge themselves, and abused the seal of Gods covenant to shead
much blood* and Judah here commits incest with Tamar. Thus they we see, that
men (...) of godly parents, and pillars of the Church may fal^^ery fearfully,
as may also appear besides these in Aaron, in Samson, Ahtathar, David,
Sat^^^^, and many others. Such i^ the strength of corruption when we are left
of God; and therefore are we to fear and to look to our standing; watch and
pray continually, lest we fall into temptation (...)
and be overcome And also we may obiserue how Jesus Christ was con^ei^ed to
come of such as were tainted with foul vices, as of men stained and polluted,
with incest, as Judah; with adultery, and murder, as David; with idolatry, as
(...); with witchcarft and sorce^^* as Man (...) so of women defiled, as of
this Tamar, of R^h^^ the harlot, and of Bathsheba, which sinned in adultery
with David to show hereby, that be our blessed Savior came into the world to
save sinners; which 1. Tim. 1. 15.
is for the comfort of the penitent. And here also such as be godly, may learn
not to be discouraged, not to be daunted, neither to account worse of
themselves, because they have had of their kindred foully tainted with vices. We
see here the innocent Lamb of God to have been of such, and yet he the Holy
one of Israel. Let such then put themselves to silence, who seek to disgrace
the well deserving, by the stain of Ancestors or some of their kindred. By
thus doing, men should offer wrong to Jesus Christ, which every Saint of God is
very far from: and who is he that should not be disgraced, if this might
serve to disgrace a man? Note farther, how these words come in by a
parenthesis: whether uttered by the Elders and people, or else put in by the
Penman of the holy Ghost, it is not material: but here we see, how God would
have a remembrance of the birth of Pharez, with his honor and outward
blessings from God: for that it is good in our great glory and outward
prosperity, to be put in mind whence we be. Thus God put David in remembrance
2. Sam. 7. 8.
and Ierob^^^: for so such persons shall have cause to praise God for his
mercies, and be kept humble, and not forget themselves, as men commonly do in
their peace and prosperity. Let such then as be raised up from a low estate,
remember whence they are, and be willing to hear thereof from others: for
Gods mercy shall be the more known, admired, and glorified, whose praise we
must seek with the very utter contempt of our selves, if so the case shall
require. How great a sign of pride is it then, and of a will to obscure Gods
mercies, when men will chafe in themselves against such as shall mention their
mean or base birth? But if men may not forget whence they be in their worldly
advancement; then may we not forget our natural birth in our spiritual
exaltation, when we be made the children of God, Kings and Priests to him, of
children of wrath, and bond-slaues to Satan. If the remembrance of the other
put us in mind of Gods mercy, much more this: for between them is no
comparison. Lastly note, that it is said, that Tamar bare Pharez unto Judah.
Mothers bring forth children to the fathers of the children: so is it said that
Leah bare sons to Jacob: Genesis 29. 34.
for the father is to bear the name, and take the child into his care and
tuition, whether borne in wedlock or otherwise. Let fathers therefore take
care of such as they beget: for to them has the mothers brought them out.

Of the seed which the Lord shall give thee of this young woman.] Hence may be
observed, that an old man may marry a young woman: as here Boaz did Ruth, and
Joseph did the Virgin Mary: but not for wantonness, but for issue and
posterity, as Boaz does: allow therefore of such marriages in such a case: but
beware of an old man lecherous, who is one that God hates; so an old woman
wantonly affected, to marry with a young man. Secondly, that Children are Gods
gift: of Genesis 4^. ^.
which at large before. Which must move us to thank God for them, and to
train them up to his service, and to acknowledge them his gracious gift, as
Jacob did. Thirdly, that true prayer is not Genesis 33. 5.
without faith: for it proceeds from it, as the Apostle teaches; and here
the words plainly Romans 10. 14.
imply, that these Elders and people were persuaded, that God would give to
Boaz children of Ruth: for they said, Which the Lord shall give thee;] As
taking it for granted, that he would give him children; which they were
persuaded unto from the young years of Ruth, then from the obedience of Boaz,
who married Ruth only to raise up children to the dead, that his name might
not perish, according to the Law of God, which he Deuteronomy. 25.
herein chiefly respected: and thirdly, because this was the Line and Stock,
out of which the Messiah should come, according to Jacobs prophecy; and
therefore they knew that of these should come issue to fulfill the prophecy.
In praying, let us also with these believe, so are we Iam. 1. 6.
commanded; and if we do believe, we shall obtain what we ask, if the Lord
think it needful Mat. 21. 22.
for us: for the prayer of faith avails much, Iam. 5. 15, 16, 17.
if it be fervent. Fourthly and lastly, hence observe, that Prayer is a means
to make an honorable house, and to continue it in the following posterity.
Therefore David used prayer in this case, as these 2. Sam. 7. 25.
do here for Boaz house in his posterity; and so did Abraham pray for Ishmael
to continue in the Genesis 17. 20.
Lords sight, who promised him mercy, and an honorable issue to many
generations from him. Let us use this means to uphold and continue our house:
I have spoken of many good means before, let this be added to them. But men
in Out of verse ^.
their worldly wisdom seek by other means without prayer, to continue their
posterity in honor, as by these: First, by great purchases for their children.
But does not Solomon tell th(...) Prou. 27. 24.
that riches are not for ever? And we find it true by experience. Secondly, by
building stately houses, and calling them by their own names, thinking that
their houses shall continue for ever, and their dwelling places to all
generations. But does not the Psalmist tell them that this their Psalm. 49. 13.
way is their folly? Is not the Tower of Babel thrown down? And, became not
that their Genesis 11. 4, 8.
confusion, by which they sought a name and to continue together? Thirdly, by
intailing of lands upon the heirs male, from one to another for many
generations. But could there be a surer intaile than the Kingdom of Israel to
David, which yet was almost quite cut off by Salomons idolatry, so as Rehoboam
lost ten Tribes in his days? Intaile it as sure as they can, yet the iniquity
of the children will make it to be cut off. God likes not, that men should by
their devices tie his blessings to whom they list, for vainglory sake, and to
keep up a name. And do not we see Lawyers, which teach parents to intaile,
how they can teach their children to vntaile it again? Fourthly, by matching
with great houses, and by this they think their house shall stand. But did not
Ahab by marrying with Iezabel, the King of Zidons daughter, root out his whole
posterity? And did not Iehosaphat by marrying his son to Ahabs daughter, do
almost the like? Fifthly and lastly, by procuring great places of honor in the
Commonwealth: oh then they think they are surely founded! But does not
Solomon tell Prou. 27. 24.
them, that the Crown endures not to every generation? but let these consider
of Haman, and of his high place, and yet how suddenly he came to a fearful
end; and with this let them not forget the Treasurer (...), who graued, as Esa.
22. 16, 17, 21.
it were, his habitation in a Rock^ by policy, and by making strong sides for
himself. But does not Esaias say, That the Lord would lead him into captivity,
and violently turn him, and toss him as a Ball, and drive him from his
station, and bestow his place upon another? And therefore without the Lord all
these means are weak to uphold a house; yea, such a house, sin will
vnder-myne and cause to fall. Let none therefore rest on these weak props, but
pray unto the Lord for his blessing, which makes strong the habitation of the
righteous.

Verse 13. So Boaz took Ruth, and she was his wife: And when he went in unto
her, the Lord gave her conception, and she bare a son.
HEre is the full accomplishment of the marriage, the holy liberty thereof, and
the blessing of God upon the same: both for conception, and bringing forth a
son.

So Boaz took Ruth.] Where he took her, it is not mentioned; whether after
this Assembly was dismissed or before, is not certain: some think she stayed
with Naomi, expecting the success, as Naomi advised in Chap. 3. verse 18. and
so from thence did take her. It may be she was, while this Assembly was
together (after Boaz had publicly declared his mind, and bought the land and
her at the hands of the Kinsman) brought in thither, and so he there did
solemnly take her: for in the end of the former verse it is said, Of the seed
which the Lord shall give thee of this young woman,] as implying her then there
present. And He took her,] implies the marriage, as appears Genesis 24. 67. 1.
Sam. 25. 43. Judge. 14. 8. Genesis 34. 2.
elsewhere in other places. And the next words in the Text show, that it was
not like Sichems taking of Dinah, to deflowre her, but to make her his wife by
lawful wedlock, which was ever public, and not done privately in corners. So
then the meaning of the words is, that Boaz did marry Ruth, and so was his
wife; and with us such as do marry, do take either other by the hand, and do
by word of mouth say, that the one does take the other to live together as man
and wife. And it may be, that the word taking is put for marrying, to note the
free consent of mind and heart; then the right and interest which the one has
in the other: and thirdly, the care and protection of the husband, which he
takes of his wife, and the woman's acknowledgement to have betaken herself
unto the man, as her head and husband. This Boaz taking and marrying of Ruth,
shows, how a noble man (for 1. Chron. 2. 10.
his father was the Prince of Judah) may marry with a mean poor woman, so
she be virtuous: as his father did Rahab before, and Assuerus did Ester, and
no disparagement: though Boaz had further reason to lead him thereto, as his
own words Verse 10.
before declare. Again, we see, how an Israelite might marry with a woman a
stranger, so she were a Convert. And lastly, that a good man will keep his
honest word: for what he had privately Chap. 3. 11, 13.
promised, he here now makes good to the utmost: of which two last points I
have spoken before.

And she was his wife.] That is, by his taking and marrying of her. So we see,
that lawful marriage Genesis 24. 67.
is that which makes man and woman husband and wife. So is it said of Rebecca,
That Isaac took Judge. 14. 8, 15.
her, and she was his wife; and in like case of the woman of Timnah, which
Samson did marry. It is not living or lying together, as lewd persons may do,
nor yet mutual affection, but the entering in Gods holy Ordinance, which
makes the woman the wife. Therefore to live honestly, and to make a woman thy
wife, marry her lawfully. Now in this that the marriage is so shortly
described, without mentioning of any such feasting and merriments, as is often
with us, with too much riot and excess; it may here be demanded, Whether it
be lawful to make feasts at marriages, and then to be merry? Answ. It is
lawful to be merry in sobriety, to rejoice and sing, so it be with grace in
our hearts, as the Apostle Ephe. 5. 19.
speaks. And we may make feasts, as Laban did Genesis 29. 22. Judge. 14. 10.
at Jacobs marriage, and as Samson did at his, as the custom was among the
Philistims, which he observed: yea, our Savior was at a feast when some were
married, and did by divine power John 2. Mat. 22. 2. and 25.
supply their want of wine; and by the Parable it seems to be an usual thing
to feast, and to have solemnities observed besides at marriages. Here only
beware of wantonness, riot, and excess, and then may they eat, and drink,
and rejoice their hearts.

And when he went in unto her.] This is expounded in another place, to go to
her into the Iud. 15. 1. Joel 2. 16.
chamber: for Brides had a private chamber, into which the bridegroom entered on
the marriage day: but here is modestly employed the act of marriage, set out
also in Scripture by other terms, as of knowing, lying with one, giving due
benevolence; never speaking hereof, but by a periphrasis and circumlocution:
and therefore are we hereby taught, that when necessity enforces to speak of
that, which in proper speech is not comely to utter, it is to be expressed so,
as chaste ears may not be offended. This the holy Ghost in thus setting down
this thing in these modest terms teaches; And it serves to reprove such as
abuse their tongues to wantonness, and lascivious and immodest terms, to
make others merry, and to be held pleasant companions: but such fools, as
Solomon calls them, make a sport of sin: for these offend against the
Commandment and charge Ephe. 4. 29. Col. 3. 8. Ephe. 5. 3. 1. Cor. 15. 33.
given by the Apostle: they corrupt good manners, by their ill words; they
trespass against the seventh Commandment, and do contrary to that which the
Apostle teaches and exhorts unto for the government of the tongue both in
Col. 4. 8. Ephe. 4. 29. and 5. 19.
speaking and singing; yea, these do grieve, not as they think, only men,
such as they judge ouerprecise, because they will not run with them into the
like excess of riot, but the blessed Spirit Ephe. 4. 30.
of God. And let these know, that if men must give an account unto God for
every idle word, then surely for such filthy communication and bawdy songs,
which fleshly spirits made themselves merry withal, which godly men have
condemned, calling such a speech, The chariot of adultery, because it brings
many to such a lewd practice. Heathen by laws have forbidden it, Athenian law:
apud S^obaeum.
for that it polluteth the mind, fills it with wickedness, and makes such
impudent; and also Au. Gell.
did punish the same, as is reported of the Romans, that so the dignity of the
Laws and Discipline among them might remain, as one says, inviolable. What a
shame and impudency is it then in such as would be called Christians, and yet
cannot by Reason nor Religion of Christ, be restrained from such petulancy and
wantonness? Note again here, how this is spoken after marriage, and not
before; to teach, that such as be married, may lawfully company together: and
that Genesis 29. 21.
by warrant from God, who said after he had made man, and joined Adam and Eve
in marriage, Increase and multiply: and the Apostle 1. Cor. 7. 3, 5.
teaches, that then neither of them has power over their own body, and
hereof makes a double use, to render due benevolence, and not to defraud one
another. Then they are to be reproved, which before marriage company one with
another, as incontinent and violently lustful persons do, and such as being
married do defraud one another. And here this condemns the Church of Rome,
which allows man and wife, upon the vow of chastity (forsooth) to live
asunder one from another, contrary to the Apostles Doctrine and exhortation. 1.
Cor. 7. 5.


The Lord gave her conception.] Hence it is evident, that the gift of
conception is from the Lord: and this is true not only in such as be
altogether barren, as was Sarah, Rebecca, Hannah, the Shunamite, and Elizabeth:
but in such as be at the Job 10. 8, 10, 11.
first fruitful; this also is from his gift. And therefore is it to be
ascribed to him, he is to be thanked for it; we are not to think, as Rachel
did, that a husband can give children: it is no strength of body, nor good
complexion that can make fruitful, but the blessing of God. And we may
further learn here, that the Lord allows of the honest act of marriage: for
he commands due 1. Cor 7. Heb. 13. 4.
benevolence: he calls the marriage bed undefiled, he blesses it, and
gives the gift of conception: he allowed thereof before the fall, and Genesis 1.
1. Cor. 7. 2.
has in mercy ordained it as a remedy against sin. This therefore confuteth
such as have judged the companying together of man and wife to be a sinful
act, absurdly and profanely abusing this place for it, Those that live in the
flesh, cannot please God: as if that which God himself has allowed, and most
holy men of God have done, should be now that, which should debar them of
Gods favor: when yet these popish harlotries can dispense with Gods Law, and
keep their whores; and yet not live in the flesh, but be holy men. But let
them know, that whoremongers and adulterers God Heb. 13.
will judge: when marriage is honorable, and the bed undefiled, and the
liberty to be used and allowed for procreation of children, to avoid
fornication, with hearty thanks unto God for his ordinance. Here note
farther the difference which the Scripture makes between conception of a
woman a wife, and of another. In copulation out of marriage, it is said of a
woman, that she conceived, as Thamar by Judah, Hagar by Genesis 38. 18. and 16.
4. 2. Sam. 11. 5.
Abraham, and Bathsheba by David: but never as here, that the Lord gave her to
conceive: for the other is by his common blessing, as among bruit beasts, but
this by his favorable approbation and gracious blessing, as Jacob said of his
children unto Esau. Genesis 33. 5.


And she bare a son.] After the gift of conception, follows childbirth,
not forthwith, but in Genesis 18. 10.
due time of life, which is sometime at the nynth month, but commonly at the
tenth. It was not enough that she should conceive, and after have an abortiue
birth, but that God in mercy should preserve the child alive in the mothers
womb to be timely borne: for as not to conceive, but to be barren, was a
punishment, so conceiving, and to bring forth an untimely birth, is in the same
nature. The Lord therefore here shows his goodness, not only in giving
conception, but a happy deliverance unto Ruth, and a timely birth; so the Lord
follows his with his mercies. Now in that it is said to be a son, and not a
daughter, it is to note the greater blessing. For it is a greater blessing to
have a son, then a daughter. And therefore we do find, when God would make
the barren to bear, and such as had begged that blessing at his hands, he gave
them sons, as we may see in Sarah, Rebecca, Rachel, Hannah, Elizabeth and in
others. Because the son is the vpholder of the name of the family, he is in
nature the more worthy; for the woman was made for man, and not man for the
woman, as the Apostle teaches; and the man is a more fitter instrument for the
good of the Church or Commonweal, albeit sometime the Lord has done
wonderously by women. Besides these reasons, the males among the Israelites
were a greater blessing; for that the man-child, and the continuance of the
line in Judah, gave them hope of the Messiah, which they looked for; and the
male child bare upon him the seal of the covenant of God, which was
circumcision, that God would be their God, and of their seed after them.
Therefore praise God for this blessing and birth, for both, but more specially
for this, as beholding therein the Lords mercy to keep thy name upon the
earth, among thy brethren, and Saints of God. Lastly, note the effectual power
of the prayer which they made, verse. 11. The Lord heard them; for here we see
Ruth before barren, is now become fruitful. So as we hereby do learn, That
the hearty and faithful prayer of the godly is never in vain: for the people
and Elders desired that Ruth should be fruitful, and she was so, and also that
Boaz posterity might be honorable and renowned, and so it was, as we may see in
the 21. and 22. verses of this chapter. For an effectual prayer of righteous
men avails much, as James says, Iam. 5. 16, 17.
and proves by an instance of the prayer of Eliah, and as may be seen in the
prayer of Moses, 2. Chro. 14. 11. 12, and 20. 6-14, 15 -- and 32. 20.
of Asa, Iehosaphat, Esai, and Hezechiah, and of many more: which is to
encourage us to the exercise of prayer in faith and feruency of spirit. If any
think, that those aforementioned were extraordinary men, and that therefore we
poor and miserable persons, in comparison of them, cannot look to have our
prayers so effectual with God; I answer, first, that James takes away this
objection and fear of acceptance with God; for he says, that Eliah was a man
subject to the like passions as we are, yet he prayed and was heard.
Secondly, that we have assistance of God his Spirit, teaching us to pray with
groans which cannot be expressed; because we know not how to pray as we
ought: and thirdly, that Christ prays for us, and in him we offer up our
supplications, and so shall be heard. This lesson 1. Sam. 12. Romans 15. 30. 2.
Cor. 1. 11. Ephesians. 6. 18. Col. 4. 3. 1. These. 5. 25. Philem. 22. Phil. 1. 19.
Heb. 13. 18, 19.
also teaches us to esteem greatly of the prayers of the godly, seeing they
be so effectual, and desire them to pray for us, as the Israelites did Samuel,
and S. Paul the faithful and Saints of God, as may appear in almost every of
his Epistles; so highly did he account of their prayers for him.

Verse 14. And the women said unto Naomi, Blessed be the Lord, which has not
left thee this day without a kinsman, that his name may be famous in Israel.
PRaise and thanksgiving unto God at the birth of the child. The parties
rejoicing were the women, their joy was uttered to Naomi, the manner was holy
and religious praising God; the matter thereof, or the moving cause was, that
God had not left her without a kinsman, and the hopeful end thereof, that his
name may be famous in Israel.

And the women said.] That is, such godly women as were at the childbirth,
these rejoiced In Naomies behalf. For it is the duty of one to rejoice in the
welfare of another, when God best(...) his blessings upon them. As these do
here, the neighbors Luke 1. 58. Exodus 18. 9. Job. 42. 11.
of Elizabeth, Iethr^ at the prosperity of Israel, and the friends of Job at
his recovery: This we are commanded to do, to rejoice with those Romans 12. 15.
1. Cor. 12. 26. Matthew. 22. 39.
that do rejoice: the godly are members one of another, and therefore must
needs have a fellow feeling: it is a fruit of love and charity, and that we
love our neighbors as our selves, which if we do, we will rejoice in their
welfare, as we do in our own. But let this be with them in lawful things;
for charity rejoices not in iniquity: let us rejoice with them in their happy
and blessed 1. Cor. 13.
welfare, whether temporal as former examples show, or spiritual, as Saint
Paul rejoiced in the behalf of the Philippians and Colossians, and Phil. 1. 3,
4. Col. 1. 3. 12. 2. Ioh. Verse 4.
Saint John in the graces of the elect Lady and her children. This reprooueth
three sorts, first, such as envy the prosperity of others, as Sanballats Nehe.
2. 10. Exodus 1.
and Tobies, like Egyptians, which cannot endure to see others prosper by them.
These are void of charity which is without envy: and they 1. Cor. 13. 4.
are like the devil, that being cast from Heaven, could not endure to see man
in Paradise; or like devilish men, Cain, Saul, and the Scribes and Pharisees,
the enemies of Christ. Secondly, such as rejoice with their friends in their
prosperity, though they get up by unjust means, and by unlawful practices
uphold themselves: this is not 1. Cor. 13. 6.
true love; for here is more cause of mourning then of rejoicing; for what joy
can it be to a godly heart, to see his friend rich and in glory, by usury,
bribery, oppression, deceit and fraud, which came for plagues upon him from
Heaven, and are the high way to hell and damnation? But outward prosperity so
dazeleth the eyes, and deludeth the heart, as the plagues of the soul, and
vengeance due for the same, they either see not, or believe not; therefore they
rejoice like worldlings with such as themselves. The third fort are they, which
cannot rejoice with others in their spiritual welfare, that men are become
godly, as Saint Paul and John did, but rather despise them for it, because they
themselves savor not of the things of God, they love darkness rather then
the light. If they do rejoice herein, it is rather for the good, which
conversion brings in worldly respects, then of religion it self, as that
hereby they leave to be vnthristie, and do care to live in the world, and such
like, which is no rejoicing at their heavenly graces, but for vvorldly profit,
and for such things as Religion makes good in regard of the outvvard things of
this life; as profit, good report in a common acception, civil carriage, and
so forth. This is a worldly, and not a spiritual rejoicing with-those that
truly rejoice in the Spirit.

Unto Naomi.] And why to her more then to Ruth? Because she was the principal
instrument for the effecting of the marriage, and she stood in most need of
comfort, having endured a long time affliction. For those chiefly are to be
cheared with the consideration of Gods mercies and blessings, who have been
most humbled: As these do here Naomi; for they speak so to her, as if this
blessing had been only for her comfort, saying, He has not left thee without
a kinsman, he shall be to thee a restorer of life, and so forth. And therefore
when we see any to have been much cast down, and that the Lord begins to
show them mercy; let us speak thereof chearefully unto them, and comfort their
hearts; for they know how to use well Gods mercies, their former humiliation
has prepared them, has schooled them, so as they will not wax proud with the
Lords blessings, as others do.

Blessed be the Lord.] Words of praise and thanksgiving to the Author of this
blessing. Thus begin they their joy and mirth: for the joy of the godly is holy
and religious: for the matter of their joy is good and lawful, the manner with
Ephesians. 5. 19.
grace in the heart, as the Apostle exhorts, and the end, to set forth the
Lords glory, of whom with praises they make mention. This was the joy of Moses
and the Israelites, of Deborah and Exodus 15. Iud. 5. 2. Chron. 20. Luke 1.
Barak, of Iehosaphat and Judah, of Zachary and Elizabeth: for the godly take
occasion from all the good which befalls them, to be mindful of the Lord,
from whom they know they receive all blessings whatsoever they be, and
whosoever be the instruments thereof to them: with David Psalm. 103.
therefore they say, O my soul, praise thou the Lord, and forget not all his
benefits! If this be the joy of the godly, what wickedness then is it in
those, who in their mirth, and in the midst of Gods blessings do put away the
remembrance of God, and the thought of his precepts: spiritual songs, and
gracious speeches mar utterly their mirth; the presence of the godly is
hateful to them, and hinders their merriments; for they cannot rejoice, but
in vani^ie* their talk is ribauldry, their songs wancounesse, their laughter
madness, and the delight of their hearts mere sensuality; the mirth of these
must turn into mourning before they dye, else shall their music b^e
elsewhere weeping, wailing, and gnashing of teeth: And here, before I end
this, women may learn how to behave themselves at the birth of Children, as
first in prayer, then in praises; pray they should for pardon of sin, and
bewail, in the woman's pangs, original corruption; in the birth, our spiritual
pollution; and praise God they ought for safe deliverance, acknowledging it his
mercy and goodness, as these do here. Many things might move them hereto,
and to be far from the behavior of some, who in stead of praising God, sit
down to be merry, and to spend their speeches idly, prating of others, yea,
sometimes in lewd slandering of their Neighbors, or in filthy scurrility,
wherein the Midwife, which should be a mother of modesty, is often chief;
when such should be chaste, grave and godly matrons, who by their office and
godly counsel might do much good, if they were as they ought to be; but so
lewd are some of them, as they cannot endure the company of better disposed
persons: Their praises should be like the Midwiues in Egypt, women Exodus 1.
fearing God, able to instruct, to comfort, to pray unto God, and to praise him
for his goodness.

Which has not left thee this day without a kinsman.] This is it they bless
God for; that God had given to Naomi a young kinseman; a kinsman indeed, which
will so show himself. Naomi had a kinsman very nigh unto her before, Chap. 3.
12. but he showed himself not like a kinsman, and therefore was here passed
over as no kinsman. For as men in deed show themselves, such they be, and so
are to be esteemed, otherwise they have but a name of a Brother, Father,
Kinsman, Friend, Christian, yea, Minister, Magistrate, and have not the truth
and substance of such. They be but merely titular, and glory in shadows, as
most do, who are nothing answerable to that title and name of nature, of love,
of fellowship, or of office and place, which they are called by, or fettled in.
Note further, that it is of God, that the godly poor are not left comfortles
of some friend, one or other, both able and willing to help them. Thus the
women here tell Naomi, and do bless God therefore in her behalf; for if God
should not raise them up succor, who would respect them? Because poverty
causes contempt, or neglect at the least, and the religion of the poor is but
held counterfeit, and themselves hypocrites: so the world judges of them. And
therefore when God raises up friends to take knowledge of them, and to do
them good, great cause have they to bless God, as they here do, both for hope
of supply of wants, and also preventing of injuries, which honest poor by such
able and good friends are less subject unto, then others which want them.

That his name may be famous in Israel.] This is the hope they have of this
young Obed; and one mercy of God, in giving this Son unto this honorable
family, is, that he might be renowned among Gods people. Whence note these two
lessons: first, That much is expected and looked for from the children of great
and godly Parents, both in respect of the Parents, and also of the Children.
For is it supposed, that Parents being godly, will have care to instruct, and
if need be, to correct their Children, to pray for them, and be good examples
to them, and being great, that they will use the best means, and procure the
best helps for their good education, and leave them sufficient to show forth
the fruits of godliness. And if thus Parents do, who may imagine otherwise,
till the contrary appear, but that the Children of such will demean
themselves as they should? And who can expect but good from Children of godly
Parents? Should not the Fathers graces provoke Children to goodness? and their
greatness, to abhor base practices? Good Children will not degenerate from
good Parents; whose goodness will more persuade to well-doing, then greatness
to make them proud and wicked, as some Absaloms and Esaus have been, and yet
are, to the grief of religious Parents, and at length to the shame and
confusion of themselves. Secondly, here may be observed, that God gives
Children to the better sort, great and honorable, that they may become famous
amongst Gods people. So conceived these godly women of this Son of Boaz; for,
indeed, all the blessings of riches and honor given unto Parents, are not only
given for their own good, but amongst other ends, for the better inabling of
them to bring up their family in good order, and especially their Children in
the ways of God, for his service and honor, as they have more means to
provoke them thereto. Let therefore such Parents here take such a course with
their Children, as they may make them, by Gods blessing, famous in Isreal, in
Gods Church, and among his people; which they may effect by these good means.
First, by being every way, and at all times a good example of piety to them, as
David was, and Zachary. Psalm. 101. Luke 1.
Secondly, by instructing them carefully in godliness and Religion, as Parents
are commanded, Ephe. 4. 4. Prou. 4.
and as David did instruct Solomon. Thirdly, by seeing them set to the practice
of that which they are taught, and to have an especial eye thereto. Men teach
their Children good manners among men, for civil carriage of their outward
man, and will see therein if they offend, and reprove them; so should they
thus see to them in their Christian good manners and behavior toward God and
good men, and in every Christian duty toward all. Fourthly, by settling them in
some particular calling, as Adam the Monarch of the world did his sons; to
keep them from idleness, from being busiebodies, and from a world of
wickedness, which such as live but of a calling run into. Fifthly, by
restraining them from ill company, idle, wanton, prodigal and profane
persons, and exhorting them to have fellowship with such as fear God, also
with civil and honest men well reported of, well brought up, and well disposed
unto goodness. Sixthly, by commending, countenancing, and encouraging their
well doing, both by present rewards and promises of future good: but if they
do ill, then fatherly to admonish at the first, to withold them from evil
by love, rather then by slavish fear; but if this will not prevail, then to
rebuke sharply, and to punish as the cause shall require. Thus if Parents
would do, there is no doubt, but by Gods mercy, many men's children of place,
may become famous in Israel, and not be so infamous, as some be to Parents
shame, and their own overthrow.

Verse 15. And he shall be unto thee a restorer of thy life, and a nourisher of
thine old age: for thy daughter in law, which loves thee, which is better to
thee thenseuen sons, has borne him.
THis is still the continued speech of the women to Naomi; the scope whereof is
still to comfort her, in foreshewing what this Babe should be unto her, and the
reason why they so speak of him.

And he shall be unto thee a restorer of thy life.] Naomi had many crosses, she
had lost her Husband and Children, yea, and her outward state in the world,
which made her, as it were, dead with sorrow, which these Women and godly
Neighbors well considered of, and here therefore do enlarge their speech for
Naomies greater comfort; to teach us, That true friends, affected with others
miseries, cannot but meditate many arguments of comfort in the days of their
felicity. For the joy of their hearts is unfeigned for their friends prosperity,
as truly as before they were moved with their calamity. Thus let us learn
to try the sympathy of men's hearts toward other in prosperity and adversity.

Arestorer of thy life.] So they speak, as if by her former misery she had, as
it were, been liuelesse. Whence note; That heavy crosses, as poverty, old age,
Widdowhood, and loss of Children, do bedead the spirit, even of godly
persons. So these words imply, and experience teaches. For no affliction is
joyous for the present, but grievous, Heb. 12. 12. How much more when many come
together? Therefore let us have compassion of the afflicted, and labor to
raise up their spirits, especially of poor afflicted Widows; for it is a
part of pure and undefiled religion before God, Iam. 1. 27. This condemns
such of cruelty, as will vex the afflicted; or be miserable comforters, as
Jobs friends were to him. Secondly, we may learn, That godly Children are as
restorers of life to their Parents, Prou. 10. 1. they make them glad. Let
Children labor to be such, that they may cheer up their Parents hearts; and
not be as too many be, causers of hearts grief to them, making them to go
down with mourning to the grave; for such are foolish Children, Prou. 15. 20.
and 10. 1. and 17. 25.

And a nourisher of thine old age.] Note, first, that old age needs nourishing:
for it makes man feeble, and to want heat, 1. King. 1. 1. Eccles. 12. 3. Also
to be subject to diseases, as to be blind, as was Isaac, Genesis 27. and Jacob,
Genesis 48. 10. and to be lame, as Asa, 1. King. 15. Therefore in the youth of
Summer, provide somewhat for the Winter of old age: and when thou have
provision for age, thank God therefore. Secondly, that children are to be
nourishers of their parents in their old age: as Joseph was to Jacob, Genesis 45.
11. and Ruth but a See before Chap. 2. 18.
daughter in law here, to Naomi, Chap. 3. 18. and such a one the women hoped
Obed would be. Let children learn this duty: for first, nature teaches it,
in the Storke; and branches of trees receiving the sap from the root, do
return it again to it toward Winter. Secondly, Reason teaches to be
thankful, and to do good to them that have done us good. From parents
children have being, bringing up, and their preservation; whose love, care,
pains and cost, children can never recompense. Thirdly, it is one end why they
be borne: for if a friend be borne to help his friend in adversity, Prou.
17. 17. then much more children to help their parents, who are bone of their
bone, and flesh of their flesh. Fourthly parents are childrens glory, Prou. 17.
6. Therefore should they make much of them. Fifthly, hereto add the
Commandment, Exodus 20. to honor our parents. Now, how are they honored, when
in want they are not relieved? Sixthly, such as succor their parents, may
expect a blessing from their children. Those children therefore which are
without natural affection, sin against God, against Nature, Reason and
Religion. But children will, perhaps, say, Our parents are froward and hard to
please, and therefore they make us weary and unwilling to keep and nourish
them. Answ. First, consider how froward you were in childhood, and yet poor
parents carefully kept you, and cast you not off. Secondly, when old age
comes, you may be such. Do then, as you would be done unto: learn to bear
with your parents, to teach your children how to bear with you. Thirdly, note
how children can bear with rich parents well enough, while they hope for
profit, and fear to lose what they look for. If hope of gain can make
children put on such patience, then let true love do it much more.

For thy daughter in law, which loves thee, which is better then seven sons,
has borne him.] This is a reason of the women's hope of this child's kindness
toward Naomi. From these words we may learn these things: First, That there
is good hope of childrens love, which come of loving parents, that they will
love such as their parents have loved. Thus the women conclude: and this was a
lesson which David taught his son Solomon, 1. Kin. 2. 7. And Christ loving
those whom his Father loves, teaches so much. Let therefore children be thus
affected, especially if their parents have set their love aright, upon such as
were worthy of love. Secondly, That there may be great love between a mother
in law, and a daughter in law. Ruths love toward Naomi was very great, she
left her country and kindred for her, Chap. 1. 16, 17. labored painefully for
her, Chap. 2. 18, 23. and Naomi was not wanting to seek the good of Ruth, Cha.
3. Let these two be examples to such: and to make them loving, strive to be
religious, and to fear God, as these did: for Religion will work, what
corrupt nature cannot effect. Let them perform mutual duties. And let
stepmothers know that they step in, to be in stead of natural mothers, and so
let children take them; so will they love one another. Thirdly, that true love
cannot be hid: for it so will express it self, as other shall take notice of
it. These women knew Ruths love: so did Saul Ionathans to David: the people
Christ's love to Lazarus, John 11. 36. for true love will break out as fire.
Try true love by the manifestation thereof. Joseph may hide his a Genesis 45. 1.
2. Sam. 13. 39. and 14. 1.
while from his brethren, and David from Absalom, but it will break out at
length. They therefore but boast vainly of love; which never express it.
Fourthly, that true love in adversity, is not lost in prosperity. Ruth is said
still to love Naomi, though thus exalted: so did Hushai David: so did Jobs
friends, Chap. 2. howsoever they erred in judgment. Let not love be altered
with our estates, nor honors change good conditions, as it does in too many.
Fifthly, that the love of a stranger may sometime exceed the love of many
children by nature. The women prefer Ruths love above seven sons, that is,
above many sons. Such God by favor can supply, what is wanting in them by
nature, and make a strangers love surpass. Let this be comfort to the
distressed.

Verse 16. And Naomi took the child, and laid it in her bosom, and became
nurse unto it.
THis verse shows the education of the child: by whom, and how.

And Naomi took the child.] This the old woman did voluntarily out of her true
love both to the mother and the child. She was in the house of Boaz that great
rich man, we here see, and so well provided for in her old age, yet would she
take pains, and not be idle. So we see, that the godly, though old, and well
provided for, yet will set themselves to labor, and do something: for they
make conscience of their time, not to spend their days in idleness, which
they know to be a foul sin, and the nurse of many. They will labor to be an
(...)
example unto others, and to spur the younger on to take pains. Though they
live of themselves, yet they owe a duty to God, to be doing what they may; and
if they live upon others, herein they show their good will* to be as little
chargeable as they may, and to be thankful after their strength and power.
Now, this holy woman is herein to be imitated; and let none think that they
may be excused to live idly, either for age, so long as they can take pains;
or for that they have enough to live upon, because God gives none riches to
live a lazy life; but such, even old persons* should live either in labor, as
Saint 1. Tim. 5. 4. Tit. 2. 3, 4.
Paul wills the widow of threescore years old, or in teaching and
instructing others: a blessed exercise for old folk, which will give them
comfort in the end of their days.

And laid it in her bosom.] This shows her love, and with what tender
affection she took him into her hands. Four things might move Naomi thus
affectionatly to love the Babe: First, her love to the mother, who so
exceedingly* loved her. Secondly, her love to Boaz the father, who had so
mercifully dealt with her. Thirdly, her love to her husband Elimelech departed,
whose name was raised up again by this child, upon his inheritance. Fourthly,
her great hope of joy and comfort from the child it self, as the women
foretell in the former verse. Howsoever it was, here we may see, that Parents
carry a hearty affection toward their children: they be in their hearts and
bosom: for if this love was in Naomi a mother in law, we may well conclude it
in natural mothers: which may appear many ways in their great pains and
care in nursing them, and in bringing them up; in their* grief and sorrow,
when their children are any way diseased, Mark 9 24. and 7. 25. Mat. 15. 22.
as we may see by the tears of the father, and cry of the mother, which Mark
and Matthew make mention of. In their kind embracing of them, as here, and as
did the father of the prodigal son. In their great joy to hear of their
welfare, as Jacob did rejoice to hear of Joseph. Genesis 45. 27, 28
In their easy natures soon reconciled to their children, when they humble
themselves before them, as we see in David to Absalom, and the father of the
prodigal son. Lastly, in their great lamentation at the death of their
children, as David did for Absalom, though a most unnatural son; and the
widow which followed her son to the Grave, which Christ raised up to life
again. No other reason can be given, but that natural and inbred love to
children in parents, else some children are so hard-fauoured, and ill
conditioned, as parents could not so love them, but only for that they be
their children. Let children hence learn to be thankful to God and their
parents, and show love to them again in all obedience.

And became his Nurse.] That is, a help in the mothers nursing of it, as by
holding it, lulling of it asleep, giving of it meat, warming of it, and such
like helps for the nourishing of the life of the Babe, and not giving it suck,
for she was too old to do this. We may find in Scripture two sorts of
Nurses: dry Nurses: such a one was Rebeccaes, to help to attend on the child,
and Genesis 24. 59.
to ease the mother somewhat, as Naomi does here; and in helping to nourish and
bring up a child; in this sense a father is called a Nurse. The other sort are
milch-Nurses, such as give suck Number. 11. 12.
unto children, as in Scripture we find only those to be their mothers, even
them that bare them, to bring them up also, that as they afforded them the
Womb to bear them, so the breasts likewise to give their children suck. And
this is the mothers duty, if possibly she be able: not birth, wealth, nicety,
nor idleness can exempt them from this duty; as it does a number of wanton
Dames, that they may be fitter to follow their lusts. That mothers are to give
their own children suck: it is apparent by these reasons: the natural
instinct in beasts, teaches every other Creature having paps, to give suck;
yea, the Sea Monsters draw out their breasts, and give suck to their young
Lamen. 4. 3.
ones, says Jeremy: and therefore such as neglect this duty, are worse then
these beasts; which we hold unkind, if they let not their young ones suck. It
is the principal use and end of breasts in women, when God sends them
children, though too many now make them only stales and bawdes of lust. The
Workmanship of God should make them do this: First, in placing them so high,
as in no other creature, even neighboring upon the heart, the Shop of heat, to
convey the blood sooner into the breasts; so as the heart works for the Infant,
to teach mothers to have affection to this work. Secondly, so placing placing
them, as the mother is taught in nature to embrace the Infant, to lay it to her
breast, the more to work love between the mother and the Babe. Thirdly, in
making them to have this faculty, to turn blood into milk. And lastly, Gods
providing, as soon as the Infant is perfect for birth, milk in the breast for
the Infant: so as God and Nature call them to this duty, except any will say
that God has done all this in vain, and might have spared this Workmanship.
The very name of a breast, Mamma, should put them in mind hereof, the first
syllable whereof is that which an Infant does soonest speak, calling the
mother Mam; as if nature had given this first to the Babe, so easily to frame
to utter this word, to put the mother in mind of her duty, and to give it her
breast. Again, God in the work of nature has not only given breasts, but
heads or nipples for the Infant to suck the milk out of the breasts; and to
help it, has made the skin about the nipples more rugous and rough for the
child's tongue to hold by. The Heathen Arist. and Plutarch.
Philosophers, endued but with the light of nature, teach this, and affirm,
that the mothers milk implants in children the love of mothers; yea, mothers
love commonly those children better, which they nurse, than the rest: and
reason may be given, because the mother gives, and the child receives, by
sucking her breasts, more of her substance, than they which do not. Children
love their Nurses, we see by experience, and better then their mothers that
bare them, so long as they be without judgment to discern, and only follow
nature, for the nourishment of life. It is not so natural, say also these
Heathen, to be nursed of another, as of the mother, in whom it is conceived:
for differing bodies have differing temperature, and therefore the taking away
of the Infant so soon from the accustomed nourishment in the mother, must
needs breed an alteration. A learned man thinks this to be the cause Kick. in
his Oecono.
of the degenerating so much of Great men's sons, and of their so little love
to their mothers. It is a token of no great love to children, when their
mothers put them over to strangers, it is just with God, if mothers after find
their children ouer-strange to them, being but rather Note this, you unnatural
mothers.
half than whole mothers, mothers of necessity, and not of good will: for
perforce they bring forth: but it is true love which makes a mother to give
suck: safety to themselves disereth the former, or else to dye with it in the
Womb; but love only to the Infant, procures this latter at their hands.
Besides all these reasons, the examples of all the godly women in Scripture
teach mothers now this duty. That right honorable Sarah, Genesis 21. 7.
the wife of a most honorable man, and mighty in substance and power, nursed
her son Isaac. Princely Job was nourished by the breasts of her Job 3. 12.
Cant. 8. 1.
whose womb did bear him. Queen Bathshebah nursed Solomon. What shall I
speak of holy Hannah, the mother also of Moses, of Samsons 1. Sam. 2. 23.
Exodus 1. Judge. 13. 42.
mother, and others? The mother of Jesus our Lord and Savior, whom all do
honor, she did give her blessed Babe suck: all women call her blessed,
because she bare Christ: And was she not as blessed in giving him her breasts
to Luke 11. 27.
suck? Yes verily. Some good Ladies at this day disdain not this duty. And
what should hinder them? Such persons may give suck, and then may deliver the
child over to a dry Nurse to attend it, in all other things, which help the
poor cannot have. Lastly, as there is a blessing Genesis 49. 25.
of the Womb to bring forth, so of the breasts to Hosea 9. 14.
give suck: and the dry breasts and barren womb have been taken for a curse.
Let mothers therefore take knowledge of these things, to press them to this
duty of nursing their own bowels, that in giving still of their own
substance, they might the more work love in their children toward them. Their
excuses are idle, and are of no force against these reasons: for true motherly
love is seen in nursing: for lust brings to conceive, necessity forces to
bring forth, but only true and natural love causes a mother to nurse her
child.

Verse 17. And the women her Neighbors gave it a name, saying, There is a
son borne to Naomi: and they called his name Obed; he is the Father of less,
the Father of David.
HEre is the naming of the child, which was borne of Ruth: where note who named
it, the reason, the name thereof, and what he came to be, showed in his
honorable and royal posterity in his Son and Grandchild.

And the women her Neighbors.] The women here are those before in verse 14.
very godly and religious, as appears by many things before spoken off. These
godly women were Naomi and Ruths Neighbors, such as dwelt together with (...)
them, as the word signifies. Here may be noted who be fittest to be called to
such businesses, the honest Neighbors, and Kinsfolk, as was at the birth and
Circumcision of John Baptist: for kinsfolk they expect it, and have therein an
interest and cause of rejoicing in the increase of their lineage, and therefore
may not be carelessly neglected: and Neighbors are to be called, as those which
be nigh at hand and helpful at need, who being near, are better, as Solomon
says, then a brother far off. But here observe farther what manner of
Neighbors they were, which these godly women had, even such as themselves: for
godly women delight to have about them such as themselves: for the wicked and
they cannot accord; they have differing heads and hearts; over the one, God
rules; over the other, Satan; the one is regenerate in heart, the other
unregenerate, and therefore cannot but jar in word and deed, the one being an
abomination to the other, as Solomon speaks. But the godly having Prou. 29.
Act. 4.
one head, Jesus Christ, and one heart, they will reap benefit one of another;
by instructing, admonishing, comforting and praying one for another. Therefore
to show your selves godly, be ye delighted to have them about you.

And gave it a name.] It is said, the women gave it: we find that sometime the
Fathers gave the name, as Abraham to his son whom he called Isaac; Mothers
often, as we may see in Leah and Genesis 29. and 30.
Rachel; so kinsfolk now and then, as we may note out of Luke, chapter 1. 58,
59. And here in Ruth the Neighbors gave it, yea, sometime a stranger named the
child upon just occasion, as Pharaoes daughter did give the name of Moses to
him, which the Parents did not alter; so as it seems, this was not strictly
stood upon, though most commonly the Parents gave the name. If any here ask
concerning the time when children were named? I find that it was sometime at
the birth of the Infant, so Rachel and the wife Genesis 35. 18. 1. Sam. 4. 21.
of Phineas gave their children names upon their departure; but being in such
cases, it seems not to be ordinary; it may be thought, to be usually at the
time when the child was circumcised, as we may perceive at the naming of Isaac,
Genesis 21. 4. Luke 1. 59.
and John the Baptist. And thus do we give names at the baptizing of Infants,
that as they did, so we may put children in mind of the Covenant made in
Baptism, of their badge of Christianity, and of their ingrafting into Christ,
and how they were admitted as Gods children, into the household of faith, and
as heirs of the Kingdom of Heaven.

There is a Son borne to Naomi.] That is, for the good and comfort of Naomi,
as is before showed out of the fifteenth verse, and as may be gathered by the
like phrase elsewhere. So as in Esai. 9. 6. Luke 2. 11.
these words is a reason of the name which they gave unto the child. Whence
note, that the godly in ancient time gave names not by hap-hazard, but as good
reason did lead them thereunto; for they gave names in obedience to Gods
commandment, Genesis 17. 19. and 21. 3. Luke 1. 13.
who appointed sometimes names unto children; to know also whence they were,
and whence taken. Thus Adam was so called of the matter whereof his body was
made; so Moses of the place whence he was taken. Some had a name from their
miserable estate and condition, as Enosh; some, to call to remembrance some
favors of God: thus Simeon was so called of his Mother Leah; and Joseph for
the like reason called Genesis 29. and 41. 51, 52.
his sons, Manasses and Ephraim. Sometime names were given from some thing
which fell out at the birth; hence Pharez had his name, Genesis 38. 29. 1. Sam. 4.
and Ichabod his. Some were named so from that which should come to pass
afterward, as Solomon was, for that in his days should be rest and 1. Chron.
22. 9.
peace. Some had their names from some things to be effected and done by them,
so was our Lord called Jesus, because he should save his people Mat. 9.
from their sins. Besides these inducements to impose a name, they did
sometime call them after their Ancestors, to keep them in remembrance. Luke 1.
59, 61.
We must learn to imitate the holy men of God in these things; to express our
own graces, or to teach our children some duties, or to call to mind the
works of God, or to remember holy men and women to imitate their virtues. And
we may not think this to be too precise a practice, seeing Gods wisdom
interposed it self sometime, both in giving names, and in changing of names;
and the reverence due to the holy Sacrament administered, advises us to a due
consideration hereof in honor of the Sacrament. And a good name may call
sometimes a man to the remembrance of his duty. I know that a name makes not
a man good: for some have good names, but their conditions stark naught: yet a
good name may sometime occasion a man to think of goodness; and howsoever the
party so named does make no use of it, yet it is commendable in the imposers
thereof, who imitate the example of godly men in the old time, the Saints also
in the Primitive Church, and the godly-disposed at this day. Which reprooueth
such as give names idly without sense or reason, ridiculous names, Heathenish
rather then Christian, and some such names as be very profane. But of this
thus much.

And they called his name Obed.] That is, as they gave him his name, so thus
was he called: which words may imply, that the name once given, was with
authority confirmed so, as the Infant was commonly so called without
alteration: neither were ever any names altered, but upon some extraordinary
occasion; for to suffer a change thereof, is either folly, or worse, if good
and honest causes move not thereunto.

Obed.] This signifies serving, because he should serve as a comforter to old
Naomi, as the women said, verse 15. which is the reason of this name; to teach
him, and also all Children their duty, which is this, to labor to be a
comfort unto their Parents: of which before in verse 15. Now this they shall
do, if they live in obedience to their Parents, with fear to offend, yielding
ever to be ruled by them: if they seek to imitate their Parents virtues, and
to follow them in all good things: if they frame their courses to godliness,
striving to have an Heavenly Father also for their guide and direction: if they
settle themselves to a good course of life, to live within some honest calling,
either in the Church or Commonwealth: if lastly, they live in mutual love one
with another, like Jobs children. These things will comfort Parents; which
therefore let children labor for; let them be Obeds, serving thus to their
comforts; let them be Isaacs, to make their Parents to laugh for joy; and not
Benonies, Sons of sorrow, like Cains, Esaus and Absaloms, wicked, profane
and unnatural.

Note here one thing more, before I come to the next words, how that this child
is not called either Elimelech or Mahlon; and yet was he given to raise up the
name of the dead upon his inheritance, that might not be cut off from among his
brethren, and from the gate of his place; and Verse 10.
for this end did Boaz marry Ruth. Whence therefore we may perceive, that the
preservation of the name of the dead stood not in another bearing of his name,
so to be called, as he was; but rather in the issue having a right to the
inheritance and inioying of it, that it might not be alienated from the
kindred and stock of the dead: which being so, shows the gross folly and
wrong which some show to their near blood, in disinheriting daughters, and
passing their inheritance unto mere strangers for a very bare name; as if that
were to hold up their name, when oftentimes it comes to pass, that such sell
away the inheritance, and so root out their name, which is better kept by
continuing an inheritance in their blood and bowels, then by the sound of a
word upon the person of a stranger: this folly we see by examples to be
condemned and cursed before our eyes, in not a few.

He is the Father of less, the Father of David.] These words are added to
show, first, who this Obed was, or rather what a one he came to be in his
posterity, even very honorable and of high renown. Here we see, that as
Ancestors may grace posterity, so honorable of spring may grace Ancestors and
forefathers. Again, by these words we understand when this Story was written,
even in the days of David, and that also when he was chosen of God from his
brethren; for else Iesse his eldest son should have been named, and not
David, who was the seventh and youngest son of his Father. Thirdly, these
words show whereto this History tends, to bring us unto David, that sweet
singer of Israel, the chief type of Jesus Christ, the Savior not only of the
Jews, but likewise of the Gentiles, of whom he was pleased to come, to be
their Savior also, as it appears to us at this day, blessed be God for ever.

Amen.
Verse 18. Now these are the generations of Pharez; Pharez begat Ram.
HEre is the last part of this book, and the conclusion of this chapter,
containing a genealogy from Pharez to David, ten generations, as they be
reckoned in order, in this and the rest of the verses from the father to the
son, and from the son to the end of the tenth generation. The occasion of
this genealogy was from the last words of the former verse, speaking of Obeds
being father to Iesse, and Grandfather to David; and to show this, the holy
Ghost begins a genealogy from before Obeds time, in seven of his Ancestors,
and descended to David his Grandchild.

Now these are the generations.] Usually the genealogies of the godly are
recorded, but sometime the generation of the wicked, as of Ismael Genesis 25. 13
and 36. 9. and 21. 13. and 4. 17, 18, 19.
and Esau, are set down; not so much for their sakes, as to show the truth of
Gods promises made to the faithful concerning some of them: or to show some
wicked instruments in their posterity, as in the genealogy of Cain. The
genealogy of the godly is set down for these ends. First, to show how God
registreth up his people in a book of remembrance, as being precious in his
eyes. Secondly, to show how he has had from time to time thorowout all ages,
a race of righteous people, a peculiar generation to himself, in despite of
Satan's malice and all his bloody instruments. Thirdly, for help to
Chronology, as may be seen in Genesis 5. from the lives of the Patriarchs.
Fourthly, to show the descent from the first Adam to the second, as appears
in the Evangelists; where Matthew intitleth Mat. 1. Luke 3.
his first Chapter, the book of the Generation of Jesus Christ, from Abraham
to Joseph, and then Luke from Joseph to Adam. This genealogy here in Ruth is,
to teach the truth of Jacobs prophecy, concerning Christ's coming of the Tribe
of Judah, for here it begins at Pharez Iudahs son, and descends to
David, the royal Prophet and type of Christ: Also to show why the house of
Pharez was so extolled in verse 12. by the Elders and people: and thirdly, to
let us know for what end this Story was written, not to praise and set out the
virtues of a couple of poor women; but to show from whom David came, the
figure of Christ, even of Ruth, a Gentile, a Moabitesse. Lastly, this may be,
to show the efficacy of the prayer of the people at Boaz marriage, wishing by
this seed Obed his house to be as famous as Iudahs house was by Pharez, as it
was indeed. For as Nahshon and Salmon, Princes came of him, so of this Obed
came Iesse and David, and so a royal posterity.

Of Pharez.] The Catalogue begins here, and from this man, though
misbegotten incestuously, the honor of the families is fetched; for so in
truth it was, the Lord* making Pharez renowned in his posterity: whence not,
First, that the holy Writers are without partiality, they write as things be;
they omit not for fear of disgrace that which is true, and ought to be set
down; they will not spare any, friend, foe, far off, nor near, no not
themselves; Moses will write his own faults, his Wives, his Brother Aarons and
Miriams; Samuel will not slip over his sons miscarriage; nor Jonah his own
rebellion against God, and his peevish brabbling with him; Jeremy will record
his own impatiencie, and Saint Paul his bloody rage against the Saints: for
indeed they are led by a better Nam quis nescit, prima^ esse historiae lege^,
ne quid falsi dicere audeat, deinde, ne quid very non audeat, ne qua suspicio
gratiae sit inscribendo, ne qua simultatis? Cic. de Orat. lib. 2. Vide
Iesephum, Antiq. lib. 16. ca. 11. vbi me^ito culpat Nichol. Damasceni
historiam, Herodis res falsis laudib. ornantem.
Spirit, then that of the world; they also cast off self-love, and they prefer
the truth and Gods glory above all: which may persuade us to the reading of
these holy Histories full of varieties, and yet trueths not to be found in any
writings of men. And this should teach such as undertake to write Stories, to
deal truly, without fabling, and to avoid partial relations, that we may
read true Histories, and not fictions and falsehoods, to the deceiving of the
posterity, which should be thereby instructed. Secondly, that men hold
themselves honored to come of such as have gained honor in the world, though
otherwise stained in their birth: for so here it is accounted honorable to come
of Pharez, as many with us do; to come but into this Island, which William the
Conqueror obtained, how base so ever he was by his birth: for outward honor
and glory procures estimation, and becloudeth birth so, as that no notice is
taken thereof. Now, if outward honor effect this, with what honor may we
think our selves honored, when God, the Emperor of Heaven and earth, is
willing to acknowledge us to be borne of him, and to be called his Sons?
But of this, few glory, because it is only spiritually discerned, and for that
such as be so honored with God, find here many crosses, and so are in
contempt with the worldly-minded.

Now, in handling the rest of the names, I will show you out of them, that as
one naturally begets another; so the Elect of God are to be qualified, one
grace, as it were, producing another. The first in this natural generation is
Pharez, which signifies separate: so in the supernatural work of
Regeneration, the Elect must be first Pharez, separate by their effectual
calling by the Word, and by the holy Spirit in their conversation from the
vain world; for such 2. Cor. 6. 17.
are the Children of God, and such ought they to be, as the Apostle exhorts,
else we be Ephe. 5. 11.
not of this spiritual Regeneration. Such then as are companions with wicked,
and so live, they are no Pharezes, and so none of Christ's line.

Pharez begat Hezron.] So is it plain, Genesis 46. Verse 19.
12. Matthew. 1. 3. 1. Chron. 2. 5. who went down Genesis 46. 26.
with Jacob into Egypt, contrary to the opinion of some Popish writers: the
name signifies, in the midst of gladness; and such be the Elect, after they
become Pharezes, they must needs be Hezrons, full of joy, when they feel the
benefit of their separation, they are a glad people, even as the Israelites
separated from the Egyptians and their heavy bondage.

Hezron begat Ram.] 1. Chron. 2. 9. Matthew. 1. This Ram or Aram was not Hezrons
first borne, but Ierahmeel; to give us to know, that the Lord tied not himself
to the first borne, but he chose sometime the second, as here, and sometime the
youngest, as David: and so he does at this day; which is the cause of the
difference of Children from one Father and one Mother, having the same
education, some doing well, other some ill. The name signifies high: for so
are the Elect Deuteronomy. 32. 10. Zach. 2. 8.
with God, and being once Hezrons, joyful in the ways of God, they seek and
set their minds on things above, as the Apostle exhorts Col. 3. ^.
all risen with Christ to do. They be not base-minded, to pore upon the world,
as Earthwormes, but are high-minded toward God and things above; they are of a
generous spirit, not suffering the things below to tread down their
affections, and to draw them from God.

Ram begat Aminadab.] 1. Chro. 2. 10. Matthew. 1. He was Father in law to Aaron,
who married his Exodus 6. 23.
daughter Elishebah; this name signifies my people is noble, or free, and so
are the Elect: for having attained to this height, that they become Rams, or
Arams, they free themselves from the world, as far as it hinders them from
setting their minds on things above.

And Aminadab begat Nahshon.] 1. Chron. 2. Verse 20.
Matthew. 1. Who was brother in law to Aaron, the head and Prince of the Tribe of
Judah; which host consisted of 74600. valiant men, the first Number. 1. 7. and 2.
3. and 7. 12.
Standerd. This first offered to the dedication of the Altar: For the greatest
should be the forwardest to Gods service, and to advance Religion. This also
first set forward with his charge toward Canaan: Number. 10. 14.
so should the greatest with their families set forward to Heaven. This
signifies experiment or trial; for the Elect of God having gotten to be
Aminadabs, and become free, they taste of the Lords goodness, and can say with
Deuid; Come and see what the Lord has done for my soul. They keep in
remembrance the kindness of the Lord, and can speak of his noble acts.

And Nahshon begat Salmon,] 1. Chro. 2. 11. where he is called Salma: he
married Rahab, Mat. 1. 5. Thus in the Line of Christ are brought in Gentiles,
for our comfort, of whom he came, as well as of the Jews; and is our kinsman,
as well as theirs. This signifies peaceable, and so are the Elect: for after
they become Nahshons, experienced in Gods goodness, they have a peaceable
conscience, they have a quiet mind, without murmuring, without doubting,
without gainesaying the will of God in any thing, which may happen, though it
cross them in this world never so much, they be peaceable also toward
others, because the wisdom from James 3. 17.
above, with which they are endued, is peaceable.

And Salmon begat Boaz,] 1. Chron. 2. 11. of Verse 21.
whom I have spoken before. It signifies in strength: for when the Elect are
Salmons, that they find inward peace with God, and that they know God to be
with them, then they say to their souls, as the Angel to Gideon, Go in this
thy strength: for in the Lord they are valiant, and by his help may do
worthily, being confident in God.

And Boaz begat Obed,] 1. Chron. 2. Mat. 1. Of this also before. It signifies
serving: such are the Lords Elect, they are his servants: for when God has
made them Boazes, and put strength of grace into their hearts to withstand
their spiritual adversaries, they will become obedient Obeds.

And Obed begat Iesse,] 1. Chron. 2. 13. Mat. 1. Verse 22.
who dwelt at Bethlehem, and was an ancient man in the days of Saul. This
signifies a gift or 1. Sam. 16. 1.
offering: and such be all true Obeds, when the elect become serviceable and
obedient, the joy they feel in the Lords service, makes them Iesses, even to
offer themselves to God, as holy Romans 12. 1
and acceptable sacrifices.

And Iesse begat David,] 1. Chron. 2. 13, 15. Mat. 1. Of this Kingly Prophet
and prophetical King, I might speak more at large, then might seem suitable
to this brief exposition: I therefore refer you to the Books of Samuel, and
the first of the Kings, and the first of the Chronicles, and to the Book of
Psalms, which lively set out this holy man, a man after the Lords own heart.
His name signifies beloved: and such are the Lords Elect; and they may know
themselves to be so, God witnessing his love to them: for when they be once
Pharez, separated from the vain world; Hezrons, joyful and glad in this their
separation; Ram's, lifted up in mind to heavenly things; Aminadabs, a free
people from spiritual thraldom, having gotten the Spirit of Adoption;
Nahshons, experienced in Gods love; Salmons, peaceable; and Boazes, going on in
this their strength; and Obeds, obedient; and that freely, as Iesses: what
doubt is there, but that they be David's, even beloved of God?

To conclude this Chapter, and so this whole History, we may here see, how from
a mean estate, some can arise to great honor: as Ruth from gleaning, to be
the wife of Boaz, and the Grandmother of a King and Prophet. Thus poor
Mordecai was exalted, and that on a sudden, from sackcloth into silken Robes
fit for a King; from fear and danger of death, to great honor, and to be
feared. And thus came Joseph from a prison, to be a Prince in Egypt; and David
from keeping sheep, to be the King of Israel: all which is the work of God,
as Hannah sings, David publishes, 1. Sam. 2. 8. Psalm. 75. 6, 7. and 113. 7.
Daniel. 4. 17.
and Daniel teaches. It is easy with the Lord, suddenly to make a poor man
rich, and to exalt him to honor. And therefore let such as be low, not envy
the advancement of others lifted up; it is of God; and let them not repine, nor
murmr to see themselves neglected: for if God held it good for such, and for
his glory, to be lifted up, as he can do it: so verily he would do it, as well
as he does others: for God respects no person, but does what he pleases in
heaven and in earth, and what is most for his glory, though we judge, perhaps,
otherwise. Another thing may we note for the comfort of the godly, That great
is the reward of Religion. Ruth was of the Lord mercifully rewarded, as we have
heard; so was Rahab by faith preserved, and all with her, brought from among
cursed Canaanites, to be among the Israelites; yea, to become the wife of
Salmon a Prince in Israel: and lastly, to be vouchsafed this mercy, to be
recorded with the faithful in the Catalogue of the most Renowned, yea, and to
be mentioned with Abraham, for her good works, Heb. 11.
the fruit of true faith. What got David for his Iam. 2.
upright heart, though he seemed to be neglected of his parents, and sent to
keep sheep, and not called to the Feast, till Samuel caused him to be sent
for? Was not he for all that, esteemed of God, and chosen before all his
brethren? The Lord will not let goodness be unrewarded: for godliness has
the promise of this life, and of the Life to come. And in this, let all that
truly fear God, comfort themselves, and look up to the recompense of the
reward, which in due time they shall receive to the full, if they faint not.
Blessed be God, and his Name be praised for evermore.

Amen.
FINIS.

