AN Oration Military to all natural Englishmen, whether Protestants, or
otherwise in Religion affected, to move resolution in these dangerous times.

Wherein is expressed the delight of liberty, and the tyranny of the enemy.

With a Prayer both pithie and necessary.

Written by a zealous affected Subject.

Non nobis solum nascimur. AT LONDON Printed by Thomas Orwin, and Thomas
Cadman. 1588.

An Oration Military.
WOrthy Cou^trymen,
whose predecessors were not only feared in Europe, but famous through all the
discovered parts of the Earth: doubtful it is not, but your hearts are
prepared, and your minds as it were one fire, valiantly to resist the force of
any forreyne invasion: yet to add flame unto your fire, I thought good in this
brief exhortation, to animate each of you, (if it may be) to more resolution.
Know then (worthy Countrymen, for why we know you are not ignorant, what rumors
are spread of the preparation of that man of sin, that worthless Priest of
Rome, against this Royal Realm) and be you assured, that whatsoever pretense
of Justice our adversaries by their false Apostles (or Seminary Priests) shall
buzze into your ears, as redress of wrongs, reformation of Religion or such
like: yet if you respect your ancient liberty, and consider the thraldom of
your neighbors subjected to the tyranie of Spanish government, and the double
dealing of the Popes feined holiness, weying besides, that of all bondage, there
is none more vile than the service of the vile, you will (I doubt not) resolve
every one rather on death, were it never so bitter, than either by persuasions
of flattery or fear, submit your selves to such, as neither merit names of
men, or are for courtesy to be accounted among reasonable creatures. The
heathen men (good Christian Cou^treymen) were so affected unto their native
soil, that some of them have entered the armies of the enemies, and aimed at
the hearts of their chief Rulers, setting so light by torments, that being
apprehended, they themselves have burnt off the hand, whose deathfull stroke
mistook the man, their hearts desired to dispatch: some cast themselves into
raging gulphes: others detested life, when Countries liberty has been lost:
most crying out, O fortunata mers quae naturae debira pro Patria potissimum est
reddita. Then much more we, who are not only bound by like love, but by a
greater bond (even Christian liberty) ought to set light by life, and
willingly embrace the greatest torments that tyranny can oppose, rather than
see Religion defaced, our Country ruinated, our Sovereign Princess injured,
our wives and virgins defiled, our infants tossed on pikes, and our goods the
greedy Spaniardes spoil. Take courage Countrymen, and if they come, resolve
on victory or death: if they come not, determine some of you to brave the
cowardes at their doors. Yea more, let not any, either English traitor, or
foreyne tyrant, be named leader but of a band against this noble Island, or the
least part of her Majesty's Dominions, but let his heart blood by some device
or other, satisfy for an attempt so injurious.

Set before your eyes the desolation of the Low Country, whose people
flourished within these thirty years, no Nation in more felicity:but fince
the Spaniardes have oppressed their government, no men so miserable. Of their
affliction, it is needless to speak, for that your eyes are witnesses of
their exiled numbers, your ears have heard of the merciless massacres among
them, and the whole world reports ye wretchedness of their defaced Cities,
and desolate habitations. But some may say to me, seeing the Pope is Patron of
this hallowed army, there shall be mercy showed to the submisse, and reward to
such as resist not (for thus his favorers will report of him): but be not you
deceived Countrymen, to you I now speak that have affected our Antichristian
enemy, the elder brother to Mahomet, by whose pride the younger grew to such
pomp, learn now at last to discern him by his deeds. His pride O
Countrymen, lost all Asia, Syria, Arabia, Armenia, Cappadocia, Egypt, Africa,
a great part of Europe, as Thracia, Constantinople, all Greece, almost all
Hungary, Epyrus, Illyria, a great part of Austria, with those famous Isles of
Rhodes and Candie, and infinite other Regions, now subject to Turkish
tyranny: yea, he that will needs be called high Bishop of Christendom, has
betrayed these Christian Kingdoms, and yet cease not by like dissension, to
lay open this little remnant for the Turkish invasion. His mercy and the
mercy of his adherents, is like that which Mustapha his spiritual brother
showed, when Famogosta was delivered by ye Prince of Cyprus, who forced through
long famine to compound, couenanted soldier like he and his people should
depart with bag and baggage: but most faithlessely when they were issued, after
many vile reproaches, they stripped the Prince, and with hot pincers blistered
his body, thrusting wier into every blister, and being dead with famine and
this torment, they bowelled and stufte him full of straw, and on their
greatest galleyes mast, (whereinto his soldiers were thrust for slaves,) they
hanged ye martyred Prince to augment his servants misery: such mercy as the
Spaniards showed to the Portugalls in Tercera, who were al without respect of
age or innocence, put either to tormenting deaths, or condemned to the Gallyes,
yet were they of the same religion as their enemies, both subject to the Sea of
Rome: such mercy as the silly Indians find, who^ the Spaniards have bayted
with dogs, thrown to wild beasts, and butchered by hundreds, as their own
Writers report: therefore it is evident that they regard not Religion, but seek
for Englands ruin, wherefore believe them not: but remember the resolution of
Lewys the French Kings son, discovered to the English Gentlemen co^federates
against their natural Prince King John, by a noble man of France a counselor
to the said Lewys, being in London at the point of death: and for that it is
so excellent an example in these times, and the pretense of the English
rebellious was to defend the Papal dignity, I think good breefely to note the
effect of his admonition: My Lords (says he) and Gentlemen of England, I am in
conscience moved, my hour of death approaching, to warn you of imminent
danger that hangs over your heads: You see that my Lord the Prince Lewys
through your assistance, has gained many forces in this Realm of England: and
if you were not blinded with too much malice, you might easily perceive what he
intends toward you, in that he makes French men rulers over those holds: but
to assure you better of his intent, I protest upon my soul, which must shortly
answer, if I speak untruth, that before ever we left Paris, it was agreed,
that not one of you which assisted him against your Sovereign, but should hane
the reward of traitors when he was possessed of the crown. Remember this good
Cou^treymen, and trust not strangers, believe not the secret messengers from
Rome, but be ye all of one mind in the defense of England, least envy let in
the enemy, who will neither spare the envious, nor the envied: therefore let
factious men be hated as your deadliest enemies, and count him happy which
hasts his end yt muttereth dissension in your cares. Lastly, noble Englishmen,
that abhor the dregs of Popery, or at least have not at all tasted thereof,
consider the old Principle, Nulla fides cum haereticis obseruanda, and for
heretics he accounts us, wherefore we ought neither to believe him nor
his. This point the Pope has so observed, that he has made the son break
faith with ye father, ye wife with the husband, as lately in France, the
subject with the Prince, as England can too well witness, yea by Ambassadors,
which is abominable among heathen men, has the Pope and Spain practiced
treason, as lately by Mendozza with Francis Throckmorton even in London. O
Countrymen, detest these infidels, think on your goods, your lands, parents,
children, wives, Prince, Country, and Religion, for which to die is even the
way to life. without which to live is worse than any death: and trust in God
that gives victory, to whose righteousness if we cleave, and consent in
unity, our enemies shall be of no force, who are only feared because they are
cruel, and never win victory but by treason.

FINIS.
The Prayer.
Almighty and Eternal God, that disposest of all Nations at thy pleasure, and
have always from the worlds foundation, shown forth thy wonders in
delivering thy elect, even from the very door of death; as Noah from the old
rebellious, Lot from Sodom, Jacob from Esau, Israel from Egypt, David from
Saul, and Ezekiah from Zenacherib: all these thy children, (O mighty God of
hosts) had mighty worldlings to their enemies: but for their faith was fixed
in thy righteousness, the armies nor envy of their adversaries could preuail
against the^: for, with the breath of thy mouth were they consumed; and to
their shame were they confounded. Thou were one God from the beginning, thou
art the same, and wilt be ever one; which makes us wretched sinners, (not
withstanding the number of our misdeedes, exceeding the Stars in Heaven, or
fandes of the Sea) to prostrate our selves before thy throne of Majesty,
beseeching mercy and thy omnipotent assistance. We have sinned o Lord, we have
gone astray, be merciful, o God be merciful to our offenses, and for thy own
name sake, look down upon thy small flock, thy little Church of England,
against whom whole armies of Rabshakehs are sent to rail, Zenacherib himself
blaspheming, and practicing in Babylon our ruin: and to him are joined the
greatest nations. Against thee and thine anointed Elizabeth have they
conspired; against thee and thine inheritance of England have they bent their
power; they have sworn to renew their old abominations; and make thy
sanctuary among us desolate: being in number as the dust of the earth. But O
God of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob and their righteous seed, in whose sight the
Majesty of men is miserable, and their proudest numbers as the fearful
Hind: stretch forth thy arm, and fight for us o Lord; pour forth thy
spirit on our honorable and aged men, on our youthful and valiant men, that
the one with counsel agreeable to thy will, may stir up the courage of the
other to fight thy battles, that the foes of England, (enemies to thy
Almightinesse) may be as chafe tossed with the wind. Increase in us charity,
confirm our faith, defend our Sovereign, continue thy Gospel among us, that
thou may be glorified for ever in this Realm of England. Grant these dear
Father and al other our necessities, even for thy son our Savior Jesus sake.
Amen.


