Pasquils Palinodia, AND His progress to the Tavern, Where after the survey
of the SELLAR, you are presented WITH A pleasant pynte of Poetical Sherry.

Nulla placere diu, nec viuere carmina possunt
quae scribuntur aquae potoribus.
Horac: ad mecaenatem. Quem non

Huc, huc pierides.

Castalius or Vinum Hispanense

depiction of muse and vintner

LONDON: Printed by THOMAS SNODHAM, 1619.

APPROBATIO.
Jnnocuos censura potest permittere lusus,
Lasciua est nobis pagina, vita proba est.
Sic censeo M. Valerius Martialis. THE PRINTER To the Reader.
GENTLEMEN, I understand that the AVTHOR is so far out of patience, to hear
that this Pasquill is pressed for the public view, which was intended only for
the private satisfaction of his peculiar friends, that he will not greet the
READER so much as with a Letter of Commendations; yet considering that in these
days we are altother carried away with Fashions, and that it is quite beside
the custom to put forth a Poem, without a Dedicatorie preamble, let me I pray
you make bold, for want of a better scholar, to salute the courteous Reader
with a few words of Complement. Who the Author is I know not, and therefore on
his behalf I will be silent; yet I hear that he is of the mind of that
merry Huntsman, which would neither give nor sell his Hare, but when he saw the
Trauailer gallop away with her, and that he was out of hope to have her
again, he cried out, Take her, Gentleman, I will bestow her on you. Concerning
the Poem, although I shall be thought to be suitor vltra crepidam, yet in my
opinion, it is a tolerable Pint of Poetical Sherry, and if the Muses Seller
afford no worse wine, it will make Sack better respected, and go down the
merrier.

What the peevish, puritanicall, and meager Zoilist out of his malicious humor
shall calumniate, it skils not, for as the Proverb is, aut bibat, aut abeat:
This dish was not dressed to set his Dog-teeth on work, and therefore if he like
not these Lettice, let him pull back his lips, for as the Poet says, Virg. de
Liuore.
Non lux, non cibus est suauis illi,
Nec potus iuuat, aut sapor lyaei,
Nec si pocula Iupite, propinet, etc.
He was borne with teeth, and grynd when he first came into the world, he
feeds upon snakes, drinks small-beere and vinegar, keeps no good company,
lives without charity, and dies without honesty; hic finis Zoili.
Notwithstanding for the ingenious and candidous Readers, and all those fat
honest men which are of a frank and sociable disposition, I dare be bold to
promise, that this dish of drink will not be distasteful unto any of their
stomachs, for as they have bodies of a better constitution, so are their minds
more fairly qualified, and their judgments freer from corruption: and
therefore to their taste is this Pint of Poetry dedicated, which if it seem
pleasant to their palate, let me be well paid for presenting them with it in
paper, and I rest satisfied.

Libellus ad Lectorem ex Martiale.
RVmpitur invidia quidam, charissime Lector,
quod me turba legit, rumpitur invidia,
Rumpitur invidia, quod sum iucundus amicis,
quod conviva frequens, rumpitur invidia;
Rumpitur invidia, quod amamur, quodque probamur,
rumpatur, quis quis rumpitur invidia.
Non nimium cure: nam caenae fercula nostrae
malim conviuis quam placuisse Cocis.
Pasquils Palinodia, OR, His Pynte of Poetry.
Lo. I the man whose Muse whilome did play
A horne-pipe both to Country and the City,
Am now again enioyn'd to sing or say,
And tune my crowde unto another ditty,
To comfort Moone-fac'd Cuckolds, that were sad,
My Muse before was all in horns yclad,
But now she marches forth and on her back
She wears a Corslet of old Sherry Sack.
Therefore it is not as in days of yore,
When bloodshed and fierce battles were her song
And when her Trumpets did Tantara rore
Till all her murdering Soldiers lay along,
A milder tune she now plays on her strings,
And Carrols to good company she sings, The Dedication.

To all good fellows that are wise in Season,
Listen a while and you shall know the reason.
Long had she Chaunted for the horned Crew
And reaped no praise nor penny from their hands,
Nor cup of drink, which is a Fiddlers due
(As every good companion understands)
And therefore unregarded being dry,
My Muse grew melancholy out a-cry,
And angry forth she runs into the streets,
Cursing each churlish Cuckold which she meets.
When I beheld her in that moody vain,
Which wont to be so blythe and full of sport,
After I ran, to call her home again,
Least she might chance to meet some man of sort,
Some wealthy tradesman, that had been Cornuted,
Of whose large horns it must not be disputed,
And in this crabbed humor fall to rail,
And so be had to Counter, without bail.
When I my sullen Muse had ouertooke,
I began reprove her for her wild behavior,
And charged her to return, as she did look
Ever to be received into my favor:
But she as mad, as is in March a Hare,
Did like unto a Bedlam stamp and stare,
And for an hour her patience was so weak,
And rage so pressed her, that she could not speak.
At last when passion was a little sway'de,
And that the raynes of fury began to slack,
A thousand curses on the head, she said*
Of every Cuckold, that cries What de'e lack,
May all their horns grow visible to sight,
May they prove Jealous, and their women light,
And care not who look on, that all may geere
And laugh aloud when their Rams-heads appear.
And may discredit, scorn and foul disdain
Light on the horns of every English Goat,
Ungrateful churles, that reward my pain
Not with so much, as with a single groat:
Have I wiped off the scurrilous disgrace
Which every Varlet cast upon their face,
And righted all their wrongs, yet none so kind,
As with fair words to show a thankful mind?
If I had Chroniceld the hungry Rats
Which eat up Corn, and made provision dear*
Or Registered what price a Cade of Sprats,
And pickled Herrings, bare in such a year,
What grim-fac'd Collier stood upon the Pill^ry,
And who did march most bravely at Th'artillary*
Or how men walked on Thames the last great(...)ost,
Then I am sure my pains had not been ^ost.
But I have labored to redeem their fame,
And lift their heads to honor with my pen,
Disolu'd all Clouds that did obscure the same,
And ranckt them with the worthiest sorts of men,
I crowned their horns with bays, and graced the^ more
Then ever any Muse has done before,
And yet no Cuckold from the forked ranks,
Puts out his weathers-face to give me thanks.
If for their wives I had my lampe-oyle spent,
And in their service drawn my Inke-horne dry,
Those loving creatures would withal content
Have sought me out, my love to gratify,
Kisses and confects had fallen with my wishes,
And many other delicates in dishes,
And even the pen, that writ in their defense,
Should have been gilded for my recompense.
Hapless was I to leave those gentle Souls,
Poor worms, that suffer more then all men see,
And take the part of perverse Iobornols,
Void of good nature, love, and courtesy,
Now I perceive my error, and repent
That I against them was so vehement,
And that the world may know that I am turned,
Here I do wish those bitter lines were burned.
For now I find those Doves are Innocent,
And that the Cuckold chiefly is in fault,
Whose stubborn carriage, and stern regiment
Makes upright women many times to halt:
For when a man is of a sour condition,
Churlish and froward in his disposition,
It thrusts such things into a woman's mind
As she nere dreamed on, if he had been kind.
And blame her not, for she is not of Steel,
Nor made of Iron, Brass, or such hard Mettle,
Neither so senseless that she cannot feel
When she is used as Tinkers do a Kettle,
She is a tender thing, refined and pure,
And harsh rough handling cannot well endure,
But like a Venice- Glass, she breaks asunder,
When boistrous man will strive to keep her under.
Let the mad Cuckold ponder his wives case
In equal balance justly with his own,
And he shall find, that she does only trace
His crooked footsteps; for if she but frown,
Or somewhat sharply speak a word or two,
When good occasion moves her so to do,
Then straight he calls her half a dozen whores,
And to the Tavern gets him out of doors.
And what is then his prattle with his mates
His fellow Drunkards, sitting over the pot?
There he begins the story, and relates
What an infernal fury he has got,
An everlasting Scold, that's never quiet
But checks him for his company and riot,
Why bang her well quoth one, for by this quart,
If she were my wife, I would break her heart.
Well, quoth another, fill a cup of Sack,
And let all Scolds be damb'd as deep as hell,
Abridge her maintenance, and from her back
Pull her proud clothes; for they do make her swell.
And thus in devilish counsel there they sit,
Till with old Sherry they have drowned their wit,
Then druncke, at midnight, home the knave does creep,
And beats his wife, and spues, and falls asleep.
There lies the beast until he rise again
Next day at twelve, when being not half well,
A hair of Bacchus dog must cure the pain
In which by last nights surfeiting he fell:
Then he at Tavern, as he did before
Drincks himself drunck that day and many more,
And in this thriftles course his glass does run
Till he run out at heels, and be undone.
And what excuse does then the Bankrupt frame
For his profuse and prodigal expense?
Mary forsooth, his Wife did cause the same,
Against whose scolding tongue there is no defense:
For when a man at home cannot be merry,
He Is forced to run abroad to drinck old Sherry:
Thus she, poor Turtle, wrong and slander bears,
Who sits mean while at home in grief and tears.
Shall this most false and slandrous accusation
Be current for the man, and his abuse?
And shall a woman suffer condemnation,
And not be heard to speak in her excuse?
It is too great a wrong, and most unjust,
The weaker to the wall should thus be thrust,
And when she has a more indifferent cause
To be denied the favor of the laws.
Shall a vast unthrift with a false pretense
Wrong his poor wife, and be exempt from blame?
And shall a woman which has just offense,
And forced by dogged usage to her shame,
If she another friend do entertain,
To give her some content, and ease her pain,
Shall she be censured with disgraceful speeches,
And he stand clear because he wears the breeches?
Mars was the first Cuckold maker.
Awake great Mars, for sure thou art asleep,
Or such injustice thou would not let pass:
There was a time, when thou did love to keep
And in a corner kiss a pretty Less:
And therefore if within thy fiery breast
Any quick spark of warlike courage rest,
For old acquaintance sake do women right,
And let them not be overthrown with might.
But Mars is deaf, and justice will not hear,
And laws are partial against women's side,
And for because the cruel laws are clear
When women in another case are try'de,
That by their book they shall receive no favor,
Which unto wicked men is often a Savior:
They now suppose it is a great offense,
If they be heard to speak in their defense.
But they shall speak you forked Unicorns,
And you shall hear them to your small content,
And in despite of your ambitious Horns,
I Will stand as Champion for the Innocent:
And so display your baseness and disgrace,
That children shall deride you to your face,
And Town and country both, shall notice have,
That every Cuckold is a fool or knave.
Peace idle Muse, quoth I, and be content,
Thou art too bitter, vehement and loud,
These railing words will make us both be shent,
For Cuckolds are grown mighty, rich, and proud,
And wisemen think it is the part of fools
To be too busy meddling with edge-tooles:
And therefore be advised, I do implore thee,
Least with their horns, for barking, they do gore thee.
I care not for their greatness, she reply'de,
Nor do I fear them though their horns look high,
For presently let come what will betyde,
Into the City shall my Journey lie;
Where I will ring all Cuckolds such a peale,
As shall quite shame them in the Commonweal.
Well then, said I, if naught will bring thee back
Yet ere thou go, lets drink a pint of Sack.
For now I saw, that in this raging fit
To use persuasion was but further folly,
And that her passion bad exiled her wit,
And drowned my Muse so deep in melancholy,
That for to cure her was no other charm,
But with a cup of Sack to make her warm,
And heat her brains, which as all Poets find,
Does quicken wit, and quallifies the mind.
Between the Muses and the God of wine,
There is a league of kindness, peace and love,
There consanguinity does them combine,
Being begotten both by lusty Jove,
So that, no Muse well bred, and truly borne,
Her natural brothers company can scorn,
And by their crowns their amity is seen,
One wearing Laurel, the other Iuye green.
And this to be the reason I suppose
That every Iouiall Poet loves good liquour,
It is the Heliconian Butt, that sweetly flows
With sprightly Sack, which makes invention quicker,
And he is no lawful son unto the Muses
That loves small beer, and better drinck refuses,
Nor can a watrish wit the Laurel win,
His Muse is lancke, and his conceit is thin.
And not alone have Poets these conditions,
Merry conceited lads, and like their mothers,
But all their servants, Rymers and Musitions,
And red-fac'd Trumpetters, with many others
Which have with Crochets stuffed their pericranions,
Are still reputed to be good Companions,
And for this reason which is here presented,
My Muse to see the Tavern was contented.
Yet to the City feign she would have gone,
Yielding a reason for to draw me thither,
As that their wine was better ten to one
Near to the exchange, where Merchants meet together,
But I half Jealous, where great numbers be
That some grand Cuckold she might chance to see,
And in this heat of Furye fall to jar,
Drew her along at last through Temple-Barre.
Keep in your heads my Neighbors of the Strand,
And look not out until my Muse be past,
Your Wives are good, for ought I understand,
And yon may be no Cuckolds, and they chaste,
Yet least my Muse might chance for to discry
Something might stir her bile as she walks by,
For peace-sake, I entreat you every one,
You would pull in your heads, till she be gone.
Fairly we marched on, till our approach
Within the spacious passage of the Strand
Objected to our sight a Sommer-broach,
Ycleap'd a May Pole, which in all our Land
No City, Town, nor street, can parralell,
Nor can the lofty spire of Clarken-well,
Although he have the vantage of a Rock,
Perch up more high his turning weathercock.
Stay quoth my Muse, and here behold a sign
Of harmless mirth and honest neighborhood,
Where all the Parish did in one combyne,
To mount the rod of peace, and none withstood:
Where no capritious Constables disturb them,
Nor Justice of the peace did seek to curb them,
Nor peevish Puritan in railing sort,
Nor ouer-wise Churchwarden spoiled the sport.
Happy the age, and harmless were the days,
(For then true love and amity was found,)
When every village did a May Pole raise,
And Whitson-ales, and May-games did abound:
And all the lusty Yonkers in a rout
With merry Lasses daunc'd the rod about,
Then friendship to their banquets bid the guests,
And poor men fared the better for their feasts.
Then reigned plain honest meaning, and good will,
And neighbors took up points of difference,
In Common laws the Commons had no skill,
And public feasts were Courts of Conscience.
Then one grave Seriant at the Common Pleas
Might well dispatch the Motions at his ease,
And in his own hands though he had the Law,
Yet hardly had a Clyent worth a straw.
Then Lords of Castles, Manors, Towns and Towers
Reioyc'd when they beheld the Farmers flourish,
And would come down unto the Sommer-Bowers
To see the Country gallants dance the Morris,
And sometimes with his tennants handsome daughter
Would fall in liking, and espouse her after
Unto his Seruing-man, and for her portion
Bestow on him some Farm, without extortion.
But since the Sommer-poles were overthrown,
And all good sports and merryments decayed,
How times and men are changed, so well is known
It were but labor lost if more were said:
And therefore I Will be silent, for I hold,
They will not mend although their faults be told,
Nor is it safe the spur-gal'd world to prick,
For she is a lusty Jade, and Iades will kick.
Alas poor May-poles, What should be the cause
That you were almost banished from the earth?
You never were rebellious to the laws,
Your greatest crime was harmless honest mirth;
What fell malignant spirit was there found,
To cast your tall Piramides to ground?
To be some envious nature it appears,
That men might fall together by the ears.
Some fiery Zealous Brother, full of spleen,
That all the world in his deep wisdom scorns,
Could not endure the May Pole should be seen
To wear a cox-combe higher then his horns,
He took it for an Idol, and the feast
For sacrifice unto that painted beast;
Or for the wooden Trojan Ass of sin,
By which the wicked merry Greeks came in.
But I do hope once more the day will come,
That you shall mount and perch your Cocks as high
As ere you did, and that the Pipe and Drum,
Shall bid defiance to your enemy;
And that all Fiddlers which in corners lurk,
And have been almost starved for want of work,
Shall draw their Crowds, and at your exaltation
Play many a fit of merry recreation.
And thou my native town, which was of old, Leede

(When as thy Bon-fiers burned, and May-poles stood,
And when thy Wassall-cups were vncontrol'd,)
The sommer-Bower of peace and neighberhood,
Although since these went down, thou lie forlorn
By factious schisms, and humors ouer-borne,
Some able hand I hope thy rod will raise,
That thou may see once more thy happy days.
And now conceive us to be come as far
As the perspicuous fabric of the Burse,
Against which frame, the old Exchange makes war,
Misdoubting that her trading would be worse
By the erection of that stately front,
Which cries what lack ye, when men look upon it:
But for thy takings, Gresham; take no care,
Thou will have doings whilst thou have good ware.
Whilst Coaches and Caroaches are in the world,
And women take delight to buy fond Bables,
And over the stones whilst Ladies will be hurld.
For which their horses are still kept in the stables,
And whilst thy shops with pretty wenches swarm,
Which for thy custom are a kind of charm
To idle gallants, thou shall still be sure
To have good utterance for thy furniture.
And therefore be not envious, nor conspire
Against thy younger Sisters small beginnings,
Thou art so rich thy trade cannot retire,
And she so poor thou need'st not fear her winnings,
If ought do raise her head, (as who can tell?)
It is her lowliness will make things sell,
Her sole humility will vent her wares,
For if men will not climb, shel'e come down stayers.
If she this open course had kept before,
And out of sight her shops had not withdrawn,
Doubtless her takings would have been much more,
For points, gloves, garters, cambrick-smocks and lawn.
The man of trade which does the world begin,
Seldom grows rich if he keep shop within:
For by this means no custom can be gotten,
And ere he sell his wares, they will be rotten.
And therefore let a Tradesman that would thrive,
First get a shop in some fair street of taking,
My next advice is, that he fairly wiue,
For such a toy, is many a yong-mans making,
Then let his shop be stuffed on every side
With new additions to increase vain pride,
And he shall see, great Gallants with huge Broaches,
Light at his door from Male and Female Coaches.
The Burse of Britain left behind our back,
We now aproach the cross, ycleaped Charing,
A weather-beaten piece, which goes to wrack,
Because the world of Charity is sparing,
Hang down thy head, O Westminster for shame,
And all you Lawyers which pass by the same,
Blush (if you can) and are not brazen faced,
To see so fair a monument disgraced.
Do you not see how London has repaired The Cross in Cheape-side.

And trimmed her Sister, with great charge and cost?
And though her head was from her shoulders pared
Yet she is now restored, and fairly crossed,
Brave Freemen, I applaud you for this thing,
And will one day your further praises sing,
Mean while my Muse in commendation tells,
You keep your wives most neat, and all things else.
It is a shame you Gown'd-men of the Law,
For it is with you that I must put the Case,
Although I know you do not care a straw,
What I do tell you, yet unto your face
I say, it is a shame, and ill befits,
That you should sell your shreds of Law and Writs
At so dear rate, to many a poor man's loss,
And not bestow one Fee to mend this Cross.
For many pious Acts and Monuments
The City will for ever be commended,
Many fair Colleges with goodly rents,
From zeal of Kings and Bishops are descended,
And many private men, our ages wonders
Have unto famous Hospitals been founders:
But where suruiues that work of Charity,
That from a Lawyer draws his pedigree?
Redeem your fame, you law-full Barristers,
And let the world speak better of your zeal,
The commons say, which are no flatterers,
That half the riches of the Commonweal
Is in your hands, or will be if you live,
Because you always take, and nothing give,
And that your Fees which certain were of old,
Are now uncertain, like a Coppi-hold. The Fynes.

And yet they say you are so honest grown,
You will not take your Fee to plead a cause,
Though once you had a Fee, you now have none,
That single word accords not with the Laws:
It must come showring in a golden flood,
Or some of you will do a man small good,
And whatso'ere men give, you will not forsake it,
Because you know that by the Law you take it.
Thus do the vulgars talk, and you can tell
Whether this fame be true, or else a liar,
But howsoere it be, you may do well
To let poor Charity come near your fire
And warm her self, that men no more may hold
The charity of Lawyers to be cold:
It will men's loud with admiration draw,
To see some Gospel joined with Common Law.
And for the first good work of your devotion,
When next you trample to the spacious Hall,
Let Charing-crosse entreat you hear her Motion,
That for your succor by the way does call,
Build up her ruynes, and restore her glory,
Which time and graceles hands made transitory.
And let her be as fair to look upon,
As is the stately Cross at Abington.
Profit and honor certainly will spring
Both to your souls and calling by this sight,
Into your mind good motions it will bring,
As you pass by, to do your Clyents right,
To your vocation will arise from hence
A good report, and greater reverence,
When with a cross she is top'd, and fair carved under
THIS IS THE LAWYERS WORK, (good Reader wonder.)
To leave conceits, that vanish as a dream,
And which our age shall scarce report as true,
Let us proceed to our intented Theme,
For now to Westminster we nearer drew,
Which when I did consider, and withal
Into what danger we were like to fall
If we went thither, I began to think,
It were not best to go so far to drink.
The reason why thus far I did proceed
And train my Muse along from Temple-Barre,
Was to avoid the object which did breed
The raging passion that did Reason mar,
Therefore I thought the further I conuaid her,
From sight of Cuckolds, which so furious made her,
She would be sooner pleased, because we find
That out of sight is quickly out of mind.
But when I now conceau'd, that it might prove
As dangerous to go forward, as retire
(And that like to a Flounder I did move
Out of the Drying Pan into the Fire)
Because through Westminster wild Courtiers range,
And if there be no Cuckolds it is strange,
Forward I durst not go, but turned back,
Greatly perplexed where to drink our Sack,
Whilst thus I walked, much troubled and dismayde,
A voice I heard which from a window spoke,
And called, come hither (so I thought it said)
And thereupon my spirit began awake,
And upward I did lift mine eyes to see
If that I knew the place, or who was he
That did me call, when by the Sign I found,
It was a shop whose wares lay under ground.
It is a place whereas old Sherry sack
Is kept in durance in a dungeon deep,
Attended by young Beagles at his back,
Whose yawling throats will never let him sleep,
But when that he would take his rest, they spowte him
And grievously they hoope and pipe about him,
And for to let him blood they never stint,
Into a Gallon, Pottle, Quart, or Pint.
There lies he Prisoner to the God of Drink,
Entombed within a Coffin like a Barrel,
Because he was so forward, as I think,
With good stale English-Beere to pick a quarrel:
For he no sooner came upon our shore
And met March-beere, which he nere saw before,
But straight perforce they two must try a fall
Where both were cast and spewd against the wall.
Which thing when Bacchus heard, he for them sent,
And Sack condemned to dungeon dark as night,
Because he was so bold and insolent
On English ground against March-Beere to fight.
Beer by his doom was barreld up alive,
Because that with a stranger he would strive,
But was committed to a lighter vault,
For in his own defense he made the assault.
Not far from Sherry sack in prison lie
Many brave Spirits, for the like offense,
Whom Bacchus uses with great tyranny,
And for their liberty will not dispense,
Until the cruel Iaylour, with his spawne
Of little Currs, in pieces has them drawn,
And many hundred times has let them blood,
Which he sophisticates, as he thinks good.
In dreadful darkness Alligant lies drowned,
Which married men inuoke for procreation,
Next unto him brisk Claret is fast bound,
Which adds to Venison more acceptance:
Another corner holds pale colored White,
Which to see Iordane does a man incite,
And feeble Renish on the Rack there strives,
And calls for help to Merchants and their wives.
Strong hoop'd in bonds are here constrained to tarry,
Two kinsmen near allyde to Sherry Sack,
Sweet Malligo, and delicate Canary,
Which warm the stomachs that digestion lack;
They had a Page whom, if I can make meeter,
I Will let you know, they called him See me Peter,
But being found, he did no great offense,
Paying his fees, he soon was drawn from thence.
Far in the Dungeon lies a dainty youth,
With his sweet Brother, as their names make known,
Unlawfully begotten in the South,
And therefore are called Bastards, white and brown.
For love to these have women been convicted,
And still unto them some are so addicted
Although with other drinks their minds are pleased,
Yet without Bastard they are never eased.
Within the utmost limits of this Cell,
Surrounded with great Hogs-heads like to burst,
Old Muscadine without his eggs does dwell,
And Malmsey though last named, yet not the worst:
Yet these are better used then all the rest,
For seldom do the Beagles them mollest,
But in a morn, for then our use is most,
To call for these, and drink them with a Tossed.
Compast with fetters, these and many more
Tumble in darkness one upon another,
And never are in quiet, till the score
Kept by the Iaylors wife, an aged mother,
Has drawn them dry, and then again they vent them,
And in another case a new torment them,
Porters.
And sometime cruel Sarasins do roll them,
Which are so stubborn, that none dare control them.
Yet none of all these are more hardly used,
Then is that true good fellow Sherry Sack,
If you should hear how much he is abused
You needs must weep, or else remorse you lack,
Trodden with feet, sold like a slave, rackt, iumbl'd,
Let blood, drawn dry, and by fell Porters tumbled,
And least al these base wrongs should not provoke him,
With Yesso they him purge, with Lime they choke him.
Thus cold and comfortless is he confined,
Unto a hideous Cave, resembling hell,
Whereas the Suns bright beams yet never shined,
Nor can he hear Cock crow, nor sound of Bell,
Nor know how time does pass, for all his light
Is from a Candle, both by day and night,
And all the company which do frequent him,
Are only nimble Spirits that torment him.
Late in the night when most men are asleep,
And few are stirring, but thieves, catts, and crickets,
Into the vault the Iaylor down does creep,
Where how he deals with bung-holes and with spickets
I cannot tell, yet some men do relate,
He makes these strangers prove adulterate,
And that's the cause when women thereof taste
They fall to lewdness and become unchaste,
For to beget a wise well featured child,
Some have prescribed, that men must use good diet,
With unsound meat the body is defilde,
And with bad Wine the humors made unquiet,
Good wine does breed good blood which makes me think
If wives are naught, it is long of naughty drink;
For Woman, is by kind a virtuous creature,
If vicious potions do not change her nature.
From these close- Seller iumblings do arise
Great harms, and much annoyance to man's body,
For false impostur'd wines do hurt the eyes,
And turn a wise man often into a noddy,
Within the brain vile excrements they gather,
Which unto most diseases are the Father,
As deafness, rheums, coughs, gouts, and distillations,
Convulsions, palsies, itch, and inflammations.
These are the cause of quarrels and debate,
Wrath, Wounds, Disorder, Lust, and fornication,
For note, how long men drink immaculate
And honest Wine, without sophistication,
So long mad passion is stayde Reasons slave,
But when the Drawer once does play the knave,
And makes his Wine dishonest, and turn whore,
Then presently the Boys begin to rore.
And now I call to mind a pretty Tale,
My Tutor told me when I was a Boy,
Of some old Soldiers (if I do not fail)
He called them Greeks, that sackd the Town of Troy,
The sacking was by base compounded Sacks,
Which laid the Trojans senseless on their backs, Inuadunt vrbem vino.

And ever since good Fellows for the same,
True Trojans and mad Greeks have had to name.
Troinoxant.
Where Troy did stand, I almost have forgot,
Unless it was where London now is seated,
For sure no Trojan better loved the pot,
Nor with old Sack has oftener been defeated
Than has our Citty-Troian; yet I gather
It stood about the I Will of Tenet rather,
For (as I well remember,) he did say
The Island Tenedos stood in the way.
But let the Poets place it where they will,
And tell of doughty warriors cladin Steel,
How stiff Achilles did stout Hector kill,
And dragged his body beastly by the heel,
These are but fictions, for the truth is plain,
The Trojans were but drunk, there was none slain,
And what wise man will say, they were not drunk,
To fight ten years about a restie Punke?
But when the Soldiers were with Sack suppressed,
And some of them lay weltring in their goare,
And some on Beds and Benches fowlie dressed,
So gaped for breath, that one might hear them snore,
And all the drunken Trojans were asleep
In their disgorged pickle laid to steep,
Homewards the merry Greeks returned singing,
Yet having little cause to boast their winning.
For hereupon blind Homer tells a fable,
Of wonders that befell in their retire,
How Circe with a potion execrable
Converted them to hogs be-dawb'd in mire,
And how the Siren with her pleasant lays,
Sung sweetly unto them whom she betraies,
Whereas the Moral is, that wine compounded,
At Mermaide, into swine those Greeks confounded.
It Is not the virgin liquor of the grape
That turns a man into a filthy swine,
A Goat, an Ass, a Lion, or an Ape,
Such beastly fruits spring never from the Vine,
Brisk blushing Claret, and fair maiden Sherry,
Make men courageous, loving, wise, and merry:
It is adulterous wine that plays the Puncke,
And robs men of their reason being drunk.
By this time I suppose you may conjecture
What this dark Dungeon is, and that the house
Of which my Muse has read so long a Lecture,
Is nothing but a School where men carrouse,
And learn to drink; a little commonwealth,
Where every man is free to drink a health,
And none denide that can discharge the score:
In brief, it is a Tavern, and no more.
The strangers there captived you well discover
As being with them doubtless well acquainted,
And therefore vainly to recite them over,
My Muse of surplussage would be attainted,
Yet of their Iaylor I must needs complain,
Which does with so great strictness them restrain
That without money none their sight comes near,
And then attired in Pewter they appear.
The Bush did wag, the Dog did shake his tail,
When first my Muse and I approached the wicket,
The Drawers bid us welcome and al-haile,
And ask't what was our pleasures with the spicket,
I called for their directions how to find,
From whence the voice was to mine ears inclined
When straight anon a nimble Mercury,
Brought us up stairs among good company.
It was the day of all days in the year,
That unto Bacchus has his dedication,
When mad braynd Prentises, that no men fear
Overthrow the dens of bawdie recreation,
When Tailors, Cobblers, Plaist'rers, Smiths and Masons,
And every Rogue will beat down Barbers Basins,
Whereat Don Constable in wrath appears,
And runs away with his stout Halberdiers.
It was the day whereon both rich and poor,
Are chiefly feasted with the self same dish,
When every Paunch till it can hold no more,
Is Fritter-fild, as well as heart can wish,
And every man and maid do take their turn,
And toss their Pancakes up for fear they burn,
And all the Kitchen does with laughter sound,
To see the Pancakes fall upon the ground.
It was the day when every Kitchen reekes,
And hungry bellies keep a Iubile,
When Flesh does bid adieu for diverse weeks,
And leaves old Ling to be his deputy,
Though carnal Libertines are so inclined,
That still they love to taste what is confined,
For all their humors are so violent
They Will rather fast at Easter than in Lent.
It was the day when Pullen go to block,
And every Spit is filled with belly Timber,
When Cocks are cudgel'd down with many a knock,
And Hens are thrasht to make them short and timber,
When Country wenches play with stool and ball,
And run at Barly-breake until they fall,
And country Lads fall on them in such sort,
That after forty weeks they rue the sport.
And on this day, the Feast to magnify
Of merry Bacchus, which did hear reside,
Within this Tavern met a company
Of true, kind, honest hearts, quite void of pride,
That good companions and good husbands are,
And know both how to spend and how to spare,
That can be merry and yet never quarrel,
Nor drown their wits and reason in a Barrel.
And hear with many welcomes were received
My Muse and I, and fell to drinking Sherry,
Where after some few cups, as I conceived, Ille liquor docuit voces inflectere
cantu.

So it fell out, my Muse grew passing merry,
And from her sullen humor which did reign,
She was transported to a better vain, Qui canit art canat, qui bibit art
bibat.

And began to sing, like to a Iouiall drinker,
In praise of Sack, and tuned it to the Tinker.
COme hither learned Sisters,
and leave your forked Mountain, Parnassus.

I will you tell where is a Well,
does far exceed your Fountain, Castalius.

Of which, if any Poet,
do taste in some good measure,
It straight does fill, both his head and quill, Frustra poeticas fores compos
sui pepulit.

with ditties full of pleasure,
And makes him sing give me Sack, old Sack boys,
to make the Muses merry,
The life of mirth, and the joy of the earth,
Is a cup of good old Sherry.
It Is not the God of Appollo.
Physic,
nor his Apothecary,
Nor all his Drugs, that stand in Iuggs,
with Potions ordinary,
Exultatio animae and corporis vinu^.
That now shall be regarded,
or had in any wonder,
His Vrinall against the wall,
he now may piss asunder.
For we have found old Sack, old Sack boys,
which makes a sick man merry,
The life, etc.
Facit ad iucunditatem, ad anitatem corporis, ad vitae aequitaetem bonos mores.
It is the true Nepenthes
which makes a sad man frolic,
And does redress all heaviness,
cold Agues and the Chollicke,
It takes away the crutches,
from men are lame and cripled,
And dryes the pose, and rheums of the nose,
if it be soundly tipled.
Then let us drink old Sack, old Sack boys,
which makes us sound and merry,
The life, etc.
Liberat seruicio iurarum animu^, and asserit vegetiorem and and aciorem in
omnes conatus facit.
It is the River Lethe,
where men forget their crosses,
And by this drink they never think,
of poverty and losses,
It gives a man fresh courage,
if well he sup this Nectar,
And cowards soft, it lifts aloft,
In praelia trudit inermem.
and makes them stout as Hector,
Then let us drink old Sack, old Sack boys,
which makes us stout and merry.
The life, etc.
It is the well of Concord, Omnis animi asperitas dulciori succo mitigatur
leuit transitum spiritus, ac molliores efficit meatus.

where men do take up quarrels,
When love does lack, by drinking Sack
they draw it from the Barrells.
If drunkards are unruly,
whom Claret has enflamed,
With a cup or two, this Sack can do, Bibant and furoris sui nonrecordentur.

they sleep, and so are tamed.
Then let us drink old Sack, old Sack boys, Qui been bibit been dormit.

which makes us kind and merry,
The life, etc.
The Broth with Barley sodden, Multae allae potiones sunt, quibus in penaria
homines vt untur, tamen inter omnes hoc vinum tenet, quia datur nobis ad
necessitatem, ad sanitatem, and ad hilaritatem.

compares not with this licker,
The Draymans Beer is not so clear,
and foggy Ale is thicker:
Matheglin is too fulsome,
cold Cider and raw Perry,
And all drinks stand with Cap in hand
in presence of old Sherry.
Then let us drink old Sack, old Sack boys,
which makes us blythe and merry,
The life, etc.
No fiery red-fac'd Claret,
attended with his Borrage,
No Renish wine that is pissing fine,
nor white, that cooles the courage,
No base begotten Bastard,
nor blood of any Berry,
Can raise the Brain to such a strain, Hoc vinum acuit nigeium.

nor make the heart so merry.
Then let us drink old Sack, old Sack boys,
which makes us blythe and merry,
The life, etc.
The Citizen loves fidling,
that he may friske and caper,
The Scholar looks upon his books,
and pores upon a Paper.
The gentle blood likes hunting
where dogs do trace by smelling,
And some love hawks, some groves, and walks,
and some a handsome dwelling.
Sack sapit omnia.
Yet all these without Sack, old Sack boys,
makes no man kindly merry.
The life, etc.
Vinum dicitur quia vinculum societatis.
The knot of hearty friendship,
is by good Sack combyned,
They love no Iarrs, nor mortal wars,
that are to Sack inclined,
Sine Cerere and Sacco friget Virtus.
Nor can he be dishonest,
whom Sack and Sugar feeds,
For all men see, he is fat and free,
and no ill humor breeds.
Then let us drink old Sack, old Sack boys,
that makes us fat and merry,
The life, etc.
Vt cor per tristitiam contrabitur and torpescit, ita per vini laeticiam
laxatur and titillat.
A quart of Sack well burned,
and drunk to bed-ward wholly,
I dare be bold does cure the cold,
and purges Melancholy,
It comforts aged persons,
Rugaque frontis abit.
and seems their youth to render,
It warmes the brains, it fills the veins,
and fresh blood does engender.
Then let us drink old Sack, old Sack boys,
which makes us warm and merry,
The life, etc.
Sack makes a faithful subject,
that does no treason study,
Nor does he think, when he takes this drink,
of plotting murders bloody,
He loves his King and Country, In vino verita (...).

from whom he never started,
The great black Jack well filled with Sack,
does make the Guard true-hearted.
Then let us drink old Sack, old Sack boys,
which makes true Subjects merry,
The life etc.
No care comes near this fountain, Eluit curas, and ab imo animum mouet.

where joy and mirth surpasses,
And the God of drink stands up to the brink, Aliquando in exultationem and
libertatem est animas extrahendus, tristisque sobrietas remonenda paulisper.

all armed in Venice glasses,
And calls upon good Fellows,
that are both wise and merry,
That about this spring, they would dance and sing,
and drink a cup of Sherry.
Then let us drink old Sack, old Sack boys,
which makes us wise and merry,
And about this spring, let us dance and sing,
and drink a cup of Sherry.
Thus sung my Muse, and thus the storms were laid,
And she grew debonaire and fairly calm.
When any Muse with rage is ouer-swaid,
Let Poets learn it is a sovereign balm,
To wet their pipes with good facetious Sherry,
Which makes them iocond and most sweetly merry,
And thus I brought her home, where now she rests, Foecundi calices quem non
fecere disertum?

The feast is done, y' are welcome all my guests.
Aliquando insanire iucundissimum est.
FINIS.

