The original and spring of all sects and orders by whom, wha^ or were they
began.

Translated out of hye Dutch in Englysh.

1537

To the reader.
FOr as much as there is in the world great disputacyon and reasonynge of
sects, and so many also of the same sects and religions both contrary to
Christ's most holy religion, and also among themselves. To induce them
therefore unto thine understanding (most gentle reader) and to describe them
unto thy knowledge, we have here gathered together the names, fashions and manner
of lyuynges of all such sects and orders as are not only under the B. of
Rome but also both among the Christen and among ye Jews, how and when they
came up, with the manner also of their garments and sundry clothynges.

Which treatise if thou read diligently, thou shalt think it no maruayll,
that there is now such contencyon and division in ye world, in as much as there
was no time, no age, no generacyon sense the beginning, but always there has been some sects, some diversity of opinion, and some sundry manner of belefe in
ye same. The Jews lacked not their Pharisees, their Saduces, their Effeies.
etc. The communite also of Christian dome has this long time not ben without
innumerable sects and diverse religions, stablyshed by the B. of Rome. Ye
every land nacyon and contrye, has in a manner a sundry fasshion of living, a
sundry fashion of doctrine, a sundry fasshio^ of clothyng, etc. and has had (I
say) this long season. And though some of them which be called seetes, are
not far from Christ nor his faith yet the most part (specially of them that
be brought in by ye B. of Rome) are no less contrary unto Christ, then were ye
false prophets in times past, then were the pharisees, and then were the
heretics that have been sens Christ's incarnacyon. For in as much as they will
not only be called other wise then Christen, but deny also ye power life,
faith and merits of Christ, who can then be more contrary to him: who are
the^ more worthy to be called brethren of sects and division, then such are?

As thou seyst therefore ye their doctrine is contrary to Christ's, yt they
preach lies and dreams, that they deceive the hearts of innocents through
fair and flattering words. Romans xvi. that they come to the but in shepes
clothing Math. vii. that they deny the power of godliness. ii. Timo. iii.
that they devour wydowes houses under the pretense of long prayers. Math.
xxiii. So be thou ware of them, of their false doctrine, of their lies and
dreams, of their fair and flattryng words, of their feigned holiness. For
all is not gold that shyneth, nether are they all of Christ's covent, that
wear broad crowns, wide coules, and side coats. And forget not that S. Paul
says. The deuell can change himself in to angel of light.

Shute not thou the^ at a wrong mark but hold the unto Christ, and to the
unite of his doctrine, of his faith and of his religion, that thou may here
be fre from all false hypocrisy, and not only knyt unto him herein this world,
but inheritour also of his joy in heaven.

Amen.
The contents of this treatise.
1 lxxxiiii. Orders, sects or religions under the bishop of Rome. 2 xiiii.
Faythes and sects of Chiste^dom only, beside all other. 3 xvi. Sects and
supersticio^s of the Jews or Hebrews.
The nombre of this Table signyfyeth the leaf, A the first side thereof, and B
the second.

Austinians the first order vi a Ambrosians two sorts vi. b Antonyes heremites
ix. b Austins heremites xi. b Austins obseruauntes xii. b Armenians sect xlv.
a Ammonites and Moabites lix. b Basilius order iii. a Benets order iiii b
Bernardes order xiiii. b Barefooted freres xxxii b S. Brigittes order xxvii. b
Beghartes or white spretes xxviii. b Bemes faith xlvii. a Brethren of Jerusalem
xxxv. b Brethren of S. Ihon de ciuitate xxxvi. b Brethren of wylfull pouerte
xxxvi. b Cluniacensis order iiii. a Chanons of S. Austine vii. b Charterhouse
order viii. a Cisterciensis order xiii. b Cross bearers or crossed freres
xviii. a Carmelites or white freres xviii. b S. Clares order xxii. a Celestines
order xxii. b Camaldulensis order xxxi. a Cross starred brethrenxxxiiii. a
Constantinopolitanysh order xxxiiii. a Cross bearers xxxvii. b Chapter monks
xxxviii. b Dutch order xxii b Esset li. a Grandimontensis order v. a Gregorians
v. b Georges order xxix b Guilhelmites xxxii. a Grecians faith xliii a
Georgians faith xlviii b Gerundinensysh order xxxix. b Galilei or Galileans
liiii. b Heremites i. b S. Helens brethren xxxv. a Humiliati xvi. b Hospital
brethren xli. b Holy ghost order xl. b Ieroms order. ii. sorts vii. a Ihons
heremites. x. b S. Iustines order xi. b S. Ihons order xxv. a Iniesuati xxvi. b
Ieroms heremites xxx. b Joseph's order xxxii. a Indian faith xliii b Indian
faith vttred by Matthew lxi. a Iacobites sect. xliiii. a S. James brethren
order xxxv. a S. James brethren with ye swearde xxxv. a Indians order xxxvii. a
Jews lii. b Idumet lv. a S. Katherine of Senes order xli. b Keyed monks xli.
b Lazarites or Mary Magdale^s xxxvi. b Lords of Ungary xl. b Minores or
Minorites xxi. a Maryes servants xxv. a Monks of mount olyuete xxix. a
Marouinyes sect xliiii. a Moronites sect xliiii. b Mosarabites faith xlvi. b
Moscouites faith xlvii. a Monachi and Monache xxxix. a Morboney and Meristei l.
a Menelaysh and Iasonysh sect lix. b New chanons of S. Austine xi. a Nestorini
xliiii. b Nolharte brethren xxxiiii. b New order of our lady xxxvi a Nazarei
liiii. a Paul's heremites x. a Premonstratensis order xvi. b Preacher order, or
black freres xix. a Peter the Apostles order xxx. a Purgatory brethren xl. a
Pharisei or Pharisets l. a Roman faith xlii. b Rechabites liii. a Sarrabaites
vii. b Sambonites xvii. a Scourgers the. i. sect xxii. a Souldyers of Jesus
Christ xxvi. a Scopetines xxvii. a Specularii or the glass order xli. b
Surian faith xlvi. a Sepulchrers order xxxiii. a Sheere order xxxiii. a
Swearders order xxxiii. a Starred monks xxxiii. b Starred freres xxxiii. b
Sclauony order xxxvi. a Scourgers the. ii. sect xxxvii. b Stool brethren
xxxix. b Scotland brethren order xl. a Samaritani xlix. b Saducei li. a
Sicarii, lvi. b Templare Lords xv. a Templare knights xvi. a The vale of
Iosaphat order xxxv. b Uallis vmbrose iiii. a Waldenses sect xlviii a
Wentzelaus order xxxiiii. b zelotes lv. b


Of sects and orders.
A treatise of all sects and orders where, when and by whom they are bego^ne,
stablyshed and confirmed.
Of the Bishop of Rome, Cardinals and other of his spiritualty in general.
IN this register or rehearsal of sects is the Bishop of Rome (that vsurpatly
called himself Pope) the first in order, as an head and father of his whole
body, accompanied with his members, chylderen and creatures as a hen with her
chekens, namely: Cardinals, Patriarchs, Bishops, Curtisans, Prestes, Monks,
Freres, and his whole spiritualty. Whose holiness and life (God be thanked) is
so come to light, yt even the chylderen upon ye street do speak and sing of
it. And the deuell also does show him as though he were weary of him out of the
world, but mids of the deuels kingdom, that is the world, to watch, and be
sober in all godliness. For God will have his to be abroad and in the light.
Ioh. iii. and Math. v. and set them judges over the whole world. He can
separate and keep the roses from thorns welynough. I know none example in the
whole scripture of bodily separatynge from the world, save only of Christ,
Moses, and Helias, which another took upon them to dwell in wyldernesses, but
only for a season to fast or commune with God. Wherefore I ca^ not be persuaded
that this life is so acceptable to God. Christ knows how nedeful the true
Christe^men be in this world. First, that they may lyghten and shine in the
world: Secondarly, yt they may teach and exhort: Thyrdly that they may give
counsel and help, geuynge a good example to every man, and stop ye mouths
of bacbyters with ye truth. Fourthly that God condemn the world with the^. If
any man will here allege Ihon Baptist I answer: Ihon fled not always the
company of men, but only when he would prayeor fast, otherwhyles was he in
Herodes court, where he shoned no man as the heremites do, but preached unto
them repentance, receauyng them that came to him, and at time convenient he
went again whether the sprete led him. Thus may one being mids in the
world also, be out of the world, as all Christen men ought to be, and as
Abraham in Canaan, Daniell in Babylon, Joseph in Egipte. These foresaid
heremites were in ye time of Decius, Ualens, Theodosius and Dicletian, from
ccc. year after Christ until. M. about what time monks order began. Some
say they fled persecution in the wyldernesses of Egipte, and so were feign to
dwell there unknown look upon Otho bishop of frisingen. the. vii. book ye.
xxv. chap. thorowout.

iii. Basilius order.
ANno. ccc. lxxxiiii. in the time of Siricius B. of Rome began thy first
monkysh order, raised by Basilius Magnus, bishop of Cesarea in Cappadocia.
Their cote, cloak, cole, and cappe were all white. He prescrybed them a rule
mixte with many tradicions and doctrines of men: Wherefore he is called of them
a father and a begynner of relygyous people, whose life he also prayseth, so
that he optayned of the aforesaid Syricius to confirm the order. He called
them Monachi, that is, solitary or separate from the world, and founded in
Greece the first house or cloister How they be divided and separate from the
world, we have seen and do se daily.

iiii. Benedictus or Benets order.
SBenet a father of monks, which gathered together all strowed religious men,
did begin a peculiar order Anno. M. xxiiii. in the time of Ihon ye i. B. of
Rome upon the mount Lassinus, where he buylt ye most renowned cloister,
geuynge them there a rule, prescripte, and form of living, as though Christ
had forgotten it. Now after he had long shyned in a wilderness, and much
resort was to him by reason of his Gods service, he buylt. xii. places and
filled them with religious men. Of this order is reported to have been. xxiiii
B. of Rome. c. lxxxiii. Cardinals. M. cccc. lxiiii. Archbyshops and bishops.
xv. M. and lxx. renowned Abbots, and as says Ihon the. xxii. Bishops of Rome.
v. M. vi. c. lv. monks canonisate or saints. This is the. iii. brood that
the B. of Rome has hatchte. He raised also an order for his sister Scolastica,
and made her abbess: her clothing was a black cote, cloak, cole, and veil.
And lest the scripture should deceive her and hyrs, it was commanded that none
should read the holy scripture without consent or permission of their
superior. Here is to be seen how God is sought in all orders, which in his
word is expelled.

v. Cluniacensis order.
ANno. ix. c. xiii. has S. Benets order begotten this sect whose bygynner was
Otho the abbot. For when the monks of S. Benets rule were nerehande decayed in
godliness, this Otho lived so, that they were quickened again byreason of his
holiness. Their clothing and rule was as Saint Benets. A duke of Aquitania
Guillidinus by name relyued the Giginacy or Cluniacis cloisters with great
substance, and yearly rentes.

vi. Uallis vmbrose or Shadowed vale order.
ANno. M. cccc. or as some say: a^no. M. lxx. Ihon a Florentine, whose father
called Gualbertus was a knight, did begin this order under S. Benets rule
with adding thereto, and chaungynge of black clothes into graye: whereof there
is many in Tuscia and upper Lo^bardy. This Ihon after the tenoure of his story
or lege^d was come to the monkery or cole after this fashion: He was at
variaunce with an vplandysh man, for slayenge of his brother, wherefore as he
upon a time rode out of Florence to avenge his brothers death, the manslayer
met him even in the teth, not far from the cloister Minati in the mountains,
upon whom he fell. Now when the vplandysh man saw no escapynge, he fell at
his fete, desiring him for the crucified Jesus Christ to pardon and forgive
him his offense. Where upon Ihon was so reconciled concerning the
manslaughter, that he abatyng his mood and leaving his fury, forgave him all
the debt. Now as he went from thence in the before said cloister, and fell
down bofore the crucifixe there should ye image have moved and beke^ned with
the head, sygnifyenge that God was pleased with the forgiveness of the debt
unto the manslayer: which cross is yet at this hour seen by Florence upon an
hill, where greatreuerence is showed to it. Upon this was he styred to give
himself over unto a spiritual conuersacyon, gat him a none to an end of the
mount Apenninus where he builded a cloister, and began this order. At ye last
he dyed Anno M. lxxiii. after that the order was well increased in persons and
cloisters.

vii. Grandimontesis order.
ANno. M. lxxvi. under Alexander the. ii. B. of Rome did this new order
begin, by one Steven the son of a gentylma^ of Auernia: which trauayled
many co^tries to seek out a solitary place, where he might serve God quyetly: at
the last he came in Aquitania, where he found a mountain full of woods, and
spryngynge fountaynes, and an untrodden land. There did this Steue^ pytche, and
began a straight life with fasting, watchynge and prayeng to God. His meat
was bread and water, his clothing was a cote of males upon his bare body, and
a black cloak there upon, where with he did penance, and y magined to become
ryghteous before God. With this life he gathered many discyples, whom he
exhorted to wylfull pouerte. Now thought the monks of S. Austins order their
title to be better to yt place: wherefore ye brethren would remyue with a good
will, prayenge God insta^tly to show the^ another convenient place. Wherefore
upon a time as Agnus dei was song at mass, a voice (whether it came from God
or ye deuel) was herd, saying: In Grandimonte. Upon this they rose and
builded there a cloister or place for them.

viii. Gregorians order.
IN the year. ccccc. xciiii. did Gregorius Magnus borne of a noble stock of
Rome, very plenteously endued with goods of fortune forsake all, and chose a
relygious state. After the deceasse of his father he builded. vi. religious
houses in Sicilia, geuynge the^ a form and rule of living: and he builded
another wtin Rome, in the name and honor of S. Andrew, wherein he dwelte with
many brethren, who^ he steared greatly to the subduyng and chastenynge of ye
flesh. He did we are a copper colored course cloth according to his rule. His
brethren (because they kept his rule as diligently, as if it had be^ gods word)
they were called Gregoria^s after him.

ix. The first order of S. Austins.
IN the year. cccc. xc. did S. Austine (after yt his mother was departed) sail
unto Cartago with his brethren, distributed his patrimony among poor folk, and
began in a house in ye woods to take upon him to follow the Apostles by a rule,
having a sleght black garment: whether it was a cole, or not, I can not show.
I reke^ it was in deed a black garment as shall be specifyed here after in ye
order of ye chano^s: There is no order as it was institut: Ye though ye
fou^ders of the^ had a fre and good meaning, (whereof I am not sure) yet by
addyng and abatynge more or less the^ Austyne or Benet and such other institut
they are so sore chasiged, yt they should not now know their brethren. I find
no more of S. Austin but yt he was fervent to follow ye Apostles, couetyng and
endeuouryng to live after their example, wherefore he called his rule ye gospel.
But I fear me lest ye deuel also have scoffed with S. Austine and his good
meaning: For if ye rule be his, wherefore calls he her ye gospel: if she is
Christ's, wherefore calls he yt rule yt is p^scribed al me^ his own? as though
every Christian man neded not to live after the ensample of Christ and his
Apostles? Finally in every play has the deuell one part. It passes my
capacyte to show the manyfold dyuersite of the orders of S. Austyne. Ye I
fear lest Austyne him self should scarce know the^ for his disciples.

x. Ambrosius order, two sorts.
OF S. Ambrose that was in S. Austines time about the year of our Lord.
cccc. xc. and did convert him, I read no mo^kry. But I think some apes or
counterfayters have presumed to follow his life, seeing he was counted for a
monster of the world, and have at any time seen him have on a graye or russet
garment, and so counterfayted his clothing and conuersacyon: but the pyth
wherein all co^systeth, that is, faith in the heart, that have they left him,
having a rechelesse heart under a graye garment. An other order is there
rekened of S. Ambrose, which wear white cotes, and a cloak thereon, wherewith
they foolyshly ymagyne to do God an acceptable service, and yet they (as all
other) are plain heretykes: seeing they seek health and think to merit
thereby by God, which has an eye to faith only. Iere. v. looks upon ye
workemayster and tree, and not upon the fruits or works. Genesis iiii. Pro. xxi.
Math. vii. and. xii.

xi. Ieronimus order. ii. kinds.
AFter Christ's birth. cccc. xc. year or there about took Jerome upon him ye
religious or heremiticall clothing, in the wilderness of Syria, after he was
consecrate a pressed and cardinal at Rome. Afterward anno. M. cccc. viii. rose
a new beggynge order under the name of S. Jerome in the time of Innocentius
the. vii. Anno M. cccc. v. a county Redo by name a religious man of the. iii.
order of S. Fraunces in the land of Etruria by the town Fesulana, whose
companion was Water Marsis. These twain did begin, institute and augmente
this order of obseruacyon. This order is brought under the rule of S. Austyne,
by the reason of the excellent vow of Gregory the. xii. B. of Rome, and endued
with priueleges and lybertyes. When this order now was decayed and near hand
come to naught, it was renewed and restored again by one Lupus a Spaynyard,
general of ye same order, which ordened new co^stitucio^s and orders, taken of
ye sayenges of S. Iero^, and was confirmed with sundry preuileges and franchises
by Eugenius ye. iiii. B. of R. and with a gray cloak i^ remembrance of yt
religion of ye aforsayd iii. order. This was don anno. m. cccc. xxxvii

xii. Chanons or regular prestes.
THis order began to florysh again in yt time of Gregory ye. vii. and Henry
the iiii. emperor, an. M. lxxx. i^ ye church of S. Quirin at Beulake ye which
was first institute by ye Apostles, after by S. Austine, and now by master Yuon
prouest of the same church, which was afterward B. of carnotu^ They wear a
black gown, and a scapulary wound about the arm, they be half monks and
half prestes.

xiii. The Sarrabaites order.
TO this sect surely belong such of ye spiritualty that by mouth profess
wylfull pouerte and not with heart. For these Sarrabaites be said not only to
come of Ananias and Saphira by untrue dissimulacyon of retaynyng their goods
Actu. v. but also by lynage and kynred. These under ye color of wylful
pouerte, would seem to have forsaken and bydde^ al temporal goods farewell,
after ye institucio^ of ye apostles: under ye which color ye covetous wretches
busyed to gather great goods and possessions, which they optayned. Of these
does S. Hierome write thryse to S. Austine. They dwelt first in Egypt i^ holes
and caves, clothed with oxe^ and suynes hedes, gyrded about with halters unshod and
bloody went they often to Jerusalem at ye feast co^fessyng their wylful pouerte
and despysyng of al thing, so long, till they were enryched thereby. They
pulled themselves by ye beerd i^ sight of al ye people, whereby they gat
themselves a name of great holiness, afterward returned home again lade^ with
goods, where they lived at their ease S. Austine commanded to fly these.
They plated thorns in ye he^mes of their vesturs, where with they be blouded
themselves. Finally they began many strange deuyces till they waxed rych and
lived i^ ydelnes Read Bid and Aug. the. xxi. sermon ad fres in Eremo.

xiiii. Charterhouse order.
ANno. M. lxxxvi. did this order begin in Gallia or France by Bruno the
Philosopher and divine, who^ Bernard calls a fair pyler of the church. This
order is confirmed by Alexander the. iii. and the. iiii. Bishops of Rome with
many other This order prospered greatly not by reason of time (as every man
knows) but because of the strayghtnesse of living. On this fearful wise did
the order begin: While the university of Paris floryshed, there dyed one of it
that was of great renown both of learning and honesty. Now while the Dirige
was song for him, in the presence of many doctors, masters, and learned men,
at these words: Qua^tas habeo i^iquitates etc. as ye body rose in the coffin,
a voice was herd saying: By the ryghteous judgment of God am I accused. At
this voice were they all abashed and concluded not to burye the coarse. The
second day, was like voice herd. On the third day was near hand the
whole city gathered to hear the voice and then did the coarse rise again as
before, with this voice: By the ryghteous judgment of God am I condemned. This
pearsed through many hearts, but specially Brunos, borne at Colen, which then
was deane and ruler of the university, so that he said to his disciples: Lo
how peteously and pity fully peryshed he, which notwithstanding was rekened of
every man a saint for his living. Here upon went he in a wilderness with
seven men, and builded there an house purposynge in his mind to lead a
straight life, every frydaye to fast bread and water: and never to eat
flesh, were he never so sick, to wear heery clothes next his body, never to
come in to the world, to keep pertuall silence, and to speak only with God, to
sit alone in a cell, and so with great chastenyng to do penance for his
sins. Urbanus the. ii. B. of Rome is reported to have been this Brunos
disciple. Hugo also yt was as who say an heremyte and charter house monk in
this world, a very myrrour and example of all virtue, would have taken upon him
this order, but he could get no license of the B. of Rome. I pass over yt
fable that is written of him. Lo good reader these deuelysh practyses upon what
fundament they are grounded. The deuell thought this shall be my deuyse: For the
world can not judge or discern this living, they shall estyme it an holy
living, all is gold with them yt shyneth, chefly in spiritual matters. If
this living be of value, then are the Heithen, Turks, and Calicutes virtues
me^: for they have monks of strayghter living. But whosoever the matter be,
the world will have monks and freres.

xv. Anthonyes order.
ANno. ccc. xxiiii. began Antony in Egypt a straight and solitary life. He was
the first hermit. His meat was only bread and water, and fasted until Son
set. He went wyllyngly in the wilderness, where many resorted unto him, ye
which made him their Abbot. S. Jerome says that he wrote vii. epistles or
letters in ye Egiptian speech, full of sprete and mysteryes, which afterward
were translated into Greek. Athanasius B. of Alexandria writes his life in a
co^plete book. He dyed at Thebaida. ye. ccc. lvii. year after Christ's birth,
the. c. v. year of his age, who^ another I ca^, nor will judge, he has one to
judge him: but ye sort of apes yt endeavor to follow him in clothing, and
not in faith, making of his living a rule, so like to his life, as ye deuell
is like God, those I say I count as heretykes and dissardes. This
cou^terfaited order wears only a black garment with a blewe cross thereon, they
use beggynge, they have a fraternite, wherein they threate^ folk with S. Antonis
fire, ye they have brought ye matter so far, yt in some parties they have
pigs fatted to the^, where with they fat their bellyes, and mock and maw at us.

xvi. Paulus or Paulins order.
THe year. ccc. xlv. was one Paulus an heremiticall monk or heremite in
Egipte, a companion to ye foresaid Antony, which spent his life in wilderness
When he was. xv. year of age, fleing the promotynge of Ualerianus and Decius
Emperors of Rome, though he was of noble progeny, yet left he all, and went in
to wilderness, where he dwelt in a little cave. xcviii. years unknown, to any
man, living in fasting and prayer with water and bread, herbs and roots such
as ye wilderness did mynister thus lived Paul. But mark yt apes that have yt
name and order after him, and yet have no more of him, then some Christen men
have of Christ, that is, ye surname: For all his goostlynesse, life, faith,
consysteth with them in their white garments or coules and kappes: The color
of whose clothes we read no where yt Paul did we are like, so yt I can not
tell from whence they have yt name. For Paul fasted, but they are fulbelyes: he
was poor, but they are rych: he was solytary, but they ru^ne about: he had
si^ple clothing and a clean heart, but these have a whit garment and black
hearts: so yt of Paul they have no black scapulary and a black kappe but they
have changed ye scapulary in to a whyt lyne^ rochet. This order is said to
have many learned men.

xix. Of S. Iustines order.
THe year. M. cccc. xxxii. some say. M. cccc. xii. did one Lodwyck or Lewis
Barbus a cou^seler of Uenice, raise up a new order of S. Iustine, under S.
Benets rule, in ye parties of Treuisa, in ye cloister of S. Justin by ye city
Badua. This order has Eugenius the. iiii. confirmed with many and great
priueleges. Their clothing can I not describe.

xx. The heremites, of S. Austins. or Guishelmians order.
THe year. cccc. xviii. (as is said before) began this order in a wood about
ye city Hippo by Cartago. Wha^ he had dwelte there. iii. year, he began to
make a rule for the^ after ye Apostles rule. Upon this came there so many to yt
place, yt one would have thought it had snowed monks, so yt many cloisters
were buylt of the^. Now wha^ ye Ua^dalies came in Aphrica, they overcame near
hand ye. iii. part of ye world, so yt they quenched almoost al ye Christian
name. Wherefore certain brethren came in to Hetruria, endeuouryng there yt ye
holy order should not be rooted out. But because of ye persecucyon yt ye
Gothies and Lo^bardes used, this hermetical order was clean destroyed, and
monkry nearehande clean rooted out. Thus is this order often decayed and often
raised again, reformed, and gotten many names, as now a days the
Benedictines and Grayfreres, whereof some be called barefooted, some
obseruau^tes, some Franciscanes, some Bernardines, some minores, some Amedei. As
this order now had be^ decayed a great whyl, there rose one Guyliame a duke of
Aquitania and cou^ty of Lictania, which this youth was taught of s. Bernarde.
This man restored again S. Austins order both in words and deeds. For ye
greater he was before in ye world, ye lowlyer he was become i^ ye wilderness,
whether he went of fre will to chastise his flesh and subdue it, with a cote of
males on his bare body, always watchyng, prayeng, and fasting: wherefore he was
called a father and restorer of ye order. When Guyliam now saw ye decay of his
order, but ye increace of ye cistercie^ses order, he gat a gelousy to this
order, and busyed hi^ to enlarge it, insomuch yt he gathered a great no^bre of
persons, which were called Guylelmites until ye time of Innoce^tius ye. iiii.
B. of To: For the^ were they called to the city out of the wilderness, and
their name changed in to Heremites of S. Austine. This Guileame after the
heremitish living by the consent of Anastasius and Adrian bishops of To. did
build about (or as some say wtin) Paris ye first beggynge order, the which
was confirmed by Anastasius the. iiii. So that this is the first beggynge order
that is brooded, changed from pouerte in to riches, going so long about till
they were nothing worth. After yt builded they with beggynge many other
cloisters, until they have filled the world: and so is beggynge that once was
forbydde^, become a gods service. This change lasted from. M. c. l. till. M.
c. lx. year.

xxi. The regular order of the obseruaunces of S. Austine.
ANno. cccc. When S. Austine was chosen bishop in Aphrica he was compelled to
leave the wilderness and to wait upon his office: wherefore he busyed to buyld
also a cloister in his house, wherein he with his children and household might
live after the Apostles rule, which were of one mind to Godwarde, and to
possess all things in common. But what manner of clothing they did wear,
find I expressed by no credible storywrytter. wherefore it is to be thought yt
they have used honest rayme^t, according to the fashion of the contrye, and not
to have known of any cole, as the apes do imagyne. And if it were so that he
had used a cole, yet counterfayte his sons and folowers him in nothing else
save that pagen, the which every vile and noughty fellow can do. As for his
holiness of life and faith, that bequeeth they him, as not pertaining to
them. The clothyng of the Austins apes is not now a days alyke in all places,
but often changed after the use of the contryes, so that. x. sorts of
Austinians are in one cote. I will not speak here of their faith, seeing that
every one has a sundery faith, and yet would be calsed an Austinian: they
make, break, make again, and mende, and that such things as Austine would
not once have dreamed, ye when he ryseth, will not know. Some wear all
white, some black cotes, some white rochets and a scapulary with a black cole,
some otherwise. There be rekened to be xxiiii. kinds of orders only under sent
Austins rule, whereof every one has his patro^, in following whose life they
thynk to please God: yet is there none that will follow Christ

xxii. Cisterciensis order.
THe year. M. xcviii. after Christ's birth began in ye wilderness of But gony
this order by Roberte the spiritual abbot and father of the same, which was
afterward confirmed by Urbane the ii. B. of Rome, and brought under S. Benets
rule. By reason of many frau^chises and priueleges under the shadow of
holiness it is come so far, that their abbots sometime and heremites and
dwellers in wilderness are now Lords and peers of realms, ye drowned in the
world and his pompt, riding with so many horses, that one would think there
came a world. This is a strange flyenge and despysynge of ye world Some would
think it were a mockage of heremiticall living. When I write of their order
and beginning, and behold them now, if in my mind I conpare them together
that were than and be now, my think I write of Christ and take the deuell for
an ensample, and make him a brother of Christ's couente. For as the deuell is
Christ's ape and counterfayter, which follows him even upon the heles, and
will do all things after him, even so do the apes likewise. The first founders
though I am not perfect of their sprete, with what intent they began, and
seeing one may well suppose that they were not dryue^ thereto by a good sprete:
(for their intent is to much given to sects, their own ease and profit, ye
and to heresy also) yet have they a better appearaunce and shine of holiness. To
go to far in Gods judgments is not permytted unto man, yet may every tree be
judged by his fruits. He that will not be reproved of his wicked living, let
him endeavor to redress it. When this. order of saint Benet decreased, and
decayed in virtue, than went Robert with. xxi. monks as despysers of earthly
and lovers of heavenly things into a wilderness called Cistercium, and there
iustitute them a new order called Cisterciensish order. After ward by
counsel and procuracion of some dukes, bishops and legates, began they to
change the Heremytage into an abbaye, which in short space came to great
lord ships. Steven the which was abbot after Robert, was sorry that so few
came to his religion, forcause of the straytnesse of ye order. In the mean
season came Bernarde with his bethren and made ye religion more easyer. They
wear reed shues and white rochets on a black cote, all shoren, save a little
cirkle.

xxiii. Bernardes order.
ANno. M. c. xx. did Bernarde shine, a Burgonion, the son of a knight of
great lynage, the abot of Clareuall or Clereuale, whereof he was abbot. xxxvi.
year In his time he builded. c. lx. Cloisters.

Some say that he has changed somthynge in the Cisterciensysh order, chefely
in the garment, for they wear now black clokes upon white cotes. Nevertheless
to declare their foundation and original they wear the Cistercie^sish rochets
upon high and principal feast days. Their rule accords very well with S.
Benets. S. Bernard wrote many books which testifye of his learning and
holiness. This order has many cloisters and swalowed up innumerable goods of
the world, whose abbottes many one are Lords, riding with many horses, and
say mass with myter, croyser and cope like a bishop. They serve God many
ways, only they preach not like contemplatife fathers, orels very little,
perchance it becomes them not, or else their order will not suffer them to
use so sleght an office, or (yt I might soonest be persuaded) they can it not
and therefore commit it unto vplandysh prestes, so yt I think one could not
furnysh one Bernarde out of so many cloisters, though he bet them even to a
plate.

xxiiii. Templer order, their beginning and decay.
AFter Christ's birth the year. M. c. x. in the time of Gelasius the. ii.
began this order at Jerusalem and continued neareha^de. cc. year, whose
beginning was thus: After that Gotfraye duke of Lorayne conquered Jerusalem,
certain knights perceauyng that such pylgroms as came to them of their
denocio^ and were robbed and murdered by the way, they made a bond among
them to serve God in chyualry. At the beginning they were but few and gave
themselves to wylfull pouerte, and their chefe-mayster was a keeper of the
tempell bore, whereof they were called Templar lords. They dwelte together, not
far from the sepulcher, lodging the pylgroms, keeping them from myschefe,
and showing them much kyndnesse, bringing the^ from one holy city unto an
other. Their orders badge was a white cloak with are ede cross S. Barnarde
made them a rule. They became very rych in few days by gifts of great men
and pylgroms, wherefore pleasure took root also among them, so that they came
to decay of virtue into al vice, and were all destroyed vpo^one day in yt
time of Clement the. v. B. of Rome, a^no. M. ccc. x. because that (as some
say) they were fallen to the Saracens, scornynge Christ with the infideles,
for whose cause (notwithstanding) they were heyred to war. Wherefore they were
in one day destroyed in france (where they had their being) of Philip king
of France and other lords, by the consent of the B. of Rome, with their
graundmayster both twnes, castles, treasures, possessions and other goods all
burnt and murdered, as was done also before in Asia and Syrya. These foresaid
Lords and the king by the B. of Romes permission did make an apoyntment and
bond by a bull (and no man should disclose this priuite under damnacio^ of his
soul) how that on one day they should fall upon them, and depryue them all of
their lives, and to wend the goods to other spituall uses, hyrynge with them
other defenders of the faith. Thus peryshed this order all in one day, and
their goods were partly turned to the knights of Rhodis, which than began
there, having there their graundmayster, partly was it bestowed to the
spiritualty in England. Some say that this rootynge out of them was more
because of envy of their prosperity and royalte, than of gyltynesse. For as
their grau^dmayster James Burgonion was burnte at Paris with many of his
brethren, he took his death thereon that he was never gylty of the accusacions
laid to him. But if religions now should be destroyed for their riches, or else
because they are gone from the faith: I fear me there should few cloisters
remain standing for their living and hypocrisyes sake.

xxv. The order of Temple knights.
AFter the birth of Christ. M. xx. began the order of temple knights at
Jerusalem, called S. Ihons. These live under S. Austines rule, and have black
lay clothing, yet very like the rule, and there upon a white cross on their
breast, they are institute to fight bodily against the infideles. Their chief
being is in the I Will Rhodis, where they be under a graundmayster with all their
houses and churches. And though they be for the most part seculare, yet
enjoy they the fredomes of the church, fulfyllynge daily their tax of Pater
nosters.

xxvi. Premonstratensis order.
AFter Christ's birth. M. c. xix. began this order in the byshopryke of
Laudune^sis. under S. Benets rule by one borne at Cole^ called Notohobertus or
as some say Norbertus. Of this order can I find nothing perticularly, but
that they be clothed in white from top to toe to declare their unstained
virginite.

xxvii. Humiliatorum or the submitted order.
AFter Christ's birth the year. M. c. lxvi did this order begin, (Yet do
some say that it was under Henry the vi. anno. M. c. lxxxix) in the time of
Alexander the. iii. The first say that what time the Emperor Frederike
Barbarossa had troubled Italy, and specially Gallia Cisalpina, and had
bannyshed many, both men and women and chylderen into Dutchland: as they now
continued there a season and were filled with mysery, they clothed themselves
all in white, came to the emperor, prayenge him forgiveness, and to let them
go home again, the which was granted and permitted unto them. Now when they
were come home, they kept themselves together, and promised to go in lowly
clothing, the men and women to be separated each from other, and to labor
every one what he was skylde in, and had a commune purse (Their head called
they a Prouest, they kept the rule of S. Benet. This order increased so both
in goods and persons, that it was confirmed and endued with many privileges of
the B. of Rome.

xxviii. The Sambonites or good brethren order.
THe year. M. c. xcix. did Ihon surnamed the good a restorer of S. Austins
order florysh, which had such a pryck of the flesh, that he feared he should
have been feign to forsake religion, and to have turned again to the world:
wherefore he took sharp thorns, which he put under the nails of his hands,
and put his hands often under a stone to preasse them, and chastysed him self
so hard that he was oftymes beside his wit. He lay. iii. days spechlesse, so
that he knew nothing of himself. At the which time a woyce should have said to
him: Ihon, thou have conquered, thou shall no more be assaulted of thy flesh.
Thus was he at the first a good monk. After this he raised up the decayed
order of saint Austine, chaungynge little in garment, but making the order
strayghter. Upon this came many to se his holiness, which were steared to
forsake the world, to renounce all, and to accompany themselves to him,
yeldynge themselves to the life of S. Austine. They builded many cloisters, and
surnamed themselves Sambonites or the good brethren: for he was called ye good
Ihon or Johannes bonus. Such is the beginning (good reader) of the orders that
swalow up lands and people, and devour wedowes houses. It is a commune
proverb: A young angel, and old deuell.

xxix. The crossebearers or Crossed freres order.
IN the year of our Lord. M. cc. xv began this order in the. lxviii.
council of Rome, it was begone long to fore, but sometime left again: at
the last it was raised again and confirmed by Innocentius the. iii. in the.
xviii. year of his byshopryke of Rome. The beginning was of this manner: Among
the^ of Albania rose a pestilent heresy, which caused a great dissension among
them of Rome. Wherefore ye B. of Rome sent many against them marked with the
cross, which were all slain. These laudable and praise worthy souldyers did
he halow therefore, and raised the order again with geuynge of many fredoms and
preuileges. Unto this order did Innoce^tius ye. iiii. B. of To. give a rule,
co^maundynge yt ye spiritual of this order should always wear a cross in their
hondes. Quiriacus a B. and martyr in yt time of Helena the mother of
Constantine ye great Emperor is said to be the founder of it: but it was
come to such decay, that it was almoost gone to naught. The year of our
Lord. M. cc. xxii. should it have been reformed: their clothing is a black
cope with a cross thereon, the bygnesse of an hand.

xxx. Carmelites or white freres order.
ANno. M. cc. xviii. did Alberte a patriarch of Jerusalem raise again this
order in Syria by mount Carmelus geuynge of his own power thereto many
fraunchises and privileges, and ordened a rule for it. Now when this order
increased and multiplied thorowout the world it suffered much trouble.
Wherefore Honorius ye iii. B. of Rome thought that this order suffered
unworthily so much, by reason of his holiness (which yet was not great) for
the which cause he translated this order under yt title of our lady of mount
Carmelus, chau^gynge somewhat their raiment. Some say that this holy order in
his first clothing (that they said was of Helias or Heliseus) was greatly
accept to the Soldane, and endued with many almesses of him: but after they
thaunged their raiment, he drove them out of his kingdom, so that of necessite
they came in Europa. There have they fallen to beggynge, so that in short space
they grue greatly. They boast Cirill, Angelus, and Albertus to be their
saints. Lo good reader this is the reasonable ground of their order, which
was so good, that it pleased also the Heythen, which shame and rebule Math. x.
Ioh. xv. xvi. they will in a manner boast where as the true Christen be always
persued of the evil Christen: ye the properte, nature, and chance of the
gospel is, that it brings hatred of the world with it. Mark farther: this
holy cole brought them a cross and trouble, who ever herd such like? This
order is to beg, to take of every man, and to do nothing again for it.
Their clothing was wont to be a white and black checkered cope, but now a
black cote gyrded about the^, and a white cloak upon yt. Their order is to
drink wine and to begyle the people with much babbling Math. xxiii.

xxxi. Preacher order or black freres of S. Dominike.
ANno. M. cc. xx. was Dominike Calaguritane a Spayniarde the begynner, leader
and father of this order: which yet being in his mothers womb was declared
unto her what he should be, on this manner: She dreamed, that she had a wolf in
her womb, which had a burning torch in his mouth, the which the preachers do
greatly auaunce and expou^de it to their orders glory, as they well can.
Nevertheless it is well known what beast a wolf is, he is no sheep which
signifies Christ and his Ioh. x As for the torche, I take it for his wolfysh
learning, wherewyth he has set all the world on fire and begyled, or else
made the^ sheep, that he might devour them: for fire and a torche do not
always sygnifye ye holy ghost. Now little does it agree than with holiness and
the gospel that their dream does sygnifye, that she bare a wolf, where as
Christen men are sheep, and in no place called wolves, nor yet is the wolf any
where taken for goodness? This Dominike was first a chanon regular, but with great
ferue^tnesse of sprete (as is well to be thought) founded he this order, and
took the cole, ye clothyng of his order upon him, for he douted how to be have
himself in the heresy yt was spronge up of the virgin Mary, yt he might root
it out. As he now vanquissed and overcame yt gayusayers of the B. of Rome at
Tolossa, he optayned the co^firmacion of his order of Honorius the. iii. B. of
Rome, the which afterward overwhelmed al contryes. This shynynge man dyed at
Bononia, and was canonisate of Gregory the. ix. Their order is to beg as the
Carmelytes, and to forsake little by wylfull pouerte, whereby they take much and
wax rych. Their cote is white, their cope black. Their rule is S. Dominks and
not Christ's, according to the name. Mark good reader what strawy and papiry
foundacio^ the orders have, ye founded upon a frosen yse, so that when the
Son of truth does shine, than melts their foundation, and their building
decays. What a like tale is this yt an author of sects shall destroy sects
and heresies? If one heretic may drive out an other, tha^ were these
heretical dyuels always the fearcest. But Christ says. mat. xii. yt one
deuel can not drive out another, yet are they confirmed to root out all
heresy, namely that is against the Popishnesse. Afterward in a general chap-
(...) Bononia it was concluded to give over all immovable goods and re^tes
that they might so themore frelyer wait upon ye office of preaching, but now
they could be content to have more than they have in possession. Innocentius
B. of Rome saw in a dream the church loused and discharged upon Dominikes
shulder, wherefore he did confirm the order.

xxxii. The barefooted order.
ANno. M. cc. xxii. approbated Honorius the. iii. B. of Rome a good frerely
father this order also. The which was founded of one Frauncis an Italian which
was a marchaunte and a worldly man until he was. xxv. years of age. After that
cast he in his mind to follow Christ, despysyng all worldly things. And when
he was shod and gyrded with a duble gyrdell, he remembered the words Christ:
(Possess another two cotes, nor shues, nor yet a staff. etc. and: whosoever
forsakes not all things can not be my disciple,) he cast all things from
him even also the gyrdell, and gyrded a coard about him, and began
contynently this order. In the which he was so straight to himself, that to
chastise his flesh in winter season he would cover his body with yse and
snow. He called pouerte always his lady, and loved rather to hear himself
reuyled then praised, he kept nothing over night. His heart desired
martyrdom, where upon he went in to Siria to the Soldane, which received him
honorably: whereby it is to be thought that surely he told him not the truth.
For truth is seldom welcome in courts, and in ye world. I will here pass
over the fable how Christ and his saints did mark him with the. v. wounds.
As he had now thus chastised his flesh. xviii. year, he dyed at Assis, and was
canonised of Gregory the. ix. Thus have thou (good reader) described unto the
the gospellysh ape, the pyler, stay and foundacyon of the barefooted order.
Let it be so that he had a good meaning, where be then his folowers? I may se
perchance his cole or garment, but his life I se nowhere. I read not that he
nor his went about with a box, saying gospel from house to house, and in
every gam were one played, nor yet that he ware cut shues or patius.

xxxiii. The minorites of s. Frau^ces.
(...)

fire and swearde.

xxxvi. The Celestines order.
THe year of our Lord. M. cc. xcvli. was there a good B. of Rome, Celestine
by name, which wyllyngly gave over the byshopryke, and would have returned
again to his hermitage (wherein he dwelty quyetly before his popyshnesse) had
he not ben let by Boniface the. viii. B. of Rome. Some apes counterfayted
this holy B. taking upon the^ an order under ye rule of S. Benet in a
wilderness, and called the^ selves Celestines after Celestine. Their orders
garment, cloak, cole, and kappe should have been blew, and Celestine should have
bego^ne it, but his storye denyenge it accords not here with.

xxxvii. The Dutch order, or order of the lords of Prusse.
ANno. M. cc. xvi. or as their rule specyfyeth. M. c. xc. when the Emperor
Frederike the. ii. hooste lay in Pruse to resyste the assaults of the
infideles, and that there rose a great disease among ye soul dyers, some of ye
goodharted souldyers made a cotage or tente of a ship, wherein they carried the
diseased, and with great te^dau^ce served them there, gatherynge an alms
among the hooste, and when they went to field, they were always the first
like fervent souldyers: so that princes and great me^ had a great mind to
them. Among these were some rych and honest cytesens of Lubeke and Breme which
undertook by the Emperor to make a brotherheade among them, by ye which deed
they did alure many to them.

They promised also if the land of Pruse should be given them, they would like
brethren and men of chyualrye, conquer it again. This was granted them,
given and registered. Duke Conrade also of Mosauia that wrote himself lord of
it, gave them over his title under a golden bull. Thus raised they a
brotherhead among them to war upon like adventure, either to lyse or to win, come who would, and procured in ye mean time a confirmacyon of this
their brotherheade of the B. of Rome, which they gat and obtained. Than
proclaimed they their order, and all such as were written in to it had a piece of
ye sail of yt ship where under they tended the sick and diseased. And
vnderone they made a statute, ye whosoever would join himself to them, should
wear a white lynnen cloth, cast about him, like the Egipcyans do, closed
about the neck, lest it fell from them, and a black cross thereon. This
brotherheade was called, ye Dutch order of ye hospital of S. Mary at
Jerusalem: for they took none therein, but Dutchmem. As for yt title knights or
lords, yt they gat long after. Now as they had conquered and taken in Pruse
it was granted them to go further, and what land they took in, yt to be their
possession and heretage. Upon this they took in every one yt came to the^, save
those married men yt had children, if he were married, and had no children, he
might be received welynough: For it was ordyned yt after his death al yt he
had, should come to the orders be hofe Married men were marked with an half
cross only, but ye other with a whole cross. They refused no kind, for they
took also we men in to their order, ye and prestes. This chyualry and
knyghthode against ye Heythen, and their busy cure to ye diseased was a great
shine of goodness: but wha^ they gat a little rest, they made out a procture,
with a sleght copper cross, and unknown relikes, to gather in diverse places,
to the mayntenaunce of their order and hospital. They obtained also great
pardon for them yt relyued the^ with their goods, bodies, aid and counsel: so
that they increased greatly, founded every where hospitals, wherefore every man
was ready to give and to mantayne the^. Such also as were slain in ye aforesaid
battayls, were holde^ for martyrs, whereupon they caused many ge^tlemen, and
souldyours to war for the^ at their own costs, and to conquer lands and
people. But what they gat with conqueryng and lymytynge, yt drue they all to
their own, payeng their ayders with thanks, and bought with the goods yt they
gathered both those ways, tributes tolles and one piece of land after another:
and as they increased in goods and possessions, so decreassed their cure to
the poor. At the first they led a straight life with the chastifynge of their
bodies, but specially with tendynge of the sick. When Dutch gentlemen came to
vysite them, they could scant find an empty corner to put of their harness,
it was so full of sick folk, and of the brethren that prayed, whereof some
scourged them selves naked with rods, which foolyshnesse at that time had a
great shine of holiness. With this conuersacyo^ and shine of holiness, as
warrynge and beggynge obtained they in short space. iii. lordshippes, namely
one in Dutchlande, (that they gat with beggynge) Prusse, and Eyflande or
Lyfelande. Mark now the chaungynge and alteracyon: At the beginning was the
order fre for every man, and an hospital of the poor, but now has the
gentlery bytten out the poor: the whole and sou^de them that were sick and
diseased: the rych the poor, so that it is no more called the hospital of the
poor, but of the gentlemen, and are called no more brethren, but lords and
knights of the Dutch order. Moreover, it is not now fre for every man, for
eue^ gentlemen themselves must make labor and friends to obtain it. Thus well
remains every foundacyon in this wicked world, so that I counsel him that
will do good to his neighbor, to do it by his life days, and let foundacyon be
foundation. Their head now is called Comither.

The order of S. Iho^s or knights of Rhodis has like beginning, myddell and
end, wherein also are now only lords, cou^ties, and other gentlemen: Unto who^
the order is not showed before they be entered therein.

xxxviii. The order of Maryes. servants.
ANno. M. ccc. iiii. was one Philippe a very spiritual and devout man the
founder of the order of the servants of our lady. He raised this order under
the rule of S. Austine, with even like words and fashion, making difference
of it with certain ordinances of the freres of our lady: which order
afterward was confirmed by three B. of Rome, namely: Been: ye xi. Boniface the.
viii. and Urbane the. vi. and is rekened among the beggynge orders. At the
last it was wholly sanctified and hallowed of Innocencius the. viii. and
delivered of the evil will that some cloisters did owe them. Their garments
are like our ladies brethren. This order began under Benet the. xi. B. of
Rome, and shortly increased greatly in goods, persons and cloisters,
decreased only in sprete.

xxxix. The order of saint Ihons, or the Lords of Rhodis.
ANno. M. ccc. viii. what time Jerusalem the city was lost, and ye Templars
were destroyed, by reason they were fallen to a great Idolatry, certain
knights with a great company of gentlemen and other vale au^t men made a
compacte in the name and honor of S. Iho^ Baptist (wherefore they were called
Iohannites.) These took upon them to recover again the lost I Will of Rhodis if
it were given them to possess it freely, orels would lose their lives. This
being granted to them they took their journey the therward, which was
prosperous unto the^, so that they recovered it, and drove out the Turks of
it, repaired again the destroyed city of Rhodis, and mended their nauye: so
that not only they kept the I Will for farther assaults of the Heythen, but also
aided greatly the Christian that were in Cipres and other Isles about them. For
the which aid and succurre, the goods of the Templars in the east were given
them by the B. of Rome and other Christian princes. And even so was the I Will
Rhodis with all ye lorshippe thereof given unto this order of S. Ihons.
Afterward of their own devotion and good mind desired they ye rule of S.
Austyne, whereby they being endued of the B. of Rome with many privileges and
fraunchises, optayned many good deeds. The Soldane or Turkysh Emperor has so
long warred upon this I Will, till at the last Anno M. ccccc. xxii. he has taken
it in Nevertheless he has ofter had euel fortune before it then good. It is
said that there was a castle in this I Will, called S. Peter, wherein ye Christen
did often fly the power of the Turks, wherein are exceadynge curste dogs that
knew Christen men by smellyng and were loving to the^: but against ye turks
would they fall fearsly, bytyng and tearyng the^, so that they have been often
hurt of the^. Their head is called ye Grau^dmayster. Their clothyng is black,
and a whyt cross thereon. They wear also a swearde, in toke^ of their
knyghthode.

xl. The order of the souldyers of Jesus Christ.
ANno. M. ccc. xxiii. did Iho^ ye. xxii. raise this new order of Jesus Christ,
so that the brethren of this order should use chyualrye against the Saracens
in Portingale. The chief head of the order is in the city Mirinu^ in the
Sylue^sish byshopryke, where their principal housynge and castle is. Unto
these souldyers by the consent of ye king of Portyngale, be ye goods given
which ye Te^plars had in Portingale, where with they should be sustained. The
head of the order is the abbot of the byshoprycke Alchasia, which has power
to admit and depose such souldyers. Of their clothyng have I no where red.
Their rule is to war and to be wild.

xli. The order of Iniesuates.
THe year after Christ's birth. M. ccc lxv. did this order begin under
Urbane the. v. B. of Rome, in the city of Hetruria called Sena. The founders
of it began in houses, in worldly raiment after the manner of spiritual men,
serving God in the sweat of their brows and their handycrafte, in great
love and charity one with an other. As now the foresaid B. of Rome called the^ to
him, he had a great pleasure in their living, and gave them a white cote to
their orders habit, and a scornful cole to wear thervpo^, and ordyned the^ to
a patro^ or defe^der a virtuous and holy man (but ye B. of To. friend) i stead
of a prouest or abbot. The same (according as he was commanded) gave the^ a
graye garment to wear upon ye white cote, and to go unshod. They were endued
with many pardons and priueleges, so that they greatly increased in few days in
many cities of Italy, being well accepted and counted for true ensamples and
folowers of the Apostles. Their daily service is a certain tax of Pai
nosters. They have no orders, yet are there many learned men among them in
Italy now a days. The beginning of the order was good, seeing that they served
god wyllyngly and freely without any rule: but after that the Antichrist of Rome
had made an order for them also, than was the fredom of their sprete bound to
a rule and clothing and than had this order also done before God. For Christ
will be alone, he will another be bound himself, nor his true disciples
another, ye where he is truly received, there makes he all fre: but ye
Antichrist of Rome will set his seat also in men's consciences, wherefore
Christ and his word be feign to give place to his wicked tyranny.

xlii. The Scopetines or S. Saluators order.
THe year after Christ's birth. M. ccc. lxvii. did this order be gynne by
certain spiritual fathers of saint Austins order in the parties of Seen in
Italy: The which Gregory ye xi. B. of Rome did approbate, endue with
priueleges, and asscribed them among the chano^s regular or quere prestes. And
for a memorial of their first foundation and spiritual estate, they wear a
white garment with a white scapulary upon a white rochet. They live of their
rentes, and revenues. They preach not, yet hear they confessions. Hitherto
have they ben in estimacion and greatly set by.

xliii. The order of S. Brigitte or Bryde.
ANno. M. ccc. lxx. should Basilius have been founder and instituter of this
order in Grekelande, so that both men and women should live together
spiritually under one rule. But because some ouerthwarte men laughed this
spiritually to skorn the order was discharged, and afterward raised again be
Brigitte, and institute that they might well have their habitacion both under
one roof, but me^ and women separated each from other, so yt the one might not
come to ye other, save only wha^ need required to minister the sacraments. The
church should be common to both, nevertheless ye systers should be closed
above in a closet, and the brethren to be beneth, waytyng upon the divine
service: and yt these should tend the altar, and they the quere. The Abbess
should have the primacy on S. Brydes behalf, and ye brethren to be under her:
so yt she should provide both man and woman meat, drink and clothyng Among
the brethren should one be called Prior, warden or Co^fessoure, and be above ye
other. The women should be co^secreated and brought in by the bishop. Their
clothing is a graye cote with a graye cloak thero^, and a reed cross in a white
cyrkle. They may wear no lynnen, after the tenoure of their rule.

Their rule is S. Austins, with it that S. Bryde put thereto, which God (if it be
at the leest way true) did declare unto her and confirmed by the B. of Rome.
In Sweden and Germany are their cloisters for the most part. These brethren
hear confessions and preach at high feasts. They have also lay brethren,
as in many places nto. Because of foren occupyeng has every cloister his
certain brethren and systers.

xliiii. The white spretes or Beghart order.
ANno. M. ccc. xcix. or as some say. lxxxix. rose the Beghartes in Italy after
a strange rysyng of the people so that every man wythyn the Alps or
mountains of Italy clothed himself in a white lynnen garmente, having a cole
like a freres abyte, and coming down even to the toes: among whom were many
noble men and women, princes, prestes, monks and all kind of spiritual men,
which also clothed them of this fashion. These all went procession wise, ever
two and two together unto the next city, and cried with a merry noise for
peace and mercy. They sange and praised God. Noman went about to begyle any
man by craftynes at this time, no stranger was oppressed, all hatred ceased,
and alenuy turned to peace: This continued ye space of. iii. months. Among
these were there. iii. M. of ye city Luca, they went to Florence, ye men went
before ever two and two, their wynes followed them likewise in the precessio^
with their faces covered. The cross that went before the^ is yet at Luca, and
is kept in great reverence, to the which is a pylgrimage, and images of gold,
silver and wax are offered unto it. The occasion of this was a pressed which was
so passing in visage, words and behaueour, that of many he was taken for a
saint. Bonifact the. ix. B. of Rome caused him to be taken at Uiterbiu^to
bring him up to him, to burn him like an heretic, and to cast his ashes in
the air: and thus vanyshed this swarm again alone by process of time.

lxv. The order of white monks of mount olyuete.
ANno. M. cccc. vi. in the time of the scisma or division between Benet ye.
xiii. and Gregory the xii. bishops of Rome began this order about Sena in
Italy, by certain cytesens of the same. For many cytesins fearing God, as
they saw this discord and division between these. ii. popesor B. of Rome, and
other unhappiness in the world, gat a great grudge and myspleasure at it,
drue together with one accord, and a little from the city upon a hill called
olyue hill, or mount olyuete, here began they to discharge them selves of
worldly care, and to serve God like contemplatife heremites By the ensample of
this were many noble and gentlemen with other steared and inflamed to join
themselfes to them, and lived in heavenly contemplacion. Now when their good
noise came to the B. of Romes ears, and their fervent contemplacion in godly
things, he caused certain of ye chief of them to come to him, to equire of
their life, and conversation: wherein he had an exceadynge great pleasure, and
confirmed the^ with many privileges. Their clothing is all white. Their rule
is S. Benets, with some addicions to it.

xlvi. S. Georges order.
ANno. M. cccc. vii. rose also a new regular order of S. George of Alga, by
Uenice, that was begone by the spiritual man ye Patriarch Laurence Iustiniane
of an increable straytnesse of life. This gatheringe did Gregory the. xii.
stablysh under S. Peter's rule and ye first order, with certain ordinances joined
thereto. Eugenius ye. iiii and many other notable bishops and cardinals were of
this order.

xlvii. S. Peter's order or ye Apostles order.
THe year of our Lord. M. cccc. ix. did the order that was iustitute first
of the Apostles, and afterward of S. Austine by the town Hippo in Aphrica
wo^derously increase, and decay again. Afterward in the. xxii. year of
Henry the. iiii ye Emperor of Rome, (according as many cronicles do
specifye) was it set up and raised again by Iuo the bishop of Burgony. This
order, (namely to live after ye perfection of the gospel) is often decayed and
raised again. Anno. M. ccc. xlii. in the time of Benet the. xii. B. of Rome
should this order have been raised, confirmed, and brought again to his old
flore. Some call it the regular or the obseruaunt order of S. Austine. This
order (if it be else of the Apostles iustitucio^) was first raised to God without
any rule or co^pulsion of their heart, being bound to no thing, cleued to
nothing else but to God, possessynge al things as though they had and
possessed them not, and lived without any difference of meats and clothyng,
being fre from all pmyse save only baptyme: but after yt s. Austine closed it
in a rule, and the B. of To. have patched many constitucyons and
commandments to it, disanullynge the precepts of God, as namely: with
choice and difference of meats, clothynges, days, promyses, persons, places,
times and with excludynge of marriage as an uncleanly thing, is the order become
the deuels order, and he abbot of it. The Apostles order ought to be commune
unto all Christen men, for they taught them always in general, and made no
difference of Christen men. All Christians have one commune doctrine, law,
baptyme, lord, gospel and Christ, but they have so long botched and cobled
to it, till it is become the deuels. It is so often changed, (the which I can
not now all show,) until at the last they be clean dispensed from Christ,
and his gospel, to a Iewysh spiritualty, and an order of their own inuencyon.

xlviii. The order of the heremites of S. Jerome.
ANno. M. cccc. xii. is there risen an here meticall order of S. Iero^ by Lupus
of Hispalu^ a proui^cial of the order, whost rule is drawn out of the
wrytynges of S. Ieroine: the which rule being sent to Martine the. v. B. of
Rome to confirm, pleased him very well. So that these monks, which before had
lived after S. Austins rule, did now take S. Jerome for a gyde and master. They
have graye clokes, and say service after the Roman use. We have spoken of
them before also.

xlix. Camaldulensis order.
ANno. ix. L. and. l. did this order begin in the parties of Hetruria by one
Romuldus an abbot of Rauenna. This wilderness belonged to one Maduldus by
name, which gave it to Romuldus the holy man for a dwelling place, after whom
the holy man caused it to be surnamed for a perpetual memory. He ordined his
monks to we are a white cole, to whom many gentlemen and other forsakynge the
world did join themselves. Among all other was one Petrus Urceolus duke of
Uenice come to their company, which after his death declared the holiness of
the order with many tokens and miracles. While Romuldus lived he did augme^t
the order wonderously, so that in some places. iii. or. iiii. cloisters were
buylt atonce, which increassed excedyngly in riches, conning, and persons.
Their rule is unknown to me. Their cloak and all from top to toe is white. I
doubt in their opinion and mind, and also in their virginite and behaueoure.
For cronicles do praise many things that are to be dispraysed, and again
disprayse, yt is praise worthy, whereof parcialite is sometime ye cause

Lo good reader such things find I praised through out with vain praise, as I
would rather blame if I were required to be judge: Wherefore count many things
to be spoken Ironice (that is not earnestly and of a contrary me anynge) and
than shalt thou ye better perceive the truth, and not my good-meanynge or
judgment written against the B. of Romes heretykes, orders and Popysh
saints. If I praise that which is not praise worthy, I do injury to it that is
good and laudable. If I say ye stews or brothelhouse is good and to be
admytted, because of avoiding farther inconvenience, I do injury to Gods word
that extremely forbyddeth it, and prefer my good meaning above Gods word.
Confer only the. xvi. chap. of Ezechiel with these brothelhouses for the
better understanding of this.

Here follow some orders, whose time, founders, and begynners I could not
hunte out, which orders nevertheless have been seen.
l. The order of Guilhelmites under Innocentius the. iiii. B. of Rome Anno. M.
cc. xlvi.
ANno. M. cc. xlvi. was this order brought forth under Innocentius the. iiii.
whose founder and begynner was Guilhelme Duke of Aquitania, and county of
Aluernia: which being without issue, gave all his patrimony, land and
goods, and builded the Giginacish cloister, making Berno an Abbot thereof,
prouydynge it with many re^tes and subsidies. Of him has this order the name
Their clothing is al black. Of this order have we treated also in the. xi.
order before.

li. The order of S. Joseph.
THe order of S. Joseph is unknown unto me save only that they should we are
an ashcoloured cote and a whyt cole or hoode, wherewith they ymagyne to serve
and follow Joseph that is called Christ's father: But I ca^ not tell wherein,
seeing I find of him no where written that he used such a garment, but that he
was a good simple man, a carpenter by his craft. Nowyf they will follow him in
outward things, then must they take an are in their hands and labor also.
But if they will follow him in chastity of marriage, and by ye consent of their
wives live chaste, orels follow his righteousness, whereof we read Math ii.
that may they do well enough in every apparel, without excepcyon, like Joseph
did. Wherefore I can not perceive their shine and appearaunce, why they set
Joseph for a patron: perchance they do it as the B. of Rome does Christ. Some
think because they have absteyned from their wives, or else gone from the^,
whereof they have no power with out ye wives will and consent. Yet I doubt whether
ye woman have power to give him leave seeing they are commanded (according to
their estate) to grow and multiplye. Ge. ii.

lii. Sepulchrers order.
THe Sepulcher brethren did first te^de the holy Sepulcher, and brought the
Dutch brethren or pylgrems to and fro the holy Sepulcher: of whom they were
well rewarded. They did wear long beerdes, and a graye cote and a graye cloak
thereon, with a cross upon it. Whether they be spiritual men and within
orders, am I not certifyed: I reken they be lay brethren, and that because of
their beerdes, which are not comely for prestes. Their daily tax is a stente of
Pater nosters.

liii. The Sheere order.
THis order surely have taylers invented, for they wear for a bag a sheere of
iron color upon a white cloak. What that do signyfye can not I tell, with out
it were, because they would seem to be cut and sundered from the world. Their
cloak and cole is white. Their founder is unknown to me. I reken it be the
taylers order, invented of their patron, where with they be mocked daily.

liiii. The Swearders.
THis order wears whyt also, and. ii. reed sweardes cross way upon a white
cole, which signify their bloody knight hode, wherewith they fight against the
Deuell until the blood. Heb. xii. The white cloak perchance sygnifyeth their
cle^nesse, whereof they be as full, as a sparowe full of chastity, or a fool is
of wisdom: and fast with chastisyng of their bodies, until they be fat.
How, when, or where this order began am I not enfourmed of.

lv. The order of Starred monks
THe rule of this order have no Cronicles, that I have red hitherto showed me,
nevertheless they wear an honest black garment with a star sewed thereon,
whereby they may be known. The ground of their order is as of al other,
namely, thereby to do penance for their sins, and to be justified: which
thing is the most wicked thing of all orders, for it makes them Heythenysh.
ii. Petri. ii.

lvi. The order of Starred freres.
THese do not differ from the foresaid in clothyng nor rule, save that they
have no cole or hoode. Their clothing is like colored and fashioned, with a
cross thereon. Their purpose is all one. The star sygnifyeth their heart to
be heaued on high.

lvii. The cross starred brethren
UPon a black cloak do these wear a dubble starred cross, so that ye
crucifyenge of their flesh is sygnifyed by the cross, and the buryenge of
their life with Christ in God is sygnifyed by ye star. Item that they be
folowers of the crucified Christ, whom with paunched bellyes, and blown up
chekes, they help to bear his cross upon a pylow, while their rentes do last.

lviii. Co^sta^tinopolitanysh order
AT Constantinople should this order have been begone. Their rule is to confess
Christ with the mouth, but to deny his power, in truth, to abrenou^ce him,
and to trust in their own works. Their cote is grene, theyrcole is reed, with
two gelow crosses sewed thereon: whereby is sygnifyed their grene heart to
Godwarde, and ready will to shed their blood for Christ's cause, the which
perchance sygnifye also ye golden crosses that they esteem so greatly. If any
man could obtain the sygnifycacyon of these things without the clothyng that
were good: but that the raiment should dispatch it, that is false.

lix. The order of Wentzelaus.
WEntzelaus should have founded this order, and compiled them a rule, with a
white cloak, cole, coat and many shynynge works of their own inuentyng
wherewith they think to do penance for their sins and to become angels,
even those that be of the better or perchance of the worst sort. But the
other only therefore because they be slothful and lead a careless life, to
serve their god, yt is, their belly.

lx. The order of Nolhart brethren.
THese be hired and institute therefore in cities that they (because their
neghboures and friends do shune them) should assiste the sick in their
necessite, and to bury them, and do such other business about the sick and
dead. They wear graye cotes, with a black scapulary upon it, and a graye
cloak over it. The women wear graye also, with white vayles.

lxi. The order of S. James brethren
AT S. Iemyes in Scotlonde should this order have been founded, they wear graye
clothing, and a muskelshel upon their breast, these have been seen. They should
have their rule of S. James, and should be his folowers.

lxii. The order of the brethren of S. James with the swearde.
THis order (to confirm the faith of fools) should a B. of Rome have
confirmed under a rule. They wear a black cote, with a white cloak without
hoode over it, and a white cappe: And in toke^ of their war, they wear a
swearde in their hand, their war no doubt is of ye flesh against the sprete.

lxiii. The brethren of S. Hele^s order.
WHat time S. Helen floryshed in holiness, there were certain apes yt took
upon them to counterfayte her life, like gelous idle bellyes. These grew to a
great multitude, which all took upon them to follow and serve her, calling
themselves her brethren: but it is no where found that she should have founded
them. Their garment is all white.

lxiiii. The order of the brethren of Jerusalem.
ANno. M. c. iii. when Jerusalem was destroyed rose this order in the time of
Gregory the. vi. They drue together at Jerusalem, and began this sect,
calling themselves brethren of Jerusalem after ye city. Their habyte was a
graye cote and a cloak with a cole, and a reed cross upon it, to sygnify their
bloody knyghthode against the enemies of the cross, which vanquished the^
daily, and were destroyed of them.

lxv. The order of the valley of Iosaphat.
IN the valley of Iosaphat should this order be, and we are all reed, though ye
bloody beast of Rome, ye B. I mean have forbydde^ any of ye spiritualty to we
are reed, that only becomes him and his apostles. But what does not money:
which also breaks vows, oaths and promyses, and dispenses with all
things. Their rule is unknown to me, save only that they as al other orders
crack and boast upon their reed abyte, and their own inverted Gods service.

lxvi. The Sclauony order.
THese gatherynge themselves from all parties, and coming in Sclauony, wear
reed coals: in all fashion like to ye Augustinia^s, only the color except.
No cronicle that I have red specifyeth of their mo^mynge, order or rule. Their
purpose is as of all other, which their abyte witnesses, though all other
things were unspoken of: namely, that they separatynge themselves, will walk
in perfection, despysynge the common sort as evil Christen men.

lxvii. The new order of our Lady.
THis order is founded under the Preachers order, which also call themselves
Maryes brethren. Uerely it must have been a fruteful mother, that bare so many
sons. They we are a white cote, and a black cloak thereon, with a black freres
cole.

lxviii. The order of the brethren of S. Ihon de ciuitate.
THese Iohannites or brethren of S. Ihon wear a reed cole, hoode and cote,
with a chalice sewed upon their breast, to signifye their holy presthode. They
have a rule several from all other. I find no where the beginning of this
order.

lxix. The Lazarites, or Mary Magdalens brethren order.
LAzarus and Mary Magdalene have these taken as patrones, whom they
notwithstanding follow another in penance, nor clothing. For scripture knows
naught of the black cote and the white cole thereon, yet will they be their
folowers and auaunce their name.

lxx. The brethren of wilful pouerte
THe brethren of wylfull pouerte are known welynoughe to the Dutch nacyon:
they went crouchyng nymbly by the streets, and had on a cloak or mantel
hanging close before and open in the side, requyrynge bread for Gods sake,
having a staff with a crucyfixe and also a pair of beedes hanging thereon.
They required no money nor riches, but only to be taken for the willing poor.
They spoke to noma^, whereby they feigned their godliness and holiness to ye
people. They had plenteously given to them. The rych gave them to drink of
their own cups and cruses of the best drink, countynge the vessel whereout
they drank even hallowed, and ye wine also yt they left. Thus did they shine to
men, which thought all things to be well, and rekened thus to make
satisfaction for their sins, and to merit much with God: which meaning
quenches Christ wholly. Some other that (after the worlds judgment) were
worse, and perchance worser yet by God, begyled me^ on this wise: They had in
ye next vyllage or there about a fair wife and other baggage, yt they carried
with them, so that they went not alone mo^myng and limlyftynge. After this
fashion is the world begyled always, for so is his will.

lxxi. The order of the Indians.
IN Inde, in the lands of Prester Iho^ should also be an order which wear a
black cote and a white cloak thereon, whose rule accords with all other,
namely that they boast and auaunce their good works, lettynge noman come to
heaven but by them, whereby they become Mammalukes, maneyed thieves and
murderers. Ioh. x.

lxxii. The cross bearers order.
THese went stoupynge to the ground with a long white rochet, gyrded about
them with a cord, they went always bareheaded and spoke not, they lay on the
bare ground, they went always knelynge even to the ground, and hanging down
their heads: they did wear a cross of wood two spanne long in their hands.
Some did wear a box about their necks wherein men put their almesses.

lxxiii. Another order of Scourgers or Flagellatores.
IAme credably informed of some, that at Rome there is a sect, as in other
places of Italy, which are called Flagellatores or Scourgers these go in long
white lynnen shyrtes having an hole on ye black, and are open upon the bare
skin, there upon do they beat themselves with scourges yt are made thereto, so
long, till the blood does ru^ne out both over the shulders and also down to
and fete. These be admitted of the B. of Rome as penite^ciares. They go
barefooted in procession two and two together on good frydaye, when the passion
is preached. To these accompany themselves many renowned cytesins at that day,
which of great inward deuoci o^ are also disgysed as the aforesaid, so that
sometime. iii. or. iiii. hundre their seen in one processio^: Nevertheless the
cytesyns go some upon slyppers, and the shyrtes put on above their hosen, and
have a scourge in their hands, wherewith some stryke the^ selves, some wear
it only between their arms. But the true brethren of this order go barefoote,
and beat themselves upon the bare, skin till the blood follows. The white
lynnen garment has a hoode sewed to it, that draw they over their heads when
they will not be seen, this comes over their faces, and it has holes like a
bysore, wherethorow they both se and draw their breath. Such as force not
whether they are seen or not, or have not dreth enough, they draw down the
cole from their heads, and scourge themselves so openly. Great men use this
fantsy with them also, that they may be partakers of their pardon, do penance
for their sins, and come to Gods favor. Of such like have we spoken another
where, but I am not sure whether they be the same, forcause their order was
condemned as heresy, and this now is permitted. Surely the one is as good as
the other, it is one potage of one pot.

lxxiiii. Chapter monks, or the chapter order.
AT Schunbach by Tubynge in ye duke dome of Wirte^borow is there a cloister and
order, which have crowns, here and gowns of all manner of colors, black,
blewe and russet, even like seculare prestes save only that they have round
clokes like the vplandysh men have, whose hoodes they draw up or let down.
Their head do they call a father. Their rule is S. Austins, or as some say S.
Peter's. At Buschbach. iiii. mile from Frankforde was this order reformed, and
made somewhat strayghter. These be of honest report among their neghbures. They
have a library wherein are Wesselus and Wicklefs works of their own
handwrytynges and the first copyes. They are learned me^, they preach, hear
co^fessions and serve ye parysh yt they have cure of. They call their head
prouest. They will not be called monks, nor their house a cloister, but syrs
and brethren, and their house do they call a chapter house.

lxxv. The order of Monachi or Monache in Italy.
IN Italy do some orders persuade the cytesins both men and women to be
partakers of their pardons and good deeds, although they be in state of marriage
and that with wearynge of their habites. Upon this does one wear his life
long a gyrdell of the barefooted freres, another a graye cote: ye one
promyseth to wear this or yt gyrdell or raiment for ye orders love, another
makes such manner of vow or clothing. Thus are they than in fie and
brotherheade with the holy fathers, which made them promise, to enjoy al such
pardons and good works as they do and have: these be called monachi or
monache. And the consyderacio^ of the holy fathers in this behalf is, that
they again be relyued with testamentes, buryals, co^fessio^s, diriges and
other aimesses, like brethren and systers.

lxxvi. The Stooll brethren order.
IN some cities and other places is a brother head founded, wherein are taken
old, aged me^ past labor, honest men and of good report, which communely
have beerdes. These are assygned to say daily a sum and tax of Pater
nosters, for the fou^ders and benefactours souls and all Christian souls.
These wear a fatherly cote of black, blew or russet color, and a hoode with
a flappe thangynge behind.

Truth it is, that to help and relyue oldeme^ is a charitable deed, and worthy
of great commendacion: but to lade them with an order or clothyng, and that
founders require much to have done for them, that is Heythenysh. Ye in no
place of the scripture is such like red, either of Abraham, Isaak, Jacob,
Joseph, Iosue, David or like holy and approbate men of God: no nor in the new
testament another.

lxxvii. The Gerundinensish order.
A Bishop of Gerundinu^, Iho^ by name had a dream and vision (eue^ as many
things are done and founded by dreamyng and visions, and because noman does
prove the spretes, whether they be of God, but only do approbate it, that has
a good show and appearaunce) upon this the myddayes deuell that changes
himself into an angel of light did easyly cause him found and build a
monastery. This he did, and gave thereto all his goods, and procured them an
habit, rule, and manner of living of the B. of Rome. Their clothing is all
white, with the bishops shylde sewed thero^ whom he called after the parties
there about Geru^dinenses. Their rule is todenye Christ in power, and to
confess him in mouth

lxxviii. The brethren of Purgatory.
WHether these be founded to have their purgatory here in the straight order,
or that they be appointed to relyue the^ yt be in purgatory, can I not show:
only they wear a cross sewed upon a russet cloak and cote. Their fundame^t
and intent is as of all other, namely to merit thereby.

lxxix. The brethren of Scotland.
IN Scotland is a place or order which wear a grene cloak and cole or hood,
where by perchaunge they do sygnifye their grene and always floryshynge heart in
God. The beginning of their rule and order is unknown to me, but sure I am
that a wicked conscience and an unfaithful heart has founded them, that thereby
they might help themselves.

lxxx. The order of the keyed. monks.
This order wears two heavenly keys upon a black cloak, to sygnyfye that they
have power of heaven both to bind and lowse. Wherefore they boast to have their
spring, rule, order and abite of S. Peter their founder and patron, of whom
they also have received their keys.

lxxxi. The order of the Lords of Ungary.
IN Ungary are rych spiritual Lords and an order which wear a white cote, and
a reed cloak thereon, where upon they have a grene cross. They have always a
book with them, to declare thereby their spiritualty. Their fundament, rule and
order is as of al other.

lxxxii. The order of ye holy ghost,
AT Rome, at Gruningen in Wyrte^ borow dukedom, and in other places is this
order, clothed and shaven like other prestes, only do they wear a dubble
white cross. These have authorite of ye B. of Rome to absolve all crimes.
Where so ever these come a visitacyon or lymytynge, there must they be letten
in. They have also letters and seal, that whereso ever they come to vysite, al
other must void and give them rowme. At Gronyngen have they a great state by
their beggynge. At Rome are the poor greatly relyued in the hospital, yt it
have some shine of holiness to bleare men's eyes, and lest men think their
money evil bestowed. The lymetynge of S. Ualentine, Quirine, Antony and such
like are other brotherheades, wherewith much money has been pyckte out of
realms and contryes. For they have such unmercifully saints, that without money
might no mercy nor brotherhead have been obtained. These are metely well
known. Their order is to begyle the people, their garments prestly. Their
rule is to fray the people with their saints, to lie, to prate, and preach
all home. ii. Petri. ii. ii. Timo. i.

lxxxii. Speculariorum Order.
THe order of Speculariorum, began in Italy. They wear a black cross upon a
white cloak, and under the cross is a black circle or a glass, perchance
they have the same name because they would be taken for a spectakle to all ye
world in their living.

lxxxiii. The order of Hospital brethren.
THese are founded in some places and hospitals to tend the sick, and to
assist the^ in syknesses and necessite of death. Their garments are for the
most part black.

lxxxiiii. The order of S. Katherine of Seen.
ANno. M. cccc. lv. did shine S. Katherine of Seen a dyers daughter, which
refusing the state of Matrimonye took upon her yt. iii. order of saint
Dominike or preachers. Christ should have married her with a ring wherein were.
iiii. pearls and one diamonde, and taken her heart from her geuynge her his
therefore. Of this saint Katherine that was canonisate by Pius ye ii. her
contryman, B. of Rome is risen a great sect. They we are garments like black
or preacher freres. Their cloak and veil are black, their cote is white. They
dyffer much from all other orders in ceremonies, save only in the Psalter, ye
which they babble without understanding, and in trusting in their good works.

Of all sects and orders in general.
THe order of the B. of Rome, Cardinals, Patriarchs, Bishops, Curtisans,
Prestes, Deacons, and such other is metely well known, and are therefore here
passed over, so that the known orders do here end. I pass ouerhere such
orders and gods service as every one takes upon him of his own choosing,
whereof there are many thousands, and near hand so many as are men in the
world. As pylgrimage goers, Psalter sayers, our Lady psalterers,
massehearers, fasters, kepers of silence. etc. For only they yt be earnest
trusters and beleuers in God are Christen men, and prayers through faith all
other good services and spiritualties that we take upon us of our own choosing
and inuencyon, are sects, orders and rules.

Fourtene faythes or sects of Christendom only, beside all other strange
orders, and faythes.
i. The sect, order and faith of the Latins or Romans, that is, the Bishops
of Rome.
THe first and princypall of al Roman Christian is ye B. of To. with al his
me^bres and adherentes, wherefore he will be called head of yt church, and
uses the Latin tunge. This faith or sect is torn in many thousands within
it self, and his kingdom parted many ways. Under this head are gathered in
ye unite of his sprete al ye aforesaid sects. Their faith and use is metely
well known unto us, seeing we have gone to scoole under him, and have be^
rocked and lulled in his ceremonies. This manyheaded faith (I say) has
noryshed and brought forth all these daughters. Surely there shall be little lack
also in other faythes, seeing this only faith has so many daughters
disagreynge within themselves. This faith has a great deal of Europa till the
weste, and compasses and reaches to the East until Hungary: (Bohemy or Beme
is decyuered from them.) Toward the South until Italy, Sicily and Naples:
Toward the West until Portingale, Spain, France, and low Bermany. These
have many kingdoms belonging to their faith, as namely: The king of Castyle,
Arragony, Portingale, Nauerne, all these are in Spain. Item France, Sicily,
Naples, Hungary, Pole, Scotland, Denmark, Sueden, Norwaye, Sclauony. etc.
with many other Dukes, Cou^ties, Marquisses and other, Uenice, ye I Will Cipres.
etc. Al these be under ye jurisdiction of ye B. of To. with the Emperor also,
that duly ought to be a Germane.

ii. Greci, the faith, order and sect of the Greeks.
There is another sort of Christians in the East, called Greci, that is
Greeks: They have had their Bishop

MArouini hold in many points with the Iacobites, yet is there some difference.
Their speech is Arabysh. They dwell by and about the hyl Libanus. They are
honest, but warrefaryng people, which are often assaulted of the Saracenes.

vi. Nestorini.
THese also are several Christians, which are so taught and informed of
Nestorinus the heretic. This Nestorinus was a Bishop of Constantinople, and
said there were. ii. persons in Christ, the one the Godheade, the other the
manhood: and said that Mary should not be called the mother of God, but of the
ma^hode, and bryngeresse forth of Christ the man, or after ye ma^hode only.
These consecrate the sacrament in leuended bread, and use yt Chaldeysh spech.
They dwell in Tartary, and in great India are also many of them.

Their borders conteyne as much in compass, as Dutchlande and Italy, wherein
they all have this faith, and hold with Nestorinus.

vii. The Moronites.
THese Christians have their spring and beginning of one Moron an heretic.
They grant only one understanding, work, kind, nature and will in Christ.
These dwell by Libia in the province of Phenicia, a great multitude, warfarynge
men, quick with bows and arowes and good archers. I believe they be the same
that above are called Morouini. They use after the manner of the Latins bells,
bishops ornaments, cope, ring, myter, crosyer. etc.

Their scripture is Caldeysh, but their natyfe speech is Arabysh. They have been
under the B. of Rome, until the time of Innocentius the. iii. for than was
their Patriarch in a counsel at Rome, but afterward when he was at
Constantinople, in a counsel that he held, he fell from the Roman church, he
fell thereto and from it again: But now do they stand steadfastly upon their
own brain.

viii. The Armenians of ye greater Armenia.
ARmeni are Christians in greater Armenia dwelling by Antiochia, which cc.
year agone were subdued of the Turkysh Emperor and made tributary to him.
These Christians differ much from the Romans. They keep no feast or holydaye
save only the Sunday. They fast not on Easter even, they know nothing of
the Newyeare, Candelmasse and such like days. They say that Christ rose on
Easter (...) at euensonge tide. They eat flesh every frydaye between Easter
and Wytsontyde. Nevertheless they keep and fast lent thorowout, and that so
straytly, that on wednisdayes and frydayes they another eat fysh, flesh nor
oil, nor yet drink wine, cou^tyng it more sin to use wine on these days,
tha^ if they stained themselves with going into an dishonest house. Three days
in the weke do they absteyne from all manner of meat, but two days they eat
once. On ye Tewsdaye and Sunday make they merry. They have no mass all Lent,
save only on Satyrdayes and Sondayes. Another say they mass on any frydaye of
the whole year: for they will not offer on that day that the oblacion was
made. They housie young chylderen of two months and al other without
excepcion. They mix no water with wine at their mass. They play the Jews
with their uncleanly beasts, as hares, crows and such other beasts. They
consecrate with wooden and glassy chalices, some with patine, some without any
massynge apparel, some have no more but a cope on. Usury and Simony are
communely used among them both prestes and lay people, even as the Georgians
do, with whom they are always at variaunce, and each part counts ye other
heretics. Their prestes have married wives, but after her deceasse they renew
not matrimony. They give a man power to put from him his wife that breaks
wedloke, and to take another. They utterly deny purgatory, and say there are
two natures in Christ. They show the Georgians to err in. xxx. artikles from
the true faith of Christ. Their prestes are lusty, and full, more than the
layme^, and use nigromancy for the most part.

They have their own spech and language wherein they execute all their Gods
service preaching and singing, so that both men and women do understand
them. Their chief or head bishop is called Catholicon, whom they worship
reverently. Some say they eat flesh all the year through.

ix. The Surian order, or Samaritan faith.
IN Syria or Assyria is the head city Sur, which has a sundery faith.

They use in their mass and scriptur the greek tunge, but else, the Sarace^s,
their natyfe langage. They have a bishop, whose co^stitucions they obey in all
things. They consecrate with leuended bread, wherein they hold with the
Greeks against the Romans. Some Christians dwelling in Iewry about
Jerusalem, called Samaritani do hold with these, the which were converted first
in the Apostles time. They differ from ye church of Rome in many artikles,
which what time they were obedient to ye churh of Rome, they observed: but now
they are ^ecyuered and parted from it.

x. The Mosarabites, or Arabysh Christians
This sect dwelled sometime in great nombre in Aphrica and Spain, but now are
there but a few. They keep the use of the Christians in Aphrica, nearehande in
all points. They say mass in latin, they obey ye church of Rome they
consecrate with vnleuended bread, yet vary they in many things from the
Romans. The day is divided with them in. xxiiii. hours, and so many collets,
Psalms or services have, they to every hour a several, but not after ye
latin fashion. That the Latins say in the beginning that do they say in
the end. The sacrament of altar do some divide in. vii. or. x. pieces. They
are a very devout people. They mary none without they be of their nation and
faith. If a man dye, ye woman marieth not again but remains in chastity and
wedowheade.

xi. The Moscouites and white Russes faith.
MOscouites is a nacio^ in Asia whose land is called Moscouia. Their king and
gyde that now is, is called Basilius, a quick, victorious and fortunate man of
war. Which was in ye sege with the Turkysh Emperor before Uienne in
Eastenrich. anno. M. D. xxix He has about a. xx. contryes under him,
according as he auaunceth him in his title. This king with his subjects will
be called a good Christian: he boasts him to be of saint Paul's faith, which
should have prescribed them their faith, law and ordinance, and to keep and
retain this until his returning. In this land (as in many other parties of
Greece) do the wives wear always a shewsole upon their heads, but ye poor wear
the^ of cloth and the rych of gold and beluet, to signifye their subjection and
obedience due to the man, so that she is content so to submit herself as
though the man should go upon her head, and knowledge him for her Lord. This
faith use the whyt Russes also.

xii. The faith of the Bemes or order of the Hussites.
THough the Bemes have been under the B. of Romes jurisdiction and accostumed
with his laws and faith, yet are they converted and seduced by Ihon Husse that
was burnt in the council of Constaunce. anno. M. cccc. xvi. so that they are
deciuered and fallen from the sye Rome. They give the sacrament of the altar
unto their layme^ under both kinds, against the commandment of the B. of
Rome: ye and vnshryuen also. But in other things do they cleue to the Bishop
of Rome: for they another do eat flesh on wednisdayes, nor frydayes, they sing,
hepe holy days and worship saints as in the byshopryke of Rome. They keep
their fastes very straytly. It is a fearce people and enclyned to lyberte.

xiii. The order of Waldenses or Picardes.
THe Picardes (that were seduced by Waldus the heretic) area several kind of
Christen people in Beme. These lead a very Christen and blamlesse life, they
call upon no saints or creatures but only God. They swear not atall,
countynge it to be uncomely for a Christen man so to do. They have no image at
all, they knele not before them nor pray to the^. They say ye sacrament ought
not be worshipped, but Christ at ye ryghtha^d of his father, and God in sprete
and truth. They have no beggar among the^, and help and counsel each other
brotherly. Yet are they divided in two, or as some say, in three parts:
namely, ye great, ye less and ye leest of all. They hold greatly with ye
Anabaptists they have all things common, they Christian no children, they
grant not Christ's body to be in ye sacrament: nevertheless ye great heap
believe in ye sacrament. They psue each other, whereby they utter their sprete,
though they shine never so fair. They are always at ye least. lxxx. thousand.
They set naught by the B. of Romes faith orders, spiritualty, fasting,
holidays, mass, prayenge, singing, reading. etc. I pass over here the
Taborytes, which also have a several faith.

xiiii. The Georgians sect and faith.
THese Christians have the Tartaries made tributaryes to them. two. C. year
ago. They use the Grecians manner in many points. They brother upon the Perses,
reachynge from Palestina until the mountains called Caspy. They had. xviii.
byshoprykes, and one head or chief bishop whom they called Catholico^. They
were first subject unto the sye of Antiochia, a warrefarynge people. Their
prestes have crowns shaven round, but ye layemen foresquared. Their wives be
partly used to war, and be hired thereto. Before they stryke any field they do
drink largely, that they may fall on their enemies with the better courage and
more fearcely.

Their prestes and spiritualty keep the walls and fenses, and use vsery,
finaunces and symony. They are ever at debate with the armenians, whom they
call heretics. Both the Armenians and Georgians ar now subject to the Turk.
Their name have they of saint George their patron, in whose name they fight,
whom also they have in their standarde and banners. They border also upon the
Medes and Sirians, of who^ they are greatly dradde, ye and of all the East
parts also. When they go to the holy Sepulcher, they enter the city Jerusalem
with spled banners: for the Saracenes shune the^ sore, another pay they any
where tribute. Their wives have here and beerdes as ye me^, and go also to
war. They wear high toted hattes. What so ever they ascribed some time unto
the Soudane, yt did he grant the^ again: for they were of great estimacyon by
him, and are greatly accepted every where for their valeaunt deeds and
worthynesse.

Here do I pass over also the Gothyes and Wandalyes, whose lands and
kingdoms has every one his Christen faith.

Sclauony also has in many things an other religion, Gods service and manner,
several from all other.

Fyften orders sects or supersticions of the Jews.
i. Samaritani.
IN the time of Sarabella or (as says Josephus the. xi. book, ye. vii Chap.
of antiquityes) Sanaballat the debite of Jerusalem, rose the first scisma or
dissencyon among yt Jews, on this wise: Manasses the brother of Iadi the
bishop confederated himself with the debite or leutenau^t, which was an Hey
then, and took the daughter of the vncircumcysed to wife against the law upon
the condicyon that he should make him high pressed or bishop. Now seeing that in
this deed he did transgress the law, he gat evil will of many of the Jews,
ye he was even reject and hated of them. Upon this did his father in law
build him a temple upon mount Garisim, and set ye foresaid Manasses there in
against Iadus his brother, geuyngt him a village thereto: and they that held on
his side were called Samaritans. These dispe^sed with the law in many things,
and yet would be called Jews. This discencyon lasted until the destruccyon of
Jerusalem by Titus and Uespasianus.

ii. iii. Morbonei and Meristei.
ISidorus in the. viii. book of the Ethimologyes writes, that among yt
heresies of the Jews some were called Saduces, some Morboneies, some
Meristeies: of the which two last sects and orders I could find no more
though I searched diligently for it, but that ye Meristeies receive not all the
prophets, saying: that some have not written of a good sprete. The Morbonet
say yt it is Christ yt has taught them to keep holy day in all things.

iiii. The Pharisees both their sect and faith.
THese. iii. sects or supersticyons following, were also among the Jews in
Christ's time. The Pharisaicall sect was separate from the commune living,
and would be estimed the perfect in the law (even as by us monks and freres
are the choice of people,) which stacke in ye law over head and ears, so
that all that was seen on them seemed holy and just: but only the wicked heart,
unknown to ye world but known to God, yt was enemy to God. This could not
the world judge, wherefore by reason of their shynynge holiness they were in
great estimacyon among ye Jews. To be plain, it were the Jews monks, which
in their and the peoples mind were nearest the prycke: these rose in the time
of Ptolomeus Philadelphus. They were called Pharisei, because they were
separate and sundered from the other people, both in clothing and
conuersacyon, but had notwithstanding a like wicked heart and hatred to the
law with the other. They lived straytly after the works of the law, and
measurable in meat, they did wear a scrol of parchement on their foreheades,
and on their left hand the ten commandments written for a remembrance and
continual exercise. They did wear also broad gardes about their garments,
wherein were bound thorns and pryckes, that should cause them to remember Gods
commandments. They ascrybed all thing to God and his predestinacyon. They
never answered their head frowardly. They hoped a judgment of god, and a
resurreccyon of the dead. They said that a man's soul is immortal. These good
men were Christ's most enemies, and causers of his death, which they were
best worthy.

v. The Saducees sect.
SAducei another sect in Israel, which held nothing of the predestinacyon of
God, said yt God did behold all things, but it is in man's choice either to do
good or evil. They denied the resurreccyon of the flesh, and also that there
were any angels. They believed that the soul peryshed with the body. They
received only the. v. books of Moses. They accompanied themselves with noman,
but led so straight and earnest life, that they were called Saducei, that is
the ryghteous.

vi. The Esseyes, and their religion.
THe Esseyes led in all points near hand an heremiticall and monastical
life. They despised matrimony, not of hatred that they had to the state of it
nor yet because they did count it unholy, but to fly the lusts and
prouocacyo^ of we men, thinking that none keeps her promise. They were so
joined in love, that as children of one father, and despysers of all transytory
goods they brought together al their substance and possession, and had all
things commune. They did count it uncomely to go in any other save white
garments. They had stewardes and officers in worldly busynesses, but they
themselves meddled with nothing save only the law of God. They had no
certain dwelling, but were lo^ged in every city. They shyfted no clothes nor
shues till they were worn out. They were of great conte^placyon in Godly
matters, they used few words. The day did they ever begin with prayenge,
after that went they to work every one that he was skylled in, until. v. of
the clock, at the which season they came together to dyne. But before they sat
themselves thereto, they washed themselves with cold water and gyrded a white
lynnen cloth about the^: this done, they went to their meat, yt their pressed
first blessed. After dinner and grace said they returned again to work. No
noise was herd any where in their lodgings, but kept great silence: They
counted an oath eue^ forswearyng. They took none in to their sect without he were
proved one year, after the which they were sworn to keep their faith to God,
love and ryghteousnes to men, and to princes to yield due obedience: and if it
so fortuned that they should be chosen to govern other, yt then they should not
use ye power to ye suppressynge of their subjects. In their judgment sat no
less the^ c. persons, whose sentence remained immovable. The sabbath observed
they so earnestly, yt upon it they another dressed meat, nor kyndled any fire:
ye did not their easeme^t another. On other days wha^ they went to do their
easement they took a spade with the^, dygged a pyt, wherouer they sat to do their
easeme^t, lettyng down their clothes about the^, lest they did injury to Gods
shadow, and covered it again with ye dug up earth. This must needs be a
righteousness: yet abides it an order, sect and fylthynesse Esa. lxiiii. both
before God and man, though they hyde their easement never so preuely, not only
before God and man, but also before the elements. Herodes Antipas had this
sect in great reverence until his death, another is any euel reported thereof in
stories: yet is it nothing worth before God. If our religious might auaunce
this also, (first that their sect is Gods ordinance and commandment,
secondarely that they had so lived thereafter, that with the truth they could
not be blamed) how would they crack and boast? yet does God damn this sect
also Ioh. vii. Romans ix. x. Of these three last rehearsed sects read Iosephum
the. ii. book of ye Jews battle the. vii. Chapter at large.

vii. The Jews sect and religion.
THough these have received the law of God until ye time of fulfyllyng, yet
are they now (seeing they have refused the Messiah and lost the true light)
rekened for a darkness, sect and heretics of S. Jerome and Austine: which
beside ye Talmud (wherein is gathered together eue^ an v^^brement of vain
dreams) have only in Moses books. vi. C. laws. It is surely a poor people,
that with vain hope does so trouble itself, and has an hard order if it
will fulfill the same without dispensyng. These are scattred among all nations,
and a very fleshly people, which will understand all scripture after the
letter, and scarce know whether there be any sprete. They be divided within
themselves so well as we, yet darre they not utter it, left they be laughed to
skorne of us. Beside the law have they also received many constitucions of
men. Their order is well known to the nedy Christians, for they are usurers,
and in many places are these open robbers suffered, to the great damage of
every man.

viii. Rechabite or Rechabites sect.
REchabite or Rechabites are they ye took upon them to follow the co^mau^me^t of
ye Rechabites. And of yt which Ionadabs chylderen did of a fre will in obeynge
their father, (whereby God praised them not for their works sake, but for their
obedience) have these apes and other Jews coueted to obtayme such praise,
making themselves a law and yock, the which is not acceptable to God. Upon
this have other Jews (that would also be Rechabites) gone to and drink no
wine, buyld no houses sow no feldes, and plant no vynes forever: and which
perchance they did not, because they gat enough with usury. Wherefore I call
such Jews Rechabites, that will in deed conterfayte Ionadabs chylderen or the
Rechabites in that, for the which they have obtained the blessing of God:
hoping that God will bless them also, seeing they do it that the chylderen of
Ionadab did Of this read Jeremy the. xxv. Chapter. To be short and plain for
thine vnerstandynge: Ionadab a son of Rechab commanded his chylderen neuerto
drink wine, build no houses, sow no feldes, plant no vynes, but only to
dwell in tents. This did they of willing obedience, though they another were
commanded nor forbydde^ it in the law. This obedience of the good chylore^
pleased God so well, yt he would have other to take example by them, saying: Lo
that to the chylderen of Ionadab, how much more ought ye to obey me which ame
your God and father? For this cause he blesses the house of Ionadab and
Rechabs kynred, so that there shall not fail one to stand always in the sight
of God. Upon this went the Jews to and took upon them also to be Rechabites
and would drink no wine, plant no vynes etc. as though God did not more
regard obedience than absteynynge from wine. Thus were the works of the
chylderen of Rechab or Ionadab acceptable to God, seeing they were done in
obedience. But the same works done of the apes and counterfayters, please God
nothing at all, for they have no precept nor commandment to do, or to leave
them, but they do the^ of their own head. Wherefore God does not regard them,
another can they do the^ in faith seeing they stond in doubt whether God be well
apayed with them, or not. And all that is done without faith and obedience, is
plain sin, which if it were done in faith and obedience were iustifycacion.
By this comes it that many folysh Jews drink no wine, counterfaytynge other
therein, as we also play the apes in our orders: ye like Manasses did
counterfayte Abraham in offrynge up of his child.

ix. Nazaret or Nazarets sect.
THe Nazarees confess Jesus of Nazareth to be the son of God, yet keep they
all the laws and ceremonies of the old testament. They refuse the
newtestament, receauynge none but the old, as more credible. They hold much
with the Helonites, saying that the faith in Christ be good, but it is not
sufficient without the works of the law, and keeping of the commaundeme^ts of
Moses. Against the which is Paul Roma. ix. x. Gala. iii. iiii. v. vi.

x. Galilei or Galileans.
GAlilet be also Jews, separated from the Jews in Judea or Jerusalem in many
things. For as they differ in bodily fashion and spech from them that dwell in
Palestina, even so differ they also in religion and faith. This appears by S.
Peter, whom his speech did bewraye as he was at Jerusalem in the court of
Annas and Cayphas high prestes. It is to be marked farthermore, that every
faith and nacio^ has his religious, as above is specifyed of ye Romans. The
Romans before Christ's birth had their Flamines, Prothoflamines and so forth,
which were hallowed or consecrate to their temples uses. Besides these they
had: Salios, Diales, Uestales. etc. that were as our religious and cloysterers.

The Turk also has his spiritual and religious. So sort is blyndnesse,
error and foolysh speculacion rooted in the world that it is even the best
coin and valued money, wherwyth the world will be paid. If one endeavor to
utter this plantacion of man with their golden and glysterynge holiness
conferring it with the infallible and pure word of God in his scripture: he
is as well herd and accepted, as if he did cast pearls before swyne, which
if thou wylt wash of their walowynge in the mire, and drive them to the clear
water, they draw back, knorre, ye are even ready to tear the. God grant us
once to have eyes to se: if it be his pleasure.

xi. Idumei or Idumeans.
THe Idumeans the neghbures to the Jews which are a gross warrefaryng people,
inclined to sedicion and in surrectio^s, and therefore would be the Jews
fellows, nevertheless more in wyckednes than in observing the law. These
were let in to Jerusalem preuely be the zelotes, a little before the sege that
Titus laid there before it, whereby was caused much unhappiness and mysery at
Jerusalem the which Josephus treats at large in the. vii. book of the Iewysh
battle the. xxviii. chapter. But how they being ouercomme of Hircanus,
became Jews and were circu^cysed read ye. xiii. book of antiquites of
Josephus the. xvi. Chap. This Idumea bordereth upon Egypt, and lies by the
hills of Arabia, which of the Hebrews was called Edom, but of other it is
called Gobolitis and Amalechitis, whose king wythstode the chyldere^ of
Israel, and would not let them pass through his land.

xii. zelotes or Gelous sect.
THese were suttyll and sedicious rascals among the Jews of Jerusalem which
gave themselves that name, as though they were gelous for the laws of God
(even as such wicked conspiracions and rysynges are wo^t to be garnyshed with
clamyng and defending some good title) and were notwythstondynge vile and
noughty fellous, that would feign have been fre, and rulers themselves: ye it
was all for ye good Ma^mon. These drue together, willing to dispatche many
things (as the nature of such fra^tike people is to take much upon them) they
would defend Jerusalem, which was rather the cause of destruction thereof. This
heap now of the false Jews that bended together and would have no rulers over
them, but would rule themselves, and be called the fre Jews ye by whom the
destruction of Jerusalem did come, were called zelotes, yt is gelous. The did
often fight with the cytesins of Jerusalem, disquietynge every man thereof. They
had also captains, but chefly one Ihon Giscalenus a very traytoure. These
made a confideracy with the Idumeans, and sent privily for them to come to
Jerusalem and help them. But after that yt Idumeans saw their wicked dealyng,
they forsook the^ and went home again. The zelotes (as it fortuneth when rude
men will rule) yetted all the day up and down the streets idle, robbynge all
yt they could snatch, and found lyghtely an occasion to every thing. Thus
was there great treason: for ye cytesins were feign to keep silence, orels to
flatter them, so yt vnoutspeake able force was done to them. All
righteousness, law and honestye was laid under foot. Josephus can scante
comprehend in. iiii. books all the mysery and force of the zelotes. Every day
were scarmussynges, another durst any man bewail this unrighteousness and
wrong: but every man must be still, as though they were honest and lovers of
God and his law, for whom the law did make. For this cause have I not
unadvisedly joined this sect to the other also. Look farther of them in the.
vii. book of the Iewysh battle the. xxv. chapter.

xiii. Sicarii or Swearders
AFter the destruction of Jerusalem, when Cireneus was debite of Iewry certain
sedicious Jews, not used to bonds and service drue together, calling
themselves Sicarii, of a murthure knefe called sica. These would not obey the
Romans commandments, but like good Jews (as they called themselves) fight
again for their lost fredome: and defied utterly all such Jews as denied to
help the^, robbinge and burning of such Jews all that they could come by.
Thus began a pyteous murthurynge every where. They said also that whosoever would
not help to withstonde the Romans, should be esteemed like the Romans.
Ioha^nes Giscalenus justified such as were adherentes to them, but as for the^
that either cou^selled for the best against the^, or otherwise withstode them,
they were slain: for all their doing was nothing but force, so that the
wanton horse wanted only them yt would release him of ye bridle, that he
coueted to be red of. The spersed Idumeans and zelotes did soon join
themselves to these, which were nearehande all rooted out, so that like came to
like. After many robberyes and destruccyon of provinces, both of theyrs and the
Romans they were rooted out and had a shameful end (as communely all
insurreccyons and conspiracyons do) under Festus and Albinus. Of their
spiritual life, deeds, robbery and end read Josephus the. xx. book of
antiquities, the. xiiii. and. xvi. Chapters. Item in the book of the Iewysh
battayl the. vii. book the. xxviii. and. xxix. chapters, whereof this is brefly
the su^me: Certain of the foresaid Sicaryes that were fled the persuynge of
Albinus, fled unto a strong hold called Massada wherein one Eleazarus was
captain. This hold did the Romans also besege. As for Massada was builded
upon a high mountain, by Ionathas a bishop of the Jews, and afterward by
king Herod was it fensed and made strong, provided plenteously with all
manner of ordinance and vitayles. He laid also a wall of fre stone about the
city. viii. mile compass, whose heyght was. xii. cubytes, and the breadth.
viii. cubits and upon the wall he builded. xxvii. towers, which were of, l.
cubytes heyght. Two things occasioned Herod to make this town so strong:
The first was that he feared lest the Jews would depose him of the kingdom,
and restore his predecessoure in to it again. The other: that he feared
Cleopatra ye queen of Egipte, which required her husband often to slaye Herod,
and to give her yt kingdom of Iewry. Wha^ this town now was beseged of
Flauius Syluanus captain of the Romans, and so sore assaulted of them, that
they within had no hope more of their lives, or escapynge, they called to mind
how ye Romans would handle them, if they took the city, what fearful martyr
dom and pain they should put them to, or in what greueous bondage they should
be, ye and lose the noble lyberte, wherefore they would rather dye then lose
it: upon this had Eleasarus the captain a goodly oracyon in the kings palace,
wherein he persuaded the people to a willing death, and a true constau^te heart
in the lyberte, so that rather then the Romans should have power upon them,
they should preue^te them with gladly and wyllyngly to dye of their own
hands. Some feeble hearted gaynsayd, pytyeng their wives and children, whom
Eleasarus so persuaded with many goodly reasons and arguments of the
immortalite of the soul, yt as frantyke men they exhorted each other to dye,
countynge this a token of gelousy and Gods service, yt they only as fre,
obeyenge only God and not the Romans, would rather fall in the hands of God
for their fredome, then to come in the hands of ye Romans, and be vilanous
slaves and bondme^ of the Heythen. Upon this made they haist to dye, none would
be the last, such desire of deynge was come upon them. He that grudged to
slaye his wife or children himself, took them in his arms, kyssed them,
blessed them, and then prayed his neghbure for to slaye them. Some other took
the children out of the mothers lappes, some mothers offered them themselves, as
though they would so provide for them, there was none that abhorred such a debe.
This wise slew every one his friend, required thereto of frendshippe, which
might not find in his heart to do it himself. Many lest they should be the
last, slew themselves. The last carried all their goods upon an heap, to
burn them, (lest they should come in ye hands of the Romans.) As for the
corn and other vitayles did they leave in their place that they should not be
rekened overcome, or constrained to this by famine or desperacio^, but to
testifye that they had done this of set purpose, and good and fre mind. When
al were killed save. x. persons, they cast lottes which of them should kill the
other. ix. and he himself at the last also. When he only was left, he looked
about whether any were left that had need of his hand. But when he saw no
body, he set the palace in fire, and with a valiau^t hand slew himself. Thus
dyed they al in one night, whose no^bre was ix. c. and. lx. men, besides wives
and children, thinking none to have remained. But. ii. women, and. v. boys,
hearing the conclusion and agreement of this dreadful deuyce, hyd themselves in
caves or pyttes under the earth. The Romans that lay before the city
maruayled that they saw nor herd any enemies, but only a fire, thinkyng
nothing less then this fearful chance, came to the walls, gave a rush at
the wall with the battelrame, to se whether any body would come in sight. Upon
this came forth the forsayde vii. persons, and showed the Romans all the
matter, which the Romans would not believe for the haynousnesse of it, until
they came in to the kyngly palace, and found all the coarses on a heap:
whereof they maruayled and were more abashed, then rejoiced. After this left
Flauius Syluius the captain men of war in the town and fensed it to his
behofe. But the Sicarii left not of: for such as were fled to Alexandria and
The be, raised a new insurreccyon and conspiracyon, persuadynge the Jews that
were there to fight for their fredom, and knowledge God only to be their Lord.

Such as would not co^sente to them, but persuaded the contrary, those they
slew. For this cause assembled the most sagest and discre test Jews such of
they: nacyon, as were in other places also, and disclosed the fury and
rashness of the sycaries or swearders, showing what myschefe and
inconvenience should come, if they followed their mind, and declared also what
unhappiness had ever ben bred by their conspiracyons. Upon this they fell upon
them, took. vi. c. of them prisoners. Thus were these taken also, which were
martyred and put to execucion with diverse torments, only was it required of
them to grant obedience to ye Emperor and call hyin their Lord: the which
none of them did, nor wolve grant, but abode styfly by their mind and
opinion, suffered death rather like brute beasts, than reasonable men, ye even
children also: of whose hardneckednesse and constaunce many one did wonder and
maruayle.

xiiii. Menelaysh and Iasonysh sect.
IN the time of Antiochus Epiphanis ye tyraunte, turned many Jews to this
sect (perchance for fear) and yet would be called good Jews. These had two
bishops until the time of the Machabees.

xv. The Amonites and Moabitessecte.
THe Amonites and Moabites be such as besides God worshypped the Idol Moloch,
yt is man's wysoome, and after the ensample of Abraham offced their children
unto God, proving it featly with arguments and wrasted scriptures, saying on
this wise: All that God creates, does please him. Now it that pleases him
done of the one, pleases him also done of another seeing he accepts no
persons: wherefore that we offer up our chylderen as Abraham did, is his will
and pleasure also.

The conclusion of the Iewysh sects and orders with all the other.
Behold (good reader) this Babel or confusion, and compare with this the
Heythenysh and Turkysh sect, and I doubt not but thou wylt say it is the
Deuell, which goes about, mommynge with so many visores. Thou must confess
also that all sects, faythes and orders, except only the true and fre
Christendom and New testament (which is earnest faith, life, holy ghost, and
no law or dead letter) are naught else save a fond Iewyshnesse. But it goes
thus to work in the world, that they which be tried should be manifest i.
Cor. xi. another was ye church ever in a better case, or more floryshyng, then
mids among her fyndes, sects and wolves. For Christ is not come to give an
outward or worldly peace, but his peace: that is, of the conscience. The
church must grow tried, and exercysed among her fyndes. Wherefore let it go
that will not abide, for chafe must be sundered from corn. This I say,
because that so many sects be not only no hurt to Christendom, but also
profitable, an exercitacyon of their knyghthode and a conquest of heaven. Su^ma
summarum it is called: Salute^ ex inimicis nostris, and not da^num or
desolacionem. Upon this says Christ Mat. xxiiii. that it is not possible the
elect should be deceived, but for their sake shall ye peryllous days be
shortened. He that has once assayed the truth, shall never fall from it,
without he be not of the truth, and such are letten go: for Christ must so
cleanse and purge his floor, try his and separte ye corn from chafe. i.
Corin. xi. But such sheep of Christ that belong to God the father, hear no
voice but their heerdmans, and can not ahyde the voice of the stranger. Ioh.
x. God knows his, and them ca^ noma^ take out of his hands. Ioh. x. Thus is
Christ's prayer herd, namely: yt Peter's faith fail not in them that be
Peter's. Luce. xxii But that God rebukes false prophets, saying that they have
deceived his people, he shows how the matter was with them: For that have
they done, so much as lyethin them, though God have let and not suffered it
to be done to his elect and chosen. Yet are they justly blamed therefore. For
their will and purpose was good. Now seeing that God judges the heart and
will, therefore have they no wrong done to them, but right, when they are
judged to be deceauers of the people.

FINIS.
The faith of the Indians, even as one Matthew the embassadoure of Presteria^s
did utter it before Emanuel king of Portingale. Anno. M. D. xiii.
1 First do they believe with us the trinite of persons, and one God.

2 And ye same maruaylously to have created heaven, earth, and all that is
contained in both of nothing.

3 That Jesus Christ, the anointed king the saueoure and the Messiah, so often
promised by the Prophets, the very son of the true God, was borne of Mary
the virgin both before and after the birth in Bethleem the city of David.

4 And that the same being judged of Pilate the wicked debite or lewtenaunt of
the Romans in Iewry, dyed at Jerusalem for our sins, and was buried.

5 And continently to have gone down to hell, whose gates he brake: and on ye
third day he rose again alive, with great victory of his enemies and death:
and finally to have ascended up to heaven by a wonder full ascencion, from
whence he came.

6 They believe also an universal and immortal resurrection of the bodies,
after this mortal life.

7 They believe also in the same faith, that Christ shall judge both the good
and evil, and that every man shall receive reward according to his deeds
done in this life.

8 After this judgment shall the godly have everlasting joy, but the wicked
everlasting pain.

9 They (as we) keep the. x. commandments.

10 They grant. vii. deadly sins also.

11 They have all the books of scripture as we.

12 They have the. iiii. gospels also.

13 And of Paul's Epistles do they want none.

14 They approve all ye artikles of ye creed.

15 They prefer the pater noster before all other prayers.

16 They make much also of ye Aue Mary.

17 Their children do they baptyse with holy water on the. vii. day, and also
circumcise them after Moses law, after ye costume and use of long time.

18 On twolftyde also does all the people yearly profess openly their faith
with great joy, and so are they baptized again.

19 They say mass also nerehande after our use, and that another for lucre or
auau^tage.

20 The sacrament of altar do they esteem the chief and principal,
confessing syncerely there to be the body and blood of Christ, and
communicate under both kinds.

21 They confess the holy oil and anoyntyng to be sacraments.

22 As soon as they have sinned, do they to shreue themselves to a pressed.

23 The penance do they diligently fulfill.

24 Fasting do they accomplysh without eating of flesh or fysh.

25. Lent do they begin on Septuagesima.

26 The Sunday and other holy days institute of their bishops, do they keep
reverently.

27 They have the remembrance of Christ's passion on the last weke of lent, as
we.

28 Palmeso^daye do they use with us also, and Candelmasse.

29 Procession going do they use also.

30 They keep Alhalowtyde and alsoule day also.

31 Ashwednysoaye accords with us, both in ceremonies and time.

32 They have also monasteryes, not only of men, but also of women, living in
great abstinence.

33 Whereof some cloisters have. vii. or. viii. C. or a. M. persons.

34 One hill is there, whereon dwell. xii. M. religious persons, which may in
no wise beg, but labor for their lyuynges: nevertheless if any alms be
given them, that may they take welynough, so that it be not craved.

35 They have preachers to teach Christ's faith, and that of ye best learned
among the prestes and religious.

36 There are many hospitals for the poor only to be lodged and tended.

37 The churches are a centuary for mysdoers, but so, that he that is manslayer
be so slenderly fed that at the last he must dye of hungre.

38 Their dead do they bury with no less ceremonies than we, and also in
churches.

39 Holy men and of heavenly conuersacio^ do they canonizat, after they have
searched their life diligently.

40 Men mary but one wife at once, and that at the church door.

41 And after old costumes and laws they mary none within ye. vii. degree,
another may their Patriarch dispense here with.

42 They have images of all saints in their churches.

43 Holy water do they keep, and think ye it chaseth away wicked spretes.

44 They have many churches, belles and holy vestimentes for spiritual
services.

45 They keep mydsomer most solemly.

46 They begin the year at Septe^bre.

47 They know there is an head bishop of Rome, but the cause that they obey him
not, is the great distaunce from him.

48 Saint Bartholomew the Apostle taught them first the faith and gospel.

49 Their prestes are married, but after the wives deceasse they mary not
again: nevertheless their patriarch lives chaste.

This did ye aforesaid Matthew confess in the presence of the nobles and
clargy of Portyngale.

Here ends the treatise of all sects, orders and religions, both of
Christendom and the Jews: Translated out of hye Dutch in English.
Printed in Southwarke by me James Nicolson for Ihon Gough.

Cum Priuilegio.


