A Countercuffe given to Martin Junior: by the venturous, hardy, and renowned
Pasquill of England, Caualiero.

Not of old Martins making, which newly knighted the Saints in Heaven, with
rise up Sir Peter and Sir Paul; But lately dubd for his service at home in the
defense of his Country, and for the clean breaking of his staff upon
Martins face.

NOSCE TE IPSVM NE QVID NIMIS
LOVE AND LIVE
printer's or publisher's device

PRINTED, Between the sky and the ground, Within a mile of an Oak, and not
many fields of, from the vnpriuiledged Press of the Ass-ignes of Martin
Junior.

PASQVILL OF ENGLAND TO MARTIN IVNIOR.
VAliant Martin, if ever the earth carried any Giants, as fabulous antiquity
has avouched, which entered into wars and conspiracies against GOD, thy father
Mar-prelat was a whelpe of that race; who to revive the memory of his
auncesters almost forgotten, has broken into heaven with his blasphemies. If
the Monster be dead, I marvel not, for he was but an error of Nature, not
long lived: hatched in the heat of the sins of England, and sent into these
peaceable Seas of ours, to play like a Dolphin before a tempest. The heads this
Hydra lost in a famous place of late, where every new Bugge no sooner puts out
his horns, but is beaten down; The Anotamie lately taken of him, the blood
and the humors that were taken from him, by launcing and worming him at London
upon the common Stage; The maine buffets that are given him in every corner of
this Realm, are evident tokens, that being through soust in so many showers,
he had no other refuge but to run into a hole, and die as he lived, belching.

Turkey has very good cause to bewail his death, for their Religion like an
ancient building, worn with extremity of age, riues, and threatens ruin on
every side, if it be not supported by new proppes. One of the best means the
devil invented to hold that up, was the help of thy Father, to pull down
all other Religions under heaven. His Conclusions and thy Epilogue, are two as
fit swords, as Mahomet himself could desire to kill a Christian. But
because thy Father wained with the Moon for want of strength, when he left
thee his Theses without life or limme, I would wish thee to put them in Mood
and Figure for his sake. Pasquill has undertaken to write a very famous work,
Entitled, THE OWLS ALMANACKE: wherein, the night labors and birth of your
Religion is set down: the ascent and descent of the Stars that favor it,
is truly calculated: the aspects of the Planets reigning over it, are
expressed, with a iollie conjecture drawn from the judgment of the Theme,
what end your Religion is like to have. Now because he has reserved a blanke
Paper at the end of the work, for the four seasons of the year, (as commonly
Calculators do) he is determined to keep that in his hand, till your
Syllogismes be made, that he may fill up his Book, with the diseases and
remedies of your Arguments, in what quarter of the year so ever they fall.

Pasquill has taken up your Glove, and desires you to charge your weapon at
him like a Man. If you play with him, as your father and your self have done
with the Bishops heretofore, if you bark like a Curre and bite behind, he will
have a trick* with his heel to strike out your teeth. Whilst you consult with
your Topics to ground your reasons sure, Pasquill will come upon you with
another venewe. For he came lately ouer-sea into Kent, from thence he cut over
into Essex at Grauesende, and hearing some tidings of Hartford-shire, because
he cannot ride far without a bayte, he made as much haste as he could to S.
Albanes, where he staid one whole Sabbath at the Christopher, and having there
pestered a new pair of Writing-tables with profitable Notes for that quarter,
he set forward the Monday following to North-hampton-shire, smyling and
glauncing as he turned his Horse about to bid the Congregation of Saint
Michaels adiewe.

To be brefe with your worshipfultie, Pasquill has posted very dilligently
over all the Realm, to gather some fruitful Volume of THE LIVES OF THE
SAINTS, which Mauger your five hundred favorites shall be printed. There shall
you read of that reverend Elder of your Church, who being credited with the
stock of the poor, pertaining to the Bride-well house of Canterbury to set
men a work, was compelled to keep it to himself, because no poor folks of
the household of Faith could be found in all that City. There shall you see
the life and learning of a Pastor of your Church, which expounding the Articles
of our Belief in Deuon-shire, when he came to handle the descending into Hell,
wrote a Latin Letter to a neighbor Minister of his to crave his advise, and
rapt it out lustilie, Si tu non vis venire mihi, ego volo venire tibi. and so
by the leakes that remain in his Latin, made more work for the Tinker, than
ever your Father made for the Cooper. I will leap over one of your Brother
Preachers in North-hampton-shire, which is as good a Hound for his sent to
smell a feast as ever man saw. Pasquill met him between Bifield and Fawseley,
with a little Hatte like a Sawcer upon his crown, a Filch-man in his hand, a
swapping Ale-dagger at his back, containing by estimation, some two or three
pounds of iron in the hyltes and chape, and a Bandogge by his side, to
command forty foot of ground wheresoever he goes, that never a Beggar come
near him to crave an Alms. O how my Palfrey fetched me up the Curuetto, and
daunced the Goats ^umpe, when I ran the ring round about him to retriue him:
it should seem by the manages my beast made, that he knew his Master had a
special piece of service in hand. You shall have a goodly band of these men
in the volume of the Saints. Pasquill is now gone ouer-sea to commit it to the
Press, and it is his pleasure (because it is the first opening of his shop) to
give you a taste of his Wares before you buy them, like a franck Merchant.

In the mean season, sweet Martin Junior, play thou the knave kindly as thou
have begun, and wax as old in iniquity as thy father. Down with learning
and Universities, I can bring you a Free-mason out of Kent, that gave over his
occupation twenty years ago. He will m^ke a good Deacon for your purpose, I
have taken some trial of his gifts, he preaches very prettily over a
Ioynd-stoole. These Bishops are somewhat too well grounded for greene-heades,
so long as they keep their place and power, it is impossible for thee to cast
the Religion of this Land into a new Molde every new Moon. The whole state
of the Land perceiues it well enough, that to deliver up the Prelacie to
Martin, is a Canker more dangerous to the Church and Realm, than it was for
the Athenians to deliver their Orators to Phillip of Macedon their utter
enemy: or tha^ it is for the Sheep to betray their Sheepheards to the Woolfe.
These staid Fathers, through their long study, practice, and experience in the
Church of God, are skilful Physicians, acquainted with the beating of every
pulse that beats out of order: they are able to discern at the first touch,
from what kind of Haeresie, every one of these new Fevers that trouble us, had
his beginning. Therefore, as the high way to hasten the end of the sick, when
you think to profit by their death, is either to counsel them to despise the
Physician, and cast both the Goblet and Potion against the walls: or else to
deliver them into the hands of an ignorant Leache, which by ministering every
Sowters receipt to reform the state of the body, plyeth them with purgative
upon purgative, till he weakeneth the stomach, and rots both the Liver and
the Longes; So the ready course to poison her Majesty's loving people, is to
discredit the Physicians of their souls unto them, and to suffer every
Martin and Mounte-bancke to practice on them.

By these means shall you see Religion haled with violence into her grave, the
goodly frame of this Commonweal shall fall, and Banck-rouptes and Atheists
pocket up the pieces. But our comfort is, that the wisdom of her most
excellent Majesty is known to be greater, then to be traind from so high a
seat to so base a lure, as every Martinist casts out unto her. Her sacred
Majesty knows, that it behooves all Princes to have a watchful regard unto
their estate, which is to be preserved as well by doing of nothing that may
endomage them, as by seeking of any thing convenient for them.

Never brag in this quarrel of your five hundred Brethren of credit and
ability, Pasquill has excellent Ferrets to follow them in their own
Boroughs: and he can tell you that there is a common kind of affection, which
men of this age carry to such as you, whilst they have any service to put you
to, like unto them that having somewhat to do with a confection of poison,
rejoice when they find it, yet they hate the malice of it, and throw it out of
the doors when their turn is served. Neither doubt I, but that the same
reckoning in the end will be made of you, which your favorers commonly make
of their old shoes, when they are past wearing, they barter the^ away for
new Broomes, or carry them forth to the dunghill and leave them there.

I could tell you many strange stratagems of your best Friends, but Pasquill
is a Trauailer, and he knows that Writers and Printers in these days, are
like to Men placed at the Persian Banquets, if they roll they eye never so
little at one side, there stands an Eunuch before them with his heart full of
jealousy, and his Bow ready bent to shoot them through, because they look
farther then the Laws of the Country suffer them Nevertheless, because your
faction is suddenly grown stale like an Oyster, and gapes so wide, that
every Fishwife at Billings-gate sees into you, either we must wilfully wink,
and put out our eyes, or else we cannot choose but discover a number of your
deformities. Pasquils experience in this generation teaches him, that many of
your Bowlsterers, may be compared to Books that are gilded and trimly
covered, they set a fair face of Religion upon your cause, but when they
are opened, they are full of Tragedies, either Thyestes eating up the flesh
of his own Children, or cursed Oedipus, in bed with his own Mother.

Can you now Mast Martin, persuade your self you shall have a pride in your
Pistle making, when you vaunte of this brotherhood, and deceive the world with
such drugs as please your own taste. If your fore-heade be so hard that you
can indeed, forwards and spare not, Pasquill is ready to pull your Feathers.
You shall shortly have a Gloss and a Commentary upon your Epilogue, with
certain Hayes, Iigges, Rimes, Roundelayes, and Madrigals, serving for
Epitaphes to your Fathers Hearse, to make the world laughe out the long Winters
nights, which very shortly will steal upon us.

In the mean season, because the Wind and the Tide will stay for no Man, and
I was just at the making hereof as merry as your self, and taking Ship to
bring that brave Catalogue of the Saints to light; I bid your Masterdome
farewell till Michaelmas Term, commending your worship to the line and the
leading of your own spirit. From Grauesende Barge the eight of August, the
first and last year of Martinisme, which like the untimely fruit of his
Masterships Mother, dies before it sees the Sun, and withers as the Grass
upon the house top before the Mower be able to fill his hand with it.

To come to the close,
In Rhyme or in Prose,
In spite of thy nose,
Thine for these seven years: Pasquill of England.


