A BRIEF DISCOVERY OF THE VNTRVTHES AND SLANDERS (AGAINST THE TRVE Government
of the Church of Christ) contained in a Sermon, preached the 8. of February
1588. by D. Bancroft, and since that time, set forth in Print, with additions
by the said Author.

THIS SHORT ANSWER MAY SERVE FOR THE CLEARING OF the truth, until a larger
confutation of the Sermon be published.

2. PET. 2.1.2.3. But there were false Prophets also among the people* even as
there shall be false Teachers among you, which privily shall bring in damnab^e
heresies, even denying the Lord that has bought them, and bring upon
themselves swift damnation. And many shall follow their damnable wai^, by whom
the way of truth shall be evil spoken of. And through covetousness, shall they
with fained words, make merchandise of you, whose judgment long agon, is not
far of. TO THE GODLY INDIFFERENT Reader, judgment to discern, and zeal to
embrace the truth.
Think it no wonderful case beloved, to see the church of England so out of
order at this day as our confusions are altogether more in number, then the ha
res of our head. For those that will needs be our Pastors and spiritual
fathers, are become beasts as the Prophet Ierem* says, and have not sought
the Lord. And therefore what marvel is it, though we the poor sheep be
miserably dispersed not knowing whether to turn us for any succor. Our
guides have not only misled us, but they are become wolves in stead of
shepherds. So that we dare not show our selves, for fear of their teeth, to
seek any pasture but the bare feeding which they have laid before us. And if we
sh^ld ^pen our mouths, to sue for the true shepherds and overseers indeed unto
whose direction, we ought to be committed: The rage of these wolves is such
(thou see) as this endeavor would almost be the price of our life. For if this
request were once granted, they full well perceive, that they should not have so
much as a place of a door keeper within the sheepefold of the Lord. And
therefore, they every way labor, to keep us in bondage. They hide the truth,
and will not suffer others to see the same. If the Lord in mercy, do open the
eyes of any man, he must not for his life, make it known that he has seen
the light, much less, walk in the same, and wish others to follow him.

They seem at this day, to have greater liberty, to wound the church, then any
they had since the beginning of her Majesty's reign, and therefore ought the
godly to enarme themselves against them, now more then before. They make use of
the time, and the opportunity which they have gotten, to keep the truth and the
church in their bondage. VVonder not at it: for this is the very hour and
power of darkness, wherein they have liberty to do no more yet, then the right
hand of our God has determined long before and when he has accomplished his
work, in mount Sion and Jerusalem, then let them, and whosoever favor any of
the offspring of Romish Babell their mother, take heed unto themselves. In the
beginning of her Majesty's reign, was the mouth of gods saints in England,
filled with laughter, but a^asse* these men labor to blot out all that joy
with the tears, if not with the blood of the church. And in the mean time,
her Majesty we are assured, is ignorant of the right case of the murdering
conclusions, set up against us by these Tyrants. Oh that it pleased the Lord,
that our course might be examined by her highness, and that she would not
suffer both our judges and our accusers, to condemn us for those things,
whereof* they shall never be able to convince us with any color. If we must
needs be persecuted, yea, and die (for I see that the Prelates, and their
accomplices mean no otherwise to be satisfied, then with the blotting out of our
names from among men) would to God yet, we might die by her hand, that is,
being convicted by her godly laws, to deserve that which we are like to
suffer For otherwise, I persuade my self, we should not be indamaged by her
Majesty except we were found to be gilty of punishment, by the voice of her
good laws. The enemies have long since endeavored, to prove us to be
dangerous subjects and yet to this day, we are ready to defy them unto their
faces, and to maintain our innocence both by the law of God, and the laws of
this kingdom. Against which, Tertullus, the greatest Atheist, and cunningest
lawier of all their crew was never able to prove, that we have any ways
offended How violently they wrest the laws against us, their souls (which I
wish not) shall find it.

The course which they have taken to confute us by writing, has been so
gainles unto them* that we never saw their third answer in the cause. They have
indeed, like men being driven unto a hole, sometimes made an irruption upon us,
as they do daily in their Sermons, but when it coms to pass, that they must
either stand unto their cause, or suffer the overthrow, we see not one of
them, that will abide the third encounter. And yet they cease not, daily, to
discover themselves, although they bring no other furniture with them then that
which has been battered and made unserviceable long since. M. Bancroft has
been one of the last adversaries that we have seen, and yet has he
furnished himself with no new artillery, but only was content to borrow
those, wherewith the Archbishop lost the field. For he has nothing in a manner
against us in his whole Sermon, but such things as have bin answered long ago
by M. Cartwright, yea, his slanders, and all for the most part (though he be
skillful that way himself) he has borrowed either of D. Whitgift, or of
Doctor Cosins, in his answer to the Abstract, and therefore have been already
confuted. In consideration whereof, I had thought him not worth the answering,
were it not that I did see, the Lord to require at our hands, the justifiyng
of his truth, as often as the same is called into question, or any ways
unworthily handled.

There have been others I suppose, that have taken more pains with this
inuectiue Sermon of his, I have therefore left place unto them, whosoever they
are, to publish that wherein they have more fully and more largely discovered,
the evil and unreasonable dealing of the Chaplain. I have examined few or
none of the testimonies of men brought in by him, the advantages which that way
might be had against him, I have not taken, both because I saw it not very
material, that he should be convinced, to abuse the writings of men, who is not
ashamed to offer injury unto the holy scriptures of God, and also for as much,
as it may be, others will indite him for that false dealing of his. If his
cause be good, and he able to defend it with truth and upright dealing, I have
showed him the way to atchieue his purpose: And that is, neither to father upon
us such things as we never maintained, nor yet to bring the testimonies of men
to oppugn our conclusions, whose grounds he is not able to shake: but to set
down that which we hold indeed, and with reasons rather to answer our
premises, then with authorities to strike at our conclusions. The contrary
dealing, may color and white line the breaches of his cause for a time, but in
the end, it will prove to be the ruin thereof. Unconscionable and sophistical
dealing, can never be able to stand any long time. He and his Masters, would
gladly bear the Magistrate in hand, that we deny the congregations in England,
where the word is truly preached, and the sacraments rightly administered, to be
the visible churches of God, whereas the truth is, that the Bishops and not we,
do maintain this error. Let the reader judge, whether I truly accuse them by
this which follows.

The visible church of God wheresoever it be* has the power of binding and
loosing annexed unto it, as our savior Christ teaches us. Matthew 18. which
authority is so essentially tied unto the visible church, that wheresoever this
power is to be found, there the church of Christ is also visible, Our Bb. are
scismatickes and deny the assembly of England to be visible church of God.
book of Martins page 5. 6.
and wheresoever there is a visible church, there this authority cannot be
denied to be. The which point that reverend father, M. John Fox teaches more
at large. Now the reader cannot be ignorant that our Bishops will never grant
that the visible congregations in England, ought to have this power of binding
and loosing, for then should they manifest themselves to be professed tyrants.
The crime therefore of Scisme and Donatisme, which M. Bancroft and the Prelates
would fasten upon us, does justly cl^aue unto them selves. And if any of our
poor brethren be carried away, to think otherwise of the congregations of
England, which enjoy the word truly preached, and the right use of the
Sacrament^: We cease not to pray that the Lord would reform their judgments.
But woe be unto our Bishops, which are the cause of this their stumbling, and
maintainers of their error. For the pore brethren do hold nothing in this
point, but that which the learned fathers, as M. Bancroft calls them have
decreed. And you shall see in this Treatise, that he sees no reason, why
Popery being now abollished, Sermon page 3,
we should not reply upon the determinations of these fathers, as other men
in time past of a: great judgment as we are, have done. Let our Bishops then,
and their vpholders, whisper into the ear of the Magistrate what they will, it
shall be proved in the end, that they are the scismatickes and not we. It
shall appear that they are growing to make a body of their own, wherewith the
church of God in a while (if they hold on their course) can have no mote to do,
then in times past in had with the scismaticall Donatists.

The devil indeed has within this twelmoneth, showed himself to be
grievously wounded in their persons, because he has raged so mightily, as
these 32. years his fury was never seen so great against the truth as at
this present. That vile and scurrilous Palmphlet, An almond a Patrot.
latey suffered to come abroad by their priuity (if not allowance) and in their
defense does evidently show, that satan feels the power and sway which he
was wont to bear by virtue of the hierarchy, to be greatly weakened. And
because he fears that his time under their government cannot be long
therefore he means now to infect the air at once, with all his contagions.
The strength which they get by such lewd and filthy stuff, and the discredit
which thereby they work either unto the cause, or the men and women whom they
suffer to be so unworthily traduced, is not other then it were to be wished
(that seeing they will needs be filthy) they would publish such another book
every day: That then it might appear indeed whose sons they are. And this
is all the confutation that I think, so godles, and lewd a scrole to deserve.

For thy self good reader, thou see the time of trial to be now at hand,
even at the door. If thou meanest to be partaker of Christ's kingdom after
this life: take heed, that neither the fear of men, nor the love of the world
draw thee to shrink from any part of that truth, which the Lord has reueiled
in his word. The Lord says, that whosoever shall be ashamed of him or his
word, that is, any part of his truth before men, Luke 9.26.
of him shall the son of man be ashamed, when he comes in his glory. Well,
I think it now no time to dally with the Lord and his word, but let us crave
strength at his hand, that we stand unrebukable, unto the day of his
appearance.

A BRIEF DISCOVERY OF THE VNTRVTHES, AND SLANDERS AGAINST Reformation, and the
favorers thereof, contained in D. Bancrofts Sermon.
D. BANCROFTS TEXT. 1. John 4.1. Dearly beloved, believe not every spirit,
b^^ ^^ie the spirits, whether they be of God: For many false Prophets are gone
out into the world
ANSWER.
IT has been the ancient custom of Satan and his instruments in all ages, I
answer not the word, but the abuse of the word.
to abuse the holy word, and name of God, as a ground unto all their ungodly
proceedings against the Lord and his Saints: that there by, they might have
some color of their persecutions, and wicked attempts against the truth and
professors thereof. That I be not tedious in a matter too apparent, hence it
is, that in all the condemnations of the holy Martyrs of Christ, by that Roman
Tyrant: We see all their processes to begin in the name of God, and the
accusasions laid to the charge of the Saints to be so boulstred out with the
testimonies of holy Scripture, as though the spirit of God had none to
condemn of heresy, scisme, sedition and treason, save only the members and
messengers of Christ Jesus. And therefore M. Bancroft, if you begin with
Scripture, and as I may say, in the name of God, begin to speak against God,
against his blessed verity and people you do but your kind, in treading the
steps of your predecessors: You have your forefathers, the Scribes and
Pharisees, that Antichristian beast of Rome, his Cardinals, Bishops, Legates
inquisitors and all others, that have colored their garments, with the blood
of the Lords chosen, for your presidents and examples. The delusion of your
course could not be so great, if you did show your self in your colors.
Your Sermon declares that your affection serves you, rather to fight against
the truth with fire and faggot, then by sober writing, or speaking, to stand in
the defense of your cause.

Well, you deal against false Prophets, Scismatiques, giddy spirits,
disturbers of the church, enemies to her Majesty's estate and prerogative. And
we on the otherside, that favor reformation, do from the bottom of our
hearts entreat and beseech the eternal God, speedily to convert and turn all
such, if they be his, or else with speed to overthrow them in his fierce wrath.
And as for our selves in particular, if we, who in sincerity seek the
reformation of the Church of England; be either false Prophets; Scismatiques,
giddy spirits, disturbers of the Church, enemies unto her Majesty's estate or
person, we do without exception, entreat the Lord in his fiery wrath and
anger, even this hour, to make us visible monuments, of his great indignation,
both in this life, and in the day of the Lord Jesus, and root the memory of us
and ours, out of the Church and kingdom of England for ever: that our most
dear Sovereign Queen Elizabeth, may continue and end her days, not only in
the quietness of her own conscience, but also in the conjunction, quietness, and
union of the hearts of all her Subjects and people. And we offer, not only to
clear our selves, by these our voluntary protestations, made in the name and
presence of the great God of heaven and earth, but even by showing the goodness
of our cause according unto the word, and answering whatsoever the adversary
brings against us. And what can we do more? Let us then M. Bancroft see
what you can say of us, or our cause Here I omit, whatsoever in your whole
Sermon is impertinent unto us, against whom you especially deal, and come to
the eight page thereof, where at the first meeting, you do very brotherly
salute us, by the names of false Prophets, though of your courtesy, your care
not much if you omit the name.

D. BANCROFT. Page 8. line. 10. Lastly, they are false Prophets, who do
pervert the meaning of the Scriptures, for the maintenance and defense of any
false doctrine, scisme, of heresy. Hereof you know, I might give you many
examples. I pray you bear with me if I set down, one as strange in my
opinion, as any to be found in a matter of no great importance. The name of
false prophets, I am content in diverse respects to suppress. The matter it
self, which I mean, stands in this sort. There are many now a days who
do affirm, that when Christ used these words: DTC ECCLESIAE. Math. 18
He meant hereby to establish in the Church forever, the same plot and form of
Ecclesiastical Government to be en^ct in every parish which Moses by (...)
counsel, appointed in mount Sinay: Numb. 11.
and which afterward; the^^ was did imitate in their particular Sinagogues.
ANSWER.
They (...) read your Sermon, will bear you witness, that you are sufficiently
able, to afforde your auditors an example of a false teacher: And yet it were
hard, to account all those to be false Prophets (without exception) who pervert
the meaning of the word, to the maintenance of every point of false doctrine.
For we know, that many of the true Ministers of God, have in the error of their
judgment, held some points of unsound doctrine, and perverted the meaning of
the holy scripture for the maintenance of the same. To speak nothing of
Cyprian, Chrysostom, Jerome, Augustme, and especially, Origin and Barnard who
have had every one of them their blemishes, and wrested the word for the
defense thereof: that worthy man of God, M. Luther you know, has delivered
unjustifiable and false doctrine, concerning the manner of receiving of the
thing signified, to wit Christ Jesus, in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper: and
as it may be truly said, he has perverted many places of the word, for the
maintenance of this his error, yet M. Bancroft, I think you will not inrolle
him in the catalogue of false Prophets: Wherefore, if I denied the ground and
principle of your reason, and sent you again unto your note book, for a better
description of a false Prophet, I should do nothing contrary unto equity and
reason. But I mean not to stand with you in a manner of so small moment:
seeing, especially you do by this your description, teach the reader, what
account he is to make of you, and your brethren of the same crewe, who daily in
your Sermons and writings, do wrest, pervert, and abuse the sacred word of God,
for the maintenance of most false and pernicious doctrine, whereof it may be,
some thing shall be spoken hereafter.

But I pray you, who are they that expound the words of our savior Christ.
Mat. 18. Dic ecclesiae: Tell the Church, to be referred to the Ecclesiastical
government, which Moses by Iethroes counsel appointed in mount Sinai? you say
they are many, why then did you not name one of them, or quote the writings of
some one of them? Even indeed, because you are not able to father this
absurdity upon none of those, whom you would gladly bear the world in hand
to be the maintainers thereof. A godless and slanderous shift of M. Bancro^^.
And here the reader is to be advertised, that among many shifts, which you
have to obscure the truth, delude your readers and auditors, and to color your
slanderous untruths, there is one whereof you make a special use, and that is
to charge us with the defense of such points as we never held: Thinking it
sufficient for you to say, that there are many now a days who affirm, that
when our Savior Christ, etc. Whereas the error, as you have set it down, is
so absurd and senseless, and smells of such gross ignorance, as I assure my
self, that none who have written in the cause of reformation since the
beginning of her majesty's reign, unto this hour, could be so groslye
ouerseene, as to conceive, much less hold and maintain any such thing as you
have uttered. For first, the officers appointed. Number. 11. (and I beseech the
reader to mark) were not ordained at mount Sinai, Not at mount Sinai
as you have set down, but (as the holy Ghost expressly notes) at Kibroth
Hataauah, Numb. 11.
which was 3. days journey from mount Sinai: compare Numb. 10.33. with Numb. 11
24.34 and 33.16. and Deuteronomy. 1.1. And therefore it is very absurd, to aduouch
that the 70. Elders, mentioned Number. 11. were ordained at mount Sinai: and it is
no less false to give our, Not at the counsel of Iethro
that these were the officers appointed by Moses at ye counsel of Iethro. For
Iethroes advise was put in execution, Exodus 18.12. and 40.17.
before the erecting of the Tabernacle, even in the first year of their
departure out of Egypt. The ordinance of the 70. elders, taken in hand after
the setting up of the Tabernaele, Exodus 40.17. Numb. 10.11.^2.
and after the 20. day of the 2. month of the 2. year. Again, the governors
in Kibroth-Hataauah were but 70. or at the most 72. in number: the other
ordained by the counsel of Iethro, being gouerners of 1000. governors of 100.
governors of 50. and governors of 10. must needs exceed that number by many
degrees. Not ecclesiastical.
Lastly, (which is your 3. slanderous absurdity) who told you that the
government ordained in the 11. of Numbers, was Ecclesiastical. The very place
it self, and all the circumstances thereof do prove it to be civil: And so
our men that have written of this argument would have taught you, Master
Cornel. Bertram de potialud. cap. 6.
if you had sought the truth of the cause out of their writings. The holy
story it self, makes the matter to be out of controversy, which is this in
effect. Numb. 11. There grew an universal murmuring among the people, because
they had not flesh to eat. The authority of the rulers over thousands, rulers
of hundreths, etc. ordained by the advice of Iethro, reached not beyond the
number allotted unto the^: So that the defection of the people being general,
(and it may be, many of their rulers joined with them) they would not have an
answer, nor be pacified by the inferior officers, but they come to Moses the
chief governor, and would have him to give the^ flesh: Moses being sore vexed
with the outcries against him, expostulateth with the Lord, thinking himself
to be hardly dealt with, that there was none appointed for ye restraining of the
general ^^^^itude, but he himself alone: Herupon the Lord commanded him to
gather 70. of the Elders of Israel, Verse. 16.
such (says the text) as he knew, to be governors of the people, and the Lord
would appoint the^ as assistants with him, to take the general charge of the
people, yt when the multitude would not be ruled by their inferior officers, as
the rulers of 1000. etc. these 70. elders should be armed by the Lord, with
authority and gifts, to bear the burden with him, and it was peformed
accordingly.

Now M. Bancroft, for whose assistance were these Elders appointed? the word
expressly sets down, that they were to assist Moses: and therefore the
offices whereunto they were ordained were civil; whereas if they had bin
ecclesiastical, they should have bin appointed helpers unto Aaron. and not unto
Moses. For Moses at this time was no more to intermedle with the priesthood,
because Aaron and his sons, Number. 16.10. Exodus 28.1.
were now consecrated thereunto, and the tribe of Leui allotted to assist Aaron,
even to take ye charge with him of the whole congregation, Numb 3.7.
in respect of the tabernacle The last time yt ever Moses dealt in the office
of the priesthood, was at the consecration of Aaron and his sons, but from the
time that Aaron was receued in to ye office, Moses never meddled with it any
more. Leu 8.90. Exodus 28.1. and 29.44. and 38.44. and 30.7. Leuit. 1.5. and
cap. 8. and 9. Number. 16.10. Number. 11.23.
So the cause is to clear, yt they who were appointed to assist Moses, and not
Aaron, w^^ civil and ecclesiastical rulers. Where it is said, than the 70.
Elders prophisied, it can no more prove them to belong to the government of the
church, then the like gift bestowed upon Saul, 1. Sam. 10.10:
can make him a church officer.

Seeing then M. Bancroft, the platform of Government, whereof you speak, was
neither appointed at mount Siuai, nor by the counsel of Iethro, nor yet
ordained for the regiment of the Church, but for the use of the civil state,
and seeing you can father this exposition upon none of these, whom afterward
you call the clergy and layitie factions, the consequent is, that your own
ignorance in the cause of Christ's government which you oppugn, has coined
us this most unlearned and senseless exposition: wherein you do no more I
grant, then that which is the common custom of all your fellows: And that is,
to imagine that these, who by the goodness of God are seen in this cause, can
bring no better reasons for the defense of the same, then you whose ignorance
therein is manifest and ridiculous unto unto all men. And indeed for your part
M. Bancroft, if you had any modesty in you, and shame of the world, (to omit
the conscience and sound fear of God, which ought to be in a Minister of the
Gospel as you would be accounted) you would give your self little rest,
until either you had named us some of these very many, who affirm as you have
set down, or make open confession of your great ignorance in that cause,
whereunto you have been always so great an enemy. The reader may well know,
that you have set down these things, rather of mere ignorance, then of
single malice only, because otherwise, you that are so ready to take any
advantage against your adversaries, and their arguments, would have been glad
to have found so many breaches in one poor reason of theirs: And though you
would never so feign avoid this blot of your insufficiency, yet your own words
following do witness, that you have spoken of the cause, even according unto
the deep knowledge that you have thereof, where you say that the Jews in their
particular Sinagogues, did imitate this government ordained by Moses in mount
Sinai at the counsel of Iethro: As though, every particular Sinagogue of the
Jews could afford 70. elders that were known to be the governors of the
people, to attend upon the regiment of the Church? It appears that you are
well seen, either in the civil or Ecclesiastical polity of the Jews, which
appoint these elders unto their particular Sinagogs. You might as well say,
that we in England in the government of our particular parishes, by
Churchwardens and Sidemen, do resemble the majesty that is in the assembly
of Star chamber or at the Counsel table, as that the Jews in their particular
Sinagogues, did imitate the government of the 70. Elders: who being joined in
authority with Moses, are manifested to be the highest civil officers, that
were in all the congregation of Israel, and both before and after the
captiu^ty, they are said by the learned, to have the highest authority in the
Commonwealth of the Jews, next unto the supreme Magistrate. If you had been
but meanly seen in Josephus (to omit other writers) you could not have
been ignorant of this point. The name Elder it may be, is that deceiues you,
thinking belike, that wheresoever we read of any called Elders in the
Scriptures, we presently take the place, as making for the Eldership under the
Gospel. We think far otherwise then so, because we find the Governors
of the Common wealth, Read Genesis 50.7. Iosua^ 6.11.
as well as the rulers of the Church; to be called Elders by the spirit of God.

Whatsoever then you say of false Prophets, (as you speak much of them in your
Sermons) the reader sees, that at your first assault of the cause of Christ's
Government, you have manifested your self to be of their number, that speak
evil of the things they know not, which the holy Ghost makes to be a mark
of these false teachers, 2. Pet. 2.13.
by whom the way of truth in the latter ages, should be evil spoken of.

But here you will say, that we ground something for the proof of the
Eldershippe upon the place of Math. 18. Tell the Church, etc. and that we
bring in the Iewishe Sinagogue for some purpose in this question. True it is,
we do so: And because you neither know, as it appears, what we infer,
nor wear able to answer them, being made known unto you therefore you did
wisely to set down in our name, your own absurdities, which of themselves,
with out any confuter, desire for shame to be buried under the earth. That
which we affirm is this. And we appeal unto the conscience of the reader,
whether we speak the truth or not. First we prove that the offices of
Pastors, Doctors, Elders, etc. are perpetually to continue in the Church,
because the Lord has appointed them to be members thereof, Romans 12.6.7.8.
M. Cart 1. reply page 140. 141. Counterpoison Answer to Briges slanders.
And because Saint Paul writing unto Timothy, makes the retaining of them in
the Church of Christ, not arbitrarie matters, left to the discretion of the
Church, but a commandment which is to be kept inviolable, until the
appearing of the Lord Jesus.

Secondly, we affirm that our Savior Christ, did establishe (Matthew 18. these
words, Tell the Church) this Government of his house by the offices of
Pastors, Doctors and Elders: In that he commands us, when a brother does not
profit by the degrees of private admonition which he there mencioneth, that
we should acquaint the Church with his offend: Tell the Church says he. By
the Church in this place, we say, that either the whole multitude must be
meant, or some one man, as the Bishop, Chancellor, etc. or else the Elders
joined together, with the Pastor and Doctrour if there be any. Now you will
not say, that a man should go and seek remedy at the whole multitude when
his brother offends him. On the other-side, if you say, yt by the Church in
this place, is meant some one man in the Church, and so go tell the Church;
should be, The phrase of speech also that on man should be taken for the
Church, is unwarrantable.
go tell one man in the Church, as the Bishop or Chancellor: The
exposition is diverse ways proved to be false. Because the degrees of
proceedings, which our Savior. Christ sets down, does overthrow it. For
we are commanded from a private reproof of our brother between us and him,
to rise unto an admonition before one or two witnesses, and so from two or
three, not to come back again, to make his fault known before one witness, as
the Bishop or Chauncelour, but before many, vz. the Church governors, as before
is set down. And in this speech tell the assembly of Church, we say that
our savior Christ, pointing out by the spirit of prophecy, the government of
the eldership under the gospel, does allude unto the form of the Jews,
government in their Sinagogues, unto whom whosoever gave not ear, was
accounted as an heathen or a publicane.

This M. Bancroft, is the sum of that which we affirm out of Math. 18. when
you can bring any thing against this exposition of the place, you shall be
answered by the assistance of God: And it shall appear, whenever you or
yours, dare abide the public trial of your cause, that there are not only
many that affirm this but also many that will prove this to be most true. In
the mean time, we refer the matter unto the conscience of the reader, whether
you and your vpholders, in expounding tell the church, to be, complain to the
Bishop or chancelour, that is, tell one man in the Church, or we which
interpret the same to be, tell the governors of the Church: to wit, the
Pastor, Doctor, and Elders joined together, being not one but many, do
pervert the meaning of the scripture: and as his judgment in these things
shall be convinced, so let him account of you and us accordingly.

D. BANCROFT page 9. They had say these men in their sinagogues, the ^ priests,
we must have in every parish our pastors, they their Leuite, we our Doctors,
they their rulers of their sinagogues, we our Elders, they their leuittical
treasurers, we our Deacons.
ANSWER.
And what can you say against this saying of theirs? if it be false, why do
you not confute it? your ability indeed to disprooue the afternoon you show
in that you leave it as you found it. And that the reader may perceive what
madness it were, for you to go about to weaken any part hereof, I will briefly
note out the places, wherein these offices are mentioned both in the old and
new testament.

First then for the offices of Priests and Levites, Numb. 16 9.10, and Deuteronomy.
33.9.10. and there you shall see the Priests and Levites so distinguished, as
although they were both of them to teach Iaacob the judgments, and Israel the
law, yet was the Priest alone to put incense before the face of the Lord: Now
under the new Testament, answerable unto the Priest and Leuite: there is the
Pastor and the Doctor, Ephe. 4 11.12.
and both of them appointed for the gathering together of the Saints, by the
work of the ministry, yet both of them distinguished in their special
subjects. The one of them to attend [ Romans 12.7.8.
] upon the gift of teaching, the other upon exhortation, the one of the^ to be
in an especial fort, [ 1. Cor. 12.8.
] endued with the word of knowledge, the other with the word of wisdom.
Concerning those, who in the new [ Acts 12.15. etc 18.8.
] testament are called the rulers of the Sinagogue, the spirit of God in the
old, names them [ 2. Chro. 19.^
] the Princes or the chief of the families: who although they were not of the
tribe of Leui, yet were they appointed for the cause and judgments of the
Lord, as well as the Priests and Levites themselves. In like manner, 2. Tim.
5.17. Romans 12.8. Act. 20.28. 1. Cor. 12.28.
there are Elders in the new Testament, bearing a distinct office from the
Pastor and the doctor, and yet appointed to rule and ouersee the house of God
by virtue of their own proper function. Lastly, as under the law, we find
Church treasures, unto whose custody, 1. Chro. 26.20 28 2. Chro. 31.13.15.
the dedicate things belonging to the sacrifices, and the maintenance of the
Levites were committed: So in the kingdom of Christ under the new covenant,
are Deacons appointed: Act. 6.2.3. Romans 12 8.9. 1. Tim. 3.6.
whose office is neither to meddle with the word and Sacraments, nor yet with
the government of the house of God, but only to attend upon the goods of the
Church, and the right distribution of them to the use of the poor, etc. I omit
here, that as the Gebonites and the Nethinimes, were employed about the
inferior and baser offices of the temple and tabernacle, so the holy ghost has
appointed Church servant and widows, to the same purpose under the Gospel.
Here by good reads thou see, that not only we, but the holy ghost also
says, those things concerning the regiment of the Church, hoth under the new
and old Testament, which Master Bancroft is not able to: gain say with any
color of truth. And yet it were, season that either his answer, or his
consent should: be had.

M. BANCROFT. This form of government, they call the tabernacle, which God
has appointed, the glory of God, and of his son Jesus Christ, the presence
of God the place which he has chosen to put hi^ name there, the court of the
Lord, and the shining forth of Gods glory.
ANSWER.
Although I deny not, but the true government of the Church by the
Eldershippe, might have the most of these titles truly attributed unto it,
wherewith the visible Church under the new Testament is adorned: yet the most
of those names which you set down, being something insolent and strange, I
make no doubt, but all modest writers would abstain from them: Especially,
knowing how subject this cause in our time is, unto the godless cauils of
such, as care not what they write to the disgrace thereof. And because you
have set them down with out any authority: for mine own part, I can no
otherwise think of them, then of the brood of your own slanderous spirit,
whereunto you can find no covert under the wings of your adversaries, when you
have produced your witnesses, to prove them none of yours, I will in this
point alter mine opinion, and it stands you upon to clear your self. That
which follows in your Sermon, does manifest both your ignorance in the
cause, and also that you have so acquainted your tongue and pen with untruths,
that you are a stranger unto the words of verity and vprightnes: your words
are these.

D. BANCROFT page 6. line 13. Where this ecclesiastical Synod is not erected,
they say Gods ordinance is not performed: the office of Christ as he is a King,
is not acknoledged: in effect, with out this government, we can never attain
to a right and true feeling, of christian religion, but are to be reckoned
among those, Luke. 19.27.
who say of Christ, we will not have this man to reign over us.
ANSWER.
As though we desire ecclesiastical Synods, to be erected in every
congregation, and parish, or that we make no difference, between a Synod, which
is a meeting of all the ministers, and elders, if occasion should require, (or
more properly of some choice ministers and elders) in a whole province, or more
general, and the Eldershippe: which contains the governors, to wit the
Pastors Doctors and elders of one only congregation. The reader may se what a
meet man you are to be an inueigher against the eldership, whereas you know
not what it means, and whether a Synod and an Eldership be al one or not.

Where this form of ecclesiastical government is not erected, there indeed we
say, that Gods ordinance concerning the regiment of his church is not wholly
observed: but that his whole ordinance is wanting, where there is a faithful
teacher we never as yet affirmed. And therefore if by your general speech
(that we say Gods ordinance is not performed etc.) you mean that we deny any
part thereof, to be where the government by the Eldership is not established,
you do but follow your own humor, that is bear false witness against the
truth, and those that profess the same.

The office of Christ as he is a King, is boath to teach and to govern his
church by his own laws. Our Bishops do profess them selves to rob the
church of the scepter of government, which they have tyranuously wrested to
them selves, and therefore we truly say, that they suffer Christ to have but
half a kingdom at the most, under their jurisdiction, and that we fear full
sore against their wills: we grant indeed, that many congregations in the land,
do enjoy, Christ Jesus reigning among them, by the scepter of his word, and
we do day and night according unto our weak measure of faith, heartily
thank our God for this blessing, and beseech him from the bottom of our
hearts, to show mercy unto our sovereign Queen Elizabeth, under whose
peaceable government, we are partakers of so inestimable a treasure. Yet
notwithstanding; it is too well known, what a stranger, the savior of
mankind is to the most part within our land, because the voice of his gospel
is never effectually heard among them: and so we may truly say, that the
office of Christ as he is a king, is no wise acknoledged under ye jurisdiction
of our Bishops in many places of our land. Again, we do so thank the Lord for
the enjoying of his Gospel preached, as we cease not, humbly to entreat his
majesty, that leeing he has vouchsafed us the lauour to be of his
householde, it would also please him, that we may be ruled by the offices and
laws of his own house. For what has the Temple of God to do with the
government and statutes of the kingdom of Antichrist? And we do protest that
we will give him no rest, until he has vouchsaued to hear our
supplications even in this point. And yet in the mean time, we do acknowledge
his office as he is a king: and do profess our selves without this
Government which we labor for; to have attained unto some right and true
feeling of christian religion; though not to such a measure, as we hope to
reach unto, whenever the Lord shall grant unto us the use of his holy
ordinance, which we so earnestly desire. This may serve M. Bancroft for a
sufficient confutation of your loose and unbridled tongue; which are not
ashamed to publish that without this government we hold, that men can never
attain unto a right and true feeling of religion: we have evermore affirmed
the contrary, and are able to prove the contrary.

For we hold that those 3000. souls which in one day were added unto the
Church at Jerusalem, Act. 2.41.
before the Eldership was established among the disciples, had a true feeling
of religion: we say the same of the Church of Creta, Tit. 1.5.
even before ever Titus ordained elders in every city among them. The like
judgment we have of the church of England, at this day. But as the spirit of
God records, that notwithstanding these Churches of Jerusalem and Creet, had
a true feeling of Christ, yet it behooued them to submit themselves, according
unto Gods ordinance, unto the government of the Eldership, which [ Act.
15.4.6. Titus. 1.5.
] they enjoyed: So say we of our selves in England, and of all other Churches
in our case, that although our knowledge and feeling were never so great, (as
alas it is but too too slender) yet are we to be built further and further, and
wrought upon by all the holy ordinances of God, least we be deprived of that
inheritance which is to be had among them that are sanctified. And indeed we
hold, it is to be feared, of all those who refuse to stoop unto the Lord in
this point of their obedience, that they have not as yet felt a right, what
true religion means. Therefore, we warn them to enter into their own souls,
and examine what true sense they have of the glory of God, and his favor
toward them. And as for the most of them, that are enemies unto this
government of Christ Jesus, it were to be wished, both in regard of the Church,
and common wealth, that their very lives and conuersations, did not show them,
to be either mere Atheistes or carnal and profane men, that only content
themselves to have godliness in their months, though their hearts have denied
the power thereof, and are so far from the true feeling of Christian
religion, as D. Bancroft is from true and upright dealing, who says, that we
account all those, amongst whom this Ecclesiastical Sinode (as he calls it)
is not erected, to say of our savior Christ, we will not have this man to
reign over us. The which speech, how untrue it is, may appear by that which
is already spoken. As for the conclusion, which in the latter end of this
page he alleges out of the Demonstration of Discipline, I wish with all my
heart, if it please the Lord, that neither he nor any other enemies of the
cause, may feel the weight thereof.

Whereas in this place, page 9. line. 26.
you would seem to make the Demonstration of discipline, to be the fountain
whence you have derived the most of the things hitherto discussed, the reader
is to make no other account of that speech of yours, then to mark it up,
upon the score of your untruths: for you shall find no such matter in that
book.

D. BANCROFT page 10. sect. 2. and 3. There was never ancient father (as I
think) since the Apostles time, that did thus expound the place, Mat. 18.
Besides there has bin a diverse government from this, used in the Church ever
since the Apostles time, and these men do confess, that this government long
before the counsel of Nice began greatly to decay and that since the said
counsel, T. C.
it was never heard of in the world, until these their times.
ANSWER.
They must needs be childish, and absurd fathers, that should expound the
place, according unto your interpretation. The reader has seen, that you have
alleged your own comment and not ours. Neither do we run unto fathers when
we would try the truth, but unto the scriptures themselves. And yet we
thankefully acknoweledg the helps, which their labors have affoarded unto us,
but so as we held it a maine point of popery to hold that a place is not well
interpreted, because no such exposition can be found in the writings of the
ancients. Besides, we account your breast for no library, wherein all the
interpretations of the fathers upon this place may be seen. Chrisostom (if
that were any thing unto the truth) does expound tell the church, to be,
Chrisost. upon Math.
tell the governors of the Church, which comprehends in a manner all that we
affirm.

We know Di^^rephes to have bin in the church, even in the Apostles times, 3.
John. 9.
and we are assured he could never be gotten out of it, since the first hour
that he set footing therein. And therefore we cannot greatly marvel, though
even in their time, there had bin a diverse government, from this of the lords
appointment, which we labor for. For even in the Apostles time, the mystery of
iniquity began to work. But for all this, 2. These. 2.7.
we would have you prove your bold assertion, that ever since the Apostles
time, there has bin a diverse government from this, and when you have done, you
must understand, that the question between us is not so much, de facto, as de
jure, not so much whether there was a diverse government etc. as whether that
diverse government was lawful or not.

We must needs confess indeed, that not only this government of the Church,
but also many other points of greatest weight in religion, fell to decay long
before the counsel of Nice: But that M. Carthwright, or any man else of
judgment has affirmed, that this government was never heard of, since the
said counsel, until these our times, it is an impudent untruth. You quote T.
C. on the margent, but neither name the page, nor the book where he should
affirm this which you would seem to publish under his name,. The reader is
to mark this is an other of shifte, which is so much the more shamles, as you
ground your next speech upon it, as upon a matter granted you without any
further question.

D. BANCROFT page 10. and 11. A very strange matter if it were true, that
Christ should erect a form of government to continue until his coming, and
that the same should never be once put in practice, for the space of 1500.
years, or at the least (to take them at their best) that the government and
kingdom of Christ should then be overthrown, when the divinity of his person
the honor of his kingly authors, etc. was established at the counsel of Nice.
ANSWER.
Let the reader mark this for another of your shifts.
And is it not also a strange case, that you will erect a building of your own
stuff, and workmanship, and then call your auditors, to gaze and wonder at the
absurd deformity of it. Why? there are non but your self, and such as you
are, that affirm this government to have wanted execution, for the space of
1500. years. Neither do we hold or think the government and kingdom of
Christ, to be overthrown at the time of the counsel of Nice. And you have in
this point, given your self the shamfull lie, in the 100. page of your Sermon,
where you allege that M. Cartwright does affirm this eldership to have been
most flourishing under Constantine the Emperor, by whom the Nicene council
was called. I refer the reader unto the place, and and wish you, though you
cannot be gotten to leave forging of untruths against us, yet for your own
credit sake, not to forget the chief ma^ime of your profession: which is, that
it behooves a lying tongue to be joined with a good memory.

We do not say, that the government and kingdom of Christ is wholly
overthrown, where the Eldership is wanting, and therefore, your speech tending
that way, does rather point out the essential all quality of your nature,
then any conclusion of ours.

And admit it were true, that the Eldership lay in the dust, at the time of the
Nicen counsel, and was never heard of in Christendoome from that hour until
this latter age. Will you conclude thereof, that therefore it is not now to
be received? that is Popery. For the holy men there met together, suffered
many other substantial and most necessary points of doctrine to be buried, as
they had been long before their time, and were never in a manner taken out of
the ground until this latter age. And all that the fathers decreed at Nice,
besides the matter of Arrius, which is but one branch of religion far from a
perfect confession of faith, let any man read their Cannons as they are set
down, either by Ruffinus, Ruffi. lib. 2 cap. 6.
or in the first Tome of the councels, and he shall find my words to be
most true.

The errors concerning free will, and man's ability to fulfill the law,
derived from Justin the martyr, and Irenaeus was at this time in some ripenes,
and yet the Nicene Council took no order with these things, as it may
appear by their writings, who lived in the ages following. And though
Augustine long after, against the pelagians and else where gave free will a
deaths wound, yet notwithstanding, we know, that ever since the Apostles
time, in a manner it flourished every where, until M. Luther took the sword
in hand against it. And by Master Bancrofts reason, the Papists defending
free will, against Master Luther, held the better part. For it may be thought
a strange matter in the sight of M. Bancrofts popish eyes, that either man's.
free will and ability to fulfill the law of God, should in our time be
thought erroneous, and to annihilate the virtue of Christ's kingdom and
priesthood, or that the Lord in his word should establish a contrary doctrine
thereunto, for his Church to follow unto his coming again, whereas the same
was winked at, or buried, when by all men's confession, the divinity of our
Savior Christ, These are M. Bantro. words.
the virtue of his priesthood, the power of his office as he is a prophet and
the honor of his kingly authority, was so godly, so learnedly, and so mightily
established against the Arrians in the Council of Nice, etc.

So that if this argument be good and forcible against the Church government,
it is also powrfull to overthrow the maine point of our justification by
faith, besides many other corruptions which were past over, yea and
established at that council, which is justly accounted one of the soundest,
that the ancient times can afford unto us. Paphnutius alone, was enforced to
stand up against the whole Sinode in the cause of the marriage of Ministers,
which notwithstanding, he (being a man himself endued with the gift of
continency) so defended, that he would not have him that were a Minister being
unmarried, Zoromen lib. 1 cap. 23.
ever after to be joined with a wife. These things, and many such like,
together with M. Bancrofts judgment of us, page 11. and his treatise of the
going out of false Prophets, page 11.12. and 13. I overpasse, because I would
be brief.

Concerning the 4. causes yielded by him, why false prophets go out into the
world, we deny not but the contempt of the true governors of the Church,
ambition, self love, and covetousness, do carry many away from the sincerity of
the truth: now whether these do bear sway in M. Bancroft and out Bishops,
let the world indge. The place of Ierom (touched pa. 14.) unto Euagruis shall be
afterward spoken off.

D. BANCROFT page 17.18.19. and 20. But the story of Aerius is most pertinent,
to show that ambition drives men to be false Prophets. Epiphanius does report
it thus in effect. Eustathius and Aerius strove one against another for a
Bishopric. Lib. 3. Tom. 1. haeres. 75.
Eustathius obtained it, whereat, Aerius began to repine, and grew to be a
scismatike, defending that by the word of God, there was no difference between
a Priest and a Bishop. He used the same arguments that now are used of these
that maintain his opinions. As that the Apostle writing sometimes to priests
and deacon, sometimes to Bishops and deacons should thereby signify, that a
Bishop and a priest is al one. In conclusion, Aerius after due trial, and
examination, had by the learned fathers, who then lived of his arguments and
slight, was by the general consent, of the Church overthrown, and condemned
for an heretic. And to this day there was never any but heretics, and such
lewd persons that condemned the callings of Lord Bishops for Antichristian.
ANSWER.
There is nothing brought in here out of Epiphanius, but it has been answered
long since by M. Cartwright, M. Cart. 2. reply 1. part. page 68.
and showed to be the reason of Pighius an Archpapist, against M. Wicklieffe
and the waldenses, it besemeth M. Bancroft very well to borow the weapons of
such a champion, to fight against the truth. But first M. Bancroft, I would
know what you can say against the person of Aerius, touching the truth which
he defends, we will deal afterward: you answer that Epiphanis reckons him
up amongst heretics, and so you account of him. Whereunto I reply, that Jerome
deals with vigilantius after the same measure, because vigilantius held it
unlawful to pray for the dead, Ierom ad Riparium and contra vigi. antium.
to worship the dead bones, and relics of Saints, and defended marriage, to
be preferred before virginnitie. Wherein Jerome (though otherwise a godly man)
does rather bewray his immodest rashness, then any wise discredit Vigilantius
with those that know the truth. The same is to be said of Epiphanius and
Aerius. And indeed, for any thing that Epiphanius and Pighius has brought, or
you can bring against him, he was an honester man, than either Eustathius his
competitor, or Pighius and D. Bancroft his confutors. He is said indeed to be
an Arrian, but that could never be proved as yet, and it was rather an action
of slander, rather commensed against him by his proud enemies the Bishops, then
any true accusation, whereof he can be proved gilty. You cannot find, Look
Danaeus in August. de haeres. cap. 53.
in the whole Ecclesiastical story, written by these that lived after him,
that ever there was any crime of heresy laid to his charge, whereas
Eustathius his schoolefellowe and adversary, is recorded by them, as also by
Epiphanius, for a known and famous heretic.

Touching Epiphanius, though I will not call his name in question, yet thus
much I may truly speak of him, that he was (as the learned know well enogh) so
besotted with the corruptions of the times wherein he lived, that his credit
alone, is not of sufficient authority to pass sentence against Aerius. For the
proof hereof, the reader is to understand, that he condemns Aerius for a
black heretic, as well because he held it unlawful to pray or to offer any
thing for the dead, as in that he defended a Bishop and a Priest as M.
Bancroft speaks, to be of equal authority. As for Augustine, whom you bring
with Epiphanius against this poor heretic, he rather follows the received
opinion, the^ his own judgment of him, according unto truth.

This much touching the person of the man, as for his heresy, if he had noe
other then those which Epiphanius lays to his charge, and especially this of
the aequallitie between a minister and a Bishop, the spirit of god gives him
a plain discharge from all suspicion, either of heresy or yet of error. For
the word of God teaches us, that to be a teaching Elder (which you retaining
your popish custom, call a Priest) is nothing else, but Episcopein, 1. Pet
5.1.3.
that is to be a Bishop or an ouerseer. And Christ Jesus forbids his
Ministers to have any superiority one over another. Now, when Pighius, D.
Bancroft, Luke 22.25.
or any other Roman Papist or Protestant, shall be able to answer these and
the like reasons, they may then have good leave with open mouth, to cry out
upon Aerius for his heresy. Otherwise, in condemning that sentence, whose
premises they are not able to infringe, they do nothing else but deny the
conclusion, which in this, and many other points, is Master Bancrofts fashion
of dispute. For what else does he in alleging, that men have condemned Aerius
for an heretic, whereas neither he nor they, can answer the reasons whereupon
Aerius his conclusion is grounded. And if Aerius his opinion, was no other then
that the word of god made no difference between a Bishop and a minister; as
master Doctor here sets down, I cannot think but upon better aduisement,
he will be concent to revoke the rash sentence, which he has pronounced against
him, lest thereby he do not only strike at Jerome; but even at the Archbishop,
M. Bancroft is so hasty to wound his adversaries, as he also strikes himself
and his friends.
and al others, that are of his side in England at this day. For Master
Bancroft I think will not say, that a Bishop is superior unto aminister by the
word of god, then how will he answer Jerome in the places quoted by him self
page the 14. who says that in the Apostles time, Ierom. ad Euagri.
there was noe such difference between them, and that this prerogative that
one minister should be above a another, is grounded upon humane custom, and not
upon the ordinance of God. And after this sort do our Bishops account of the
present Church government, which they hold unchangeable, only as long as it
shall please her majesty and the state. If M. Bancroft be of an other
judgment, we say that he condemns not Aerius aloane, but even Jerome and our
Bishops for obstinate heretics, and we crave his answer unto the place of
Jerome. Now if he be of Ieromes mind, I would gladly learn of him and
Epiphanius, where they learned to condemn men of heresy, for gainsaying such
things in religion, as have no other original and ground then the constitutions
of men. For if it was not an heresy in the Apostles time (as Jerome tells us
it was none) to hold a minister and a Bishop to be of aequal authority, it can
be non at this hour, neither could it beat any time since the age, wherein
they lived. For noe man can be now accounted an heretic, for defending that
which had been sound, and Catholic doctrine in the Apostles time.

Now that either we or Aerius should conclude, the aequallitie of ministers
because the Apostle writes sometimes unto Priests and Deacons, and sometimes
unto Bishops and Deacons, For mine own part, I never heard of the reason
before. The reader is to make no other account of it, but as a testimony of
Master Chaplains acquaintance with our arguments. And I believe it I should
ask either him or Aerius, where they find that the Apostle has written unto
Priests any otherwise, then they are contained under the name Bishops) and
Deacons, I should put them both to their shifts.

Where he says, that Aerius was condemned for an heretic, by the consent of
the whole Church, after due trial and examination of his arguments, by the
learned fathers then living, it is as impudent an assertion, as ever he
uttered. And I marvel, that he blusheth not to publish such windy stuff unto
the view of the world in this learned age. Indeed, if Aerius had no other
reasons, then that which we have already heard, the learned fathers of his
time were very simple, that would stand in the trial and examination of so
groundless a supposition. I am sorry to hear you so far gone in the heat of
your impatiency, as you should deny the superiority of Ministers to have
been againe-sayde, and their Government accounted Antichristian, by any
since the time of Aerius, save only by heretics and such lend persons.

Do you account the Waldenses to be heretics* Do you account M. Wickliffe, And
I pray you what account you of the reformed churches.
M. John Husse, and M. Tindale to be heretics or lend persons? The godly have
them in other manner of estimation. And yet M. Carthwright and others have long
since proved these men to be unreconcilable adversaries unto the hierarchy,
and showed that they began no sooner to stand against the Pope, but they also
encountered with the Bishops, whose callings, that they do belong unto the
Antichristian kingdom, is manifested by this reason: whereunto if you will
maintain the credit of your masters, I would wish you to answer.

Those offices and callings are Antichristian, with out which, all form of
Gouernements are perfect, save only the government of the kingdom of
Antichrist which in no wise can want them.

But such are the callings of Lord Archb. and Bb. as all form of gouernements
may be perfect without them, save only the Antichristian kingdom, where in no
case they can be missed. For the Government both of the Church and commonwealth, can well spare them, and be never a whit the more imperfect. Therefore,
the callinges of Archb. and Bishops, do only belong unto the kingdom of
Antichrist. If you do reply M. Bancroft, that the most learned; and the most
zealous of the fathers, especially in these latter times, have taken upon them
the callings of Bishops and Archbishops, you do thereby nothing else, but offer
to produce your witnesses to swear that the conclusion is not true: And
therefore as I have said, so I admonish you again, not to trouble yourselfe in
so gainelesse a labor. But if you will stand our Bishops in any stead, deal
against either the proposition or assumption, otherwise the burden of the
conclusion will lie upon them, whether they will or no.

Your distinction of the clergy and layity factions, To the 24.25.26.27. pages.
we acknowledge not: For we maintain neither factions nor scismes. If there
be any Courtiers or great men, that desire to be enriched with the patrimony
of the Church, we wish them better minds, and pray that they may be
disapointed of their expectation. Yet we see no more reason, why our Bishops
and Chaplains should live upon the spoil and robbery of souls, then Noble
men and Gentlemen should be maintained by sacrilege. For we hold, that both
sorts, in so doing, do bring the price of blood into their houses. But it is
most intolerable, that they who would be taken for Levites and governors of
the holy Temple, should have a hand in this trespass. You have streined your
conscience to far I fear me, in going about to make up the credit of Bishop
Coopers admonition to the people of England. Page 24.
A large conscience I perceive has along hand, to reach a distinction a far
of. Let the reader consider the place.

If you set down any thing that is Annabaptisticall or Popish, it were meet
you should confute it, Page. 25.
least the simple auditors should take it for your own doctrine, rather then
other men's errors. Now I come to that part of your Sermon, where you deal
concerning the trial of spirits.

D: BANCROFT page 33. lin. 26. and page 34. lin. 19. and 41. lin. 17. The
popish false Prophets will suffer the people to try nothing, but teach them
wholly to depend upon them. The giddy spirits would have men to be
everseeking and searching. The mean therefore betwixt both these extremities I
hold to be best. And this it is, that when you have attained the true grounds
of Christian Religion, and are constantly built by a lively faith upon Jesus
Christ, 1. Cor. 3.
being incorporated into his mis^^eal body, by your baptism, and afterward
nourished with the Lords Supper: you then content your self and seek no
farther, etc.
ANSWER.
It is well known, that we allow neither popish, norgiddy spirits, no nor yet
slanderous and lying spirits. As for the rule of the popish false Prophets,
you have squared your doctrine page 43. just according unto the same, as the
reader shall perceive in the proper place.

You have plotted us out here such a mean, between two extreamities, as they
must needs be mean Christians, that will go no further, then the resting
place which you have set down for them. I will not say here that the Papists
will grant the miserable people under them, leave to go thus far, which is
true: but this I will say, that this doctrine of yours, tends wholly to
remove an able Ministry out of the Church, and so consequently, to rob the
people both of the scepter of Christ's government, and also of his word. For if
the people need no more, (nay, if it be unlawful for them to go any further)
then to be baptized, and after they have attained unto the true grounds of
Christian religion, and are engraffed into Christ, to receive the Lords
supper; to what use serves the preaching of the word? And to what end should
the Apostle require, Phil. 1.9.10.
that the word of God, should dwell plentifully. among Christians, and pray
that our love may abound more and more in knowledge, Phil. 1.6.
and in all feeling, that we may discern things that differ, that we may be
pure, and without offense until the day of Christ, filled with the fruits of
righteousness, etc. If you could once M. Bancroft, bring this mean of yours to
take place: then indeed might you place readers instead of Preachers, over the
people without controllement, and say that they need no other teaching, because
they are baptized, engraffed into Christ, and fed with the heavenly food
exhibited unto them in the Lords Supper: and what need they more? For
Tertullian says, Page. 42.
that we need not be curious, after we have apprehended Christ, nor in
quisitiue, after we have received the gospel. But a miserable teacher are you,
that in such sort do open a window unto the devil and man's corruption, to
break faith into all impiety and wickedness. For how shall either the rage
of satan against us, or the rebellion of our own corruptions within us, be
restrained, but by that mighty scepter of Christ's word preached, even unto us
that have received the first fruits of the spirit. If you had ever known what
it had been, to receive Christ truly, and to retain him being received, you
would never have endeavored to seduce your auditors, in this monstrous and
popish sort. But because the light of your own conscience does tell you, that
christians cannot contain themselves within this prison, wherein you have
shut them: You set down a good supply of the want of teaching, if men would
desire to be resolved in any matter of doubt: your own words, or rather your
popery I will set down.

D. BANCROFT page 42. and 43 line 24. God has bound himself unto his church
of purpose, that men by her good direction, Councels.
might in this point (that is in matters of dout) be relieved: to whose godly
determination, in matters of question, her dutiful children, ought to submit
themselves without any curious or wilful contradiction. Neither can I see,
now that popery is bannished, and the truth of christian religion is godly
planted amongst us, why in these dais, we should not attribute as much to the
decrees of our learned fathers in their lawful assemblies, as other men in
times past, of as great judgment as we are, have done.
ANSWER.
You account the Papists to be false Prophets, because they will suffer the
people to try nothing, Page 33.
but teach them wholly to depend upon them: you do well in it. But if this
touching councils, be not to ioin hand with them, in the point wherein you
pretend to be their adversary, and if this be not to teach men to believe, as
their mother the church does let the reader judge. The Bishop of Rome, desires
no more to be granted unto him, for the authority of his councels, the^ you
have set down in express terms. And if the Lord has bound himself by his
promise unto his Church of purpose, that men should be directed thereby: I would
demand of you, whether this promise was, that the Church should direct them
unto truth, or unto error. If you say unto truth, otherwise it were no
promise, I demand then how the Church can err? For either the Lord must break
his promise, if he has made any, or else the Church cannot err in the
direction of her dutiful children. Now if you say, that the Church cannot
err, the reader knows what account to make of you, if she be subject unto
errors, to what end should we stand to her determination in matters of
question, any further then we are assured, that her decrees are according unto
the word. Now, if it be lawful for us (otherwise our bondage should be
intolerable) to try whether her determinations be according unto the word,
and to reject them, if they be otherwise, to what end do you carry us from
the sure foundation of the word, unto the uncertain and unconstant voice of
the Church? surely, if you would know what I conceive of you, for this, and the
like points of doctrine in your Sermon, my opinion is, that you are not far
from a close papist, how vehement so ever you speak against the^: and
whosoever they were, yt allowed your Sermon to be published, they may justly
fear, least the Papists do ere it be long, make too great advantage that you
have been suffered to preach and to publish many grounds of popery unreproved,
under the profession of the gospel. The Church of God we reverence, to be
wilful in standing against her, or any member thereof we hold it unlawful,
but that men should stand in matters of question unto her determination, as
unto the undoubted voice of God, she has no authority to require any such
obedience at our hands.

I dare say for you, that you are vexed at the very heart, that any thing
established in the Convocation house should be called in question, when you
prove that assembly to be lawful, and the learned fathers (as you call them)
there met, to be true Pastors, and not ravening wolves, we will promise to
give greater reverence unto their degrees. Popery is so bannished from among
us, that by the authority of those learned fathers, you dare in open Pulpit,
and public writings, justify many points thereof. Answer to the
46.47.48.49. pages.
It is not only lawful but necessary, that all men, of what state soever they
be, should be required, yea, and compelled by the Magistrate, to subscribe
unto true religion. 2. Chron. 14.12, and cap. 34 31.32. 2. Kings 11.17. Nehem.
9.38. and 10.29. This we do willingly confess: Howbeit, we hold it unlawful
to subscribe in that form that our Bishops do exact at our hands. Your reason
that subscription is lawful, therefore the English, or the Augustane
subscription is lawful, is no other then if I should say, that religion is
good, therefore the popish religion is good. But of all other points in your
book, I cannot but greatly wonder, that you seem to justify the subscription
unto the Augustine confession, and the silenceing of those that would not
subscribe unto it. Page 47. lin. 24
You are not ignorant I think, that the said confession is unsound, in the
point of the Lords supper, which has set Germany on fire these many years. As
for the subscription which in England is required by statute, our men have
been always ready to yield unto it. But the learned fathers whereof you
speak, seeing that by the same subscription, they could have no advantage
against the truth, have coined a new one of their own, which we hold utterly
unlawful, because it requires our consent unto the popish hierarchy, unto
the Apocripha, and many other corruptions. The which course of theirs, because
they are not able to justify, therefore have you done well, to find out a
way, whereby they may easily determine of any question or difficulty moved
unto them. So that now, if we deny to subscribe unto that, which against law
they require of us, until we be satisfied in the douts we make, whether it
may be lawful for us to maintain the proud and ambitious superiority of one
minister above another, the appointing of ignorant and godless men unto the
Ministry, the cross in Baptism, the profanation of that Sacrament by
women, with other manifold abuses, which we are urged to approve, their
answer may be according unto your rule, that they being the learned fathers
of our Church, have in their lawful assemblies, decreed that this subscription
should be called for, and they see no reason, why popery being now bannished,
etc. we should not attribute as much unto their decrees, as other men in times
past have done. Look M. Bancroft in the place set down before.
And so if we were dutiful children, we would submit our selves without any
wilful contradiction unto their godly determination: seeing the Lord has by
his promise, tied himself unto them, being his Church for this purpose. Now,
if we shall reply any thing again, as being unsatisfied by this resolution,
we are presently cried out upon, as being giddie Spirits, and men that
cannot be content with any good order established by law, and approved by
our betters, even such as gave their blood for the testimony of the truth. And
thus in stead of answering our reasons, they invent slanders against us, and
fall out with our conclusion, according unto Master Bancrofts manner of dealing.

Whereof as I have often before admonished the reader, so now I have special
occasion to put him in mind of the same concerning his dealing with us
touching the book of common prayer, and the point of her majesty's supremacy.
Wherein he spends 20. pages for the most part, From the 50. to the 72. pages.
we show diverse corruptions to be in that book, we set down the
particulars, as baptim by weomen, cross in baptime ring in matriage,
appropriating of garments to the use of religion, and grosser coruptions, as
Arianisme, where the book makes Michael to be a creature, The Collect on
Michaels day.
and adds unto the word, as psalm 14. in which place, 3. verses, that is the
5.6.7. are added unto the text, more then ever the holy Ghost penned in that
psalm, with other grievous corruptions, which I pass over. Now how does M.
Bancroft think you deal for the credit of the book, in answering these
particulars? he touches not one of them, but first of all he tells his
auditors, how glad all the churches in Europ were at the establishing of
religion, Page. 15.
in the beginning of her Majesty's reign, And for our parts we wish them
confusion that do not rejoice at it. Page 53. From 54.58.
Secondly having set down what pains was taken in reforming the book he
brings in diverse testimonies of godly learned men, to prove that the book
is in a manner without spotte, or wemme, whereby what does he else but fall out
with our conclusion. We charge the book with diverse particular corruptions,
we bring our proofs, Page 61.
he is not able to answer them. Therefore our conclusion will stand firm, that
the book is corrupt. The general commendations of all the men in the world is
not able to clear it, when it is not denied to contain many gross particular
falts. Thirdely he falls a quarreling with a new communion book, preferred
in parliament, Page 62.63.
the year 86. and caueleth diverse ways against the same. As yt it had bin
diverse times altered, that it mentioned not the civil magistrate in the first
edition, and that it does not tie the minister to any set form of prayer etc.
Al which points, I omit as frivolous, and ungodly cauils not to be stood upon.

Lastly he falls to his old bias, that is to plain slaundering, Page 67.
and affirms that one of our reasons why we hold the established
government of the church of England to be Antichristian, is because the civil
Magistrate is made a Pope amongst us, and that we call her majesty's supremacy
unto question. whereunto we answer no otherwise, then Nehemiah did Sanballat.
Nehem. 6.8.
It is not done according unto these words that thou say, but thou fainest
them of thine own heart. Look whatsoever prerogative in ecclesiastical or civil
causes he or any man living can truly attribute unto the civil magistrate,
we do the same. Concerning the pre-eminence in civil causes there is no great
question he will say between us, Page. 71.
only in ecclesiastical matters we assume unto our selves says he, that
authority which by right is the magistrates. This slander is general, we desire
the particular proof of it we cannot answer generalles, he repheth that the
magistrate by law is to have whatsoever priuiledg the pope at any time had
with in this land by usurpation, Page. 70. lin. 3.
what will he conclude hereof? Not I hope that the magistrate is to have the
power of remitting sins, and dispensing with the law of God, which the Pope
by usurpation had in times past within this kingdom? Her Majesty we know,
detesteth al such prerogatives from her heart. But what is it that he requires
to be granted unto the civil authority, which we yield not most willingly?
The power to establish godly ecclesiastical laws, and constitutions amongst
the subjects? we are so far from denying this, that we hold it intolerable
that our Bishops, and the convocation house, should intrude their
subscriptions, aduertisements, and cannons upon the subjectes, whereas no such
things can be warra^ted by statute. And whereas he says, that we claim unto
our Presbiteries the ordinary authority to make al laws, constitutions and
ceremonies of the Church, it is most false. All that we affirm in this point,
is noe more then her majesty voluntarily yealdeth in all such cases. when the
question is whether such or such a case be statute law or not? whether does M.
Bancroft think her majesty or her learned council in the law, as her judges,
Solliciters, Atturneis, etc. to have greatest skill in the deciding of this
matter? he knoweeth well enough, that her Majesty in all such points, will be
directed by that which her aforesaid lawiers do prove to be law and equity,
and yet thinks her royal prorogatiue no whit diminshed thereby. In the like
case then, we say that the true governors of the church are meetest to direct
her majesty what laws and ceremonies are most lawful, expedient, and
necessary, for the right government of the church And we say, that as her
majesty in worldly matters, is to give ear unto the Lawiers which have skill
in that faculty: so, in the matters of God is she to establish nothing in the
church, but that which the true ministers and true governors (if they may be
had) shall show unto her to be according unto the word of GOD. And yet all
this while we make not the governors of the Church to have power to enact
laws, we leave that authority unto her Majesty and the Parliament, unto whose
hands the Lord has committed it. This indeed we affirm. Moreover, that her
majesty and the Parliament are bound to establish and erect amongst their
subjects, al such laws and ceremonies, as the true Ministers of the word,
shall prove by the Scriptures of God, to be meet and necessary for the
government of the temple, and house of the Lord, within this kingdom: And that
they are bound to see, that no form of religion or Church-gouernment be in
force amongst the subjectes, but that alone which by the word of God may be
proved lawful, and so that they are bound to see, that the Church of God be
cleansed and purified of all Idolatrous, popish, superstious, and superfluous
government and ceremonies. And furthermore we say, that they are to provide by
law that all persons, both Ministers and others, do submit themselves without
contradiction, unto all such things as shall be godly established in the
Church. Whether this be M. Bancroft to weaken or call into question her
Majesty's prerogative in Ecclesiastical causes, let the reader determine. We
would also desire him to judge, whether her Majesty be well used at your
hands, which call her a petty Pope, and say that she usurps the same
authority in causes, page. 68. lin. 2^
Ecclesiastical with in her dominions, which the pope did in times past. Had
we conceived, much less published any such things, we had worthily smarted
for it. Your answer here will be, that you did bring in this reason, to show
the weakness of Martins arguments against the Bishops. Let Martin in other
points answer for himself. The case of her Majesty and our Bishops are not
alike: He proves our Bishops to be petty Popes and usurpers, you deny it
not. And therefore you only address your self to show what a rebellious and
absurd conclusion he has made by the like kind of reasoning as you suppose.
And where his minor truly assumeth our bishops to be usurpers and petty
Popes, you falsely and standerously charge her Majesty to be an usurper and a
petty Pope. We are not so hasty to shead blood as you are, otherwise, this
your undutifulness is so heinous, that I could easily show that there were no
other way of desence for you; but in the acknowledgement of your rash boldness,
(to give your doings no worse terms) to fly unto her Majesty's clemency.

TOUCHING SCOTLAND.
WE answer, that we desire not the Eldershipp to be planted in the Church of
England, From the. 72. to the 78. page
because Scotland or Geneua enjoys the same, but in as much as Christ Jesus
the head and king of his church has commanded it to be therein. And
therefore we admit the government of no church under heaven to be the p^^^^^e
of that which we desire, but only that regiment which is set down in the word
of God, the perfection whereof if any Church has attained unto, we rejoice
with them, and desire to be pertakers of so great a blessing, in the Lods good
time. But as for any thing that is amiss (if there be ought) either in Geneua
or Scotland, we labor no more to have that established in England, then we
do to have the great abuses that reigned in the Church of Corinth, or Galatia
to be imitated. The slander which you have raised, Page 75.
both against the Kings Majesty there, in giving out, that he is a deadly enemy
unto the present government established in his kingdom, and watches but his
time to over throw it, and also against the godly ministers of that realm, in
making them traitors unto their soueraign, Heave to be answered by themselves:
and I dout not, but you will in time be forced to answer the injury, that you
have offered unto that godly and noble King o^ and also unto the whole Church,
with in his dominion.

But let it be granted, that the true Church governors in Scotland, behaved
themselves rebelliously toward then Prince, which yet is most false, what is
that to the Church government which they enioly? Do you think it a good
season to say, that the Archbishop is a Traitor, therefore the Archbishopricke
is gilty of Treason: You can not deny, but Thomas Becke^ was a traitor, so were
diverse others that have been Archbishops of Canterbury, but I trust you will
not therefore attaint the Archbishopricke of treason.

Brown a known Scismatike is a man very fit to be one of your witnesses
against the Eldership. Page 75. lin. 29
His entertainment in Scotland was such, as a proud ungodly man deserved to
have. God give him and you repentance, if it be his will, otherwise, you shall
make and hard reckoning both of you, before the judgment feate of Jesus
Christ, for the slanders which you have raised up against the government of
his kingdom here upon earth. Your calender deceived you for it was not the
Parliament of the year 88. where of he wrote, Page 76. lin. 4.
but of another held Anno 86. or before.

If any thing be written amiss in any of the books that you mention, Page 78.
we have nothing to do therewith. Bring our own assentions, and you shall be
answered. We hold it altogether unlawful for Ministers and Church officers to
deal in any civil cause, much more, to depose Princes, and therefore our
attempts that way are not to be feared. Look you, Page 79.
and your masters unto those things, who arrogat unto your selves, that
pre-eminence, which is in deed dangerous unto the throne of the magistrate and
think Parliaments and laws cannot be half orderly kept and enacted, without
Lords spiritual.

Your fear, Page 80. lect. 3
that whatsoever has been done or written in foreign Countries, is labored
to have execution with us at home, is but the ouerflowing of your gall. The
disease is dangerous, and you may one day answer for your distemp^rature in
his presence, before whom the imaginers of evil against their brethren, shall
have their reward.

We hold indeed, Romans 13.2.
that the Magistracy is gods ordinance be he a good or a bad, Page 81.
an heathen, or a Christian, that is called thereunto: so that the right of a
Christian and an heathen Magistrate, within his dominions is the same. You that
hold the contrary, profess your self not to be a subject for conscience
sake, as the Apostle commands, but for some other respect. So you would be
very dutiful belike, if you were under an heathen Prince.

Ministers we say, are not to deal in civil causes, Page 82. lin. 27
and therefore in that point we ascribe unto the Magistrate, both Potestate^
juris and facti: that is, power to make laws, and to execute them. If there
arise any difficulty (as often as it comes to pass) of that which is
agreeable unto the law of God, in matters that are controverted, then indeed it
is the Ministers duty to inform the Magistrate of the mind of the Lord:
wherein he does nothing else, but (respondere de jure) show what the will of
God is, that the magistrate may (statuere de facto) pronounce sentence
accordingly.

For Ecclesiastical matters, it is the word of God only, that therein has
(potestate^ juris) the power to determine, what is acceptable in the sight of
God, and the Minister ought to have the knowledge thereof, that he may declare
the same, both unto Magistrate and people. The Church officers also are
appointed of God, to execute all ecclesiastical matters. And if you should
attribute this power unto the magistrate, the imagistrate might justly account
of you as you are. For will you have the Magistrate to preach the word,
administer the Sacraments, take the charge of watching over the manners of the
people, and distributing to the pore within his parish? or will you have him to
visit the sick, comfort the weak, ordain ministers, discuss controversies
in religion, and exercise the church censures, by excommunications, etc. And
yet these are the only matters which we account ecclesiastical, and wherein
alone we hold it lawful for church officers to deal, other punishments of
malefactors as imprisoning, fining, or any mulct yt touches the life, body or
goods of men, are only to be reterced to the Magistrates, who bear the sword
for that purpose. Our Bishops usurping this sword, do show that they and
their fathers house, and not we do labor to bring and maintain confusion in
church and common wealth.

You exhortation both unto people and magistrates, Page. 85.
that the one should avoid, and the other punish heretical spirits, we
embrace withal our hearts. Being ready to show, as our writings have done at
large, that your errors, corruptions, idleness pride, ambition, slanders, and
untruths, uttered against the truth, has not only (as daily experience
teaches us) begotten and nourished the lamentable ignorance, which every where
reigns in this land, but also called for the wrath of God to fall upon us,
because such unruly and wicked spirits as you, are tolerated in the holy
ministerye amongst us. Page ^6.
You are now come to the gathering up of your standers and vntruche, into an
heap in the conclusion of your sermon, lest the readers and auditors should
forget, that you are an impudent slaunderer. And therefore that you may incense
the magistrates against us in one place, especially you rake the^ up after this
manner.

Her Majesty is depraved, her authority is impugned, and great dangers are
threatened. Page 57 to 19^ M Doct. think^ belike that we are maintainers of the
hierarchy
Civil government is called into question: princes pretogatiues are curiously
scanned; the interest of the people in kingdoms is greatly advanced, and al
government generally is pinched at and comemened: The Church is condemned, the
ancient fathers are despised, your preachers are defaced, and yet these men
are tolerated.

Whereunto I answer with the wise man, that the lying tongue slays the soul,
Pron. 12.6.
and that the very words of the wicked lie in wait for blood, but the mouth
of the righteous will deliver them. And so we doubt not, whenever we are
araigned for any of these heavy accusations, but that we shall be delivered
from this bloody tongue. The reader knoeth that (as a noble Emperor spoke in
the like case) if it be sufficient to accuse, no man can be innocent. Now if
he has these advantages against any of us, let him set down his particulars,
and name the man, or his writings, and he shall be answered. Otherwise we make no
other account of such Epistrophaes and homoioteleutaes, page 88. line 4.
then of the barking and dog Rethorick, of some profane Lucian or god less
Porphirie. It is no news for us to have our legs and thighs desired to be
broken. Ioke. 19.30.
The reader is to remember, that this was the Jews requests unto Pilate
concerning our Savior Christ* and therefore we are not to think it strange,
that M. Bancroft is guided by their spirit whose place he supplieth. But this
we are to know, that neither he not his masters shall do any thing against us,
but that which the Lord our God has long since determined, and therewith by
his grace, Act. 4.1^.
we hope to be right well contented.

In stead of arming his hearers with reasons out of the word against us, whom
he accounts sect. masters and false Prophets, he comes off, after his
wonted manner, with idem peridem, leaving his auditors in as great doubt as
they were before: And says, that the doctrine of the Church of England is pure
and holy: Page 89. lin. 27
the government thereof, both in respect of her Majesty, and of our Bishops
is lawful and godly: the book of Common prayer, contains nothing in it
contrary to the word.

Her Majesty's government, he knows well enough we call not in question. He
and his patrons, have corrupted the doctrine of our church, and as for the
hierarchy and common book, when he has made up yt holes which I have already
showed to be in both (besides the incurable wounds yt other men have
discovered) he may build something upon his conclusion, which if he do not, his
manner of disputation, in craving and begging the matter in controversy will in
a while grow to be a common proverb. If we were such unreasonable men, as we
would find salt with matters that are blameless: his exhortation, that private
men would take heed, page 8^. 89.
and the Magistrate take punishment of us, would carry with it some weight.
But in as much as both the Magistrate and people see, that we have cause to
speak, and perceive that out adversaries can do little, if they cannot set a
fair face upon a cracked cause, we fear not any great hurt, that his tongue
can work unto us.

And the very same account do we make of his speech, where he says, Page 94.
that we use the same arguments for the sovereignty, of our Presbiteries
against the Prince, in causes Ecclesiastical, that the Pope does for his
principallitie in the same, and we answer as the Papists do him. This is
VVhitgifts quarrel, and answered long since.
But these things (as he says) he cannot stand to prove at this time,
only he thought it necessary to advertise his hearers of it, that they might
the better beware of such kind of spirits. Take his advantage who list.

We care not how little a do we have at the Arches, Answer.
and therefore we mean not to take any great advantage against your tongue,
any further then your blushing may be for the clearing of the truth. The reader
will think you worthy to be marked in the forhead, according unto the Roman
law, except you prove this which you have so confidently set down. Though,
as it should seem, you have a commission, to use your tongue and pen at your
pleasure, yet you cannot blot out the light of men's reading and knowledge. We
are known to be so out of amity (in this case especially) with all Romanists,
and you truly accounted to be so nearly allied unto them, that we desire no
other weapons to strike down the hierachie, then M. Luther, and M. Calvin
have use to overthrow the Roman chair and her ministers.

How often shall it be told you, Page 95.
that we would have no civil matters handled in any ecclesiastical meeting?
and therefore, that we admit not anything in our assemblies, to be decreed
against the constitutions of Princes, any further then Princes may account the
truth of the word to be against their statutes. We are as far from making our
own wills, Page. 96. 97.
to be the rules of other men's lives, or from affirming that what we speak is
the very word of God, as you are from being ashamed to lie in the face of the
sun: you have taken great pains in sowing the seed of most gross untruths:
repent betimes, least in the Lords just judgment, you reap the fruits of your
lying tongue.

Concerning M. Cartwright. Page 97. 9S. 100.
WE depend not upon men, Christ Jesus is our only guide. As concerning M.
Cartwright, whom you (to keep your tongue in ure with your natural vain)
call our ring leader, we bless God, that ever he has vouchsafed us such an
instrument to stand in the defense of his holy government, and to give your
hierarchy, and your high Priest the shameful foil. But we follow him no
further, then he attends upon the truth of his God. And in that work we are
not ashamed to glaine after so worthy a man. But what can you lay to his
charge? you say that he alleges Cyprian, Ierom, etc. to prove the equality
that ought to be in the ministers of the word and Sacraments, and that in the
ancient times there was no difference betwixt a Bishop and a Priest, but that
whosoever was a Bishop, was a Priest also: and that they had all equal
authority within their own parishes, whereas the clean contrary say you, is to
be seen in their writings.

Then heaven and earth, be you judges in this caus^, that the mouth of this
slanderer may be stopped. First, the place of Cyprian lib. 1. epist. 3. calls
him a Priest, Defense 355.
whom D. Whitgift would have to be an Archbishop, and the papists affirm to
be his elder brother the pope. Therefore by Cyprians judgment, whosoever was a
Bishop, was a priest. Again, Cyprian speaking of the election of a priest, by
the consent of the whole people, lib. 1. epist. 4. he makes the same manner of
electing Cornelius, Bishop of Rome, and calls his Bishopric a priesthood,
lib. 4. epist. 2. Now, Tom. 1. Can. lib. 4 epist. 9.
that Cyprian condemned superiority among Bishops or ministers, his sentence in
the counsel of Carthage proves it: where he says, that none of them made
him self a Bishop of Bishops, he also reprooueth Pupianus, that he made
himself a Bishop of a Bishop.

As to Ierom, 2. Reply 1. part page 591. Ierom. ad Euag
M. Cartwright alleges these places out of him. A priest, that is to say a
Bishop, and a little after, the Apostle does plainly teach, that a Bishop and
a priest are all one. And in another place, Ad Oceanum.
a Bishop and a priest are the same: again although with the ancient fathers,
Bishops and priests were al one.

Now good reader bear witness, whether Master Cartwright has falsified the
ancients or not, and whether this past shame Doctor, has not cause to sow up
his lips for ever opening them in pulpit again. For the confirmation of the
equality of Ministers, and that the name Bishop, was common unto all the
Ministers of the word and Sacraments in the ancient times, thou may add
unto that which has been already spoken. Ignatius ad Smyrnensis.
First the testimony of Ignatius which says, that it was not lawful for any to
baptize, but for the Bishop. Where then M. Bancroft was the distinction,
between him and the priest, or his superiority over the priest? Secondly,
that in the time of Gregory the great, priests did ordain Bishops, and yet
this is made one of the essential differences between a Bishop and a priest,
Greg in Euan. a Whitgift page 387.
[a] that a Bishop may ordain, whereas a priest has no such authority.
Thirdly, that Theod. mencioneth an 150 Bb. which were met, for the election of
the Bishop of Constantinople. Theod. lib. 5. cap. 8.
Where all these Bb. could be gotten, if Bb. and Ministers were not all one,
let M. Bancroft show. Lastly, it would be known, what account M. Bancroft
makes of that notable martyr M. Tindale, M. Tindales works. page 251. b.
which speaking of priests and Bb. has these words: there is presbyteros, which
same is says he, Acts. 20.28.
imediatly after called a Bishop: and in the same place, all that were Elders
or priests (if they so will) were called Bishops also, though they have divided
the name now. I hope he will not answer him, as he does Aerius, that this
opinion was condemned for an heresy long ago, and none but heretics and such
lewd persons ever since that time held it.

One thing I do not a little marvel at, both in M. Bancroft and all the rest of
his coat, why they rather join with Sir Thomas Moore and the papists, M.
Tindals answer to Moore. page. 251.
in calling the Ministers of the word priests, then with M. Tindale, and the
most sincere professors in the world at this day, in abrogating that popish
name, and using the word Minister, or Elder in the stead thereof. Admon. pa.
44.
The B. of Winchester says, that the Archbishop has showed sufficient reasons
against T. C. why the Ministers of the gospel should be called priests, and
all of them are of the same opinion, and will not take it patiently if they be
gainsaid in it: but what account is to be made of them for this labor, (...)
shall learn out of M. Tindale, page 14. 4.
who in his obedience of a Christian man says, that the word Sacerdos, should
have had another name in english, then priest, but that Antichrist has
deceived us with unknown and strange terms, to bring us into superstitious
blindness, as for the word presbyteros says he (both in this place, and against
Moore in the place above cited) it ought in English, to be translated Elder.
This I thought good to admonish the reader, least he should think me in
using the word priest, to allow of that Antichristian name. Whether M.
Cartwright has truly alleged Ignatius and others, To the 98. page
to prove the use and practice of the office of Elders in the Church, long
after the Apostles time, because there is nothing but the pawn of M. Bancrofts
credit brought to the contrary, I refer the reader, to examine the
testimonies used by M. Cartwright for that purpose. T. C. 1. reply 145.
Especially the place of Jerome upon Isaiah, who says that they had also the
presbitery or eldership in the church, and that of Ambrose upon the 1. Tim.
cap. 5. where he complains, that through the pride and slouthfulnes of the
Doctors, the Elders were worn out of the Church: were it not yt M. Chaplain
carries his license in his bosom, to speak what he will, I should wonder
that he durst in open pulpit and writing, deny elders to be in the church long
after the Apostles time, seeing D. Whitgift tells us of his own knowledge,
that in the Primitive Church, they had in every church certain seniors, to
whom the government of the congregation was committed. Whit. page 638.
M. Bancroft, sees there is no advantage in granting any part of the truth,
and therefore, he takes a round course, to deny every thing without more a
do: Take his advantage thereof who list.

His profanenes, Page. 98.
in calling the Elders, Aldermen, the Lord I fear will revenge, who cannot
abide to have the officers of his kingdom, derided and scoffed at by any
Lucian whosoever.

Your caueling with the proofs, To the 100.111.
brought in by M. Cartwright, to show the Eldershippe to be most flowrishing in
Constantines time, i^ a proof, that you retain your usual boldness in out
facing the truth. If it be not a good reason to say, that because there were
infinite numbers of Bishops and Elders, at the council of Nice, therefore the
Eldership was in a flowrishing estate at that time, to what purpose, should
they be present in that synod, if they had nothing to do with the government
of the church? If they had to do with the government of the church, the reason
holds most forcible, to prove the Eldership to be up under Constantine. For
wheresoever there is a Church government by Bishops and Elders, there the
Eldership is in force. Though we should grant, Page 101.
that you deal truly with Eusebius, yet his testimony is not a whit the
weaker, to prove the government by the Eldership, because he means nothing
else, but to show the great appearaunce from all places of the Clergy men, of
all sorts in that assembly. Eor beit that his only purpose was, to show
this great concourse of Clergy men, yet that hinders not, but he speaking
of Bishops and elders met at the said Synod, we may thence gather, Bishops and
Elders did govern the church at that that time.

That Bishops had large jurisdiction before the Nicene council is only
affirmed, M Cart. 2. reply page 557.560. etc.
and not proved by you M. Bancroft: the contrary has been showed. It is your
manner to build upon false grounds, which have been long since ouerthrone. The
appointing of Metropolitans (or confirming whether you will) at the council of
Nice, hindered not the government of the Eldership to be in force. They had
not such an unruly jurisdiction, as the Archbishops do usurp: The fifth Canon
of the council, whereby it is decreed, yt the disorders of the church, should
be compounded, at the provincial assemblies, and not by that Metropolitans
show, what small authority they had. They had but their own suffrages as every
other minister had. That which the council of Nice attributed unto them, was
no more then chief place in the meetinges. Ibid. page 562.
Answer that which M. Cartwright has written in this question, and then set
down your bold conclusion: otherwise, the reader will deride your boldness, in
pitching a camp of torn assertions, whereof, not one will be granted unto you.

Feign would you I see, have the people not to give ear unto us, To the 103
104. page.
and to that purpose you bring up to them the reasons, that al Atheists have
for them selves, why they will not embrace the true religion. And that is
because the professors thereof cannot agree among them selves. The godly are
not ignorant, that there must be scismes in the Church of God, and therefore
cannot stumble at the divisions among us, ^^i
if they be any. We have learned of the blessed Apostle to be so far from
agreeing with any save only in the truth, as we hold our selves bound to bid
battle unto at the Angels i^ heaven, if they stand against the same. Our
breaches would be easily made up, Page
if you would yeald the Church her right. As for your side, it is well known
how little you agree save only in the main drift, whereat you must al shoot,
or else you shall soon fall to the ground. And that is in standing against the
truth, Tot 111.
and maintaining outrageous coruptions. I have already noted, that you in this
short inuectiue against us, have twice scratched the Archbishop by the face,
and that in matters of weight.

The 3. last pages of his Sermon, contain nothing in them, but general
exhortations, that the people would cleave unto the truth without wavering: the
which we earnestly entreat all men to do, as they would be saved in the day
of the Lord: And from our hearts we wish (if it be the Lords will) both unto
them, and to all our adversaries, and perticularlie unto M. Bancroft, that
immortal crown of glory, whereof, he speaks in the last page, desiring
them and him, notwithstanding to call to mind, that neither liars, Page 1
nor those that delight in lies, especially against gods truth and his church,
shall ever be partakers thereof.


