

The Treasury of commodious Conceits, and hidden Secrets. and may be called,
The Huswiues Closet, of healthful provision.

Mete and necessary for the profitable use of all estates both men and women:
And also pleasant for recreation.

With a necessary Table of all things herein contained.

Gathered out of sundry Experiments lately practiced by men of great knowledge.

By I. Par.

Imprinted at London by Richard Jones. 1573.

John Partridge to his Book.
Go forth my little Book,
That all on thee may look:
Fear not the cuttyng book
of Zoylles spightfull rage:
Thou can not Zoyll shon,
Whose tongue on wheels does ron,
More connyng works erst don,
In any former Age
Thou know went never free,
But that the Cur Dog he
Takes his delight and glee
for to deface the same:
How thinkste thou then to void?
The tongur that has annoyde?
Great works which have imployde
continually to frame
A happy common weal?
And which at large reveal,
That time did long conceal,
To pleasure every one:
If thou which art but small
To whom it happen shall,
Small fruit to bring withal,
for men to scan upon:
Yet must thou be content,
To bear what Zoylles bent
Sith forth I have thee sent
(to lay upon thy back)
And if be bap to chyde,
Do thou the brunt alyde,
And I will stand aside,
And help thee if you lack.
Finis
To the worshipFVLL, MASTER RICHARD Mistow, Gentleman: one of the Assistants
of the Company of the Barbours and Surgions: John Partridge wishes increase of
Knowledge by his worthy travail. (??)
AFTER THAT I HAD (worshipful Sir) taken some pain, in collectynge certain
hydden Secrets together, and reduced them into one libel, or Pamphlet (for my
own behoof, and my familiar friends:) yet at the instance of a certain
Gentlewoman (being my dear and special friend) I was constrained to publish
the same, and considered which my self the saying of ye wise: which is. That
good is best, which to all indifferently, is of like goodness, or effect: or
which without respect of person, is good to all indifferently. The
consideration of which, and her importunacie togethers instiged me to
communicate unto the view and public benefit of all men, this little Book:
The coments whereof, does instruct and teach all manner of persons and Degrees
to know perfectly, the manner to make diverse and sundry sorts of fine Conceits
as well of meats, as of Co^serues and Marmalades, as also, of sweet and
pleasant Waters, of wonderful Odours, Operation and Virtues: With diverse other
things that have not hitherto ben publicly known: which fact of mine (I
know) will be, not only dessyked of some, but altogether condemned: Not for
that it is evil, but that their fine heads can not digest, that any other
beside them selves should enjoy the benefit thereof, having for their MAXIM,
that such things, are of small price, as are common to al men: much after our
Englysh Proverbs, Quainty and dainty: Far fette and dear bought, is good
for great Estates. But I account that Person foolysh, and unworthy help of
any Physician or Surgion: that will refuse to receive, or gain health by the
Medicine of any such Physician or Surgion: Who by learning the same out of A
VICENE, GALENE, or HIPOCRATES, or any others such like, has often times cured
the Deseuses in sundry and many Persons, for that the same has been commonly
used: but rather most wyllynglye and courteouslye to embrace the same (for
present remedy) as a thing excellently well experymented and proved: I need
not (right Worshypfull) to use these words, for the Defense of this little
Book, co^sideryng ye your Worship does very well accept such things, as
universally bring with them a public profit and vtylitie: (whence consists
your delight,) rewardyng lyberally, the travail of such, who have, and do
travail therein. Wherefore, for that I among al other persons, do think my
self most beholden unto your worship: To gratify your goodness, and to
satisfy the request of my friend, I have compiled this little Book. which I have
put forth under your W. name and protection: protestyng, yt if I shall see this
work, which with some cost and charge, I have brought to perfection, be well
accepted at your hands I shall shortly exhibit unto your Worship, a thing of
greater value and estymation. And thus, co^myttyng your good worship to God. I
end: who send you your desire of understanding and knowledge.

Your Worshyps to comaunde. I. P.

Thomas Curteyse Gentleman, in praise of the Auctor.
TO pleasure Contreys state who tends
With careful heed, and more perpends
The wealth of others: then his own,
whose seed is sown.
* To pleasure all, and he that sowes,
Of all his toil, least profit mowes:
Deserves at least, the dross to have,
that frankly gave
* The Gold that all inricheth so,
Therefore thou Book where ere thou go:
Say freely that thy Masters pain,
deserves gain.
* And if that Momus gin to chat,
If thou be wise, yet fear not that,
For good deserving, well does crave,
reward to have.
* The which reward, without great charge
Thou may give, if that at large
Without reproach, thou let this go,
and thankful show.
Thy self, for that which herein he,
Has now set forth to pleasure thee:
Who ear thou be, to this inclyne,
The profits thine.
* FINIS.
T. C.

Thomas Blanck Gentleman, in the behalf of the Auctor.
THe Painters Pen: with no small charg^
Does now and then: depaint at lar^
BELLONAES broils, and bloody fig^^
To move somwhiles, a man's delight
The Poet eke: with paynfull Quyll,
Does somtymes seek: men's ear to fill,
With sundry sorts, of Verses new:
When he reports, things false and tri^^
In both whereof: the learned find,
No toy nor scoff: or thing by kind,
That brings not out, some learned sky
For which no dout, most wisemen wy
Accept the thing: what ere it be,
That so should bring: Commedytie,
The Partrige here, ye thing has sough^
which nothing dear: need now be boght
Wherein pleasure: does full consist,
And eke Treasure: if that thou list,
By travail to, obtain the same,
The which to do, I wyssh thee frame.
And give him praise: that with his toil,
Has in these days: from forrayne soil,
Brought home to thee, pleasure and gain:
Then thankful be, his is the pain.
FINIS.
The Chapters and contents of of this Book.
TO bake a Capon with yolks of Eggs. Chapter. i. To bake a Feasant, or Capon,
in steed of a Feasant. Cap. ii. To bake Chickins, Sparrowes, or other Birds.
Cap. iii. * To bake Woocoks. Cap. iiii. To make Pescoos of Marow. Cap. v. * To
make a sauce for a roasted Rabbet, first used to King Henry the eight. Cap. vi.
To bake an Oxetung. Cap. vii. * To make vinegar of Roses Violettes, or Elderne
Beries. Cap. viii. To make a Marchpane. chapter. ix. * To gylde a Marchpane, or
Tarte. cap. x. To bake Quinces. chapter. xi. * To keep Quinces vnpared all the
year long. chapter. xii. To make fine blaunch powder for roasted Quinces.
Apples, or Wardens cap. xiii. * To conserve Quinces condict, ready to be eaten.
chapter. xiiii. To keep Plummes condicte in Syrop. chapter. xv. * To keep
cheries, or Gooseberies condicte. chapter. xvi. To make conserve of Roses,
Read, or white: With the sundry Virtues and Operationns of each of them. Cap.
xvij. * To make Conserve of Violet flowers, with the sundry Virtues and
Operations thereof. Cap. xviij. To make Conserve of Buglose flowers, with the
sundry Virtues and Operations thereof. Cap. xix. To make conserve of Borage
flowers, with the sundry Virtues and Operations thereof. cap. xx. To make
Conserve of Rosemarie flowers, with the sundry Virtues and Operations thereof.
Cap. xxi. * To make Conserve of Succarie flowers, with the sundry Virtues and
Operations thereof. Cap. xxij. To make Conserve of Elder flowers, with the
sundry Virtues and Operations thereof. Cap. xxiij. To make Conserve of Sorell,
with the sundry Virtues and Operations thereof. chapter. xxiiij. * To make
conserve of Maydenhaire: with the sundry virtues and Operations thereof.
chapter. xxv. * To make conserve of Elecampane roots with the sundry Virtues
and Operations thereof. cap. xxvi. To make Conserve, of Gladon, or yelow
Flowerdelice: With the sundry Virtues and Operations thereof. Ca. xxvij. To
make Marmylade of Quinces. Chapter. xxviij. To make Marmalade of Damasines or
Prunes. Cap. xxix. To make conserve of Strawberyes, and the virtue thereof. And
of Damasines: or of Prunes. Cap. xxx. To make Conserve of Cheries, and of
Barberies. Cap. xxxi. To make Succade of ye peels of Orenges: and Lemons. Cap.
xxxii. To make green Ginger, and Pepper condicte. Cap. xxxiii. * To make al
kind of Syrops. Ca. xxxiiii. To make Manus Christi. Cap. xxxv. To make Losings.
Cap. xxxvi. * To make powder of Holland against the Colicke. Ca. xxxvij. To
make a powder to loose the Bellye gentlye. Ca. xxxviii. * To make a receipt to
restore strength decayed with sickness. Cap. xxxix. To make Ipocras. Chapter.
xl. To make a Violet. or Damask powder for woollen and Furs. Cap. xli. * To
make a sweet powder for lynen cloths, Chapter. xlij. To make a fine Pome Amber.
cap. xliij. To make a fine Fumygation to cast on the coals. cap. xliiij. To
make the same in Oslets. cap. xlv. * To make a moist Fume, to put in a Fumyng
Dish. cap. xlvi. To make a Fumygation for a Press of Clothes. cap. xlvij. To
make a powder for sweet waters. chapter. xlviii. To make Damask water another
way. chapter. xlix. To perfume Gloves diverse ways. chapter. l. To make a
Perfume for Chystes and Cubboords. And also for Gloves. cap. li. To color
Gloves. cap. lii. To make Musk Soap. cap. liij. To make red sealyng Wax. cap.
liiij. To make sweet Damask Powder. iiii. manner of ways. cap. lv. * To keep
Barberies whole in Syrope. chapter. lvi. To make fine Rice Porredg. cap. lvij.
* For the Ague in a woman's Breast. chapter. lviii. For the unnatural heat of
the Liver. chapter. lix. * For the canker in the mouth. cap. lx. * To know what
time in the year Herbs and Flowers, should be gathered in their full
strength. cap. lxi. The sundry virtues of Roses for diverse Medicynes. cap.
lxii. * The sundry virtues of Lyllyes. cap. lxiij. The sundri virtues of
Milfoyle. ca. lxiiii The sundry virtues of Rosemary. ca. lxv. A brief Treatise
of Vrines as well of men's vrines, as of Women's, to judge by the colors, which
betoken health, which betoken sickness, and which also betoken death. chapter.
lxvi. How to make a sovereign Water, that Doctor Steuens Physician, a man of
great connyng did use of long experience. And therewith did many cures, and
kept it always secret, till of late a little before his death, that a special
friend of his, did get it in writing of him: with the sundry virtues and
operations thereof. chapter. lxvii.
* FINIS.
The Auctor to his Book concerning his friend, whose importunate suit
procured him to publish the same.
Go little Book of profit and pleasance,
unto thy good mistress, without delay
And tell her I send thee for yt performance
of ber ernest suit (since she would have no nay)
Let her use thy commodities, as well I kno she may
To profit her friends for health es p^seruatio^
And also to pleasure them, for recreation.
Tell her that all things in thee contained,
I have seen them put often times in ure:
And given thee to be her servant retained,
To serve her faithfully, doing thy cure.
And also say, of this let her be sure
That she with her suit, of me has obtained
Thee: that no Gold nor good could have gained.
I. P.

The Closet, or Creasurie of commodious Conceits and hidden Secrets.
To bake a Capon with yolks of Eggs. Cap. i.
WHEN THE CAPON IS made redi, trusse him in to ye Coffyn: then take.viii. yolks
of eggs sodden hard, and prick into every of them.v. Cloves, and put the
yolks into the Coffyn with the Capon: then take a quantity of gynger and salt,
and cast it on the Capon, and let it bake.iii. hours. Then take.ii. raw yolks
of eggs beaten into a Gobblet of Vertuce, with a good quantity of sugre
sodden together, put it into ye Coffyn and so serve it.

To bake a Fesant, or Capon in steed of a Fesant. Ca. ii.
Dress your Capon like a Phesant trussed, perboyled a little and larded with
sweet lard: put him into the Coffin, cast thereon a little Pepper and Salt: put
thereto half a dish of sweet Butter, let it bake for the space of.iii. hours,
and when it is cold: serve it forth for a Phesant. And thus bake a Phesant.

* To bake Chickins. Chapter. iij.
TAke and trusse your Chickins, the feet cut off, put them in the Coffin: the^
for every chickin put in every Pie a handful of Goose beries, and a quantity
of butter about every Chickin: then take a good quantity of Sugar and Sinimon
with suffice^t talt, put them into the Pie, let it bake one hour and a half,
when it is baken take the yolke of an egg and half a Goblet of veriuce with
sufficent sugar sodden together, put in the pie and serve it.

To bake Woodcoks. Chapter. iiij.
PErboyle them, and being trussed put them into the Coffyn with sweet larde
about the^, season them with Pepper and salt, and a good quantytie of butter,
let them bake one hour and a half, and so serve them.

To make Pescods of Marow. Chapter. v.
First slice your Marow in length. drive your past as thin as a paper leaf:
the^ take and lay small Raisins, Cinimon and a little ginger and Sugar about
the Mary, fashion them up like Pescodes, fry them in butter, cast upon them
Cinimon and iuger, and serve them.

A Sauce for a roasted Rabbet: to King Henry the eight. Cap. vj.
TAke an ha^dful of washed percelye, mince it small, boil it with Butter and
veriuce upon a chafing dish, season it with sugre and a little Pepper gross
beaten, when it is redi: put in a few fine Cru^mes of white bread, put it in
amongste the other, let it boil again till it be standing, the^ lay it in a
Platter, like the breadth of three fingers, lay of each side one roasted Conye
(or more) and so serve them.

To bake an Ox tongue. Chapter. vij.
Sees the tongue till it be tender, then slyce it on a boorde in fair pieces:
and take a good quantity of Marow slceed small, cast it into the bottom of the
pie: and lay the slices of the tongue upon it: and betwixt every one some
marow, and a little salt upon them. Bake it the space of an hour, then roast
half a manchet a little at the fire, and put the tostes into half a pynte of
Reddewine with a little Vinegar, strain them out together: the^ take cloves,
Mace, Sinimon and Sugar, sees them in yt liquor till it wax somewhat thick:
make a hole in ye cover of the Pie, put it in, set the Pie again into the Oven
for a quarter of an hour, and serve it.

To make Vinegar of Roses. Chapter. viij.
IN Summer time when Roses blow, gather them ere they be full spread or blown
out, and in dry wether: pluck the leaves, let them lie half a day upon a
fair board. then have a vessel with Vinegar of one or two gallons (if you will
make so much roset,) put therein a great quantity of the said leaves, stop the
vessel close after that you have styrred them well together, let it stand a day
and a night, then divide your Vinegar and Rose leaves together in two parts put
the^ in two great Glasses and put in Rose leaves enough, stop the Glasses
close, set them upon a Shelfe under a wall side, on the Southside without your
house where the Son may come to them the most part of the day, let them
stand there all the whote So^mer long: and then strain the vinegar from the
Roses, and keep the vinegre. If you shall once in.x: days, take and strain
out the Rose leaves, and put in new leaves of half a days gatheryng, the
vyneger will have the more flauor and odor of the Rose.

You may use in steed of Vinegre, wine: that it may wexe eygre, and receive ye
virtue of the Roses, both at once. Moreover, you may make your vinegar of wine
white, red, or claret, but the red does most bind the belly, and white does
most lose.

Also the Damask Rose: is not so great a binder as the red Rose, and the white
Rose loses most of all: hereof you may make vinegre roset.

Thus also, you may make Vinegre of Violets, or of Elder flowers: but you must
firstgather and use your flowers of Eldern, as shall be showed hereafter, when we
speak of making Conserve of Elderne flowers.

To make a Mar^hpane. Cap. ix.
TAke half a.ii. of blanched Almons, and of white sugre: a quarter of a. It:
of Rose water, half an ounce: and of Damask water, as much. Beat the Almons
with a little of the same water, and grind them til they be small: set them on a
few coals of tier, til they wax chick: then beat them again with the Sugre,
fine: Then mixed the sweet waters and then together: and so gather the^, and
fashion your Marchpane. Then take wafercakes of the broadest making, cut them
square, paste them together with a little licour, and when you have made the^ as
broad as will serve your purpose, have ready made a hoope of a green hasell wand
of the thiknes of half an inch on the inner side smothe, and on ye vttersyde
round and smooth without any knags: lay this hoope upon your Wafer cakes
foresaid, and the^ fyl your hoop with the gear above named, the thiknes of ye
hoop: the same driven smoothe above with the back of a Silver Spoon as ye do a
Tarte and cut away all the parts of the Cakes even close by the outlyde of
the hoope with a sharp knife, that it may be round, then haueing white paper
underneath it, set it upon a warm hearthe, or upon an instrument of Iron or
bras made for the same purpose, or into an Oven after the bread is taken out,
so it be not stopped, it may not bake but only be hard and through dried, and
ye may while it is moist stick it full of Comfets of sundry coolers, in a
comely order ye must moist it over with Rose water and Sugar together, make it
smoothe: and so set it in the Oven or other instrument, ye clearer it is like
lantern horn, so much the more commended: if it be through dried, and kept in
a dri and warm air: a march pane will last many years, it is a comfortable
meat, meet for weak folks, such as have lofte the taste of meats by reason of
much and long sickness. The greatest secret that is in the making of this
clear, is with a little fine flower of Rise, Rose water and Sugar beaten
together and laid thin over the marchpane ere it go to dryinge: this will make
it shine like Ice, as Ladies report.

To gylde a Marchpane or any other kind of Tarte. Cap. x.
TAke and cut your leaf of Gold as it lies upon the book, into square pieces
like dise: and with a Conies taylles end moiste a little, take the Gold up by the
one corner, lay it on the place being first made moiste, and with another rail
of a Conie dry, press the Gold down close: And if ye will have the form of
an Heart or the name of JESUS, or any other thing, what soever, cut ye same
through a piece of Paper, and lay the Paper upon your Marchpayne, or Carte:
then make the void place of the Paper (throw which, ye Marchpayne appears)
moist with Rosewater, lay on your Gold, press it down, take of your Paper,
and there remains behind in Gold the Print cut in the said Paper.

To bake Quinces. Cap. xi.
PAre them, take out ye Core, perpoyle thin in water till they be tender, let
the water run from the^ til they be dry: then put into every Coffin one
Quince, i^ it a good quantity of marow. Also take sugre. Cinnamon, and a little
Ginger, and fill the Coffin therewith, close it, let it bake an hour, and so
serve it.

* To keep Quinces vnpared all the year long. Cap xii.
TAke ripe Quinces and at yt great end cut out a stoppell, then take out the
core clean, and stop the hole again with the same stoppel (but pare them not)
and perboyle them a little, take them up and let the water drayne from them,
then put all the Cores and some of the smallest Quinces into little pieces all
to cut, into the water wherein the Quinces were perboyled, and let them sethe
till the liquor be as thick as molten size, that painters occupye, then take it
from the fire and let it keel: in the mean season couch your cold Quinces in a
barel or an earthe^ pot ye great end downward (if the stoppel be out it makes
small matter) and one upon an other. Then put the liquor in, that it be a
handful over and above them, cover them close, and after.iiii. or.v. days,
look to them and when you see the liquor suncke down, put in more of ye same
which ye purposed li kept to cover them as before, then lay a boorde upon them
and a stone that they rise not, and cover the vessel close with a thick cloth
folded, that it take no air, so let them remain. And when ye intend t^
occupy some of them, uncover the vessel and ye shall find a Cream coueryng
the whole liquor, break it in ye midst, turn it over with your hand, then take
out your fruit in order begi^ning in ye midst first: then by ye sides, so that
you remove none (it is may be) but those yt you take away and every time that
ye break the Creme to fetch Quinces, turn the Cream over again into his
place, for you must know that the Cream keeps out air, and kepeeth in the
strength of the Surrop, therefore it makes much to the co^seruation of the
fruit to save it, and also to se ye vessel close covered. Also when ye will
bake your Quinces, wash them well and clean in warm water, and bake them as
before is written.

To make fine Blaunch powder for roasted Quinces. Chapter. xiij.
TAke fine Sugar half a pound beaten in a whote Mortar too fine powder, of
white Ginger pared half an ounce, of chosen Sinimon a quarter of an ounce
beaten ready to fine powder, mixed them well together, and if you will have it
most excellent cast two Spoonful of Rose or Damask water in the beatyng of the
Sugar.

To conserve Quinces in Syrope condict, always ready to be served whole: or in
quarters. Cap. xiiij.
AFter your Quinces are cored and pared, sees them till they be tender and
soft: then lay them out till they be cold, in the mean time take of ye same
licor. ii. quarts or more (according to the number of your Quinces which ye
will keep) and put therein the cores and some other small Quinces, all to cut
in small pieces, sethe them in ye liquor to make the Syrope strong, strain
them, and put into the liquor being.ii. or.iii. quartes.i. pynte of Rosewater,
and for every quart also of lyquor, one half pound of sugar, sees them again
together on a soft fire of coals till ye sugar be incorporated with the liquor,
then put in your Quinces, let them sees softly till you perceive that your
Syrope is as thick as live honey, the^ set them to keel, and take them out, lai
them in a tray or treene platter: till they be cold, then take one ounce of
bruised Cinimon, and some whole cloves, put them, with some of the Cinimon in the
Syrope, and when it is cold lai a larde of quinces in your glass (called a
gestelyn glass) or an erthe^ pot well glased, then straw a little of your
Cinimon upon you Quinces, the^ power some Syrope, lay on an other larde of
Quinces, and again of your spice, and Syroppe, and so forth till you have
done: and cover them two fingers over with Syrop above, cover the^ close: and
within.iii. or.iiii. days, look to them, and when ye find the Syrop shrunken
down, put in more, and so reserve them. Chese are to be served in with Syrop.

See that the Quinces be tenderly sodden, and the Syrop thick and strong
enough.

Plummes condict in Syrrope Chapter. xv.
TAke half a pound of Sugar, half a pint of Rose water and a pint of fair
Rain water, or of some other distilled water, sees ye Sugar and ye two waters
upon a soft fire of coals, till ye one half be consumed: the^ take it from ye
fire and when it leaves boyli^g, put therein half a pound of ripe Damazines,
or other plummes, and set it again on the embers, and keep it in the like
heat till the plummes be soft by the space of an hour if need be, then put
into it some cloves bruised and when it is could keep it in a Glass, or in an
earthen or Gallypotte, the stronger the Syrrope is with Sugar, the better it
will continue.

Some put into the Syrroup Sinimon, Saunders, Nutmegges. Cloves, and a little
Ginger: seethe them not hastily for fear of much breaking.

To keep Cheries condict, or Goose beries. Cap. xvi.
MAke your syrop as for plu^mes then take half a pound of Cheries and cut off
half the length of ye stalk of every Chery, put them into the syrop, and use
them as you did the plummes, put in what spice that pleases you, and so keep
it as before is written: but make your syrop strong enough of sugar lest it
wax hoar and corrupt, then must ye make a new syrop stronger of the Sugar:
and put the cheries in it to keep, as before is said. Thus ye may do with
Goosberies to make of them Tarts, or sawces al ye winter long, saving that
Goosberies may be well sodden without breakyng, because of their tough skin, so
it be softly and dilligently done.

To make Conserve of Roses, or other Flowers. Cap. xvij.
TAke the Buddes of Red Roses, somewhat before they be ready to spread: cut the
red part of the leaves from ye white, then take the red leaves and beat and
grind them in a stone mortar with a pestell of wood, and to every ounce of
Roses, put.iii. ounces of sugar in ye grinding (after the leaves ar well beaten)
and grind them together till they be perfectlye incorporated, then put it in a
glass made for the nonce: and of purpose: or else into an earthe^ pot: stop it
close, and so keep it.

Thus ye may make conserues of all kind of flowers used thereunto.

The virtue of the conserve of Roses.
Conserve of Roses comfort the stomach, the heart and all the bowels, it
molysyeth and softneth the bowels, and is good against black Coler:
melancoi^y, conserues of white roses does loose the bellymore then the red.

To make conserve of Violets. Chapter. xviii.
TAke the flowers of Violets anpicke them from the stalk, beat and grind them
with sugar, as you did your Roses, to these put double the weight of Sugar to
ye weight of Violet flowers, but to all other flowers put.iii. parts of Sugar
to i. part of the flowers.

The virtue of the same.
Conserve of Violet Flowers is good against the heat and influmation of Coler,
called yellow Coler, it quenches thirstines, it makes ye Belly moist and
soluble.

The virtue of the conserve of Buglosse. chapter. xix.
Conserve of buglosse flowers, comforts ye hot heart, it is good for the
frantic, for the lunatic, and for the melancolicke, it is good for the
Sincop and sowning, it takes away heart burning, and trembling of the heart,
or stomach, it profits against Coler.

The virtue of the conserve of Borage. Chapter. xx.
Conserve of Borage flowers, is of like virtue, it is especially good against
black Coler, or mela^coli, it also makes one merry.

The virtue of the conserve of Rosmary. Chapter. xxj.
Conserve of the flowers of Rose mary, comfort the cold and moiste brain,
it comforts also the Senowes, it is good against melancoly and flewme.

The virtue of the conserve of Succary. Cap. xxij.
Conserve of Succary is good against yelow and black coler, and in ye burni^g
and heat of hot fevers.

The virtue of the conserve of Elder flowers. Cap. xxiij.
Conserve of the flowers of Elder is good against the morphewe, it cleanses the
stomach, and ye whole body from scabbs. Gather the clusters, or bunches whereon
ye flowers grow when they are new blown and spread: lay them upon a fair
sheet abroad in a Chamber a day or two till ye shall perceue ye flower will
shake off and fall away, then pyke them clean, and make thereof conserve, as
ye do of other Flowers.

And whereas it is more wholesome then pleasant, therefore put some other conserve
(such as ye lust) amongst it, when ye will occupy it.

The virtue of the conserve of Sorell. Chapter. xxiiij.
Conserve of Sorell is good against al unkind heats, of the stomach and other
principal parts of the body, and against yellow collar.

Take leaves of Sorell, wash them clean, and shake of the water clean, or
else tarry till the water be dried clean: beat them, and grind them with Sugar
as above, and then keep them.

The virtue of the conserve of Maiden heaire. cap. xxv.
Conserve of ye leaves of Maiden heir is good against the sickness of the
side, called the Pleuresy, and for all diseases of the breast, and of the
lyghtes, and in all maladies of Malencoly, and against red coler, make it as
you do of sorel.

To make conserve of Elecampana Roots. cap. xxvi.
TAke the roots of Elecampane wash the^ clean, slice them in to pieces as big
as your thumb, sees them in fair water, till they be tender, take them up,
and powne them and draw them throw a hairesiue, put thereto in the second
sethi^g the doble or treble weight of sugre and when the sugre is perfectly
incorporated, take it off, and keep it. See it be well styred in the se thing.

The virtue of the same.
Conserve of Elecampana is good to comfort ye stomach, and the noorishing
members, it maruelously loses tough flewme, desolueth, and consumes the
same, by the siedge it auoydeth it.

To make conserve of Acorns, or Gladon. With the virtue of the same. chapter.
xxvii.
TAke the roots of yellow flower delice which grows in moist grownde,
otherwise called a Flag root, wash them and scrape them, sees them. and
order them as ye do of Elecampana now last before rehearsed, and so keep it.
This conserve is good against all sickness of the brain and synowes, and
against all deseases of fleume, unto women it oppeneth natural course and
terms.

And you must generally learn, that in making conserues, Fruits and Roots are
made with fire and seething: but Flowers are made without fire or seething.
Moreover the more Sugar or Honey is put into the^, so it be not past.iii.ii.
to.i, the conserve shall continue the better.

To make Marmalade of Quinces. Cap..xxviii.
AFter that your Quinces ar sodden, ready to be kept condict as before in the
chapter is written, then with some of the liquor wheri^ they were sodden (but
without any spice) beat them and draw them as ye would do a Tarte, then put
some over they fire to seethe softlye, and in the seething strew by little and
little of powder of sugar, ye weight of the Quinces, or more, as your taste
shall tell you stir it continually, put there to some pure rose water, or damask
water, let it sees on height til it be w^l standing, which thing ye may know,
by taking some of it upon a cold knite and let it keele, if it be stiff, then
take it off and box it while it is warm, and set it in a warm and dry air,
if you will gylde your Marmalade, do as before is spoken of a Marchpane.

The best making of Marmalade is when the Quinces have layne long and are
through ripe, and very yellow, as in lent season.

And forasmuch as Quinces are bynding, and therefore not good for some
sickefolkes costife, it is necessary to put a good ma^y of ripe apples of good
verdure, as Renet, Pyppen, Lording, Russetyng, Pomeriall, Rex pomoru^, or any
other apple that is pleasant raw among them, being first drawn, for a tare and
then sodden among the other matter of Quinces. Thus shall you make your
Marmalade, somewhat souple, and also increase the quantity and verdure of the
same, specially if it be well dashed with sweet water.

To make Marmalade of Damsins or Prunes. Cap. xxix.
TAke Damsins which are ripe, boil them on the Fire with a little fair water
till they be soft, then draw them through a course Boulter as ye make a tart
set it on the Fire again seethe it on height with sufficient sugar, as you do
your Quinces, dash it with sweet water. etc. and box it.

If you will make it of Prunes, even likewise do put some Apples also to it, as
you did to your Quinces.

This wise you may make Marmylade of Wardens, Pears, apples, and Medlars,
Seruits or Checkers, strawberys every one by him self, or else mixed it
together, as you think good.

To make conserve of Strawberies, With the virtue of the same. chapter. xxx.
TAke Strawberies.i. quart clean picked and washed, set them on the fire til
they be soft, strain them put thereto two times as much sugar in powder, as
weight of the strawberies, let them sees till the sugar be incorporated with ye
straberis put it in a Glass or earthen Pot well glased.

The virtue of the same.
The conserve of Strawberies is good against a bot liver, or burning of the
stomach, and specially in the seruent heat of an ague.

Thus make conserve of Damasins and Prunes.

* To make conserve of Cheries and Barberies. Cap. xxxi.
Likewise ye must make co^serue of Cheries, and also of barberis saving that
these require more Sugar then the other do which are not so sour as they be.

Here is to be noted, that of conserues of Fruits may be made marmalade, for
when your conserve is sufficiently sodden, and ready to be taken off the^ sees
it more on height and it will be Marmalade.

Moreover same make their conserve, Marmalade and Syrops with clean Sugar,
some with clean Honey clarifyed, some with Sugar and Honey together. And after
the opinion of diverse great Clerks, Honye is more wholesome, though it be not so
toothsome as sugar.

* To make Succade of Peels of Oranges and Lemons. Chapter. xxxii.
First take offe your Peeles by quarters and seet hthem in fair water
from.iii, quartes to.iii. pynts, then take them out, and put to as much more
water, and seethe them like wise, and so do again, till the water wherein they
are sodden have no bitterness at all of the Peeles, then are they ready. Now
prepare a Syrop as ye do for quinces condict in syrop in ye. xiiii. chapter
before written: sees them in the Syrope a while, a keep them in a Glass or
Pot.

To make green Gynger. chapter. xxxiii.
TAke the Rases of cased Ginger of the fairest, and use them as follows, lay a
broad lane of fair sand upon a low flore on ye grownd half a foot thick,
then lay your Rases of Ginger upon the sand in order, cover the Ginger with
more sand.iiii. or.v. fingers thick. sprinkel the sand over fair with water,
twice every day, that it be moist, thus daily do till ye shall perceive your
Rases to be soft. Then take up your Rases: wash them and scrape them clean,
have a Syrop ready made as above is said, sees them in it till they be well
seasoned, take them up and with some of ye Syrop cast the^, or put the^ in a
pot of stone.

To make Pepper soft: with the virtue of the same.
AFter the same manner with sand ye may make pepper soft and with like Syrop
season and kept them. Ginger and Pepper in syrop comfort a cold stomach,
and helps much to good disgestion.

To make all kind of Syrops. chapter. xxxiiii.
TAke Buglosse, Borage, white Endive, of each.i. handful, of Rosemary, Time,
Isop, winter Sauery, of each half a handful sees them (being first broken
between your hands) in.iii. quartes of water, vntoiii pints, the^ strain it,
and put to y^liquor, whole cloves an ounce, powder of Cinimon: half an ounce,
powder of Ginger: a quarter of an ounce.i. Nutmeg in powder, of sugar half a
pound, or more: let them seethe upon a soft fire well styrred for burnning
too, until it come to the thickness of live Honey, then keep it in Gallypots,
if you put.i. pynte Malmzey in the second seethi^g, it will be better. When it
is perfect, have six graynes of fine Musk in powder, stir it amongst your
Syrop as ye put it in the Gallypot, and cover it,

This Syrop will last many years and is excellent against swowning and
faintness of heart, it comforts the Brain and Sine was, if it be used as
much as a Hasell Nut at once, at your pleasure.

To make MANVS CHRISTI. Chapter. xxxv.
TAke half a pownde of white Sugar, put thereto.iiii. ounces of Rosewater,
seethe them upon a soft fire of Coals, till the water be consumed, and the
Sugar is become hard, then put therein a quarter of an ounce of the powder of
Pearls, stir them well together, put for every spoonful, a piece of a leaf
of Gold cut of purpose: cast them upon a leaf of white Paper, anointed
first with the Oil of sweet Almonds, or sweet butter for cleaving too.

To make Losings. Cap. xxxvi.
TAke half a pownd of Sugar, and as much Rosewater: or other distild water, as
for Manus Christi sees them likewise, and when ye will know when it is sodden
enough, take out some upon a knives point, and let it keel, and if it be hard
like Sugar then it is sodden innough: then put into it of any of the powders
hereafter next following, one ounce: stir the^ well together, lay it upon a
paper oyled: drive it as thin as ye think meet, lay on your Gold leaf with a
Conys tail, cut your Losings Diamonde fashion, and so keep them.

Powder of Hollond against Colic, and gnawing of the belly. cap. xxxvii.
TAke Cinnamon, Anys seed, fenel seed, Cummin seed, of each a quarter of an
ounce, of shaven Lyquerice.iii. quarters of an ounce, of Gallingal one ounce
and a half, of Spyknard a quarter of an ounce, of Seen of Alexandrya.ii. ounces:
beat them al into fine powder, and serce them, whereof take a quarter of an
ounce in a mess of Potage.

Powder to make the belly soluble, causing a gentle laske: meet for noble
personages. Chapter. xxxviii.
TAke Seen of Alexandria one ounce, of fine Gynger half a quarter of an ounce,
of Anys seed a quarter of an ounce, beat them into fine powder and serce
them, put of this powder into your sodde Sugre, and make Losynges as before: of
the whole, ye number of xvi. whereof disolue two of them in a mess of Potage,
or in a Cup of Mine fasting in the morning, and fast one hour after, if you
do put as much of sugre in powder, as the weight of the whole powder, ye may
keep it in a Bladder, and the whole powder will serve.viii. times to receive,
as even now is said.

A receipt to restore strength, in them that arr brought low with long
sickness. chapter. xxxix.
TAke of the brawne of a Fesant or Pattridge, and of a Capon sodden or roasted,
of each a quarter of an ounce, steep them in rosewater two hours, of the
Kernels of Nuttes called Pistaciorum and of the kirnels of ye pine apple, of
each a quarter of an ounce of Cinimon, in fine powder the weight of twenty Barley
corns, of ye Spices of Dianthos, diamargarition, Letificantes Galent, of each
the weight of forty grains, or barley corns, of the seed of Millon, pepon, Go
orde, and Cucummer, of each the weight of ten grains, the skin taken of, let
them be all grownde small, then take.vi. ounces of sugar, dissolved in borage
water, seethe it on haighte as for Lofinges, and when it is sodden enough, the^
put in all ye other gear, and make Losings thereof. Whereof one is sufficient at
once disolued in a mess of Potage, or a draft of dri^k: thus do, it. or.iii.
times every day.

To make Ipocras. Cap. xl.
TAke of chosen Cinimon, two ounces, of fine Gynger one ounce, of Graynes half
an ounce, bruise them all, and sleep them in. iii. or. iiii. pyntes of good
odiferous wine, with a pound of Sugre by the space of. xxiiii. hours. then put
them into an Ipocras Bag of Woollen, and so receive the liquor. The rediest and
best way is to put the Spices with the half pownde of sugre, and the Wine
into a stone Bottle, or a stone pot stopped close. and after: xxiiii. hours it
will be ready, then cast a thin linen cloth, or a piece of a boulter cloth on
the mouth, and let so much run through: as ye will occupy at once, and keep the
vessel close, for it will so well keep both the sprite, odor and virtue of
the Wine, and also Spices.

A violet powder for wullen clothes and Furs. cap. xli.
TAke of Ireos. ii. ounces, of Calamus aromaticus. iii. quarters of an ounce,
of Cipres, or gallingal, of Spiknale, of Rose leaves dried, of each a quarter of
an ounce, of cloves of Spyke: or Lauender Flowers, of each half an ounce: of
Nigella romana, a quarter of an ounce: of Benjamin, of Storax calimit: of each
half an ounce. Let them be all finely beaten, and serced, then take two or
three graynes of Musk disloue it in rose water, and sprinckell the water upon
the powder, and turn it up and down in the sprincklyng, till it have drunke^
up the water, when it is dry, keep it in bags of sylke.

* A sweet powder for Napery and all Lynnen Clothes. chapter. xlii.
TAke of sweet Mariornm, (that is hoar, that is the sweeter) when it has in
him Seeds ripe, cut the branches, so that the Root may spring again, when
this Mariorum is dried, then rub out the seeds and keep them to sow about
Easter, and the Husks or leaves that grow about the Seeds take for your
purpose, rub them small between your hands (for if you beat them to powder
in a Mortar, they will loose the most part of their savor) then take of white
Saunders, or of gray Sanders, but look that they be new of right sweet odor,
for if they be old, and have no pleasant and quick odor, they are nothing
worth, take I say of these sweet Saunders beaten into fine powder one ounce,
and put it to an ounce of your sweet Mariorum rubbed between your hands as
before is said, and if you put one or two Graynes of Musk thereunto (for your
wearyng linen it is the better) sow these up in a sylke bag together, and lay
it among your Linen, of such baggs have a dosen or two, which will continue
many years, and when you look to your Linen: then chafe each of the bags
between your hands, that they may yield our their sweet odor. Moreover in the
Summer time, gather red Roses in fair wether, so soon as they be blown, and
opened, lay them upon a Table, a Bed, or a fair flore of boords, and now and
then remove them least they mould, and wax foysty, when they are dry, pick off
ye leaves, that you may have. ii. peckes of them, then strewe them among and
between the boughts and foldynges of your Linen, with. i. handful of of dry
spike flowers, to. vi. handful of dry Roses, and lay your sweet bags amongst
them. Be sure that your lynen be euerthrough drier ye lay them up, for else the
Roses will wax hoar, set your coffer in a dry air, and in the winter time,
or in wet wether, when ye perceue your Roses to wax moist, the^ put them into
a pyllow bear or twain, that they fall not out, and lay them upon your bed
between the Couerlet and the Blancket, all night, or else before the fire, let
them dry, and strew them again.

Moreover ye must always have a bag full of dry Roses in store, kept in a dri
air, for if he loose his readnesse, the^ loses the rose his swetnesse.

Finally ye must every year, put away your old Roses, and occupye new, out
keep your sweet Bags still many years.

* To make a Pomeamber. cap. xliij.
TAke of Benjamin.i. ounce, of Storax calamit half an ounce of Labdanum the
eight part of an ounce, beat them to powder, and put them into a brason Ladle
with a little damask or Rose water, set the^ over the fire of Coals, til they
be desolued: and be soft like wax: then take them out and chafe them between
your hands as you do wax: the^ have these powders ready finely serced, of
Cinimon, of Cloves, of sweet sanders gray or white, of each of these. iii.
pouders half a quarter of an ounce mire ye pouders with ye other and chafe the^
well together, if they be to dry moysten them a little with some of the Rose
water left in the Ladle, or other: if they wax cold, warm then upon a Knives
point over a Chafingdishe of Coals, then take of Amber grease, of Musk and
Ciuet, of each, iii. grains, desolue ye Amber grease in a Silver Spoone over
the bot Coals, when it is cold, make it small, put it to your Musk and Ciuet,
then take your Pome, that you have chafed and gathered together, and by little
and little, (with some sweet water if need be) gather up the amber, musk and
ciuet: and mix them with your Ball, til they be perfectly incorporated, then
make one Ball or two of the lump as ye shall think good, for ye weight of the
whole is above two ounces, make a hole in your Ball, and so hang it by a Lace.

If you perceive that ye Ball is not tough enough, but to brittle, then take a
curtesy of storax liquida, and therewith temper your Bal against the fire, but
take not to much storax liquida, because it is too strong.

Or ye better way is, to have some gu^m called dragaga^thi ready disolued in sweet
water, it will be desolued in. ii. days, and with ye gather your Ball with ye
heat of ye fire: this Ball will be of like goodness within as without and of great
price. Some men put in ye making hereof. iii. or. iiii. drops of the Oil of
spike, beware of to much, because it is very strong.

When ye will have your Ball exceed in sweetness, break it and have ii. or.
iii. grains of Musk. or Ciuet or Amber grease, as you delight in, or al
together, desolue them in rose or Damask water, and with the same chafe your
Ball over the fire till al be drunken in, then pearce a new hole as before.

* To make a fine Fumigation to cast on the Coals. cap. xliiij.
TAke of Benjamin.i. ounce, of Storix calamit half an ounce disolue them as for
a pomeam ber, then have ready these woods in powders or one of them, Gyniper, or
Cipres, or of white Sanders, and of Cloves, of either half a quarter of an
ounce, al in fine powder, mixed them all together: and with some Storix liquida
gather the^ together with the heat of fire, then make the^ rownde of the
bigness of a black sloe, and with your Seal printe it a Cake while it is
warm and soft.

Of these cast one or two upon a Chafingdishe of Coals, to purge all
pestifferous infection, and corrupt airs, out of your house: if you put to
the other things, the powder of Amber beads it will be the sweter.

Some put also Labdanum, as before is said in making of the pomeamber, hearein
do as the savor thereof shall please you.

To make the same in Oseletts. chapter.xlv.
TAke a little of the fine powder of Sallow, or wyllow Coals, mix it wtsom of
your fumigatio^ last before named, in the making work them well together. then
fashion it with. iii. or. iiii feet like a Cloue. and when it is dry kyndle
the end of it at a quick Cole, and it will yield a sweet savor, put not to
much coals for the^ it will savor of the^, put not to little Coals* for then it
will not keep fire: put not to much Storax liquida, for then it will be too
brittle and to moist, and will not lightly dry: therefore it shall be well to
have some Gu^me of ye cheritree or Plumtree, which they call Gu^me Arabic,
disolue some of it in sweet water till it be liquide and toughe, with this
gather your Oselets, or other Fumygations.

A moist fume upon a fuming dish. chapter. xlvi.
TAke a piece of your Pomeamber as big as a hasel Nutt, bruise it, put it into
you fumeing dishe, with sweet water, put thereunto a few bay leaves, as much of
dried Basell leaves, a little rosemary, and set it over the fire, upon a
Cubbard: or else in the stead of the Pomea^ber, put.ii. or. iii. of ye cakes
before written broken small, and. ix. or. x. whole Cloves, and if you will have
it excellent sweet, then put. i. or. ii. graynes of Musk, and let the leaves
and them stand over that fire together, as before is said.

A Fumigation for a Press, and clothes that no Moth shall breed therein.
chapter. xlvii.
TAke of the wood of Cipres, or of Ieniper, of Rosemary dried, of Storax
Calamit, of Benjamin. of Cloves, a like weight beaten all in to powder, then
take of ye powder of Wormwood leaves dried as much as all ye others, mix them
well together, cast thereof upon a Chafyngdish of coals and set it in your press
and shut it close, and thus do ofttimes till you have well seasoned your Press
or Coffer.

* A Powder wherewith to make sweet waters. cap. xlviii.
TAke of the wood of Cipers, or the roots of Galingal. i. quarterne. Of Calamus
aromaticus. i. quarterne. Of Orace or Iris one quarterne. Of Cloves. i
quarterne. Of Storix Calamit, one quarterne. Of Benjamin, one quarterne.

Or ye may take of each of these, one ounce for a proportion, let all be beaten
into powder: and when ye will distyll your Roses, fill your Still with Rose
leaves: and a few Spick Flowers, and upon the top of them, strew some of your
pouders, and so distill them. Some put a little of the powder of Nigella
romana: to the other powders. These cakes will be very sweet: put the water in
a large glass, and to the pottle, put. xii. graynes of Musk, let it hang in
the mids of the water in a thin Linen cloth with a thread, set it in the
son. xx. or. xxx days, then take the Glass in, and set it in a dry air.

* An other manner of making of Damask water. cap. xlix.
TAke of Arace or Iris, of Spike flowers dried, of Cloves, of each i. ounce,
make the^ in poder, put them together with a pint of new Ale in corns, and. i.
pynte of Rose water, into an earthen pot: put thereto a good many of grene Rose
leaves, let them soke in it, a night time, stoped close, in the morninge when
ye will distyll, first lay other Roseleues in the bottom of your Stilitory for
fere of cleuing to, then take of the Rose leaves, out of the Pot, and put them
with other green Rose leaves in your Stilitory sufficient, and to the water:
put Musk as above is said. This water is excellent to set forth a Carte, an
Apple moyse, or Almond butter.

To perfume Gloves. cap. l.
TAke the Gloves, and wash them in Rose water, or Damask water, till the
scurfe of ye Lether be gone, and then stretch them forth softly, and keep the
water, you wash them with still: Then hang them up to dry, and then lay them
in a clean lynnen cloth that is foulded. iii. or. iiii. doubles: and when they
be dry, let them lie in Rose leaves dried, a day or two: then take Oil of
Ciuet Almons, and Musk: and grind them together up on a Marble stone. Stretch
them forth softly, and with your hand annoynte your Gloves. iii. or. iiii.
times: and ever among stretch them forth, then let them dry, and ever stretch
them forth softly as they dry Then take Sandifer mixed with a little
Ambergreace, and strewe the powder of it thinly upon them and lay them in a
Paper: and in a Box, or else melte the Amber grease with a quantiti of Rose
water, and mix the Sandifer to it, and so annoint the Gloves with the same.
Then let them dry, and lay them in fair white papers.

2. To perfume Gloves another way.
TAke the Gloves and wash them as aforesaid. iii. or iiii, times and wring
them eueri time softly: then take Gu^me of dragagant, and stepe it in fine
Damask water one night, then strain ye water through a fine Linen clothe, and
take the Gu^me and mix it with an ounce of Amber grease, and a quarter of an
ounce of Musk, first grynde your Amber grease with Oil of Turpentine, then
mingle al together, and roll your Gloves with the same: lay them to dry, and
lay a paper between.

3. A preparatiue for Gloves.
Wash ye Gloves as before is said, till the sent of the leather be gone, then
take Benjamin. ii. ounces, of Storax Calamit. i. ounce, let them be very fine,
then take oil of Ciuet Almons and mingle it with Benjamin and Storax upon a
Marbell stone: When it is well grownd, put it into an earthen Pot with more
Oil of Ciuet Almons, then put in Cloves in powder, and so let it stand very
close couerd: and when you need, take a little Rose water in a Sponge, and rub
the Gloves softly, and then in like manner with the Oil called Ciuet Oil for
the same purpose.

4. Another way.
TAke twelve Graynes of Musk, six grains of Ciuet. viii. grains of
ambergrece. iii. grains of storax Calamit. vi. grains of Benjamin and a few
Cloves: grynde all these together, with Oil of Ciuet Almons. First wash your
Gloves: with Fusses, disolued a day in Damask water.

5. Another for Gloves.
TAke your Gloves and wash them in rose water once or twice, til all the
scurffe be gone from them and then let them dry, and stretch them well out,
fyngers and all: Then plain them, and wash them once or twice, then take two
ounces of Storax, and as much Benjamin made in powder: Dress your Gloves all
over, on a smooth board before they be dry, then hang them to dry, and when
they be dry, save the powder that is left, then take a pynte of Rose water,
and. ii. ounces of Storax, and two ounces of Cinimon, put all these in fine
powder, and cast them to the rose water, and let the^ seethe in a close Posnet
covered. Then take a fine Brush, and brush them over.

6. An other way to perfume.
TAke Amber greece a dram, of Musk half a dram, of Fusses a dram, of Ciuet
half an ounce, put all these together in a pynt of rosewater, or Damask water.

7. An other way.
TAke a dram of Amber greece, a dram of Benjamin, half a dram of Fusses, a
dram of Storax, a quarter of an ounce of Labdanum, put all these to Rosewater.

A perfume for Chestes and Cubbords: And also for Gloves. cap. lj.
TAke Benjamin and Storax, of each one ounce, Labdanum, and Fusses, of each a
quater of an ounce, half a Dram of Ciuet. If you burn it for Chestes, or
Cubbordes, beat it in a hot Mortar. If it be for Gloves, boil it and put it
to Rose water.

* To color Gloves. Cap. lii.
YOu must have Hulles of green Walnuts, that must lie in water all the year
long: roll them well with these Hulles, and make them as deep a couller as
you may.

How to couller Gloves yellow within.
TO color Gloves yellow, wtin take ye yolks of xx. Eggs, and put them in a
fryinge pan, with a soft fire, stir them ever, and bruise them with a ladle,
and the Oil that ascends of them, being anointed on the in side of the
Gloves, will make them look yellow.

To make Musk Soap. cap. liii
TAke strong lie made of chalk, and six pound of stone chalk: iiii, pound of
Dear Suet, and put them in the lie; in an earthen pot, and mingle it well,
and keep it the space of forty days, and mingle and styr it. iii. or. iiii.
times a day, till it be consumed, and that, that remains. vii. or. viii.
days after, then you must put a quarter of an ounce of Musk, and when you
have don so, you must al flyrre it, and it will smell of Musk.

To make red sealyng wax. cap. liiii.
TAke to one pound of Wax.iii. ounces of clear Turpentyne in Summer, in Winter
take four: melte them together with a soft fire: Then take it from the fire
and let it cool: Then put in Vermylion very fynely ground, and Salet Oil,
of each an ounce, and mix them well together, and it is perfect good.

To keep Damsins in syrop.
TAke Damsins and pick them with a knife, or a pi^ the^ take clarified Sugar
as much as you shall think will serve and them you must boil it til it be as
thick as birdlime: Then boil your Damsins in ye clarified sugre, til they be
soft, the^ take the^ up, and put them in a glass, then you must boil ye
syrop, till it be thick as ye other was, before you put in ye Damsins, and as
soon as it is so thick you must power it into the Damsins and so cover them
close.

For the gnawing in a Woman's stomach.
TAke a good handful of Spermi^t, and a handful of Worm wod, and heat a tile
stone, and lai these, ii. things on it, and make a little bag, and when the
herbs be hot, put the^ in ye bag, and so lay them to her stomach.

To make sweet Damask powder four manner of ways. cap. lv.
TAke. ii. or. iii. handfulls of dried Rose leaves ii. grains of Musk half an
ounce of Cloves and beat these all to powder.

2. An other way
Take. vi. ounces of Orace. iiii. ounces of Cloves. ii. ounces of florax
Calamite. i. ounce of Labdanum ii. ounces of yellow Sanders and a little Musk.

3. An other way.
Take. ii. ounces of Cloves. iiii. ounces of Spruce, iiii. ounces of Storax
calamit. iiii. ounces of Roses. iii. ounces of Benjamin.

4. An other way.
Take. iii ounces of Sypres. iiii. ounces of Benjamin, ii. ounces of Coleander
or Labdanu^, iii. ounces of Storax Calamit, ii. ounces of Roses, beat all
these to powder.

To keep Barberyes. cap. lvi.
TAke claryfied Sugar, and boil it till it be thick, which you shall perceue
if you take a little between your fingers it will rope like Birdlyme: Then put
in your Barberyes, and let the^ boil with a soft fire, until you perceive
they be tender, the^ put them in a Glass and cover them: and so keep them.

To make fine Rise Porredge. cap. lvii.
TAke half a pound of Iordyn Almons, and half a. li. of Ryce and a gallon of
running water, and a handful of Oak bark, and let the bark be boiled in the
running water, and the Almons beten with the hulles and all on, and so strayned
to make the Rye Porrege withal.

For the Ague in a woman's breast. cap. lviii.
TAke Hemlocke leaves and frye them in sweet Butter, and as hot as she may
suffer it, lay it to her breast and lap a warm white cotton, and it will drive
it away in short time.

For the unnatural heat of the Liver. Chapter. lix.
Take borage, buglosse, sicory, violets, fumitori, young hop buds, fenel buds,
of each a quarter of a handful, young mallows and mercury of each half a
handful, boil these in a potle of Whey and strain it.

For the Cankar in the mouth. cap. lx.
TAke half a pint of ale, and a sprig of Rosemary, and seethe them together,
and scum your ale, and then put in a piece of Allu^ as much as a nut, and a
spoonful of Honey, and two spoonful of Honysuckle water.

* To know what time in the year Herbs and Flowers, should be gathered in
their full strength. cap. lxi.
MEdicines ar made diverse and sundry ways, some by leaves, some by seeds, some
by roots, some by Herbs, some by flowers, and some by fruits: Such leaves as
are put to medicines should be gatherd when they be at at their full wexing, ere
that their coullour be changed, or that they fade any thing.

Seeds when they be full ripe and the moystnes somewhat dried away

Flowers should be taken when they be fully open ere they begin to fade.

Herbs should be gathered when they be full of Sap, and ere they shrink.

Roots should be gathered when the leaves fall.

Fruits should be taken when that they be at their full growth, or when they
fall, and the heavier ye fruit is, the better, and those that be great and
light in ponderation choose not them, and those that be gathered in fair, wether
be better then those that be gathered in rain.

And those Herbs that grows in the Feldes are better than those that
grows in Cownes, in Gardens, and those that grows on hills in the field be
best for Medicines, for commonly they be less, and not so fat, and have more
virtue. Many Herbs there be that have special time to be gathered in: And if
they be gathered in yt time, they have their whole virtue to their property,
or else not so good. Some helps when so ever they be gathered, and some be
naught if they be gatherd out of time, therefore mark well what I teach thee.

Betayne shall be gathered principally in La^mas Monthe with the seed and the
roots, and without any Iron tool, and it shall be dried in the shadow, for
medicines it may be gathered other times, but evermore it is the better if it be
gotten without Iron, and it must be gathered before Son risyng.

Swinsgras shall be gathered when it pleases in time of need.

Camimamill shall be gathered in Apryll

Perytory shall be gathered i^ June before the Son rising.

Red docke shall be gathered when they need daily.

Longedebefe shall be gathered in June and July.

Penyworte shall be gathered in the beginning of Winter.

Germander shall be gathered in Lammas Month.

Dragaunce shall be gathered in June and July.

Columbyne in La^mas month.

Addertung should be gathered in Apryll.

Pedelyon when thou will.

Groundsill always after midday.

Wall wort when it pleases you without Iron.

Violet should be gathered in the Month of March, and in this month should
Violets be put into Sugre and to Syrop. Roses should be gathered in April and
in May, and of them should be made Sugar roset in Syropes of Roses, and in
this same Month should Oil be made of Camamyll.

Rosemary Flowers should be gathered in May.

Centory when he begi^eth to flower.

Origanum in ye Month of June.

Solsequie should be gathered the xvi. day of Auguste, before the Son rising
without Iron.

Hertstong should be gathered ere day, in November.

Aristologia should be gathered the same time.

Garlyke may be taken when you need for Medicines.

Wild Garlyke should be gathered when it flowreth.

Gurdes should be gathered in the end of September, when they be ripe, and
dried where the Son may be all day. Wild Nep beries should be gathered when
they wax yellow.

Cucumbers should be gathered when the fruit is ripe, and ye fruit should be
laid under Uines, where the Son may not have all his strength to him in a
moist place that it may root, for than the seed shall be good and full of
kernelles.

Citrull when ye fruit is ripe and dried in a dry place in the Son.

Calamint water should be gathered when it flowreth, and dry it in the shadow,
and it will last a year.

Saffron should be gathered before that the Son does rise.

Godur that grows among Flax should be gathered when he begineth to Flower,
and it may be kept three year.

Drauke should be gathered when it flowreth, and dry him in the shadow, and a
year it will last.

Eleber, must be gathered in Harvest time.

Fenell seeds should be gathered in the beginning of harvest, and two year he
may be kept.

The roots of Fenel should be gathered in the beginning of the year and.ii.
year they are good.

Baldemonye that some men calls G^ncian, should be gathered in the last end
of the year, and.iiii. year he is good enough. The root of this Herb is
used, and how thou shall know him is this, that he be very bitter: the less
bitter, ye worse. Also, look that it be white whole, and not hollow within,
but sad, and not brittle, nor full of powder.

Gallyngale, is called in Physic, Cipus: it may be taken at al times when thou
wylt, but best is in the end of Ver: and three days it must be laid into
the Son, and be dried: that the moyslure rotte it not, and then you must
keep it in the shadow.

Flouredelice, should be gathered in the end of Ver, and dried in the Son,
and it will last. ii. year well.

Here follows, the sundry Virtues of Rases, for diverse Medicines. Ca. lxii.
ROses, be cold and moist, in two degrees: it has these Uertues. Stamp it,
and lay it to a sore that brenneth and aketh: and it shall cease both the
brennyng and akyng.

Also, it is good for the Fever in the stomach, and against all euylles that
are gendred in hot humors.

Also, let any woman drink it with Wine, and it shall forth with restrain
bleedyngs, and help the Marowes of the womb.

Also, make Oil of Roses, and that is a principal Receipt for pricking in
Sinews: and the water thereof is good for sore eien, and for hot evils, and the
Oil is good for head ache to anoynte therewith the temples, and ye root of him
is good, and drawing for Iron: or other thing in a man's foot, and the red
Rose is much better then the white.

* The sundry virtue of Lyllies. cap. lxiii.
LYllies are cold and dri in three degrees, and so says Galyen, that who so
setheth ye leaves in water, it is a noble Plaster for Sinowes that are shorted,
and it is good for all manner burnings and scaldings.

Also when the leaves and ye roots are sodden in old Wine, and tempred up with
honi, it is a profitable plaster for sickness ye are kortten. Also the water
and ye Iuce is good for to wash thy brissers, and namely to do away ye frekles
on man's visage or Woman's, and the root is good to ripether with botches, and
for to help to break them.

Of the sundry virtues of Milfoyle. Chapter. lxiiii.
MYlfoyle is not and dry in. ii. degrees, it is good to staunch the blody flyr,
and the iuce thereof heleth the biting of a red hound, and if it be sod in red
Wine, drink it, and it sleeth worms in ye womb, and it will destroy venim,
and it softneth hardness in man's womb, and it helps Iawnes and Dropsye.

Also take the herb and stamp it, and temper it with Vinegar, and it will do
away blood in wounds, and it will cease the toothache, when it is chewed
fasting. Also it is good for the stinging of an Adder when it is sodden in
wine, drink it, and lay the substance thereto, and it will draw out the
Venim of the sore.

Of the sundry virtues of Rosemary. Chapter. lxv.
ROsemary, is hot and dry: take ye flowers thereof, and put them in....a clean
cloth, and boil them in fair clean water, until half be wasted: and cool
it, and drink that water, for it is much worth against all manner of euylles in
the body.

Also, take the Flowers, and make powder thereof, and bind it to thy right arm
in a lynnen cloth, and it shall make thee light and merye.

Also, eat the Flowers with honey fasting with sour bread, or else with other
bread, and there shall rise in thee none evil swellyng.

Also, take the Flowers, and put the^ in thy Chest, among thy clothes or among
thy Books, and Mothes shall not destroy them.

Also, boil the flowers in Gotes milk, and then let them stand all night
under the air covered, and after yt give him to drink thereof that has the
tisike, and he shall be helped.

Also, if there be any man that is ramage: take the Flowers and the leaves, a
great qua^tytie, and boil them together in a good quantytie of clean water,
in that, Paciens bulneat: and it shall heal him.

Also, boil ye leaves in white wine and wash thy face therewith, and thy Bearde,
and thy brows, and there shall no corns spryng out, but thou shall have a
fair face.

Also put the leaves under thy head, and thou shall be delivered of all evil
dreams.

Also, break ye leaves to powdre, and lay the^ on the ca^ker, and it shall slep
it.

Also, take the leaves, and put them into a wine vessel, and it shall keep the
wine from all sowrenesse and evil savors, and it thou wylt sell thy wine, thou
shall have good speed.

Also, if thou be feeble with unkind sweat, boil the leaves in clean water,
and wash thy head therewith, and you shall be delivered of yt evil.

Also if thou have lost appetit of eating, boil well these leaves in clean
water, and when the water is cold; put thereunto as much of whit Wine, and then
make therein Soppes, eat thou thereof well and thou shall restore thy appetyte
again.

Also if thou have the Flux, boil the leaves in strong eyzill, and lay them
on a linen clothe, and bynd it to thy Womb, and a none thy Flux shall be with
drawn.

Also if thy Legs be blown with the Gowte, boil the leaves in water, and then
take the leaves and bind them in a linen cloth, and wind it about thy Legs,
and it shall do thee much good.

Also take the leaves and boil them in strong eyzyll, and bind them to thy
stomach in a Clothe, and it shall deliver thee of al euyls.

Also if thou have the coughe by styring or by any other way, drink the water
of the leaves boiled in white Wine, and ye shall be whole.

Make powder of the rynd of Rosemary, and drink it, and if thou be in the
pose, thou shall be delivered.

Also take the Timber thereof and burn it to coals, and make powder thereof, and
then put it in a linen cloth, and rub thy teeth therewith, and if there be any
worms therein, it shall sley them, and keep thy teeth from all euylls.

Also of the wood make a boyst to smell thereto, and it shall keep thee yongly.

Also make thereof a barel, and drink thou of the drink ye stands therein and
thou need not dread of any evil being therein, and if thou set it in the
field or in thy Garden keep it honestly, and it shall bring forth much
increasing of him self.

Also if a man have lost his smelyng of the air, yt he may not draw his
breath, make a fire of the wode and bake his bread there with and eat it, and
it shall keep him well.

Also a man that has the Gowt, take oil of Roses, and the yolke of an egg,
and the flowers of Rosemari, and meddle them together, and do it to his sore,
and he shall be helped.

A brief Treatise of Vrines as well of men's vrines, as of Women's, to judge by
the colors, which betoken health, which betoken sickness, and which also
betoken death. chapter. lxvi.
IT is showed that in iiii. parts of the body dwells sycknes, and health. That
is: in the Womb, in yt head in ye liver, and in the blather: in what manner you
may know their properties, and thereof thou may learn.

If a man's Vryne be white at morrow, and red before meat, and white after
meat, he is whole, and if it be fat and thick it is not good, and if ye urine
be meanly thick, it is good to like, and if it be thick as Ass piss, it
betokneth head ache.

Vryne yt is.ii. days red, and at ye.x. day white, it betokneth very health.

Vryne yt is fat, white, and moist, betokneth the fever quartayne.

Urine yt is blody, betokneth yt the bladder is hurt by some rotti^g that is
wein. A little Urine all fleshye, betokneth of ye raines, who pisseth blood,
without sickness, he has some vain broken in the raines.

Urine yt is ponderous, betokneth that the bladder is hurt.

Vryne that is some what blody of sickness betokneth great evil wtin the body,
and namely in ye bladder. Vryne that falls by drops above as it were great
bolnes, betokneth great sickness and long.

Woman's bryne yt is clear and shining in the vrynall as silver, if she cast
often, and if she have no tallent to meat, it betokneth she is with child

Womanes Vryne that is strong and whit with stinking betokneth sickness in the
raines, and in her secret receites, in her Chambers full of evil humors and
of sickness of her self.

Woman's vryne that is bloudye and clear as water under, betokens head ache.

Woman's Vryne that is like to Gold, clear and mighty, betokens ye she has
lust to man.

Woman's urine that has color of stable clensyng, betokneth her to have the
fever quartayne, and she to dye the third day.

Woman's vryn yt appears as color of Lead, if she be with child, betokneth
yt it is dead within her.

Here follows all the vrynes yt betoken death, as well the bryne of the man, as
of Woman.
IN a whot Axcis one partred another black, another green. and another blew,
betokneth death.

Vryne in whot Axcys black and little in quantytie; fatty, and stinki^g
betokneth death.

Vryne over al colloured as Lead betokneth a prolonging of death.

Vryne dark above and clear beneth, betokneth death.

Vryne that shines raw and right brighte, if the skyn in the bottom shine
not, it betokneth death.

Uryne thin in substannce, haueing fleting above as it were a dark sky,
signifies of death.

Vryne dersty, stinkynge, and dark with a black ski within, betokneth a
prolonging death.

Vryne that is of the color of water, if it have a dark ski in an Axcis it
betokneth death.

Vryne ye has dresses in ye bottom meddled with blood: it betokneth death.

Urine black and thick: if the sick loathe when he goes to the Privy, and when
he speaks ouertharte, or that he understands not aright, and these
Sickenesses go not from him, they betoken death.

How to make a sovereign Water, that M. Doctor St^^uyns Physician, a man of
great knowledge and cunnyng, did practice: and used of long experience. And
therewith did very many Cures, and kept it always secret, till of late a little
before his death, a special friend of his, did get it in writing of him. Cap.
lxvij.
The Receipt.
TAke a Gallon of good Gascoyne Wine: then take Gynger, Gallyngale, Camamyll,
Cynamon. Nutmegs, Grains Cloves, Mace, Annys seeds, Fenel seeds, Carawayes
seeds: of every of them a dram. Then take Sage, Myntes, Redroses, Cime
Pellitory of the wall, wild Margerst, Rosemarie. Penny mountain: otherwise
called wild Time, Camamyll, Lauender and Auens, of eueri of them one handful:
Then beat ye Spices small, and bruise the Herbs, and put al into the Wine: and
let it stand. xii. hours: styrringe it diverse times: Then still it in a
Limbeck, and keep the first pint of the water, for it is the best: then will
come a second water, which is not so good as ye first.

The sundry virtues and operatio^s of the same, many times approved.
THe Virtues of this Water be these: it comfort the sprits, and preserves
greatly ye youth of man, and helps the inward deceases, coming of cold,
against shaking of Palseye: It cures the contraction of Synowes, and helps
the conception of Women that he barren, it kylleth ye worms in the Bellye: it
helps the cold Gowt, it helps the Tooth ache, it comfort the stomach
very much: it cures the col^ Dropsye, it helps the stone in the bladder and
in the veins in ye back: it cures the Canker: it helps shortly a stinki^g
Breath, and who so uses this Water ever among, and not to often, It preserves
him in good lyking: and shall make on seem young very long. You must take one
spoonful of this water fasti^g but once in. vii. days: for it is very hot in
operation. It preserved Doctor Steeuens that he lived. lxxx. and. xviii:
years. Whereof. x. he lived bedred.

FINIS.
* These Books are to be sold at the West end of Paul's Church: By Richard
Jones, the Printer hereof. 1573.


