AN EPISTLE OF THE PERSECVTION OF CATHOLICS IN England. Translated ovvt of
french into English and conferred withdraw the Latyne copy. by. G. T. To
which there is added an epistle by the translator to the right honorable
Lords of her majesty's preeuie council towchynge the same matter.

Psalm. 105. Ver. 38. They shed innocent blood, even the blood of their own
sons and of their own daughters.

Psalm. 78. Ver. 2. They lay the dead bodies of thy servants (o Lord) for
meat to the fowls of the air and the flesh of thy saints to the beasts
of the field.

Imprynted at Douay in Artois.

TO THE HONORABLE LORDS OF HER MAJESTY'S PREEVIE COUNCIL.
FINDINGE this epistle of the persecution of England, divulged in diverse
foraine languages, Right honorable: I was moved both to translate it to my
country men, whom properlye it concernethe: and to direct it to your
Lordships, to whom principallye it appertains. My intent herein was simple
and plain: First to procure good men's prayers, by disclosinge our necessities,
secondly, to move your honors at lenght, (if it might be,) to some favorable
and merciful consideration of our calamities: which perhaps in some part
are more particulerlye declared in this discourse, then every one of your
honors has either knovve^ or considered of heretofore.

For albeit we are not ignorant, that our afflictions and persecutions do
pass upon us, both in name and authority as from your Lordships: yet know
we also, that you are not alvvayes precuie to every our particular
agreeuement and hard usage, nor if you were, (being wise and honorable)
vvoulde allow of the same.

Wherefore saying the treatise follovvinge is written by a man, bo the of
great modesty, as appears, by his style, and also of good intelligence in
English matters past, as it may seem by the particulers by him alleged: I
do most humblye beseech your honors, to lend the labor of readinge over the
same, and to consider in your own consciences, before the dreadful majesty
of our lord and Savior, to whose justice both you and we remain
accountable for our doings in this life, whether the sufferinges of
Catholics here recited, deserve complaint of our side and of your honors
part, consideration or no. It is a lavvfull and allowable refuge delivered us
by nature her self, to mourn and bevvayle in time of affliction, and to bar
us of this, either by offense or punishment, were as hard as to prohibit the
sick man to groan, or the child to pule which is greevouslye beaten. If we
groan without grief, or complain without cause: we are vvnvvorthye of
compassion, and deserve no redress: but if our case be such, as it moves
admiration to as many as hear it, and no small horror to them which
consider it: we hope your Lordships, being our borne peers and Nobles of our
nation, vvil not alvvayes bear your selves more compassionles toward our
miseries, then strangers who have less cause in nature to affecte us.

Enter in (my good Lords) I beseech you on my knees even for his sake of
whom you also must one day crave mercy, enter in (I say) but to some small
cogitation, what you do: to whom: for what cause to what end.

You persecute heauylye, and that in such measure as the like has scarce ben
mentioned in Christianity before, albeit in some points What per secutio^
Catholics suffer.
more couertlye then some other did. And as for the disciplyne of the
Catholic Church, which is commonly accustomed to be laid against us,
whereby she punishethe new fangled deuisers, and obstinate bringers in of
new religion, it has no comparison at all withdraw this of yours: for first,
that disciplyne is old and ancient, and allowed by your own practice of
burninge other sectaries then of the part of Calvin. Whereby it follovvethe,
that our Church having condemned as orderly John Calvine and his followers,
in her late general and most learned Council, as she has done other
sectaries executed by your selves: if she punish also Calvinistes among other
sectaries: she is no more to be blamed for the same in indiffere^cie of reason,
then your part for burninge Anabaptists familians or the like.

Secondlye if we compare the procedinges of Catholics to protestants
generally, or of English Catholics, toward them of Caluins part in
Queen Mary's time, (for that is The comparison of this persecution to that in
Queen Maryes time.
most of all brought and urged against us:) we shall find that in all
respects, this far to surmounte and to over reach that, and to be both
greater, and incomparablye more greuouse.

For first either fevv or none were tovvched then, but such as were either
obstinate, or malitiouse, or vvilfull to intrude them selves: and how
infinite many were tolerated, and vvincked at, although they were known,
some of your honors (I think) will not deny to give particular testimonye.
Secondly they which were complained of, and attached, were ciuilye dealt
vvithall, disputed withdraw at large both publiquelye and priuatelye, made to
see their weakness, though not to confess the same: and if sentence passed
against them for obstinacy, yet was their execution, withdraw all favorable
compassion, which the law did permit, and mitigation of their pains withdraw
short dispathe: the contrary of all which is used toward us. And as for
tormentinge and rackinge and prohibitinge their frinds from sustaininge them,
withdraw terror to all those which should bodilye relieve their poverty: I
think our adversaries will not once charge us withdraw it. It is not practiced
amongst us, upon the greatest heretics that ever were: God for bid that it
should, it is to to cruel for Christian natures. We are Matthew. 27.
commanded by our religion, to feed the hungry, Esa. 58.
as Christ him self, and much more, not to bar them that vvoulde give
relief, when we will not. Finallye, if we confer numbers to numbers, men
to men, prisons to prisons, usage to usage, there is no comparison. Differences
betwixt the punished protestants and Catholics.


And yet (good Lord) what kyn or liknes is there in the matter? they were
punished by an ancient general law, for brynginge in of new opinions,
never hard of in England before, and condemned by the high Consistory and
parliament of Christiandome, gathered together for the same purpose. We are
persecuted by new national Statutes, for holdinge the ancient faith of
Christianity, and only religion of our forefathers in England, without
either trial or public disputation in our doctrine. They dissented not only
from us, but also from the first beginners of their own side, and were By
Luther: ar. 28. cont. Loua^. to. 2. Vvitten. fo. 503. also by the Edict of the
princes of ma^sfilde anno 1560. and by others.
solemlye condemned for heretics by the same. but no such matter can be
said of us. They agreed not amongst them selves upon the points of any one
relygion, but each man as he had received of some particular teacher. So being
asked (for Example sake) of the number of Sacraments: He holds three in
apolog. confess. August. cap. de sacra. And four in editione vl. loco. co^.
some held two, withdraw Caluinistes, some three or four withdraw Melanctho^.
So me three or two, or one withdraw So he holdethe in the beginning and end of
his captivity of. Babilo^:
Luther. And if they were demanded of particular sacraments, as of penance:
one vvoulde hold it no sacrament withdraw Calvin, an other a sacrament withdraw
Melancthon, an other only a sacramental sign withdraw So he holds in lib.
de ca. Babi.
Luther in one place, and in an other, a very So he holds expresselie ar. 35
cont: Louan:
true sacrament having annexed unto it, the promise of grace. If they were
asked of holy orders: one vvoulde deny it to be a sacrament with Luther and
Melancthon in one place, and an other vvoulde hold it a true sacrament withdraw
Melancthon in an in edi: vl: locoru^ co^.
other place. Some other vvoulde hold it an vnordinarie sacrament withdraw li:
4: c: 14:
Calvin, and thus as sheep brought ovvt of their fold, and left amazed in
the broad filde, not knovvinge what way or pathe to take, they stood giddie
in their own opinions, and yet with obstinacye every man to dye in the
same: but we stand all in one faith consonant to it self in every point,
not devised by our selves, but left unto us by the general consent of all
antiquity in Christian dome, and yet are we more afflicted for the same, then
if we were heretics or deuisers of any new religion.

The persons punished by your honors are The persons persecuted.
of your own blood, and nation, borne subjects of the land, and commonly
of such life and conversation, as are not vvorst lyked in the places where
they dvvell: of quiet and civil behauyour most ready both withdraw life and
goods to serve their Princess, and your honors, with all devvtifull and
faithful good will. They neither deal nor practice against the state abroad,
nor offer injuries to their neighbors at home. But are most ready and
vvillinge to concur withdraw your Lordships, for the preseruinge their Country
in peace and quiet, each man The cause of persecution.
according to his power and calling. The only cause of their molestation,
is their conscience in religion, which being settled upon invincible
grounds, as it semethe to them, is not in their power to alter at their
pleasure, neither is any persecution in the word, able to change the same,
but rather confirmethe it more and more, bringinge alvvaies an argument withdraw
it, of lack of truth in the persecutor, which seekethe to supply by
external terror the thing he is not able to prove by argument.

The end therefore which your Lordships The end of this persecution.
pretend by this rigourouse course of austeritie to wit, to bring men to
conformity in matters of religion, can never doubtless take effect by this
means, but must needs make greater disjunction, for the reasons by me declared
before. And if your honor should upon terror bring any frail man to
conform him self against his conscience, in such external acts, as you
require: yet your wisdoms can not but consider, that he is never the nearer
gotten for this, but rather in his heart much farther of then before, having
vvounded his soul and conscience upon compulsion, which lyinge greuouse
and festeringe with in his breast, must needs often put him in mind of the
iniurye received, and so more detest the thing done, then before. Wherefore
saying there is nothing gotten to your Lordships intent, by this man's
dissimulation, but much lost often times unto him self, even as much as the
price of his soul for doing against his conscience and judgment, vvherby he
must be tried at the latter day: there is no cause either in respect of
policy or religion, which may persuade us, that your honors will
alvvayes hold this heavy and extreme raze tvvardes us.

And because I fall into the mention here of polycie, whereunto I know your
honors, (as Polycie.
very wise,) to have a special eye and particular regard, albeit I presume
not to pretend any part of that profounde judgment, which your honorable
vvisedomes by nature and long practice have attained in the same: yet to say
that, which common reason layethe oppen to every mean understanding: it
appearethe no way to impeache polycie (if respect of conscience were laid a
side) to proceed some what mylder withdraw the Catholic part in England.

I will not talk of intrinsecall and special by M: I: hovvlet: and M: D:
Allen
points, mentioned heretofore by some other, and easy to be considered of by
your Lordships, as the counterpesinge of other sects, and dangerous factions,
grovvinge and confirminge by the quiet they enjoy through our only
molestations. I will speak only of the nature of our Catholic religion,
which as it was first plotted ovvt by the most high wisdom of God him
self, that is, by his Son our Savior, and founded by them which
immediatlye received their spirit from him, that is, by his Apostles, and
disciples: so stands it substantiallie, with all right wisdom and
polycie,) being gifts of God and little sparkles of his infinite wisdom)
and establishes the kingdoms wherein it is received and executed
accordingly, in all honor, peace, tranquillity and wealth, as may appear
by the long continuance of other Realms Catholic abroad, and especially by
our own, which has continued from the beginning of her conversion, for
the space of more then a Thovvsande years, in great prosperity, riches, and
renown by the same. Whereas in the mean space, diverse great kingdoms,
states, and principalities, have been overthrown by the occasion of heresy
and alteringe this religion, as Asia, Greece, Egypt, Africa, Hungary, and the
like: and what will finally become of diverse other countries near unto us
and as yet lyinge under the trial of Gods hand, though already greatly
rased, spoiled, and impouerished, we can not tell.

And the reason of these different effects The different effects of heresy
and Catholic religion to vvchinge the weal public.
in heresye and in the Catholic religion, besides the particular providence
of God, standethe principally in this one point, that we have a certain and
sure mean to keep unity and consent thorovvgh ovvt the whole, by
understanding scriptures according to the expositions of our forefathers from
time to time, and by obeyinge the determination of one Supreme pastor, with
the general Counsels of Christian prelates, in all matter of strife that may
fall ovvt. VVheras the heretic in the contrary part, obevinge no pastor,
but at his pleasure, nor receauinge any man's exposition of scripture but his
own, must needs raise and maintain much contrariety of opinions, and
consequentlye much division of people by the same: and then having no place
to rest, nor way to end (for general Council or pastor he vvil not hear),
also making the temporal prince head of all, which often times is a child,
and may easelie be impelled to variety of humors: must needs make great
innouations, which alvvaies are great hazardes to kingedomes and states. And
this in general is betwixt our religion and others tovvchinge the matter of
Commonvvealthe.

But now, if we look into certain particular Particular differences
bettvvixt Catholic and protestant religion, for maintenance and continuance
of the co^monvvealthe.
commodities and helps which our religion brings unto a common wealth,
and which the religion of our adversaries impugnethe and overthrows: we
shall easelie, see that permission of the Catholic, can not any way
preiudicate the vvealepublique of any state. And for examples sake, we will
make our comparison in England it self, where the practice and effect of
both religions have been now experienced, and diverse men yet alive, that have
seen and proved the consequence of both, and can the easyer geeue judgment
of the comparison.

First therefore, our religion teachethe actual restitution of all goods what
so ever, either 1. Restitution.
vvro^gfullye or deceatfullye gotten, or taken by might or iniurye. And it
teachethe this restitutio^ in such severe manner, as no priest may absolve
any man from his sins duringe his life, nor admit him to any Sacrament, no
nor at the extreme point of death it self, (where not vvithstandinge all
other matters are released) except he be content to make actual restitution
(according to his ability) to the party iniuryed: nether can any mortal
power, or prelate of the Church, dispense in this point, where the will of
restitution is not, but that such a one dyinge, is accounted a reprobate and
damned person, and not to be prayed for by our Church, of which thing do
ensevv two great commodities to the common wealth. Two commodities of
restitution.


First that men knovvinge they must make this restitution again, if ever they
be able, are much stayed from extortion, theft, bryberye, vserye, Simonie and
the like offenses, which temporal laws of them selves can never
thorovvghlie bridle. Secondly that many restitutio^s are made dailye to
parties vvronged in our Church, at least wise when me^ come to dye: and of
this I could here allege both rare and marvelous examples.

But for the protestant, he troubles him self little about this matter,
nether has he any means in deed to do the same (confession being taken
away) and the practice is so strange amongst them, as you shall read in the
storye folovvinge, a good man punished four ye res in the Tovver of London,
for restoringe of twenty povvndes for an other man after his death.

Secondly our religion teaches the observation 2. Observation of vows.
of vows, that is, that who so ever has made a vovv to God, of a thing,
honest, lavvfull and possible: is bound to keep it, according as the
scripture bids us: Vouete and reddite domino: Psalm. 75.
vovv and pay your vows to God. Of which our church inferrethe, that
saying our promise to our neighbor, is also a kind of vovv, we are bound
in like sort to keep that for conscience sake: much more then if we stood
bound to the same by obligation, and to make dew recompense and restitution,
if we break the same. VVherof ensued such The consequent of keepinge and
breakinge of vows.
faithful and trusty dealinges amongst our ancient forefathers. But now
the protestant teachinge, that vows made to God may be broken, each man
inferrethe thereof, if I may break a vovv to god, much more a word or
promise to a man, and so we see now no promise or bargaytne kept but only
for commodity, and there is no trust to men's words any longer.

Thyrdlye our religion use the abstinence of 4 Abstinence from flesh.
flesh and some other meats at certain times and days, not condemninge the
creatures, but forbearinge the use there of, for punishinge our bodies for more
fervent seruinge of God, at certain times more the^ other: as i^ lent,
frydaies, Saterdayes, and other, as is appointed by our church, which days
being in number very near 160. that is, almost the one half of the year,
besides the obseruances of religious people, vvherof many never eat flesh at
all, and besides the particular devotions of infinite private persons which
abstain at certain other times: do bring an inestimable commodity unto a
vvealepublique. For that fish, herbs, fruit, and The public commodity by
abstine^ce from flesh.
the like, which Catholics upon these days do use, do not any way
impouerishe the land, being taken the most part from the water: But
consuminge of flesh does, being vvholye fed upon the ground, which
flesh, by these days of abstinence encreasethe greatly, esspeciallie about
the spring time, when our lent fallethe out, at what time, by the judgment
of skillful men the forbearinge of flesh for those only six weeks, is
sufficient for the maintenance of all the year after. And what avail this
abstine^ce bringethe to a kingdom in one year, it may be gessed, if a man
make but an estimate what the flesh is worth, which vvoulde maintain all
England one day, and then double the same eight score times in euerve year,
and consider what it will amounte to in fevvyeres.

And now, albeit the protestant (for polycies sake only as he says) will
seem to command the like abstinence at some of these days: yet seeing it is
but an external punishment only, and no matter of conscience to break the
princes law therein, as they affirm: how many (trow you) will break the
same? or how many protestants them selves do observe it? if you converse
withdraw the preachers, you shall see them eat flesh every day, and inuit
other men to do it, and judge very yuill of them, that will not therein bear
them company. The temporal judges also, when in their lent circuit, they
publishe this very proclamation of abstinence, do eat openly flesh them
selves. How then shall the people observe the same, when they see both their
Ecclesiastical and temporal governors to do the contrary? the truth is,
that the exact obseruinge of this law amongst higher estates, is only in
Catholics, as also amongst the common people, except some poor protestant
that can get no flesh, and thereby is constrained to make of necessity a
virtue, for other wise he will eat it even in despite of the time. So that
this commonvvealthe point depends only in deed of the Catholic part.
Fovverthlye our religion, besides this abstine^ce 4 Fasting.
aforesaid from flesh, co^maundethe alsomany of the same days to be kept in
fast, to the number at least of a hundred every year in England. In which
times there is but one meal to be made a day, and the other to be spared,
which one meal sauede being valued, but at alovv price thorough ovvt all
the persons above The sequel of fasting.
xvi years of age in England, (for after that time they are bound to fast),
amountethe to a great sum of monye, and being doubled a hundred times
every year, arysethe to much more, which great sum is utterly lost by
the protestant that fast the not, and is saved by the Catholic to the
vvealpublique. Which difference albeit it be not felt presentlye in a great
state (for great palaces shrincke not at the beginnynge withdraw little chvnkes:)
yet in time it will show his effect, when great multitudes of people
shall be by the same means of protestancie increased (as shall be shevved in the
next reason folovvynge) and the old provision of the land by little and little
consumed, as alredie I think in part we see it fulfilled.

Fifthlye our religion commaundethe continency and sole life to all clergy
men, and to 5. Sole life of cleargye men.
all sorts of religious people, which (to omite all other respects)
profitethe greatly the common wealth, and the liberty of marriage given by
the protestante, brings infinite inconveniences. For first if we make an
estimate of the number which lived unmarried in Catholic times in England,
allovvinge to every parish church but two pryestes one withdraw an other,
withdraw other temporal offices dependinge of the spirituality, and therefore
requiringe sole life: and if we add to this, the great numbers of all
religious people, both men and women in monasteries and other where, which
perhaps were twice as many as the other: we shall find the number to arise
very great. which all lyuinge then unmarried and chaste (or else should have
done) if we now allow them to marye and accounte to every coople, but
three or four children, and so consequentlye to their children, and childrens
children? we shall see that the increase of people will be huge in one age: and
much more in many ages follovvinge, which all being norished by the common
wealth, must needs pester greatly the land, withdraw main multitude of
people, and they, for the most part idle also (for so are clergy men's
children commonly) and consequentlye, much empouerishe the same:

Besides this, if we consider the necessity of temporal provision, cast
upon clergy men, by their marriage, as to provide first for the present
needs, and then for the time to come: as iointer, dovvrye, or some portion for
the wife, lyuinges for the children, and the like: we shall find that they
can nether keep that hospitality for the poor, which was wont, nor spare
the leases, copieholdes, and other offalles of Ecclesiastical lyuinges, to
help other men, as in times past was accustomed: and much less build
Colleges, Churches, and other such monumentes of piety, which their
predecessors have done. Nay if the minister dye not, and leave often a pack
of orphans upon the poor parish, it is more tolerable. So that we see,
that the marriage of the clergy men, diverse vvayes spoileth the poor
commonaltie and consequentlye impayrethe greatly the vvealpublique.

Sixthlye our religion prohibiteth landlordes to raise their rentes, or any
other way to 6 Raysinge of rentes.
press their tenantes, except it were upon some great cause and withdraw
great moderation, known and allowed of by spiritual men and learned
divines, and if they do it rashelie and immoderatlie, our Church does solemly
once a year accurse them. Which was the cause that our good forefathers in
times past, and esspeciallie In the bulle de caena domini, solemlye recited by
the pope every year on ma^dy thursdaye, in the title, de pedagiis nou is non
imponendis: 7 Deuorcementes. Math. 19. 3. 6. 7. 8.
all religious men, used to let their lands at a reasonable rate: whereby
infinite men were sustained and helped., as appearethe by our Abbayes in time
past in England, the want whereof the poor countries which dvvell about
them, do now feel.

Seuenthlye our religion holds tovvchinge the state of marriage, that who so
ever is once lavvfullye contracted in vvedlocke to another, albeit they may be
upon cause deuorced from compaininge one withdraw an other: yet can the ba^de of
marriage never be so broken, as either party may marye again, duringe the
others natural life. And therefore they must either reconcyle them selves
together again, or else live chaste. Which is a brydell to many mischeefes
that must needs ensevv upon our adversaries contrary doctrine and practice in
this matter, who allow the divorced to marye again, the other party yet
lyuinge. Which liberty laid open to married people, geuethe occasion of
easy mislyke and divorce betwixt them, upon hope to marye again where they
like better, to the great disturbance of common wealths in process of time.

Eightlie, our religion teachethe a point 8 Of obedience to magistrates
abovvt magistrates, which greatly concernethe the common wealth, and the
contrary doctrine of our adversaries, is very much hurt full and daungeruose
unto the same. The point is this. That we teach all laws of magistrates (be
the magistrate good or evil) which are of things either good, or
indifferent, or not expressly against Gods commandment, do bind the
subjects consciences to obedience, that To: 13.
is, the subjects are bovvnde in conscience, to obey them not only
externallye, but also in private and secret, and to accounte it as a syn
before God, if they vvillinglye break the same, for that the magistrate what
soever, is Gods minister. VVerof it follows that the laws of the common
wealth are obeyed trevvlie, and syncerelye, as well in secret as in open
shevve, withdraw love also, and without grudge or contempt to the magistrate.

But the protestant theachethe that no law Calvin: l. 4. insti. c. 10. number. 5.
of man byndeth the subjects conscience to obedience, vvherof it must needs
follovv, that saying the subject obeyethe not of conscience but only for
policy and in respect of external punishment: when so ever he is not in
fear of that punishment, he without scruple This is also the cause why the
prince is so infinitely at this day deceived in hercustome of matcha^dise by
all marchantes report.
will contemn and break that commandment of his magistrate, as for
example, he vvil eat flesh in the lent, in such places and companyes,
which he is sure, will not accuse him, albeit the magistrates commandment
and proclamation be to the contrary: and so in the like. Which thing is
very hurtful and dangerous (as I have said) to the weal public. For
besides the common breakinge of public laws in private, and secret places,
vvherby the magistrate grovvethe into contempt, and the state hurted: if at
any time the subjects or any faction of them, shall be so strong and hardy, a
Dangerous sequel
as not to fear the magistrates punishment, what shall cause them any
longer to obey* Fear of punishment there is none: In conscience (by this
doctrine) they are not bound: why then may not they as well prescribe
laws to the magistrate, as he to them? In this point therefore, Catholic
religion more vpholdethe the vvealepublique, then that of our adversaries.

Ninthlye it is of no small importance unto a Christian common wealth,
(whose end is Of sin and concupiscence.
to keep men within the limits of virtue and honesty) that which our
religion teachethe of the difference of sins, and of the nature of
concupiscence. For tovv chinge the first, as we hold, that as some sins are
greeuons and mortal: so some are lighter, called venial, that is, such as of
their nature and by rigor of justice, deserve not eternal damnation, and
expel Iaco. 1. 15.
not alvvaye grace, but may stand withdraw the same. Mortal we call (for
examples sake) as to be droncke: venial, to drink a little more then a man
should. Mortal, to geeue consentin a man's heart to an evil cogitation:
venial, to be negligent in expellinge the same, though he consent not.

Our adversaries hold that all sins, be they never so little, are mortal of
their own Calvin. in antid. council. Tri.
natures, and of them selves do deserve damnation. Secondlye tovv chinge
concupiscence, we hold, that in the regenerate, that is, in Christians after
baptism, the natural inclination of lustinge, left in man, ad agonem, as the
ancient fathers do term it, that is, to strive vvithall, is Augu. li. 2.
cont. Iulia^. and li. 1. de peccat. merit. c. vlt.
not sin of it self, except we geeue consent to the motion. Our adversaries
hold that the very motion it selffe though no consent be given unto it, is
syn.

Of this diversity of doctrine flovvethe great diversity of effects into
the common wealth. For ovvt of our doctrine ensuethe this, that saying the
natural motion of concupiscence in me to evil, is not syn, except I yealde
unto it: I will strive against it, and not yield consent, for sauinge of my
soul. Again, saying there is a difference of sin, if I should be carried
away a little further then I ought: yet will I at least, strive to refrain
mortal syn withdraw all diligence, consideringe that this sin, brings
damnation.

But out of our adversaries contrary doctrine, ensevveth in contrariwise,
that saying concupiscence mouethe one whether he will or no, to matters
unlawful, as to adultery, theft, murder, and the like: and saying whether
he consent or no, he has alredye sinned by the very natural motion: again,
saying all sins are mortal and none venial: what shall let him to consent
to the motion, and to accomplish the same, at least in desire, saying he can
but syn mortallie, if he do it, and so has he don alredye by the very
motion it self, which is not in his power to stay. And by this means,
saying he must needs syn mortally whether he consent or not consent to the
syn: who will not rather consent to the lust, withdraw pleasure, then strive
against the same withdraw great pain, and yet to sin never the less. And so
this openethe an infinite gapp to syn and all lewd life: for that no man will
strive about that which he can not avoid, that is, abovve the resistance of
mortal sin.

Tenthlie tovvchinge the reward of evil 10. The revvard of good, and evil
and pains for sin in this life.
and good life in the next world, and tovvchinge expiation of syn in this
life, our religion teaches, that a mortal syn, being once committed after
baptism, is not so soon dispatched again, but besides faith, there is
required first, hearty sorrow withdraw full purpose never to commit the same
again. Then humble confession Contritio^.
of the same to the priest. Thirdlye, after the guylie of the sin remitted by
the virtue Confession
of Christ's passion in the Sacrament of absolution, there is required some
temporal punisshment Satisfaction.
and penance, for satisfaction of gods justice: the which if a man fulfill
not in this life, he must pay it in the next with much more pain.

After this, when he commethe to heaven, Purgatory
we hold, that he shall receive his degree of glory according to his
perfection of life in this world, as also according to his demerite and
measure of wickedness, he shall receive the quantity of his torments in hell,
if he go thither. VVherof follovvethe both fear to commit syn, saying a man
must take such pains for the release of the same in this world: as also
diligence in all the three works satisfactorie, to wit, prayers, alms, and
affliction of our own bodies, for preuentinge the pains of purgatory. Also
zeal of perfection in good men, saying their degree in glory shall be
according to their life here. And finallye, some stay from ovvtrage in
wicked men, consideringe that their torments in hell shall be but according to
the measure of their wickedness.

But our adversaries teachinge first, that there is no more pain to be taken
for the expiation of sin committed after baptism, but only to believe,
which is a very easy point, especially to every man that will persuade
him self that he beleeuethe well: also teachinge that there is no place of
purgation in the next life, and that no works of satisfaction are here
needful on our behalf: thirdly teachinge, that all glory is equal to all
that are there, and all pain in hell as much to the least offender as to the
greatest: must needs open a gapp to an infinite sea of wickedness, and
licentiousenes in the common wealth. For every man persvvadinge him self,
that how evil so ever he live, yet if he hold a faith in Christ, and
believe he shall most certainly be faued: that he, without all pains either
in this life or in the life to come, shall presentlye go to heaven, and there
be in as great glory as Peter and Paul and other Saints, which led the
straitest life in this world. who will not let stand the painful life of
virtue, and take his pleasures, which natural concupiscence inuiteh him
unto, consideringe that he may be saved as well withdraw them as without?
Again who vvil spare (being once over the shoes) to run in to any
extremity what soever of wickedness, when he thinkethe that if he be damned,
he must have equal punishment withdraw the vvoorst?

Eleuenthlie as these opinions of our adversaries, are great fovvntaines in
deed to all kind of liberty and loose behavior, consideringe 11: Works.
Free Will. and predestination
the mighty inclination of our corrupted flesh to the same: so their doctrine
abovvt works ad predestination, pluckethe up by the very roots all
foundation of good life, beatethe down the whole hedge of fear, and laiethe
all open to most dangerous dissolution. For vvheras we teach that albeit,
all saints of God be predestinate before the vvoorldes were laid: yet that
extinguishethe not the liberty of man's free will, but that he may (being
prevented and assisted by the grace Eccl. 15:
of god) do any good works or refuse Luc: 13.
them at his pleasure. Which good works Apoc. 3.
being don for the love of god, by a man that is in the state of grace, have
their reward and merit, even to the least cup of water that a man can
geeue, which is a great prick to Math. 5. and 10. and 12.
incite men to the same, used by the holy Scriptures them selves. Heb. 13.


But our adversaries teachinge first that aman has no free will to these
things, and secondly that if he do them he shall have no reward for them
in heaven: mustes needs utterly discourage all men from the doing of good
vvoorckes. For who will study about a thing that is nether in his power,
nor yet necessary or profitable unto him: especially when the thing is
both hard of it self, unpleasant, and much repugninge to our sensuality?
who will geeue his goods to the poor? his lands from his own kindred, to
build hospitals and colleges for strangers? who will afflict his body
withdraw fasting and prayer, when he knovveth that he shall receive no reward
therefore in heaven? and that without doing the same he may be saved by only
faith?

Tvvelfthlie and lastly (for I will tovvche no more,) our Catholic religion
teaches 12. Private confession.
private confession of our sins unto the pryest which thing is the very
hedge and wall of all virtuous life, and the cheifest bridle of Lycentiousnes
in a common wealth. For by this, infinite enormities are redressed, which
by public laws can not be remedied. In confession Vtilities of confession:
many servants are made trusty to their masters, vviche before were false,
and they are caused to make privy restitution of many things, when their
masters think not of it. Many great breaches betwixt frindes, as wife and
husband, father and son, and the like, are salued. Many great mischifes
intended either against the magistrate, private persons, or the common wealth,
are stayed. Many provvde heart plucked down and abated withdraw the
exaggarations of his sins to his face, by his ghostlye father. Many greatte
sinners brought to hearty repentance, and full purpose of amendeme^t, and to
promise also, and sometimes and in some cases to swear, never to commit
vvittinglye and vvillninglye the like enormimities again. Many afflicted
persons comforted withdraw particular helps for their greefes: many desperate
folckes mollified, and instructed in the vvayes of a new life. Many
Landlordes and superiors, brought to deal more mildly withdraw their subjects,
and many subjects, to behave them selves more obedientlie and devvtifullie
toward their superiors: many restitutions made, many vvronges recompensed,
many quarrels ended: finally, it is impossible to number up the infinite and
singular great commodities which do come to man's life, and consequentlye to
the common wealth, by this spiritual court and tribunal of God in earth,
that is, by confession.

The which being taken away, as it is now by our adversaries in England,
(albeit Lutherans in Germany yet use it,) there must needs follow in
success of time, intolerable inconveniences. For what way is there now to
deal withdraw the conscience of a child if he be disobedient to his parents?
Or withdraw a servant, if he be false or prodigal to his master? if you accuse
him, he will deny it: if you urge him, he will fall out withdraw you for it:
but if him self should confess it to you, as he was wont to do to his
ghostly father, askinge absolution at his hands, and pardon at Gods for the
same: there is offered both fit place and occasion, to entreat withdraw him
for it: and he in disposition to hear good council.

So if a prince or great personage, abuse him selffe in life, who will dare
to tell him uerye fault in particular, or rebuke him for the same? If a man
(for examples sake) do exceed in apparel, or other vanity, who will go
and reprehende him for it, or withdraw what hope of amendment? To conclude, this
holy exercise of confession being taken away, the very lock of good life
(vvherof not only the soul but also the weal public dependethe) is
utterly burst and removed from amongst Christians.

These differences therefore being betwixt our religion and that of our
adversaries, (right honorable) tovvchinge the maintenance, continuance, well
doing, and secure establisheme^t of a common wealth: there appearethe no
reason in policy, that is, in respect of the good estate of our country,
(vvherof your honors have the charge) which may prohibit your vvisedomes to
show some more favorable tolleration to the Catholic part, if it might
please God to instill so good and gracious a motion into your hearts.

Nether is it for any of our adversaries to an objection prevented. So
D^ffulke has answered M. hovvlets reasons of refusal. Grauntinge the
reasons as they lie, but yet quarelinge at some matter of controversy in the
reason.
stepp up here, and to impugn any of our former opinions in religion, (as
they are wont commonly to eschew the matter in hand, and to deal with
impertinent points not intended in that place): for my purpose is not here to
handle matters of controversy, which we both offer dailye and desyer much
to try withdraw our adversaries at other times either in writing or public
disputation: but my only meaning is, to show, that the practice of our
doctrine as we hold it, and of our adversaries as they teach it, whether it
be true or false, (which at other times and places is to be discussed): of
ours (I say) do follovv infinite vtilities to a Christian common wealth,
which do not from the doctrine of our adversaries, but rather the clean
contrary hurtes and damages, and this is the state of our question in this
place, which Ileaue open to any of our adversaries that can, to improve by
reason, in the points before recited.

Now then, if our religion and the secret The king of Bungo in Iapan being a
heathen has permitted and protected the catholic religion in his countries
these 28. years only for the commodity he fee lethe his common weal the to
receive thereof, in cp. Indic: the like does the great Turcke and other
Princes of Mahometes sect at this day.
exercise thereof, be in no wise hurtful unto your common wealth, (right
honorable) but rather do bring great commodities thereunto: it may be one
motyue unto your wisdoms (as it has been, and is to some other councellers
else where of the contrary religion) to tolerate more, or at least, to show
less extremity against the same, how much so ever you think us deceived
in not conforminge our selves to the protestants religion. Albeit to say mine
opinion also herein, withdraw your honorable favors, I can not think but that
your wisdoms being such as they are, both great and grovvnded, do
easelye see that our standinge in this point, is not without substantial
cause and reason in us, albeit not sufficient to move your honors to the same
opinion that we are of.

For first who does not see that the very proceedinge of our adversaries is
a strong reason to make us stay, if there were nothing else, who dare not
admit any equal trial, of their cause, nether in writing, preachinge, or
lavvfull disputation, they being so often requested by us to the same: But are
alvvaies at your honors elbovves to stir up the temporal svvoorde against
us, If we make any The procedinge of ministers withdraw us.
reasonable offer, or never so orderly and devvtifull attempt, for the
obtaininge of this thing, even at home upon their own grovvnde (for abroad
they dare not apeare with never so much security or courtesy invited) to our
own great toil, labor, danger, and disadvantage of our cause? And yet
they are not ashamed for some color of the matter, to Such was the
disputation in the tovver with. M. campian and others vvher men were
prohibited with bills and tipstaues to enter. And many a knock on the head
received for offeri^ge to hear: and much money spent to geate places.
creep into a prison to some poor man miserablye racked, or otherwise
pitifully handled before, and there without geeuinge the party any vvarninge
or time to forethincke him self, or allovvinge any books, or permittinge
equal notaries, or sufferinge him to oppose one argument for his part, to
assault with iumpinge interrogations, leapinge from point to point, from
matter to matter, according as they came prepared, or as any little shevve of
advantage was offered, with great words, stearne countenance, bygg voice,
much threatninge, and uncivil reuilinge.

Which proceedinge of theirs, declaringe manifestly their fear and nakedness
and utter want both of truth charity and modesty: must needs in the
judgments of all wise men, dispute as much for us, as any argument in the
voorlde that we can make for our selves.

Secondlye, how clear so ever the matter The uncertainty of temporal favor
in matters of religion:
be made against us, in words, and ordinary speech of men, as that we
resist the Gospel and manifest word of god, and the like: yet your honors
can not but think, that these speeches (when all indifferent trial is
refused) can not move us much, especially seeinge that in other contries,
where other sects do reign, no less differinge from us, then this of
Calvin, they do orderlye say the very same of our English protestants,
which they do of us, vvherin I refer my self to a Luthera^ Superintendents
book, entitled, Confessio purae doctrinae Nicolaus Amffordius
Euangelicae. A confession of the pure doctrine of the gospel, where he
gives sentence (as a bisshoppe) of the doctrine now taught in England, by
this word Damnamus: we condemn it as dissonant from the pure gospel. And
I have shevved ovvt of luther before, where he says of the teachers and
maintainers thereof, Haereticos serio censemus, and alienos ab Ecclefia dei.
art. 28. contra louan. to. 2. vvitte^. fo. 503.
We do censure them in earnest for heretics, and removed from the church of
god. The like do Anabaptists, Trinitaries, and other sects pronounce of
them. So that in this common phrase and speech of pure gospel, there is
little importance that tovvcheth the matter.

And surely, if after king henryes death the noble man which the^ could do
most, consultinge with his frindes to bring in a new religion, had pleased
to bring in, tovv Lutherans, Anabaptists, or of any othersecte, as he did
two Caluinistes, to read in the two universities of England (as he might
very easelye P. Martyr. M. Bueer.
have done, for any resista^ce or trial that then was used:) had not that
religion been now called the gospel, the pure word, the law of the lord,
the establissed religion, and the like, as now this is called in England, and
as these other sects are called by their professors in the places where they
bear rule? And should not we have been punished as much for resistinge of
them, as we are now for resistinge this? yes verelye, and no reason to the
contrary.

Wherefore saying a man may not alvvayes depend safelye of the seculer
magistrate in religion, nor make repose of his soul, upon the fovvndation of
a temporal law: we are in justice to crave pardon of your honors, for not
conforminge our opinions to yours in this matter: we can not do it without
dissimulation and most greeuouse remorse of an accusinge conscience. If your
honors vvoulde grant such indifferent trial betwixt the The petition of
lavvfull disputation renewed.
learned of both our sides, as we demand for our instruction and dew
reformation in judgment, if we err: the matter perhaps might sone be ended:
But that being denied, and the adverse party shevvinge manifest distruct
thereby, as it seems to us: we remain as before, of contrary opinion in
points of belief: but in all other matters as becomes devvtifull subjects,
most ready to serve her majesty and your honors, to the uttermost of all our
earthlye and mortal ability.

Our desire we have to be rightlye informed, may appear, not only by our
often and earnest petitions of lavvfull trial in points of controversy: but
also by this, that we require not any long or tediouse satisfaction in
matters, but only a demo^stration of one necessary point, vvherof our
resolution in other things vvoolde soon ensevve.

And this point is, that saying the religion of Christ and his Apostles, was
(by all parties confession) the very true religion for which we strive, and
vvherby we must be saved, and so for a hundred or two hundred years after,
without contradiction of either party, the religion was pure which was
delivered by the Christian church over all the would: let demonstration be
made, which of our religions began sense that time (for that must needs be
false, having not his beginning from Christ and his Apostles,) and this may
be don (as it seems to us) both easily, apparentlye, and sensiblye in this
manner.

When any religion is once publiquelye planted and received, as the true
religion was by our adversaries confession, in the first two An easy, short,
and evident way offered of trial:
or three hundred years after Christ: it is impossible to bring in a new
religion contrary to that, or any articles of faith repugnant to these before,
without some co^tradiction or resista^ce of them that then lived, possessed in
the former religion. This is a proposition evident both by experience and
reason. For first, reason teaches us to be impossible, for one man or many,
to Reason.
bring in a new religion, contrary to all, and to make it to be received
generally of all, without resistance of some, especially the thing being a
manifest falshoode to vvchinge matter of salvation, as they say our opinions
are. This (I say) is impossible in common reason. For if one city would
receive it, yet an other would not: if one country or kingdom would allow
it, yet an other vvoulde make resistance, atleast wise for a time. And if no
City nor country nor kingdom had controlled it, yet some good man or other
would have done it in the world abroad. Secondlye the same appearethe
experience
by experience, for that there was never yet heresy or error that rose
against any one clause or jot of the truethe before received, but it was
controlled presently and resisted by voices and writings of infinite men. And
in England being but a little corner in respect of the whole world there
could never yet appear any one opinion contrary to the doctrine before
received, but it was straight way noted and rebuked: as the religion of
Calvin, by the Catholics before in possession: after that, the fancy of the
puritan by the pretestant: after that, the devise of the family of love, by
both protestant and puritan: and generally there was never yet heresye
offered to the church, or to any piece of the same, but that it was straight
way known, who were the beginners thereof, at what time, what multitude
first left the former religion and followed the same, who resisted, who
spoke and vvrote against it, and the like: and this is a trevvth more clear
than the Son it self.

This then being so, the issevv which we A very reasonable issue offered.
desire to join, is evident and plain: to wit that of these articles
vvherin we dissent from them and which they call heresies, as invented by us
sense the Apostles time: as the real presence, the sacrifice of the mass,
purgatory, prayer for the dead, intercession of saints, meritt of good
vvoorckes, grace inherent, five sacraments denied by them, and the like: let
the^ shevve by any one father, historiographer, or other aute^ticall
testimony, when any of these points were brought first into the church and
resisted by them that then lived, (as they must needs be if they were
contrary to the universal doctrine then received in christianity) and we
remain satisfied without any further particular trial.

This is a most reasonable demand, so one answered if the trevvth be with
our adversaries. For we take upon us to show all these particulers before
recited in every point of doctrine vvherin they dissent from us: that is,
when it began to be first knovve^ in the church by what man, who first
controlled it, and the like: but let them do the same by us, and the matter is
ended.

But if they can find no one book extant in the world against any article
of our difference from them, at the first coming of the same into the church,
nor can find record of any man that either reprehended or controlled it when
it was first invented (as they say) by our forefathers, but that it was
received withdraw silence and approbation, not only in one country, but
thoroughovvt the world, not in one point, but in many, and they most
important: as for example, the fayninge of five sacraments together, (although
we hold in our doctrine that none but Christ can institute a sacrament, no
not the whole church together, nor all the Apostles when they were alive),
if (I say) they can find no record at all, that any man resisted or
controlled these horrible and blasphemous points at their first entringe into
the church, (if it be true that they entered in since the Apostles time) then
must they think that men were senseles and madd at that time, that vvoolde
suffer so many, so gross, and so important heresies, to pass vnchecked, and
never to open their mouths against them, vvheras at the very same time, (that
is, within the first five hundred years after Christ, vvherin our adversaries
grant these heresies to have been crept in to the church) the fathers and
doctors that then lived, vvrote most diligently against every other little
error that appeared. But now whether it be reasonable to think so of those
holy learned and vigilant men or else to think our adversaries some what
shameless, in charginge them withdraw such absurdities, I leave to the
indifferent reader to consider.

And thus much have I been bold to lay down to your vvisedomes, right
honorable, both for the innocence of our cause, the equity of our demand,
the reason of our offer, and the easy means of our satisfaction, if our
adversaries vvoolde agree to the same. Which all tends only to this end (as
your honors right well can discern) to mitigate the great offense conceived
against us, and consequently some part of that extreme rigor used toward
us and our cause of later days, which being such, as in very deed is
intolerable: we are constrained to make recourse to your honors to whom of
dew our protection appertains and to do, as a certain afflicted man did
with an Emperor in times past, that is, to appeal from your selves unto your
selves: from your selves, as offended by the instigation of our adversaries:
unto your selves, mollified with our just defense and innocence in crimes
objected.

If by the rackinges, stretchinges, vvrestinges, and dreadful tortures, used
so often and to so many of our innocent afflicted brethren, and that in so
rigourous and merciless manner, there has been any one thing vvrounge out
from them, of treason, conspiracy, or practices against the state, vvhervvith
our adversaries, without conscience, do use dailye to accuse us in their
books and sermons, thereby to stir her majesty and your honors against us:
let the party guyltie be punished openly, with infamy also to our whole
cause, albeit in this later, we offer more than reason. But if after all this
ado, after all this fierce halinge, and pitiful pullinge of me^ in pieces,
nothing has been found at all, no one act, no word, no cogitation of such
matters, but only innocence and Zeal of religion in the tormented: then is
our case much more hard at home, in our own country, under our own
Sovereign, than it could be any where else under the extremest adversaries of
our religion in the world.

For I know your honors can not but consider, that the greatest enimyes of
Christianity this day living, as those of the sect of Mahomet, and many
ge^tles besides, ar so far of, from tormentynge Catholics, as they permit
unto them the liberty and exercise of their conscience, in respect of the
antiquity and continuance thereof. For which cause also, the most of Christian
princes, do tolerate withdraw the very jews: and such as possess the Indes
and other places, where gentiles inhabit, never use to moleste, and much
less to torment them for their consciences, vvheri^ they were borne and bredd
up: for that, faith being the guifte of God, and coming by hearing (as the
scripture Romans 12:
saiethe) is not to be put in by torments and persecution. Romans 10.


Pitiful then and compassionable is our case (right honorable): if, of all
other men, we find less rest and most extremity, and that also there, and
from those, where, and from whom, many great considerations should yealde
us hope of favor and mercy. No protestant prince of any other country did
ever use the like: and it is quyte contrary both to the preachinges and
protestations of all those of that religion in other places, as also of our
adversaries in England, before they came to bear rule them selves.

Alas (my Lords) what impelleth your wisdoms (for of nature I can not
thinckc you sofiers and pityles) to exercise such extremity upon poor
people for that cause, vvherof your own fathers were as guyltie as we are,
that is, for our conscience in the ancient religion? If you mean to vvi^ne
me^ thereby to your opinion, it is the clean contrary course, as I have
shevved. If you think by terror to make those desist, which of mere zeal
after the apostolic manner do offer them selves to danger for maintenance
of that faith: you know the wise counsel of honorable Gamaliel: if it be
of man, it will sone be dispatched: but if it be of Act. 5.
God, humane terror can not let it, as hit herto I am sure it does greatly
increase it.

Your honors have procured liberty of conscience for those of your religion
in some other countries, which must proceed (as we interpret from a
merciful disposition toward the afflicted, and that men's consciences are
not to be constrained.

We beseech your Lordships then, that we your poor afflicted subjects,
may taste some part of that your honorable disposition, vvherof strangers do
receive so great relief and comfort.

Consider (my good lords.) in most humble manner I desire and request it,
what the end of all these straininges, and most rigourous procedinges can
arriue^ unto. In respect of the world, (I must speak playnelye) it can be
nether honorable nor profitable, nor of any secure continuance, being subject
to infinite horror, obloquie, grudge, and hatred, as also to diverse breaches
and most dangerous wounds, as all extremities are wont to be. And in
respect of God, how it is to be liked, each man may guess which reads the
scriptures, detestinge every where all merciless procedinge of mortal men
with their brethren, and commendinge, most carefully, compassion one
toward the other, with grievous threats to them that use the contrary.

Remember (right honorable), that how different so ever our degrees be in this
world, yet must we all be equal before the common judge, at the later day,
and all those afflicted persons, these tormented, these imprisoned, these
impouerished, these poor men, women children, and servants, which lie now
in misery by your means, either lurkinge in corners or driven from place to
place, not daringe to appear or show their countenance before your Lordships,
must standby you without fear at that day, to geeue in evidence of things
passed against them.

Good Lord, what comfort can it be to any of your honors, at the day when
you must depart this world, to have used such rigor, to your own flesh
and blood, for matter of conscience, which you have not don to any other most
impious, heinous, or detestable malefactor. What good or comfort can the
tormented members of your brethren, the stretched veins, the broken synovves,
the dismembered iointes, the rented bowels of your country me^, of your own
quiet subjects, of most peaceable, modest, and innocent priests yield unto
your souls at that day? you must your selves cry for mercy in that
dreadful hour, to him whom these men, either in trevvth, or in opinion do
serve, and why than may not we ask some mercy at your honors hands now,
at the least, from these horrible and servile torments, which Christian and
civil hearts do detest to think on? What good can these outrageous means
work any way unto your cause, or when you be dead, what honor,
estimation, love, or security, can the eternal me morie of these extreme
dealinges, pourchasse unto your posterity.

The cause being gods, as we presume: if all the earth should rise against
us, we may not geeue over, nor once shrincke in the confession and profession
of this faith, though all wrath of man under the cope of heaven should rage
and wax tempestuous. For that, having but one life to yield: we know the
uttermost that can be done unto us. And if our tormenters vvoulde defer the
same, by long, and often, and slow tortures, to feed upon our pains, as
they seem to do: yet, at the last, they can afflicte us no longer, than our
breath will hold in: and finally, the matter must have an end, and both they
and we be transposed to a new judgment seat, where matters must be new
trauerst again, and new sentence geeuen, and new tortures appointed, of
other quality and continuance, Apoc. 21.
than these former were. At what time, if we suffer in a good cause, (as we
persuade our selves we do) all our tears shall be vvyped away by our
savior him self, all our molestations appeased, all our penuries relieved,
all our pains assvvaged, all our racked members resetled, all our dispersed
bovveles restored again, Apoc. 21.
and we placed ovvt of all fear, sorrow, and affliction, for the time to come,

In respect vvherof, and especially in consideration of the infinite pains
and torments, which our svveete Savior suffered for us: we are content to
bear both this, and what so ever further affliction, his holy hand shall
please to lay upon us, being sorye that we have not moelyues than one, to
leese in this his cause: for a thovvsande in each man, can not be aunsvverable
to his one death for us, nor to his great love and divine consolation, where
with he assisteth daily, and confortethe the hearts and spirits of our
afflicted brethren, even in the midst of their greatest tortures, penuries,
and miserable calamities.

Wherefore, to conclude this woeful matter, The conclusion.
without any further tediousnes unto your honors, we are in all humility
and devvtifull submission, to beseech and obtest your most honorable
assemblye, even for the love of our Saueoure, in respect of our cause (which
we protest before his divine majesty to be only our conscience in religion,
and not any evil meaning toward his minister, our soueraygne): that you
will at length take notice of our distresses, consideration of our calamities,
and finally, some merciful inclination, toward our afflictions. Which if
your honors do, how so ever otherwise you think us amiss, in our cause of
conscience: yet, no doubt but you shall receive the reward dew to mercy and
clemency, both from God and the world. But if this our supplication of
mercy, find no mercy, nor place at all: yet shall not we cease to pray still
for your honors, confortinge our selves with the hope only of Gods mercy,
when man forsakes us, and also with this cogitatio^, that your Lordships are
nether the first, nor the greatest, nor shall be the last which shall persecute
this faith, and church, for which we suffer. And how so ever the matter do
pass for our lives and times, (vvherof we make no great accounte): yet our
posterity shall see, (as our ancestors have seen before) that men doe^
alter, pass and fade, and their cogitations come to chaungeable and unexpected
euentes, but the trevvth of our Lord endures for ever. Psalm. 116.


Your honors humble orator and vnfavned hearty Beadesman. G. T.

AN EPISTLE TOVVCHINGE THE PERSECVTION OF CATHOLICS IN ENGLAND. To his very
louinge frinde. M. Gerarde at Bononie in Italy.
I Have received diverse and sundry your lettres (my dear frinde) and all to
like effect and purpose. For you require most earnestly at my hands, that I
should signify to you the certainty of our English persecution upon
Catholics, whereof you say there is a great brute with you, but yet
dyuerslye reported, and of no constant creditt. Marye, to me you think it an
easy matter, to write the very truth and the certainty of things: for that
I lie near to the place where they are done, and may learn dailye both by
lettres and reports of such as come thence, how they pass. The which thing
albeit I should grant, (for in deed I lyeneere and do attend with some
diligence, both what is written, or reported from thence:) yet whether I may
put down the same in writing, and imparte it to our frindes there, most
desirous of the same (as you say) especially with the intent it should be
made public: I can hardlye resolve my self. For you are not ignorant what a
perylous point it is, to complain of injuries received from the mighty, whose
fashion is, not to pmitt free the wailinges of the afflicted, but rather to
take revenge of the very complaints which are made of their doings.

Wherefore lest I should hurt them whom I vvishe best unto, and by
recountinge their calamities, increase the same, which I would rather ease if I
could, though it were with the danger of mine own life: I rest very
doutfull, not knowinge well what were best to determine. And yet, to say the
trevvthe, I must confess, that I find inclination in my self to the
satisfyinge of your demand, both for that the thing semethe just, which you
ask, and also the reasons by you alleged, sufficient to defend it from all
cavil of the enemy. For thus you reason: what? is it not lawful to committ
to private lettres that which is openly and publiquelye done? and if they
would make this a fault: yet is it only your fault, not to be laid upon the
poor men already in affliction: punishable upon you, and not upon them.

Which reason of yours being taken in deed from the very sense of nature her
self, encourages me much to satisfy your demand, saying that the wisdom
of our adversaries ought to yield us this hope, (for they are not unwise
according to flesh and blood) that they will not attribute other men's
offenses, (if it be an offense) to such as are innocent of the same, albeit
trewly my endeavor shall be so to write each thing as (by their own judgments)
I may not offend. For I will speak nothing odiouslye, nothing bitterlye,
but I will declare what has been done: and if the rigor of the matter drive
me at any time into complaint: it shall be without the reproach of any man.

For I deem it not the part of Catholics to recompense injury with iniurye,
The part of Catholics.
or to requyte injustice with acerbitie of speech. For that we have a merciful
and mighty lord to whose only arbitrament all injuries, are to be referred:
he has care of us, (as the scripture says;) 1. Pet. 5.
to him let us leave revenge. He him selff will Romans 22.
repaye: he will discern our cause: he will deliver us from the unholy
nation, from the unjust and Psalm. 42.
Psalm. 74.
guylefull man: he, when time shall be, will sit in judgment upon [our]
justice it self, and how much more upon the unjust psecutions, molestatio^s,
and vexatio^s of his servants.

In the mean space if we be afflicted; if we be trodden down, if we suffer
the spoil of our worldly goods, if we be subject to reproaches, if we be
pressed with prisons, if we be tied with chains, if we pyne away with hunger,
cold, and want of necessaries, if we be whipped and burned in the ears as
roags, if we be drawn hanged and quartered alive, if we be consumed with
diverse kindes' of deaths. (for all these things Catholics in England do
sustain:) and if, (which is a matter yet of more grief,) we sustain these
things in the midst of our brethren, in sight and hearing of other
Catholics rownde about us, they lookinge on, and taking little compassion of
our case, nor helpinge us with their word, when as perhaps they may: yet must
not we be discouraged, nor forsake the wholesome anchor of patience. For we are
not 4. Re. 19.
(as the scirpture says) better then our fathers Heb. 11.
which were hevved in pieces, racked, vvhipped, and imprisoned. And the
Apostle adds one thing which I would have you to marcke: and thesmen (says
he) received no redemption: (that is, no ease of their afflictions in this
lyffe) to the end they might find a better resurrection. We being Scholars
are not above our master, who Luc. 6.
1. Pet. 3.
doing no injustice in the world, yet was reputed amongst the wicked, and
suffered much more cruelty for our sakes, and yet Esa. 53.
did not he open his mouth as the scripture Luc. 22.
says before his persecuters. Esa. 33.


Let us then retain still this ancient The property of heretics.
possession of holy sufferance, commended unto us by our saueour and conserved
by our forefathers. Let us leave unto our adversaries, that disloyal kind of
revenge, Romans 9. Ep. iud.
whereby they are wont to resist magistrates to stir up sedition, and whereby
in these our days they have destroyed partlye by violence and partlye by secret
fraud, so many noble men, valiant capitaines, Holy priests, strong cities,
and most noble and renowned common wealths and states. Let them use the arm
of man, let them trust in their Hier. 17.
1. Cor. 3.
craft and subtlety of wit, let them feed of wickedness as much as they
list, our hope Ephesians. 4.
is in god our lord, who will save them that Psalm. 61. 16. 113.
hope in him: all our healpe is in the name of our lord, who made heaven and
earth, and forgets not our poverty and tribulation. It may Psalm. 45.
please his divine majesty, perhaps, to deliver us over to be chastened for
our sins, for that the kings honor louethe judgment. Psalm. 98.
But certes he will not cast us away, if we repent our sins, and return
unto him, for that he is merciful, and full of mercy, and there is no number
of his merciful doings. Psalm. 49. 77. 140. 144.
What could be spokem by him more expresselye than this?

If his children for sake my law (says he Psa. 88.
of David) and shall not walk in my judgments: if they shall profane my
justice, and shall not keep my commandments:

I will visit with the rodd their iniquities, and their sins with
vvhippes:

But yet I will not take my mercy from them, nether will I hurt them in my
trevvth,

I will not profane my testament, nor make frustrate the words, which have
passed from my own lyppes.

I have once sworn in my holy, I will not lie, to David, his seed shall
remain for ever and ever.

This is the promise, this is the firm protestation of god, to the seed of
David, that is, to the Catholic church of Christ, towchinge her everlasting
continuance, made by an oath, confirmed by his blood, and establisshed by the
experience of many ages. Wherefore we must not despair but confidentlie
endure, for who so ever indureth our lord, shall never be confounded. And if
he do flaie Psalm. 24.
some what long, yet let us expect him, for that coming he will come, and
will not forslovve it. Abac. 2.


To this tollera^ce of adversity, when we in this our banishement for
religion, do often cohort one an other for our comfort: there is nothing
which we can propose more forcible, either for our co^solatio^ or imitatio^,
the^ the sufferinges of our dear bethren in England, so much more grievous
and sharper then ours, by how much the wounds do more afflict, which are
felt in a man's own body, then those which are made upon external
temporalties. I mean that we who flyinge the hands of our persecutours, do
lead a banisshed life in strange countries, albeit we are besett with many
incommodities, thorough lack of our country and domestical frindes, and by
the loss of our goods and possessions at home: yet we enioie the liberty of
these two things, which of all other are of most importance, that is both of
body and soul, neither of which is permitted unto our Catholics at home.

For first besides the taxes and aggrauations, which are laid upon their
temporal commodities, their very bodies are subject to a thowsande vexations,
both of bonds, imprisonment, and also of torments. But to their sowls there
is nothing left free or at liberty, not their religion not their internal
feelinge or opinion of God and their conscience, for thou must say as other men
say, do as they swear, if thou live there albeit thou think the plain
contrary in thy conscience.

Which servitude, and illiberall pressure and forcement of mind, especially
in matters pertaininge to God, being the greatest and most grievous
affliction, that may be exercysed upon man, makes our state and condition,
(albeit in other things very hard) to seem much more tolerable than that of
our brethren at home. For who would not esteem it more grievous than all
other incommodities, yea than death it self, to be wrested in conscience, to
be forbidden all exercise of religion, to be enforced to swear and make
profession of new strange opinions, which his heart does reject, detest, and
abhor: and if by chance he should be taken seruinge god according to his own
manner, and the manner of his fathers and ancestors, and of the most part of
Christianity besides, (albeit it were alone, albeit it were preuilye, and in
most secret wise:) yet to be plucked out, as an offender of the supreme
majesty of the prince, as an enymie of the common wealth, as a wicked and
flagitious caitife, unworthy of life, or the company of me^? And that these
things do so now pass in England (M. Gerard) it shall evidently appear,
by the narration followinge.

And first of all that the matter may The laws of England against Catholics.
the better be understood, and you the easier coniect of the truth of that I
say, it seems to me no evil method, to lay down first, the public laws
which England (borne, and instructed by Catholics, in Christianity,) has
now for their Christian faith, set furthe against Catholics. For by these
laws may be easelye conceived what Catholics are subject unto, in respect of
the power, malice, and iniquity of private adversaries when they list, saying
that public laws do yield so much authority, to every man almost, that
woold seek a cavil or sclaunder against them.

To begin therefore with these laws, it is first to be known that there are
two kind of laws at diverse times set forth in dissauoure and punisheme^t of
the Catholic Two kinds of laws.
religion. The one which concerns monye, possessions, and other goods both
of fortune and body, which I think may be called penal or monye laws. The
other which may rather be called bloody or capital laws, for that they
inflicte death unto the offenders. And to this division of laws will I apply
my speech folowinge.

Amongst the penal laws I will Penal laws.
put that as first, which was made amongst the last, for the punishment of
those which for conscience sake refuse to come to the protestants churches.
For this point the adversary urges greatly, that (all beyt the Catholics
be of an other religion, though they detest Caluinisme in their hearts, though
they abhor all prayers and co^uenticles of the ministers, and account their
service for most wicked and blasphemouse:) yet must they come to yt, they must
assist and show them selves present, albeyt with a repynyng and resistinge
conscience. And because Recusants.
some do refuse to synn in such horrible wise against god, and their own
consciences: therefore this law was made against these scrupulouse men for
soothe: that 1. For refusing to go to churches of protestants.
who so ever should refuse to come to the protestants church, to hear divine
service (as they call yt) if he be above the age of sixtene years: shall
forfeyte twe^tye powndes English every monethe: and he which can not pay, to
lie in pryso^ until he be of better ability to pay. The rest of those laws
follow here in order.

Who so ever shall be convicted to have heard mass, though it were
secretlye, shall fuffer imprisonement, the space of one whole year, and so
long after, until he pay a hundrede mark. 2. For hearing or sayeing mass.


But as for the priest which celebrateth mass, he shall never be let owte of
prison till he have paid two hundred marks. And that sum of money must be
paid so often as any offends herein. 3. For abiuration of religion.


What soever Ecclesiastical person shall not make public detestation of the
roman Religion, and openly abjure the authority and jurisdiction of the
bishop of Rome: shall forfaite all his benefices and all his dignities
ecclesiastical what soever. 4. For oaths in the universities.


No Scholar or student may have any place with in the Colleiges of the
universities, or be preferred to any degree of Learning, excecpt such as at his
first entry in to the Colleige, and at the taking of every degree, does by
solemn oath, deny the bishop of Romes authority, in all causes
Ecclesiastical.

None may have any public Office, 5. For oaths of officers.
or other ministry, in the common welthe, except he first solemlye publishe,
the self same abiuration of the bishop of Rome.

No ward comyngeto full age may enter 6. For oaths of wards.
in to his inheritance, or enjoy any commodities there of, except he first
take the same oath.

Who so ever under degree of a Baron, 7. For oaths of perleyament: men.
shall be called (as ostentimes it happens) to be one of the parliament (in
which court voices were wont to be most free) must never the less have no
voice there, if he will not take the said common oath against the Pope.

What person so ever (under degree 8. For recusants.
of a baron) to whom this oath has been twyse ministered, does the second
time refuse the same, shall for fait all his goods and possessions, and be
condemned to perpetual prison.

Who so ever denies the queen to 9. For denienge of the queen's supremacy.
be supreme head of the Church of England, in causes Ecclesiastical, shall
sustein the same Penalty of loss of all his goods, and of perpetual
imprysonment.

Who so ever receives or keeps 10. For receivers of halovved* things:
any Agnus dei Rosaries, hallowed grains, medalls, or any other thnig which is
hallowed by the Pope and brought in to England, shall endure the same punishment
of loss of all his goods and of perpetual imprysonment.

If any keep a Scholemaster in his 11 For keeping Catholic scholemasters.
house, to teach his own childeren or others, which does not haunt the
church of protestants, or is not by one of their by shopps allowed: he shall
for that cause forfeit ten pounds for every month, until he have removed him.

If any do know one, which has 12. For co^cealers of reconciled
Catholics.
reconciled another, to the unity and communion of the church of Rome, and if
he do by any way or mean aid, either the reconciler or the reconciled, or
do conceal the one or the other, in such wise as he do not discover them both,
to some public magistrate, with in the space of twentye days, then next
folowenige: he shall forfait all his good, as well mouable as immovable, and
all his possessions whiles he lives: and his body shall remain to be
disposed, as pleases the queen.

Who so ever does know any person, 13. For co^cealing procurers.
to have procured an other, to be reconciled to the faith and religion of Rome,
thowghe he himself be no reconciler, nor is reconciled, yet, if such a one
do by any way or mean releue or succoure the said procurer, or if he do
conceall, or not discover the same procurer to some magistrate (as is above
said: (shall incurr the same punyshement.

Who so ever does know any person 14. For co^cealing of counselers
to have counseled an other to be reconciled to the Roman Religion, thowgh he
him self did not procure it at all: yet if he any way aid such a counsayler,
or co^ceale or not discover him (as is before said:) he shall have the same
punishment.

If one know any to have persuaded, 15. For concealing such as obey the pope.
procured, or counseled an other to obey the bishop of Rome, in causes
Ecclesiastical, and yet does aid him, co^ceale or not bewraye him (as is
above say de:) shall endure the fame pain and punishment.

Who so ever knows any, which 16. For co^cealing of promised obedientiaries.
has suffered him self to be perfuaded to obey the bishop of Rome, in causes
Ecclesiastical, or which has promised, any obedience to him for the time to
come, and yet does any way aid, or conceal such a one, or does not
discover him within twenty days (as is aforesaid) he shall suffer the same
penalty of loss of all his goods and possessions, and of imprisonment.

He which knows any priest, to have absolved an other, and yet does 17. For
conceling absoluors.
aid or conceal him, or does not give knowleige of him, in sufficient time
(as is aforesaid): shall be condemned in the same penaltye.

If any know a priest to have authority 18. For concealing such as have
authority to absolve.
to absolve (albeit the priest exercise not the same, nor absolve any) if he
either help or conceal him, or do not discover him, (as is aforesaid) he
shall abide the same pain.

Who so ever knows any to pretend to have authority to absoluet (hough 19.
For concealing pretensed absoluers.
in deed he have none) and yet does aid or conceal him, or not discover him,
(as is aforesaid) he shall suffer the same punishment.

If any know one to be absolved, were he willyngly absolved upon his 20. For
concealing the absolved.
own suit, or wittingly did but suffer him self to be absolved, (though he
never desired it): yet if he any way succoure, or conceal him, or do not give
notice of him, (as is aforesaid) he shall have the same punishment.

Who so ever knows any to have 21. For concealing dissuaders, of caluinism,
dissuaded an other from the religion now publicly used in England, of
intent, to draw him to the obedience of the bysopp, and religion of Rome: or
knows any to have been a procurer, mouer or counseler, to such dissuadyng of
any other: and does by any way or mean help, conceal, or not discover him
to a magistrate withein the space of twenty days, (as is a foresaid): he
shall endure the same penalties, punishements and pains, so often now
remembered, which is as much to say in effect, as he shall lose all the
joys, comforthes, and commodities which this mortal life can velde to man.

And thus much (for so farras I now do remember) towching the penal laws.
By these only (though there were no capital laws,) a man may easilye
conjecture, in how hard terms, the Catholics now in England do stand,
against whom, so many dredefull and most perilous laws are laid, like
snares for their destruction. who can have a quiet mind, when he is without
security to enjoy but one hour the very necessaries where with he showld
live, being on every side hedged and listed in with so many menasing laws,
the dawngers whereof he is not able to eschew, except he would be come
impiouse? how great a swaye do cauills bear among these Laws? how great
force has malice here? how much opportunity is given to iniquitye? Behold I
pray you. If any person do either aid or co^ceale the reconciler, or the
reconciled, the absoluer or the absolved, the procurer, counceler dissuader, or
such like: he is guilty (says the law) of an haynouse crime, and worthy to
be punished, with loss of al his goods, yea and of his liberty also. Let the
matter it self pass: consider but only how wide open to all injustice the
Catholics do lie by means of these laws, if one by chance or unwittingly
should receive in to his house, some of the a foresaid persons, and a
quareling fellow would accuse him, that he did yt wittinglie: how cowld he be
hable in this case to defend him self, or what supportatio^ might he find for
his own innoce^cye? If one would dissuade a man from the heresy of Calvin and
never speak word at all of By the 21. Law before mentioned.
the bishop of Rome: how shall it appear that he is not guilty of treason?
I mean, how shall he be able to bring in evidence, that he did not dissuade
with this intent, that the other should reject the pha^tasies of Calvin, and
submitt him self to the bisshopp and church of Rome? Yes (you will say) the
peril may be easily avoided, if this fellow showlde plain lie move one to the
religion of puritanes, Anabaptists, Arians, or yet of Atheists: Each heresy is
more safely defended in England, than the Catholic faith.
In very truth I believe it well: And surely yt is not vnproblable that this
same clause was so smothelye couched to the rest by the penner of the law, in
favor and maintenance of these and such like heresies. Oh how miserable is
the condition of these owre days?

And thus much touching cauillation The inequality of the laws aganist
Catholics.
and surmise. Now as to the inequality of these laws, what should a man say
thereof, sith therbye at this day in England the father is bownde to accuse
his son, the husband his wife, the brother his brother, the penitent his
ghostly father, the servant his master, as if it were for a myschoeuouse
crime? And wherefore I pray you? forsoothe for the Catholic religion, under
which we were borne, with which we were brought up, and instructed, and the
very same, which all other princes do embrace and defend. The like to this
without doubt, no age past has tasted, no memory of our forefathers has
heard, no antiquity of former worlds has seen. These are the braynsick
fantasies only of our days, the variable innouacions of particular places,
the flexible wilfulness of man's mind, the most vain cogitatio^s of flesh
and blood, whereby men do attempt to exchange the vnmutable truth of Christ
for their own fantasies to serve their own turns in respect of their own
commodities.

But let us yet see mo of these severe laws, and that is, the capital laws,
which before, I have called bloodye laws, in The capital laws against the
Catholics of England.
this respect, for that they lie in wait of blood, and do assail, the very
life of man. And in these laws, first of all, there is one thing not unmeet to
be noted, that all these laws, do concern religion only, and yet never the
less they do infer not only the pain of death, but such a pain, as is
provided for offenses, committed against her majesty's person, which of all
other is a most greuouse and most odiouse pain, as due for the most
flagitiouse crime, and that is treason or rebellion. And this course our
adversaries do take of special purpose, that the death of Catholics,
snoulde not seem to be a martyrdom, but rather might be conveyed through the
ears of the ignorant people, under the infamouse blott of an haynouse crime:
and to the intent also that the prince might more easily be persuaded, the
Catholic religion to stand styfflie bent against her royal scepter, and
dangerous to the security ofher regiment. Now when this foundation was ones
laid, yt was no hard matter for the^, to procure what laws they lusted
against Catholics: Albeit in very deed, she of her own disposition,
abhors such violence, and effusion of man's blood. But now I come to the
laws, and thus the first begins.

Who so ever shall say, write, affirm, 11. For admitting. dissuason.
or by any manner of ciphar shall utter, or yet being demanded, shall confess,
that the bishop of Rome is head of the church of England, or has there
any Jurisdiction in causes ecclesiastical: shall be reputed and taken for a
traitor, and shall endure such pains of death, for faitures and penalties, as
are provided in cases of high treason, committed against the state.

He which for any cause does hereafter 2. For appellants to Rome.
appeal to the Byssopp of Rome, and obtein from him bulls or other
instruments, and bring the same in to England: shall endure the punishment of
high treason.

If any person do hereafter bring 3. For bringers in of. halovved things.
in to England any Agnus Dei, (as they call the^) rosaries, hallowed grains,
medalles, crucifixes, or any other thing hallowed of the Bishop of Rome: shall
be reputed demed and taken for a traitor.

What person so ever being under 4. For recusants of the oath.
the degree of a baron, to whom the oath or abiuration against the popes
authority, and in the behalf of the Queen's supreme power i^ causes
ecclesisticall shall be thryse tendered, do at the third time refuse to swear:
shall suffer the pains ordained for high treason. 5. For sayeing the queen is
an heretic or scismitique.


VVo so ever by any way or mean doethe from hensefourthe say, write,
signify, or being demanded, does confess, that the queen is an heretic,
or a Shismatique: shall be subject to the same pains for high treason.

If any do hereafter reconcile an 6. For reco^cilers.
other to the unity and communion of the sea of Rome: he shall suffer the same
pains and punisheme^ts provided for treason.

Who so ever shall wittinglle and willingly 7. For the reconciled*
be reconciled, to the same unity and communion: shall endure the same
punishment.

Who so ever does hereafter procure 8 For procurers of reconciliation.
any person to be reconciled to the same unity and communion: shall be
condemned to the same punishment.

What person so ever doethe from 9. For counsailers of reconciliation.
henseforthe but only give advise or counsaille to any to be reconciled to
the same unity and communion, though he do not procure the same: shall never
the less have the same punishment.

If any person do hereafter persuade 10. For persuaders of obediens to the
pope.
an other to obey the bishop of Rome in causes ecclesiastical: he shall be
condemned of the same crime of high treason.

If any suffer him self to be persuaded 11. For admitting persuasio^
to such obedience: he shall be demed guilty of the same crime of high
treason.

If any do procure such persuasion to be used with an other, or give
counsel 12. For procurers and counsailers of such persuasion.
thereunto: he shall suffer the same pain of high treason.

If any do promise to use in time to come, any such obedience to the sea of
13. For promisers of obediens.
Rome in causes ecclesiastical: he shall endure the penalties provided for
high treason.

If a pryeste do absolve any of the 14. For abfoluers.
queen's subjects: yt shall be Judged to be high treason.

If any have authority to absolve in England, thowghe he never do in deed
15. For such as have authority to absolve.
absolve any: yet shall he never the less be demed and taken for a traitor.

If any do make a pretense or show that he has such authority to
absolve, 16. For pretenders of authority.
though in truth he have none: yet shall he be reputed as a traitor.

If any person wittinglie be absolved 17. Admitters of absolution.
of an other, be yt that he either made suit for the same absolution, or
without making any suit for it, suffered him self to be absolved: he shall be
punished as a traitor.

If any do procure absolution for 18. procurers of absolution.
an other, he shall have the same punishment.

If any person do advise or counsel an other to be absolved, though he do
19. Counsailers of absolution
not procure yt to be done: yet shall he therefore suffer as a traitor.

If any do either procure or counsel an other generallye to be an absoluer,
20. Procurers or counselers to absolve.
all be yt that he do not move him to absolve any special person: yet he
shall never the less incurr the same punishment.

If any do hereafter dehorte or dissuade an other from the religion now 21.
Disvvaders of caluins religion.
publiklye used and professed in England, or do procure any such dissuasion,
of intent that the person which is to be dissuaded may be drawn to the
obedience and religion of the sea of Rome: he shall be reputed demed and judged
guilty of high treason: and shall endure the same punisheme^t, which is dew
for that crime. And that punishment is such as follows. The pain of
Catholics condemned as traitors for religion


First, that the person condemned, and drawn a long by land to the place of
execution, be (for his greater torment,) half strangled with an haulter: then
is he to be let down, that whiles he is coming to him self, his privy
members may be cut of and brent in the fire before his face: by and by his
bellye is to be vpript with a knyfe, his gutts haled owte, and whiles he lies
yet pantinge and struglinge: his heart, lungs, liver, and all his bowels and
intrales must be plucked fourth by the boucher, and thrown in to the fire
there at hand: in the end, his body is boiled, cut in pieces, and hanged by
quarters at diverse gates of the City. And as for his goods and possessions,
they are all forfeited, and no part thereof must descend to his wife,
children, or kynred: yea and they also for this one man's sake are to be
blotted with ignominy, and the whole posterity of this dead creature utterly
attainted, and disteined in blood for ever.

Are not these severe enough? are they not (think you my frinde Gerard)
sufficient sharppe for the professors of a religion which they received of
their grand fathers and forefathers? And yet, for soothe, The vneauen dealing
of the ministers of England.
our ministers of England, those our innouators, our tro^pett blowers of the
evangelical doctrine, and resemblers (for soothe) of Christian myldenesse, do
daily exclayme for the of pulpits, redouble thick and threefold through their
written books, and beat in to the ears of the magistrate, yea and of the
prince also in daily speech, that to much lenity is used: that clemency
is daungerouse: that the toleration and forbearance, which is used in the whole
course of that regiment toward Catholics, is blame woorthye, and not to be
suffered. See now the unadvised folly of spiteful and furiouse persons.

Is there any haynouse offense, or detestable act, that can be more sharplye
punished, than with these torments which here I have set down? is there any
forte of men so ungracious, as could be with mo laws lysted abowte, with
greater pains restreined, to mo perils subjected, to mo mischeues and
inconveniences laid open, than the Catholics are in England by theyse laws?
And yet, when all is done, wherein have these poor Catholics offended? What
manner of crime is to be imputed to the faith and religion of our grand fathers
and ancestors? well, theyse adversaries were ones of one society with us,
but now, when they have taken hold of Caluines faith, for saken Luthers
religion, and contemned ours: they have made them selves our masters, they
have banished us ovvt of our own houses, and thrusten us from all degrees of
honor and estimation. But for our part, we make no complaint thereof: let
them take, and use all at their most liberty. Then why are they not here
withal content? why proceed they further sely poor me^? what mean they to
assail our souls? why are they so rigorouse against our blood? how is
yt, that nothing can satisfy them but our death, or our extreme calamity?
if the quarrel which they have against us, be for no other thing, but only
for our faith: alas, there are other petye sects no less enemies to Calvin
tha^ we are: yet can they be content very frindlie to entertain them, and to
use their favorable ministerye. But if a paddlye hyddin the straw: if Varres
be affrayed to be called to account by order of law: behold, we are content
to deliver them from that trouble, to seal them an acquitance, and to yield of
our own right and interest. Marye, this is the thing which we only desire,
that this be not to us an overthrow, and an occasion of their perpetual
displeasure against us, for that ones we enjoyed our native soil, which now
we want: for if this hadd not happened, their public weal hadd now been none.

And thus much of the laws. Now, you see how much our adversaries are
hable to do against us, under the pretense of theyse laws: but how much more
they would feign do, the matter it self declares euidentlye, in that they
are not content with the severity now used, but earnestly call for sharper
and more painful laws every day. And yet verylie I do not think, that
any Christian can have so hard and yroned a heart (unless he have lost both
feelinge of humanity and faith) but might be moved to compassion with theyse
extremities, which our poor Catholics do suffer. The terms where in
Catholics do stand in England.


For no lamentable distress can be imagined in any kind of calamity, well
nighe, which theyse men do not daily bear, no trouble in any condition of
men, can be thought on, which they do not continuallye sustain. In so much,
as they may most truly say, with the Apostle: in tribulatiu^s, in
necessities, in distresses, in strypes, in prysons, in tumultes, in labors. And
2. Cor. 6.
with, the same soldioure of Christ in an 2. Cor. 11.
other place: in perils with in the City, in perils in wilderness, in
perils in the sea, in perils among false brethren, in travail and misery.
Yea they may also say further, as the Apostle says: even in death
oftentimes. Yet further, that same may be applied unto the^, and not vnaptlye,
Skornefull mockes Heb. 11.
and beatings have they felt, over and beside both fetters and pryso^s, they
have been racked, they have been cut and mangled, they have abydden
temptations and trialls, they have been slain with the svvoorde. And to
conclude, that same also very fytlie agrees unto them, we are made a
spectacle to the world, to angels and to men: we are evil spoken of, and 1.
Cor. 4.
we say well of others: we suffer and endure persecution: we are blasphemed
and we pray, for them: we are accounted the parings of the world, and the
refuse of all to this day.

But to make all theyse more evident, it shall not be (perhaps) far from the
purpose, if I touch every thing yet more particularly.

And first (to speak of the last execution, The last punisheme^t of
Catholics.
which our Catholics do endure in the end of all) yt can not be doubtful
(I think) to any, how many men, and what manner of men, have been put to most
paynfull death, as strangled, bowelled, cut in sunder, boiled, and dispersed
by piece meal in the air, and all for religion: and though our adversaries
(for more reproach) make a surmise of treason: yet the matter is manifest, and
they them selves do not deny, that only religion is the cause of this death.

I make no mention here, of the great number of those most reverend bishopps,
doctors, priests, and other confessors of Christ, which in prison have been
either choked with filthy stinkyng savor, or consumed with sorrow and hungar,
whose causes we referr to the Judgment seat of Christ alone. I speak here
of them only, which openly in the sight of all men, have given testimony to
the truethe, with their own blood. Who (besides the very torment of the
execution, and that common contumely, where in they die (in the opinion of the
people) as traitors to the state, and not as Catholics, have also (for the
most part) this reward, and good turn given them when they are dead, that
they are slaundered Slaunderinge of dead me^.
in dispersed libells with some notable false surmise thrown out against
their manners and doctrine.

In this wise very lately when they had hanged on their common gallows,
Paradoxes falsely imputed to M. HANSH.
that godly and zelouse priest Euerard Hanse, and were affrayed lest some
perchance, would be moved with the martyrdom of that Innocent: they gave out
in two contrary books, the one impugnyng the other, certain monstruouse errors
and paradoxes, (I know not what,) and made this dead man theauthor thereof:
Such as this: that the bishopp of Rome can not sin: where as in truth
master Hanse did speak expresselye of the doctrine of faith that is to be
published to the universal church, and therein only he said, that the pope
could not err.

And this is an other: that no prince has any supremacy within his own
dominions, saving the bishop of Rome only: where in deed he spoke only of
the supremacy of the Catholic church in causes Ecclesiastical. And this
also: that no treason against the queen of England is a synn. VVheras being
now at the point ready to be executed to death and repeting his own words
diverse times before the people there present, he affirmed that he spoke not of
every kind of treason, but of that only, for the which withowt desert he was
then in dyeing, and which his adversaries indiscreetly call treason, being in
truethe no other thing, than a needful confession of the Catholic faith.
For now by the recital of the laws before mentioned, yt is manifest, how
many chief points and Principles of faith made treason.
principles of our faith, they have drawn to the case of high treason.

In this point therefore, our adversaries excede the malice of ancient
persecutors, that they do not make known the true cause why they martyr men,
though them selves do confess the same. And yet the deuell in those formoste
times hade sown much seed of this iniquity, when S. Paul as pernicious and
seditious: yea and our savior Christ: as one seducing Act. 24.
the people, and forbyddinge to pay tribute Luc. 24.
to Caesar: were most i^iuriously slaundered.

But now it is (I suppose) skant woorthe the labor, to put down here in
Sauuage rudenes.
writing, with how great reproaches, with what outcries, with how many mocks
and skorns, with howsower and spite full skoffes, with how bitter and
unsavory taunts, with what rustling noise and dynne of mutteringe male
co^tents, and foul mowthed detractors, theyse our martyrs were strangled, and
in the sight of all the people rent and torn in pieces: for the thing of it
self is lothesome to the eyes, and terrible to the ears. O how pitiful is
owre case, which are fallen in to these times, when we see so great rigor
practiced by christians against christians, for the christian faith?

And thus much for the pains and punishements ordained for Catholics:
Contumelies against Catholics.
Now let us say something of the co^tumelies that they abide before their
deaths: but it is an infinite and endless matter, it can not be expressed in
few words. For I think verelie, that Catholics no where in the world, no
not among Moors, Goths, Tartars, Saracens, Turcks, or whatsoever other
confederats, or sworn enemies of Christ, could be more skornfullie, than they
are by these contumeliouse and disdeinfull new gospellers.

If they take a priest at mass: a man How a priest is entreated that is
taken at mass.
would marueyle to see, how impiouslye and how despitefilly they behave them
selves. First, for the sacred yea and consecrated host, they take it away with
violence, tread it under foot, thrust it through with knyues and daggers,
fasten it to a post, and with great wounder show it to Catholics, insult
and triumph against yt in all skoffing and skornfull manner, and call it (such
is their blasphemy (the wheaten or breadie god of papists. Now as to the
priest, when they have (after their manner) first entreated him ill withein
doors, then they bring him forth abroad, and in the self same attire
wherein they fownde him standinge at the altar, they hail and chase him
abowte, throwghe streets and villages, where all folk gase and stare upon him
the whole multitude skorne him, yea and some spytt in his face, but the most
part scolde, and rail against him, and every one (well nighe) does practice
some particular spite and injury against this servant of Christ. Then they
lock him fast in the counter, or lay him up in some other prison: they bind
him in yro^ cheyns, load him with bolts and shakles, and (if it like them)
they put him to the rack, and torture: or else, when they have vexed him in
every part with the rodd of all manner of reprochefull punishements: they hale
him fourth to the place of Judgment, and their, both him, and all them which
were present at his mass, they do condemn to prison, and to pay that sum
of money for their fine or ransom, which I told you before is to be paid
for this so heinous a fault (God wot) of hearing mass.

And when all this is done and past, (if they think it may any way further
their affairs to dispatche the man quyte out of the way, and kill him) they
exhibit unto him interrogatories touching some articles of the aforesaid
capital laws: they appose him with captiouse and subtle questions: they urge
him upon his allegeaunce to answer directly and plainly. What need many
words? Do they not easelie (think you) beat out of the poor man some
thing that may suffice to serve their turn? yes in deed: for a staff is ever
at hand to beat a dog.

And here because I have made mention Of prisons.
of imprysonme^ts, and you in yowre letters request aduertiseme^t of some
particulars thereof by name: I will say some thing also of prisons: whereof
this shall be the first: that they are all very full replenished and stuffed
up with Catholics, in so much as there is skante any romthe for thieves.
Many priso^s are Mistress Tomson.
new builded of late, but all do not suffice. The Tower of London, (in time
past used for traitors,) is now fraught full of priests. Yea, our Bridewell,
an infamouse place of light houswyues and lewed folk, is not without some
part. For it is not long since a young maid, a gentle woman borne,
confessinge the Catholic faith some what zelouslie, was thrust in to this
dishonorable place by the Superinte^dent of London.

Now to the wantes, distresses and inner troubles of prisoners I dare say
nothing, lest with my complaint I might afflict the afflicted more. This never
thelesse is common, that no frinde of theirs may visit them, all intercourse of
speech and letters is forbidden, strayte watch is laid, and narroulie it is
observed who resorteth unto them, in so much as none without present peril,
can either give them any alms or other ways releive them with any work of
charity. And I hear of much harder dealings, concerning the order of their
diet, specially in the prisons at york and hull. Yett because those
extremities may proceed perhaps of some peculiar frowardness of Iailers: I
will not touch them here as afflictions common to all prisoners.

But yet the report of a rigor vse^ in a prison at Lanson in the county of
The prison at Lanson.
Cornwale, is certeinlie true, and the fact more than barbarous. For when syx
(as I wene) or eight Catholics were shooueled together and piled up in to
one hole: though they were of good calling, and for more part gentlemen borne:
yet had they neither meat given them, nor allowed to them, other than
unsavory and Lothesome, yea and begged of alms from door to door, nor use
of any water but of corrupt and filthy. And as for place of easement to their
bodily necessities, they had none at all, other than the very floor where on
they did lie. A savage part of a layler.
But of all other this exceded: that when theyse poor wreches began at last
to complain of this inhumaine and savage cruelty: the layler threatened them
further, that he would from thenseforthe tie the^ to maungers, and feed them
like brute beasts. Yet in the end by lo^gesute and continual soliciting of
fryndes, yt came to pass, that they were removed from this prison abowte two
hundred miles thense, and posted over to a prison in london, with a common
guard. Of which pilgrimage this was the ceremony and circumstance. How
Catholics are led to prison in England.


Every one of them was fett on a selie lean and bare horse, without bridle
spurr, or other furniture for a horseman: the horses were fastened each one to
othera tail, marchinge in a long rewe one after an other. Each man's feet were
tied under his horse belly, and his arms were bound hard and fast behind
him. When they came near to any city or town: one was appointed to ride
before, and to give warning to the inhabitants, that there were cominge at
hand, certain papifts, foes to the Gospel, and enemies in the common weal.
Upon which notice, the people being sturred up, did run in flocks forth
of their houses in to the streets, and welcome the comers with as spiteful
contumelies as they could.

With a very like pomp and solemnitye Master Edmund Ca^pian of the Society
of Jesus, led i^ triumph.
(fashioned and framed all together for reproach, and to every trick and toye
of mockerye) did they lately lead through the city of london, twelve
catholics, whereof five were priests, and the rest were of good estate and
calling. Their fault forsoothe was this: they were fownde prayeing and at
mass all in one house with master Edmund Campian, of the Society of Jesus, a
great learned clerk, a harmless and very Innocent man. This good man, for
offeringe to the ministers a most just defense of his faith by way of
disputation, was by our adversary slaundered as a sediciouse person, and to
that end and effect, a large paper was most spitefully written with great
letters, which they forced him to bear upon his head in this triumph. All
this the good man did bear (not unlike as Christ did bear the title and
superscription of his cross Calmelye, myldlie, modestly, with a glad mind
and a cherefull countenance.

At last after this tragedy was ended, How Catholiqnes be tormented in the
tovver.
when they were come to the tower of London: as they had before that time
entreated other of gods servants, and specially priests: so did they now put
Master Campian to the rack and to extreme torments, and thereby would have
wrested ovvte of him, in what places he Light causes of tortute.
had seiourned, in whose houses he had been enterteined, by whose frinde
shipp and liberality he had been maintained, where he had bated or inned:
whom he had visited by the way, whom he had made of his counsel, whose
help, and industry he had used, and (to be short) who they were through
out all England, which favor the Catholic religion, and who abhor
Caluianism in their hearts. O haynouse crimes, sufficient (no doubt) to bring
free borne men to be turmoiled in so exquisite manner of examination, and that
by torture too, even, for a mere furmise, and but a suspicion there of.

Now (I pray you) tell us if you ca^ when was this practice used any where
before these days? In what barbarous Scythia was this as much as heard of by
any report at any time, that freeborne men, of honest state and condition,
learned, of good education, well instructed and trained up in gentlemanlye
manner, dedicated and vowed to the sacred function of priesthood, should be for
the testimony only of an ancient religion, of long continuance left unto
them by their ancestors, stauled up in cages to be racked on a pain bank
(as bondslaues were wont to be) and with dire and horrible pains, greeues,
and afflictions wrested and writhen owte of their joints, unless they will
appeache, and traitorously deliver up to the torture their own co^panio^s in
faith and profession: which to do they are forbidden by the law of nations,
by the rule of nature, by civil duty, by common honesty, and by every
religion? Is this (think you) a very just cause of torture? is this a reason
effectual enoughe to bring men to their inquisition? specially so extreme,
so rigorouse, so servile a manner of inquisitio^ for free born me^ to endure?
did Catholics in any aige practice this, even against the desperatest and
peruersest heretics?

Assuredly, if there were nothing else The diffimulation of heresy.
to admonish a circu^spect and attentive person of the fraud of heresy, and
of that desperate wickedness, which lies lurkinge under her hypocrisy:
thowghe the novelty of their opimons, the contrariety among the^ selves,
the variable uncertainty of their assertio^s, their lice^tiouse dissolution in
conversation of life could say nothing to the matter: yet this one thing
would (to him I say that has good eyes and ears) sufficie^tli discover the
whole frame of all their dissimulatio^: to wytt: that these self same fellows
which of late so freshelye professed all kind of humanity and courtesy, and
have so fiercelye inueihed against the Catholic church of Christ for her
most eauen and most indifferent discipline, by most just and most ancient
laws ordained, do now use such savage cruelty upon light and tristinge
causes, as the very churlish, rude. and barbarouse did skante practice for
most haynouse offenses.

Well, he must bear with my grief and sorrow, who so ever thinks my
words to be over sharpp. For I am displeased in deed and not well content:
but not so much with these men, which have committed these owtrages (for I
beseech God forgive them): as I am with heresy, by whose means these men (not
cruel of their own nature, but much disposed rather to lenity and
meekness) are driven in to so great (I will not say woodenesse, lest I
should offend them, but) sharpp angrinesse in deed, and fore displeasure
against their own: as, neither for neighborhood of one native soil, nor for
integrity oflyfe, orname^t of learning, or flower of aige they can be induced,
nor in respect of the prerogative of freedom, nor in regard of the privilege
of priesthood, nor by entreaty of words, nor by abundance of tears they
can be moved to take pity and compassion upon innocents and guiltless men,
nor can be stayed back from doing extreme and outrageous violence. I humbly
beseech our most merciful and most mighty God, that this huge offense be
not imputed unto them, but raither that they may find mercy in the day of
our Lord, who in their own day, that is, in the day of man, have showed no
mercy to their brethren. Esa. 13.
1. Cor. 4.


But now I omit to speak of the other outrages, which in this Tower of London
are perpetrated, and patiently endured. The strait ward and evil entreaty
Catholics in the tovver.
For though they be many and very grievous: yet can they not easily come to
our knowleige, by reason of that close and strait ward, wherein the sound of
all speech, and mourninge of the afflicted is shutt up from the ears of them
that are abroad. Nay, our adversaries bestow no small diligence in this
point: that the aflictions and torments which are there practiced withein
doors, be not browght to the knowleige of them that are witheoute: but buried
rather in darkness, and clean hyd in blind and obscure dungeons. But if
these break forth at any time, and the doolefull voice of the aflicted be
plainly heard: then are those fellows greuouselye offended, and either
flatly deny all that was done, or with pleasant words extenuate the matter.

For twyse now of late Master Campian has been pulled on the rack. And what
adversary did not utterly deny yt? Yet at length the truth of the matter
came to light, when master Campian him self did utter it in an open audience,
and in the hearing of our adversaries: twit, (say de they) yt was a merry
pastime: he was cramped or pulled a little, not in ernest, but in ieaste. After
the same manner they Ieasted of others, which had been racked before. So great
delight these merry conceited fellows do take, in making skosses and sports of
the afflictions of forie poor men. Our aduer saries accustomed to lie.


But they have yet an other stratageme or politic shyst, familiarlie
acquainted in this tower: that is, to surmise and forge what they lust of the
prisonner, and to publishe it to his shame, and for a trapp to beguile other
Catholics. The thing is evident, and has plenty of examples: but because I
purpose to be brief, I will touch but a few.

When master Campian had been afflicted with torments: it was reported that
he had confessed what soever they had demanded of him: specialie at whose
howses, and in what places he had been. And (to give to the lie his right shape
and perfection) it was further bruted abroad, that he had promised a
recantation of I know not what. But that tale no man thowght to be probable:
yet there were that doubted thereof, because the adversaries had so earnestlye
affirmed it. For many gentlemen, and some of the nobility were called up to
London, from their own howses, and charged with a supposed confession of
master Campia^: And yet in very truth (as afterward it well appeared) he
never yielded one word to his torments.

A like shyft the lieutenant of the In the guildhall at London
tower used, and (of purpose to lay a bate to seduce others, by some example)
affirmed openly at a common session, that there were no catholics under his
ward, which refused to go to the church of our adversaries: yet it was
well known to all there, that even they whom he meant of, went not willingly
to the church, but upon compulsion and drawn by violence had been present at
a few sermons, yet they allways openly spoke against the same, called the
preacher from his railing speech, and challenged him to disputation, even in the
presence of the same lieutenant albeit angerlie he thretned them often with
heavy bolts and shakles. But it is hard by writing to discourse through all the
particulers in every kind of affliction, which the prisoners in that tower
do endure: yet such as have some time been present vewers of the matter do
tell us part: upon whose faithefull relation I will putt down this one to
give a conjecture of the rest.

There was a young man, of honest Conper.
parentage, well entered in learning for he had been Scholar and servant to
Doctor harpesfeild a very learned man, that dyed in prison for christ's cause.
This young man, for religion and learning sake, had appointed a Journey in to
these parts: And being ready for it, made his repare to the haven (with the
wealth that he had got together in money or other things) of purpose to pass
over the sea. But by some chance the matter was discovered, the young man was
apprehended by an officer, and sent back to London: where first he was spoiled
of all his goods and cast in to the Tower of London: Beaucha^p, tovver.
there he was very straitelie kept in that part of the prison which, is
called Becheams Tower, destitute of all comfort and consolation needful for
man, saving one sorry bed, that his frindes sent, and yet hardly could he be
allowed to have yt. Within a while after, this young man (being but of a
weak complexion, and accustomed to open and clear air) partly through
Hungar and cold, partly through the filthy sauoure, and lothesomenesse of
the place, and corruption of the air, did fall in to a sickness, and seemed to
be vexed with an ache, or giddiness of his head. The lieutenant New found
physic.
hearing hereof, devised a meruelouse strange medicine for this disease. For
he commanded the bed to be taken away, that for the better recovery of his
health, he might lie upon the bare floor. To be short: within few days the
poor man dies, sterued, wasted, and pined away by extremity of cold and
Hungar: and thereof remained this evident testimony and proof, that when his
clothes were to be taken of, that he might be buried: his flesh being putrified
and rotten by cold, did stick fast to his hose, and was with the hose pulled
of from the bare bones, and fell in gobbetts upon the grownd: a pitiful sight
of a churlishe barbarousnesse and of an odd kind of cruelty. Never thelesse
there be men yet lyuinge which did see this with their eyes. And (were it not
for their peril) I could name the^.

And because I am entered in to this kind of talk: I will be some what more
liberal than my promise. And one other example I will lay down, to let you
see what good store I have, if I list to set it forth to the show.

An other young man not unlike the Shear wood. The ladietregonell. Martin her
son.
former, the son of a Catholic co^fessor did frequent the house of a right
woorshipfull lady, who had a son clear opposite and contrary to the
mother, and one full gorged with Calvin. This man did fume and freate in his
mind very much for that he demed his mother had mass often times in her
house by this young man's help and procurement. On a time therefore, as he by
chance did mete the young man in a street in London: he cries very
outragiouslie, O rebel and traiter: take hold on the traiter, for by this
term they name us, to make us more odious: and with this kind of most unjust
ignominy they vex us. The they of the city hearing these words, traiter
and rebel, leap forth of their shoppes, lay hands on the man, and hale him
to the Justices or commissioners. And at their next session when he came before
them: the exclamer had nothing whereof to accuse the young man, nothing where
with to charge him, save only a bare suspicion of the Catholic religion: for
he was not hable to convince him of the fact. The commissioners not
withstandinge would not give him leave to depart. For a presentment of
religion is of all other most adiouse. And if the presenter want sufficient
matter: the presentment is helped and set forward by interrogatories and
questions, to be ministered by the commissioners them selves.

The Justices therefore examine the young man, what he does believe, or think
touching the chief points of faith. And at last by way of argument they wreste
out, that he supposes the bishop of Rome ought to have chief authority in
causes Ecclesiastical, yea, and in England also. Upon the hearing hereof:
there followed a like sentence as was given in an other session of Justices.
Why require we Marc. 14.
any further proof? you have bearde blasphemy, what think you? all they
condemned him to be guilty of death.

Then was he removed over to the tower of London, and there Laid up in a
priuye chamber near to the place where the Ingines for torments do lie. In the
mean season his chamber which he had in the city, was ryfled and ransacked,
and all his goods snatched up, and therewithal about thirty pounds english
more, (which he had taken up of other men for debtes oweing to his most
miserably afflicted father) were also stolen and carried away. Well, the
poor man in prison was sore afflicted with torments, to enforce him to
discover the places where he had heard mass: for being but a lay man he
could not him self say mass. Then, after very greuouse torments, which he
endured with great courage (for, so much an adversary that had been there
present did confess:) he was thrown in to a very obscure doungeon, that was
both dark and dredefull, without light, without bedding, without needful
apparel. And of his diet you may easily conjecture, when he could not be
allowed to have any piece or paringe of his own goods, no not for the
necessary sustentation of his own life: Nay, there is an other thing that
does looth me to M. vvillia^ Roper.
tell. For when a certain devout and charitable man being (upon the common
brute of this young man's extreme calamity) moved to compassion, had sent a Sum
of money to be conveyed unto this poor man for his relief, and by the mean of
an other prisoner had delivered the same to his under keeper (for here each
prisoner has his under keeper): the under keeper received the money, and
brought it again the next day to him of whom he had yt, and told him that
the lieutenant of the tower would not suffer the poor man to enjoy the benefit
of that alms. And when the keeper was very earnestly requested to take part
thereof and bestow it in some thing for the poor man's relief he denied to
take yt, and said that he might not in any wise take apenny, except it were
six pence to bye him straw to lie upon. So malitiouselie bent was that
lieutenant against the selie poor man.

In the end after six months (as I think) were over passed in this most
greuouse kind of Martyrdom they draw him forth along through the streets on
a hurdle, and hang him up a little, let him down again, and then as he is in
reviving, they afflict him with the other kind of tortures, which they use
to practice upon such as are traiters to the state, but in far more
terrible manner than they handle those traiters. For our adversaries are more
rigourouse and more Protestants are merciless to Catholics
mercylesse against us, than they are against any sort of malefactors, how
vngratiouse naughty so ever they be. For when these by order o flawe are to
suffer the same kind of death, they find such favor, as either they are,
by compassion and pity of our adversaries, full dead before they be cut
down from the galowes: or in deed the execution is so handled according to the
prescript rule of the law, as they are suffered to hang till they be half
dead at the least, to dull the sense and felyng of payns in the torments
foloweinge. But far otherwise it is in the case of Catholics. For they are
no sooner hanged, than the hangman enforces him self in a furiouse manner of
haste to cut the haulter in sunder, and whiles they are yet alive, and alive
like, yea and of perfect sense and felyng: he brings them to the other
torments: and this oftentime he does so readily, and with such dexterity and
nimblenesse: as not only their senses for most part are perfect, but they
speak also distinctlie and plainly after their bowels be dug up, yea and
whiles the bouchars fyngars are scratchinge at their very hearts and intrailes.

And yet this bloody sight woorketh no compassion in the hearts of our
adversaries: but they deride and skorne the sorry poor wights, yea and
spitefully rail against them, even whiles they are yet in dyeing, and
specially if any being overcome with pain do groan, or happen (which is
very rare) to make any lamentable noise. For thus a certain preacher of
theirs (and not a mean one) in a printed book does collect and conclude, that
our very Martyrs, are not Martyrs, because forsuthe (says he) one Fulk.
of them cried out in his torments, and (that I may use his own words) did
yell and hovvle like a hell hovvnde. O goodly sentence well besemyng such a
preacher. O new fownde charity of a new fownd gospel: what ever hacker or
ruffian would have uttered such a word without blushing? what ever cutthrote
has showed so sauuage and barbarouse a mind?

But truly these fellows seem to degenerate clean from all sense and felyng
of humane nature, and to be quite transformed in to (I can not tell what)
unnatural wildenesse, utterly forgetful of that sentence: Judgment
without mercy to him which has not shevved mercy: And Iac. 3.
specially of this sayeing. A hard heart shall feel sorrow in the last day:
This appears Eccle. 2.
not only by these examples which I have allredy put down, but by infinite
other also, which now I may not prosecute, lest I should be longer than an
epistle may suffer. Yet I will note unto you some such things by way of
example, as may make the matter most clear and evident.

A certain young gentleman, of an ancient M. Tirvvit son to Sir Robert
Tirvvit.
and right woorshipfull family, was accused for hearing of a mass celebrated
(as it was reported) at the marriage of his sister. Where upon he fled from
his fathers house, and kept him self secret in London the year last past. And
there, by reason of his travail in flyeing away, and (as I think) through the
intemperature of the so^mer, he fell in to a greuouse fever. The adversaries
hearing hereof, do run unto him by and by, and in all haste will needs pull
him out of the house, and throw him in to prison, even as he then was, feeble,
faint, and greuouslye sick. This seemed to the beholders thereof to be a manner
of dealing both churlishe and detestable. They pray, they entreat, they make
intercession, they use all the means they can, to move the adversary to have
consideration of the sick, not to heap sorrow upon sorrow, nor affliction upon
an extremely afflicted man, not to take away the life of so comely a young
gentleman: they proffer as sufficient assurance for his forth coming, as his
adversaries would demand, and to under take for his appearance before the
justices immediately upon the recovery of his health: but it will not be
accepted. The physicians come, they affirm for certain, that he is utterly
undone and caste^ away, if he should be removed forth of that place in to the
inconuenie^ces of a prison. All this is nothing regarded: they laid hands on
the sickeman, haled him away, shut him up in prison, and with in two days next
after he dyed: they bury him, and make no bones of the matter, nor scruple, or
any regard at all.

Even so yt feel out against a right M. Dimmok.
woorshipfull and valyant gentleman, one (for a peculiar honor in the Armurie
which he did bear) very famous, and son in law to the right honorable
Earl of lincoln. This gentleman had been troubled many years with a vehement
palsy, and such a resolution of his sinews, as he was not hable to go forth
of his own house, or move a foot out of his place, but as he was lyfted or
holden up by the hands or arms of his servants. At the last upon an
informatio^ touching the Catholic Religion, preferred against him to the
superintendent of that province (for by that term would they be named which
now detein the possessions of ancient byshopriks:) he was noted and appeached
as suspected to hold the faith of his aunceters: and thereupon he was
summoned to appear before the commisioners as evidently guilty of
Catholicisme or Catholicque Religion, which they in contempt call papistrie.
But this palsy sickeman appeared not. Nevertheless he made his own excuse
very advisedly by letters. Yet is it not accepted: for the superintendent him
self comes with all speed to the diseased man's house, and throwghlie veweth
with his own eyes the impotencie of the gentleman: but no motion of compassion
enters in to this snperintendents breeste: he commands him to be carried to
the Iaile. What need many words? Nether the age of that man, nor his degree
in calling, nor the woorshipp of his kynred, nor the nobleness of his
affinity, nor the resolution of his limbs could deliver him from the present
trouble and mischefe of imprisonment.

What followed? by these inconveniences in very short space after, he dies.
And yet they leave him not when he is dyeing: yea then they vex and afflict
him more. For they come when he is extreme sick, they come whiles he is
wrestling with the pangs of death, they come as he is passing out of this
lyse, they come whiles he is yielding up the Ghoost: then they trouble him:
the^ they do not suffer him to rest, nor permit him to die in such sort as
he desired to die: (for his desire was to die according to the custom of the
universal christian church:) but then the ministers flock about him: the^
they intrude them selves upon him: then they urge him to pray such sorry
prayers of their own making, as in health he contemned, in sickness with
open voice he rejected, and (now dum and half dead,) by his countenance, by
signs and tokens, and by gesture of his body he did utterly detest and
abhor. What greater vncourtesie, or cruelty rather, can be imagined than
this?

But here I may not pass over in silence Mistress Thimilbie
an other matter which happened at the same time, and in the same city. For a
young gentle woman, upon license first obtained, did go for deutie sake to
vysit her husband, and entered in to the prison where he lay for religion.
When this was known: the superintendent (as one ready to catch hold of a
pray fallen in to his own snare) gives commandment to shut her up also in
prison. The gentle woman shortly after (either upon some grief conceived for
this inhumane dealyng, or through terror of some further treachery, or else
upon some annoyance taken by the distemperature and lothesomenesse of the
place) is possessed with a very greuouse sickness, and falls into a
manifest peril of her life. And when yt Great in-humanitie
was looked for every hour that she would die: her sorrowful husband made
humble suit that she might be en larged alitle, and removed (if it were but for
one day) forth of the prison, to some other place, where she might use the
help of skillfull women. But his suit would not be heard. O hearts of iron.

I have now been long enoughe in prisons (my dear frinde Gerard,) and my
speech (perhaps) may seem to have tarried ouerlong in this kind of discourse.
But where (I pray you) should I be with better will, than with our own
fryndes? why do I say our own fryndes? Nay rather with the most dear
fryndes of Christ our God and Savior? for the life of these fryndes is our
light: their constancy is our example: their fortitude is our woorshipp and
honor: and their death is our glory. Wherefore, I confess, that though
in body I am absent: yet in spirit I do co^uerse continually with them, and
they shall never slyppe out of my mind. For I prefer their bolts and
shackles, I extol their prisons, I exalte their reproaches and contumelies
far above the riches, welthe, and diadem of any Cresus, who so ever he be.
Yet notwithstanding I would leave these captives for a time, and go forth to
visit the^ which are toiled and turmoiled abroode, were it not that the fit
occasion of this place admonishes me (before I depart) to make mention of a
certain bare shyft, or poor starting hole, which owre adversary (upon the
oportunite of imprisonment) takes hold of, and fortifieth: I mean that
deceitful pretense of a disputation, A pretense to dispute.
which he would be thought to profer to captives in prifon: but to such as
are at liberty he will not yield therein, no not when he is requested, or
becalled and challenged there unto: Nay, nor yield therein to the self same
captives upon any indifferent or reasonable condition or law. And thus the
case stands.

About twenty years past, when our adversaries had expelled us, before we
were called to our answer: and when they were in full possession of our
romthes and habitations: then lo, (upon a practice to give a show to the
people, that they hold by Justice that which they have usurped by violence)
they proffered a co^bate, by way of writing, in the whole matter of
controversy. And here Protestants provoke Catholics to write. And yet forbydd
their books.
upon they becalled us forth to write, and they challe^ged so many of our
party, as were either learned in deed, or so accounted, with this condition
annexed to the challenge, that who so ever shall win the victory in writing,
shall be accounted, sounder in truth of teaching.

Our Catholics most willingly take hold of the condition. Many very
great learned me^ (though troubled with the discommodities of exile) did never
thelesse write much in the English tongue, for the defense of the Catholic
faith: as those famous doctors and Learned clerckes, Saunders, Harding,
Fekena^, Alan, Stapleto^, Heskin, Marshall Dorma^, Rastall, and others. They
set forth the state of the whole controversy very plainly: they show what
reason, authority and truth we have on our side: And they lay wydeopen the
great fraud, falsehoode, lapse, fall and error, on our adversaries side.

But when they on the other side perceived them selves to be over reached by
their own cunnyng, and in a manner beaten down in this open co^bate: then they
devised an other shyft, such a one in deed, as indesperate cases were
necessary, albeit no discrete nor skillfull mean for the safety of their
estimation and credit. For they procured the Queen's very sharppe and
threatnyng iniunction to be proclaimed against all those persons which should
have, read, receive, bring or co^uey in to England any such book as those,
which they the^ selves before had urged the Catholics to write. Here upon
what great vexations from hense forth our Catholics have endured for these
books. It is no easy matter to Judge. For many have been haled to the rack
Persecution for Catholic books.
and painbank: many have been streictlie examined upon their oaths: some have
been deeply fined: very many have been chased away, and for fear forced to
fly into exile: An infinite number of houses have been by night searched,
narowlie perused, ryfled and ransacked in every corner: And all, but upon a
light suspicion only of these books. And if any of these books happened to
be found in a search: it was (be ye assured) a matter sufficient for a
greuouse presentment. If a man should bid an adversary answer one of those
books: it were a vehement presumption (forsothe) of no good subject. If one
should speak but a word in defense of such a book: oh, that were a plain
evidence, yea and a flat verdite of a traiterouse heart.

Now, when our men see them selves driven in to these streicts and
difficulties, that they could not (without very great inconveniences and
molestations) either write or speak in the defense of the cause of God, and of
his church universal: what did they then think you? truly (even as it
besemed good and Catholic Christians to do) as occasions of matters
required, they submitted their bodies to prisons, their hands to gives and
manacles, their feet to bolts and shackles, their goods to rauine and spoil,
yea and their lives to perils of death. In the mean season (lest they might
seem to distrust their own cause, and by silence to betray gods business)
they made a petition quietly and calmelie, for to have indifferent conferences
with their adversaries: and (with as much submission and earnest fute as might
be) they humbly sued to every magistrate, that either public disputation, or
at the least private conference touching the now litigiouse points of religion
might be admitted, under reasonable and indifferent laws and conditions.

Many at home, and mani abroad did The earnest suit of Catholics for
liberty to dispute.
solicit this suit by way of petition: some applied it earnestly by favor of
fryndes: other pursued it by authority and credit as they might: and very
many preferred yt by other ways and means. Our men for their parts (though
by the way of great disaduauntages, yet leanyng to the word of the prince,
and for truth sake) offered them selves willingly and gladly to enter in to
this combat, with this only hope and confidence, that they trusted, many
sowles, which were redeemed with the pretiouse blood of our savior Christ,
and now are defiledd with heresy, might with disceptation by gods grace be
recalled and recovered. Whereupon they gave to the adversaries the whole
liberty and choice, either to use their own homemates, or to call for others
forth of foreign countries, for the defense of their cause: yea and to
appoint the day, to chose the place, to move the question, to prescribe the
order and form, to begin, to end, and to do all things after their own
will and fantasy, so always, and upon such condition, as some law, rule,
form and order of a disputation might be observed and kept. Protestants
distrnst their own cause.


But (to make a short tale) the adversary will none of these. For he did
foresee (and not vnwiselye) that his party would go to wrack, if the matter
were once to be tried by combat, hand to hand in open field. And therefore
he refused this open cooping at barriers in Schools, as to lightsome a place
for their dark dealings, and to famous a trial of their deceit and guile,
according to the sayeing of our Saluioure: every one that does evil, hates
Joan. 3.
the light, and comes not to the light, to the end that his works be not
reproved: but he that works truth, comes to the light: that his works may
be manifest, for they are vvrooght in god.

Yet in fine, two practices our adversaries (lest they might seem to do
nothing) did put in execution for their more security and estimation sake.
First, they stir up sharper persecution against all Catholics, but
specially against the more learned, and against such as were thought able in
this conflict to annoye them with reasonyng. Therefore they removed from london
the Lord bishopp of lincoln, and the Lord Abbot of westminster, with others
of sownd learning, profownd knowledge, very much gravity, and great virtue,
not a few. All these The castle of vvisbiche.
they cast into an vplandisne dongeon, spoil them clean of all their books,
debar them from all intercourse of talk and conference one with an other,
(except at meal time) and shutt them up close and severally in dark corners.
And if any besides of name and account were left out, them also they call
unto these Iron grates of prisons, that this way, at the least, they may put
all to silence.

Secondly, when they had contrived The shift and craft of ministers in their
all these things according to their own desires: the^ they convey them selves
with great secrecy in to prisons. There they set upon the captive
Catholics suddenly pretense to dispute.
ere they be aware, and call them in all haste to dispute of faith, without
any time before hand to think on the matter, or liberty to talk thereof
among them selves, And lest they might help or comfort one an other, or
testify one for an other: they assail them (for the most part) severally,
every man alone by him self. And yfanie of our party did object their
vneauen dealing, or desire time to consider, books for study, or speech with
his companions for instruction, and other things requisite for his defense: and
if any alleiged further (as some did) that there wanted an indifferente Judge
to give the sentence, convenient auditorie to bear witness, and faithful
notaries to set down the arguments in writing: then lo, our adversaries
exclamed that we refuse the combat, that we stand upon bare shyfts of words,
that we seek for excuses, and fly in to holes and corners: In so much as
many on our side moved with the importunate clamoure of these fellows did
yield them selves to all manner of conditions that were offered, puttinge their
on lie confidence in the goodness of their cause.

But what so ever our men alleiged, yt served to small purpose there. For
either did our adversaries co^tumeliouslie reject it, or odiouslie draw and
wrest it to treason, or else most unjustly deprave, pervert, and misreporte
yt to the people. And thereof I have many examples: but here a few may
suffice.

First yt fell out of late, that after the se^te^ce of death was pronounced
against Diverse examples of cauills and untrue surmise of ministers.
Master hanse (the good priest) for the Catholic faith, and he now in
prison preparing him self to die: there came unto him a certain minister under
color of frindeshipp, with a countenance settled and framed to an hypocrisy
of holiness, but the yssewe of the matter proved him to be full of bitter
malice, and of every subtle shyft to deceive the poor man. For in speech
between them two, this minister, besides many other reprochefull words, did
charge that martyr of Christ with treason against the Queen's person: where
upon when the same martyr had made this answer, that he had never offended
against the Queen's Majesty, that he had but only made a profession of the
Catholic faith and religion, which cannot betraie nor hurt the Majesty of
any humane creature, for so much as above all other things it most pleases
the Majesty of God. When good master hanse (I say) had spoken these and
other like words: and said further that he most willingly would embrase this
death, sith he was then clear in his conscience, that he had never committed
any haynouse crime against her majesty: but rather (according to his duty)
hade commended her to God in his prayers: and that this crime of treason
against her majesty, imputed unto him, by his adversaries, is in truth
neither any crime of treason at all, nor any synn in the sight of God: Lo
this goodly gospeller (as one that had catched plenty of matter, whereupon to
forge a malicious surmise) passes forth of the prison, bruteth abrood to the
people and publishes in a libell written and printed, that hanse affirmed no
treason to be a sin before God: Master hanse having intelligence hereof,
complained of this injury openly to the people when he was brought to the
place of execution: and there he opened his meaning towchinge his former
words, and besought god to perdo^ the accuser, for so unjust, and so odious an
untruth.

Likewise two ministers for conference sake came into a prison, to a gentleman
Tripp and Crovvley against M. Thomas pound.
which had been some time a courtier, and then was become a prisoner, and so
had been many years, for his faith. And when they had onerworne and waisted all
their matter with contumeliouse and lewed words, and had wearied the gentle
man with blasphemies (as he him self by letters complained), and yet for their
parts had not either concluded upon any matter, or refuted any thing by
argument: then this gentleman (lest their talk should have been altogether
idle and unprofitable) moved them at length to conclude upon some certain
principal points whereupon they might afterward proceed to discuss the rest.
And the poi^t was this: whether the private spirit of each The controversy.
particular person, or the common spirit of the universal church ought to
judge of the sense of holy scripture? For when he had heard them alleige
scripture out of all places, and wrongfullie: he affirmed that in these
matters of controversy, a man should not run to the bare letter of
scripture, in such sense as every particular man list to take yt: (for by
this A necessary principle for deciding of controversies.
mean all heresies are defended:) but that we ought to resort to the most
certain Judgment of the church universal, at the least way most ancient:
which being directed by the spirit of God, does lay down before us the true
and natural sense of scriptures. And because the ministers did not admit this
grownd, nor yet refell yt: but (as their fashion is) run into corners,
creakes and starting holes: he put down in writing (being but a lay man, and
not much travailed in scriptures) six strong reasons to fortify his opinion:
whereunto he desired that the ministers would answer, and there with all
requested that it might be lawful for him, by speech or pen to confute their
answers, if they should seem to him either impertinent and doubtful, or
otherwise weak and insufficient.

Well, when these ministers had got the writing: thense they pack in haste,
and to the superinte^de^t of london they go: and to him they co^plain of the
man's pertinacie, how, notwithstanding their aduises and motions, he refused to
be a Caluinian, yea and that he durst take upon him to defend his opinion by
writing. This superintendent (as in very deed he is a fumish hasty man, and by
nature choleric) being outragiouslie incensed with ire, desineth the gentleman
by and by in his mind to some special pain, purposing to punish him
throughlye: And thereupon he thrusts him so delulie out of london i^to a
streicter kind of imprisonment: he locketh him Strateford castle.
up in an old decayed castle, a raw, unhaunted and obscure place, vhere he
could neither have the sight of the Sun or other light, nor yet of men: he
loadeth him with yrons: and (not to recite all particulars) he afflicts him
with calamities meruailouse and without all measure. Now these ministers
(being thus put owte of all doubt and fear of their adversary) do set forth
a book, and make a kind of answer to the reasons by him before laid down
unto them: and as in other things, so especially in this, they dealt most
injuriously with him: for they conceal and dissemble the very state and
principal point of the question and controversy, charging him to have said
that the scriptures are (in his opinion) of less authority than the church:
where in truth he talked not of the authority of such scriptures as are
evidently known to be divine scriptures: but his talk was either touching
the knoweing and discerning of such uncertain scriptures as have been called in
question and doubted of: or touching the understanding of the sense and true
meaning of dark and obscure places of divine scripture. Walker. In the
marshalsey.


Moreover, a certain divine doctor, and one of some authority among our
adversaries, came one day (with no small ostentation, nor light train of
folowers) to a certain prison for disputation sake, as he pretended: (for these
fellows would gladly bear the people on hand and make them believe that they
do offer to our men disputations thick and threfolde,) there, this gloriouse
doctor calls to gether in to the halle every prisoner which whas shut up in
that prison for religion, both young and old, priests and lay folk: he
tells them that he is come to dispute: he and his associates take their seats
on the benche, and sit down solemnelre. And first of all, though the
prisoners were in number many: yet he demands of each man his name, and
dwelling place. If any answer not readily: the divine So he railed against M.
Cotton a priest, for telling his surname and not his proper name.
by and by would fall in a terrible chafe, and shake up the prisoner
outragiouslie. Then before the disputation did begin, one of the prisoners
upon occasion did alleige forth of holy scripture some thing which the
doctor had denied: whereupon, the sely old man waxes very augrie, and in no
case will admit that any such thing is to be found in scripture: the book is
brought forth, and the thing is recited very clearlie word for word as it
had been alleged. The old man takes his spectables and reads: but for that
the book was an other man's book, he would not credit ye, but called for his
own: his companions fall to laughing. And (to be short) without further
proceeding they all arose and departed: and thus the disputation was ended
before it began. Then the sorye old fellow (when he sees that he could not
prevail) falls a cursing, and wishes mischef and destruction to the house
and to all the prisoners there. And all this fell out thus, the keeper of that
prison being present, and ashamed of the matter. Now, what can be said more
fond or more ridiculous than this? And yet nevertheless yt was reported for
certain and sure, that this mighty Hercules had overthrown and beaten down
the Catholics: albeit in very deed he never used argument: but only a bare
brabling and contention in words.

There is also among our adversaries Fulk.
one other odd minister, a bygge man in his own opinion, yet in other men's
judgments he is but mean: how be yt in tongue not unready, yet rash and
headlong, by reason that he knows not him self. This fellow not long ago
(hoping to pick out some piece of estimation by contending with great
personages) crept, unlooked for, into a prison, where the aforesaid learned
and reverend vvisbiche castle.
fathers, the bishop of Lincoln and* Abbot of west minister with others of good
account are imprisoned for religion: And at his first entree he gives in
commandment that they all appears personally before him: he tells them
that he his come to confer about the chief litigiouse points of religion:
and signifies his will and pleasure, that they should begin the dispision.
But when those good fathers (as they are wise) did perceive the man to do all
this without warrant, and without any certain order or form of conference,
but only upon a rash and indiscreet head of his own, and meerlie for
vainglorie: they make small account of him, but contemn such ridiculouse
vanity of the arroga^t young fellow. And therefore when they had spoken
something abowte the unreasonable condition then offered, and of their want of
books, time and other things: they leave the man to his own folies, and (as
best besemed their gravity) they let him pass away, as one by them
conte^ned, rather than vexed. But yet the young peacocke (as his manner is)
advanced up his tail triumphed abroode with all brauerye, and publishes a
pamphlet of his great conquests and victories over captives: In which pamphlet
there are many untruths, very many friuolouse toys, and nothing to serve his
turn, nothing to make for his side, but mere vanity, and that even by his
own declaration, as he him self tells his own tale.

But when such huddling and shyfting of matters was known, so as many even
of our adversaries, did mislike yt (for it had allmoste bredde a common
quarrel, and had wellnigh putt into the peoples heads some suspicion that
their cause was over thrown:) Some there were which (to salve this sore and
to take away the infamy) made a certain promise that within short space
there should be a disputation with co^ditio^s very indifferent and very
reasonable. And thereupon, the In November. 1580.
knight Marshal writes unto the keeper of the Marshallsey, and commands him
to inquire and signify, if any papists under his charge would maintain their
cause by A new disputation. appointed
disputation: that they should send to him in writing such co^clusions as they
would defend, and should subscribe their names, make them selves ready to
dispute: that he him self would advertise them very shortly of the manner,
place and time of the disputation. M. Bosgraue. M Shyrvvin. M. Heart.


This thing pleased all men. Three of our priests, though younger in years,
and of less reading (for such as were of more ability and experience were all
sent away from London as I told you before): yet with a certain good assurance,
trust and confidence in their cause, do under take the charge: And therefore
they close up certain conclusions in writing, subscribe their names, and send
them away to the knight Marshall with great thanks. But the conclusions
please not our adversaries: they appoint others according to their own
fantasy and send them back. These our men do allow: the day for the
disputation is appointed: great is the expectation thereof. But what followed?
Forsothe, in the day (as I think) next before they should dispute, the
aforesaid defendants on our side were removed from the prison of the
Marshallsei, and conveyed to the tower of London to be racked: that sith they
would not be taught nor persuaded with reasons fett from authority, they might
there be trained up and exercised with arguments derived from the rack and
torture.

But yet all this could not terrefye our Catholics from their suit touching a
disputation to be had with an indifferent co^ditio^. VVher upon a noblemo^, and
one of the chief of her Majesty's most honorable Thee Earl of Lecestre
Council, moved (as I think) with the urgent petitio^s of some Catholics,
agreed thus far at length, that in this common suit, he would in a private
manner satisfye some principal persons that were then in prison for religion.
For he called them unto his chamber, and said, that upon the love he bare unto
them, he was moved to agree unto their requests, and desired them to show them
selves indifferent and diligent hearers, and not peruerslie obstinate in a
desperate case: And said further, that he puts no doubt, but by this one
conference of very well learned men, the truth of the matter might most
easily be discovered. The gentlemen show them selves willing to be conformable
to that request, and humbly thank his Lordeshypp for so great a benefit.
But they look about if they could see any Catholic divine to defend their
cause by disputation D. Laurence hu^frey with his fellows.
(for there were four ministers present to impugn it) yet they find none:
they merueile much: nevertheless they speak not a word of yt: Because they
would see the yssewe and end of the matter.

And at the last up rises a minister Adam Squier.
from the benche, and (with very great commendatio^s of his associates before)
down he goes as smothelie as may be among the prisoners, and offreth him
self to be our spokesman, and to plead our cause. Who cowlde forbear
laughing, if the reverence of the place would have admitted a skorne? who would
not have pityed our case, to see us thus frustrate and disapointed of our
own frendelye counsailers, and committed to the defense of none but of our
foes? Yet forsoothe he gives us fair words, and will needs bear us on hand
that he will support us with his faithful assistance. And thereupo^ he
steppeth forth, and up he Ierketh his hands, and white of his eyes to heaven
ward, (as his manner is) and (full deuoutlye like a good man) he there
undertakes the defense of the cause: but of what cause I pray you? forsoothe
even of that same cause, which before (like an apostata) he had betrayed and
forsaken, and made his brag thereof when he had so done. But who would
believe a skornfull and light tryfeler? Is there any so mad (think you) as
to commit so weighty a cause to him that pleads in skorne? or to trust a
Ieasting disputer with a matter of salvation upon his bare word: who (as it is
reported) can not be trusted of his creditors in a money matter, no not upon
his oath when he swears most deeply?

And these are all in a manner, that can be said of the disputations or
co^ferences with ministers in matters of learning. For I do not remember, that
our adversaries ever yielded to grant any disputation to Catholics, besides
these which here I have mentioned: saving only The disputation withdraw father
Campian.
the late disputation which they granted to master Campian, being the^ a
prisoner, and twice before that time racked, destitute of books, and
unprovided of And once again racked syns the time here mentioned.
all things, saving only of a good cause, and of a well willing mind. But as
for that disputation, we hear (even by the testimoni of the^ which were
present) of much parcialitie, and injury therein used, yea and of mani such
odd shyfts, as perhapps to learned men might seem skant credible: but we are so
admonished by examples in experience of former times, as we are forced to
mistrust any thing, beyt never so vnliklie, towching the indirect dealing of
timourous and falseharted men in a naughty cause. For who is ignorant, that
need makes the naked man to run, or that the swoorde of necessity is of all
other most dangerous? or who does nor very well understand that old proverb,
poverty makes many thieves, and that error and want in a desperate case, lead
many men into dishonest ways? but now let us disgresse a little while to other
matters, for me thinks I have spoken enough of prisoners. And though their
condition seem hard and painful: yet is the condition of those men either
more painful or more intricate, and more encumbered which live abroad under
some color of liberty and are neuerthlesse vexed and shaken with storms and
tempests. For they which are shutt up close withein the limittes of prisons:
though in other respects they seem to be full of calamity, yet in this one
point seem very happy, that in mind they have some quietness and
tranquillity. The affliction of Catholics ovvte of prisons.
But the Catholics which are abrood I mean those that are dwelling dispersed
through England, are neither suffered to rest nor abide any where: but are
tossed and tormoyled to and fro, as it were with waves and wyndes in continual
vexatio^s and troubles. For where so ever you would set your feet, what way
so ever you would go by street or pathe, you may see lamentable sights: this
man to fly away: that man to lie hydden in a corner: an other to convey him
self privily in disguised apparel: some apprehended and led to the lustice:
others to be sought for and not taken: many to abide among busshes and vvoods:
agreate nombre to haunt the feilds in the day time, and never to repair home
but at mydnight.

And yet when they are at home in Searching of houses by night.
their own houses: they can not so be in security one hour. For at midnight
our adversaries oftentimes rushe in forcibly upon them, and set a watch
about the house, that none may escape: then they search every chamber, even
the bedcha^bers of wives and maidens: about they go throwgh all the house
from place to place, veweing, tossing, and rifeling in every corner, chests,
coffers, boxes, caskets and closetts. And if any thing happen to be fownd that
may work some detection of religion, or may bread any blame, or minister
matter of surmise: as silver chalices, patens, candlesticks, crosses, books,
vestments, and other ornaments which are called church stuff: these they
snatche away, by a privilege of robbery, and by the prerogative of their
gospel: for other law they have none to maintain these their doeings. And
that these things may not go alone, they catch hold oftentimes, for
company, of what so ever other thing lies bye. And lest any thing else should
be lost by negligence, they stick not to ryfle the bosoms, purses, and coffers
of honest matrones, yea and to uncover their very innermost garments, and
oftentimes to tear and re^t the a sunder with violence, to see if any Agnus
del, crucifix, medalls, beads or any hallowed things do lie hydd there. These
pageants their sergeants do play, their catchepoles I mean, whom they call
pursyuants, those hungrye storuen beasts running most fierslie on every pray
or bootye: And in the power of these fellows yt lies, who^ so ever they do
find in the house either to commit to prison, or at their will and lyking to
trouble with other vexatio^s, except they be anointed with the oil of the
sinner, Psalm. 140.
and pacified with some grateful sacrifice of money.

This is the peace and rest which our Catholics do find at home in their
own houses. Let us see alitle what interteinment they do find abroad. I
have told you how these pursyuants like theuysh night fyendes do run with
deadelie hatred to do displeasures in howses: we may add hereunto how Psalm.
99.
they besett the common ways and cross streets with ambushements like noone
day devils. For if any of our men, whose name is presented, do happen to
pass through either city, town or villaige: him they apprehend in the common
street. If any enter in to any city yea by night, and be betrayed or
bevvraied by the detectio of some espiall, taleteller or pickthanke (vvereof
we have great store:) him they hale and dravv forth of the common tavern, or
ynne: but though one be neither presented, nor bevvrayed, yet is he not for
all that in safety, except he utterly eschevve all company and conversation
with men: For by many vvayes and means, even upon a light suspicion only may
a man be brought in peril: As for example, if a man do refuse to eateflesche
on days prohibited by the church: if he be seen to pray some what
earnestly, and spetiallie in latin prayers: if he bless him self with the
sign of the cross: if he counsel any to fast, or move one to virginity or
single life: if he some what earnestly commend the ancient fathers: if he
say or affirm any thing on the behalf of the Catholic religion, or confute
a very manifest untruth of our adversaries: Nay, when others by course one
after an other do rail and speak reprochefully against the Catholic
religion, if he (for his part only) hold his peace and speak never a word:
any of these is matter sufficient to bring a man in question for religion. And
to be short, there is extant an edict and law, not In November 1580.
long a go published, whereby every man has power and authority to present,
appeache, or accuse any man, who so euerhe be, upon every least
circumstance, which may induce any suspision or surmise of the Catholic
religion. By mean whereof, many since that time have been apprehended, and
very many have been afflicted with diverse vexations and adversities.

But there is one manner of roughe dealing (for I will not use a more greuouse
term) which afflictetth more tha^ all the rest: I mean that, which our
men do find and feel in suits of law, in trial and Judgments before
justices, in private businesses; and in the common conversation and
entercourses of living to gether one with an other. For this is a matter
which in deed touches the very veins and sinevves of the natural society
of mankind, that are nourished and preserved by Justice and humanity or
gentle behauioure: and, do detest all cruel barbarousnes. But for my part, I
do neither complain, nor think it mete to complain, if neither favor be
shevved unto our persons, nor pity nor compassion to our estate and
condition, be yt never so afflicted or miserable, (for I can be content, sith
they will needs have yt so, that such humanity and civil courtesy as nature
grants even among enemies be denied unto us their bethren, for the hatred
which they bear to our religion:) yet in very truth, for so much as there
be some, which are not satiate with the rigor of laws, and greuousnesse The
great rigor of some Judges against Catholics.
of pains and punishments laid upon us all ready, but they will needs add a
bitter vexation of malice and evil will of their own devise and making: inso
much as either by pretense of law they use rigor against us, where there is
no law to warrant them: or else they exte^d the rigor of the law, further
than the mind of the lawmaker did reach: and that in greatest, and most
weighty causes, even such as concern our lives and our blood: no man
should wounder, yt we mourn, if we lament, if we sighe and groan alitle under
so great a bourden of calamity.

Let us therefore see, what Catholics do endure also in this manner of
persecution, which arises upon hatred and despite of the christian religion.
First, there is a certain law (which before I have recited) that, who so ever
shall obtain from the by shopp of Rome bulls or public Page. Number 2.
instruments, or bring the same in to England: he must be reputed guilty of
high treason. Now admit this to be a most Just law: (for I do not here
entreat of the equity and indifferency of the law, but of the mind and
intent of the law:) Who sees not that the intent of this law was only to
except, provide and take order, that the pope should not determine or appoint
any such thing to be done, touching causes or affairs of England, as he was
wont to do by way of bulls (as they term them) or writts Apostolic? And yet
not withstanding, not long ago, when a certain bare copy of 1575.
the bull, conteinynge a denuntiation of a year of Iubiley, then past, was
fownde: albeyt the same perteined not to English men: allthough it was printed
with in an other princes dominions: allthowgh the force thereof was determined
more than a year before: although it lay (as matter of no account) among only
torn and cast A notable point of injustice.
papers: all this not with standing: the greuousenes of the matter was so
vehemently enlarged, and aggrauated by the severity Judge Ma^vvoode. M. Mayn
priest.
of a Judge: as a priest in whose chamber the copy was fownd, was, for that
same cause, put to a most cruel death: and a M. Trugio^
gentleman of great woorshipp, though ignorant of the matter, yet beause he
enterteined the same priest in his house, was by the sentence of the same Judge
turned owte of all his goods and possessions (which were very worshipful) and
cast in to perpetual prison.

Again, before the same Judge and promoter, (for he executes both those At
dorcester the fifth of September. 1581.
offices against Catholics) a certain honest man was arraigned of high
treason, upon the one and twentieth capital law before mentioned, because he
had given page. 67. Number. 21.
a reason to one of his neighbors, why he him self might not go to the
churches of protestants with a safe conscience. Now, this Judge did interpret
the ma^s words in such a sense, as if by the reason which he gave, he meant to
have drawn his neighbor to his own opinion, and co^sequentlie to have
dissuaded him from the Religion of England, and by an other A hard co^struction
of a savve.
consequence to bring him to the obedience of the bishop of Rome. So long are
the snares which are set to intrapp our blood. But there is yet an other
severe practice of this Judge, to give more show of his cruel mind in this
matte^r. For when yt was referred to a Jury (as the custom of the country
requires:) and that the inquest could not find the offense to be so greuouse
as deserved death: they were compelled by the authority of the same Judge to
find it to be a matter of treason: such a practice as was never wont to be
used, nor ought to be used against any man, were he never so far past hope of
grace, never so detestable naughty. The law against vagabunds.


And where there is a law in England that such slouthefull beggars as will not
abide i^ one certain place, but idelie roaue abroad from place to place like
vagabunds should be whipped and burned in the ears with an hot iron: yt so fell
owte that a Marck. syppet.
vong man, born of honest and rich parents, sikillfull in humame learning,
having left his study for a time, and going from London to visit his fryndes
was apprehended, and brought before a Judge for religion. What affinity is
here with the persons noted to be punishable by this law? yet because the
young man was the^ lately come forth of ffraunce, and had been trained up in
the popes Seminary: therefore and hasty froward Judge, in despite and malice
that he bears to the Christian ^letevvood.
religion and Catholic cause, would not dimisse the poor man before he was
whipped through London, and odiouslie burned in the ear. The like punishment
touching burning in the ear was executed very latelye at the City of yorcke
(as I have heard) and upon a priest. And I could reckon up a great number of
like strict Fulk.
dealinges of Judges against Catholics: but this may suffice for a complaint.
God which Judges the poor in justice, and requiteth Esa. 11.
the provvde abundantlye. Our Lord Psalm. 30.
which is both Judge and witness (as Jeremy Ier. 29.
says), and will Judge in measure against Esa. 27.
measure, when measure shall be cast away, pardone these Judges for so
wicked and so unjust judgments.

But what might a man say to the wickedness of this time? whether now (good
God) whether now have these exulcerate and rancorouse controversies towching
matters of faith and religion thruste us? how have they plucked us down? no
nation in the world adourned with civil manners: no country endued with the
holy light of Christ's Gospel: no people i^structed with Christian laws and
customs, was ever either better framed to courtesy and humanity, more
disposed to beneficence and fryndelie behauioure, more inclined to the love of
equity, more bent to pity and mercy, than this English people and nation
was, before such time as this unlucky, detestable and pestiferous heresy had
hardened the heart, and intrailes of love, infecting them with deadelie poisons
of malice. For this is she that has shaken in sunder the bolts and bares of
right and equity: this is she that has dissolved the bonds of love and
amity: this is she that has blown up the fowndations of mercy and
beneficence: this is she that has cut in su^der the veins and sinews of the
common society of men, and with a fyendelie force and tempestuous violence
has knocked together the members thereof and beaten them one against an other
into miserable disorder and confusion.

But now perhaps (frinde Gerard) the time would require me to make some end of
this epistle: for me thinks I am very long: and I owght to have care that I
weary you not with a report so greuouse and lamentable, as in truth it can
not but vehemently trouble you (I think) whils you are reding it, seeing yt
woorketh such passions in my self in writing it, as some times I can not
refrain from weping, whiles I considre, either what I have written, or what I
have omitted. For there be far more things that ought to be suppressed and
passed over in silence, rather than here to be committed to writing: partly for
that I should charge my self with an infinite labor in reciting all the
particulars: partly, because the certain knowledge of very many things in these
difficulties and troubles of times and causes, can not be had: but most
especially, for that the explication and notice of the principal matters, and
the discovery of the persons whom they concern, do run to gether in such
sort, as they can not be so separated that the matters may be well understood,
nor so annexed as the persons may not be damnified. For the things can not be
committed to public speech or writing, but that the persons may be drawn
thereby in to private peril. Let us there fore leave these things to them which
are to come after us, that they may either commit them to writing when
oportunitye shall serve: or else in the mean time, with inward amasednesse,
and secret sorrow marvel and be wail the case.

Now these things which I have told may suffice to minister matter, either
for sorrow and heuines, or for a lesson and example. For our calamity ought to
be a perpetual lesson, not only to our selves and our posterity but to all
Catholics also through the woorlde: how terrible a thing it is (as the
Apostle says (, to fall in to the hands of the liueing god: And to refuse to
do the vvoorthie works Heb. 10.
of penance: yea, after me^ have been theru^to admonished. For our own synns
and the synns of our parents and auncetours have laid upon us this most
heuye and painful scourge of God, which will wax heuyer withowte doubt, and
reach further, if the Justice of God, (by due repentance of Catholics, and
amendment of their sinful lives) be not prevented.

And as for sorrow, particular or common, (frind Gerard,) who would not judge
that the things now by me recited may procure sorrow, and heaviness enough,
either to you or me, or to any Catholic who so ever: for as they be very
many, most grievous, and haunt us daily: so in respect of the cause, they are
most unjust: for their manner of dealing, they are most adiouse, and for the
Innocence of the persons which suffer, they are most unseemly and full of
indignities. The strait examination of Catholics.
Nevertheless (as I have said before) I could not touch every special
matter, nor yet the chief and principal points: then much less is any man
able to putt down in writing the particularities of matters moved in that
strict manner of examination, practiced by our adversaries against us, with
interrogatories so drawn in length by piece meal, with such searching and
siftyng even in to the smallest motes that may be discerned, so curiously, so
circumspectly, with so many eyes cast upon a man, and with so many notes, and
observations as nothing can escape them. And if a word, yea a piece of a
word slipp forth of a man's mouth at unawares, or that he happen to give but a
wink with his eye, or a nod with his head, whereby any suspicion may arise,
that he favors our cause: there is then matter enough, whereupon either to
accuse him, or to cast him in prison. As of late (by report) some were put in
prison for speaching afew words in commendation of Catholics touching the
late disputations.

But behold a more strange practice putt In August. 1581.
in execution by our adversaries, not many days a go. For all the students
abiding with in the universities, were by the^ enforced upon their oaths, to
discover and appeache every person, whom so ever they knew or suspected to
favor the Catholic religion in heart: to this intent and purpose (with out
doubt,) that they might drive away all suspected Catholics forth of the
universities. Now I pray you look well in to this devise. This matter of
suspecting, how far does yt reach think you? how easily is it covered
under the cloak of dissimulation? how redily does yt attend upon hatred and
envy? what licentiouse scope does it give to ambition? how much force does
it bring to ill will and malice? and how sharp spur is it to prick forward
every kind of revenge? See then an experiment fallen out even of the present
occasion of In Oxford.
this deep devise. A minister forsoothe did accuse one upon suspision of the
Roman religion. The person accused did ask the minister what he had for him
to induce that suspicion: because (said the minister) I do not see you resort
so much to sermons, as you would do, if you A folish surmise of a minister.
were fervent in the zeal of our religion. How weighty and strong is this
conjecture, to enforce an accusation? Alas full grievous and troublesome is the
state and co^ditio^ of them which even by laws and public authority are
subject to these storms of malice, and to these tempests of the surmising
forgerie of sycophants.

And because I am talking here of that pro^ptnesse, facility and rash
disposition to accuse, whereby our adversaries usually do charge us with
offenses, and do surmise slanderous tales, and mere cauills against us, and
that upon most frivolous and impertinent occasions: And albeit for have I
thought to have omitted this point: yet one example I will leave for this
place: whereby you may perceive, that we are not onele accused for small and
tryfeling matters, but blamed and punished oftentimes for the benefits which
we bestow upon them. The history is notably well known, pleasant also, and
yt will give to your Italians there (beside matter to maruaille at) some
pattern also of the estate and condition of our affairs and troubles. And thus
it is.

A courtlike gentleman of good wealth, An history touching restitution.
that had lived in much bravery, hapened to fall sick. And vvhiles he was
lyeing in great pain: he did fall (as at that time ytt happens often to the
most rechelesse) in to a vehement cogitatio^ and deep study of the life to
come. VVherevpo^ he called for a priest (for in mind and opinion he was
Catholic) that by his advise and counsel he might learn to dye well. The
priest (according to his deutie, and the custom of the Catholic church)
admonished the sickman among other things that if he had any way hurt or
injured any man, or unjustly possessed other men's goods: he should go about
by and by to make restitution according to his ability. The sick man did
agree to do so, and called to remembrance that he had taken away somewhat
from a certain Caluinian under color and pretense of law in deed, but not
under any good assurance for a Catholic conscience to trust unto: therefore
he took order for restitution to be made, and died. The widow, his wife being
very desirous to accomplish her husbands will, and affraied to committ the
matter to an heretic, was in very great perplexity of mind, and could
not ridd her self out of it. Now whiles she was thus entangled in the breres
of dowbtfullnesse: by good happ a priest comes to her she declared her M.
Alvvai.
grief unto him, and besecheth him for gods sake to help her, either with his
trauaille or with his counsel.

Now the good man, wha^ he perfectly understood the devout and holy desire
of the gentlevvoman, being himself a very zelouse and charitable man,
willingly proffered to put him self in all peril that might befall in doing
the thing which she desired, persuading him self that no man would be so cruel
and barbarous as of a benefit to desire reue^geme^t. Therefore first he
commended the matter The third day in Easter vveke.
to God, then he mounted on horseback and away he goethe on his Journey. And
when he came to the town where the man did dwell to whom the money was to
be delivered: he sets up his horse in the next Inn, that he might be
readier at hand, for scaping immediately after his Fisher of vvarvvick
business were dispatched: he goes him self to the creditors house, he
calls the man forth alone, takes him by the hand, and leads him a side
from the company Twenty pou^ds english.
of others. Then he declares that he has money for him, which he would
deliver to him with this condition, that he inquire no further, either who
sent yt, who brings yt, or what the cause or matter is, but only receive
the money, and use yt as his own. The old fellow promises fair, and with a
good will gives his word faithfulli to do so and with many thanks he
dimisseth the man, and sends him away.

The good priest with all the speed he was able to make hastneth to his hosts
house, for to catch hold of his horse and fly away: but all in vain. For
forthwith Two of the said fie shers brethren.
the deceitful old fellow betrayed the priest, and sent men after to apprehe^d
him. And first to begynn with all, they made this surmise against him, that
forsothe he is not a man but a devil, which had brought money of his own
making He is taken for a devil which makes restitution of ill gotten goods.
to bewitch the old man. And for a proof there of, they used this argument
among others, that he had a black horse. And this horse they did observe and
watch diligently whether he did eat hay as other horses eat or no. And as
for the priest, they put a horse lock about his leg, shutt him up close in a
strong chamber, and appointed a fellow to be with him continually both day and
night, which should watch yfhe did put offe his boots at any time, and if
his feet were like horsefete, or that he were cloue^ footed: or had fete
flytand forked as beasts have. For this they affirmed to be a special mark
whereby to know the devil, when he lies lurking under the shape and
likeness of a man. Then the people assembled about the house in great
nu^bres, and proffered money largely that they might see this monstre with
their own eyes. For by this time, the people are persuaded that he is in deed
an ill spirit or a very devil. For what man was ever heard of (say they)
which (yfhe had the mind, understanding and sense of a man) vvoolde of his
own voluntary will and without any respect or consideration at all give
or proffer such a sum of money to a man utterly unknown, of no
acquaintance with him, and a mere stranger of an other country.

Now when they had thus contumeliouslie vexed Christ's servant a while: they
pretended to set the man at liberty, and licenced him to depart and go away
whether he would: yet all was but a deceiptfull practice to work him more
spite and injury. For lo, the ungrateful and The brother of the said fisher
churlishe Caluinia^, which had received the monei, sent out privily a
suborned fellow to stay the good priest as he was goeing forth: to with hold
him from escaping away: and to accuse him of high treason. This was no sooner
done than the man was all ryfled, and spoiled: his horse ridden and used as
pleased them, his money all taken from him, saving a little portion to serve for
his expenses to the city of London, whether shortly after they sent him as a
prisoner with a strong and curiouse guard, And when he came thither, and had
opened the matter to her majesty's Council (or rather to one of the^, that the
matter might not be uttered abroad to the reproach of the dead:) he was by
them casten of, and put over to the Superintendent of London, and by him
thrown, first into one prison, then in to an other, and thyrdlie in to the
Tower That is, first in to his own porters lodge: the^ in to the gate house
at westminster.
of London, where the space wellnigh of a quarter of a year (hardly escaping
the rack and tortures) he was sore punished for that heinouse offense
(forsuthe) of restitution.

And here the recital of this history puts me in remembrance of that
ridiculous and wanton manner of chatting of our adversaries (as our most
ancient enemies were wont to do) in slaundering Catholics to be of familiar
acquaintance with devils. And I might sooner lack time tha^ matter, if I
should reckon up all the surmises, and fables which they have forged,
touching this point. But among many this is one. Poules Poules steple burned.
steple in London was meruailouslie (a few years since) blasted with
lightning, and set on a light burning fire ragiouse hoate and skant
extinguishible: Our adversaries laid the fault and blame thereof upon us, and
were not a shamed to say that it was done by Iuglings and coniurings practiced
by Catholics. Again, it happened that certain charms or inchauntments, and
devises of witchecraft wound up together in pieces of parchement with figures,
characters and such like fond toys, and hid in the grownde, were at length
fownd by certain persons: The matter was supposed to have been contrived for
some mischefe or destruction to the Queen's Majesty. But who was he among all
our adversaries which did not charge Catholics with that fact? yet lo, not
long after, yt was fownd out and proved, that a certain minister was the The
minister of Nevvington.
Author and principal of this sorcerie, and had diverse accomplices and
accessaries which were very zealouse gospellers: whereupon all was huysht
suddenly: vea (as busye as they were before) now they say not one word of the
matter, saving that some (to turn the fault from one to an other, that the
blame might fall some way on Catholics) said that this minister had perhaps
dissembled his religion and was a very papist in his heart. A like surmise was
devised upon an accident that happened in a city and university. Where Oxford.
a book bynder for speaking some words in the favor of the Catholic
religion was arraigned at the assizes, before the Judges, and roughly handled
by all the benche. For beside much grief and vexation which he endured in
prison: the matter fell out thus at the last, partly by the verdit of the
Jury, and partly by the rigor of the Judges: that the poor man was first
made to stand openly in the market place to his reproach and infamy, then
were his ears nailed hard and fast to a post and a knyfe was put into his
own hand, there with all to cut his own ears in sunder and so to deliver him
self. This was a feuere sentence above measure as many men then did think. But
what followed? A wonder full Judgment of God vndowbtedlie. For withein few
days after, the two Judges, and well nigh all the jury, many of the justices
and freeholders, with very many other of them which had been present there,
dyed all of a strange kind of disease, some in the said city, and some in
other places. But all the blame for this was laid upon Catholics: all this
was imputed to magike and sorcerie, as practiced by Catholics.

What safety then or security (frind Gerard) is there for us? In how hard
terms stand we think you, when not only other men's faults are laid upon us,
but the manifest Judgments of almighty God are peruerslie interpreted to
our inconvenience and infamy?

I could never make end if I should prosecute all the other means which our
adversaries woork to the dishonor and slander of our cause. For if they may
find one (be he never so base and so badde) which can tell any reprochefull
tale against Rome: or bring any tydinges sownding to the rebuke thereof, or
of any others which are thought to favor our faith and religion: albeyt that
the stuff which he brings, or the tale which he tells be either nothing
but very rakinges of the sink and ca^nells of filthy detractio^, or else
void of all probability or appeara^ce of truth: yet such a fellow is for
their toeth: him they take hold of as affectuouslie as they can, and obtrude
him to the people as a prophet: to him they give free leave, and liberty to
talk, to So was 10. Nicols a grammarion, and minister coming from Rome and
lyeing of Rome. Set up in the pulpet and honored with an honorable presence.
dispute, to preach, and to write what so ever he lusts according to his
own fantasy and pleasure, so he do it by way of despite and contumely
against the Catholic religion. Now whence comes so great rancour and hatred?
whereof springs so much displeasure and malice? what may be the cause of ali
this spite and envy? can ye tell? Yea but they rest not thus: they stay not
with in this degree of immodestie: nor are content to be kept with in these
limits of folly: they run headlong much further: for if there be none to be
fownde, which can tell skornfull and scoffing tales, nor throw up on heaps any
filthynesse, nor observe and note any milbehauiours against Rome: then do
these fellows forth of their own forge coin and create new miracles and
wondres of Rome, to do them selves some pleasure or service in pulpets,
tables, The 23. 24. 25. days of January. 1580. This fablingbook was printed
by 10. charlevvood and Ed. white with approbation under noted.
and books. And to such an effect they have lately settforth in a printed
pa^phlet mani marvelous things to have happened the last year at Rome, and
that by the space of many days. VVherby they would make us believe that God
by great and strange signs and tokens does show his wrath and indignation
against that city, for they tell us of two Suns and two rainbowes that
appeared at one time: that saint Peter's great gate did fall down, and kill
fourtene persons with eight soldiers. That two towers also of Saint Peter's
church were fallen, had beaten down the church and crushed in pieces much
people, among whom were eightene preests: further more, that the churches of
the franciscanes, saint sames, and of saint Bartilmew, with our ladies
church, the whole Monastery of Marie Magdalen, the whole Armorie of the city
of Rome, the hospital of an hundred and fifty persons with an infinity
number of other houses and buyldings fell down all at once: And all this
happened (say they) to the intent that the world might understand the Roman
Religion to displease God. I pass over and omit very many such artificial
shifts and devises which our adversaries do lean to, of purpose to make
our cause more odiouse in the open sight of the people.

Now therefore (to come at the last to an end) you know the state of our case,
in what terms we stand, and to what Issue our matters in England are
grovve^. All is on a hotefire with the light burning flames of pesecutions:
Catholics and right belieuers are every where afflicted with all manner of
disco^modities, with hatreds, with reproaches, with bo^ds, with imprisonments,
with injuries, and with what else soever serves to an afflicted life or
helps to make up a calamity, full, absolute and perfect: And yet for all
this our adversaries are not moved at all with any affection of pity or
compassion: but their wrath waxes fierce, and their malice grows fresh
daily more and more: In so much as now they seem to be come to that point
whereof our Savior foretold: that every one that kills you, think he
does a service to God. Ioh. 16.
But the Catholics do comfort them selves with the words of our Savior
foloweing in the same place: These things they will do to you, because they
have not Io. 16.
known my father nor me: but these things I have spoken unto you, that when
the hour shall come, ye may remember them, for I have spoken to you. That
sayeing also of Saint paul they do often recite for their co^sort. God is
faithful, which will not suffer 2. Cor. 10
you to be tempted above that you may, but even with temptation he will make
an increase, that ye may ondure.

This encreasse of the faithful, thus promised before hand as a recompense for
patient sufferance of persecution, the Catholics in England do se^siblie
feel The increase of Catholics in England.
to be passinge good: And thereupon yt falls owte, that beside the inward
sweetness of the holy ghost, they are also not alitle animated and
confirmed with this external comfort and consolation, whiles they understand
and see with their eyes the number of right belieuyng Catholics to be so
maruailouslye increased, syns the rigor of the persecutors haith been doubled
and redoubled upon them. For this is a manifest signification of gods love,
whereby he does assure and certify us that he will never forsake this our
cause, or rather I might say his own cause, if we for our parts do fulfill
and keep the rules and precepts of humility, meknesse, longanimitie and
patience. And without doubt if in mind and memory we would run over and
vewe the troubles which Catholics have suffered allredye: or measure and
esteem by conjecture the vexatio^s which may hang over their heads to be yet
suffered: we shall find, how yt can neither be imputed to the power or
ability of man, that hither to they have sustained the same: nor may be
looked for that hereafter by man's power they may persevere steadfastly to the
end. This must be begged and craved of God alone, and must by continual
prayers be obtained of the father of lights, from whom every best guyst and
every perfect Iac. 1.
guyft proceeds.

Now, what puissance and value of mind think you might suffice? what nobleness
of courage were needful? what strong and steadfast constancy do you judge
requisite to make me^ hable to bear and endure those vexations which before I
have reported? those contumelies (I mean) and those despites? those rebukes and
dishonors? those prisons, bolts and shakles? those deformities and disorders?
those loothsome and ill favored sights? those stinking savors? those
putrifactions for want of good lodging? those consumptions, waistings and
pinyngs away for lack of natural sustinance? those torments? those deaths?
And nevertheless that same which before I have said, I must here eftsoon
repeat and you must keep yt in memory, for it is true, that I have skant
touched the hundredth part of those afflictions which our Catholics daily
sustein in prison. But yet if Catholics might find such favor as they might
be entreated and used in such manner as thieves, man murderers, parricides, and
hainouse offenders are used, or might be releued with their own goods, or
refreshed with the benignity and alms that other men would bestow of them: we
showld have no cause to grudge, and we might well think that we were not
hardly delte withal. For I know there will be fownd in England many, as well
of honest calling, as of the degrees of wooshipp and honor, which willingly
woolde be content to sell away all their goods, lands and possessions, and to
yield them selves to become servants to the afflicted Catholics, rather than
the same Catholics should suffer so unseemly and dishonorable misehiefes and
inconveniences of hungre, famine, poverty and want of necessaries as they do
daily suffer and endure: but it will not be allowed nor permitted.

Yet I would not you should take me other wise than I mea^. I speak not of
those principal persons of honor or woorshipp, which are in prison for
religion: who (I deny not) have liberty to use their own goods. But I speak
of the great multitude of most miserable poor captives, and specially of
priests, who at this day are kept so straightly, as no man has access unto
them: and who so ever desires access, he is called in suspicion: and except
he can purge him self, he is apprehended by and by. So Master hanse of late,
when he desired to speak with some prisoners (because he had alms to deliver
to them) was attached as suspected for religion, and in short space after
hanged on the galovves. In like sort many other, for the same cause, have been
arreasted upon suspision, and clapped in prison. And by these means our
adversaries do terrefie Catholics, that none should dare to bring any alms
for prisoners.

And it is no less peril to the geuers than to the bringars, if the matter be
once known: But it happens to be known many ways: and our adversaries, to
get the knowleige thereof, do oftentimes putt priests to the rack, or other
tortures, and examine the^ who they are which M. Iohnso^ M. Briant an others
racked for the same cause, all most to death.
have given them alms? and who has bestowed upon the^ other woorks of
piety? And if any by force of torment should confess any such thing (which
to this day, by gods help, none has done:) then would our adversary
thereupo^ two manner of ways anoye us. First, he would utterly discredit the
man, as a traitor to his own frinds: then would he so afflict the geuer of
alms, as for dread of punishment he would drive away others from exercise of
like works of piety.

Now, sith our adversaries by this cunnyng devise have brought this to pass,
that none dare give alms, nor any dare carry to a prison the alms which is
given: yt must medes hereupo^ follow (as plainly with our eyes we see haith
followed) that our Catholics in prison through penury, nedynesse, and want
of necessaries must languish and wear away, and at the last for very pinyng
hungar and nakedness pitifully perish in prison I suppose you have heard of
a certain number of persons lately extinct and dead in prison at york: I will
not take upon me to auouche or suspect more hardly thereof, than as I have
said: albeit there be some which do suspect somewhat because (...) of
hu^tingdon.
that president there bears such mortal and inconsiderate hatred against
us, as he seems to covet nothing in the world so much as our utter ruin and
destruction. God be gratiouse to him, give him a better mind, and send him a
mileder spirit toward miserable captives, that he him self also, once at the
length when the time will come, may for him self obtain mercy at the hands of
the general and common Lord and Judge of us all.

If I would recite the bitter affliction and inhumanitie which Catholics in
that prison at york the years by past have felt and suffered, or at this time do
feel and suffer more than ever before: I should never make end. But by this
one we may conjecture of the rest. A certain minister M. Bell.
competenlie learned, which had stood a great while on our adversaries side,
and had very earnestly to the vttermoste of his power defended the same: came
at the length to such intelligence by reading of the holy fathers, as he did
see very clearlie that his companions had no truth to lean unto, but that
all was on our side, and that, with out all doubt. The zealouse young man could
not stopp the conceived light of truth, nor suppress the flame thereof
burning within his breast. When this was known abroad to the world our
adversaries apprehend the man, they seek by threathinges to putt him in fear:
But he for all that is not terryfied: they set upon him with arguments, but
he was to hard for the^: they would vvynne him with faier words, but he is
not allured. What then? they thrust him into prison, they handle him sharply:
yet is he nothing relented. At the last they hang him vpvvard are in such
manner, as his feet being put in a pair of high stocks, he lay with his
shoulders only upon the floor, and that without either bedding or any thing
to lean upon other than the bare floor, the space of very many days
together, saving that they showed him such favor only; as at certain times
they eased him some what, for his bodily needs. What can be more cruel than
this?

I omit here the rigours which are used against women there imprisoned for
religion; to whom over and besides the yexations that are incident to prisons:
this further grief is added, that albeit their husbands do yield, and are
conformable (as they term it) to our adversaries: yet are they all punished,
except they will either compel their wives to do as they them selves do, or
else will take away from them their necessary food and sustinance. What
then shall these miserable afflicted women do, when they cannot be permitted
to have the necessary relief of life, no not at their husbands hands? must
they not perish through the inconuenie^ces of penury and nedyenesse? and yet
our gospellers are not moved with any compassion or pity for all these.

And as to other prisons which are in London, I could report to you many
lamentable cases asvvell of such as late were extinct therein, as of them
which yet live there in misery, but that I fear lest my complainte would be
an occasion of more greuouse affliction yet this is most certain, that many
have endured very great extremities through penury, and yet daily look for
more grievous vexation, if that most severe law touching going to churches be
put Before mentioned.
in execution. For it will so utterly beggar exhauste and oppress
Catholics: as they shall not be able to releive either the^ selves or their
families, and much less to succeure others that are afflicted. And thereupon
the state and conditions of Catholics in England seems likely to fall in to
extreme calamities, and inconveniences, never heard of before with christian
ears, in such wise, as Innocents shall be spoiled of their own goods, yea and
pine away perish and be consumed with famine: and all for their conscience
only, towching the faith and religion of their aunceters.

But when I behold and earneslie look into that passing excellent, singular
and in deed princely no blenesse of heart, with the exceeding great clemency and
mild disposition which nature has planted in our Queen: I am hardly
induced to believe that her majesty will permit such a strait and extreme law
to be putt in execution, to the utter ruin of men afflicted with misery, to
the overthrow of her own subjects, to the disturbance of her kingdom, and to
drive all the whole world besides, in to a mase with the wonder thereof. Yet
nevertheless on the othersyde, when I deeply consider how her grace is
incensed against us with the continual clamours of our aduer saries, and by
how subtle means and cunnyng shifts, daily incited and stirred up to our
persecution and destruction, whiles there is not one in the way either to
excuse or defend us, or yet in our behalf, by way of humble suit, to procure
some compassion for our afflictions: then I see yt to be possible, that not
only these extremities, but greater also, and far harder extremities may be
permitted against us.

The conclusion.
Now therefore (to conclude all in one word) two things only remain for us to
do in these strait distresses wherein we stand. One, that with seruent vowos,
and deu out prayers we humbly call and cry upon our Lord and Savior
Christ, to mollifye the hearts of our persecutors. The other, that we remain
in a steadfast sure and resolute mind to suffer, and bear for his sake, what
so ever happens to us, referring all the rest to his most holy providence,
with this most certain persuasio^, trust and belief, that if we stand fast
in this mind, and lay our selves wholly under his custody and protection,
he will direct us the safest way into the haven of our soluation.

And if we persist firmly in this mind and purpose, if we putt on this armoure
of hope, faith, and seruent charity, with the contempt of all mortal and
wordlie things: if we be (I say) once fast planted and depely rooted in this
most firm and immovable roole, which is our Christ crucifiede We shall be
able with great ease, and without trouble to endure, and abide what rigor
or cruelty so ever our adversaries shall practice against us. For we shall
peaceably enjoy the passing great security ^ quietness of that man, whom
our Savior in the gospel commends as a right wise man which builded
Matthew. 7.
his house upon the rock, and the rain did fall and the floodes came, and
the winds did blovv, and rushed against that house, and yt fell not for yt
was (...) upon a rock: yea we shall sensibly feel in out hearts, and
profess by mouth, as Saint Paul did, that most holy and most valiant
capita^^ of our religion and champion of Christ our Savior: Who shall
separate us from Romans 8.
the love of Christ? shall tribulation? shall adversity? shall nakedness?
shall peril? shall persecution? shall the svvorde? As who should say none of
these: for by and by he expowndeth him self: Neither death, nor life, nor
angels, nor principality, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to
come, nor strength, nor highenesse, nor depenesse, nor other creature can
separat us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus, our lord.

O passing noble sayeing, and woorthye to proceed from so great an Apostle as
Saint Paul was. What can be spoken or imagined more couragiouse? What can be
thought in man's mind with more assured trust and confidence? This therefore
must be deeply co^fidered of us who are persecuted for the same cause for
which he was persecuted: this must we imitate, which wrestle in the same
barriars where he wrestled, and contend for the same game for which he
contended: which hope for the same garland which he hoped for, and expect the
same recompenser which he expected. Hither must all our cogitations and
studies tend: hither must our forces and powers be applied all together: that
in all troubles, and adversities, we retein fast this sure hope and confidence,
whereof, in deed, so exceeding great fortitude will spring: and in all
distresses (be they never so greuouse, hard and doubtful) such passing good
comfort will arise and grow: as may suffice to bring us through by fire and
water Psalm. 65.
in to the refrigerie (as the prophet says (...) that is, by the painful
troubles and calamities of this world, in to the everlasting rest, glory, and
felicity of God and all Saints. Amen.

AN ADMONITION SENT BY GERARD TO THE READER touching the former epistle.
When I imparted with some of my familiars this epistle, which was sent
unto me from a fryend over the Alps: upon their earnest request and certain
kind of devout (...). I was come^t to let it pass further in to the hands
of some noble and principal persons, by whole persuasion, or rather
commandment it was put in printe. For I thought it to be much auailable to
the common estate of Christendom, that this so notable a persecution of
Catholics in England should be not only communicated to the knovvleige of
this present age, but put over also to the mind and memory of our
posterity. For it has matter enough to stir up them now living to
compassion and pity, and to instruct them that are to come, of what things
they ought to take heed and bevvare. But of one thing I vvoolde advertise the
reader (as my free^de in other letters has advertised me) that among many
matters not mentioned in the other parts of his Epistle this one in the
rehearsal of laws he has willingly omitted: that is, how by many
statuts, and proclamations such order is taken in England as no Catholic,
either by exile, or by forsaking of his country, can escape, or with dravv
him self from those pains or persecutions which follow him for religion For
it is provided (to this effect) that no Catholic may go forth of the (...)
without leave and license first obtained And that if any do go forth without
license he shall forfait all his possessions during his life was and further,
that none before his departure forth of the realm may give away his
possessions no not to his wife, childeren nor fryend (...) do: it shall be
taken as done of (...) defraude the queen of her for(...) for such forfaitures,
they (...) by information of couen. But this statute of fugitives (for so it is
called) is so strictlye and severely observed against Catholics, as none
within the realm, dare by any way or mean help, succoure, or relieve either
father, mother, husband, brethren, or children, which are Catholics, and
without licece abiding out of England. And as for this license to be absent
out of the realm, as it is hardly obtained for others: so is it never or
seldom, and with very much difficulty granted to Catholics. Yea
further, (which is more severe) all those parents (whose childeren are
abiding in these parts, or else where out of England, for study sake, are
compelled to enter in bond, with good assurance, either to dravve their
childeren home again by and by without tarieng, or to deprive them utterly
of all exhibition and relief. All which things do tend to this end, that
no part nor portion of any reloose or comfort, be it never so little, might
frelye come to the English Catholics, either at home or abroad. And these be
the matters where of I thought good to admonish you, because they are not
spoke of in the epistle. There remains now no more but that all true
Christians would thorovvlie view and consider the great distresses of their
brethren and of their own (...), and with most fervent prayere, for the
common bond sake of Charity, which passes thorovvgh the whole corpse of
Christendom, to commend their case to the common (...) over all.

THE COPY OF A LETTER SENT from a priest, being prisoner in the Tovver of
London, to the fathers of the Society of Jesus in England.
To the devout reader.
Although it be true, that Catholics imprisoned in the tower of london, are
kept so straitlye, and vncourteouslie in ward: as neither friends may have
access unto them, nor they permitted either to have company or to speak with
other men, and much less to have books, paper, or pen and ynke: Yet during
the late disputatio there with father Campian the prisoner, some of them which
were entered in to hear the disputations, finding opportunity, stepped a side
unto the holes of some seclused priests, to visit and salute those servants of
Christ: by which means, as by gods holy providence, some things were
understood and known, touching their state and passing great comfort, where
whith God of his goodness does refreshe and recreate them, in the mids of
their extreme troubles and distresses. And among other things, this epistle
foloweing, written in haste, (even forth of the mouth dowtlesse, as it seems,
of the holy ghooste) by a good priest, which had been miserably tormented, and
sundry times racked, came to my hands from the reverend fathers of the
Society of Jesus, to whom it was sent. And here I thought good to place yt
word by word taken out of the Authors own handwriting, that all mortal men
may understand gods hand not to be abbriged, but that as well now, as in old
time, he aydeth his confessors in their necessities, Esa. 56.
and assisteth them with in those dark and close prisons.

TO THE REVEREND FATTERS of the Society of Jesus.
AS often as ever I consider with my self (reverend fathers) hovvferuentlie,
and by how many vvayes and means allmighty God seekeeth our salvation,
desires our love, wishes to possess our heart, and to reign with in us:
eue^ so many times, am I ashamed and abashed, that neither benefits do move us,
nor rewards all ure is, nor terror of Gods Judgment do the prouoque us
miserable men, to serve and obey him with all force and endeavor, yea and most
freely to present our bodies as a living sacrifice, and perfect offering to
his divine majesty. For beside those his passing great benefits of creation,
redemption, preservation, justification, and expected glorification beside
these (I say) and infinite other his benefits, bestovved upon us: he exhorts
us with most svvete words to haste apace toward him. I love them (says
he) which love me: and he which early in the morning vvaketh to me, shall
find me: blessed is the man which hears me, watches at my gates daily,
and atte^deth at the posts of my door: he which fyndeth me, shall find
life, and obtein salvation at the hands of his lord.

Now, where he is to be sought, he himself teaches us by these words;
where so ever two or three are gathered together in my name (says he) there
am I in the mids of the. We must then think Christ to be truly in that
place, where many being fast joined in love and charity, do assemble together
to this end that they may honor God, serve god only, keep his commandments
and enlarge his most gloriouse kingdom. Who so ever hears him, shall
learn truth and shall not walk, in darkness and in blyndnes of errors, but
shall go safe and sure to the fountains of waters.

In such sacred congregations, dedicated to god, lies the right way to
heaven: away not planted about with breers and brembles, not haunted of
levved livers, but continually trodden with the feet of devout people, A
way not abounding in vain delites; nor in fair flattering enticeme^ts: A
way not adourned with the fading flovvers of this wicked world, but
fenced and fortified with most holy laws and rules, that the simple and
ignorant can not err therein, nor any other go a stray out of that way:
except such as viterlie neglect their own saluatio. Here things are aptly
disposed in number, weight, and measure, in so much as it may well be said,
that true vvisdome in deed dwells here, by whose me is all things are set
in good order meruailouslie. Here is used and exercised a certain heavenly
reformation of brethren, a svvete correction and amedment of stovvard
affections with a vvonderfull procurement and inuitation to mutual love and
charity.

For these or such like respects, I had determined with my self now two
years ago to enter in to this kind of life, if god so would: and I had some
speech with a learned and devout man, then my Ghostly father to this effect:
whether there were any hope, that the fathers of the society would receive
me under their holy rule and obedience, if I shovvlde upon reasonable cause
return forth of my natural country again; for then I was in the parts
beyond the seas: his opinion was clear that I had no need at all to doubt
thereof, Hereupon my hope increased, my courage was augmented, and in these
two years, vvhiles I have been in England, I have oftentimes renewed this
purpose. But upon hope and trust that my travail and industry here, in the
harvest of our, Lord, is not altogether unprofitable, I have differred the
execution of my said purpose. Yet now, sees I am by the appointeme^t of god
deprived of liberty, so as I can not any longer employe my self in this
profitable exercise: my desire is estsones revived, my spirit waxes fervent
hot, and at the last I have made a vovv and promise to god, not rashly (as I
hope) but in the fear of god, not to any other end, than that I might thereby
more devoutly, and, more acceptablie serve god, to my more certain salvation,
and to a more gloriouse triumph over my ghoostlie enemy. I have made a vow
(I say) that vhen so ever it shall please god to deliver me (so that once at
the length yt like him) I will with in one year then next following, assign
my self wholy to the fathers of the society, and that (If god inspire their
hearts to admit me:) I will gladly, and with exceeding great joy thorovvlie,
and most vvlie, from the bottom of my have give up and surrender all my will
to the service of god, and in all obedience under them.

This vow was to me a passing great joy, and consolation, in the mids of
all my distresses, and tribulations. And therefore, vv^^h greater hope to obtein
fortitude and patience pdrevv near to the throne of his divine majesty, with
the assistance of the blessed and perpetual virgin Marie, and of all Saints.
And I hope verify this came of God, for I did it even in the time of prayer,
when me thought, my mind was settled upon heavenly things. For thus it was.

The same day that I was first tourmented on the rack, before I came to the
place, giving my mind to prayer, and commending my self and all mine to our
Lord. I was replenished, and filled up with a kind of super natural
svvetenelle of Spirit. And even while I was calling upon the most holy name
of Jesus, and upon the blessed virgin Marie (for I was in sayeing the
Rosarie): my mind was cheerfully disposed, well comforted, and readily
prepared, and bent to suffer, and endure those torments, which even then I
most certeinlie looked for. At the length my former purpose came in to my
mind, and there with all a thought to incidentlie fell upon me to ratify
that now by now which before I had determined. When I had ended my
prayers. I reuolued these things in my mind deeply? and with reason as well
as I could) I did debate and discuss them thorovvlie: I Judged it god, and
expedient for me: I accomplished my desire: I put forth my vovv and promise
freely, and boldly, with the condition a fore said.

Which act, (me thinks) god him self did approve and allow by and by. For
in all my afflictions and tourments, he of his infinite goodness, mercifully
and tenderly, did stand by and assiste me, co^forting me in my trouble and
necessity. Delivering my soul from wicked lips, from the deceitful tongue,
and from the roaring lions, then ready gaping for their pray.

Whether this that Ivvill say, be miraculous or no: God he knovveth: but true
it is, and thereof my conscience is a witness before God. And this I say:
that in the end of the torture though my hands and feet were violently
stretched and racked, and my adversaries fullfilled their wicked lust, in
practisynge their cruel tyranny upon my body yet notvvitstanding I was with
ovvt sense and feling well nigh of all grief, and pain: and not so only,
but as it were comforted, eased and refreshed by the greeues of the torture by
past, I continued still with perfect and present senses, in quietnesses of
heart, and tra^quilitie of mind. Which thing when the commissioners did see,
they departed, and in goeing forth of the door, they gave order to rack me
again the next day folovveing, after the same, sorry. Now when I heard them
say so: It gave me in my mind by and by, and I did verelie believe and trust,
that with the help of god, I should be able to bear and suffer it patiently.
In the mean time (as well as I could) I did muse and meditate upon the most
bitter passion of our Savior, and how full of innumerable pains it was.
And vvhiles I was thus occupied: me thought, that my left hand was vvounded
in the palm, and that I felt the blood run out: but in very deed, there was
no such thing, nor any other pain than that, did then grieve my hand.

Now then, that my suit and request may be well known unto you: for so
much as I am out of hope, in short time to recover and enjoy my former
liberty, so as I might personalie speak unto you, And whether happily I
shall once at length speak unto you in this world, no mortal man does
know: In the mean season I humbly submitt my self unto you, and (supplia^
the kneeling) I beseech you, to do, and dispose for me, and of me, as shall
seem good to your wisdoms And with an humble mind most heartily I crave,
that (if it may be in my absens) it would please you to admit me into your
Society, and to regester and inrole me among you: that so, with humble men I
may have a sense and feling of humility, with devout men I may sound out a
lovvde, the lauds and praises of God, and continually render thanks to him, for
his benefits: and then after, being aided by the prayers of many, I may ru^ne
more safely to the mark which I shoot at, and with out peril attain to
the price that is promised.

And I am not ignorant that the snares and vviles of our ancient enemy are
infinite: for he is the slye serpent, which lies in the shadovv, of vvoods,
vvyndyng, vvhirling, and turning about many vvayes: and with his vviles and
subtle shifts, he attempteth meruailouslie to delude and abuse the souls of
the simple, which want a faithful guide: in so much, as it is not without
cause, that we are admonished, to try the spirits, if they be of God. To you
therefore, because you are spiritual, and accustomed to this kind of conflict,
I commend all this business: beseching you even by the bovvelles of gods
mercy that you would vouchesafe to direct me with your counsel and vvisdome.
And if in your sight yt seem profitable, for more honor to God, more
commodity to his church, and eternal salvation to my soul, that I be
preferred to that Society of the most holy name of Jesus: then presently
before god, and in the court of my conscience, I do promise obedience, to all
and singular rectors, and governors established all ready, or to be hereafter
established, and likevvyse to all rules, or laws received in this society,
to the vttermoste of my power, and so far as God does give me grace: God is
my witness, and this my own hand vvriting shall be a testimony hereof in the
day of Judgment. As for the health of my body, you have no cause to doubt,
for now well nere I have recovered my former strength and hardness by gods
help, and I wax every day stronger than other. Thus in all other things
commending my self to your prayers, I bid you farevvell in our Lord,
carefullye expecting what you think good to determine of me.

Vale.

THE TRANSLATOR TO THE gentle reader.
SInce the printing of this epistle last rehearsed, I have heard that the
Author thereof was one Master Bria^t, who lately suffered (as is said)
with Master Campian, and Master Shervvyn, three most blessed and fortunate
men: whose happ has been after so many torments and tortures suffered for
gods cause, to seal with their innocent blood, the truth, which they
taught with so much pain and dangers before. Now Master bria^t has more
than his desire, being joined i^ society with Jesus him self, to whose
holy name he so much coueted to dedicate his life in this world, as
appears by this his epistle. And I dovvbt not, but that it was a singular
comfort unto him to suffer in the company of good father Campian, so rare a
man of that Society, whereof he desired so greatly to be a member vvhiles he
lived.

How far all treason, and other disorder of life, was from the hearts, hands,
and words of these Innocent men, and the rest which were condemned with
them, all they can testifye which ever knevv them, or lived with them: for
that their words and exhortations, were allvvays to the contrary, in
detestation of all vice, and in commendation of virtuous life, with contempt
of the world, and humbly suffering all troubles and persecutions for Christ
his sake, adding alvvayes, that Catholics must rather love, and heartily
pray for their persecutors, than seek any way to hurt them, or to revenge
their selves upon them, if it lay in their power. This have I heard, and so
have thovvsands moo in England besides me, and no man living (I know) did
ever hear from their movvthes the contrary. Their lives also were such in
all secret austeritie of discipline to them selves: as he that had known
the^, would little believe, that they were men to attempt such matters, as
they were charged vvithall.

If these men had been guilty of such horrible treasons: they should never
have been so dallied withdraw all, first in disputatio^s, and much less should
they have had life, liberty, and favor offered them, for only yielding to
go to church, as master Campian ope^lie affirmed that they often had, and
amongst many, named one of some account there present (as it was credibly
told me) which had offered the same to him with terrible threats, not only
of death, but also of renting of his nails from his fyngars with pynnes, if
he yielded not thereunto.

Again, their joyful acceptance of Judgment, and thanks giving to God for
the same, with their several and most vehement protestation, there made at
the bar, after their condemnation, does declare sufficiently the
clearenesse of their co^scie^ces. For then, and there, Master Campian
protested before God and his angels, heaven and earth, the world and that
Judgment Seat there present, which (as he truly said) was but a little
figure of the most dredefull Judgment seat of God, before which he to his
great joy expected shortly to be presented: he protested (I say upon
eternal perdition of his Soul, that he was most innocent, guiltless, and
vnvvitting of all and singular the matters in that indictment alleiged, and of
every part and parcel thereof. Master Shervvyn protested with like
vehemency, that if ever his head did imagine, or his heart conceived, or his
tongue uttered, or his hand attempted, any thing against his sovereign lady
Queen Elizabeth, or against any of her honorable Council, or against the
common wealth, or realm of England: he renounced there his portion in
heaven, and desired God, as a just Judge to da^ne him both in body and soul
to the eternal darkness and torments of hell fire And when he had done, he
cried out: O happy and blessed day that ever he was borne. The like did the
rest, which were condemned with him, forgeuing openly their false accusars
there present, and prayeing to God for them.

Now let any man show to me, that ever traitor dyed so, or that a guilty
conscience, does yield such confidence, when they knevv now that there was
no way with them but death.

Well, God be blessed for them: and surely his holy name has been greatly
glorified by them.

What strange torments and other extremyties they have suffered before they
came to die, he alone knovveth, and we hear only of some part thereof, for
we see they were not men to complain of every thing done to them, but were
content to put it up in secret, with hope to receive their reward at his
hand.

Yet if we had not heard of their several and often rackings: master Campian
his coming to the bar with his hands folden in lynnen clothe, and with
that feblenesse, as he was neither able to pluck of his own mytton of freese
nor lift a cupp of drink to his mouth without help, may well show how he
had been handled. Our sorde show his tourmentours more mercy at the day of
his Judgment, than they have shevved him. How man's nature had been able to
bear ovvte so great rigor and extremities, as they have passed, (except Gods
holy grace had been ple^tifull unto them) I do not see. And that our lord
did concur with extraordinary comfort, in their torments, it may appear in
this epistle goinge before of Master Briant: whom Master Norton the Rackem
aister (if he be not misreported) vaunted in the court to have pulled one good
foot longer than ever God made him and yet in the mids of all he seemed to
care nothing, and therefore ovvte of dovvbt (says he) he had a devil vvithein
him. But whether it be a more property to the devil to suffer patiently, or
to torment other men mercyleslie, master Briant and master Norton shall
dispute the matter one day, when devils shall be at hand to bear witness,
and the Judge both of devils and deuelish men, shall be at hand to give
sentence. In the mean space I beseech God to accept the Innocent blood of his
virtuous preests, for some part of pacification of his wrath toward us,
and toward our persecutors, that they having the miste of error taken from
their eyes, may see the truth of Christ's Catholic religion, for professing
where of, they afflict us so greuouslie as he sees, to whose eyes al
injuries do lie open, and to whose only Judgment, we leave our cause and
doeings to be tried and discerned, when it shall seem most convenient to his
divine majesty. Amen.

FINIS.

