CERTAIN SERMONS PREACHED By JOHN PRIDEAVX, Rector of Exeter College, his
MAIESTIE'S Professor in Divinity in OXFORD, and Chaplain in Ordinary.

printer's or publisher's device OXONIENSIS: ACADEMIA

Christus: Lucrum

S^^Cmb^: Arbbreuis

Veritas. m Profundo:



OXFORD, Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD An. Dom. 1637.

CHRIST'S COUNCIL FOR ENDING LAW CASES.

AS IT HAS BEEN DELIVERED IN TWO SERMONS upon the five and twentieth verse of
the fifth of Matthew.

By JOHN PRIDEAVX, Doctor of Divinity, Regius Professor, and Rector of Exeter
College.

MATTHEW. 5.9. Blessed are the Peacemakers.

OXFORD, Imprinted by LEONARD LICHFIELD Anno Salutis, 1636.

TO THE WORSHIPFVLL MY VERY WORTHY Kinsman EDMUND PRIDEAVX Esquire, Counselor
at Law, and Mris MARY PRIDEAVI his virtuous and religious Wife.
THE many kindnesses I have heretofore received from you both, have long
sithence required a fuller acknowledgement, then yet I could ever meet with
opportunity to express, howsoever I much desired it. In which respect being
over-intreated by some friends, to publish these Sermons, I made bold to pass
them under your names, assured by former encouragements, of your loving
acceptance. They were my first assaies in this kind, which riper judgments
will soon discern, both in sundry defects, and superfluities. But my desire to
do good to the meanest, shall in part (I trust) excuse me to all. Romans 1.14.
For we are all debtors (with blessed S. Paul) both to the wise, and unwise.
Prove. 11.30.
And as it must be our wisdom especially, to win souls, John. 1.21.
so it behooves all Gods children to receive from us with meekness, his
statutes and judgments. Deuteronomy. 4.6.
For this is your wisdom, and your understanding, in the sight of the nations,
which shall hear all these statutes, and say, surely this is a wise and
understanding people. Your exemplary practice herein (which your Neighbors and
Country can well testify) my self to my great comfort, have often observed,
both in private prayers, duly continued in your well-ordered family, and
public esteem of the Word, and its true Professors. To which if this small
Mite of mine may add the least life, or increase, I have attained my purpose;
in which I rest

From Exeter College in Oxford. October 12. Yours ever in Christ to be
disposed, JOHN PRIDEAVX

CHRIST'S COUNCIL FOR ENDING LAW CASES.
MATTHEW. 5.25. Agree with thine adversary quickly, whilst thou art in the way
with him: lest thine adversary deliver thee to the Judge, and the Judge deliver
thee to the Sergeant, and thou be cast into prison.


1 THese words (Worshipful and Beloved) are a part of that large and heavenly
Sermon, which our Savior made in the Mount to his Disciples, and a great
multitude, as appears in the first verse of this Chapter. A learned man calls
it, Perkins in his exposition of Christ's Sermon in the Mount.
the key of the whole Bible, because by it is opened the sum of the Old and
New Testament; and in that sense my Text may be termed, the chiefest ward of
this key; as being that which first discloseth the corrupt Glosses of the
Pharisees, and whereupon our Savior especially insisteth: Who having showed
before, that the sixth Commandment, not only forbids actual murder, (as
the Pharisees would grossly have it) but also railing words, Verse. 22.
discontented gestures, (...). vid. Bezae Annot. ib.
rash anger, (as the several punishments declare, to which these things are
liable) infers thereupon an effectual exhortation, to concord, love, and
charity, and first with their Brethren, in the two verses going immediately
before. Ver. 23.
If then thou bring thy gift unto the altar, and there remembrest, that thy
brother has ought against thee; leave there thine offering before the altar,
24.
and go thy way, first be reconciled to thy brother. And secondly with their
Adversaries, which is a higher step to perfection, in the words I have read
unto you: Agree with thine adversary quickly, whilst thou art in the way with
him, etc.

2 The Learned seem not to agree altogether about the sense and scope of these
words? Saint Chrysostom takes only the letter, Jn hunc locu^.
and extends it alone to such contentions, as happen between party and party,
here in this world, before a civil Magistrate; and of this mind also are
Theophylact, and Euthymius, among the ancient; Brentius, Pelican, and
Kemnitius, with some others, among the latter writers. Vid. Thomae Caten.
But Cyprian, Hilarie, Ambrose, Hierome, and Augustine, with the rest of the
Fathers and Schoolmen, expound parabolically, the way, In 5. Math.
this life, the Judge, Christ, the Sergeant, the Angels, the prison, Hell. Both
senses are true (says Abulensis) but the latter more principal; whose opinion
I the rather embrace, because it tends to agreement, for which I labor. To
omit therefore the curious discussing of the point, how, and by what reasons,
both interpretations may stand, as fitter for the schools, then this place: I
take the words to be uttered by way of a similitude, whose substance, or latter
part, commonly called (...) is here omitted, as easy to be gathered, by the
shadow, (...), or former part expressed; it being usual in Scripture, and
common talk; and in this particular enlarged, may carry this sense: If a
crediditor of thine, to whom thou art fallen in band, should thereupon put thee
in suit; the law is open, the Judge must do right, the penalty is
imprisonment: were it not wisdom, therefore for thee to hasten, and agree,
before it come to a trial, that so by drawing the Court thou might withdraw
thy self from danger? The like is thy case here in this world, for brotherly
reconciliation; whether thou be wronged, or have wronged, seek peace, and
ensue it, and that now, in the acceptable time, speedily without demurres. For
thou art waylaid by death, and know not how soon thou shall be arested.
If thou come out of charity before Gods tribunal seat; the Angels are his
Sergeants, hell his rack; judgment must pass, and execution shall follow,
and then to desire a compositio^ will be too late. So that here you see
(Beloved) what both opinions yield, to further, and persuade this
Christian-like agreement: the first from the words, in regard of temporal
damage, the second from the meaning, to avoid eternal undoing.

3 The sum is an earnest motive to Brotherly reconciliation with all men, and
consists as it plainly appears, of these two parts: 1. A Precept. Agree
with thine adversary quickly, whilst thou art in the way with him. 2. A reason
thereof, in the words ensuing, lest thine adversary deliver thee to the Judge,
and the Judge deliver thee to the Sergeant, etc.


The Precept (whereof only at this present, by Gods assistance and your
Christian patience I intend to entreat) contains in it these four
circumstances, the 1 Matter whereof. Agree. 2 Party with whom. Thine adversary.
3 Time when. Quickly. 4 The place where. Whiles thou art in the way with him.


Agree with thine adversary quickly, whilst thou art in the way with him.

Agree, as becomes a man, with thine Adversary, as it behooves a Christian,
Quickly, to show thy willingness, and whilst thou art in the way, to express
thy careful providence. For by Agreeing, thou imitatest thy Savior, with
thine adversary, thou excellest the Scribes and Pharisees, quickly, thou
out-strippest the sluggard, and whilst thou art in the way, thou preventest
the danger that is to come. And therefore give me leave once more to inculcate,
and repeat again Agree, to save thy self, with thy Adversary, to win thy
brother, quickly, to redeem the time, and whilst thou art in the way, to
speed the better at thy journies end.

4 Agree: The original has it in two words (...). Which translators contend,
who should express most significantly. The vulgar Latin gives it this sense.
Esto consentiens.
Consent or think the same things with thine adversary. Erasmus, Habeto
bene^olen^tiam.
Bear him good will Castalion, Gompone.
Compound. Vatablus, Fac convenias.
See thou come to an agreement. The Syriaok, e Be desirous of his friendship.
An old Translation which Saint Augustine seems to approve, Esto co^cors.
accord, compound, (...)
or make a full atonement: which is also liked by Beza, and in effect is the
same with his: Esto amicus. Nec monet ta^tum vt animo been velimus adversario,
sed vt cum eo transigamus etc.
be friends, let there be a perfect reconciliation, see there be an end of all
brabbles betwixt you. For we are not only advised (says he) to wish well to
our adversary, and there let it rest; but to go to him, talk with him,
conclude with him, and as Saint Luke has it, Chapter 12.58. Luke 12.58.
Deliver our selves from any thing he has against us. All which is included
in this one word Agree, and yields this maine doctrine besides many other.

That it is a necessary duty for every true Christian to seek reconciliation:

A necesary duty (I say) of every true Christian, not only coldly to admit,
or to be content it should be so: but also earnestly to seek, faithfully to
bring about, and joyfully to embrace an absolute, hearty, and brotherly
reconciliation.

5 The proofs whereof are so many, and pregnant throughout all the Book of
God, that whatsoever is there written, may serve for a testimony. All the long
Art, of Divinity, is comprised in this one short word, Love. As the Apostle
observes, Gal. 5.14.
Gal. 5.14. Love the Lord thy God, is the first and great commandment; and
love thy neighbor, is the second likevnto this; upon which two hang the whole
Law and the Prophets, Mat. 22.40. In regard whereof, Mat. 22.40.
the chief subject of our Saviors prayer, Ioh. 17.21.
was unity, Ioh. 17.21; his chiefest Legacy, peace, Ioh. 14.27.
Ioh. 14.27. And by this shall all men know (says he) that you are my
Disciples, Ioh. 13.35.
if you love one another. Ioh. 13.35. For as there is one body, one spirit, one
Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God and Father of all, Ephesians. 4. ver. 4.5.6.
who is above all, and through all, and in you all: so it behooves the members
of this body, the guided by this spirit, the servants of this Lord, the
partakers of this faith and Baptism, the worshippers of this God, and children
of this Father, Ib. verse. 2.
with all humbleness of mind, and meekness, and long suffering (as the
Apostle exhorts) to support one another through love, endeavoring to keep the
unity of the spirit in the band of peace. Chap. 25.1.
Three things (says the wise son of Syrach) rejoice me, and by them, am I
beautified before God and men: the unity of Brethren, the love of Neighbors,
and a man and his wife, that agree together. And therefore ever will be
remembered that good mind of faithful Abraham, Genesis 13.8. who to cut off all
debate betwixt his heardmen and Lots; Genesis 13.8.
disdained not to go, the elder to the younger, the Uncle to the Nephew, the
worthier to the inferior, in this kindest manner, Let there be no strife, I pray
thee, between thee and me, neither between mine heardmen, and thy heardmen,
for we are brethren. Genesis 45.24. Act. 4.32.
The like was Joseph's counsel to his departing brethren, Genesis 45.24 Fall not
out by the way. And the multitude of the first Christians, Act. 4.32. are said
to be of one heart, and one soul, in regard of the faithful agreement which
was between them. Whereupon the Author of the Sermons ad fratres in Eremo,
Ser. 2. Qui pacem cordis, oris, and operis, non habet, Christianus dici non
potest, etc.
sticks not to infer, That he that in heart and word, and work, contendeth
not for this agreement, cannot be called a Christian. He that rests not on
this foundation, sets his life and foot in slippery places, sayleth in a
tempest, walks in a ruinous cliffe, sows on the sand, the new Jerusalem
being not a place for quarrellers (as S. Basil gravely observes) but an
inheritance and reward for gentle natures.

6 A lesson (Beloved) for these contentious times, and dog-daies of ours, to
remember us, what we are, whom we serve, what is expected of us, and how
little we perform. The merciless debtour in the Gospel, should be a
pattern unto us all: Who for taking his brother by the throat, and exacting
(as it should seem) no more, but his own, received this doom of his Master,
O evil servant, Mat. 18.32.
I forgave thee all the debt because thou prayedst me: should not thou also
have had compassion on thy fellow servant, even as I had pity on thee? But we
are so far, either from fearing such Judgments, or imitating this pity,
that like Ishmael (almost) we are become Wild men, Genesis 16.12.
his hand against every man, and every man's hand against him. So far from
seeking this brotherly reconciliation, that being sought unto, we will scarce
hear of it. But alas (self wild and inconsiderate men!) little do thou
mark the steps thou treadest, or the downfall of this way, wherein thou
postest. Shall thy God be called the Author of peace, and will thou continue a
maintainer of dissension? shall he receive thee, who rejectest thy Brother? or
suppose thou will agree with him, who quarrellest with his, and thine own
fellow members? No, no, (Beloved) he has taught us otherwise. Our trespasses
are forgiven us, but with this condition, as we forgive them that trespass
against us. Where is thine adversary (says he) whose injuries like the blood
of Abel cry unto me for vengeance? never look me in the face, except your
brother be with you. Genesis 43.3.
So true is that which Pelican has on this place observed: Non experieris
Deum tibi propitiu^, nisi proximus sentiet te sibi placatum: Thou shall not
find that God is pleased with thee, before thy neighbor perceive, thou art
reconciled unto him. For as the spirit of man (it is an old Authors similitude)
never quickneth those members that are cut asunder or broken, Sermon. 2. ad
fratres in Eremo.
until they be ioynted again, and set together: so the spirit of God never
gives life to us, except we be bound together in the bond of peace. This
prepares us to prayer, which must be without wrath, it fitteth us to hear,
which must be with all meekness, it provides us for the Lords Supper, 1. Tim.
2.8. Iam. 1.21.
who accepts no ghest without this Wedding garment. Though thou speak with
the tongues of men and Angels, Mat. 22.12. 1. Cor. 13.
have the gift of prophecy, know all secrets, can remove mountains,
give thy goods to the poor, and thy body to be burned; all this is but
sounding brass, and tinkling Cymbals. Vaunt of no such offerings at the Lords
Altar, before thou go, and be reconciled to thy brother. Go (I say) not expect
when he will come unto thee, nor tarry till thou happen to meet him; but seek
him out of purpose, enquire for him, commune with him. And where thy presence
cannot, thy desire of peace (says Gregory) must perform that office. Satisfy
him in thought, Dialog l. 4.
whom thy thoughts have wronged; in words make amends, for thy injurious
speeches; as also for thy deeds, let thy deeds recompense. For why should our
stubbornness so far overmaster us, as to make our best services unacceptable
to our King and Master? (...); O the admirable benignity, and unspeakable
goodness of God (says that golden-mouthed Father Chrysostom on this place!)
He despises his own worship, to maintain thy charity, he will not be found
of thee, till thou have sought this reconciliation. Never pray, come not at
Sermons, worship me not at all (says our Lord God) what have I to do with
your appointed feasts, and solemn assemblies? my soul hates the oblations of
such as foster, or bring with them hatred in their souls. Wherefore ( Beloved
brethren) let us study to agree, that we may be beloved, and feeke peace here,
that we may enjoy it in heaven. Prou. 30.27.
The very grasshoppers can go forth quietly altogether by bands (as the wiseman
tells us) and the kingdom of Satan is not divided against it self. Mat.
12.26.
Now, if you will farther know the party with whom we are thus to agree, it
follows: Thy adversary] which is the second circumstance I before proposed,
and comes here in order to be likewise handled.

7 Agree with thine Adversary.] The word (...) in the original is not so
largely taken, as adversarius in the Latin, which may signify any kind of
enemy: but rather as we term in English in our Law matters, the plaintiff, in
regard of the defendant; or the defendant, in respect of the plaintiff, to be
an adversary. Adversarius litis (says Bellarmine in a passage upon this place)
non iniuriae: Lib. 1. de purgat. c. 7.
an Adversary, not so much for an injury offered, as in a trial to be had; and
therefore may not so properly be expounded an enemy, as a friend or neighbor
of ours, with whom we have a case in controversy. What is answerable to this
in the similitude, diverse are of diverse opinions. Some would have this
Adversary to be the Devil, Vid. Buccasen. Enarrat. in. 5. Math. and Beuxam.
Harmon. Euing. Tom. 2. page 20.2. Lib. 1. de sermon. Dom. in mont. cap. 22.
as Origin, Euthymius, Theophylact, with whom we are to agree, (as S. Hierome
expounds it) by renouncing him wholly, as our promise was in baptism, and so
shaking him off, that hereafter before the Judge of heaven, he may have no
action against us. But Calvin confutes this mainely: following herein Saint
Augustine, whose argument is from the Greek word (...), be friends, or a well
willer: but between the Devil and us there should be no such commerce, or
familiarity. Others by adversary understand the flesh. This also likes not
Saint Augustine, neither Saint Hierome, who think it hard, that the spirit
should agree with the flesh, which ever lusts, and rebelleth against it.
Saint Ambrose would have this adversary to be sin. But what peace or
composition should be with that, which we are bound by all means, to root
out, and extinguish? Others therefore come nearer the truth, as Athanasius,
Augustine, Gregory, and Beda, who would have this adversary to be either God,
or his law, or our own consciences. And surely the best way it is for us to
curry favor with these; whiles opportunity and time is granted us. Yet I take
the exposition of Hilary, Anselme, and Saint Hierome, to be more natural for
this place; who go no farther then the letter, but by Adversary understand
Dominu^ litis, quod est commune nomen vtrique parti litiganti, ( as Tremelius
notes on the Syriack word) any man that has ought against us, or we against
him; importing no other thing, but that the offender should seek, and the
offended embrace, any Christianlike agreement, without running to extremities.
Whereupon I ground this general doctrine:

That the going to law of Christians, where a good end in private may be hoped
for, or had, is contrary to that course of proceeding, which our Savior here
prescribes in Judicial causes.

8 A doctrine depending on the former, but yet in such a sort, that whereas
there I insisted in general, upon the matter to be fought, here I declare in
particular, the manner how to find it: especially in such cases, as breed the
greatest jarres. Wherein I would not be mistaken, as though I went about to
tax such courses, or vocations, as our Commonwealth allows; or held all
public trials before a civil Magistrate, unnecessary. No, my text clean
dasheth such Anabaptisticall conceits, wherein I find an accuser, a Judge, a
Sergeant, a Prison, and all approved. My purpose is therefore only to show,
what mutual moderation should be practiced of us all, in our private
differences, and affairs. For as not to agree in such, dissolueth the bands of
charity: so in wickedness to consent with any, is felony, treason, or
conspiracy. Luke 23.12. Prove. 1.14.
So Herod and Pilate were made friends, Luke 23.12. but yet continued enemies
to our Savior. Cut purses consent, Prove. 1.14. but it is to do a mischief;
and such cords never hold longer, then the strangling of their masters. But
our causes should be lawful, in which we should agree, and personal, which
wrong not estates, and of that nature, which need not so tedious a traversing.
Of which the Apostle speaks, 1. Cor. 6.7. 1. Cor. 6.7.
Now therefore, there is utterly a fault among you, because you go to law one
with another: why rather suffer you not wrong? why sustain you not harm? See
how earnestly he presses that, which our Savior before had preached, Mat.
5.40.
Mat. 5.40. If any man will sue thee at the law, and take away thy coat, let
him have thy cloak also. That is, rather then seek private revenge, which
belongs unto the Lord, and not to thee, be content to lose a garment, or
more of thy temporal goods: for he easily contemns such (says Chrysostom)
who hops for eternal treasures in heaven. In Mat. c. 5. hom. 11. Genesis 39.12.
He will leave his garment with Joseph, in the hand of his mistress, to
escape unspotted with the veil of honesty. And if we must forgo such
necessaries, (says Saint Side necessarijs imperatum est, quanto magis
superflua contem^ere conuenit? Ser. Dom. in mont. l. 1.
Augustine) as coat or cloak, or the like for quietness sake: how much more
should we contemn things of lesser value, especially at the command of such a
Lord and Master, who will certainly see we shall be no losers by it?

9 This is counsel (beloved) of the Great Lawgiver, not varying with the
times, but as a law of the Medes and Persians, that alters not. Hest. 1.19.
Which if we could be content to follow, by curbing and overtopping our
impatient affections, would save us much travel, great charges, hot
bickerings, infinite discontents, and ever end our causes to our truest
advantage. Plutarch. in Pyrrh.
We read in Plutarch in the life of Pyrrhus, of one Cyneas, a man of great
employment about that King, who understanding that at the Tarentines entreatie,
the King his master was resolved to make war on the Romans, took occasion to
discourse with him in this sort: It is reported (O King) (says he) that the
Romans, are great Warriers, and have large command of puissant nations; put
case we overcome them, what benefit shall we get thereby? Pyrrhus answered,
That is a question, which few wise men would ask: why then, all Italy and
Greece are straight at our command. Cyneas pawsing a while, replied: But when
we have Italy and Greece, what shall we do then? Pyrrhus not finding his
meaning; Sicily (says he) thou know is hard adjoining to us, and very well
may be our next conquest. But having that (quoth Cyneas) shall our wars be
ended? That were a jest (quoth Pyrrhus) for who would not then to Affricke, and
so to Carthage? the passage is not dangerous, the victory assured. True indeed
(says Cyneas) but when we have all in our hands, what shall we do in the
end? Then Pyrrhus breaks out a laughing. We will then, good Cyneas (quoth he)
be quiet, and take our ease, and make feasts every day, and be as merry one
with another as we can possibly. Then Cyneas having that he would, thus
closes with him, and what lets us now (my Lord) to be merry, and quiet
together, since we enjoy that present without farther travel, and trouble,
which we are now a seeking with such bloodshed and danger; and yet we know not
whether ever we shall attain unto it, after that we have suffered, and
caused others to suffer infinite sorrows and calamities? The application is so
manifest, that I need not stand upon it. For ask but our contentious wranglers
what they aim at by their going to Law, and their vexing one another: their
answer can be no other but to right themselves, that at length they may live
quietly. But quiet thy bosome-enemies at home (whosoever thou art) and thy
cause shall be ended, before the action be entered. For through pride man
makes co^tentions, Prove. 13.10.
Prove. 13.10. Could thou but once take order with this malicious affection,
Discordia filia inanis gloriae, Greg. Mor. lib. 13. c. 31. Aquin. 2 a. 2 ae. q.
37. art. 2. Ephesians. 4.26.
'twere easy to compound with thy greatest adversary? But thou can not be so
base as to yield unto him; and yet will thou be so base as to yield unto the
Devil? Harken to the blessed Apostle: Let not the sun go down upon thy
wrath, Ephesians. 4.26. and it immediately follows, Neither give place unto the
Devil. But thine adversary provokes thee to strife, and thou can not endure
it? But thy Savior commands thee to agree, and wilt not obey him? But should I
lose mine own, to buy his favor? But would thou wreake thy anger, to lose a
Kingdom? Love suffers all things, 1. Cor. 13.7.
it believes all things, it hops all things, it endures all things, it
seeks not its own but the things that are of God. If thy cause be good, and
thy conscience unspotted, thou have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ
the righteous. 1. John. 2.1.2.
This was the Kings Attorney, that David retained, plead thou my cause (O Lord)
with them that strive with me, Psalm. 35.1.
and fight thou against them that fight against me. But we must have writ upon
writ, and Action upon Action, to undo our selves, that we may vex our
brethren: Eseck, and Massah, and Meribah, Genesis 26.20. Exodus 17.7. Esa. 8.6.
the waters of strife and contention, are those we delight to drink of, the
gentle Shiloah runs too softly for our turbulent humors: whose counsel do
we follow in this (Beloved) but his, who was a liar and a murderer from the
very beginning? Are we Sheep of the Lords pasture, and yet like Dogs, Psalm.
100.
and Swine will be barking and biting one another? Mat. 24.29.
and shall that servaunt speed well at his masters coming, Luke 12.45.
who is taken molesting and smiting his fellow servants? Hence therefore let
Tale-bearers, and those Attournies learn, who set neighbors together by the
ears, and egg them onward to contentions, whose Apparitours and Agents they
be. For if blessed be the Peacemakers, Mat. 5.9.
for they shall be called the children of God, then cursed be such
Brawle-makers, for they shall be called the Children of the Devil. Mat. 5.9.
But of you (dear Christian brethren) I am persuaded better things; you have
learned of the Wise man, Prove. 17.14. Prove. 17.14.
that the beginning of strife is as the opening of waters, which will quickly
drown, if they be not stopped. Take up therefore such contentions, as now, or
at any time shall arise amongst you; confer together, lay aside all malice,
use the help of your neighbors, and all other good lawful means. What? is
it so, that there is not a wise man among you? No not one that can judge
between his brethren? But a brother goes to law with a brother (as the
Apostle complains of the Corinthians:) 1. Cor. 6.5.
and I may add, most commonly for a matter of small moment. Rather make a
friend of thy adversary, to join with thee in league against thy spiritual
enemies, and that effectually, and that quickly, without any farther
prolonging; which is the third circumstance I observed in the precept, and will
quickly here, by Gods grace, and your Christian patience, endeavor to run it
over.

10 Agree with thine adversary quickly] Mature, says Castalion: (...).
cito, say the other interpreters: all comes to one, seasonably, or
presently, the present being ever most seasonable. Because in actions of this
nature, the contrary to our common proverb is found most true, the more have,
the better speed: whence I gather, that delay in any Christian duty is always
dangerous. To die well (says one) is a long art of a short life, and a speedy
beginning, is the shortest cut to this longest art. Behold (says the blessed
Apostle) now is the accepted time, 2. Cor. 6.2.
behold now the day of salvation, and to day if ye will hear his voice,
harden not your hearts, but exhort one another daily, while it is called to
day, Heb. 3.13. There is a (...) or a (...) to day, Heb. 3.13.
or now, in all the mandats almost of the King of heaven. So the Prophet
Esaiah's search, Esai. 55.6. Esa. 55.6. Mar. 13.37.
our Saviors Watch. Mar. 13.37. the Wisemans memento, Ecclesiast. 12.1.
contain no other thing, then that wise son of Syrach so much beateh upon,
Ecclesiast. 5.7. Ecclus. 5.7.
Make no long tarrying to turn unto the Lord, and put it not off from day to
day; All excuses are refusals, and delays are denials, when our Savior says
unto us, Come and follow me. For though his mercy afford us oftentimes many
years to repent; yet his Justice permits us not one hour to sin. Peccanti
crastinum non promisit (says Gregory:) he promises not to morrow to the
offender, who is always ready to forgive the penitent. And therefore Matthew
was no sooner called, Mat. 9.9.
Mat. 9.9. but presently he arose and followed. Hastily came Zacheus down
from the Tree, and received our Savior joyfully, when notice was once given,
Luke 19.6.
that he would be his ghest that day: and no sooner had he looked back upon
Peter, Mat. 26.75.
Matthew 26.75. but he went out (says the Text) and wept bitterly.

11 I will not stand longer, for the proof of a point so evident, but come to
apply it to our selves. These things are written for our instruction, to
admonish us to beware, how we defer our repentance. It is strange to observe
our shifts herein, how cunningly we can cozen our selves, and abuse Gods long
suffering, for our longer sinning. But had we but the grace to consider what
true conversion is, and the manifold difficulties that always cross it; most
evidently it would appear, that all these are augmented, and strengthened by
delay, and that by this deceit, more do perish, then by all the guiles and
subtilties of Satan besides. For better considers that old Serpent, then we
do, how that one sin draws on another, how he that is not fit to day, will
be less fit to morrow, how that custom grows into nature, and old diseases
are hardly cured. He knows, the longer we persist in sin, the more God
plucketh his grace and assistance from us. Our good inclinations are the
weaker, our understanding the more darkened, our will the more perverted, our
appetite the more disordered, all our inferior parts and passions, the more
strengthened, and stirred up against the rule of reason; whereby his footing is
the stronger, and our case the more desperate. Last of all, he is privy to
the uncertainty and perils of our life, to the dangers that may befall us, to
the impediments that will always cross us: so that if once he win us to
delay a little, he doubts not but to gain our whole time from us. Now shall
we see this net, Prove. 1.17.
and yet be entangled? Know this guile of this old writhing serpent, and yet
never endeavor to prevent it? Most commonly there is no man so yron-hearted,
but he has a purpose in time to amend his life. And when he sees another to
live religiously, and hears the commendation of the Saints of God; he wishes
in his heart he were also such a one, Number. 23.10.
and groneth oft-times in conscience, that he has never endeavored so to
be. But alas (my good Christian brother) what lets at this instant, that
this course should not be taken? What inconvenience would follow, if presently
this were practiced, which for ever should do us good? Thou should prevent
the evil day, which suddenly may over-take thee: thou should have thy lamp
ready, whenever the Bridegroom passes by thee: thou should be furnished
of a wedding garment, when the Master of the feast comes to take notice of
thee. The outward pleasures which thou seem here to abridge, should be
recompensed in this life, with the peace of conscience, and hereafter with
eternal felicity. And if for the present by such means, thy gain be
neglected, thou shall surely find the increase another where. Now, can there
be a waightier matter then thy salvation? See thou not by others ruins, the
uncertainty of thine own estate? And are not these things true, which out of
Gods sacred Word I have proved unto you? What senselessness is it then for us
(Beloved) to make that the task of our old age, which should be the practice
of all our life, and to settle our everlasting, our only, our surest making or
marring, upon so tottering, and sinking, and sandy a foundation? We see, and
know by experience, that a ship, the longer it leaketh, the harder it is to be
emptied: a house, the longer it goes to decay, the worse it is to repair: or
a nail, the farther it is driven in, the harder it is to pluck out again.
And can we persuade our selves, that the trembling joints, the dazeled eyes,
the fainting heart, the failing legs, of unweildy, drouping, and
indisciplinable old age, may empty, repair, pluck out the leakes, and ruins,
and nails of so many years, flowing, failing, and fastening? But suppose we
came to that age, (which is an extraordinary blessing of God, and not granted
to many) and retain in it that vigor, which happens to very few, and enjoy
that grace of God, which now and heretofore we so often have despised: Imagine
(I say) the best that may be hoped for, that thou may have time hereafter
to repent, and ability to use that time, and desire to use that ability, and
grace to prosper that desire: whereby thou may vanquish Satan at the
strongest, when thou thy self art at the weakest; yet consider herein thy
foolishness, which in matters of less moment, thou would be loath to
commit; each day thou knittest knots, which once thou must undo again; thou
heapest that together, which once thou must disperse again; thou eatest and
drinkest that hourly, which once thou must vomit up again; to omit thy
ungrateful dealing with thy Lord and Master Christ Jesus, whom thou seruest
thus at length with the Devils leauings, and then (for sooth) we will turn to
be religious, when time will scarce permit us to be wicked any longer. We see
therefore (beloved brethren) the weight, and importance of this one word
quickly. Though there be twelve hours in the day, Ioh. 11.9.
wherein men may walk, no wisdom it is for us, to post over our repentance to
the last cast. Non semper manet in foro paterfamilias (says Saint Augustine:)
The Lord of the vineyard is not always in the Market, to set thee a work: and
no marvel (says Saint Gregory) if at the last gasp he forget himself, Ser.
1. de sanctis.
who in all his life neglected to remember God. Let us attend therefore to
open, when it pleases him to knock. And not (as Felix did Paul) so answer his
messengers; Go thy way for this time, Act. 24.26.
and when I have convenient time, I will call for thee again: but rather with
David to be ready, when he says, Come, presently to reply, Lo, I come. When
he says, Psalm. 40.7.
Seek my face, to echo immediately again, Psalm. 27.8.
Thy face (Lord) will we seek. Samuels answer must be ours at the first
call, Speak, Lord, for thy servant hears: 1. Sam. 3.10.
and that not only quickly, but also when we are in the way, which is my
fourth and last circumstance, before observed, and comes now briefly in the
conclusion to be considered.

12. Agree with thine Adversary quickly] (...), which all translate, whiles
thou art in the way with him. Alluding perchance, to countrymen (says
Illyricus) who came some distance for judgment, from their houses into the
city, in which they had fit opportunity between themselves to discuss and
take up all matters. But citizens (in my opinion) have no less, they dwell
near together, and may more conveniently meet, and days of hearing come not
so fast, but space, and place may be had, to compose in good sort such
business. But figuratively in Scripture, this word Way has three especial
significations. First, it is taken for doctrine, as Psalm. Psalm. 23.3.
23.3. Show me thy ways, O Lord, and teach me thy paths. Which Hebraisme the
Schoolmen have taken from the Arabians, when they put viam Thomae, or viam
Scoti, for Thomas, or Scotus doctrine. Secondly, it signifies the manner of
living, counsels, behavior, or endeavors of men: so Genesis 6.12. Genesis 6.12.
All flesh had corrupted his way: that is, their manners: and the Lord knows
the way of the righteous, Psalm. 1.6.
Psalm. 1.6. that is, the counsels, actions, or endeavors of the righteous, or
wicked. Lastly, it is taken for a man's life, as Joshua 23.14. This day I enter
into the way of all the world; Josh. 23.14.
and so in this place, whiles thou art in the way with him: that is, in the
days of this thy pilgrimage, whiles thou art alive. Which directs us
especially to this conclusion, that

After this life there remains no place for repentance, or reconciliation.

12 For alia est (says Musculus on this place) praesentis, alia futurae vitae
conditio. The condition of this life, and the next, are not both alike. Here
there may be had a composition; but there the Judge will proceed according to
law; as the next words following my text do sufficiently confirm, thou shall
be cast into prison, and thou shall not come out, until thou have paid the
utmost farthing. Here is no mention at all of pardon, but all of payment; pay,
or stay: infinite has been thy offense, and so must be thy punishment: not a
dog to lick a sore, not the tip of a finger dipped in water to cool a tongue,
can be there obtained with an Ocean of tears: How much less Indulgences, or
pardons, or Masses, or Pilgrimages, or any Intercession of the living can alter
the estate of the dead? But of this hereafter in the reason, when we come to
speak of the prison which the Papists imagine to be their Purgatory. Now a
word or two by the way, for applying this doctrine taken from the way mentioned
in my Text, and so I will commit you to God.

13 This may serve (Beloved) to hasten that speedy conversion, which in the
point before I so earnestly urged. For if this life be the appointed place and
no other, wherein this quick reconciliation is to be sought, and wrought; then
all excuses are cut off, whatsoever the Devils sophistry, or man's backsliding
tergiversations can imagine. Otherwise, some peevish conceit might humor it
self with such an idle contemplation. There is a great space between Heaven
and Earth; Gods judgment seat, and the place we go from; and can this be
passed in a moment? Besides? who can tell, whether my judgment shall be
immediate upon my departing? May not others be first examined? May not I be
repriued, till the last day of judgment, and having that respit to be
reconciled, so sue out a pardon? But our Savior meets with all such humane
fancies, and earthly cogitations. No, (says he) this agreement must not only
be quickly in regard of the time, but also in this life, whiles thou art in
the way, and thy adversary with thee, both together, in respect of the place.
Just as that noble Roman Popilius dealt in his embassage with King Antiochus
(the history is recorded by Liuie) he makes a circle with his rod, Decad. 5.
l. 5.
and pass we must not the compass thereof, till we have fully resolved on an
absolute answer. Such a circle we are all in at this present (Beloved) and
behold an urgent embassage from the King of Kings. Peace or war, life or
death, hell or heaven, are to be determined on of us, in this instant and
place, and therefore let us bethink us (I beseech you) what to do. We find
here no certain habitation, But only (as my Text intimates) a way to pass:
this passage has all the dangers, and more then can be imagined: The Devil
as a thief, the world like a bawd, the flesh like a false brother, to assault,
entrap us, and lead us into utter darkness: every breathing we make, is the
shortning of our life, and every step we go, is the hastening to our grave.
Sands of the Sea, or Gnats in Summer, or leaves in Autumn, are not more
innumerable, then the heaps, and swarms, and mountains of calamities, which
are every moment ready to fall upon us. And yet we like those outrageous
Sodomites, Genesis 19.9.
Genesis 19.9. will not suffer our brethren to host quietly by us, but will have
them out, to quarrel, and deal worse with them, though fire and brimstone
fall on us the next day after. Good Lord, that man should so hardly be brought
to consider himself, and remember thee! and yet so quickly to join with his
enemy, and malign his brother; to forget, whose he is, whence he is, where he
is, and which way he tends. We account him an idle-headed fellow, that will
be building in every Inn, where he may not dwell: a foolish Pilote, that will
be anchoring in every creek, where his business lies not: and a most
desperate, and impudent thief, that will stabbe when he passes along, from
the prison to his trial. Our practice is the like, but we will not think of
it. We build where we may not inhabit, anchor where we may not harbor,
quarrel and fall out in that very way, nay in the very presence of that
greatest Lord chief Justice, who has bound us to the peace, both with our
brethren, and adversaries. And now consider, I beseech you (Beloved) would true
men fall out in that way amongst themselves, where from every bush they may
expect a thief? or soldiers be tumultuous in such a garrison, where they
ever stand in danger of their mortal enemies? That be far from us who march
under the banner of the King of peace. Let it be the infamy of Cain, to rise
against his brother: and the curse of the Midia^ites, Genesis 4.8.
to sheath every man his sword in his neighbors side: Judge. 7.22.
and a just imputation laid on Ahab, that he and his fathers house had
troubled Israel. 1. King. 18.18.
But let us (beloved) according to our Captains command, and precept, love one
another, as he has loved us. We are all children of the same heavenly Father,
children must dwell together; members of the same body, members must grow
together; sheep of the same pasture, sheep must feed together; soldiers of
the same army, soldiers must march together. See thou therefore a bruised
reed? break it not: or smoking flax? quench it not: or a fainting soul?
thrust it not: or one that is fallen? trample him not. Rejoice not at another
crosses, but fear what thou have deserved, and what may befall thy self.
Hear thou of a Readiness overthrow? bewail him with David: though perchance
he hated thee, and sought thy utter undoing. Has a Lion killed a disobedient
Prophet? afford him in compassion, Alas, my brother. Brethren, and children,
and beloved, and babes, and friends, are the most frequent titles we are called
by in Scripture. O let us curb our swelling affections, and endeavor to be
answerable to such excellent appellations. Archidamus (as we read in
Plutarch) being chosen an vmpire to reconcile two parties, who had sworn
solemnly to stand to his award, gets them into Minerua's grove, and there
enioynes them, that they should never depart thence, till they had reconciled
themselves. O that my entreaty now, might be as his policy then, to bring you
all here present to the like exigent, that this moment might be the quickly,
and this Temple the very way, out of which you might never pass, without a
full resolution for this Christianlike agreement. But this is his only to
effect, who has commanded it should be so. Paul may plant, and Apollos may
water, but it is thou (O Lord) that must give the increase. O thou therefore
that art the Author of peace, and lover of concord, who give unto thy
servants that peace which the world cannot give, Incline (we beseech thee) our
stubborn, and carnal affections, so to love one another, as thou have taught
us: that thy eternal peace, which passes all understanding, may keep our
hearts and minds in the knowledge and love of thee, and thy son Jesus Christ
our Lord: that the blessing of God Almighty, the Father, the Son, and the
holy Ghost, may be amongst us, and remain with us now and evermore:

Amen.
CHRIST'S COUNCIL FOR ENDING LAW CASES. THE SECOND SERMON.
MATTHEW. 5.25. Least thine Adversary deliver thee to the Judge, and the Judge
deliver thee to the Sergeant, and thou be cast into prison.


SVch is the servile disposition of the sons of Adam, that in the ordinary
passages of this life, fear more avails then love, to work a consideration
of their own estates: according to that of the Prophet, Ver. 67.
Psalm. 119. Before I was troubled, I went wrong, but now have I kept thy Word.
The reason I take to be, the sharpness of our senses, and dullness of our
understanding; this being more apprehensiue of bitter, then that of sweet. In
regard whereof, an injury more galleth, then a benefit contenteth, and we
remember to revenge the one, when we forget to be thankful for the other. So
sickness more then health, crosses more then courtesies, imprisonment, more
then liberty, make a deep impression. Aquin. 12.1 ae. q. 25. ar. 4. ex Boetio.
fear (as the Schools observe) is one of the four principal passions, that
usually overswayeth all our deliberations. Whereupon the holy Ghost, the
deepest searcher, and expertest applyer, in all our affections, imperfections,
infections, and defections, annexeth a penalty to his chiefest mandates. Eat
not, least ye dye, Genesis 3.3. Genesis 3.3. Levit 20.5.
Commit not Idolatry, least thou be cut off, Leuit. 20.5. Watch, Mark. 13.36.
Romans 11.21.
least he find you sleeping, Mark. 13.36. Take heed, least he spare not thee,
Romans 11.21. It is his ordinary style, to rouse our security, and is here the
burden of this song of judgment. Agree with thine Adversary quickly, whilst
thou art in the way with him, least thine Adversary deliver thee to the Judge,
and the Judge deliver thee to the Sergeant, and thou be cast into prison.

2 In the unfolding of the former part of this Text, it may be easily recalled,
that it was divided into a Precept, and the reason thereof. The Precept was
there enlarged, according to these four Circumstances. The matter whereof,
Agree] the party with whom, thine Adversary] the time when, quickly] the place
where, whilst thou art in the way with him. The reason now follows to be
farther followed, carrying with it (as it were) threats, and whips, to scourge
on ward the assent; as though in more words our Savior had thus urged it: Ioh.
9.4.
I have advised you quickly to agree, whiles space and place is granted, to
take order in the day, before the night approach, and not to suffer your
brabbles to come to a scanning after this life: but if your frowardness be
such, as to admit no good counsel, see what will be the issue. Appearance
without delay, judgment, without partiality, imprisonment without bail, will
be strictly exacted and inflicted. Adversary, Judge, Sergeant, Prison, no way
to be shifted, or escaped, twice delivered, then cast, never to be repriued,
or eased. Think upon these damages, before the action be entered, for all this
will befall, if agreement prevent it not. And this I take to be the drift of
our Savior, in the words I have read unto you: The sum whereof is

A declaration of the exceeding danger, which attends the neglect of
reconciliation.

And is here exemplified by three circumstances, drawn from the rigorous
proceeding of the 1. Adversary: in these words; lest thine Adversary deliver
thee to the Judge. 2. Judge: And the Judge deliver thee to the Sergeant. 3.
Sergeant: and thou be cast into Prison.


Least thine Adversary deliver thee to, etc. The first includes an accusation,
exhibited by the Adversary. The second, a condemnation, pronounced by the
Judge. The third, an Execution performed by the Sergeant. Facilis descensus
Averni. He tumbleth with a witness, whom the Lord forsakes, and the Devil
drives. From Adversary to Judge, from Judge to Sergeant, from Sergeant to
Prison: so one in the neck of another; that the first may check our
impatience, for abusing our neighbor; the second our arrogance, in presuming
on God; the third, our security, for not considering what may follow, all our
dullness, coldness, and benumb'dnesse, in matters of the waightiest
importance, that ever may concern flesh and blood. Give me leave therefore (
Right worshipful, and beloved) to summon our startling meditations, to take
some view beforehand, of these fearful Assizes; where we know not how
quickly we all are to have a trial. It is Syracides good counsel, Chap. 7.36.
Eccles. 7.36. Remember the end, and thou shall never do amiss. Sometimes
Boanerges, Mark. 3.17.
the sons of thunder (who preach judgment) must as well be heard; Mat. 16.17.
as Bar-iona, or Barnabas the son of a Dove, or consolation. Let us take
therefore a copy of the Declaration, Act. 4.36.
that our defense may be the directer and first of the first, which is the
rigorous proceeding of the Adversary, in these words, least thy Adversary
deliver thee to the Judge.]

3 About the first particle in my text, which in the original is (...), some
scruple arises, both for the reading, and meaning. The vulgar renders it, by
ne forte, which the Rhemists retain, in their, least perhaps. Preferring such
broken cisternes, before the Fountains themselves. But this is well corrected
by Erasmus (says Beza) both here, In v. 25.
and in diverse other places: the word signifying properly, ne quando, least at
any time (as our last Translatours express it, and our former understood it)
without any forte's, or peradventures, Lib. 1. cap. 1.
for which Saint Augustine first censureth himself, in his Retractations.
Howsoever this difference may seem exceeding nice, yet upon it, are grounded
two several interpretations. Sic temperavit, (says the ordinary gloss, which
Hugo and Lyra follow) such a moderation is intimated, by this particle forte,
In hunc locu^.
that the penitent may hope for an after remission, and ideo dicit forte (says
Gorram) quia potest sieri quod non. Auendano wheels on the same bias, with
Thomas, and the rest of that side except the learned Abulensis, In textum.
who mainely stops it. This forte (says he) is not put by way of doubting; but
as that in the third of Genesis; Verse. 3.
ne forte moriamur, or the like: in the seventh of Matthew, Verse. 6.
Cast not pearls before swine, ne forte conculcent eas; where there could be
no doubt of consequence, but that man should dye, and swine would trample such
treasures. I should be loath, by playing too much the Critic on these
particles, to be thought to read Grammar Lecture. The reconciling (in my
understanding) is very evident, if we take the exposition of the first, with
Chrysostom, Theophilact, and Euthymius, in the literal sense, and of the
latter, with Cyprian, Hilary, Ambrose, Hierome, and Augustine, with the rest of
the Fathers, and Schoolmen, in the parabolicall. For in the processes of this
life, friends may interpose, or money prevail, or pity sometimes hinder a just
prosecution; and therefore in regard of men, a perhaps may have his place: but
in reference to that greatest, and last account, Ne forte, is as much as alias,
which (...) in the Hebrew, and (...) in the Syriack translation, may very well
also bear; as though the whole had been thus connected: Agree with thine
Adversary quickly, whiles thou art in the way with him: otherwise, or if thou
neglect to do it, Vid. Buccasen and Beauxam.
thy Adversary will deliver thee to the Judge, etc. Secondly, by Adversary I
understand, not the devil with Tertullian, Hom. 35. in Lucam.
Origin, and In cap. 12. Luc:
Theophylact; nor the flesh with others mentioned by Saint Lib. de sermon. Dom.
in monte Bellar. l. 1. de purgat. cap. 7.
Augustine; nor conscience, with Athanasius; nor Sin with Saint Ambrose; nor
the Holy Ghost, with Chromatius; nor God, or his Law, with Gregory, Augustine,
and Beda: although all these (as Buccasenus at large declares) may have a good
meaning; But (as I took it in the precept) with Hilary, Vbi supra.
Anseme, and Saint Hierome, (...) Dominum litis, either party contending,
plaintiff, or defendant. But here Saint Augustine obiecteth, I see not by what
means one man should deliver another to that Judge, before whom all are
culpable: besides, put question I kill my Adversary, can I then agree with him
whiles we are in the way, whom by such means I have made out of the way? In
hunc locuro
The answeere of Abulensis, and Maldonate sufficiently clears the first; Lest
thine adversary deliver thee, that is, lest he be the occasion thou be
delivered. Non repraesentative (says Buccasenus) as though he personally
there should present thee with a Corpus capias, sed occasionaliter, which is
Hugoe's word, Jbid.
be the occasion why Christ should pass sentence upon thee. For do not the
tears often run down the widows cheeks, Ecclus. 35.15
Ecclesiasticus 35.15. and from thence go up into heaven? So John 5.45. Moses
is said to accuse: and Saint Hilarie on this place, Hilar.
Manens in ea simultatis ira arguet. The hatred shall accuse that remains
vnpacified. Which if the case so stand that thou can not personally appease,
by reason of his death with whom thou should agree; true repentance (says
Abulensis) may obtain so much of God, who accepts, in such necessities, the
will for the performance. Which answers fully Saint Augustines latter
objection, and gives clear passage to this doctrinall proposition, that The
breaking of Gods Law, by any sin whatsoever, makes us liable to eternal
damnation.

4 For if the last jarre with our Adversary will bear such an action, what
breach of Gods Commandment can be exempted? Mark but the nature of the most
petty fault that ever was committed, and we shall find it high treason
against an infinite Majesty. For whether sin be a word, or deed, or thought
against the eternal Law, Vid. Aquin. 1.2. q. 71. ar. 6.
as Saint Augustine; or a revolting from our alleagiance to Gods edict, as
Saint Ambrose; or a straggling from a prescribed course to a due end, against
nature, reason, or Gods Word, as Thomas, and the Schools define it it; ever it
includes a rebellious contempt, which by breaking the least commandment,
sets up (as it were) a Flagge of defiance against the Commander himself.
Fail but in one point of the Law, Iam. 2.10. and thou art guilty of all. Iam.
2.10. Aquin. 1.2. q. 73. art. ad 1 um. De operib. Redempt. lib. 1. cap. 8. ad
These. 2.
Though non quoad conversionem ad creaturas, (as the Schoolmen restrain it)
yet quoad aversionem a Deo; (as Zanchius helps them out) qui tam contemnitur
in vno praecepto, quam in caeteris omnibus. Wherefore the wrath of God is
revealed from Heaven against all ungodliness, Romans 1.18. because such a one
has stretched out his hand against God, and made himself strong against the
Almighty. Job. 15.25. This will further appear, by conferring but the back
parts of Gods Majesty, with man's unworthiness, and the severitie of the
Judge, with the respectlesse presumption of the offender. For seeing that every
sin is to be esteemed, according to the worth of the party against whom it
is committed, (as the same injury offered to a pesant and a Prince stands
not in the same degree) hence it follows, that the disobeying of an infinite
Commander, is an infinite offense, and consequently deserves a correspondent
punishment. And howsoever, an unwise man does not well consider this, Psalm.
92.6.
and a fool does not understand it: yet certainly that is most true, which is
observed by one, out of Saint Augustine, that in every sin we commit, as
also in all other elections, there is balanced (as it were) in the scales of
our reason, here, an Omnipotent Lord, commanding, for our eternal good, and
there a deadly enemy, alluring to our utter destruction. Where
notwithstanding, such is our damnable ingratitude, and malicious stupidity, we
will fully reject the Lord of life, and prefer a murderer, Act. 3.14. Lam.
1.12.
Have ye no regard, all ye that pass this way, behold and see, whom ye
daily pierce, and then tell me, what disgrace may be viler then this, or
punishment too heavy for such a contempt. The incomprehensible Ancient of
days, Almighty Jehovah, who made all things of nothing, by his Word, and by
the same can reduce them to worse then nothing again: whose look dries up
the Deepes, and whose wrath, makes the Mountains to melt, the Earth to
tremble, the Rocks to rent, the Heavens to shiuer, Devils and Angels to quake
before him. Before whom all Kings are as Grasshoppers, all Monarchs, as
Molehils, all beauty, base, all strength, feeble, all knowledge, vain, all
light, dim, all goodness, imperfect; in such a case, with such an opposite,
by such a creature, as man is, so extraordinarily graced by him, to be weighed
as Belshazzar, Dan. 5.27.
in the balance, and found too light. This is that, which urges his mercy,
and kindles his Royal indignation, Sometimes (as it were) passionately to
expostulate, Ier. 2.32.
What iniquity have your Fathers found in me? Or have I been a wilderness
unto Israel, or a land of darkness? Then to exclaim, Hear, O heavens, and
hearken, O earth; for the Lord has said, I have brought up children, Esaias. 1.2.
and they have rebelled against me. And go to the Isles of Chittim, and behold,
and send to Kedar, Ier. 2.10.11.
has any nation changed their gods, which yet are no Gods? But my people has
changed their glory, for that which has no profit. Last of all, if a man will
not turn, he will whet his sword(...)(as Ezehiel ingeminateth) A sword, a
sword, both sharp, and four bished, Chap. 21.9.
and the strings of his Bow make ready against the face of the rebellious.
Psalm. 21.12.
Thus says the Lord God of Hosts, the mighty one of Israel, Ah, Esaiah. 1.24.
I will ease me of mine adversaries, and avenge me of mine enemies. All which
does justify God in his saying, and clear him when he is judged. Psalm. 51.4.
Mat. 10.30.
For as his Providence numbreth our hairs, so does his Justice our sins;
whereof as none is so weighty, (without final impenitency) that may not be
forgiven: So none so slight, (if he once enter into judgment) that waigheth
not down to hell.

5 This may be a caveat for us, (Beloved) first to beware of the leaven of the
Romish Synagogue, who frame indulgences for Gods law, and come with peace,
peace, when death is in the pot. Which that we may the more understandingly
deem of, it shall not be amiss to touch a little on the positions, of their
chiefest patrons. In which I intend to be exceeding brief, as aiming rather
at our own reconciling with God, then quarrelling with such obstinate
adversaries. Lib. 1. c. 2. Laethalia, quae ho minem plane avert^nt a Deo.
Venialia quae nonnihil impediunt cursum ad Deum, non t^men ab eo avertunt, and
facili negotio expiantu^, etc. Lib. 1. de Amission. great. and statu peccat.
cap. 14.
Bellarmine de amissione gratiae, and statu peccati, besides other four
divisions of sin, which he there relates, has this for the fifth, which he
only stands upon throughout that whole book. Of sin (says he) some are
deadly, and divert a man wholly from God; others, venial, which hinder him
only a little: and those he terms not so, ab eventu, (with Saint Ambrose,
and Augustine) because it pleases God in mercy, upon repentance through
Christ, to pardon them (as Wickliffe, Luther and Calvin most strongly ever
maintained against the Schoolmen:) but ex natura sua and ratione peccati,
being such, as cross not charity so in their nature, vt si vellet Deus non
condonare, (it is the very vpshot of the book before cited) that if God would
not pardon them, but (as it were) in justice do his worst, Poenom temporalem
tantum, non autem sempiternamexigere possit.
he could punish them no further, then with temporal afflictions, They stand
with perfect charity, says In 4 sent. did. 17.
Scotus: Remitted they may be without any infusion of grace, as Gregorius de
Valentia the Jesuit peremptorily defines; they make us not spotty, or odious,
Tom. 4. disp. 7.
in the sight of God, according to the gentle Censura Colomienfis.
censure of the Divines of Collaine, and therefore deserve not hell but
Purgatory, if In quartum sent. d. 21. q 1.
Aquinas may be believed. And to make it yet more plain, how bold they can be
with Gods Justice! We need not repent for them, says Andradius, with
Bonaventure, in his fifth book of the defense of the Council of Trent; neither
say to God, Forgive us our trespasses, as the Rhemists would father on Saint
Augustine, at the 8. verse of the 7. chapter of the Epistle of Saint Paul to
the Romans. When God had given a Command to Adam, Genesis 2.17. Of the Tree of
knowledge of good and evil, thou shall not eat: for in the day thou eatest
thereof, thou shall die the death; Cap. 3.4.
the Serpent comes with a cou^termand, Ye shall not dye at all: as though Gods
meaning, and his words, had been clean contradictory. And is not this the
dealing of our Adversaries in this present controversy? For if every one be
accursed, that fulfilleth not all the Commandments, Levit. 26.14. all his
ordinances, Deuteronomy. 28.15. whatsoever is written, Gal. 3.10. if he violate the
first, and greatest Commandment, Mat. 22.37. who loves not God, with all his
heart, and with all his soul, and with all his mind. And (...). 1. Ioh. 3.4.
every, the most insensible staggering, (as Calvine soundly urges) comes
within the compass of one of these circumstances; what presumption is it then
in any Baalamite, to be hired to bless, where the Lord has cursed, Number. 23.1.
Kings 22.6
and to say with Ahabs Prophets, Go up and prosper, when Gods Word has told
us, we shall surely fall? But Bellarmine has devised certain shifts, Lib. 1.
de Amiss. great. and statu peccat. cap. 12.
to delude all these evident places, as first properly, and of themselves.
These are not mandates (says he) but degrees of the same Commandment.
Secondly, such places are not to be interpreted of venial sins, but of
mortal only, where finding in his own conscience, these Figleaues too narrow
to cover such apparent nakedness; he adds thirdly, that we must not so
strictly urge whatsoever the Law has enacted against venial sins, because
(which is his fourth extraction out of the School limbiques) these are not
against, but besides the law: and lest all this should fail, he strikes it
dead at the last, with such a qualification: Though these venial faults may
be absolutely called sins, Quamvis peccata venialia fi cum mortalibas
conferantur. non sunt perfect peccata, absolute tamen peccata nominari
possunt, vt in sacris literis nominantur: lib. 1. de Amiss. great. and statu
peccat. cap. 12.
and are so termed in holy scripture; yet perfectly they are not so, being
conferred with mortal sins, and idcirco ex solis istis vocibus, derebus
ipsis non est pronunciandum. And therefore we must not speak of such matters,
as the Word of God directs us, but attend (as it should seem) such
circumstances as the Consistory of Rome shall prescribe us. But can such husks
satisfy any one that has a father to go unto? The Jews Massoreth are
thought too saucy, for disliking some words in the old Testament, as offensive
to modest ears, and adding their corrections in the margent, as though the
holy Ghost had not known how to express his mind. But these are pidling
criticismes to the Cardinals animadversions. With him, mandates must be degrees
of mandates, and contra, shall be praeter; he will have a milder censure for
venial sins, or the text shall stretch for it. God says plainly yea: he
says expressly no. But if such chafe hold out weight in the balance of the
Sanctuary, what proofs may Scripture yield to convince heretics? or
heretics not pervert, to maintain their own fancies? The Arc and Dagon,
Christ and Belial, Bethel and Bethaven may be so united together. Antiquity (I
am sure) was little acquainted with such subtilities.(...); who dares to term
(says Regul. Brevior ad Interrog. 4.(...). Ibid. Interrog. 293.
Basil) any fault little: and v^ vniversae nostrae iustitiae (says Confess.
lib. 9. c. vlt.
S. Augustine) woe to our best works, or righteousness, if without Gods mercy,
they come to a scanning. Every offense (according to Gregory Nazianzen) is the
death of the soul, and clippeth it (in the Latin Gregory's opinion) from
soaring aloft. And howsoever Bellarmines former shift may wind from these
also: yet his own men in reason should sit nearer to him. Gerson de vita
spirituali Anim. Lect. 1 a opposes himself purposely against this absurd
distinction of the Schoolmen. Richardus seconds him: Almaine thinks no
otherwise: 2. Sent. did. 42. q. 6.
Roffensis ioynes with them both: Durand so proves, that every sin in his
own nature, is not only besides, but against Gods Law: that Caietane is feign
to come with this old Catholicon, simpliciter, Caietan. in Aq. 1a. 2^. q. 88.
art. 1.
and secundum quid, to help out Thomas his Master, 1a. 2ae. q, 88. ar. 1. and
yet all will not serve. To hasten to a more profitable use, Michael Baius, not
long sithence professor of Divinity in Lovaine, acknowledges just so much,
that every sin is mortal in its own nature, as we contend for. And all the
world may see, that these Taske-masters can show no other warrant, for
gathering this stubble of venial sins, in the sense they urge it, but only
from the Roman Pharaoh, to make brick in Purgatory. But this availes not in
Gods Court (Beloved) and therefore our plea must be clean altered. For his
thoughts are not our thoughts, nor his ways our ways: Esaias. 55.8. Behold
(says Bildad in the Book of Job) the Moon has no light, Chap. 25.5.6.
and the Stars are unclean in his sight: and will a worm, or a shadow, a
bottle in the smoke, stand up to try titles with him in judgment? If thou,
Lord, wilt be extreme, Psalm. 130.3.
to mark what is done amiss, O Lord, who may abide it? That which vinegar is
to the teeth, smoke to the eyes, a carcasse-smell unto the nose, a naked
dagger to the heart: more is the smallest faultring of mortal man to the
infinite justice of Almighty God. Never can there be the like antipathie, or
deadly feud, betwixt the most hostile creatures that ever were created, as
betwixt the Author of all goodness, Jude. 6. Genesis 3.24. Genesis 19.24. 1. King.
15.29. 1. King. 16.12. 2. King. 10.11.
and this Devils brat, sin. It crosses his very nature, and he must needs
crush it; it contemns his prerogative, and therefore may not be tolerated. It
threw the Angels out of heaven, Adam out of Paradise, burned Sodom,
disinherited Saul's posterity, plagued David, rooted out the whole families of
Jeroboam, Baasha, and Ahab, plucked at length the most beloved Son out of the
bosom of his Father, to dye ignominiously in the habit of a servant. And yet
such is our sensles stupidity, and ungrateful perverseness: we drink iniquity
like water, and distaste it not; acknowledge Gods heavy indignation against it,
and regard it not; see the dungeon ready to receive us, the scourges to torment
us, the plagues to befall us; and yet by any manner of repentance shun them
not. Who presumes not on Gods mercy, as though he were not just? and is not
bolder to offend this King of Kings, then the meanest neighbor or friend he
has? what examples terrify us, or terrors effect, or effects declare, that
we incline not to the position of David's fool, Psalm. 14.1.
who has said in his heart, that there is no God? After so long teaching and
often hearing, many threats, and often punishments by famine, pestilence, and
waters, remain there not Chams amongst us, who dishonor their parents?
Ismaels that mock, and Esaus that vow revenge against their fellow members,
and natural brethren; Ioabs, to kiss, and stab; Absolons, to flatter, and
rebel; Pharisees for outsides, and Sadduces for belief, that rate at a mess
of pottage, their heavenly birthright? Judas once sold his Master for thirty
pieces of silver: but we often part with him, and commonly for half the money.
What sophistications use we not to gild over, and extenuate sins: not only
to poison our selves, but also to draw on others? To be drunk, and frequent
lewd company, is now to be sociable and Jovial: swearing, a note of resolution:
gulling, of a good wit: cheating, of a tried experience: extorting
couertousnesse of a careful providence, and damnable dissimulation of a
notable headed politician. How many of our greener years affect not rather the
name of a good fellow, then of a good Christian? come at Sermons as at plays,
to censure, rather then to practice; and take up all new fashions, both in garb
and complement, except that newness of life, which our Savior commends. But
I tell thee (my good Christian brother) these leakes are not so little, but
they may quickly sink thee; the very touch of this pich is sufficient to
defile: and thou tread but on the eggs of this wily cockatrice, thou shall
presently perceive that there lurketh a serpent. Were the Angels punished
eternally for sinning once, and think thou to stand out in judgment with so
many transgressions? must our thoughts be sca^ned, and shall our words escape?
or our words be condemned, and yet our actions pardoned? Be not deceived, God
is not mocked. Inclinations, motions, intentions, our most secret, and lightest
sins, are as Eli's sons, they will break our necks, if we break not off
them. Gods Word is a two-edged sword, which must kill our faults, or us; and if
we stumble and dash against the Corner stone, Mat. 21.44.
it will fall upon us, and grind us to powder. For as one spark of fire may
burn a whole City, and one naked place in an armed man (says S. Chrysostom)
give way to a deadly wound: Jn Matthew. Homil. 35. Vid. August. in Johan. tract.
12.
so the least grain of sin unrepented, may draw such mountains of miseries
upon us, which all that we can do, or say, (without Gods infinite mercy)
shall never be able to remove. O that we would therefore deal with these
vanities, as Joseph did with his Mistress, and break out at the first assault,
into this or the like contemplation: Thus and thus has the Lord done for me;
he brought me into this World, to overcome this world, that by contemning this,
I might enjoy a better. Do not all creatures serve me, that I should serve
him? and have I ought of mine own, but only by his bounty? how then should I
do any wickedness, and sin against him, who beholds my least
backslidings, and will surely punish them? He spared not the natural branches,
and shall I have an indulgence? has his Son suffered to redeem his enemies,
and shall his enemies escape that contemn his Son? No certainly (Beloved)
he is just, as well as merciful: if thou turn from his statutes, thou shall
be overturned. In a day that thou look not for, Math. 24.50. Psalm. 18.
and in an hour that thou art not aware of, the snares of death shall overtake
thee, and pains of Hell shall compass thee round about. Thine Adversary shall
not only deliver thee to the Judge, but the Judge deliver thee to the
Sergeant: which is the second circumstance I before proposed; and follows to
lead furthery your judicious considerations.

7 The Judge shall deliver thee to the Sergeant. This Judge all consent upon to
be Christ, to whom the Father has committed all Judgment. Ioh. 5.22. For
though the Apostles are said also to judge, Luke 22.30. and the men of Niniveh,
Aquin. supplem. q. 89. art. 1. Lomb. lib. 7. c. 18.
Math. 12.41. yet this is but by way of assession, or approbation, as the
Schoolmen expound the former; or exemplarily, as produced to convince others,
who have less profited by greater means (as Beza and Piscator intimate of the
latter) none having absolute authority, Jn 12. Mat.
but the to whom all power was given Math. 28.18. Next, Luke 12.58.
what this word (...) should signify (for which Saint Luke has (...), the
Syriack, (...), the Remists and our last Translation, Officer, Vid. Bell. lib.
1. de Purg. c. 7.
D. Fulke, Minister; some old translations, Doomesman, and we here Sergeant)
there is some small difference. S. Ambrose and S. Augustine would have it to be
the good Angels, because these are said, to minister to our Savior, in the
former Chap. at the 11. verse; to come with him, chap. 16.27. to gather the
tares, Chap. 13.30. But Chrysostom, Gregory, Theophylact, Hugo, and Abulensis,
together with the Ordinary gloss, do think it rather the Devils office. Ibid.
For these are the cursed Iaylers of the damned, which must accompany them
eternally in everlasting fire, Math. 25.41. Both opinions are probable (says
Bellarmine.) Piscator joins them together: In hunc locu^.
and Buccasenus shows the reason. The Goats (says he) are delivered to the
good Angels, to be separated from the sheep, and from thence to the evil, to
be tortured for ever. Whence I gather in stead of many, this one general
observation:

That there shall be a Judgment hereafter, wherein every man shall receive
according to his works.

8 I need not to be curious in proving this point, which is received as a
principle, in the Articles of our faith. That Sadduce, which denies it, denies
also God, and shall sooner feel it, then have time to prevent it. 1. Cor.
15.22.
In a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the terrible sound of the last
Trumpet, the son of man shall come in the clouds of heaven, Math. 24.30.
with all his holy Angels in power and great glory: when the Sun shall be
black as sackcloth of hair; Rev. 12.5.
the Moon like blood, the Stars fall unto thee earth, as a figtree casts
her leaves, the heavens depart as a scroll roled, and every mountain and I Will
move out of their places; when the earth melts, the sea roareth, the elements
dissolve, nations howl, all the world flasheth with the terrible and all
consuming flames, mentioned by the blessed Apostle S. Peter; 2. Pet. 3.40.
then shall we all appear before the Judgment seat of Christ, Romans 14.10.
that every man may receive according as he has done, 2. Cor. 5.10. And here
(beloved) in a matter of so serious importance, it should be idle for me, to
break out into the mazes, and vagaries of the Schoolmen: as to determine
with the master of the Sentences, 4. Sent. did. 47. Ibid.
that this last fire shall, as the first flood, rise just fifteen cubits above
the tops of the highest mountains; or with Nicholas de Orbellis, that the
material Cross, whereon our Savior was crucified, should be carried (as a
Mace) before him, when he comes to Judgment, In supplem. q. 88. art. 4.
or with Aquinas and the rest of that side, that the place of this Judgment
shall be in the air, right against mount O liuet, over the valley of
Iehoshaphat. Well says Artemidorus in his Oneirocritiques, No dreams of a
private man may have a public interpretation. For what should we speak in
such obscurities, 4. Sent. did. 47. Epist. 24. ad Hieronym.
that the Lord puts not into our mouths? That which Lombard has of the
authority of Angels in this business, Puto hoc non ante sciri, quam videatur.
I think it cannot be known, before it be seen, or at least revealed; and St
Augustine somewhere of original sin, Never be so inquisitiue, how thou had
it from thy parents, but labor to be cleared of it by the merits of thy
Savior; may serve us here, to curb our curiosity. Let it not be thy care to
conceive, where and when, and with what circumstances, this judgment is to be
holden, but there, and then, and by good assurances, to be delivered from the
horrible damages thereof. Two kinds of Judgments the Scripture mentions,
on which we may safely build. The first a particular, the second a general.
This for the soul alone, at every man's several departure, as that of Dives
and Lazarus, Luke. 16.22.23. That for the soul and body, and all men together,
at the last day, after the universal resurrection, Heb. 9.27. The first
respects us (says Aquinas) as private persons; Vbi supra q. 88. art. 5.
the second as parts of mankind: neither shall that be recalled, or mitigated
in the second, which was determined in the first: but rather published, what
there was privately passed, and what was in the particular begun, in the
general shall be consummated, by reuniting the soul and body everlastingly
together.

9 In both which, could we but think of with deliberation, the most strict,
and severe proceeding of Gods immovable justice, it would cool our courages,
and take down the presumption, that now so lauishly runs on in the score of
Gods mercy. For though in this life, his ears be open to the petitions of the
penitent, yet hereafter when he returns to execute Judgment, Mat. 25.26.
he acknowledges that he is a hardman, Math. 18.6.
reaping where he never sowed, and gathering, where he strowed not. Who for
offending a little one, will inflict a heavier punishment upon the guilty, then
the casting him into the sea, with a millstone about his neck, and for defect
alone of a wedding garment, will adjudge an invited ghest, to utter darkness.
Math. 22.13.
And now (my beloved brethren) was Adam so hardly censured, (as it is thought)
for one Apple? The Angels for a thought: Moses and Aaron for once doubting: all
Israel, for Achans taking one wedge of Gold: the whole Tribe of Benjamin, for
forcing of one woman: and shall we think, in that terrible Day of the Lord, a
day of darkness and dimnesse, a day of clouds, and storms before so just a
Judge, so many accusers, for so heinous, voluntary, and continued crimes, it is
possible for us to escape unpunished? Act. 24.26.
Foelix trembled when Paul preached of judgment: Lib. 2. de complex. cap. 20.
and Lemnius reports of a young man of the Emperor Charles his Court, who for
horror of the execution he was the next day to suffer, in one night became
white, both in his head and beard. But could we but restrain a little our
thoughts, to the meditation of these fearful Assizes, it would stop our lewd
courses (as the light from heaven did Saules) and make us to cry out with him,
Lord, Act. 9.6.
what will thou that we do? For alas, how will all our Gallants and Swaggerers
behave themselves in that perplexity? all our hypocrites and extortioners? all
our drunkards and Adulterers, when the Judge shall come in this terrible
majesty, this to fan, this to purge, this to separate the corn from the
chafe, the wheat from the tares, the Sheep from the Goats, without pity,
pardon, or partiality? which way will they beturne themselves? What Apologies
will they make? whose help and counsel can they use, in so desperate and
sudden an extremity? who? where? what thing can yield consolation? when the
Lord once blows against them (as the Prophet speaks) with the fire of his
wrath? Ezech. 21.31.
Above them (as Anselme describes it) an angry Judge, ready to condemn them,
beneath, a gaping Chaos, with grisly fire and brimstone, eternally to ingulfe
them; on the right hand, their sins accusing; on the left hand, ugly fiends
to dragge them to execution; within, a gnawing conscience; without, loath some
companions, the world burning, all creatures amazed, the last sentence thundered
out in this dreadful manner: Math. 25.41.
Go ye cursed of my Father, into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and
his angels. Upon the pronouncing of which, what imagination can conceive, or
tongue of men and Angels express the ruthful and dismal departing of the
damned reprobates? Parents, from their Children, Husbands from their Wives,
Brothers and Sisters from each other, so to be sundred, that never pity, or
comfort may afterward be expected? this is that which should stick closer to
the brawny hearts of our careless worldlings, Judge. 3.22.
then Ehuds dagger did to fat Eglons: and awake them to look about, whiles
space, and place is granted. O my dear Christian Brother, then thou shall
truly find, that this is no Bugbeare, wherewith we are threatened at this
present: one cup of cold water given, one pleasure abandoned, Mat. 10.42.
one injury endured here in this world for Christ's sake, but especially the
treasure of an unspotted conscience, shall give thee at that instant greater
comfort, then all the dignities and delights of a thousand worlds. But thou
supposest this far off, and therefore the less regardest it. Senseless, and
inconsiderate as we are! have we been so often deluded, and yet discern not
this last, and deadliest bait of that old Serpent the Devil? It is not for us
(I confess) to know the times and seasons, Act. 1.7.
which the Father has put in his own power: and therefore to particularize
with some, that the Brightman in c. 9. Apoc. An. 1696. vltimus est terminus
Turcici nominis.
Turkish Monarchy shall have its period, just 81. years hence, and the Papacy
71. or with Napier prop. 14. c. 116. Alsted. praec. Theol. cap. 16 vbi vid.
plura de fine Mundi page 526.
others in like curiosity, that the end of the world shall fall, within the
compass of those doozen years between 1688. and 1700. is more then my
Algorithme finds demonstration for: yet if by a cloud, we may conjecture of a
storm, and by the budding of a fig tree, that Summer is near at hand,
warrantable it is to teach at this present, which the Apostle S. John did 1500.
years sithence, that these are the 1. Ioh. 2.18.
last times, which how much longer they are to last, neither the Mat. 24.36.
Angels, nor any creature can exactly assure us. Jonas had for the Ninivites,
Cap. 3.4.
yet forty days: but for ought we know, within forty hours, this time may
come, when time shall be no more. For what signs thereof are mentioned in
Scripture, which are not already fulfilled, or what summons have been omitted
to warn us to provide? False Christ's were to come, and they have been
discovered; persecutions to arise, and they have been endured; Antichrist to
be revealed, 2 Thessalonians. 2.8.
and behold, he is conspicuous, with his Locusts and followers: wars, and
rumors to trouble all the world, and they have been felt, and heard:
pestilence and famine, earthquakes, and strange prodigies, false Prophets, and
false brethren, increase of iniquity, and frozennesse of charity, what man so
simple that speaks not of, and daily almost complains not? Two signs only
remain which can be doubted of: The preaching of the Gospel throughout the
world; and the Conversion of the Jews to Christianity. But the first
(according to most Writers) was accomplished in the Apostles time. For went not
their sound out through all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the
world? Romans 10.18. or at least now is, as Io. Fredericus (in a peculiar tract)
has showed, by spreading the Gospel amongst the East Indians, Vid Pareum in
11. cap. ad Roman. Dub. 18. Vid. Marlorat. in Romans 11.20.
and Americans. And for the latter, though Chrysostom, Hilarie, Ambrose,
Hierome, and Augustine, with diverse of our new Writers, very probably collect,
that before the end, there shall be a general conversion of the Jews: yet
Calvin, Bucer, and Musculus, with diverse others of good note, expound that
Israel of God, Romans 11.26. (the only place that intimates such a matter)
either allegorically, of the faithful, or of some persons, to be converted in
allages of the Jewish Nation: All falling at length on Origens uncertainty in
this point. Quis autem sit iste omnis Israel: what all that Israel is, that
shall be saved, He only knows, and his Son that saves them. Small hope
may therefore be grounded on such ambiguities. To these if we further add the
Prophecy of Rabbi Elias, not disliked by most of the Ancients, and the Cabala
of Rabbi Isaac on the first verse of Genesis, related by Genebrard, Chronol.
lib. 19. which al drive at the period of 6000 years. By the Septuagints,
Josephus, Eusebius, Augustines, Isidores, and Alphonsus the Astronomers
account, this date is out already. And according to the truer supputation of
those that follow the Hebrew text, not far from finishing; the times for the
Elects sake being to be shortened. What is left therefore (B.) for us, but to
watch, and be ready (as our Savior counsels,) lest our Master come, and the
Bridegroom pass, and this day as a Thief overtake us, where we are least
provided of it? S. Hierome professes, that whether he eat or drink, or did
any other thing, this voice did always seem to trumpet in his ears, Surgite
mortui, and venite ad iudiciu^, arise you dead, and come to judgment. And
nothing can better us more, then the remembrance of this like sentence, uttered
by our Savior: Come, give an account of thy Stewardship, for thou may be no
longer Steward. Certainly there can be in this case but two kinds of
deliuerings; the first, from our sins, to a better estate; the second, for
our sins, to an incensed Judge. If the first befall thee, no happiness can
be greater then thine; but if the second, without redress thou shall be cast
into prison: which is the last circumstance I before proposed, and will hasten
by reason of the time briefly to conclude.

10 And thou be cast into prison. (...), says the Syriack, domum vinctorum; to
wit, by the Sergeant, to whom the Judge delivered thee. That which breeds here
a scruple, is what this word prison should signify. Convenient similiter omnes
(says Bellarmine lib. 1. de Purgatorio, cap. 7.) All Interpreters concur in
this, that by this prison is meant hell: and thus far he speaks
ingeniously. But mark the poor shifts of so great a scholar, to set up his
Dagon again, that has so often fallen, before the Ark of God; he is feign to
rake Hell it self, to find out Purgatory. For this he goes onward, In quo
tamen multae sunt mansiones; aliae pro damnatis, aliae pro his qui purgantur.
In this hell notwithstanding are many mansions, some for the damned, others for
them which are to be purged. But a more ample map of this place, we have in
his second book of Purgatory, and Chap. 6. where having rejected 7. opinions,
concerning this subterranean Geography, the eighth he borrows from the
Schoolmen, and seems to approve, that this infernum, or hell, is a place
within the bosom, or bowels of the earth, divided (as the higher regions) into
four parts, whereof the lowest sink, or coale-house is hell; next above that,
Purgatory, then Limbus infantum, where children go, that dye unbaptized; above
all, Limbus Patrum, where the Patriarchs were feign to lodge, before Christ's
Passion; but then were removed, and the place left empty. This scantling of
time will not permit me to examine all particulars, how our adversaries could
come to so perfect notice of all these places, as also so distinctly to
understand, what persons are there to be purged, and for what sins; how
grievous the punishment is there inflicted, by devils, in a corporal fire,
Vide Bellar. vbi supra.
how long it shall endure, what suffrages, Masses, or indulgences will assuage
it, or remove it, that the souls can neither merit, nor demerit in such a
case, that they are always certain of their eternal salvation, and this to
be firmly believed as an article of faith; It will ask (I say,) more time,
then your patience can allow me: I will strike therefore at the root, and so
pass along. To make all this good unto us, Bellarmine produces ten places
out of the old Testament, and so many more out of the New. To all which in
general I answer: First, out of Bellarmine himself in the last Chapter of
his first book of Purgatory: Where being urged by Peter Martyr, and our men,
that Purgatory is is not found in Scripture, and therefore can be no matter of
Faith; has nothing to say but this, Ad primum ergo respondeo, Non est necesse
vt Scriptura vbique omnia dicat. It is not necessary that the Scripture should
every where mention all things, especially where it may be patched up with
Apostolical traditions. On which when Bellarmine also relyeth, for the proof
of this Ignis Fatuus; what does he, In eundem locum.
but in effect (as Iunius well notes against him) overthrow his Scripture
forces? Since Traditions take no place, but where Scripture fails, Lib. 4. de
verbo Dei non scripto. Lib. 2. Epist. Libro 12. Deipnosop. Conuenit inter nos
and aduersarios ex solo literali sensu peti debere argumenta efficacia. Bellar.
l. 3. de verb. Dei, c. 3. Lib. 1. de purgat. c. 7.
by his own doctrine in his first general Controversy. But as that lunaticke
Thrasylaus mentioned by Horace, and Athenaeus, thought all the ships to be his
own, that arrived in the Haven at Athens: so wheresoever there is fire
doubtfully mentioned of in Scripture, our Adversaries straight convey it, to
heat Purgatory kitchen. Secondly, I answer in particular, to the words of my
Text, which he especially builds upon. First, that they are symbolicall (as
himself confesses) and therefore according to Aquinas and their own
Schools, prove nothing. Secondly, whereas this particle (...), or until, may
seem to enforce a deliverance from this prison, and so by some show of
consequence, their Purgatory, the argument being thus framed: Thou shall not
come out, until thou have paid the uttermost farthing; therefore, afterward
thou may come out. Saint Augustine (as he acknowledges) instanceth against
this, both by that place of the Psalmist, Psalm. 110.1.
Sit thou on my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool; as
also in that of the Evangelist, Mat. 1.25.
Joseph knew not Mary, until she had brought forth her first begotten. Where
the first implies not, that after Christ's enemies were subdued, he should sit
on Gods right hand no longer; nor the latter helps the inference of
Heluidius, that after our Saviors birth, Joseph knew his wife. Saint
Augustine therefore concludes, that donec in this place signifies, non finem
poenae, sed continuationem miseriae: not an end of pain, but the continuance
of misery; Semper solues (says Hugo out of Remigius) and nunquam persolues.
Thou shall ever be paying, yet never satisfy. Which exposition Calvin, and
Bucer, and Musculus do not only embrace: but Anselme, and Beda, Thomas, and
Gorram, Ammonius, and Avendano, Maldonate, and Iansenius, with I know not how
many of their own consorts. But Bellarmine urges this farther, and therefore
we must farther follow him. Vbi supra.
Exempla B. Augustini non satisfaciunt (says he) S. Augustines examples, or
instances satisfy not. For in the first; Sit thou on my right hand, until I
make thy enemies thy footstool, although I cannot infer, therefore afterward
Christ shall not sit on Gods right hand; yet this is a necessary consequence,
therefore there shall a time come, when Christ's enemies shall be made his
footstool. So in the second, he knew her not, until she had brought forth.
Though I cannot gather, therefore he knew her afterward, yet this I may argue,
therefore she was to bring forth. And no other is the consequent in this place,
thou shall not come out, until thou have paid the utmost farthing. Therefore
there shall be a time, when the utmost farthing shall be paid. But to this
utmost strain of Bellarmines sophistry, a mean Logician may easily answer;
that all this concludes but a a necessity of the thing to be done, not a
possibility of the party to be able to do it. In 26. ves. 5. cap. Math.
Ostendit debitum solvendum (which I take to be the meaning of Piscators
answer) non debitore^ solvendo: If it argue the debt to be paid; it inricheth
not the debtor to be able to pay it. So that by equipollency it falls to be
such a connexiue proposition: If thou pay the utmost farthing, then thou may
be delivered; which I deny any man can ever pay (having, by offending an
infinite God, deserved an infinite punishment) and therefore must always ly by
it. For if some pains may satisfy Gods Justice in Purgatory, for a small
offense; should not greater pains proportionably in hell, do the like for a
greater offense, and so by consequence, the devils themselves (which was
Origens error) in time might be freed? The Fathers father not (howsoever
Bellarmine marshall them) this glowing, and local Purgatory; but rightly
understood, are as far from it as it from truth. For they make it not a
hot-house for the souls of the elect, farmed by the Pope to the Devil at a
yearly rack rent: but abdita quaedam receptacula (as Lombard has rightly
delivered out of ancient learning) certain unknown places of repose, 4. Sent.
did. 45.
where purged at their dissolution from the body, by virtue of Christ's passion,
they rest from their labors in expectance of the complement of that joy, which
they shall receive together with the body, at the reuniting again, in the
general resurrection: wherefore Saint Augustine concludes, Non est vllus vlli
locus medius, Lib. de peccat. Merit. et Remiss. cap. 28. Vid. Tabulam Market.
universe.
vt possit esse nisi cum diabolo, qui non est cum Christo. Just therefore as
some Geographers, for proouing of a black rock many hundred miles about,
directly under the North pole, send us to Gyrabdus Cambrensis; he to a Priest
of Norway; the Priest to an Oxford Magician, who was carried thither to see it
by the Devil, if we will believe the narration: So the best proofs of our
adversaries for their Subterranean Purgatory, come by many deductions, from the
same Author; as it appears by the diverse apparitions they so confidently
allege for it. But we taking parabolically this prison, for no better place
then Hell, may resolve without difficulty on this position,

That the wicked shall be turned unto Hell, and all the people that forget God.

11 I take it the words of the Prophet, Psalm. 7.19. to cut off all occasion of
farther proof. The use is a terror to careless worldlings, that run the
broad way spoken of by our Savior and never mark where it leads. Come on
therefore, thou inconsiderate and retchlesse Christian, and look before thou
leapest, and if thou will needs to this prison, see thy entertainment. Horrible
(out of doubt) was that storm of fire and brimstone, which consumed Sodom,
and the Cities of the Plain. Genesis 19.3.
And fearful was that seventh plague of Egypt, Thunder, and Hail, and
Lightning running upon the ground. And inferior to neither, Exodus 9.23.
was that prodigious death of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, when the earth opened
her jaws, Number. 16.
and swallowed them alive into the pit with all their goods and families: but
these are but a preface, a spark, a drop, a nothing to the everlasting
tortures of Gods extremest vengeance. Never eye has seen, nor ear has
heard, nor heart of man has conceived the infinite bitterness of these last
vials of wrath. A bottomless dungeon, a lake of Gods wrath, a poole of fire
and brimstone, a ghastly (...), pitchy mists, deadly fogges, hideous confusion,
chains of utter darkness. Tophet prepared of old, deep, and large, burning
with fire, and much wood, and the breath of the Lord kindling it as a river of
brimstone. These very names of this Prison, mentioned in Scripture, should
daunt, and amaze the most presumptuous worldling, that by altering of his
course of life, he might avoid the thing it self. Of which, should I but
farther relate the fearful descriptions, frequent in Fathers, and Schoolmen,
(wherein all notwithstanding come too short) I should not so much rack your
patience with horror, by reason of mine own insufficiency, as abuse it with
prolixitie, by going beyond my time. O God! to depart from thee, to accompany
the Devil and his angels, to be excluded from heaven, into everlasting fire,
always scorched, and never consumed; ever dying, and never dissolved; sinking
eternally, and never come unto the bottom; weeping, gnashing, freezing,
frying, without the least drop of hope, or hope of pity; I quake, and stop, and
dare to go no farther. O indignation of the Almighty, fall not upon us: for our
flesh trembles for fear of thee, and we are afraid of thy terrible
judgments. We acknowledge our lightest offenses, to deserve thy eternal
anger, and this prison to be due for our daily transgressions: but spare us,
good Lord, for thy Son, who spared'st not thy Son for us: let not the
thought of our last end be so the last end of our thought, that by forgetting
thy justice, we neglect thy service, and presume in the least sins, to offend
thy infinite Majesty. Hear us, good Lord, for thy Church, and thy Church for
thy Son, and thy Son, for both; to whom with thee, and the holy Ghost,
three persons and one God, be ascribed all honor, power, and dominion, both
now and evermore.

AMEN.
EPHESVS BACKSLIDING: CONSIDERED AND APPLIED TO THESE TIMES.

IN A SERMON PREACHED AT OXFORD, IN St MARY'S, the tenth of July, being the
Act-sunday.

By JOHN PRIDEAVX, Doctor of Divinity, Regius Professor, and Rector of Exeter
College.

JOHN 6.67. Will ye also go away?

OXFORD, Imprinted by LEONARD LICHFIELD Anno Salutis, 1636.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL MY VERY REVEREND AND WORTHY PATRON, Dr BODLEY CANON
OF EXETER, AND Parson of SHOBROOKE IN DEVON.
SIR,
BEING overruled by some friends to print this Sermon, not framed, nor
intended to any such purpose: my choice was easier to whom I should dedicate
it. The world sees how much I am bound to you for the late real kindness
conferred on me. For which, to show my self thankful by all honest means,
the less you expect it, the more I hold it due. Our Savior, Who most avoided
popular applause, See thou say nothing to any man, Mark. 1.44.
misliked not the Samaritane, Luke 17.16.
that turned back to give thanks. And much it were to be wished, that in
these days thanks would serve. Mat. 21.12.
But since buyers and sellers have broken into the Temple, Iudas'es what will
you give me, Mat. 26.15.
and Simon Magus's offering, make most bargains for Benefices. Act. 8.18.
Whereby God is dishonored, worthy men disheartened, hirelings preferred, good
laws deluded, holy things profaned, the Church stained, the people starued.
The more remarkable therefore has been your free dealing with me, and your
religious kinsman's M. Periam's, with M. Orford of our College. If such Patrons
might be patterns for disposing the Lords portion many in the country might be
better taught and in our Universities sooner employed. My self with this
savor of yours am the more affected, because it comes from my native country,
to which my best services were otherwise devored. Besides, it stands with a
kind of conveniencie (in my desires at least) that Exeter College especially,
should be patronized from Exeter; from which it first had it is name and
Founder, and for which it has bred (as by Gods grace it shall continue to do)
so many men of worth. Concerning this ensuing discourse, I have little to say.
It must speak for it is self, now it appears abroad. Judicious is that
position of S. Augustine, Haud quicquam facit bonos vel malos mores, nisi boni
vel mali amores, ep. 52. Amor est vis animae, naturali quodam pondere fere^s
eam in locum vel finem suu^. Lib. de not. and dignit. divini amoris cap. 1.
Men's lives are as their loves: whereof Bernard gives the reason, because loves
is to the soul, as weight to the body, it caries it to the right place, if it
be rightly placed. As long as the Lark soareth upward, she sings without
danger of the Net: but stooping to gaze on the Fowlers deceitful glass, she
is quickly ensnared. We are all too far enamored with the glympses of things
below; where the Devils ginnes are always in a readiness. Our ancestors first
love was more wisely fixed. My song therefore has been, return, return,
Cant. 6.13.
O Shulamite, return, return! Which howsoever may sound harsh in some men's
censures; yet the better sort (I trust) will conceive my meaning to be good He
that runs in a race, Homil. 7. in ep. ad Philip.
(says Chrysostom) is not so much to eye the spectators, as the mark. And
Readers it cannot meet with more understanding, then it had hearers. Next to
God glory, and the Churches good, if you accept it kindly, I attain my scope.
To whom it is due first fruits, from him that assuredly rests.

From Exeter College in Oxford, August. 5. Yours to dispose in the Lord Jesus,
JOHN PRIDEAVX.

EPHESVS BACKSLIDING CONSIDERED AND APPLIED TO THESE TIMES.
REVEL. 2.4. Nevertheless, I have somewhat against thee, because thou have
left thy first love.


THere is nothing so dangerous to the estate of a Christian, that trauaileth
here from Egypt to the heavenly Canaan, as spiritual pride, and carnal
security. For seeing that all our life is but a temptation, (as Saint Nemo
securus esse debet in ista vita, quae tota tentatio nominatur, vt qui fieri
potuit ex deteriore melior, non fiat etiam ex meliore deterior. lib. 10.
Confess. c. 32.
Augustine confesses;) great heed must be taken, least he that should grow on
from worse to better, by his careless negligence fall away from better to
worse. This was the Angels case of Ephesus, as my verse. 1.
Text shows; whom he that holds the seven Stars in his right hand, and
walks in the midst of the seven golden Candlesticks (that is, Seb. Meyer apud
Marlor. in hunc locu^. Rhemist. annotat. Viegas in 1. cap. Apoc. Sect. 14.
Ribera ibid. Bulling. conc. 7. v. 5.
vpholdeth the Ministers of his Word, and continually suruaieth his Churches,
to repair defects) vouchsafes in this regard to rowze by an Epistle. That
seeing insensible decays continued, in time prove great breaches, slyding
leads to falling, cooling to benumb'nesse, drowsinesse to sleep, slacknesse
to defection, indifferency to senselessness, and a loathing of all Religion;
Ephesus might look about from whence she had fallen, and repent, and do her
first works: least the sudden approach of her Lord should take her loytering,
and by removing her Candlestick, prevent her conversion.

2 For the clearer passage to the words, some difference must be reconciled
among Interpreters, who are meant especially by the seven Angels, to whom these
seven Epistles are in general directed. Vestigat arcan. sensus in Apocal.
Antuerp. 1614. lib. 2. Notat. 1.
Alcaezar the Jesuit, in his new painted bulk upon this Revelation, says,
the Bishops; In hoc cap. disp. 2. Fox, Fulke, Bullinger in hoc caput conc. 6.
Viegas in hoc caput, sect. 1. Perer. in cap. 1. disp. 15.
Pererius his fellow (together with some Ancients, Arethas, Andreas, Ansbert,
and Anselme,) think rather the people; S. Ambrose, Haymo, and Beda, join both
together: and this is best approved of our reformed Interpreters. For howsoever
the inscriptions be to the Angels only, who signify (according to most) not
celestial spirits, but the Pastors of those Churches, yet the contents
concern their In tantum Angelorum nomine Ecclesias Catholicas voluit
intelligi, vt iubeat Angelos poenitentiam agere. Aug. in Apoc. Hom. 2.
flocks as near as themselves, and therefore in the former Chapter we have,
verse 11. What thou see, write in a Book, and send to the seven Churches
which are in Asia. Not that it is all one to write to the Church, and to the
Head and Governor thereof, (as the Inver. ^um not. marg.
Rhemists hence would gather, to scrue in, and interest their Pope to dispose
of all things:) but rather to express the bond betwixt the people and Pastor,
whose faults he is to reprove, or answer for; and therefore it stands him
upon, to communicate what he receives. Now this particular Pastor here of
Ephesus, In hunc locu^ Comment. in ver. 1.
Lyra would have to be Timothy. Ribera labors to refute that out of
Metaphrastes; but Pererius and Alcazar take Lyra's part. Others name Onesimus,
some Tychicus. Be it either, or neither, it matters not, the Spirit of God
being silent. For the best may grow remiss, and need daily inciting. Vid. D.
Ioach. Vadian. in epitom. 1. Not. hist. l. 36. cap. 14. Eusebius. lib. 3. Hist.
Eccles. cap. 18. Baron. Annal. anno Christi 98. ver. 2. ver. 3.
As Ephesus here, the Metropolis of little Asia, and glory of Ionia, famous
amongst the Gentiles, for her situation, and Temple, which (as Pliny reports)
was 220. years in building; famous amongst Christians, for Saint John's
residence, and Saint Paul's Epistle unto them; nay, which our Savior here
commends in such ample terms, for her forwardness in labor, for her
constancy in patience, for her zeal in reforming manners, for her discretion
in dismasking Heretics, whose constancy, patience, labor, and that for a
right end, for his names sake, and that without failing or fainting, are
ingeminated with good approbation, immediately before my Text; may have
somewhat notwithstanding, Chap. 1. v. 14.
that is out of frame; their friends may over-see it, themselves may scarce
perceive it, which the flaming eyes of Christ will pierce through to censure,
Nevertheless I have somewhat against thee, because thou have left thy first
love.

3 As though with his beloved Spouse he had thus debated the matter: Think
not, Ephesus, but I take notice of all thy doings and sufferings; thy labors
please me well, I approve thy works, I pity thy patience, and cannot choose
but commend thy discipline; but O that this first affection were seconded with
the like alacrity! for do not I perceive thy coldness in devotion, thy
carelessness in Preaching, thy slacknesse in performing any deed of charity?
Have thou not begun in the Spirit, and now art sinking back to end in the
flesh? Ephesus, I love thee, and therefore may not sooth thee; much good (thou
see) I speak of thee, yet somewhat I have against thee. I remember the
kindness of thy youth, it was hearty and through; but time has cooled it, and
thou art grown remiss. My left hand is under thy heard, Cant. 2.6. Jbid. v. 5.
and my right hand does embrace thee, I daily stay thee with Flaggons, and
comfort thee with Apples, as thou have occasion; Cant. 1.7.
but thou have turned aside to the Flocks of thy Companions, so that when I
come with my bedewed head, Cant. 5.2.
and dropping locks in the night, to find my accustomed entertainment,
saying, Open unto me, my sister, my Love, my Dove, Ibid. ver. 3.
my undefiled: thou tellest me, thy coat is off, and thou can not put it on;
that thy feet are washed, and thou art loath to defile them: such excuses thou
have to put me off, and make me withdraw my self. Ibid. ver. 4.
Whereat though thy bowels are sometimes moved, yet stirring not to give
entrance as thou were wont to do; pretend what thou may, say what thou will,
dissemble how thou can, it is manifest thou have left thy first heat of
affection. And this I taker to be the complaint of our wronged heavenly
Solomon, included in the words I have read unto you. The sum is,

4. An Indictment of Ephesus for backsliding and security:

Wherein observe the 1 Exception, Nevertheless; 2 Accusation, I have somewhat
against thee; 3 Fault, because thou have left thy first love.


A Church militant cannot be without Exceptions; where exceptions are to be
taken, Christ sticks not to accuse; and accuse he does never without a fault.
The first shows our infirmity; the second, our Saviors integrity, and the
third, sins malignity. That we may be humbled in the first, and directed by
the second, to correct the third: Within these bounds I shall endeavor, by
Gods assistance, and your Christian patience, to confine my meditations. He
that has an care to hear, Reve. 2.7.
let him harken what the spirit says unto the Churches; to the Churches, as
well of great Britain, as those of little Asia. For howsoever we flatter our
selves, our defections are more deeply to be accused, and perfections as
subject to a Nevertheless, the note of exception to Ephesus; notwithstanding
all it is good parts; which falls here in order to be first considered.
Nevertheless.

5. As in Arts, so in Acts of morality; few veritiers are so general, that
admit not exception. If a Church might plead immunity, Ephesus might here stand
upon our Saviors testimony. For are not her labors in peace, and patience in
trouble, (as Aretius well observes) once and again repeated, and commended?
In hunc locum.
Evil men should have little ease in her, for she could not bear them.
Dissemblers should not deceive her, ver. 2.
for she would try them, 1. Cor. 15.32. Act. 20.29.
and find them liars. The beasts that assaulted her, she fought with; the
greevous Wolves that were prophesied to enter amongst them, she endured and
resisted. ver. 20. Chap. 3.1. ver. 14.
Iezabel prevailed in Thyatira, Sardis had a name without life, Pergamus was
taynted with Baalisme, and Laodicea's luke-warmenesse, was loathsome to Gods
stomach. Ephesus notwithstanding escapes all this, Chap. 3.16. ver. 6. Lib. 1.
cap. 27. vid. Eusebius. lib. 3. hist. Eccles. cap. 26. Theod. Heret. Fab. lib. 3.
Ignat. Epist. 9.
nay, her hate to the Nicolaitans for their community of wives, and promiscuous
lusts (as Ireneus and Theodoret object unto them) is registered afterward as an
especial commendation. What could a man here pick out, that he might justly
censure? who would not esteem such a Church, to be in the rode way to
happiness? yet when Christ comes with his Fan, there is Chafe found amongst
the Wheat. Much is well, yet somewhat worse then it was, or ought to be; the
good is fostered, the ill excepted at. Nevertheless.] Many things might be
here gathered for our instruction; one especially from our Saviors manner of
reproof, Richard. de Sanct. victor. Viegas.
which may be a pattern unto us all in that behalf: first, to take notice of,
then ingeniously to confess Gods graces in any (if any be found at all) before
we be too busy with the imperfections of our brethren. For this puts the
faulty out of suspicion of bitterness in the Reprouer, it encourages men to
do more, when somewhat is commended, and keeps them from desperate
resolutions, by retaining them in a hope of a possible recovery. It breeds a
loathing of sin, by ranking it by virtue, Aretius.
whence it is ugliness is the more discovered, and his judgment the sharper
censured, that embraces so foul a monster, to the blemishing of those good
parts, which otherwise might highly grace him. Those that will fish for men's
souls, must look how they bait their hooks: and too harsh an increpation
(says Gregory) is like an Axe, Ferrum de manubrio prosilit, cum de correptione
sermo durior excidit, etc. Curae Past. part. 2. cap. 10.
that flies from the handle, it may kill thy brother, when it should only cut
down the briars of sin. But this I note only by the way, not purposely follow,
as not so necessary for these soothing times, wherein most are rather too
pleasing, then piercing. Ephesus here so commended, and yet excepted at so
plainly, directs us more usefully to this observation:

That the best Churches may be subject, and are liable to exception.

6 It is usual with the Fathers to compare the Church to the Moon, Ambros.
lib. 5. Epist. 31. Aug. in Psalm. 10. and 104.
in regard of her visible changing, like to the others waxing and waning. But
the similitude holds as well, in respect of her borrowed light, and spotted
face; all the beams she reflecteth to the world, are darted upon her by the
Sun of righteousness; and yet by reason of her unequal temper, in her
brightest shining, she appears spotty. Her self acknowledges so much,
Cant. 1.5. I am black, but comely (O ye daughters of Jerusalem) as the Tents
of Kedar, as the Curtains of Solomon. Lib. 3. de Doctrine. Christ. c. 32.
Whereupon Saint Augustine commends this rule of Ticonius the Donatist, which
he calls, De permixta Ecclesia. Whereby (says he) the Scripture, by reason
of the temporal communion between the godly and wicked, attributes that
promiscuously to either, which originally grows but from the one. Solomon's
Curtains (indeed) belong to the Church, but Kedars Tents are Ismaels, who may
not inherit with the free borne: yet the Beloved consisting of both, has the
titles of both, those spots will not out; there will be such a speckled breed,
as long as the flocks cast their eyes on motly vanities, in the gutters of
this world. All the types in holy writ, whereby the Church is shadowed unto us,
most evidently show so much. The floor has in it Wheat and Chafe, Math.
3.12. The net good fish and bad, Math. 13.47. See but into the nuptial banquet
of the Son, is not there one found without a wedding garment? Was there not a
Cham and unclean beasts in the Arc? Mat. 22.11. Genesis 7. Mat. 25.2. Ibid. ver.
32.
foolish Virgins amongst the Brides Attendants? Goats in the great Shepherds
flock? And in his stately Palace, vessels as well to dishonor as service and
glory? So that, 2 Timothy 2.20.
that of the Angel to Esdras, may here pass for Canonical, 2. Esd. 8.2.
when thou ask the earth, it shall say unto thee, that it gives much mold
whereof earthen vessels are made, but little dust that gold comes of: even so
is the course of this present world, and the Churches case in this present
world. 1. Cor. 5.1. Ibid. cap. 15.
Thus the Corinthians were polluted with an incestuous person, and troubled
with Sadduces; Gal. 3. Romans 12.2.16. Coloss. 3.8. 2. These. 3.6. ver. 6. and 15.
ver. 9. and 13. ver. 14.20. ver. 24. cap. 3.1. cap. 3.16.
the Galatians bewitched, the Romans, Colossians, and Thessalonians, had
haughty spirits, brabling Sophisters, brethren that walked disorderly, crept
in amongst them. But what need I look back so far? Appear there not here
amongst these seven Asian Churches, an odious company of Nicolaitans? Has not
Satan here his Synagogue and seat? Balaam and Iezabel, their Bawds and
Panders? Read we not of depths of Satan? Names of those, that make a show to
live, without life? Luke-warmnesse, and vaunting, and senslesnesse, among so
many especial commendations? The Fathers testimonies for this point, are not
sentences, but volumes. It is the maine scope of Saint Tom. 2. Orthodox. and
Luciferian. Dial.
Hierome against the Luciferians, and of Saint Tom. 2. Ep. 164. ad Emeritum
Donatist. Tom. 7. contra epist. Parmen. lib. 3. tom. 7. cont. Crescon. grammat.
lib. 3. cap. 37.38. lib. 1. de civit. Dei ca. 35. and passim alibi praecipue,
tom. 7. Can. 2.2.
Augustine, against the Donatists, and Pelagians, to prove that it is a poor
pretense, to make a Schism in the Church, in regard of some dislikes, which
might, and should be amended. For at what time was it ever so free, that no
exceptions could be taken? As a Lilly among thorns, so is my love among the
daughters. Non dictum est (says Saint In Psalm. 99.
Augustine) in medio alienarum, sed in medio filiarum; It is not said amongst
strangers, but amongst the daughters. The sons of her mother against her,
Esaiah. 9.21.
Ephraim against Manasses, and Manasses against Ephraim, in one Nation; the
Mat. 10.35.
father against the son, and the mother against the daughter, in one house;
Genesis 25.22.
Esau struggling with Jacob, in one womb; nay, the Romans 7.23.
natural man against the spiritual, in the same members. And yet if we would
go farther, we may chance to meet with (...), James 1.8.
a double-soul'd man (if I may so speak) by reason of unstable distractions in
the same mind. To such a lunacie are subject all things under the Moon.
Whiles we dwell with Mesech (as David complains) some enemies to peace will
be sure amongst us. Psalm. 120.5.
There will be always tares to be weeded, ulcers to be cured, ruins to be
repaired, rents to be amended, sinkes to be purged, Leapers to be cleansed,
manners to be reformed, controversies and heart-burnings to be taken up and
composed. And the reasons for it are diverse; that the Elect might be employed
and tried, Reprobates left vnexcuseable, 1. Cor. 11.19. Romans 2.1.
Gods strength appear in our weakness, and his mercy, and Justice, in such
variety of objects. Otherwise how should the Church be militant without an
Adversary? Or why should it daily pray, Forgive us our trespasses, if here it
might attain to be freed from all exceptions? Go therefore (says the Lord to
Ezechiel) and set a mark upon the foreheads of the men that sigh, and that
cry for all the abominations that be done: not about the suburbs only, Zanch.
lib. de Relig. Christ. cap. 24. these. 11. Aug. lib. 2. Retract. cap. 18. cap.
9.4. Aug. Tom. 2. ep. 164. ad Emeritum Donatist. Mat. 24.40. In Psalm. 99. Luke
17.34.
but in the midst of Jerusalem? For how should Jerusalem be untainted? seeing
of two men together in the field, the one should be received, the other
rejected; of two women grinding at the Mill, the one should be taken, the other
left. What place more secure then our beds? (as S. Augustine sweetly
amplifieth) yet thence it also follows, that of two men lying together, the
one shall be taken, and the other left. Thus the Church must bear those whom
she cannot discern; and lament, what she cannot amend: she must not make a
rent in the coat that is seameles; it is reserved for the Angels only at the
last day, Mat. 13.41. and 25.32.
between the Sheep and Goats to make a separation.

7 How then can some fanaticall spirits of our days, See Bernards separatists
schism and plain evidences, together with Dr Hals Apology against Brownists.
Lib. de Baptist. Donatus separated for some bad ones in the Church. Novatus and
Lucifer, for want of strict discipline. Audius for some lesser abuses, as
Epiphan. witnesses, Here Is. 70. Mornaeus de Eccles. cap. 2. Esa. 1.6. Ierem. 3.
Mat. 9.12. Mat. 2.17.
with any show of reason be excused (Beloved) who, upon dislike of our
discipline, and some ceremonies they fancy not, retire themselves to
conventicles, from their natural mother; where they have almost, as many
sects, as sectaries, one testifiing (as they speak) against another, with no
less gall, then giddiness? But these Saturnine, and melancholy-co^plectioned
wanderers (as Zwinglius justly terms them) are fitter for a Physicia^ to
purge, then a Divine to confute. Their reasons are long sithence answered by
the Fathers, against Donatus, Novatus, Lucifer, and Audius: I will touch
therefore at them only, and so pass along. They reckon up disorder in our
Discipline, corruption in manners, superstition in Ceremonies, and the unworthy
coming of all sorts to the receiving of the Sacraments. But these things can
only be matter of reproof, not sufficient, or efficient causes of separation.
When from the sole of the foot, to the crown of the head, no soundness was
found in Israel, did Esaiah fly to rail, or rather stay to preach? All the
ways (cries Jeremiah) are polluted with the whoredoms, and filthy lusts of
Judah; where he continues notwithstanding to lament, not persuades to
forsake. So our Savior balked not the proud Pharisees, or poor Publicanes,
that needed the Physician; and S. John leapt out of the Bath, (as Irenaeus
reports it) not out of the Church wherein he found Authors differ in this
Relation see Iren. l. 3. c. 3. Eusebius. hist. lib. 3. cap. 22. Theod. Haeret.
fabul. lib. 2. Hieron. in scrip. Eccles. de Joh. Baronium Tom. 1. anno 74.
either Ebion, or Cerinthus the Heretic. But the Church (say they) must be
pure without spot or wrinkle, Ephesians. 5.27. True (says St Lib. 1. Ret. ac. c.
19. and l. 2. c. 18.
Augustine) ad hoc est electa, non, vt iam sit talis, sed quae praeparetur. It
must strive so here to be, and shall be so hereafter; but yet it is not; save
only in desire, and Christ's acceptance. So Saint Ser. 3. de Fest. omnium
Sanct.
Bernard out of Saint In Hieremi. cap. 31.
Hierome, the Apostle speaks not of the Church which now is, but of that which
shall be after the Resurrection. The end is here expressed, which Christ drives
at, (says judicious In hunc locum.
Calvine) not that which is performed for the Church already. But do not the
Esai 48.20. Ier. 50.8. and 51.6. Rev. 18.4.
Prophets (say they) charge us to fly Babylon, and all the abominations of
Antichrist, least we be partakers both of her sins and plagues? Most true;
and we have done it, not so much by a Iunius in. lib. singular. praepos.
controu. 4. general. Bellar. c. 17. Apapatu, non Ecclesia; ab Idolis, non
templo; a tyrannide, non republica; a peste, non vrbe, recedimus, plane
co^lituri quam primum Anti-Christam cu^ pravis humoribus evomuerit. Mornaeus de
Eccl. cap. 10.
local separation, as a necessary renuntiation, not of the good she has but
of the poison she has added. Here then comes their Hebrew song, which they
sing in a strange land, being the maine objection they always harp on: If you
(say Ainsworth against Bernard. Robinson against Dr Hall.
they) might shake off Rome for the Antichristian leprosy, whereof she would
not be cured; why might not we do the like by you, for the Babylonish
garments, which yet you retain as the execrable thing amongst you? The case
would prove far different (Beloved) if these reformers had but the patience
to discuss it. For first, our refraining, rather then separation, from Romes
community, was for known, and convinced abominations, of Armin. these. 22.
prodigious tyranny, manifest heresy, open Idolatry, whereunto we were
commanded by the Holy Ghost, directed by the Fathers, and Councels, admonished
by their own men; as Lib. de Religione, cap. 24. These. 17.18.19.
Zanchius judiciously proves, and these our wayward brethren cannot choose but
acknowledge. Between whom and us, the quarrel is far otherwise; we say, for
things merely indifferent; they find very doubtful and controversiall.
Secondly, our reformation was orderly by the Magistrate, authorized by God in
that behalf: theirs tumultuous, as near to rebellion, as without warrant. For
as in Religion, the body is one thing, the skirts and outward government
another; so in reformation, private profession is one thing, and public
injunction another. Profess the grounds of Religion I may and must, either
without, or before, or against my Prince; but to reform in public
government, where something is truly amiss, who gives me warrant? 2. Chron.
34. Nehem. 2. Ezra. 1.
Did the Israelites attempt it without Josiah? or Nehemiah without Artaxerxes?
or Zerubbabel against Cyrus? In those times (indeed) the Prophets prophesied,
but built not, they directed, but corrected not. Ever their hearts smote them,
in but meddling with the skirt of the Lords Anointed in this behalf. Whom if
they could not win to redress all abuses; they held their duties discharged,
and the fault transferred on the hinderers; whom they staid to pray for, not
forsook to disgrace. Whence arises a third difference betwixt our renouncing
Rome, and these men's leaving us. We were never the Popes subjects, as they
were Queen Elizabeth's, and are now King Iames' es. Our forefathers (indeed)
acknowledged a certain preeminence of that See; but it was but as a matter of
course, and courtesy, at most of humane constitution, not of necessity, or
obligation by the Word of God. And is it all one to shake off thy lawful
Magistrate, to whom God subjecteth thee, and thy debausht companion, or whorish
neighbor, with whom thou might ever have stood in equal terms? Add to
this the encroaching of the Papacy, as much upon the Prerogatives of
Commonwealths, as the Liberties of the Church: If the like could be objected to
us, we should be content to hearken. Last of all, we were pressed in Popery,
to assent to their blaspheamous heresies, Zanch. de relig. cap. 24. These. 16.
and damnable Idolatry; no man might be safely silent, or refrain in those
acts, which were most against his conscience. Now these men cannot complain
of the like hard measure amongst us. The refusal of conformity brings no man
to the stake; it stoppes only in some courses, some dangerous private Spirits,
D. Hall Decad. 6. Epist. 5
from wrangling about circumstances, to unite all against the common adversary,
that strikes at the foundation. For who ever took discipline to be more
essential to the Church, then Order in an Army, or a Hedge to a Vineyard, or
Proportion to a Body, or a Hemme to a Garment? An Army, Vineyard, Body,
Garment, may be, but perfect and well it cannot be, without these things. Now
a discipline they acknowledge amongst us, but not right. Say it were so, (which
they shall never be able to prove) will thou forsake thy house, because the
wall is mudde? Or leave thy Vineyard, because the Hedge in some places is
ruinous? Does a ghest invited to a banquet, straight leave the table in a sum,
for the misplacing of a trencher, or napkin, or because some dish is not served
in aright? Diverse moderate spirits there remain among us, who perchance
approve not all our ceremonies, yet run no to Amsterdam, as holding such a
remedy more Nulla potest a schismaticis tanta fieri correptio, id est,
emendatio, quanta est schismatis pernicies. Tertul. de Praescript. cap. 60. 1.
Ioh. 4.1. 1. Cor. 14.32.
dangerous then the cause. The Disciples of Christ (I am sure) took wiser
courses, when the brethren had a controversy amongst them about legal
Ceremonies, Act. 15. the Apostles and Elders came together to consult, that
private spirits might be tried, and the spirits of the Prophets subjected to
the Prophets. Who if they give no satisfaction (as too often it has fallen out in
Popish Conventicles,) a faction crying down the truth, and the most, the best,
no posting is prescribed to the Popes inerrability; or separation allowed, to
the wronged parties; but the Apostles rule is to be followed, Philip. 3.16.
First the ground must be searched, Vid. Parei Iren. cap. 12. (...).
wherein the agreement is, and whereto we have already attained; then
follows walking so far by the same rule, minding the same thing. In which
walk when we come to the point of parting, cross ways must not be taken, or
schisms raised, but the perfect must forbear the weaker, and expect Gods good
pleasure, Ver. 15.
who will reveal in due time (as the Apostle there promises) to those that
are otherwise minded, as much as concerns his children to understand. Vi.
Aug. Tom. 7. in Donatist sparsim per libros sex.
Thus Cyprian behaved himself, in regard of the Donatists: who, though he
dissented from the Catholics in the point of rebaptization; yet he forsook
not the unity of those Churches, which censured his opinion, to associate
himself to a company of Schismatickes. Saint Augustine says, De Baptism
cont. Donatist lib. 7. cap. 49.
that God permitted him so to fall, that his example might more benefit the
Church, in maintaining unity, then his Judgment hurt it, in defending the
error of rebaptizing heretics.

8 Thus he that brings light out of darkness, Aug. de vera Religione, Tom.
1. cap. 6.
makes scandals, the trial and triumph of his chosen. Infidels he proposes
to be converted by them, Heretics to be the touchstone of our doctrine,
Schismatiks to be the credit of our constancy, Jews to be the foil of our
beauty; some must be invited, Jdem ibid.
some excluded, some left, some led on by our even carriage: so many taskes are
laid upon the few laborers, who in the Lords great Harvest shall ever find no
less to suffer, then do; both scowring them from idleness, and ministering
matter of conquest, according to that of Saint Augustine; Open enemies, and
false brethren, benefit most commonly the Church by the providence of God;
Ibid. cap. 8.
Non verum docendo quod nesciunt, sed ad verum quaerendum carnales; ad verum
aperiendum spirituales Catholicos excitando. It was Lucifer the Heretics
perverseness, that drew S. Hierome unto the stage; the wickedness of Julian
that brought Cyrill to write; Arrius stirring, that cleared the article of the
Trinity, by Great Athanasius; Pelagius wilfulness, that edged on Saint
Augustine to sift and discover so) narrowly the fraylty of man's free will. And
to touch a little on our latter times, were it not the Monks absurdities, that
first set Luther a work? The Schoolemens mixtures, and brabbles, that
occasioned Calvin, Martyr, and the rest of our Worthies, more closely to stick
unto the Text? Seldom there threatens a Goliath, but a David arises; or a
false heart forsakes his station, but presently some one or other is ready in
the gappe. So our Harding yielded us a Jewel, our Campian an Humfryes, our
Stapleton a Whitaker, our Martin a Fulke, our Heart a Raynolds: to spare the
modesty of the living, who take the same courses. And I make no doubt, but
that Socinus blaspheamies, Arminius subtilties, Vorstius novelties, Bertius
quiddities, shall rather be an occasion of farther clearing, then shaking the
settled truth amongst us; as the clamours of the Vbiquitaries have been, for
the Sacrament, Grace, and Predestination in the reformed Churches of Germany.
Courage, courage therefore (my dear Christian brethren) we see the ground
whereon our lot is fallen. Whatsoever now happens, has been foretold, and
fore-sampled, and therefore should be the less offensive, because so well
foreknowne. Our task remains, to gather with Christ, Luke 11.23.
not scatter with the envious, or separate with the malcontent; and when we
have done our best, yet somewhat may be objected, that makes against us. The
accusation of Ephesus, and second member of my Text; whereof I will endeavor to
gather somewhat.

9 (...) by an usual Ellypsis; for (...), I have against thee, In hunc locu^,
vid. Bezam in in Mar. 6.19. de phrasi (...).
for I have somewhat against thee, or to accuse thee of: as both Beza and
Camerarius observe. Men may ouersee much, or dissemble what they see, or please
themselves with the present, or be misinformed by others; but our Savior
deals more roundly and soundly. I have (says he) not a suspicion only, but
somewhat, as before for Ephesus's commendation, so here against her. Sweet
Jesus! art thou become an accuser? Will thou our only advocate be extreme to
mark what is amiss? Luke 22.31.32.
It Is Satan's office to winnow; thy prayer was wont to be, that the faith of
thine might not fail: and may somewhat now incense thee, that have paid the
ransom for all our sins? But fear not little flock; he that strikes, will
heal. This somewhat through his mercy will prove as much as nothing. Satan
accuses through malice, to condemn; but Christ through love, to amend thee.
Non deser it ad poenam, (says Richardus a Sancto Victore) sed monet ad
poenitentiam. In textum.
His accusations are instructions, his chastisements peace, his precious balmes
shall never break our heads. In Ezechiel. homil. 11. Non parcit, vt parcat,
non miseretur, vt magis misereatur, Hieron. in Ezech. cap. 7.4.
As a Surgeon being to lance his best-beloued child, he long handles softly
(says Gregory) before he strikes, and then cutteth and weepeth, and weepeth,
and cutteth again, (as Saint Bernard feelingly expresses it;) otherwise
sparing would be spilling, in such a pleurisy, which cannot be cured without
letting blood; so this great Physician of our souls will not stick to reprove
any thing, where something may grow, to set all things out of order. Whence I
infer, that.

The smallest faults in the Church are not to pass uncontrolled.
No toleration is to be granted for any thing that is amiss, either in Pastor,
or people.
10 As the plague is in the body, so is sin in the soul; nothing sooner
infecteth, spreads, kills: being like a bemired Dog, that in fawning,
defiles; Mat. 13.31.
speedier then a grain of Mustard Seed, from the least seed, becoming the
greatest amongst herbs. Not to quash therefore in the egg this venomous
Cockatrice, is to foster it against our selves, till it be unconquerable; and
not to purge the least leaven thereof, is to endanger, and corrupt the whole
mass of goodness. In regard whereof, the walker amongst the Candlesticks,
with the two-edged sword in his mouth, has furnished out his Prophets to be
fit for such a purpose. One has his forehead as an Adamant, harder then a
flint, not to be dismayed at men's proud looks, howsoever they be
hard-hearted, and impudent, Ezech. 3.8. Another is a fenced brazen wall, not to
be prevailed against, Ier. 15.20. And hence grew the resolution of poor silly
Prophets, not to favor the least offenses in the greatest persons. Samuel is
bold with Saul, Wherefore did thou evil in the sight of the Lord? Verse. 19.
1. Sam. 15. Nathan with David, Wherefore have thou despised the commandment
of the Lord? Verse. 9.
2. Sam. 12. So Hanani to Asa, Verse. 9.
Thou have done foolishly, 2. Chron. 16. Azariah to Vzziah, It pertains not
to thee, Vzziah, to burn Incense to the Lord, Verse. 18.
2. Chro. 26. John Baptist to Herod, It is not lawful for thee, to have thy
brothers wife, Verse. 4.
Math. 14. No sin in his own nature, may pass here for venial; (as the
Bellar. lib. 1 de Amissione great. and statu peccat. cap. 9. and seq.
. Romanists footh their Popelings;) nay concupiscence it self, so extenuated
by the Thom. 1.2. q. 85. ar. 3. Bonau. in 2. Sent. d. 32. q. 1.
Schoolmen, and pargetted over by the Beslarm. de Amiss. great. et statu pec. l.
5. cap. 5. Greg. de Valent. in 1.2. q. 82. disp. 6. q. 12. punct. vnico.
Jesuits, must here come under the lash. For, Genesis 6.5. is not exception taken
at the very imagination of the thoughts? Does not David acknowledge the
wickedness of his shaping, and pollution of his conception, Psalm. 51? And that
chosen vessel S. Paul, five times in the sixth to the Romans, six times in
the seventh, and three times in the eighth, disclaim, by the name of sin,
our original corruption? What fault more pardonable in these our days, then
the remissness of a father to untoward children? Or the carfulness of a young
man, to hold his own? Or the forwardness of a man of parts to purchase
preferment? 1. Sam. 4.18. Mar. 10.21.
Yet Eli smarted for the first, and the young man in the Gospel (otherwise
commended) was touched by our Savior for the second, Act. 8.23.
and the gall of Simon Magus was broken for the third. The reason whereof is
pregnant. The commandment is peremptory against all (as the Apostle urges it)
Thou shall not lust: Now a Botch is never cured, Romans 7.7.
as long as the core remains. Excrements grow in dead carcasses, Scintilla
erat Arrius, etc. lib. 3. Comment. in Gal. cap. 5.
while the humor lasts. And the fire increases, as the fuel is ministered.
Arrius was but a spark in the beginning, (says Saint Hierome) but being not
then trodden out, it cost the world a groan to quench his heresy. The least
cranny or hole unstopped ( as Saint Chrysostom well advises) is sufficient to
sink the largest ship. Will thou then except at a moate in thy brothers eye,
and can thou favor a sin to fester in his conversation? In cap. 2.
Apocalypse. 1.
Unhappy friendship (says Carthusian) quae illum quem diligit, tacendo tradit
diabolo! God save every good Christian from such a friend, who by soothing and
forbearing, will damn his soul! He betrayeth therefore his brother, that
favors his ears, to break his neck, seeing somewhat uncontrolled, may
grow to any thing, and one devil finding entrance to an house swept and
garnished, Math. 12.45.
will quickly get a company far worse then himself.

11 If then no fault in a Church, in a family, in a private person, in
substance or circumstance, whether it be much, or somewhat, must be suffered
vnchecked; what impudency arms our adversaries the Papists, to mention a
toleration of their superstition, especially amongst us, whose eyes God has so
far opened to see their abominations? Has the Lord so mercifully freed us
from this spiritual Egypt, and shall we again be longing for their Pepons
and Onyons? Has he enlightened us so clearly by the lantern of his Word,
not to make use of it our selves, but to see how grossly our adversaries are
misled to cross it? It cannot be the conceit of a true Christian, to be so
false-hearted to his Lord and Master. If Baal be God, profess it wholely; but
if the Lord be God, Deuteronomy. 22. Ver. 11.
cursed be such halting. A plow of an Ox and an Ass, a garment of
Linsie-wolsie, Meremaids half fish and half flesh, Centaures half horse and
half man, are monstrous and abominable in his jealous affection. Deuteronomy. 7. v.
1. and seq.
When the Lord thy God shall bring thee into the land (says Moses to Israel)
which thou go to possess, thou shall make no covenant with the people
thereof, but down with their Groves, and burn their Images with fire: no
marriages must be made between them and Gods people: and reasons are given;
Exodus 23.33.
It will turn thy children to serve other gods; It will be a snare unto thee.
And did it not prove so to strong Sampson, to wise Solomon, to vxorious Achab,
to all that ever were drawn to this indifferency? It is not for nothing then,
that Esaias and Jeremy were so earnest with Israel, Esai. 52. Ierem. 51. 2. Cor.
6.14.
to sever themselves from Babylon, Saint Paul with the Corinthians, not to
bear the yoke with unbelievers: Saint John with all, not to afford as much as
an Ave, (...) 2. Ioh. 10.
good day, or good night to an obstinate Heretic. And not to tire your
patience with examples in this kind; Bellar. in Praef. ad primam controv.
Theol. lib. 4. hist. cap. 14.
the very Boys of Samosatene, solemnly cast into the fire a Tennis-ball, in
the midst of their Market place (as Bellarmine himself relates out of
Theodoret) because it had but touched the foot of the Ass, whereon Lucius
rode, their heretical Bishop. But what need I instance in Christians? The
Heathens themselves have been ever scrupulous, not rashly to allow of such a
blending, or mixture of Religions. It is the ancient Latin of the old Law in
Tully, Lib. 2. de legib.
Nemo habessit Deos nouos and advenas, nisi public ascitos: private men, must
submit themselves to public conformity: new gods, and strange gods, must come
in upon examination. In regard whereof Atilius Regulus by decree of the Senate
(as Livie testifies) was to gather all books of Ceremonies, Lib. 25.
at a certain day, to stop variety of Religions. So Herodotus reports, that
the King of Scythia flew Anacharsis the Philosopher, Lib. 4.
for worshipping the mother of the gods after the Athenian manner. Heliogabalus
(indeed) with Adrian, In Heliog. and Adrian. Iovinian. Socrat. lib. 3. cap. 21.
Valens Arianus Theod. l. 4. c. 22. Nicephor. lib. 10. cap. 32.
and some other Roman Emperors (as Lampridius records it) commended all
manner of worship in one Temple; but it tended to no other purpose, then the
like stratagem of Julian the Apostata, who gave heretics freedom amongst
right believers, not that he cared for either, but that by their mutual
distractions, he might destroy both. Tumenim reddidit Easilicas haereticis
(says Saint Augustine) quando templa Daemoniis. Epist. 166.
Such a good commodity came by the toleration of heretics, that they that
could endure it, should take Devil and all for company. Excellent therefore is
Saint Basils resolution to the President of Valens the Emperor; Theodoret.
lib. 4. cap. 17.
Those that are thoroughly seasoned with true religion, will rather suffer all
kinds of death, then give way for the altering of one syllable. A man would
think that there were but small difference (it is but a little Iota) between
(...), Lib. 2. cap. 18. and 19. and Hist. Tripart. lib. 5. cap. 21.33. Vid.
Bellar. de laicis, l. 3. c. 19.
and (...), yet the right believers could never be brought, (as Theodoret
witnesses) either to omit the one, or admit the other. Sylvanus and Eustathius
boldly told the Emperor himself (it is recorded in the 5. Book and 24.
Chapter of the Tripartite History) Power thou have (O Emperor) to punish us,
but never to drive us from the tenants of our forefathers. To add politic
considerations, I list not. The world sees how little, Polonia and our nearer
neighbors have gotten, by practicing this Alcoran Divinity of tolerating
diverse Religions: Alcor. 2. and 119.
which howsoever Parsons, with others of our homebred vipers, in their diverse
supplications to His Majesty, Lib. 3. de Trifiplic. homin. of*
have presumed most Impudently to plead for: yet Weston their own man, most
earnestly detests it; c. cap. 14. Promp. Cath. ser. 6. post Pasc.
Stapleton railes at Lib. 3. Polit. cap. 7. Verse. 5.
Bodin for but mentioning such a liberty; the Rhemists conclude out of Cyprian,
and Hilary, upon the fourth to the Ephesians, that it is not to be endured.
And mark but BELLARMINES own words (who is of the same opinion, in the
nineteenth Chapter of his book de Laicis) Catholici non patiuntur in suo grege
vllos, qui ostendunt vllo signo externo, se favere Lutheranis. The Catholics
(says he) do not suffer any in their flock, that show by any outward sign,
that they do but as much as favor the Lutheranes. And would they expect that
of us, which they themselves profess, to be impious to ask, and irreligious
to grant? or should we endure such impudency, that offers to propose that
which supposes us to be Atheists? What do they then but betray Religion, and
expose themselves to all sides hatred, who in such a case, but stagger, or
express not themselves? If therefore thou be on our side, tumble out the
Roman Iezabel at the window, howsoever she be painted. Babylons Brats must
not be da^dled, but dashed against the stones. Psalm. 137.9.
Phynea's zeal, Iehu's march, Iosiah's resolution, Luther's heroical spirit,
have ever best prevailed against the mystery of iniquity. For who finds not
that Rome is as a nettle? it stings where it is gently handled; and provideth
powder, and poisoned knives, where she is not manacled. The voice of more then
man, and louder then a Trumpet, is therefore necessary for you (fathers and
brethren) in these dangerous times, to be inquisitiue for the truth, and to
speak home, and resolutely, that somewhat be not defective, through our
default. Has God enjoined us to be watchful Pastors, and shall we sleep, or
fly, or take no notice, when the Wolf comes? Are we seers, and shall we
wink at any thing? Especially seeing that a cloud rising from the Sea, 1.
King. 18.44.
but as big as a man's hand, may soon overcast the heaven, and procure a
storm; and a few runnagates coming from beyond the Seas, may quickly infect a
whole Country of weaklings, never fore-stalled by true grounds, but naturally
carried to sensuality, and superstition. Who if they dare set foot sometimes in
such places as this is, (for where will not the Devil intrude, and his Impes
follow?) to the intangling of some vntatechiz'd giddy-braines, with shows of
learning, and counterfeit antiquity; let us have somewhat against them to nip
them in the bud, Psalm. 58.
that ere ever their Pots be made hot with thorns, so indignation may vex
them, as a thing that is raw.

12. Last of all, for the rest of you (my brethren;) If somewhat may not be
amiss, but all means must be used, for the redress thereof: suffer your
selves to be led with all alacrity, and meekness, either by the gentle, or
rough hand of those that are your Teachers. You must not think (with Ahab)
that we trouble Israel, 1 King. 10.17.
when we permit you not to settle on the least dregs of your sins; or to cry
out with him, when we speak plain unto you, 1 King. 21.20.
Have thou found me, O mine enemy? Frantike man! because I tell thee the
truth, am I become thine enemy? Art thou so possessed, that when thy Savior
comes to free thee from legions, will thou exclaim outragioussy, Mark. 5.7.
What have I to do with thee, thou Jesus, thou Son of the most high God? I
should stick on this point (Beloved) which is a great stop to the progress of
the Gospel. For, when the Preacher brings the words of the wise, you come not
provided with the ears of the attentive. Every learner will be a censurer,
and an offender, a correcter. All are gone out of the way, there is not one
that does good, no not one, and yet (as the Lord complains by his Prophet
Hoseah) no man must strive, Hosea. 4.4.
or reprove another, for the people are as they, that strive with the Priest.
And is not this a just cause, why (as here he taxes Ephesus) so our Savior in
like manner should have somewhat against us? And because we may presume to
expostulate with the Jews in Malachi, Cap. 1. Ver. 2.6.
Wherein and wherein do we so much transgress? Let me thrust into this great
Harvest a little farther my sickle; to remember our natural dullness with a
therein and therein. Atheism and flattery are eminent in the Court; therein
our Savior has somewhat against us: Sacrilege grates the Church, Symonie is
forced upon the ministry, therein and therein our Savior has somewhat
against us. In the whole Commonwealth when usury grows a vocation,
drunkenness and whoredom, the practice of good fellowship, stabbing and
swearing a note of resolution, oppression a kind of Justice, and tithes the
Preachers portion, the demaines of such men, who commonly are worst affected to
Church or Religion; be not herein and herein many somewhats which our Savior
may most palpably urge against us? Ieremie's book, Chap. 36.8. Chap. 2.1.
and Ezechiel's role written within and without, cannot contain the
particulars I might here descend unto. Somewhat might be had against Husbands,
that suffer their wives and children to be Recusants, when they themselves can
strain to profess any conformity. Somewhat against wives, who commanded to
hearken at home, 1. Cor. 14.35.
will needs be Teachers abroad, being Antichrists chiefest factors, to vent
his superstitions; who should be as the fruitful vine upon the house; Psalm.
128.3.
but prove the twining Ivy that plucketh down the wall. Somewhat against
Magistrates, and Officials, who are lukewarm, or false-harted in Gods cause,
to the deluding of good laws, and increase of superstition. Somewhat against
Reformers, who busying their tongues most commonly in things that pertain not
to them, disable themselves through faction, to do good in greater matters.
Beloved brethren, paritie is not purity, nor the wisest preaching, the
wrangling about ceremonies, nor the vilifying of faulty Ministers, the
profitablest lesson the ignorant people can hear: zeal may run without
discretion, and do more hurt then good. Then strain at Gnats, and tithe mint
and cummin, when thou have reformed the greater breaches of the law. And here
if I should go farther, more might be had against sacrilegious hypocrites;
who pretend purging, and intend pilling; who are sweeping Gods House, and
prying into every corner, not to restore the groat that is lost, but to take
away the penny that is left. Achan's stoning, and Belshazzar's doom, and
Judah's hanging might lesson these men sufficiently, from such dangerous
meddling with consecreated things: whereto the old Emblem may serve for
illustration; if thou snatch from the Lords Altar, with the ravenous Eagle, but
a gobbet of a sacrifice to cramme thy young ones, some coal (perchance) may
stick unto it, which brought to thy nest, will set all on fire. And to draw to
an end in this point; who sees not what a great deal more might be had,
against Parents for indulgence, children for riot, masters for hardness,
servants for unfaithfulness, young men for idleness, old men for
covetousness, Tutors for carelessness, Scholars for dissoluteness, Pastors
for coldness and nonresidence, people for contempt and profaneness, many for
pride and luxury, all for unthankfulness; who in so great plenty have stored
up so little, in such continued peace, have made so small profit, upon so good
advantages, have gained no more ground of our adversaries. Alas (beloved) with
what nails or goades shall I fasten this doctrine to our consciences? Plenty,
peace, means, will all one day accuse us, for looking back with Lots wife,
when we should have hastened forward; which was the fault of Ephesus (as the
sequel shows) wherein I will labor to prevent your weariness.

13 Because thou have left thy first love, (...). The Rhemists give it, Because
thou have left thy first Charity. Some Critics put a difference, betwixt
dilection, love, and Charity, making love more then dilection, Polan. syntag.
lib. 9. ca. 10. Illiricus.
(as Cicero seems to do) and Charity more then love. But this curiosity is
here needless, especially to set love and charity by the ears, which so well
agree in (...) the original. The time permits me not to sift things narrowly.
Not to trifle therefore on the word: Love, according to Saint Augustine (as
Lumbard cites him in the 27. did. of the 3. of the Sentences) is the most
right affection of the mind, by which God is loved for himself, and our
neighbor, for and in God. I include not here that incomprehensible love, which
is in God, or rather God himself, essentially, notionally, and personally
considered (as the Schoolmen have ventured to speculate) but content my self
with an habit, infused by God, effused in good works, Vid. Altenstaig. in
verbo charitas.
diffused amongst our neighbors. Whose efficient, end, and object, is God
himself; subject, man's heart; fruits, obedience, patience, and the not-seeking
of our own; companions, sincerity and constancy; opposites, distrust of our
selves, Diligens non diligenda; aut aeque diligens quod minus vel amplius
diligendum est aut minus vel amplius quod aeque diligendum est; contra ordinem
charitatis diligit. Bonau. and Gabriel. ibid. ex Aug.
and a hard conceit of our brethren. This love is as orderly, as forward; and
heedy, as hasty in her proceedings. For things not to be beloved, it loves
not; things of different worth, it loves not alike; things of equal esteem,
it esteems not partially; (as Saint Augustine wittily observes) but above
us, it finds God; in us, our own souls; besides us, our friends and enemies
to spend its strength upon. Thus our Angel here of Ephesus began to do, and
continued to do, for ought I find objected. For it follows not, thou have
run into ill courses, thou have shaken off all goodness, thou beginnest to
be hateful and loathsome: neither read we absolutely, (as Ioachim, Lyra, In
textum.
and the best Interpreters observe) Thou have lost thy Charity; no (says
Thomas, Ansbert, and Richardus,) it was not the habit that was extinguished,
but some degrees slaked, the fault was in the manner of doing, thou have not
lost thy love; Aretius. Brightman, Viegas sect. 7. Perer. in Apo. c. 2. disp. 5.
but (...) (too true an allusion to the name) thou have remitted, thou have
diminished, thou have cooled, not that thou now have, but that which thou
had, not thy love absolutely, but thy first love. Whether this happened,
through the instability of free will, which headlong to ill, is drawn only to
good, whereby as in violent motions, the progress is slower then the
beginning; or because Gods grace is supernatural; and rests in man as in a
strange subject, unprepared and opposite to it is sweet motions; or that the
flesh with Amalek, sometimes gets ground, to force the soul in jeopardy, to
lift up the hands for help; or for that our course is a race, or daily
striving against the stream, where tripping, or failing in a stroke, does
quickly cast us back; or that our spiritual life in some sort is answerable
to our carnal, full of heat and humors in our first growth, which afterward
in age are cooled and dried up; I stand now not to discuss. What this first
love should here be, and wherein it consists, some difference may be found
among Interpreters. Arius Montanus fetches it far, In textum.
as though it should signify the love received in the first creation; Hugo
holds it a defect in preaching; Are thas a neglect of almsdeeds. But what
need such scruples? Why might it not rather be a decaying in all the virtues
before mentioned; as Saint Ambrose, and Richardus, with our latter Writers,
more judiciously take it? The first love therefore that every Convert has,
Heb. 6.4.
is his ardent affection at his first enlightening, and tasting of Gods holy
Spirit; whereby the joy for his freedom from sin and Satan, carries all his
faculties to adore the Author of it. The makes whereof are the renouncing all
things, in comparison of it; Mat. 13. Ioh. 6. Colos. 3.1.
the enduring of losses and afflictions to retain it; the reverencing of Gods
Word and Ministers, for increasing of it; a struggling against sin, the
flesh, and world, that they may not hinder it; Luke 19.6. 1 Thessalonians. 1.9.10.
a relieving of Christ's needy members for the expressing of it; a continuance
in the powerful means of praying, preaching, harkening, meditating,
conference with good company, for the continual renewing and preserving of it;
Heb. 10.
not quenching the motions of the holy Spirit, flying all occasions of
backsliding, suspecting especially these four enemies, spiritual pride in
the best, carnal policy in the greatest, worldly prosperity in the richest,
and abuse of Christian liberty in the gallantest. In all which, or in most, or
at least in some, our Angel and Church (as it should seem) had been here
defective. They halted in their march, abated their edge, began to be weary of
well-doing, Psalm. 78.9.
and like as the children of Ephraim having their Bows bent, turned themselves
back in the day of battle. Which our Savior here taxing, for a sin not to
be suffered, it directs us to this conclusion; which I propose in Saint
Bernards words,

In via vitae, In Purificat. B. Mariae. Sermon. 2.
non progredit est regredi,

In a Christian course, to be slack, or at a stand; is a falling away, or a
turning back again.

14 The walk of a Christian shows it, which must be from strength to
strength, Psalm 84.7. His path as the morning light, that shines more and
more unto the perfect day, Proverb. 4.18. He runs in the savor of his
Saviors Ointment, Cant. 1.4. For as the house of David, 2. Sam. 3.1.
in the long war between it and Saul, ever grew stronger and stronger; the
waters in Ezechiel, deeper and deeper; Ezech. 47.3.4.5 Luke 14.10. 1. Tim. 1.18.
the word to the humble ghest in the Gospel, Sit up higher: so in this warfare
under our heavenly General, we must always fight, in his vineyard, Mat. 20. 1.
Cor. 9.24.
always work, in the race he has appointed us, always run, until we
obtain the victory, the penny, the Crown, which is laid up for us in the
world to come. For the motion of a Christian must not be like that of the
Planets in their Epicycles; now ascending, then descending, sometimes
stationary, anon retrograde; but rather as the beasts mentioned by Ezechiel,
who passing forward, returned not again: Chap. 1.9. Levit. 6.12.
his charity is as fire upon the Lords Altar, always kindled, and never
extinguished; his grace not as a standing puddle, that quickly putrifieth, but
as the fountain of living water; John 4. that bubbleth, Ver. 14.
and springs up to everlasting life. 2. Tim. 4.10.
He revolts not with Demas, disappoints not with Meroz, stands not still with
the idlers in the Gospel, Judge. 5.23. Mat. 20.3.
nor follows a far off with timorous Peter: but thrusts himself forth with
David into every good action, Psalm. 108.
O God my heart is ready, my heart is ready. I will sing and give praise, with
the best member that I have. Psalm. 63.5.
And as long as I live, will I magnify thee in this manner, and lift up my
hands in thy name. For what great matter is it (says Saint Augustine) to
begin well and not to hold on? Like a Metcor, to give a blaze, De bono
Perseu. c. 1.
and suddenly to vanish without heat, or light; like a Locust (says Gregory)
to flyrt up, Locustarum saltus, Greg. Moral. l. 31. cap. 12. 1. Sam. 10.7. Act.
8.13. Mar. 6.20. 1. King. 21.37 Luke 18.10. Act. 24.25.
and presently to fall on the earth again. Saul at his first entrance behaved
himself well. Simon Magus believed; Herod harkned, Ahab fasted, the Pharisees
prayed, Felix trembled, and Socrat. lib. 3 c. 1.
Julian the Apostata in the beginning made a fair show: But minime certe est
bonus, qui melior esse non vult; good he cannot be (says Epist. 9.1.
Bernard) that will not be better; and si dixer is sufficit, periisti; say but
once thou art good enough, and Saint Lib. de Cantico Novo.
Augustine will pronounce thee in a manner undone. For faintness in this case,
is failing; loytering, leaving; standing, or staggering, an absolute starting
back. Ephesus here but trips, and the spur (you see) is presently in its
side: Thou have left thy first love.]

15 In making use of which doctrine, the time will scarce permit me to point
at particulars. For how fitly would come here to be taxed, lukewarmenesse in
our profession, dullness in our calling, deadness in our charity, repining in
our patience, remissness in our discipline; from many of which, Ephesus (as you
have heard) was free. What a gulf (if comparison were made) would too plainly
appear, between the first onset of our heroical reformers, and the flagging
seconding of them in these our days: as also to encourage the true hearts,
that strive as yet amongst us, to express their first love; what exhortation
could be earnest enough? what commendation correspondent? what thanks, and
prayers to God sufficient, for the continuance, and increasing of his blessings
upon them? But I must not trespass so far on your patience. I will but lap
therefore with Gedoons soldiers at the river, Judge. 7. 1. Sam. 14.
or touch the honey, as Jonathan, with the tippe of my rod, and leave the
farther applying to your private religious meditations.

16 Where first (if I listed to be contentious) the Rhemists note on these
words of my Text, might give sufficient occasion: For Ephesus being here
accused, to have left her first love; By this (say they) is plainly refuted
that, which some heretics hold; that a man once in grace and charity, can
never fall from it. Only to clear the place, and pass by purposely what
otherwise might here be sifted; I answer briefly, This note is a notable
instance of the ignorant and perverse dealing of these glossers, who either
understand not us, or the Text, or their own men, or else of purpose catch at
any thing, to delude their simple Proselytes, For do not their own men
distinguish, between the habit of Charity, and the act, the cause, and the
effect, the essence, and the degrees, the action, and the manner of performing?
And have not our men made it plain enough, that the grace we affirm cannot
be lost, is (...), not (...), Gods working favor, not man's inconstant work,
depending not on man's free will, but Gods free election, whose decrees are
unalterable, and gifts without repentance? But Satan may be here set against
Satan; the Jesuits against the Rhemists. Viegas words are, Non amisit
charitatem, In textum. ibid.
sed de charitat is fervore nonnihil remisit; the Angel fell not here from
charity, but was not so hot as before. It was not privatio (says Pererius) but
a kind of Laodicean lukewar menesse. They performed not, duly, daily, often,
earnestly, to so many, in so many things, the good they were wont to do? which
they further confirm to be the exposition of Are thas, Abbas Ioachim,
Richardus a sancto Victore, Lyra, Pannonius, Hugo Cardinalis, Carthusian; and
that deduced manifestly from the very Text. For love the Angel did, but not as
at the first, grace he had, but not so working, as at the beginning; work he
did, but not with that alacrity and zeal he was accustomed to do. Tzebi was
flourishing, Dan. 8.9 Deuteronomy. 32.15.
but faultering; Ieshurun was fat, but lazy.

17 A reproof as necessary for our times, as our times are far from the
first reformation. When the chief of the Fathers and ancient men, that had
seen the first Temple, beheld how much the second was inferior to it;
howsoever some juniors sang and shouted, they wept aloud (says the Text) Ezra
3.12. More our good Fathers would now lament, if they lived but to see us their
degenerate posterity. Me thinks we should stand together in this comparison,
as the men of Chica in the Maps, near the straights of Magellane, by our
travailers of Europe: they as the sons of Anak, we as Grasshoppers; so far
from attaining their forwardness in Religion, that diverse account it their
glory to be snarling at them. But such comparisons would prove odious to be
farther prosecuted. To say no more; If Luther's zeal, or Calvine's judicious
painfulness, could be found in some mongrell temporizers, that are so
forward to censure them; I should think among some professors, our first love
were in some measure recovered. Fathers and Brethren, is this a time to make a
doubt, whether the Pope be Antichrist or no, seeing his horns and marks are
so apparently discovered? And must we now fall back to be catechized by
Lumbard, and Aquinas; as though our ownemens doctrine, so evidently grounded on
Scripture, not refusing the touch of pure antiquity, or any true
schoole-learning, were not conclusiue, and acute enough, for our abstractiue
capacities? Our first love to Gods word was a great deal more fervent; when so
many burned in defiance of Romish mixtures. O that the consideration hereof,
would rowze up every one of us in our several places, to remember, whence we
are fallen, and to do our first works! How happy would it be for Ministers,
to show their first love to the truth! for hearers, to make good their first
love to their Ministers! for both, to join together, in an holy emulation, to
profess, and express, the first love of our zealous predecessors? And if ever
the Lord marched before his Church in a pillar of clowd and fire, Exodus 13.
to guide them in the way they are to walk; now he does before us (Beloved)
to mind us of our ungratefulness, and to set us in a course, to return to
our first love. What a blessing is it to have a Royal King, so able and
resolute to withstand Popery! a Clergy so eminent, a People (for the most part)
so forward, that maugre Achitophels proiects, Sanballets stops, some Wolves
among the Pastors, some Foxes among the Lambs, the maine notwithstanding goes
constantly forward for the pursuit and recovery of this first love.
Distractions (I confess) may dismay, and discontents affright the godly, to
make us the more solicitous to hold fast that we have; but comparing our
helps, with the assaults, and our case, with our neighbors that dwell about
us, we shall find cause to confess with David: Truly God remains yet loving
to this our Israel; Psalm. 73.1. Psalm. 147.20.
and he has not done so to any nation. For to return home to our selves of
this place, does not the late bounty of so many famous benefactors, so fresh in
our memories, so obvious to our senses, put all good men in comfort, that this
first love, By that Knight of immortal memory S. Thomas Bodley.
in diverse of our days, is not altogether extinguished? I cannot express it
sufficiently; Our Library built, and furnished, our Schools mounting, so many
Colleges enlarged! what arguments can be more evident, that this first love is
revived in some, to stir it up in others, and to maintain it in us? At this
present, the Lord has given the Word, 19. Doctors of Divinity Proceeders.
and behold the company of Preachers! who, as that Angel that came up from
Gilgal to Bochim, Judges 2. will for the most part (I make no doubt) be shortly
amongst you (Beloved) to stir and set you a weeping after your first love.
And to end with that which follows my text, Often to remember from whence we
are fallen, Verse. 5.
and repent, and do our first works, is the path our Savior here preseribeth
to lead us to our first love. The meditation of his sudden coming, and the
indangering of our present happiness, are the motives to hasten this first
love. To hate the abominations of Popery, Verse. 6.
(as the Ephesians did here the deeds of the Nicolaitans) is an evidence of a
soul prepared, for the entertaining and rellishing this first love. Have thou
a mind to the Tree of life, Verse. 7.
which is in the midst of the Paradise of God? O harken then to strive, and
strive to over come! for this is the price, that our Savior here proposes to
them that persevere, to retain their first love. O Lord, thou art acquainted
with our backslidings, and see the rubbes that are cast athwart us: Draw us
therefore, we beseech thee, that we may follow thee; turn our brawny hearts,
and we shall be converted; that acknowledging our many imperfections, and the
necessity of reproouing them, we may shake off all worldly encumbrances, to
recover and embrace our first love; through thee the best-beloved, our only
Savior and Redeemer: to whom, with the Father, and the holy Ghost, be all
honor and glory, both now and for evermore.

Amen.
A CHRISTIANS FREE WILL OFFERING.

AS IT WAS DELIVERED IN A SERMON ON Christmasse day, at Christ-Church in Oxford.

By JOHN PRIDEAVX, Doctor of Divinity, Regius Professor, and Rector of Exeter
College.

OXFORD, Imprinted by LEONARD LICHFIELD Anno Salutis, 1636.

A CHRISTIANS FREE WILL OFFERING.
AS IT WAS DELIVERED IN A SERMON ON Christmasse day, at Christ-Church in Oxford.
PSALM 110.3. In the day of thy Power shall the people offer thee free will
Offerings with an holy worship; the dew of thy birth is of the womb of the
Morning.


THis Psalm is an evident prophecy of our Savior Christ, our Savior himself
so interpreting it, Mat. 22. Mark 12. and Luke 20. Some Jews would make it to
be Eliezers gratulation for his master Abraham's victory against the five
Kings, Genesis 14. Others, David's thanksgiving for his escaping Saul, and settling
in the kingdom. But the wiser Rabbis refer it no otherwise then we do, to
the Messiah alone, (as Lyra on this Psalm notes:) and that Calvin ever went
about to wrest, or apply it to David, is a malicious slander of Hunnius and
Gesner, as Pareus shows at large, in his second book Calvini orthodoxi, cap.
41. Now this Prophecy fore-describeth, first, the calling of the Messiah to the
office of the Mediatorship, both Kingly and Priestly, in the four first
verses: and secondly, the administration of his Kingly Office in the three
following verses to the end of the Psalm. His calling to this Kingly office,
is solemnized first by a Commission: Secondly, by a promise. The Commission
graceth him first with Title, my Lord, secondly, with Peace, Sit thou on my
right hand. The Promise assures Him first of the crushing and trampling of his
enemies under foot in the residue of the first verse. Then, of the general
spreading of the Gospel from whence, and among whom; verse 2. Lastly, of the
condition of the believers, who should be willing in their offerings, holy in
their worship, innumerable for their multitude, verse 3. The Priestly Office
succeeds, confirmed, first, by an oath, The Lord has sworn: and farther
illustrated by the type of Melchisedech, verse 4. on which the Author to the.
Hebrews at large commenteth, chap. 7. To this the administration of his Kingly
office is annexed, and farther amplified, first, by the successful onset, The
Lord shall wound Kings, judge the Heathen, fill places with dead bodies, smite
in sunder the heads of diverse Countries; verse 5.6. Then by his triumphant
victory in lifting up the Head to reign, after he had passed the brook of all
tribulations and crosses, with resolute expedition according to his Fathers
appointment, verse the last. Thus we have the general view of the whole
Psalm, which (according to Cassiodore) is the absolute sum and comprisall of
the Messiah doings and sufferings, manifested at large in the Old and New
Testament, Totum hic summatim dicitur, quicquid in vtroque Testamento
continetur.
so that this third verse falls out to be a particular touch of the Believers
application; the former exhibiting the Kings Due, this the Subjects Duty:

In which may it please you to observe the circumstances, 1. Of the time,] In
the day of thy Power. 2. of the Persons] amplified by their 1. Devotion,] The
people shall offer thee free will offerings with an holy Worship. 2. Hidden
increase and innumerable multitude, The dew of thy Birth is of the Womb of the
Morning.



The first may be referred to the solemnity of this Time: the second may mind
us of our duties in celebrating this Times solemnity. The third may rest as a
comfort to the afflicted Church, whose lot though it sometimes fall as a Lilly
among Thorns, Esaias 1.8.
or as a Lodge in a Garden of Cucumbers, or as a besieged City: Yet it will
prove at length to be a goodly heritage, through the good will of him that
dwelt in the Bush, Deuteronomy. 23.16.
who shall water her Furrows with the dew of heaven, and lead her forth by the
rivers of comfort.

The points therefore I am to stand upon, may be reduced to these three heads,
1. The Incarnation of Christ. 2. The duty of Christians. 3. The hidden and
fruitful propagation of the Church of Christ.


Which may be connected thus for our better memory, and more ready practice.
The Son of God (as upon this day of his Power) manifested himself in our
flesh for our Redemption: therefore let us offer unto him freewill-offerings
with an holy worship, that so amongst us the multitude of the faithful may
increase, as the numberless drops of dew from the mornings womb. Of which
high mysteries if my discourse come short (as needs it must) of your
expectation, I trust, my known distractions in another kind, and small time
allotted for a business of this consequence may be in stead of an apology.
That which shall be now defective in me, may be made up hereafter (when God
shall give leave) by * him whose turn in a cafe of necessity I now supply. Dr
Godwin the Reverend Deane of Christ-Church.
For the present, I shall be forced from my wonted method of Doctrines and
Uses, to propose what I have to say by way of explication and application,
which experience will reach a man to be the readiest course, though both in
effect come to one. First then, of the Incarnation of Christ manifested to the
world, especially upon this day, and here foretold in general in these words
of my Text, In the day of thy power.]

2. The exception that may here he taken to the reading (which is according to
the most common Translation of our Church Books,) will prove upon scanning to
be nothing material. The original indeed has it in this order, as our last
Translation sets it: Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy Power. But
no man (I trust) will be so Critical, to put any great difference betwixt, In
the day of thy power shall thy people offer thee free will offerings; and The
people shall be willing in the day of thy Power. In the day of thy strength,
says the vulgar: of thy force and valor, In die virtutis, fortitudinis,
exercitus.
say Tremellius and Iunius: Of the Assemblies, say they of Geneva: of the
Armies (says Munster;) at such times as thou shall bring thy bands and join
battle, as Vatablus, Castalio, and the Chaldy Paraphrase have it. All which
the original (...) may bear without any strayning. Now the better to gather
the meaning we are to consider, that Vid. Pelbart. Ros. Theolog. lib. 3.
Altenstaig. ver. Adve^tus. Hospinianum de Orig. Festorum Christia. pa. 131.
Divines do mention a fourefold coming of Christ: the first in the flesh; And
the Word was made flesh, John. 1.14. The second, into the hearts of the
faithful; Behold, I stand at the door and knock; if any hear my voice and
open the door, I will come in to him and suppe with him, Revel. 3.20 The
third, at the hour of every man's death: Watch ye therefore, for ye know not
when the Master of the house comes, Mar. 13.35. The fourth, at the universal
and dreadful day of Judgment: For then shall ye see the Son of man come in
a cloud, with power and great glory, Legenda aurea in principio.
Luke 21.27. In reference to these four commings of Christ; the Church by a
laudable custom, has anciently celebrated the four Sundays, immediately
going before the feast of the Nativity, by the name of Advent Sundays, that
prepared beforehand, with the due meditation of so inestimable a benefit, we
might solemnize the Nativity, with the greater triumph. Which here to be meant
certainly (though not only) by the day of power, The Church read it for one
of the Psalms appointed for Evening prayer for this day
may be easily gathered by the former verse: For when began the root of Iesse
apparently to sprout, or the rod of power to be sent from Sion, among the
midst of the Gentiles, Christ's enemies, but at the breaking down of the
partition wall, published first in Jerusalem, and from thence to all the world,
by the Apostles preaching? All which notwithstanding (says Lumbard) had
ground and beginning from the coming of our Savior in the flesh. 3. Sent. d.
1.
Whence we are to conceive somewhat more to be meant by the day of Christ's
power, then by power in it self, considered without this adjunct of day. His
power indeed from the beginning was ever sufficiently manifested by the
Creation of the world, preserving of the Church, conversing with the
Patriarchs, entering into league with Abraham and Isaac, wrestling with Jacob,
leading his people through the Wilderness, (he being Genesis 14.
Moseses Deuteronomy. 18.
great Prophet, Josh. 5.13. (...)
Iosua's Captain of the Host of the Lord, Job's Job. 19.
(...), Chap. 7.
Esayes Immanuel, Chap. 3.
Zacharie's Joshua, Dan. 8.13. (...)
Daniels Palmoni, as here David's (...) to whom all the Types and Sacrifices of
the Law had reference; and therefore in Jury must needs be well known, whose
name was so great in Israel:) Yet to us, to us (I say) the Gentiles that sat
in darkness, and in the shadow of death, the manifestation of this power
never appeared, before this fullness of time, this acceptable year, this day
of Christ's power springing from on high had visited us, as it is fully, Plene
and breviter de Incarnatione.
though shortly here set down (says Cassiodore) in the doctrine of the
Incarnation.

3. Jn which, for the farther enlarging of our meditations, as this time
occasioneth, we may observe first, the conception, secondly, the nativity of
our Savior; his conception shows him to be the Son of God, his Nativity
the Son of man; another manner of conceiving could not have been void of
sin, another kind of birth had called his Manhood in question. In this
conception we shall most profitably enquire, First, who took our nature upon
him: Secondly, how: Thirdly, by what efficient it was immediately brought to
pass. Who? the second person in the Trinity, John. 1.14. The Word was made
flesh and dwelt among us. That the Incarnation was most agreeable to the second
person in the Trinity, the In 3. Sent. d. 1.
Schoolmen labor to show: First, out of the properties attributed to him in
Scripture; (and if I may so translate their term appropriata;) Secondly, out
of his approprieties. The properties are four. First, he is called the Son:
and who so fit as the Heir to fetch home the lost Prodigals, and make them
coheires with him. Secondly, he is termed the Word, as readiest at all assayes
to declare his Fathers will, preach his Law, Psalm. 2. and manifest his name:
Ioh. 17. Thirdly, in that he is the express image of his Fathers person, Heb.
1.
who could more conveniently restore the image of God which was decayed in us.
Lastly, the Mediatourship, best sorted with the middle person in the Trinity,
to take our nature, and to become a mean for reconciling us with God. The
Approprieties which are also four, Wisdom, Strength, Equality, Pulchritude,
(observed by Saint Augustine and Hilary to be attributed to the Son,) do
further clear the convenience of his Incarnation. The Wisdom of God was
firtest to restore the things that were made in Wisdom, Psalm. 104. The
strength of his arm, to triumph over Hell and Death: Turre-trema. Dom. 1.
Aduent. q. 3.
True Equality, to rectify them who ambitiously had lost themselves by
affecting to be as Gods: and beauty to cover their deformities, whose gayest
flourish is but as a menstruous garment. The Father could not so conveniently
have assumed man's nature, by reason of his internal attribute of
innascibility: and least there should have been two Sons in the Trinity.
Neither could this have been performed by the Holy Ghost, without the
communicating of the name of the Son (says Lumbard) to more persons then one.
Thus the Schoolmen had leisure to contract that which the Fathers by subtle
search in this point had hammered out against the old Heretics, who now
beginning to reviue again in our new Arrians and Samosatenians, it stands us
upon to be catechized in these (otherwise needless) subtilties, that some may
always stand in the gappe, and the truth be not wronged by our slight and
negligent maintaining of it.

4. It appears by that which has been briefly touched, who took our nature
upon him. It will be harder to express that which follows, the manner, how?
for who shall declare his generation? Esaias 53. In vigilia. Natalis Domini.
In the assumption of our flesh (says Bernard) three mixtures, the omnipotent
Majesty of God made so admirably singular, and singularly admirable, that the
like were never done, or ever shall be upon the earth. For there were married,
as it were, and linked together Deus and homo, Virgo and Matter, Fides and cor
humanum, God and Man; a Maid and a Mother; Faith and man's heart: every word in
this point involving a mystery; and noveltie, or misplacing of a phrase in the
jealousy of careful Antiquity, has been censured for an heresy. For they
ever warily affirmed the humane nature to be assumed, but the Divine to be
united. They constantly maintained the distinction and integrity of both
natures against Eutyches confusion; united notwithstanding in one and the same
person, against Nestorius distraction. Alex. ab. Hales, Sum. Theol. part. 3. q.
7. m. 1. art. 1.
This person the Schoolmen more nicely pronounce to be one, not by that
incomprehensible unity which excludes all multitude or multiplicitie: for
that belongs only to the persons in the Deity: but by an union which
requires a composition, In 3. Sent. d. 6. q. 3.
not huius ex his, (as Durand speaks) but huius ad hoc; not a framing of a
third thing out of diverse parts united; for so the Godhead and the manhood must
not be said to concur as parts for the making up of this person, but such an
adjoining of the things united the one unto the other, that the natures
remaining distinct (as Lib. 3. ca. 10.
Agatho rightly teaches) and all their properties and operations, the
subsistence notwithstanding is but one, and in this case (according to
Athanasius) one, not by the conversion of the Godhead into flesh, but by taking
the manhood into God. The Fathers have much labored to express this
popularly. Lib. de recta fidei Confess.
Iustine Martyr and In Symbol.
Athanasius bring the similitude of the Soul and body. Saint Ep. 99.
Augustine and In 3. sen. d. 1.
Scotus of two accidental forms in one subject, as of the sameman, who is
both a Lawyer and Physician. Peri Archon. lib. 2. cap. 6.
Origin, Orat. in Nativit.
Basil, and Ortho. fid. lib. 3. cap. 11.
Damascene of a piece of glowing Iron to which the fire is incorporated: and
this is best approved by Brentius, and Kemnitius. Ibid. l. 3. c. 5.
Damascene again and In vigil. Natal. sermon. 3.
Bernard compare the mystery of the Incarnation with that of the Trinity; that
as there we believe three persons in one nature: so here we should acknowledge
three natures, of flesh, Soul, and Dcitie (as Saint De Trinitat. l. 13. cap.
17.
Augustine speaks) in one person. But the most expressiue is that of a tree
and a Siens ingraffed to it, which becomes one with the stock, yet retains
it is own nature and fruit. Thus In 3. sent. did. 1. Lib. 3. de Incarnat.
cap. 8.
Aquinas, Bonaventure, and with them most of our orthodoxe writers: all which
notwithstanding (as Bellarmine in this point truly shows) come short of the
thing. Wherein our Lutherans are farthest out, by grounding the hypostaticall
Union on the transfusion of the proprieties from one nature into another, and
not (as they ought to do) on the communication of the subsistence from the
Deity to the Manhood. This only is sufficient to make good these harder
speeches in appearance. God has purchased the Church with his own blood, Acts
20.21. And where the Son of man being upon earth, is affirmed to be in
Heaven, Ioh. 3.13. for subjects of a looser composition afford in a manner the
like Synechdochicall praedications in the concrete (to speak with Logicians)
not the abstract. So a Philosopher dies (says Saint Augustine) but not
Philosophy; in his 89. Epistle. The Man Christ is every where, but not the
manhood; and with these generalities we rest informed of the manner of this
conception. The efficient succeeds, which is the Holy Ghost; Matthew 1.20.
Much remains to be spoken, and the time wears: I can but touch therefore at
matters, and so away. The action of the Incarnation being opus ad extra, or
external, Vid. Turrecrem. in vigil. Not. Dom. q. 4.
belongs (as you know by a received rule in Divinity) to all the three
persons in the Trinity, though it be terminatiuely in the Son (as the
Schools speak) and appropriated here to the Holy Ghost: To the Holy Ghost
(says Saint Augustine) by reason he is the conveier and distributer of all the
boundless graces and mercies, that flow to us from the Deity, among which, a
greater then this of the Incarnation cannot be conceived. Some have labored to
open this more plainly by this obvious comparison: Three sisters (say they)
concur to the weauing of one seamlesse coat, which the Second only wears,
and the third immediately sets on: So man's nature was assumed only by the
Son, united by the Holy Ghost, though wrought by all three. But in such
profundities it is dangerous ventring farther then the text inlightens us. This
we have expressed by an Angel concerning the secret of this conception: Luke.
1.35.
The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee] as for a work that goes beyond all
substitution of any created Excellency. And the power of the most high shall
overshadow thee] either as a shelter to free the sacred Embrio, from original
infection, to which Adam's flesh was liable, and actuate it in the womb by an
vnconceiveable operation; or as a cloud to overshadow it from our ambitious
prying (as Calvin and Stella take it) who neglecting and loathing that we are
bound to learn, 1 Samuel 6.
will endanger our selves with the Bethshemites to look too far into the
Arc.

5. Thus far of the Conception of our Savior, being the dawning (as it were)
of the day of his power, which has brought us to the Nativity, wherein this
Sun of Righteousness appears above the Horrizon. Here the nativity must be
said to be (with Damascene and Aquinas) of the person, Lib. 3. part. 3. q. 35.
art. 1. Actiones sunt suppofitorum, non naturarum.
and not of the humane nature, as some will speak unadvisedly. For the humane
nature is only the term of this action, the Person the subject: who was borne
of a Virgin, that yet ever remained a Virgin, Maria virgo ante partum, in
partu, post partum erat porta clausa. Augu. ex Ezech. 44. vid. Turrecrem. in
vigil. not. Dom. q. 3.
(howsoever Helvidius dreamed the contrary;) and that by opening the womb, not
vtero clauso, as the Papists imagine, to make way for their poetical
transubstantiation: (for not the bearing of a child, but the knowing before of
a man is opposite only to virginity) as true philosophy and sense might teach
them. Now in this blessed Nativity of this Virgins son, we are briefly to
take notice of these four circumstances; the time the place, the manner; the
manifestation. For the time we need not trouble our selves with the differences
of Chronologers, Hebrew and Greek, Vid. Sleidan. de 4. Imper. lib. 1. --
Genebrard. l. 1. Chronolog.
Greek and Latin, old and new, wherein, two scarce meet in one reckoning,
either for the year or month, much less for the day, as diverse have
laboriously showed: but rest our selves on the general certainties which the
Scripture affords us. When the Scepter therefore was departed from Judah
(according to Jacobs prophecy, Genesis 49.) when the first Temple was destroyed
and the second was yet standing, foretold by zachary and Aggai, H^g. 2.7.
under the last Monarch, in the last of Daniel's weeks, which some would have
to end precisely at Christ's passion; others, at the overthrow of Jerusalem by
Titus and Vespasian; Origin, Driedo, Iansenius, Vid. Willet in Daniel. page
295. John. 1.
and Melancthon, at his Nativity, when the Romans out of their Sybills, Herod
from the Jews, the Jews out of their Prophets, the Easterlings from Balaam's
star, were so possessed with expectation of such a King to be borne, that it
was not the question of the Jews alone, but the inquisition almost of all the
world, Who art thou? Art thou Elias? Art thou that Prophet? Art thou he that
should come, or do we look for another? Then in this fullness of time
appeared the morning of the day of His power, Gal. 4.4.
wherein the seed of the Woman advanced forward to break the serpents head.
The place which He honored with His birth, was not ruling Rome, or glorious
Jerusalem, but little Bethlem, little incomparison of many thousands of Judah.
Mich. 5.2.
There was another Bethlem in Galilee, near Nazareth, Hieronym. in 2. Matthew.
where Joseph and the Blessed Virgin great with child then dwelt, but all the
world must be taxed by Augustus that ruled all, Luke 2.
to occasion a removal of this holy couple, that so prophecies might be
accomplished by Gods secret hand, that guides the proiects of the greatest,
and Statesmen unwittingly bring to pass what he had before determined. That
which politic Augustus and oruell Herod never dreamt of, and the proud
Scribes and Pharisees would have held madness to have noted poor Joseph and
Mary for, King David foresaw in the Spirit, and truly gave notice of it: Psalm.
132. Lo, we have heard of it at Ephrata, and found it in the fields of the
wood. And where could this bread of life be more conveniently borne (faith
Gregory) then at Bethlem, which is by interpretation the house of bread? in a
little town and hovell, to show the vanity of pompous and luxurious buildings:
as a pilgrim in an Inn and stable, to mind us of our condition in this life,
from whence he came to reduce us to the many mansions of his Father. Thirdly,
the manner of his birth was so mean; Psalm. 22.6. Esaias. 53.2.
that the Scripture be fulfilled, that from the bottom of humility, he might
the more gloriously ascend to the top of power: that the great ones of this
world may be hence lessoned not to swell in such outward vanities, and
disdain their poor brethren. That the difference might be the more
conspicuous and apparent betwixt his First and his Second coming, and to teach
us to expect our portions and dividends, not here, where he had nothing, but
hereafter, where in all abundance he has provided for us. Last of all, the
manifestation of this gloriously-meane Nativity, was so disposed of by the
Fathers providence, that though the most neglected it, all notwithstanding had
that notice, which might leave them inexcusable. The Shepherds in the fields,
and the wisemen of the East, Jews and Gentiles, Herod and all Jerusalem were
troubled at it, King and Subjects; Bethlem and all those coasts were filled by
the relation of the Shepherds, Town and Country. In the Temple aged Simeon
and Anna spoke to all that looked for redemption in Jerusalem, men and women.
Luke 2.
And it is worth the noting, to consider how it pleased God to vary the manner
of this manifestation, and to fit it according to men's diverse conditions and
capacities. The Eastern Astronomers shall have directions from a Star, Herod
a stranger from strangers, the Priests and Scribes from the Prophets wherein
they were best studied, holy Simeon and Anna in the midst of their devotions,
had a Revelation from the holy Ghost, which best fitted them. But the ruder
Shephards had the plainest message both by word and tokens, as being unfittest
to believe, or to be believed without uncontrollable evidence.

6 I need to hold you no longer in the point of the Incarnation, so wonderfully
foretold, so precisely effected, so plainly manifested in this day of the
Lords power, which here our Prophet speaks of: the application now should
follow of all the circumstances, if I thought your godly meditations in this
behalf had not prevented me. And yet (I know not how) Knowledge and Devotion
are sometimes so far sundred and estranged, that the farther we wade in the
one (without the especial operation of Gods Spirit) the less we respect the
other. A man would have thought the Jews had had fair warnings enough of this
day of this power, to have daunted them at least from such violent oppositions,
and persecutions; and we are hot upon the Scribes and Pharisees, as they were
upon their Ancestors, Math. 23. If we had been in their days, and case, we
would have hastened with the Shepherds, followed the Star with the Wisemen,
been at Bethlem, spent our dearest blood, to convey the Child with his Mother
from Herod's tyranny; told the Scribes and Priests to their teeth, that they
were Serpents and Vipers. Thus we crackle what we would have done, in a
wandering kind of speculation; but from performing at home what we should do,
the very same temptation now hinders us, which then inveigled, and overthrew
the Scribes and Pharisees. St Augustine, in his tenth book de Civitate Dei, and
29. chapter, indevouring to express the cause why Porphyrie and the rest of
the Platoniques, should be so averse from Christianity, seeing they believed in
their own Philosophy, things of as great impossibility, falls at length upon
this issue; Huic veritati vt possis acquiescere, humilitate opus erat, quae
cervici vestrae difficilime persuaderi potest. For the receiving of the
Christian Truth; humility must be a preparatiue; but that you hold a yoke too
uneasy for your necks. Upon which he presses them farther: You can believe
(says he) Porphyrie in his book de regressu animae; and Plato shall have
credit in his assertions, that the World, and Sun, and Moon are living
creatures, and have souls: but when Christians tell you of a Resurrection, you
straight forget your selves, and your own Tenants. But what is the cause of
this diversity? No other surely so apparent as this; Christus humilitate venit,
and vos superbi estis: Christ came humbly into the World, and you are proud.
This was also the very stumbling block of the Jews: They were so fastened to
the earth, and to the conceit of an external Monarchy here below, that it
could never be beaten into their brains but their Messiah should be an
earthly Conqueror, who should advance his followers to be Magnifico's, and
Rulers over all the earth. This conceit seemed also to have possessed Zebedees
children, and therefore their mother must put in for a promise of places like
to be about our Savior in his expected temporal Kingdom; and the Disciples
after the Resurrection, were casting about some such matter: Acts 1.6.
Lord, will thou at this time restore the Kingdom to Israel? So natural a
thing it is for flesh and blood to plot for somewhat, especially how to become
great here, howsoever it lose by the bargain hereafter. Thus we can observe,
(B.) and reprove in others, but yet go on to practice it our selves, as
though our estate and case were of a different nature; otherwise why cannot a
little content us, who show our selves in the managing of that we have, to be
worthy of nothing? or why should a mean estate be the subject of scorn,
sithence our Saviors choice has thus graced it in the day of his power, but
that ( as Saint Augustine has it) He was humble, but we are proud? Should it
not make us tremble, to cloth our selves with the Fleece, and not feed the
Flock? make it dainty to trouble our selves with winning fowls, which Christ
has purchased with his dearest blood? plot more for a poor preferment here,
then for a Kingdom hereafter? take the purple robe upon us, but turn off the
Cross, to be undergone by any Simon of Cyrene, whom we happen upon in the
way, but that (as S. Austin has hit the right vein) our pride looks ascue
upon our Masters humility? It is this stateliness that makes us unlike our
Savior, and all his true Disciples, that have followed him, and gone before
us. For to speak nothing of the Fathers, and those men (as it were) of another
world, what is the reason we come so far short in learning, gifts, and zeal
of our Reformers, and Masters, who have gone (as it were) but yesterday day
before? Why is there such a sensible decay of Doctrine, and Discipline, among
the best, but for that we vye, who should be greatest, and not who should be
holiest, aim more at the esteem of men, then the praise of God, and still
forget this lesson of our Saviors humility. He was humble in the day of his
power; we account our selves disgraced, if we be told fully of our faults.
The remedy for all this is the direction which follows. Thy people shall
offer thee freewill offerings with an holy worship; which is the duty of the
faithful, and second member of my text, that follows now in order briefly to
be considered.

7 Thy people] Thy, implies a propriety, People, a Congregation, at least a
multitude: except the people be Gods, in vain a holy worship is expected, and
singularity in this thing is not so acceptable, or fit, as the united devotions
of a Congregation, or people. This people shall offer] Here is their external
forwardness, exemplarie, to draw on others. They shall offer to Thee] Not to
others, Saints, Angels, much less their shrines. Our Prophet seems not to
be acquainted with any such doctrine. They shall offer thee free will
offrings] This is the inward ground which He especially here respects, that
gives to will and to do, and only searches the hearts and reins. With a
holy worship,] composed of inward synceritie and outward decency, according to
the first and second Commandment. Thus I paraphrase the words as they lie in
my translation. Those that read it otherwise, may frame some other deductions,
but in substance not much different. The vulgar Latin is here wholly wide from
the original, in rendering it Tecum principium, which the Schoole-boyes of
Doway (for their childish translation out of the Latin, credits them no
further) construe, With thee, the beginning. The error (as it should seem) of
the Greek gave some way to this, (...), which diverse of the Ancients afterward
took for a ground to prove the Eternity of the Son of God: but by a mere
mistake, both in the pointing of the Hebrew, and then reading (...) with thee]
for (...) thy people] and next, (...), which may signify, principality, not
beginning (as the vulgar) for (...), devotionum, says Pagnine, and Montanus:
spontancarum voluntatum, according to Leo Judah, Munster and Vatablus.
Ingenuitatum, adds Iunius, and the rest different not, which is sufficiently
expressed in both our English translations: Thy people shall be willing, or
offer thee free will offerings. It may be (as Moller on my Text conjectures)
that the vulgar mistook (...) for (...) letters much alike, and so came in the
difference. In hunc locum.
Bellarmine would feign justify that reading, by chopping and charging points
and letters at his pleasure, but his own men concur not with him. Such
Criticismes (I know) are harsh in a Sermon, but the Text must be cleared,
that the ground be sure. That which follows with an holy worship] some read,
in ornatibus sanctis, referring it to the Priests Robes, or garments: so Moller
and Piscator. Others in decoribus, or decorislocis Sanctuary, in relation to
Jerusalem, and the Temple, as Bucer, Iunius, and Calvin. Saint Jerome seems to
mistake (...) for (...), and therefore in stead of (...), reads (...) in the
mountains of holiness, all which our last translation very well compriseth,
In the beauties of holiness. To fasten then upon some certainty: Two things
may be hence gathered, as the graces and luster of all Christian worship;
Cheerfulness in the undertaking, and syncerity in the performance. Both
which, as they concern a settled Church or congregation, must be set forth unto
the world in regard of the place, the Temple appointed for that purpose, for
the more solemnity. In respect of the administration, in vestures or gestures,
or some mark of difference, which shall be thought fittest, for decency and
edification, between the Priest and people. There may be a holiness without
external beauty; and there is external pomp enough, not grounded upon
inward holiness. But such unlawful divorces should not dismay us; from a
ready, and voluntary striving, for regaining, and maintaining, this belssed
match of beauty and holiness. This was God own precept, three times repeated
in one chapter, Deuteronomy. 12. The free will offerings, and the rest of that nature,
must not be huddled up in private, but brought to the place, which the Lord
had chosen, and there must they eat before the Lord, and they must rejoice in
all that they put their hand unto, they, and their households, verse. 7. which is
again repeated to the like purpose, verse. 12. And ye shall rejoice before the
Lord your God, you, and your sons, and your daughters, and your men servants,
and your maid servants, and the Levite that is within your gates; And the third
time at the 18. verse, and thou shall rejoice before the Lord, in all that thou
put thy hand unto. Surely, dullness, or murmuring, or coldness, or
external formalities aiming rather to please the world, or stop men's
censurings, then proceeding of inward willingness; is so far from
acceptance at the hands of God, that he pronounces it worthy of all reproach
and punishment. What a volley of curses are there thundered forth, Deuteronomy. 28. but
when or for what offenses, are they especially inflicted upon Israel? The cause
is plain in the 47. verse. Because thou seruest not thy Lord with ioyfulnesse
and gladness of heart for the abundance of all things. Agreeable to this, was
dying David's exhortation to his here apparent Solomon, 1. Chron. 28.9. And
thou, Solomon my son, know thou the God of thy Fathers, and serve him with a
perfect heart, and with a willing mind. The reason he adds, is pressiue, For
the Lord searches all hearts, and understands all the imaginations of the
thought; If thou seek him, he will be found of thee, but if thou forsake him,
he will cast thee off for ever. And what need we in this point go further,
then this our kingly Prophets royal practice? Good God, how extaticall in this
kind are the flashes of his devotions? Sometimes, in chearing up his own
dullness, Why art so vexed, O my soul, and why art so disquieted in me?
Sometimes, in exciting others, O clap your hands together, blow up the trumpet
in the new moon, in our solemn assemblies, bring hither the lute and harp.
The Church could never meet with the like invitations as his, O come let us
sing unto the Lord, let us heartily rejoice in the strength of our salvation:
Let us come before his presence with thanksgiving, and show our selves glad in
him with Psalms. And, O be joyful in the Lord, all ye lands, serve the Lord
with gladness, and come before his presence with a song. In the virgin purity
of the Primitive Churches devotion, (when plain Honesty was held the best
policy, and formalitie without sincerity, as borrowed too scandalously from
the stage, was denied institution and induction into the Church of God) then
these things were as religiously applied, as now they are often repeated. But
the world is altered, though God, Heaven, and the way to it, remain continually
the same. The more too blame are those humorous schismatiques, that snarle at
this, and the like festiuals, and are come now at length to that Jewish
niceness, as to deny the dressing of meat upon the Sabbath day; I say no more,
from such the pooremay expect poor Christmasses. Another sort run in
opposition; to take up all such times with gourmandizing, and gambols, in stead
of these free will Offerings in the beauty of Holiness; but neither of these
are worthy to be further mentioned. Our course must be in the mean,
according to Nehemiahs direction, Chap. 8. verse 10. Who when the people that
returned from the captivity, wept at the reading of the Law which they had so
carelessly transgressed: Go your way (says he) eat of the fat, and drink the
sweet, and send portions unto them for whom nothing is prepared. And his reason
is remarkable: For this day is holy unto our Lord, neither be ye sorry, for
the joy of the Lord is your strength. This course if we took, on such, and the
like Holidays, the fruit would appear at length, in the secret increase of
the Faithful, which I have signified to be meant in that which follows.

8. The deaw of the birth is of the Womb of the morning.] The exact unfolding
of which words, may yield matter enough for another Sermon: but I presume not
so far to trespass upon your patience, and therefore will only touch them,
and so conclude. The differences that at the first entire do here arise, are
first, concerning the readings, then, the sense. In the reading, there grows a
diversity both in the pointing, and words. For some would have the kingly
accent Athnach (which is here under the word (...) the morning) to supply (as
usually it does) the place of a colon, or middle distinction: and then the
reading may be (as our last translation has it, with Iunius) In the beauties
of holiness, from the Womb of the morning, and there stop. Others take it, as
a note of the sentence only inverted: so Piscator, Munster, Moller, and the
most that I have seen. And Gesner gives instances of this reading, which I
follow without prejudice to the other. The vulgar here again is strangely
besides the Text. For in stead of, From the Womb of the morning, thou have the
deaw of thy birth; it has it, (as the Doway renders it) From the womb before
he Day Star I begat thee. No color is for it, but from the Greek. I cannot
stay of sift the ground of this mistake. Read but only Epiphanius in his 2d
book, the 65. Heresy, against Paulus Samosatenus, and you shall see the
inconvenience, of depending too much upon other men's references, and taking up
things at the second hand. That good Father in that place, conferring all the
Greek copies, of Aquila, Symmachus, Theodotion, the first and sixth edition, at
last falls upon the original, which he sets down in Greek letters with his
own interpretation, word for word, but his Hebrew is such that I think few
Jews would ever understand, or acknowledge. For instead of (...) from the
womb] he has (...). for (...) the morning, or from the morning.] (...) for
(...) to thee the deaw.] (...)] One word, which he sets down as Hebrew for
deaw: And last of all for (...) thy birth] he has put (...), a word never
heard of. Which I mention not for any disgrace to that learned Father, who has
so well deserved of the Church: but that it may appear, how much we are
beholding to those Linguists, that have spent their labors, to make these
fountains more clear for us. For upon these diversities of readings grew
diverse expositio^s, some, referring it to the person of Christ, others, to his
members. In regard of the person of Christ, Tertullian and Iustine Martyr, Lib.
5. advers. Marcion. Dialog. cum Triphon.
understand it of his Incarnation, as if by the womb of the morning, were meant
the Virgins womb, wherein Christ was conceived without the help of man, and
borne in the night before the rising of the day star. Vid. Moller.
Melancthon and Gualter mislike not this, but deduce it in another manner.
Athanasius, Hilary, Ambrose, Augustine, with most of the Ancients who follow
them, interpret this only of Christ's eternal generation, and Bellarmine with
Gesner, strives to make it available against the old Heretics. In which case
I say no more, but we have no need to depend upon such deductions, Part. 1. q.
32. art. 1. and ib. q. 46. art. 2.
but that Aquinas his rule is good (which Calvin of some has been taxed for
following) Cum quis ad probandam fidem Christianam adducit rations quae non
sunt cogentes, cedit in irrisionem infidelium; credunt enim quod huiusmodi
rationibus innitamur, and propter eas credimus. Such arguments therefore are
better spared, in a choice of diverse more urgent. In regard whereof, I take
this, with the current of our later writers, to be rather understood of the
propagation of the Church by the seed of the Word. Of which two things, are
here intimated, first, their secret increase, as the Morning deaw, which is
found upon the grass; though no vapor or cloud appears from whence it has
descended; and secondly, their multitude, which as the morning drops, in every
age more multiply, then man can take notice of. The Spirit of God therefore
never cease from the propagating Christ's Church, though men neglect their
duties, and all the world oppose it. And here I might take occasion to
discourse how the Church is sometimes invisible, and yet ever fruitful:
sometimes, personated by Hypocrites, and yet springing still as the Corn among
the Weeds, in persecution flourishing, in exile from one place, entertained
ever in another, known still to be by her members, but only known to God,
how many the members be. But I perceive the time has prevented me. The
application of the whole is: This is the day of Christ's power, wherein we are
to tender our freewill offerings, prayers, praise, and thanksgiving, unto the
Lord of Hosts, in the beauties of holiness, now he comes down unto us (as
our Prophet speaks) like the rain into a fleece of wool, even as the
drops that water the earth. Let us conclude therefore with the end of that
same 27. Psalm, Blessed be the Lord our God, even the God of Israel, which
only does wondrous things: And blessed be the name of his Majesty for ever;
and let all the earth be filled with his Majesty.

Amen, Amen.
THE FIRST FRVITS OF THE RESVRRECTION.

A SERMON PREACHED ON EASTER DAY, AT St PETER'S in the East, in Oxford.

By JOHN PRIDEAVX, Doctor of Divinity, Regius Professor, and Rector of Exeter
College.

OXFORD, Imprinted by LEONARD LICHFIELD Anno Salutis, 1636.

THE FIRST FRVITS OF THE RESVRRECTION.
1. COR. 15.20. But now Christ is risen from the dead, and become the first
fruits of them that slept.


THis day is this Scripture fulfilled in our ears, (B.) and contains the
happiest tidings that ever was imparted to flesh and blood. For fiducia
Christianorum (as Tertullian begins his book de Resurrectione carnis) is
resurrectio mortuorum. The chiefest string that Christians have to their bow,
is their undoubted persuasion, that the dead shall rise again. This the truth
(says he) constraines us to believe: this truth is revealed in Gods Word; this
Revelation is no where expressed in shorter and plainer terms, then in these
words of the blessed Apostle, which now I have read unto you. I shall not need
to wast time, or suspend your patience with an over-logicall demonstration of
the coherence with that which went before. It may suffice by the way, only to
take notice of First, the Apostles auditory; Secondly, his manner of
proceeding. His Auditors were the Corinthians, great Critikes, prone to
factions and emulations, standing much upon their Philosophy and strains of
subtilities, whereby the Apostles plain course of teaching was contemned as
vulgar, his person undervalued, his Followers esteemed weak and simple, as his
apology discovers in the four first chapters. Besides this, they had gotten
a trick to bolster out one another, for what misdemeanour soever, and to
undergo rather the frown of any foreign jurisdiction, then quietly to have
matters composed among themselves, chap. 5. and 6. And now could this choose but
draw on greater scandals, as quarrelling about Virginity and marriage, which
should have the preeminence? chap. 7. Abuse of Christian liberty to the
overthrow of their weaker brethren, chap. 8. and 9. Irreverent behavior both
of men and women at Prayers, Sermons, and receiving of the Sacraments, chap.
10. and 11. Odious comparisons between Preachers and Linguists, tongues and
miracles, miracles and other spiritual gifts, as if any of these were our
own, or if other use then to edify one another, from the beginning of the 12.
to the end of the 14. chapter. No marvel then if in a Church so tainted, some
fell, out of their presumptuous profaneness, to question also the
Resurrection: which, how the Apostle here meets within this 15. chapter, may be
noted farther as a pattern for disputants in divinity to imitate. For first
he comes not upon them with Philosophical Quiddities, or apocryphal
fragments, to justify an article of such consequence. Nay (says he) I have
delivered unto you, first of all that which I also have received, how that
Jesus Christ died for our sins according to the Scriptures, and that he was
buried, and that he rose again the third day according to the Scriptures,
verse 3.4. The Scriptures therefore are the grounds, and foundation of
Apostolic building. And that according to the Scriptures, all things came to
pass, he brings in eyewitnesses, verse, 5.6. Cephas the Foreman, and if
his word would not be taken, an eleven more of the same rank to justify it.
And in case also that these should be excepted against, upon a suspicion of
partiality; there are ready five hundred brethren besides, which all saw Christ
at once, after his Resurrection, and diverse were alive at that time to witness
it. And least our Apostle might be noted, as too confident upon hearsay,
last of all he was seen of me also (says he) as of one borne out of due
time, the last and the least; but all comes to one, for whether it be I or
they, so we preach, and so ye believed.

But here the Corinthians might except, admitting these proofs as strong for
the Resurrection of Christ: Does it thereupon also follow, that our bodies
shall likewise be raised? Yes (says the blessed Apostle) otherwise there were
no avoiding of those prodigious absurdities, preaching and faith should be
vain, the Apostles found false witnesses, the living, in their sins; the
dead, perished; Christians, of all professions the most miserable. Let a
Scholar then gather the arguments, and he shall find the first fairly
categoricall: That which the Scripture has expressedly delivered, and so many
eyewitnesses beyond exception are ready to avouch, must needs be true without
contradiction, and cannot be denied without impiety; But Scriptures and
witnesses are clear for Christ's resurrection: therefore that is an argument
beyond all exception. The second is Hypotheticall, forcing a number of
intolerable absurdities. If Christians are not to rise again by virtue of
Christ's Resurrection, as Christ did, then the Preaching of the Apostles is a
foppery, the faith of Christians vain, the forgiveness of their sins, a
fancy, the hope of their dead, a delusion, their estate in this life, beyond
all others the most wretched; but such inferences are no way to be endured;
therefore it must be ever firmly held, that not only Christ rose again, but
that Christians by virtue of his Resurrection, are also to be raised.
Uncontrollable therefore is this minor proposition, which the Apostle here
assumeth, But now is Christ risen from the dead, and become the first fruits of
them that slept. I could not pass along this goodly Field of Corn (B.)
without plucking some ears, which were eminent above the rest: for where may a
man presume rather then in such an Auditorie as this, where Knowledge, and
Humors abound, and the Devil is most busy? that some are proud, and
factious, standing upon their gifts, to the vilifying and discouraging of their
weaker brethren? others profane and peremptory, to reject all good order,
irreuerently to abuse the Word and Sacraments, and turn all Gods graces into a
customarie wantonness? On the other side, what hearers may be imagined to be
more understanding of the Apostles Logic, for settling of their own
consciences against all Atheistical opposers, and the profitable imparting of
it to the strengthening of others? Every one therefore in his passage may rub
out the Corn of such ears as he likes. I shall deal with the whole heap,
which the Apostle has here in good measure, and running over, shaken together,
in this narrow vessel: But now Christ is risen again, and become the first
fruits of them that slept.

3. The words, as you see, of their own accord, fall asunder into these two
parts. First, the ground of our Resurrection, in these, But now Christ is risen
from the dead.] Secondly, the Fruits of this rising of Christ, And is become
the first fruits of them that slept.] The first includes the cause, the second
the effect, of the greatest good that ever befell mankind. Join both
together, and no Logic ever instanced in the like Enthymeme: Christ is risen
again, therefore we shall also rise. That Merchant can never break, who has
sold all to purchase this Plot of ground; and thrice happy is that beneficed
man, who has so paid his first fruits. When the witty Athenians heard this
doctrine of the Resurrection of the dead, Act. 17. howsoever some Epicures, and
Stoics gain said, verse 18. others mocked, verse 32. yet the wiser sort were
desirous to have it repeated again, and certain claue unto Paul, and
believed, of the Noblest and best rank amongst them, as Dionysius the
Areopagite, and a woman named Damaris, and others of both sexes, by their good
example. We are all Christian Peripatetiques (B.) and therefore as our Apostle
elsewhere admonishes us, Romans 13.
(...), must walk honestly as in the day, and be armed against the Epicurisme
and Stoicisme of such brutish opposers. Now the custom of the place will
shortly call for a repetition, and I make no doubt, but many a Denis and
Damaris will stick to that which shall be spoken. This is a day of good
tidings, and better then the Lepers could bring to the almost starued
Samaritanes, of the flight of their besiegers, and the plenty left behind
them, and therefore we should not do well to hold our peace; for now is Christ
risen from the dead] the ground of our former freedom and future happiness,
which comes now in order to be first thought on.

4. But now is Christ risen from the dead.] If I did not purposely now abstain
from controversies, I could here from this particle (...), referred to the word
(...), now is Christ the first Fruits, take occasion to discuss against some
needless muttering in these days. First, what became of the Fathers before
the Resurrection of Christ? whether they were in Limbo (which Bellarmine in his
sermons of the Resurrection, takes for a ground, and Rhetorically descants
upon) and many of the Faethers and Schoolmen give way to it: or else enjoy the
presence of God, in a degree of happiness, competent to souls separated: as
also from the word Christ, referred to (...) Christ raised, to require whether
this were done by his own Power, as Redeemer, or else by Gods Omnipotency,
helping His inferioritie, as a distinct Agent, with that ability that he wanted
in himself, for such an archieuement. Besides, a doubt might be also moved
concerning the object raised, whether it were the person entire, or natures
disseuered; and if so, whether the Godhead, or manhood? or if the manhood,
whether the body only, or Soul, or both, or how? The Schoolmen you know make
work for such speculations, upon the 3. of the sentences, 21. distinct and the
3. part of Aquinas the 53. question. The practice whereof we have in Abulensis
on the 22. of Matthew spending at least 24. disputations upon this and the like
curiosities. And lastly, quarrels might arise, and are picked, from the words
(...), from the dead, what should be the terminus, or bound, from whence the
Soul of Christ returned, whether from Purgatory, or the prison of the
Patriarckes? (as too many have ventered to define) or from Paradise, or Hades
of Blessed Spirits, as others would have it; or that his descent was no farther
then the grave, and the passion torments, as a third sort stiffly defend. But
this days solemnity, hours compass, places custom, your expectations,
should be wronged, to be so entertained, being content (I trust) to take by
the way in gross: First, that the Fathers before Christ, and those that
follow, like the Cherubims within the veil, Apocal. 13.8.
look upon the same Mercy-seat: For Christ was the Lamb slain from the
beginning of the World, in Gods immutable purpose, and therefore takes away the
sins of the World, as well before, as after this actual Resurrection. 1.
Cor. 10.
Brethren, I would not have you ignorant (faith our blessed Apostle) that all
our Fathers were under the cloud, and in the Sea; and were all baptized unto
Moses, in the cloud, and in the Sea, and did all eat the same Spiritual meat,
and did all drink the same Spiritual drink; for they drank of the
spiritual Rock that followed them, and that Rock was Christ. Secondly, that
the Person of this Christ was raised, the Godhead (one with the Father and the
Holy Ghost, and the same Actor in all external effects) reducing, and
conjoyning the soul again to the body, Ioh. 10.17.
I have power to lay down my life and to take it. Thirdly, that this return
both of soul and body, was from the state of the dead, by loosing the fetters
of death and Hell, in which it was impossible he should be with holden, Acts
2.24. This may satisfy for the present, those that can content themselves to
be wise with sobriety. My progress therefore shall rather touch on these
especial passages, that concern the main. First, how this resurrection of
our Savior in the old Testament was prefigured and fore-prophecied. Then, how
manifestly foretold by himself, and shrewdly feared by his persecutors before
his death: Afterward, how vncontrolably witnessed, both on the present day,
when it was done, as also in the forty days, wherein he conversed with his
Disciples, before his ascension. For this especially makes for the settling of
our Faith in this grand Article. This is opus diei, the work of the day, which
Satan cannot endure we should take due notice of: we are all negligent
(beloved) and need remembrancers to mind us of that which we know in the most
received points of Christianity: it is to good purpose therefore, though no new
thing may be brought to inform the understanding, to set the meditations
notwithstanding on working, to recount with Selah's and Halleluiah's,
Tehillah's, and Tephillah's, all praises and thanksgiuings for the infinite
benefits we have received.

5. And here for the old Testament, if the bringing of Joseph out of the pit
and prison, Moses from among the flags; Samsons rising at midnight from the
midst of his enemies, and carrying away the gates of Gaza on his back: the
quitting of the three Children from the Furnace, and Daniel from the Lions
den (which the Fathers take as Types of the Resurrection) should be called in
question; I shall proceed more vrgently, Chap. 53.1.
to demand with Isaiah, Who was he that came from Edom with died garments,
from Bosrah, glorious in his apparel, and traveling in the greatness of his
strength? What is meant by his treading the Wine Press alone; and stayning all
his raiment with the blood of the trampled, but the victory of Christ over
death, and hell, in this day of his Resurrection? This the Father himself
acknowledges, Psalm. 2.7. Thou art my beloved Son, this day have I begotten
thee: which according to the Apostles comment, Acts 13.33. is referred not to
his Eternal generation, or temporal incarnation, but to this (hodie) of his
resurrection. Of the same, the Son interprets the being of Jonas in the
Whales belly, Matthew. 12.39. And who knows not that the holy Ghost by two
Apostles, both Saint Peter and Saint Paul, denies that Text in the 16. Psalm,
Thou shall not leave my soul in hell, to be properly meant of David, but
principally, (though Typically) of that holy One, who lay not so long buried as
to see corruption. Such evidences the old Testament affords us, which are
notwithstanding but glimpses, and shadows, in comparison of those we have in
the New; where it is obseruable as a thing extraordinary, that this article is
cleared more, then any of the rest. That the Disciples might no way doubt of
it, he foretells them in plain terms, Matthew. 20.18. Behold, we go up to
Jerusalem, and the Son of man shall be betrayed unto the chief Priests, and
unto the Scribes, and they shall condemn him to death, and shall deliver him to
the Gentiles to mock, and to scourge, and to crucify him, but the third day
he shall rise again. And howsoever the Jews took advantage of a speech of
his to this purpose, Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up,
Ioh. 2.19. and made it the chief ground of their accusation against him,
Matthew. 26.61. Yet their importunity with Pilate, to have his Sepulcher sealed,
and their care to set a watch about it, of their own faction, discovered their
more then suspicion, that he might rise again, as they remembered that it was
given out when he was alive, that he had foretold himself. All these
assurances before his Passion, make for the certainetie of his Resurrection.
But greater evidences follow after, that admit no delusion. If a man should but
deal with the fee'd Ianizaries of the High Priests and Scribes, upon their
own grounds, their own testimony were enough to convince them. Mat. 28.13.
His Disciples (say they) came by night, and stole him away while we slept.
Mentita est iniquitas sibi. O the sottishness of humane policy, when once it
begins to tamper against the determinate counsel of the Almighty! His
Disciples, a few, and silly unarmed men, that were at their wits end, to
think what should become of themselves, a poor sort of scattered sheep of a
smitten Shepherd, that fled from him when he was yet alive, would they upon
the sudden be so hardy, as to venture their dearest lives, to recover a
mangled carcass, in so desperate a piece of service, so unlikely to take
effect, so hazardous to the undertakers, so little beneficial, if they had
success? why had they not then attempted to do it (as Chrysostom well
observes) the first night, before the Guard of Soldiers was set? for the text
is plain, Mat. 27.62 It was the next day following his funeral, before the
soldiers came, and so long the stone and seal had remained untouched. To omit
the vnlikelyhood of unbinding him, and leaving the linen clothes behind, in a
case requiring so much dispatch; they are manifestly taken in their own tale:
For if the Soldiers were asleep (as they blanch the matter) quomodo furtum
viderunt? Tem. 10. Hom. 26.
(says Rhemigius out of Saint Augustine) how could they witness that his
Disciples stole him? But if they were waking and saw it, what let them to
hinder it, and apprehend the attempters? No: if they had made enquiry, and
desired to be rightly informed, many in Jerusalem would have told them of
opening of other graves besides this, for company, Mat. 27.52.
and that of known and holy Saints, long before that time buried, and their
bodily appearing unto diverse, to show there was somewhat more then the theft of
a few poor fishermen, which was accompanied with the strangeness of so great
a miracle. All which circumstances notwithstanding, might be spared in regard
of the proofs that follow, which doubtless are so distinctly registered by
the Penmen of the Holy Ghost, not to be taken in gross, but particularly
considered, for the stirring up of our faith and devotions.

6. Some later Divines, for order and memory, rank them into Apparitions, and
Testimonies. His appearances before his Resurrection were either the same day it
was done, or in the forty days following, before his Ascension. The same day,
we read that he appeared five times. To Mary Magdalen, out of whom he had
cast seven Devils, making so notorious a Convert, the first Evangelist of his
Resurrection, Mar. 16.19. To her again, and the other Mary, admitting them
then to touch his feet, and worship, and to carry news thereof to the
Disciples, Math. 28.9. Thirdly, to Cleophas and his fellow, as they were going
to Emmaus, instructing them first as a stranger in this very point, and
afterward, discovering himself in breaking of bread, Luke 24. Fourthly, to
Cephas or Peter alone, as you have in the fifth verse before my text. And last
of all, to all the Disciples, ( Thomas only wanting) where they were assembled
together, the doors being shut, showing them his hands, and his side, for
their more assurance, that it was no delusion; and taking them so together,
that if one would not trust his own eyes, he might be confirmed by his
fellows, who saw it as well as himself, John 20.19. So speedily, the very
same day, with such evidence, so often, was the Article of the Resurrection
confirmed. In the forty days after, we have six of the like appearances. To
the Apostles, (and Thomas being among them) eight days after, whose doubting
gave occasion for the farther instruction of all, John. 20.27. To Peter and
six more of the Disciples, as they were a fishing at the sea of Tiberias, John
21.2. To James, (as some conjecture) for the strengthening him against his
martyrdom, being the first of the Apostles that was to suffer, Acts 12. To the
eleven Disciples upon a mountain in Galilee, to make good that he had promised
by the women, Matt. 28. To more then five hundred brethren at once, mentioned
here by our Apostle. And to all those last of all, that were present at his
ascension, from the mount of Olives, Acts 1. To which eleven Apparitions,
before his Ascension, if we ad that to Saint Paul Acts 9. it will make up the
full dozen or Jury, to quit our cause, and cast opposers. But if apparitions
should seem to any too subject to counterfeiting, we have a cloud of witnesses
besides to confirm it. From heaven, of Angels, He is risen, he is not here,
satisfy your own eyes, come see the place where the Lord lay, Matthew. 28. From
women in earth, who were unlike in such a case to vent a gull, because they
scarce believed it themselves, They have taken away (says Mary Magdalen, who
little thought of his rising) the Lord out of the sepulcher, and I know not
where they have laid him, John 20. From the Disciples, who had eyes enough upon
them, to trippe them for failing in the least circumstance: whereupon they
esteemed the first relation of the women, Luke. 24.11.
as idle tales, before experience had taught them that the Lord was risen
indeed, and had appeared to Simon, Luke 24.34. These things were so sifted, so
evident, so manifest on all hands beyond exception, that impudency it self
might stand amazed, not daring in any sort to disavow it. It was made apparent
to Jews and Gentiles of both professions, to Disciples and Soldiers, Clergy
and Laity, to men and women, both sexes were satisfied, in the Evening and
Morning no time excluded. In the garden, upon the way, in the City, at the
sea, upon a mountain in Galiley, upon another, overlooking Jerusalem, within
door, without, no place ever shunned. They could not be deluded by hearesay,
for their eyes saw him, a mist was not cast before their eyes, for their ears
heard him. As near as might be he came to their smelling, Luke. 20.22.
(if such a sense were fit to discern in such a case) for he breathed upon
them, they beheld him eat and drink with them, of such meat as was by
miracle provided for them, wherein taste might have his portion in the
discovery. But more then all the rest, he showed them his hands and his side,
Luke. 24.29.
told them, that a spirit could not have flesh and bones, as he had; wished
them to handle him, caused Thomas to thrust his hand into the wound in his
side, for his own and the fuller satisfaction of them all. It were strange
therefore that touching, and handling, the sense of seeling, so often, so
freely, by so many admitted, to make experiment about it is proper object,
should in so maine a point be deluded. Out of all which promises you see the
Apostles conclusion, and the ground of our faith inferred in the very words as
my text has it: Now is Christ risen from the dead] which I have labored so
fully to declare, not so much to convince apposers, as to confirm the weak
believers.

7 For here I make no doubt (B.) but all good Christians will be forward for
application to themselves. Some upon the consideration of Satan's absolute
overthrow, hells harrowing, deaths swallowing up in victory, will follow the
conquerours triumphs, with their heartyest acclamations. Others in a sort
dejected, with the meditation of his former passion, will now cheer up their
thoughts in this glorious amends; As the Israelites for their escape from
Pharaoh, Deborah for the defeating of Sisera, the Israelitish women for the
overthrow of Golias, expressed their exceeding joy in set songs, and
thankes-giuings: Much more every one in this case, should turn sacred Poets,
and make holy Anthems, to their own souls and consciences, to celebrate the
solemnity of this Festivity. O what joy must it needs be to a good heart, to
recount, that when the Devil and his complites had spit all their venom,
against the only means of our Redemption, when they had (as they supposed)
taken the Lion in a trappe, delivered him to the Iaylour Death, (if I may so
speak) without bail and mainprise, shackled him sure with bolts and seal,
for ever stirring to disturb them again; That then the Lord awaked as one out
of sleep, and like as a Giant refreshed with wine. Psalm 7.5.
He smote his enemies in the hinder parts, and put them to a perpetual shame.
Then the huge Stone was rolled away, the Seals broken, the Guard frighted, the
whole plot spoiled. What ayled thee, O thou Earth, that thou so trembledst, and
thou Stone, that thou wast so driven back? ye Soldiers, that ye fled like
cowards, and ye graves of the Saints, that ye could not keep in your dead?
It was the Lord that returned from the slaughter, leading captivity captive,
and now having drunk of the brook in the way, lifted up his head to be Ruler
in the midst of his enemies. Long was it before his dearest Followers could be
possessed with this truth, but having once the hynt, how their hearts burned
within them to impart it to others. Mat. 28.8.
Mary ran to bring the Disciples word: Peter and John ran to see whether it
were truth or no. Ioh. 20.3. Luke 24.33.
The two Disciples could not rest in Emmaus, (howsoever like to be benighted,)
but back they must the same hour to Jerusalem, to acquaint their fellows
what had befalne them in their walk: Luke 24.34.
Their fellows prevented them with the same news, before they could have time
to speak. Amongst all which congregations, no doubt but the blessed Virgin his
mother bare the most affectionate part, which notwithstanding is no where here
mentioned: to show, that this spiritual Iubile was beyond the taking notice of
the nearest earthly relation. No (B.) we need not feign the Suns dancing, or
Hermes vision, or Paschasinus holy well that was filled of his own accord
every Easter day, or the annual rising, as upon this day, of certain bodies
of Martyrs, in the sands of Egypt, which some frivolously maintained, to
amplify the glory of this Resurrection. p. 3. q. 53. art. X.
Aquinas gives five reasons of it: The commendations of Gods Justice, which
was to recompense so great humiliation with the like exaltation: the
strengthening of our faith: the assurance of our hope: the reforming of our
lives: the complement of our Salvation. He might have added for a sixth out of
the blessed Apostle, Hi mightily declaring himself to be the Son of God,
Romans 1. But all these are in a manner comprised in the part of my text that
follows, being the effect and fruit of Christ's Resurrection; surrection;
which succeeds now in this place to be likewise discussed.

8. And become the first fruits of them that slept.] I cannot more fitly enter
upon this second part of my text, then with the words of the Psalmist, When the
Lord turned again the captivity of Sion, Psalm. 126.
then were we like unto them that dream: As old Jacob at the relation of his
son Joseph's being alive, Genesis 45. the news was beyond expectation so good,
that he took it for a dream, rather then a true narration. Then was our mouth
filled with laughter, and our tongue with joy. Then said they among the
heathen, The Lord has done great things for them, yea the Lord has done great
things for us already, whereof we rejoice. The ground whereof is this, whereof
I am now to speak: Christ is risen from the dead, and is become the first
fruits of them that slept. (...) made, become, not in acceptance only, in
regard of Gods mercy in admitting his sufferings for our sins, but by desert
also, in satisfying the Justice of God the Father, and paying the utmost
farthing, wherein mankind had run into arrerages. Become the first fruits.]
Like unto that is the old Testament sanctifying all the after-harvest, Leu. 23.
Romans 11.
not of all without a difference, lying under deaths custody, but of the^ that
slept, in expectation of him before this Resurractio^; and those that follow,
who shall awake by virtue thereof; and as members, follow the Head. Our bones
lay scattered before the pit (says David) like as when one breaks and heweth
wood upon the earth. Psalm. 141.8.
And now, Son of man, Ezech. 37.3.
think thou that these bone can live? I have warrant to prophecy upon them
that they shall live, and to make good what I say, out of this ground of our
Apostle: Christ is risen from the dead, and by virtue of this resurrection they
shall surely live. You know (B.) by that which has been spoken, the
antecedent being cleared, that Christ is risen again, the consequent might be
called in question, De Christo Servat. p. 2. cap. 3.
(and is by Faustus Socinus) how thence it should follow that we shall also
be raised? This the Apostle wisely foresaw, and therefore makes it good, by
three invincible arguments. Two are couched in these few words, He is become
the first fruits of them that slept. As the first fruits are accepted, so the
whole mass speedeth, and those only that sleep, shall have a time to awake.
The head above the water, the members can never be drowned. The third argument
in the two next verses following, is of like force: As by man came death, so by
man came the resurrection, and if in Adam man's nature offending, became the
prisoner of death: why in the same restored by the Son of God, that assumed it
to that purpose, should not all in the like sort be made alive? It is true that
some bodily rose again before this Resurrection of Christ, as in the old
Testament, the widows son of Sareptaraised by Elias, the Sunamites son by
Elisha, and another also at the touch of the same Prophets bones in the
Sepulcher, long after he was buried: as also in the New, the Centurions
daughter, the widow's son of Naim, putrified Lazarus, the brother of Martha
and Mary: But the case between their Resurrection and Christ's, is much
different. First, in the Effect, these rose not to live immortally, but to die
again, as the Schoolmen give the reason. Secondly, in the efficient, Christ
rose by his own victorious power, but these by virtue of this Resurrection of
Christ, as our reformed Writers more fully have declared.

9 The order in which this shall come to pass, and how the dead shall be
raised, what difference there shall be between these corruptible carcasses of
ours, and the same refined by this Resurrection, how in the Resurrection, one
star shall differ from another in glory, and what shall become of those that
are found living upon the earth, at the Lords coming, is fully added by our
Apostle, in that which follows my text, but without the compass of my
intended scope. These texts sufficiently illustrate the point I have now in
hand. Christ is the beginning, the first borne, Colos. 1.18. the first begotten
of the dead, Apoca. 1.5. The faith in whose Resurrection shall save us, Romans
10.9. And therefore if we believe, that Jesus died, and rose again, even so
them also which sleep in Jesus, will God bring with him. Which conclusion is in
the words of the Apostle, 1. These. 4.14. And this he so insisteth upon in all
his trialls, as though the Creed of a Christian had consisted of no more
articles. In his tossing between the Pharisees and Sadduces, Men and brethren
(says he) I am a Pharise, the son of a Pharise, of the hope and Resurrection
of the dead I am called in question, Act. 23.6. After, before Felix the
Governor, I have hope toward God, which they themselves allow, that there
shall be a resurrection of the dead both of just and unjust, Act. 24.16.
before Festus and Agrippa, Why should it be thought a thing incredible with
you, that God should raise the dead? Chap. 26.6. And having therefore obtained
help of God, I continue this witnessing both to small and great, saying none
other things then these which Moses and the Prophets did say should come, that
Christ should suffer, and that he should be the first that should rise again,
and should show light unto the people and to the Gentiles, verse 22.23. He had
reference no doubt to that of Isaiah: Thy dead men shall live, together with my
dead body shall they rise: awake and sing, ye that dwell in dust, for thy dew
is as the dew of herbs, and the earth shall cast forth her dead, Chapter 26.19.
But what seek we a surer discharge, then the Master himself of this first
fruits Office affords us, I am the Resurrection, and the life: He that
believes in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live? Ioh. 11.25.

10. For farther amplifying of this point, I will not spend much time, to take
notice of the ancient heresies concerning it, reduced to five heads, and
refuted by Alphonsus de Castro. The first (granting the souls immortality)
denied only the bodies restoring, as Simon Magus, and his adherents, the
Ophytes, Valentinians and Carpocratians. The second, admitting the Resurrection
of the body, imagined it to be so altered, and turned to a Spirit, that it
could not be said to be the same. To refute this fancy, wherewith Eutychus
Bishop of Constantinople much troubled the Church, Gregorius (before he had
the title of Great or Pope) made a journey thither from Rome, and handled the
matter so wisely before Tiberius the Emperor, that Eutychus's book de
Resurrectione was adjudged to the fire. A fit dispatch also for the Divellish
pamphlets of Ostorodius and his damnable associates, which now in this
Sunneshine of the Gospel, (among diverse far worse) set abroach the same
opinion. And the Arminians (as the world sees) are too ready to take after
them. The third heresy is laid to the charge of Origin by Theophilus
Alexandrinus, Paschal. 2.
as though he should hold the Resurrection of the Body with such a clause,
that after it had risen once, and so flourished for certain ages, it should
again be dissolved, and brought to nothing: but Epiphanius clears Origin
for this, burthening him with the flat denial of the Resurrection of the
body. In regard whereof, Alphonsus will credit neither of the relators, because
their testimonies (says he) concerning Origin, do not agree. As little heed
is to be given to the imputations of Guido Garmelitanus against the Arminians,
putting on them, that they hold Christ rose upon the Saturday, which Alphonsus
makes the fourth Heresy. For who finds not by Friar Waldensis, and Widdiford,
against Wickliffe, Peter Cluniacensis, against the Petrobrusians, Bernard of
Lutzenburg and others, against the Waldenses, what small trust is to be given
to such relators, when the Authors cannot be had, to speak for themselves?
Last of all, there wanted not those who affirmed, that in the Resurrection no
women should be found, but all then should be turned into men; abusing that
place of the Apostle, Ephesians. 4.13. of the growing of al unto a perfect man,
unto the measure of the fullness of the stature of Christ. But Saint Augustine
elegantly refutes them Decivitate Dei, lib. 22. cap. 17. interpreting man in
that place to include, as homo, both sexes, and wittily concluding out of the
22. of Matthew, where our Savior tells us, that in the Resurrection they
neither marry, nor are given in marriage: erunt ergo qui vel nubere hic solent,
vel ducere vxores, sed ibi hoc non faciunt. Therefore shall then (says he) be
the parties which on earth were married, or marriageable, but there they shall
be freed (as the Angels) from any such relations of man and wife. Now partly
to give some satisfaction to curious demanders, but more I think out of their
itching humors, to make work for their wit; the Schoolmen have presumed to
define of the qualities of those that shall rise again, of their stature, age,
place, appearance, crowns, and coronets, more then our Apostle, after his
return from the third heaven, ever thought fit to acquaint us with. To better
purpose a great deal the Fathers press this point; Iustine Martyr,
Athenagoras, and Tertullian, to co^vince the Gentiles; Irenaeus, Ephrem, and
Augustine, to stop the mouths of Heretics, Gregory Nissene, Chrysostom,
Cyprian, and Ambrose, labor especially in a concionatory and Paraeneticall
kind of strain (wherein they were excellent) to settle the conscience,
persuade the will, and strongly to work upon the affection. Saint Hierome
binds himself against the particular errors of John, Bishop of Jerusalem:
Damascen the Greek master of the sentences, is full of collections out of the
Ancients. Lactantius, Prudentius, Hilarie and Paulinus, took a delight to
hallow their divine strain in Poetry with so sacred a subject. Sedulius
though it not enough to entitle the memorable Story of the Bible, which he had
comprised in verse in four books, O pus Baschale, Easter work: but needs
he must repeat the same again in prose, under the same title; which the last
Bibliotheca Patrum has now also taken in, from the Library of Peter Pithaeus.
The time allotted will scarce give leave, to point but at the scope of each of
them. They never thought this doctrine of the Resurrection enough repeated, or
sufficiently taught, or learned. Their Philosophical answers out of the
grounds of the Physickes, to show the possibility of it, their reasons
borrowed from the Ethickes, to prove how it stands with convenience and
justice, and their excellent similitudes of the Phoenix, corn, corn, the
rifing of the Sun after his setting, and the like to illustrate the same, are
testimonies of their extraordinary learning, pains, and piety, and patterns
for us to follow, in the due consideration of so Sacred a Mystery.

11. But alas (B.) our thoughts (for the most part) are taken up with other
matters: the commonnesse of this great treasure, makes us all to undervalue
it; we can talk of it upon occasion, acknowledge it to be an especial
Article of our Creed, brand with the deserved note of Infidel, him that in
any sort should question it: and yet come too short (God wot) in the due
esteem of our Saviors conquest of death, the primarie and meritorious cause
of it, or of the virtue of the first fruits, whereby the whole mass is
hallowed, or the happy condition of those, who are not dead, but sleep, and
reposed in their graves, as in a bed, at the voice of the last Trumpe to awake
again. Surely our Apostle accounted all things but dross and dung, in regard
of this Knowledge of Christ, and the power of his Resurrection, Philipp. 3.10.
But our averseness, and neglect is such in this behalf, that I fear me, such
spiritual themes are least studied upon, and the Apostles price of this
knowledge, amongst the wits of this age, held somewhat too dear. The
consideration of our Forefathers devotion, should set an edge on our dullness.
Good God! what ado there was between the East Church, and the West, about the
precise time of this solemnity? All were for the thing, but the emulation was
about the time, who in every circumstance should be most exact. Pope Victor and
his adherents were for the Sunday, in regard that it was the day of the week,
that our Lord rose from the dead. Polycarpus and those of the East Church, tied
themselves to the time of the Jewish Passover, which might fall upon any day
of the week besides. These pretended traditions from James and John: the other
from Saint Peter and Saint Paul: And when Irenaeus and other good men that
interposed, were not able to take up the matter, the Council of Nice became so
far Vmpyre for the Sunday, (as we find related by Athanasius and Eusebius,)
and Constantine the Emperor, so strongly backed it with his Imperial letter,
(which is yet to show in Socrates and Theodoret) that the not-conforming to the
Councels ordering in that behalf, was made abranch of the Quarto-desimanian
heresy. How justly this was done, and upon what grounds, I censure not; those
that desire to be farther informed in the point, may read what Hospinian de
origin Festorum: Bellarmine in his 3d book de cultu Sanctorum, cap. 12.
Morney in the beginning of his book of the mystery of iniquity, have gathered
out of the Ancients: only I may not omit that which a Reverend Bishop of our
Church has farther observed: Should we esteem so highly of every Lords day,
that it may not be profaned, or (because it is de iure divino) by the Church
altered? And should Easter day, which contains the ground of the change, from
the Jewish Sabbath, to our Sunday, the archetype (as he calls it) or the
prototype of all Sundaies in the year, be in any sort scanted of its due
celebration? What should I speak of the Cycli Paschales, or the golden number,
sent by the Alexandrians to the Romans, as a rare invention in golden letters,
for a directive Calender, to find out the true seat of Easter, when Hyppolitus
the Martyrs Prime (for now we so commonly call it) was found erroneous?
Dionysius (also a Martyr) and Bishop of Alexandria, was ready to mend it; and
as farther process of time discovered any sensible difference, there wanted
not care and study to set all right again: so Eusebius corrected Dionysius;
Theophilus of Alexandria, Eusebius; Prosper, Theophilus; Victor of Aquitaine,
Prosper; Victor Capuanus, and Dionysius Exiguus, the former Victor. And when
about the year 454. near upon the Council of Calcedon, Easter fell so high
in April, that that they doubted they were in the wrong, what ado keeps Leo
in his Epistles to Paschasinus of Lilibaeum in Sicily, to Julian Bishop of the
I Will of Coos, to the Emperor Martian himself, and his wife Eudoxia, to solicit
Proterus, Bishop of Alexandria, to set all right again. Where I enquire not
why the Popes infallibility should not serve him to keep a true account in
Ecclesiastical matters, as well as others? The like thing fell out in Saint
Ambrose's days, and likewise in the time of Innocent the first. Upon which
occasion, we have that Fathers 83. Epistle, to the BB. of Aemilia, and
Innocents letter to Aurelius, Bishop of Carthage, entreating him to call a
Synod, that the matter might be more fully bated. So highly they valued this
times solemnity, in regard of the first fruits consecrated in Christ's
Resurrection, that they held the failing in the smallest circumstance, a note
of ingratitude, and a kind of sacrilege. To prevent therefore such
inconveniences in calculation, the task at length was laid on those of
Alexandria, as held the best Mathematicians after Ptolemies time. And hence we
have the Paschales, as yearly Almanackes sent abroad by them, to inform all
other Churches, and mainetaine uniformity. Eusebius mentions some of these
Epistles, sent first by Dionysius even under the persecution. Three of that
kind are now extant under the name of Theophilus Alexandrinus, translated into
Latin by Saint Hierome, and lastly reprinted in the last Bibliotheca Patrum at
Colen, containing, besides the evidence of the custom of keeping Easter,
matter well worth the reading. And to intimate that only, which time will not
suffer me farther to enlarge, a man, shall hardly turn over the Ancients, but
ever and anon he shall fall upon Sermons, or Homilies for Easter, questions
and answers concerning the exact form of keeping Easter: Hymns and Anthems
composed for the celebration of Easter: Facts of greatest consequence reserved,
as Baptizing of the Catechumeni, Absoluing of the Excommunicated, Receiving of
the Lords Supper, in most solemn manner; and all for the honor of this great
Day. The feast of first fruits, this rosh hashanah, (containing many mysteries,
besides common solemnities) this holy time of Easter: It is strange, to observe
how many books we find written together, by the most devout men, even in
times of persecution, by Anatolius Bishop of Laodicea, Theophylus, of Caesarea,
Baccillus, of Corinth, Meli^o, of Sardis, Irenaeus, of Lions, Hyppolitus, the
Martyr, and the great Doctor Clemens Alexandrinus; and all for the due
maintaining of this custom of keeping Easter. Chrysostom deposed, and
Athanasius wanting a fit place, would needs notwithstanding keep Easter: the
one, in a spacious room built for the public Baths of Constantinople; the
other, in a Church at Alexandria not consecrated: So heinous a matter they
thought it to neglect the due observing of Easter.

12 And to come at length to our own selves, and customs, derived from sacred
antiquity, what means our preparation by a Lentfast, the solemn repetition of
these Easter Sermons, rather then any other, the extraordinary concourse to the
Lords supper, at this time of the year especially, but to draw us by all
circumstances, to reckon with him for our Easter duties, that has so
effectually paid our first fruits for us, at this holy time of Easter? What
these duties are, our Apostle elsewhere shows. As Christ was raised up by the
Glory of the Father, Romans 6.4.
so we also should walk in newness of life. And if we be risen with
Christ, why seek we not those things which are above? Col. 3.1. Our dullness
in our vocations, deadness in our devotions, faintness at the approach of
death, and the grave, are arguments that these Resurrection Sermons cannot be
too often repeated. Wherefore, brethren, be ye steadfast and immovable, always
abounding in this work of the Lord, for as much as you know that your labor
is not in vain in the Lord. For what cross or temptation can amaze a
Christian soul, that can make but the true use of this short text, Christ is
risen again, and become the first fruits of them that slept? Turn such a man
to fight with beasts, after the manner of men; present before him the stake or
torture; the assurance of his restoring by the Resurrection, is a Supersedeas
to him in all his trials. Upon this affiance he will profess with old
Ignatius, that it belongs to Gods wheat, to be ground with beasts teeth: he
will resolutely, with Saint Laurence on the Gridiron, offer both sides to be
broyled. In Iosses, in sickness, in disgraces, in all assaults of Satan, in
the pangs of death, he will be always repeating with Job, I know that my
redeemer lives, Job. 19.
and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth, and though after my
skin, worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God. Last of all,
in the death of our parents, and children, brethren, sisters, or friends, or
any other, who are near and dear unto us, what comfort so present as this, so
surely grounded, so fit to be applied, That Christ is risen from the dead, has
satisfied the utmost farthing, has broken up the prison, turned the death of
the faithful into a sleep, out of which, by virtue of his Resurrection, they
are to awake again, unto a far more happy estate. Seeing therefore that
Christ our Passover has been thus sacrificed for us, and paid the first
fruits whereby we are restored, and reconciled to God the Father, let us keep
this feast not with old leaven, neither with the leaven of malice and
wickedness, nor dicing, nor absurd dancing, or ridiculous legendpreaching to
make the people laugh, which Durand and Beleth commend in their popish Bishops,
as Hospinian at large declares, but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and
truth: This is the day which the Lord has made, let us rejoice and be glad in
it, Let our hearts dance for joy, and in our songs let us praise him. Tell it
out among the heathen, and when our children or Iuniors shall ask, what mean
these solemnities at this time that the Church is so careful to observe,
before any other; let us amply relate unto them, how we were utterly lost in
Adam, and became the prisoners of sin, death and hell: but now is Christ
risen again, the first fruits of them that sleep, for their everlasting
recovery; the benefit whereof, by no triumphs, laud, and thanksgiving, can be
sufficiently expressed. O thou therefore that of stones can raise up children
unto Abraham, and reviued'st Lazarus when he stanke in his grave, make our
dead hearts sensible of the virtue of thy Resurrection, that seconding thy
first fruits with a serious awaking to righteousness, we may triumphantly
meet death in the face with this happy (...), O death, where is thy sting? o
grave where is thy victory? Hear us o Lord, for his sake, who died for our
sins, and rose again for our justification: to whom with thee and the
blessed Spirit, be all praise and glory both now and ever.

Amen.
Gowries Conspiracy.

A SERMON PREACHED AT St MARY'S IN OXFORD, the fifth of August.

By JOHN PRIDEAVX, Doctor of Divinity, Regius Professor, and Rector of Exeter
College.

OXFORD, Imprinted by LEONARD LICHFIELD Anno Salutis, 1636.

GOVVRIES CONSPIRACY.
2. SAM. 20.1. And there happened to be there a man of Belial, whose name was
Sheba, the son of Bichri, a Beniamite, and he blew a trumpet, and said, We
have no part in David, neither have we inheritance in the son of Ishai:
Every man to his tents, O Israel.


THere is no state so settled under the Sun, but subject it is to manifold
alterations. St Ambrose gives the reason in his sixth book and 39. Epistle,
because true Rest and security keep their residence in heaven only, and not
here on earth: and therefore (as Saint Augustine writes to Celestinus in his
63. Epistle) in this world are not any way to be expected. If any might
presume to speed better then others, Kings might plead their Prerogative: but
being in the same ship with their inferiors, they are forced to run the
hazard of the same tempests. So generally that old verse falls out to be true,

Interdum pax est, pacis fiducia nunquam. Above many others, a man would have
thought King David, a King of Gods own making, a man after his own heart, so
beloved at home, so feared abroad, so compassed on every side with inward and
outward blessings, had at length been sufficiently guarded from any
extraordinary attempts of traitors or treason. He had so miraculously escaped
Saul, subdued the Philistims, recovered Ierusalent from the obstinate
Iebusites, the finger of God appeared in all his actions, and victories, he
wanted not friends, and kindred, his Captains and Soldiers were terrible, his
sons many and towardly, his treasure boundless, and his own valor and
experience famous amongst his subjects and borderers, so that desperatnesse it
self might have trembled to have given him the onset: Yet the text here
shows, that as the best men have their faults, so Gods dearest children want
not their crosses. In the matter of Vriah, David in three respects had been
scandalously to blame, in murder, adultery, and the under hand betraying of a
poor Innocent. The first where of, God repayed by the murder of his own son
Amnon, and the death of the child begotten in adultery. The second, by the
deflowring first of his daughter Tamar, by her own brother, and then of his
own wives, by his incestuous son Absalom; whom as he raised out of his own
bowels to turn traitor against him, (as appears in the five former
chapters) so here he orders the malice of Sheba to raise another commotion,
justly punishing sin by sin, and working his own ends, by such perverse
instruments. The brand therefore of Absalom is scarce here quenched, when Sheba
steps forth to blow new coals of rebellion; Of which treacherous attempt of a
disloyal and false hearted subject, against his most religious and lawful
Sovereign, I have taken in hand upon this day and occasion, especially to
treat of.

2. Where not to burden you attentions with unnecessary curiosities, observe, I
beseech you, with me in the general

These three circumstances: 1. The occasion given by a contention between the
Israelites, and the men of Judah, in the former Chapter, and here accidentally
embraced by a treacherous disposition, And there happened to be there. 2. The
traitor lively deciphered in his colors, a man of Belial, whose name was
Sheba, the son of Bichri, a Beniamite. 3. The treason it self, first,
confusedly, breaking out in the doubtful sound of a Trumpet: And he blew a
Trumpet. Secondly, distinctly uttered in express rebellious terms: and he
said, We have no part in David, nether have we inheritance in the son of Ishai;
Every man to his tents, O Israel.


The occasions, advantageous, the traitor, malicious, the treason, perilous.
As the occasion unexpectedly, draws on the traitor, so the traitor violently
sets on foot the treason. Whence we may easily gather, the danger of
occasions, the rancour of disloyalty, and the unconstant leuity of an incensed
multitude; And for memory we may thus connect it: When occasion is offered,
(howsoever they otherwise strive to appear good subjects) traitors will be
ever ready to vent their treasons. Of all which, whiles I shall plainly
discourse according to my tumultuous provision, I trust, my occasions shall
privilege me from those sinister censures which pass upon matters without
due notice of circumstances. But be the manner of propounding taken as it may
be: the doctrine (I am sure) will not be gain said, being occasioned by this
days celebration, against Traitors and Treasons, of which my Text contains
a notable example, with the occasion intimated in the first words.

3. And there happened to be there] Casu, says Iunius, with the Chaldy
paraphrase. Accidit, says Castalio. Forte fortuna, says Vatablus. The Greeks
have a double rendering, (...) called hither as it were by chance, (as some
would have it) which others express by (...), occurrit, as being an adventure,
which was occasionally met with. Whether this Sheba were a party in Ahsaloms
rebellion, and then came in with Amasa, upon the overthrow in the wood of
Ephraim, Chap. 13.
or that afterward he thrust in among the ten Tribes at Gilgal, to
congratulate the Kings victories, to conduct him back with honor unto
Jerusalem; the Text expresses not, and I hunt not after conjectures. Once this
is manifest, that here he was; for so run the words in the original (...)
ibi evenit, vel casu erat, there he happened to be (as Arias Montanus with
Pagnine expresses it word for word) which intimates, that his being there was
merely accidental. And howsoever Saint Augustine mislike in his writings, the
name of chance, and fortune, in regard it might be offensive, by a customary
heathenish interpretation: Yet the Scripture applied to our capacities: often
has it; forasmuch as things most certain by Gods disposition and providence,
in respect of man's circumspection, may be termed casual. God (out of doubt)
here had a purpose, (as Brentius and Peter Martyr well observe) either to make
a further trial of David's faith and patience; or to curb him from being too
presumptuous upon the strange recovery of his state, and Kingdom; or to lesson
him in the variable fickleness of a wavering multitude, and teach him to
depend wholly on him, and none other. As on the other side who sees not, that
Sheba's inveterate malice was ordered to be dis-vizord, and punished, by such a
public attempt, and shame? Howsoever, this we may build upon by the connection
of these words, with the latter end of the former Chapter, that the heat
between Israel and Judah, who should seem most officious to their King, gave
the hint to a false-hearted traitor, to raise a new rebellion. Whence I
infer, That hypocritical traitors watch their times, and are ready to vent
their villainy, upon the least advantage.

4. So Cain sets upon his brother Abel, when he had severed him from his
parents, and they two were alone in the field together, Genesis 4.8. Simeon and
Levi, brethren in iniquity, take their time to murder the Sichemites, when
they were sore of their Circumcision, Genesis 34. Dalilah knew well enough, that
there was no shauing of Sampson, till he was througly lulled asleep, Judge. 24.
But the most unnatural treason that a man in this kind shall ever light on,
was that of Adramelech and Sharezar, Senachribs sons, who took the vantage
of their father at his Devotions, in the house of Nisroch his God: the story is
set down, 2. Kings 19.37. Where in stead of the word (...) his sons, in the
original, we find the vowels set in the Text (which is somewhat strange in
that tongue) without their consonants: Perchance to intimate closely, that so
many circumstances, concurring otherwise for the aggravating of the offense, as
subjects to lay violent hands on a King, and that in the Temple, and that at
his devotions, to add further, that it was done by his own sons; howsoever
it be more vocal then the blood of Abel; yet the manner of setting it down,
should show it also to be scelus infandum, a wickedness too monstrous to be
fully expressed. And yet we need not go far, to find the like among the
people of God; so far does Satan prevail with the ambitious humors of
irreligious miscreants. Two sons there were, that David had, whom he
especially (as it were) doted upon, above the rest of his children, beautiful
Absalom, and gallant Adoniah, and both of these take their vantages (as far
as in them lay) to tumble their aged Father down from his throne, and bury him
alive, to make way for their prodigious, and preposterous purposes. The former,
by the peoples favor, which he had gotten by his hypocritical popularitie; the
latter, by his fathers feebleness, backing himself by the countenance of
violent Ioab, and disloyal Abiathar. This hard measure received good King
David, at the hands of those, of whom he best deserved. He saw the law of
nature violated, conscience of so heinous a fact contemned, his indulgence
repaid; with monstrous ingratitude, his tried valor, outbraued by his own
subject, who could not be ignorant of it. But that which touched him nearest,
was, that in his person, and through his sides, Religion, and the name of God
was blasp hemed among the heathen: in comparison of which, he held the virulent
raylings of damned Shimei, too slight to be take any notice of. Behold, Chap.
16.11.
(says he to Abishai and the rest of his servants) my son, which came forth
of my bowels, seeks my life; how much more now, may this Beniamite do it?
Let him alone, let him curse: for the Lord has bidden him. Thus a broken and
contrite heart, standing at the bar of Gods Justice, and daunted at the
multitude of it is own inditements, is willing to put up any thing, in lieu of
his own satisfaction. He will speak for the devilish traitor, persisting
in the height of his villainy, Entreat the young man Absalom gently for my sake.
He will lament his death, as untimely, and undeserved, O my son Absalom, my
son, my son Absalom, would God I had died for thee, O Absalom, my son, my
son! But the Judge of all the World is not subject to such passions, nor
satisfied (most commonly) in such a sort, without exemplary punishment; none
shall touch his Anointed for evil, but evil shall hunt those wicked persons
to destroy them. The traitor here in my Text, could not be ignorant of this.
For if he had never taken notice of Corah's conspiracy, and the punishment
thereof: Chap. 4.
Baanah's and Rechab's betraying of Ishbosheth, and the end of it: Yet
Absalom's fact, and judgment, could not be unknown unto him; Every one of
the people could have told him, how miraculously his huge army was defeated, by
a small number, with the loss of twenty thousand; how strangely the Wood
devoured more people that day then the sword. It must needs then be in the
mouth of every one, that a senseless thick bough'd Oak performed the part of
a good subject, to apprehend the traitor, that his Mule left him to the
gallows, who had renounced his allegiance to his King, and Father; that the
earth refused to reccaue him; Heaven, was shut against him; none of all his
troop left to guard him, (who had in so) high a nature wronged the Creator of
all, in his Anointed Vicegerent. Last of all, I make no doubt, but diverse also
observed, and spoke of the extraordinary hand of God, expressed in Ioab's
violence, in the speedy dispatching him, notwithstanding the Kings express
charge to the contrary, accompanied with his infamous burial, in a great
ditch, or pit, like a carrion, under a heap of stones: whereas formerly he
had ambitiously provided a stately monument for that purpose, to wit, a
Piramis, or pillar in the Kings dale. Some of which express tokens of Gods
vengeance against such Rebels, at the least, all joined together, so lately
acted, so freshly bleeding, so notoriously spread abroad and known, might have
amated this traitor in my text, from ventring again so soon, if he had had
the least spark of grace, or common humanity, or policy in him. But malice is
blind, desperatnesse admits not of discourse: he must needs on, whom the devil
violently pusheth: an opportunity was given, Sheba's false heart was tender,
and must needs take fire. Seeing he happened to be there, when such an oceasion
happened to fall out, he would take advantage to vent his malice, whatsoever
became of it.

5. A lesson first for Kings, and Magistrates, not to rely too much upon those
that are of none, or a suspected religion: For howsoever they kiss, and cry,
Master, with Judas; or profess they have somewhat to say from God, as Ehud
told Eglon: yet they carry a two-edged dagger under their raiment, Judge. 3.
(as there he did;) which is too loose in the scabberd, (as Ioabs was) and will
be the readier to strike you upon any advantage given them. Gedaliah was too
confident on his own innocence, and the loyalty of those that spoke him
fair; whereupon when he was truly informed by Iohanan and others, that
Ismael the son of Nethaniah, was suborned by Baalis King of Ammon, to slay
him, he believed them not; but answered Iohanan in anger, Thou speak
falsely of Ismael; Ier. 40. and the last verse. But the event proved it too
true; for his security gave the advantage, which the traitor taking, performed
that most wicked design; which made all the miserable remnant of Israel to
smart for it. In consideration whereof, no doubt, Zerubbabel, and the chief of
the Fathers returned from the captivity, took afterward a better course, Ezra
4. For when the treacherous enemies of the Church, made a proffer to join with
them in the reedifying of the Temple: No (say they) you have nothing to do
with us to build a house unto our God, but we our selves together will build it
to the Lord God of Israel. So suspicious were they, that they who remain
false-hearted to God, would never prove trusty to his faithful servants. David
himself in diverse places complains of such kind of people, in the five and
thirtieth Psalm. When they were sick (says he) I put on sackcloth, and humbled
my self with fasting; I behaved my self as though it had been my friend, or
my brother, I went heavily as one that mourns for his mother. But in mine
adversity they rejoiced, and gathered themselves together, yea, the very
abiects came together against me, and that unawares making mowes at me, and
ceased not. In the 41. Psalm. he takes up the same theme again, and
displayeth their hypocrisy: If he come to see me, he speaks vanity, and his
heart conceiueth falsehood against himself, and when he comes forth, he
tells it. And this he takes most unkindly of all in the 55. Psalm: For if
an open enemy or adversary had dishonored, or magnified himself against me, I
could perchance have borne it, at least hid my self from him: but when they
that profess religion, and fidelity, shall prove the vilest miscreants, this
is that the earth will groan to bear; and heaven will not suffer vnrevenged.
Now if ever there were a generation of vipers, that unnaturally make their
passage to light, through their mothers bowels; our treacherous fugitives, and
homebred Papists, may most justly be esteemed such, whom no benefits can
win, no allegiance bind; no hazard deter from attempting (on the least
advantage) the utter overthrow of their Prince, and Country. I need not to go
beyond sea for instances. Were they ever quiet in Queen Elizabeth's days? or
has the mercy of our gracious Sovereign (whom God so miraculously has so
often freed from their villainy) wrought in them any remorse of conscience? No
surely (Beloved,) for seeing the Pope himself has mounted to this height,
only by such treasonable practices against his own Prince and others; when
they hold such grounds in their Schools, that the Pope may loose, and make
void the oath of allegiance that subjects have taken to their lawful Princes:
that upon a pretense they are fallen from the Church, and are turned heretics,
he may depose them from their Thrones, and dispose their kingdoms to others;
that the excommunicated, or deposed, in such a case, may be lawfully murdered by
their subjects, and the children for ever disinherited, though no way involved
in the Fathers fault; that such powderplots undergone for the sea of Rome, are
so far from treasons, that they are justly termed martyrdom, and often are
rewarded with canonization, or the like. What hope (I say) may remain that
such, so bred, so taught, so believing, will ever prove Loyal? When they
confess their poor conformity, they yield for the time, to be for want of
strength, which should soon appear in other colors, if Sheba's advantage
were once given: The more it stands good subjects upon, to be solicitous, and
watchful for their Princes safety. Nets, and snares, and ginnes, and pits, and
traps, were not only laid for David, but are renewed daily, against such
religious Princes, as make conscience to tread in David's footsteps. And to what
shall we attribute the miraculous escapes of our Religious Sovereign, with the
confusion of their enginers? has there been any circumspection used
extraordinary? or retyrednesse, for prevention? or a guard, to keep off? or
new law to cut off all such fals-hearted Sheba's, who may happen to be amongst
us, to do a mischief? The world sees, that with us it is far otherwise. It
is therefore only Gods extraordinary protection, that has hitherto freed him
from such apparent, and remediless dangers. The Gowries had dispatched him;
Watson and his accomplices had surprised him; the Powderplot had blown up him
and all his, if this mercy of God only had not prevented the devils malice,
and our security. O then how should this stir us up, to commence our suits to
the same Protector, for the continuance of his favors in this behalf! For
let us depend upon it (Beloved) as long as there is a Pope, and devil; Princes
professing the Gospel, shall never be secured from Gowries and Garnets. Some
malcontents will lurk in the throng, among better-affected subjects, who have
swallowed a morsel either of Ambition, with Absalom, or of revenge with
Bigthan, and Teresh, or of covetousness, with Judas, or out of an old grudge,
with Sheba will be houering for their advantage, who comes now in the next
place to be personally indicted, and arraigned by name for a traitor.

6 A man of Belial, whose name was Sheba, the son of Bichri, a Beniamite] The
traitor here is deciphered by four notable circumstances: First, by the
character, or badge of his profession, he was a man of Belial. Secondly by his
proper name, whose name was Sheba. Thirdly, his pare^tage comes in question,
the son of Bichri: and lastly, Iemini and Benjamin ide^ sunt: vel saltem,
Jemini erat magnus Princeps inter Beniamitas: Abulen.
is mentioned his Tribe, a Beniamite, or (as the original has it in the same
sense, as Abulensis shows) a man of Iemini. That which we translate to the
word, out of the original, A man of Belial; Iunius renders Nequam: Castalio,
improbus: others with Saint Jerome, Vir sine iugo disciplinae; an Apostata,
that would not conform himself to any good order: With which accord the
Greek; (...), say the 72. (...), say others: all which joined together, scarce
express the thing, he being a lewd, ungodly, dissolute, pestilent son of
the Devil, which could endure no law, or to live within any compass, brother
to Elie's sons, 1. Sam. 2. which are thus described in the text, Now the
sons of Eli were sons of Belial, and they knew not the Lord, that is (as
Abulensis glosseth on it) Howsoever they professed him for a fashion, yet in
heart, and other actions they flatly denied him. This name Sheba in the Hebrew
fignifieth seven, or the seventh; perchance because he was the seventh
brother, and therefore presumed farther upon the strength of his family. But
the same word signifying also an oath, might as well have minded him of his
oath which he had taken to obey his King, and was upon no occasion to be
violated. Celebris, nobilis: O siander.
That which follows, The son of Bichri, Strigelius, (I know not upon what
ground) would change into (...) vnus e proceribus, a great Noble man, for
birth, means, and authority. True it is, that (...) or (...) which signify the
first borne, or the first fruits, with a little inflection may be varied to
that purpose; but what need change of the text, if the collection may be had
without it? Far more passable is the inference of Abulensis, that except he
had been some great man, he would never have ventured for such a purpose, to
have blown a trumpet, and the multitude would rather have slain him outright,
then upon such a motion, to have given ear unto him. Well therefore he may be
presumed to be a man of eminency, as Catiline among the Romans, or Gowry
amongst his countrymen, of greater nobility and note, then desert, or honesty,
which the circumstance following does more then intimate; A- Beniamite, or a
man Iemini: for why should this be added? but (as most interpreters take it) to
show the ground, why Sheba was so ready to revolt from David. Ever there
remained a sting between the Beniamites, and David; especially of those that
were any way kin to Saul, for the translating of the Kingdom from Readiness
posterity, to David. And howsoever the express disposal of good was known to
all Israel in it; yet malicious men will take no satisfaction, especially where
a Kingdom is the object of their difference. So Shimei, which reviled him in
the 16. Chapter, is said to be of the family of Saul, that we might take notice
of the reason why he did it. David was easily induced to believe Ziba, grossly
belying Mephibosheth, for aspiring by tumult to the kingdom, as having
experience of the inward grudge, that most of Saul's family bore him; which here
breaking out in Sheba, he is termed a Beniamite, to make it the less strange
to them, who desire to know the reason. In sum then, howsoever these words
may seem to import nothing farther then a bare narration; yet upon waighing,
and laying circumstances together, here appears, first, the ground of
treason, whence it generally arises: and secondly, the disgrace, that it
necessarily draws with it. The ground is twofold; first, a rotten heart fully
possessed by Belial; for no man becomes a traitor, that has any relic of
grace in him: The second ground is most commonly hatred, accompanied with
ambition, and desire of revenge for some wrong received. The disgrace is
likewise double; first, striking to the actour himself, that undertakes so
foul a fact; and next, to the family, whose blood thereby is taynted. All
which the text affords; A man of Belial; behold the heart corrupted: a
Beniamite, there is the reason of the grudge. In like manner the name of Sheba
chronicleth the personal blot: and the son of Bichri, the imputation
sticking to the family. All which in stead of a doctrine, yield this essential
definition of a a traitor: A traitor is a man of Belial, who to the disgrace
of himself and his whole family, impiously conceiueth, and rebelliously
venteth his hatred and disloyalty against his lawful Sovereign.

7 The meanest Logician will here easily find the genus to be (...), a man of
Belial, and the difference drawn partly, from the proper object, his lawful
Sovereign, and partly, from a necessary adiunct, the infamy both of person,
and family. The grounds whereof are so clear, that it needs no further
illustration: Proofs there are plenty, if it were my purpose to use them:
Curse not the King, no not in thy thought: Eccles. 10.20. But fear God and
honor him, not only for wrath but for conscience sake, 1. Pet. 2. Romans 13.
as Saint Peter and Saint Paul jointly teach us. Certainly he that faultereth
in his allegiance to man the deputy, manifestly revolteth from God, the
deputer. And he that shakes off this sacred bond of obedience, has first
resigned heaven, and made shipwreck of a good conscience. I need not cast
about in this for any farther confirmation: the other particles in the
definition are no less evident. For why is Sheba here named so precisely with
his Father and Tribe, but to be left as Pilate in our Creed, gibbeted up (as
it were a carcass) for detestation to all posterity? It was a heavy doom for
Amalek, to have his remembrance to be utterly put out from under heaven, Exodus
17. as also for Jeroboam and Baasha, to be grubbed up by the roots with all
their offsprings. But the curse seems far more disastrous, to be remembered
with a brand of infamy, and to be chronicled with Bigthan and Teresh, as blots
to their name and family. Thus Judas weltreth in Aceldama, and no man pitties
him: Achitophel hangs himself so politikely, that no man, so much as in
conceit, will cut the halter. God would not have the names of such to
putrify, with their carcasses, but posterity shall ever be tossing them to
their everlasting infamy. So general is that of the Wise man applied
particularly to an adulterous woman, Ecclus. 23.25. His children shall take no
root, and her boughs shall bring no fruit. A shameful report shall she
leave, and her reproach shall not be put out. For as the righteous shall be
had in everlasting remembrance: Psalm. 112. Genesis 48.
their name shall be called upon, that is, continued, and advanced in their
issue: nay their Eunuchs, that keep Gods Sabbaths and please him, shall have
a better name then of sons and daughters. So the name of the wicked shall rot:
Esaias. 56. Psalm. 107.
It shall be left as a curse unto Gods chosen, Esaias, 65.15. The sins of their
fathers shall be had in remembrance, and the sins of their mothers shall not
be blotted out, Psalm. 109.14. So Jeroboam is seldom named, but Nebat is fetched
in, to bear a part of the reproach and scandal. Seven times in this Chapter,
mention is made of Sheba, and so often the son of Bichri is added. Such a
stayne one false traitor leaves upon a whole family. Ulysses in the Poet, by
the light of nature could well vantage his cause by it: where to justify his
own pedigree, and girds at Ajax, he could handsomely say of his ancestors,

-- Neque in his quisquam damnatus and exul. Treason is of a deeper tincture,
deserving a heavier doom, and therefore of all true Christians the more
earnestly to be detested. It shall be needless to make farther application
of that which has been in this part delivered, except it would please more
particularly, first, parents, hence to be admonished, for the bringing up of
their children in obedience in their tender years, least their
after-rebellions reflect, to the blemishing of their whole families. Next,
kinsfolk, to proclaim such degenerate, and raze them out of their
genealogies, that shall fo far link themselves with Belial, as to be
accounted his children. Last of all, all sorts may judge how to esteem of
such, that under pretense of Religion, sow the seed of flat rebellion, and
learn of David a subject, how to behave themselves toward their Kings, such
as David was, who when he had Saul at an advantage, that against all right, and
Justice sought his blood, and might have had him (slain, but by a word's
speaking: 1. Sam. 26.
As the Lord lives (says he) the Lord shall smite him, or his day shall come
to dye, or he shall desce^dinto battle and perish the Lord forbid that I should
stretch forth mine hand against the Lords Anointed. To which purpose he had
spoken to Abishai before, whose fingers itched to help him, Destroy him not;
for who can stretch forth his hand against the Lords Anointed, and be
guiltless? In which doctrine if Bichri had well catechized his son Sheba, it
might perchance have restrained him from blowing a trumpet, and stirring
rebellion, by such a damned outcry, or proclamation, We have no part in David,
neither have we inheritance in the son of Iesse; Every man to his tents, O
Israel. Which is the treason it self, the last member of my text, wherein I
will strive to recompense my former tediousness.

8. Those whom Belial once possesses with Judas, and winnes to be traitors,
shall have counsel crafty enough suggested by the same master, which in all
likely hood might bring about their devilish, designs. But he that dwells
in heaven, has such a book in their nostrels, that he twines them in and out,
as he sees most convenient; So that commonly their policies stead them no
farther then Achitophels, by an orderly disposing of all things, to hasten
their shameful execution, Sheba here is not to seek for the managing of
matters to his best advantage. Wherefore first he blows a Trumpet, the
unexpected sound of which, in so clamorous a tumult, and bickerings (as was
formerly showed to be between Israel and Judah) was the only means to
procure him audience. That being once gotten, he presently falls to a forcible
persuasion, sorting it to the exasperated passions of the men of Israel, which
notwithstanding he groundeth upon the harsh speeches used by the men of Judah.
This cannot be better understood, then by reflecting our eyes to the 3 last
verses of the former Chapter. David being freed from Absalom, is to be brought
back by his subjects with honor unto Jerusalem. Cap. 19.11.12.
Now he had secretly sent to the men of Judah, that they should be the
foremost. The other Tribes, in an afficious emulation, take this unkindly, and
thereupon expostulate with the King, Why have our brethren, the men of Judah,
stolen thee away? Do they not think that we are as faithful subjects, and
affect our Sovereign, as well as they? They of Judah reply, The King is near
kin to us, and in that respect we challenge a preeminence. Yea, (say the
Israelites) have not we ten parts in him, and in that respect more right? Why
then did ye despise us, that our advice should not be first had in bringing
back our King. How the men of Judah put this off, the text mentions not,
only it follows (...) harder or fiercer were the words of the men of Judah,
then the words of the men of Israel: It might be, they used some opprobrious
speeches, which the Israelites being great in number, thought very disgraceful
to endure: Where the King holding it not safe to interpose, he being so lately
shaken, and the humors not thoroughly settled: In comes this Sheba upon the
nicke, and sets all again in a combustion. Do the men of Judah (says he)
think so basely of us, as though we being ten to one, must give way to them?
Cannot we make good our own parts, without dependence on them for King, or
Counsel? seeing they so arrogantly stand upon, that David is their Kinsman,
and therefore wholly theirs by inheritance, so that our interest in him is a
far off, or none at all: let us leave him to them, and let them know, that
whole Israel has as fit men to reign, as that one Tribe of Judah: for what
part may we challenge in him, who is wholly for his own kindred? and what was
Ishai his father? was he not an obscure man yonder at Bethlem Ephrata, and this
David his shepherd? shall we then, better descended, continue to be his
vassals, as though the father had been King, and the man succeeded as his
lawful heir apparent? Judah tells us we have no part in David, and we know
that the kingdom of Israel was not Ishai's sons inheritance. Every man
therefore to his tents, O Israel, and stand upon his own guard: we shall
quickly provide for our selves, without being beholding to them. And to this
sense most Interpreters do paraphrase Sheba's seditious speeches: from the
drift of which, and effect, we may deduce this observation, That there is not
a more dangerous inducement to damnable Rebellion, and Treason, then to be
possessed with a conceit, that a lawful King, and his liege people, may be in
any case parted; or, that kingdoms are from the peoples choice, and not from
Gods appointment made hereditary.

9. This lesson of Sheba here first proposed to malcontents, those men of
Israel afterward in Reboboams time had gotten by heart, and therefore when
their young King answered them not according to their mind, in the matter of
taxes and subsidies, which wicked Jeroboam had set on foot, every one had
ready at his tongues end, 1. Kings, 12.16. What portion have we in David, or
what inheritance have we in the son of Iesse? To thy tents, O Israel: Now see
to thine own house, David. But had these men but remembered so well, that which
their wise King Solomon, long after Shebae's destruction, had left them for a
better direction, Proverbs 8. (where he brings in the wisdom of the most
High thus proclayming, By me Kings reign, and Princes decree justice: By me
Princes rule and Nobles, even all the Judges of the earth:) they might have
found, that the bond of obedience to Princes, is not so loosely knit by God,
that subjects may dissolve it at their pleasure, or upon any discontent, or
injury, whatsoever cry, We have no part, and renounce our inheritance. For as a
head never so rheumatike, and the fountain of all diseases in the rest of the
members, may not be therefore parted from them, for fear of a worse
inconvenience, neither can the members upbraid it, (as the Apostle and Nature
teach us) with these contemptuous terms, I have no need of thee: So the head
in the body politic, must keep his place howsoever, till that highest
authority take it off, who first set it on, to change it for a better. The
more pernicious in reformed States and Commonwealths, is the wicked band of
Antichrist, who take upon them to sever those, whom God has so linked
together, where finding it too hard a task against conscience and nature, to
persuade the thesis, That subjects may rebel against those, whom God has
advanced to be their lawful Kings; they come in with the hypothesis, to
inueigle the weak or malcontents, that Kings excommunicated by the Pope, are
divested of that dignity, as Sampson was of his strength by the shauing of
Dalilah; and therefore they may be dealt with, as other men, who are public
enemies to Christianity. Thus they cease not most diuelishly to spread in
their slanderous pamphlets, virulent libels, and secret whisperings, which
must go by tradition from hand to hand, to mislead simple women, and work on
desperate humors, who discontented that all things run not as they would
have it, assure themselves of redress in any change whatsoever. Now what is
this in effect, but to preach on Sheba's text, We have no part in David, nor
any inheritance in the son of Iesse? What other conclusion do they drive at
in all their Volumes, against the Kings Supremacy and subjects Oath of
allegiance, but to make their followers conceit, that they have no part in King
James, nor any inheritance in the lawful Successor of blessed Queen
Elizabeth? This doctrine (it should seem) the Earl Gowrie had learned, and
brought from Italy, who in many things may be paraleld with Sheba, to make up
the conclusion.

10. As Sheba was vnus ex proceribus, according to Strigelius, Nobilis and
celebris, says O siander, Nobly and Honorably descended; so was Gowrie. Sheba
lived in a place of note, and credit, amongst those of his Tribe and Country:
Gowrie herein was not much inferior. There never appeared other then good
correspondence before, between Sheba, and King David: the like was between
Gowrie and our Sovereign. For after the just execution of his father, in his
Majesty's minority, he restored (this traitor his son) his lands and
dignities, advanced two or three of his Sisters to wait on the Queen in her
privy chamber, used that wretch Alexander graciously, who so wretchedly was
the chief actour in the plot. But favors rather exasperate, then win, where
a poisoned heartturnes all to the worst. For as Sheba (as it should seem) ever
bore a secret grudge to David, for a wrong conceived, offered to the house of
Saul: So did Gowrie to the King, for the death of his Father. Thus both played
the hypocrites, both watched but the opportunity, both violently took it being
offered, both attempted, and both by the providence of the King of Kings were
wonderfully defeated. Sheba is set down in my text to be (...) a dissolute son
of Belial, molded in gall and venom, without conscience to undertake any
villainy. And what can we make better of Gowrie, a mere Atheist, without any
sense or touch of Religion, as Sprott afterward confessed at his arraignment
1608? his accomplices, Rashtiltaig, and Bower, of the same stamp: his recourse to
Necromancers, and enchanted characters found at his death about him, testify
no less. So that Sheba here comes behind him (for ought we find) as being not
linked to Belial in so firm a band. Last of all, as Sheba sped afterward, so
Gowrie had his due, at the first onset, King James being delivered, (as David,)
to magnify the Deliverer in the imitation of David, which he there did
presently upon his knees, in the midst of his own servants, they all kneeling
round about him in the place of his delivery, and has celebrated this day
ever since, for a thankful remembrance. And now (Beloved) what remains for
us, but to unite our hearts and prayers in a thankful congratulation? David
will well help us to express our selves, as in most of his Psalms of
thanksgiving, so most compendiously, for this purpose, in the 21. The King
shall rejoice in thy strength, O Lord, exceeding glad shall he be of thy
salvation. His honor is great in thy salvation, glory and great worship shall
thou lay upon him. And why? Because the King puts his trust in thee, O Lord,
and in thy mercy (we trust) he shall never miscarry. Let all his enemies (O
Lord) feel thy hand, let thy right hand find out them that hate him. Make
them like a fiery oven in the time of thy wrath: Thou (Lord) shall destroy
them in thy displeasure, and the fire shall consume them. Their fruit shall
thou root out from the earth, and their seed from among the children of men.
For they intended mischief against thine Anointed, and imagined such adevice
as they were notable to perform. Therefore have thou put them to flight, and
the stringes of thy bow were made ready against the faces of them. Be thou
therefore exalted (O Lord) in thy own strength that we may ever sing, and
praise thy power. To whom, three persons in one Deity, Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, be ascribed all Honor, and Glory, Might, Majesty, and Dominion both
now and evermore.

Amen.
Higgaion and Selah: FOR THE DISCOVERY OF THE POWDER PLOT.

A SERMON PREACHED AT St MARY'S IN OXFORD, the fifth of November.

By JOHN PRIDEAVX, Doctor of Divinity, Regius Professor, and Rector of Exeter
College.

OXFORD, Imprinted by LEONARD LICHFIELD Anno Salutis, 1636.

HIGGAION ET SELAH.
PSALM. 9.16. The Lord is known by the judgment which he executes: the
wicked is snared in the work of his own hands. Higgaion. Selah.


THere is no man that compares the words of my text with the occasion of this
days assembly, but-will straightway acknowledge the fitness of this
acknowledgement, as at all times never to be forgotten, so especially upon
this day and occasion, with an Higgaion and Selah to be remembered, The Lord is
known by the judgment which he executes, the wicked is snared in the work
of his own hands. This perchance will receive the more life, when it snall
appear, that David in this whole Psalm may well be made our spokes-man, as
composing it for a celebration of some extraordinary deliverance, and leaving
it to the Church as a pattern for imitation. And so much may be collected
from the title it self, that in the original is (...), which our last
Translators (as you may see) frame to the chief Musician, and his instrument;
Iunius, to the tune of treble, or countertenor; an excellent applying of such
faculties, which now most commonly are abused. But others either by disioynting
the words, or straining the points, or taking vantage of inversion of letters,
and diverse significations of the same root, (as n="a" In hunc locum.
Moller and Lorinus at large inform) bring it about either to be a
thanksgiving for Pharaoh's destruction, and the first borne of Egypt, or
Goliah's overthrow, or Nabals fall, or Hanun's discomfiture, for abusing David's
messengers; or according to Saint Hierome, and Aquinas, expressed in the vulgar
edition out of the Septuagint, pro occult is filij, for the discovering and
punishing of the secret plots of Absalom his son. For those that expound it
of Christ's Victory over death and Satan, mistake an application, for an
interpretation, (as Burgensis well taxes Lyra:) And others observe not the
difference in the genders, that would make (...) to signify the Flourishing
estate of the Church, luventute^ candidam, and so gratify their mother by a
broken title. Out of all which differences, this consequent may be picked for
our purpose, that for any notable deliverance, either from tyrants, as Pharao,
or terrible invaders, as Goliath, or Churlish neighbors, as Nabal, or open
truce breakers, as Hanun, or bosom traitors, as Absalom, the Church is to
express her joy and thankfulness in an extraordinary manner, as receiving
herein an earnest, that the time at length shall come, wherein the overthrow of
Antichrist by the Lamb, shall be celebrated in heaven, with everlasting
Halleluiah's. This the Papists themselves cannot complain to be wrested: for
whereas we translate (according to the Original) the last verse of this
Psalm; Put them in fear, O Lord, that the heathen, or nations, may know
themselves to be but men; they say according to the vulgar, out of the seventy
Interpreters, which n="a" In hunc locum.
Bellarmine takes upon him to make good; Appoint (Lord) a Lawgiver over them.
And this Lawgiver, their Doway Divines with the Interlineary gloss,
acknowledged to be Antichrist; the heathen, to be men of heathenish conditions:
Gentiliter vinentes (says the Gloss.) So that to make, by way of application
the Pope, this tyrannical lawgiver, the Gentiles, his seduced assasinates,
this delivera^ce, the powder plot, or a treason of the like nature, is but to
take the hint, that they themselves have given, and the insisting on a
notorious instance, included in the general. It would set an edge on our
devotions, and excellently direct our meditations, but to take a view in the
passage, of our Prophets carriage in the whole frame of this thanksgiving, how
heartily he begins to vow praises, and rejoicing, and singing, and every kind
of setting forth Gods marvelous works in this behalf; how syncerely he
acknowledges his justice, his uprightness, his care of his chosen, his
curbing of the adversary. For when he ascends his throne, to make inquisition
for blood, out-goe the names of the wicked, their destructions have a period,
down they sink into the pit, turned they are into hell, their own Lawgiver
shall play the tyrant, to set them onward with a mischief, so that woeful
experience at length shall teach them, to know themselves to be but men,
whereas the innocent on the otheiside, shall be wonderfully delivered, to show
forth all Gods praises in the gates of the daughter of Sion, and rejoice in his
salvation. Of all which my text is (as it were) the moral, comprizing the pith
of all: The Lord is known by the judgment which he executes; the wicked is
snared in the works of his own hands; Higgaion Selah.

2 The words include in them without forcing, three parties, The Lord, the
wicked, and the godly, with their several attributes, Execution, punishment,
and triumphing. Which connected together as they ly, yield unto us three
points, especially at this time to be stood upon:

The 1. Judgment of God. 2. Success of traitors. 3. Churches applause, both
for the one and the other.


The Judgment, known, the success, fit, the applause, tuned to the highest
key. So that in the first, we have Gods Justice, in the second, his Wisdom; in
the third, his Mercy, presented to our considerations in a most heavenly order.
All which, if it please to have in one word, and conceit as an arraignement,
the awe of the Judge, will command attention, who first takes his place to
execute his authority, in these words:

3 The Lord is known by the judgment which he executeth] The wonderful
events which the ignorant attribute to fortune, the superstitious, to Saints
and Idols, the politicians, to their plots, some, to their own worth, most,
to the means, and the extraordinary concurrence of second causes, the Penmen
of the Holy Ghost ascribe ever unto the Lord: they held it the best
Analytiques, to resolve all such effects into their first principle. In
describing of the like matters among other writers, you shall find Alexander
did this, or Caesar thus behaved himself, Nestor gave this counsel, and such
effects ensued upon it: But when Moses and Ioshuah handle their weapons more
valiantly, then any of these: Abiah and his son Asa, overthrew greater
forces, then ever any of these incountred: Chusai, for counsel, and Solomon
for wisdom, had never their paralels among any of the nations; The text most
commonly thus expresses it: Deuteronomy. 1.2. and 3. Josh. 10.42.
The Lord delivered Sihon and Og into the hands of Israel. Israel overcame,
because the Lord fought for Israel. The Lord smote that huge army of a thousand
thousand Ethiopians, 2. Chro. 14.12.
before Israel and Judah. And howsoever Chushai played his part, yet the Lord is
said to defeat the counsel of Achitophel: 2. Sam. 17.14. 1. Kings 3.28.
and Salomons famous decision between the two harlots, is said to be the
wisdom of God. Such prevention is used against self-conceit, and vainglory,
and simplicity, in referring honor to it is proper object, that we should not
assume to our selves, that which belongs to him that made us, but in all such
blessings, and favors, endeavor with all alacrity, that the Lord may ever be
known to be the first mouer, and principal effector. Now as the Lord is
known to be omnipotent by his works of creation, merciful in our redemption,
infinite, wise, and provident, in composing and disposing all to his own
glory, and the good of his Church; So his Justice can be never more
conspicuous, then by the judgment that he executeth] Men may be often wronged
by their careless security, or prevented by celerity, or mistaken in the
carriage, or overtaken through ignorance, or seduced, by flattery, or deluded,
by equivocation, or perchance abused, by credulity, or outfaced, by bravery, or
terrifyed, for fear of a worse inconvenience: But when the Lord arises to
execute Judgment, and when his glory shall appear, the fierceness of man
shall turn to his praise, and the fierceness of them shall he refrain. The
drowning of the old world, the burning of Sodom, the rooting out of so many
nations, to plant his chosen Israel, sufficiently makes in the execution, that
many things which escape, in this life, man's control, find at length a
Judge, that will be known in their punishment. If Pharao will not know the
Lord, at the mouth of his servants, he shall feel him at length to his cost,
in the bottom of the water: and if Herod so forget his Commission, as to rob
God of his honor, such a judgment may presently seize on him, as to make his
chiefest flatterers to loath him. All the world almost is a map of instances
in this kind: it were but following of a common place to repeat them, and to
cloy your Christian attention with that you know.

4. Bonaventure distinguishes of two sorts of judgments, the first, in this
World, 1. Sent. d. 18.
which he calls iudicium Poenitentiae, inflicted especially to draw all to
repentance: the second, in that to come, from which there is no declining. My
Text deals only with the first, not as it properly signifies the distinct
apprehension of an object, or a true conclusion, from certain premises; or a
definitive sentence according to law, or the authority of the Judge to
determine, or power, to execute, or the cause, that comes in question, or a
custom, that has gathered strength by long acceptance, or the Text of
Scripture, that gives direction how to judge: upon which diverse
significations, Scotus and Illiricus plentifully enlarge themselves; but by a
metony mie for the punishment, that is inflicted upon just grounds. For herein
the execution manifests the judgment, and by this judgment especially, the
Lord is known. The causes of it, are sin; the subject, notorious offenders;
the effects, generally, amazement, specially, comfort to the innocent, and
horror to their adversaries. This the Lord takes upon himself to execute, as
often as his Ministers, either for want of power, or courage, or information,
are driven to a stand: and for these purposes especially, that the Church might
have a breathing in her continual combats, and her persecutours, a taste of
the anger that is to come. According to the sentence of this Judgment, Corah's
conspiracy was plagued by the earths opening, Absalom hanged by the hair,
Senacherib had a hook put into his nostrills; Ieroboam's, Ahab's, and Baasha's
families, were grubbed up by the roots, for their treasons, and idolatry. And
as old Babylon's stately Palaces were turned to disconsolate habitations, for
Zijm and O him: so new Babylon's redoubled abominations must look for no
better issue: For though she have a long time raised mists, to dazzle the eyes
of her followers, the Scriptures have been locked up in an unknown tongue,
Idols, and heathenish ceremonies, obtruded in stead of preaching, implicit
faith, for plain catechizing, Princes, terrified with the bug-beares of
briefes, and bulls and excommunications, traitors, honored with martyrdom,
all villainies justified, under the mask of zeal, and ignorance commended, as
the mother of devotion: Yet the Lord will ever be known by the judgments
which he executes, when she comes in remembrance before God, to give her
the cup of the wine of the fierceness of his wrath: Rev. 18.
( as a mil-stone thrown into the bottom of the sea, so shall she sink
down into the pit of destruction. Jn an hour shall her Judgment come upon
her, the Kings of the earth, and Merchants, shall take notice of it, with
wayling and alas, and the Saints with a double Halleluiah, whiles her smoke
arises up for ever and ever.

5. This doctrine of Gods judgments, so plainly delivered in his Word, so
effectually urged, and so often repeated, upon any notable occasion, as it
should strike a terror into the wicked, not to kick against pricks; so
should it animate the godly in all extremities, with the assured dependence
upon a happy issue. But alas (Beloved) these things stick with us most
commonly, no longer then they are in acting. Three impediments may be observed
above the rest, which frustrate in diverse the good use of this doctrine,
Contempt, neglect, and mis-interpretation by soothing our selves in our own
courses, and turning the stream of Gods judgments another way. Of the first
humor are those, which our Prophet describes in the next Psalm. The ungodly is
so proud, that he cares not for God, nether is God in all his thoughts; His
ways are always grievous, thy judgments are far above out of his sight, and
therefore he puffes at all his enemies. If you urge unto him the like
judgments, executed upon others for the same offenses, his contemptuous answer
is ready, Thus I shall never be cast down, there shall no harm happen unto
me. This is the resolution of Antichrist and his followers, as most
Interpreters with Saint Jerome, and Saint Augustine note upon that place.
Judgments never so known, Executions never so evident, shall no way deter
them from their damnable projects. Epist. 55.
But this is the greatest judgment of all, (as Saint Cyprian well observes)
Non intelligere delicta, ne sequatur poenitentia; not to take notice of our
faults, lest repentance should thereupon follow. Secondly, the neglect of Gods
judgments appears in those men, who are truly affected at the first, but,
as a pang, it is quickly past over, and as news, it soon grows out of date.
Pharaoh was no sooner quitted from one plague, but presently his heart was
hardened, to draw on another: and the Israelites that were so much affrighted
at the horrible end of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, even the morrow after fell
upon Moses and Aaron, and vpbrayded them for killing of the people of God; such
small impression is left on us by the stripes of others. Birds and other brute
beasts, most commonly avoid that place where they are sensible by a token that
their fellows have miscarried: but we look on others judgments, as furnished
with a supersedeas from all arrests, and argue from their punishments how well
they have deserved, without the least reflexe upon our own mutable condition.
A third sort play with such examples, and shift off the application from
themselves. These will rather ascribe Noah's flood, to an extraordinary aspect
or concourse of watery planets, or the drowning of Pharaoh's host, to the
inconsiderate venturing upon an high tide, rather then to Gods wrath for sin,
who sends such judgments on some, to make all the rest afraid. So our
Italianated fugitives pass over the powder plot, by terming it only the rash
attempt of a few poor unfortunate Gentlemen; by means whereof, their
proselytes are hardened to the like courses; whereas such terrible judgments
should teach them to know the Lord: and executions make them sensible, how
desperately they are seduced. De Ciuit. Dei. lib. 2. cap. 33.
But perdidistis vtilitatem calamitatis (as Saint Augustine justly vpbraydeth
the Pagans) miseri facti estis, and pessimi permansistis. Wherefore should ye
be smitten any more? The whole head is sick, and the heart is faint. Those
that contend so much for a Judge of the controversies between them and us;
why observe they not out of Gods judgments, which side the Lord favors?
Have any of their damnable projects by Summeruile, Parry, Babington, and his
accomplices, Lopez and his abettours, Campian, Parsons, and their adherents,
taken any expected success? Have the Popes Bulls and curses wrought any
strange effects? Have Watson and the Powderminers attained to the end they
sought after? If God then have ever defeated such malicious designs, and
showed by his judgments upon the actours, how much he detesteth such
practices; they might well gather, that their courses are not warrantable, or
that (as some of them in indignation have blundred out) the Judge of all the
World is become a Lutherane. For what virtue have they ever found in their
Agnus Dei's, Medals or superstitious relics, to make their plots
successful? or truth, in the promises of their ghostly Fathers? May they not
easily perceive themselves to be made the miserable instruments of Antichrists
ambition, who sels the souls of men, Apoc. 9.
to buy himself reputation? If we are such damnable heretics, as they would
make us, how comes it about that the Lord so takes our part? Is it possible,
their doctrine, that is so Catholic, or those Catholics, that are guided by
an infallible head, should venture so far, and attain so little? profess
such infallibility, and be so often deceived? If men were not drunk with the
wine of Sodom, or nursed with the blood of Dragons, or steeped in the gall of
bitterness, such palpable tokens of Gods judgments so directly against their
proceedings, so mainly in favor of their opposites, might breed at least a
suspicion that something is amiss, and return them to a serious examination,
to know where the fault rests. But Leopards change not their spots, Apoc. 9.
deaf Adders hear no charming. Trumpets may be sounded out against them, and
vialls powered out upon them, yet their Idols shall not be left, nor their
sorceries, thefts, or fornications abandoned. Being scorched with the
Sunshine of Gods Word, in stead of repentance, they turn to blaspheme: and
when Egyptian darkness has notoriously environed the seat of the Beast, they
will rather gnaw their tongues for pain, then acknowledge Gods arrest that
seizes upon their Abaddon. But behold, all ye that kindle a fire (says the
Lord by the Prophet Isaiah) and that compass your selves about with sparks;
Chap. 50.
walk in the light of your fire, and in the sparks that ye have kindled: but
this shall ye have of my hand, ye shall lie down in sorrow: the snare that
ye laid for others, shall intrappe your selves, which is the success of the
wicked, and comes in the next place to be considered.

6. The wicked is snared in the works of his own hands.] As before, the
Justice of God appeared in the execution of his judgments; so his Wisdom
here may be observed in the manner of punishment. The wicked] not simply
(...), as the Seventy: or generally peccator, a sinner or an offender, as the
vulgar: but (...), impius, improbus, irrequietus, vagus, as the root in the
Original will bear; vngoldly, lewd, turbulent, wavering, irreligious toward
God, debosht in manners, turbulent in the Commonwealth, unsettled in all
things. Such a one is snared] as a fellow that digges a pit, and falls himself
into the midst of it (for so the similitude runs in the former verses, and
Interpreters aright apply it.) Or as one that provideth powder to do a
mischief, and himself is blown up with it, so they are plagued, so they are
paid home in their own inventions. And this is a plot, a work, a matter of
pain, and charge, and a vexation unto them, not begun or continued by others,
but contrived by their own hands. A wonderful judgment of God to inform his
Chosen, that his Wisdom disposes all for their good; and a terror to the
wicked, to daunt them in the like projects, and make others take heed by their
example. This the heathen themselves have observed, (...). Chiliads of their
proverbs testify so much; (...), Thou have played the Politician, to undo thy
self. (...), buzzing as a Fly about the candle, to sindge his own wings. So
in the Scripture Adonibezek confesses, Threescore and ten Kings having their
thumbes and their great toes cut off, gathered their meat under my table; as I
have done, so God has requited me, Judges 1.7. Pharaoh took an order for the
making away of the Hebrew Infants; and was requited at length with the death of
his firstborn. Hamans gallows set up to hang Mordecai, served for his own
strangling. Herob slew the infants of Bethlem, and was punished in the end, by
murdering of his own children. When Hildebrand had suborned a villain to
provide a great stone, to let fall on the head of the Emperor Frederick, as
he came to do his devotions, according to his accustomed manner in the Church
of Saint Mary of mount Aventine, the fellow making more haste, then good speed,
tumbled down with the stone himself, and there was broken in pieces by the
same engine, wherewith he treacherously would have crushed his Sovereign. The
story is distinctly set down by Benno the Cardinal in the life of Gregory the
seventh. And who reads not, how Alexander the sixth was poisoned with the same
liquor he had provided to make away some of his Cardinals? This measure had
Agag by Samuel; As thy sword has made women childlesse, 1. Sam. 15.13.
so shall thy mother be childlesse among women. It was wished to old Babylon,
Happy shall he be that rewards thee as thou have served us: Psalm. 137.
And must befall the new; Rev. 18.
Reward her as she has rewarded you, and double unto her double, according to
her works: in the cup that she has filled, fill to her double. How much she
has glorified her self and lived delitiously, so much torment and sorrow give
her. This cannot be expressed in plainer terms, then our Prophet has it in
the 37. Psalm: The vngoldly has drawn out the sword, and bent their bow, to
cast down the poor and needy, and to slay such as be of a right conversation.
But their sword shall go through their own heart, and their bow shall be
broken. Which before, more directly to our purpose, we may find, set down in
the seventh Psalm, The ungodly has graven and dug a pit, and is fallen unto
the destruction that he made for other. For his travel shall come upon his
own head, and his wickedness shall fall upon his own pate. And did not this
shower of snares, to the amazement of themselves, and their adherents, by the
just judgment of God strangely accompany the work of our powder-plotters? Who
knows not Catesby, Rookwood, and Grant, (the principal actors in that hellish
design) as they were drying powder at Holbeck in Worcestershire, were
disfigured, and maimed, by the firing of the same powder? and not long after,
how the same Cates by, and Fercy desperately were slain at one shot,
proceeding from power? So justly they were snared in the work of their own
hands, that themselves upon their knees were forced to confess it. This is
registered by the hand of a King, who had best means to know it, and greatest
reason to relate it, to the terror and shame of all such divellish
assasinates. Now let their Apologists return from beyond the seas, grin like a
dog, and put on the impudency to smother it.

7 They will tell us that their Catholic Doctrine in no sort countenanceth
it; and the faults of some malcontents, are ever to be distinguished from the
equity of the cause. But this is but a gilded pill, compounded only for those
of their own complexion, a Tophisme, a shift, an after-reckoning; which is as
soon discovered, as their books are opened. We are not such dastards (says
Gretser in his vespertilio haeretico-politicus) that we fear openly to
affirm, Page 159.
that the Pope of Rome may (if necessity so require) free his Catholic
subjects from their oath of fidelity; if their Sovereign handle the^
tyrannically: and father he ads, If it be done discreetly and warily, it is a
meritorious work. But say now, that subjects should proceed to execution, upon
such way made by the Pope, should they not (think you) therefore by justly
punished as traitors? Aphoris. verbo Clericus.
No, says Emanuel Sa, especially if they be of the Clergy: for the rebellion
of a Clarke against a King, is not treason, is as much as he is not subject
unto him. Then perchance the Laity is left only to the stake, as having no such
warrant to exempt them from King-killing. Simancha will help that too: As
soon as a Christian King becomes heretical, Instit. tit. 23.5.11.
forthwith his subjects are freed from his government over them. This is short
work indeed. But may he not then be left to Gods Judgment, until it shall
please him in mercy to free the people from that yoke? No sure (says
Bellarmine) especially if he go about to infect his subjects: De Summo point.
lib. 5. cap. 7.
Then they are bound (ads Sanders) as soon as may be, to set another in his
place. They ought to expel him (says Philopater) as the enemy of Christ, De
visib. monar. l. 2. cap. 4. Page 194.
from having authority over Christian people. and this he affirms to be the
undoubted doctrine among the learned, and agreeable to Apostolic all truth.
Here is Apostolical truth with a witness. But suppose the Popes Apostolical
transcendency either in pity, or policy, hold such a King fit for a time to
be spared; I trust the, good Catholic Subjects may not venture to stir. Yes
but they may (says Bannes) Etiamsi Pontifex toleraret Regem Apostatam; tame^
Respub. In secundam secun de Christiana possit q. 12. art. 2.
illu^ pellera e regno, quonia^ Pontifex sine ratione permittit illum
impunitum. Thought the Pope himself should be never so indulgent; the people,
if they list, may un king him, because the Pope unreasonably is slack in his
office. Well then no remedy is left among these me^ for Protestant Kings, but
down they must. If their holy Father make scruple to correct the^, their own
vassals may take them in hand. Perchance this will work with the^ to be
reconciled to the Church, and the^ it is likely they shall be restored to their
estates. Simancha will tell them also in that case, whereunto they shall trust:
Neo ius hoc recuperabu^t (says he) qua^vis postea reconcilie^tur Ecclesiae.
Once gone, and for ever discarded, nay their children, though innocent or
Chatholikes, must be punished for their fathers errors, and be excluded for
ever from succession, to give way to whom the Pope pleases.

I have gleaned these few scatterings by the way, (Beloved) to make it appear
to those that would willingly be better persuaded of their doctrine, that the
doctrine it self directly warranteth treason, let the traitors be what they
will, and that none can be an absolute Papist, but (if he thoroughly
understand himself, and liver under a Christian Frince that has renounced the
Popes authority) must needs, being put unto it, be an absolute traitor. The
Popes infallibility he assumeth to make heretics, and punish them by virtue
of his Supremacy: The exemption of his Clergy, to act their own designs; the
interesting the people, in the right of making of a King (whom they define,
with Apostate William Reinolds, De iusta authorit. pa. 8.1.
in scorn, to be but a creature of man's creation) how can it stand with loyal
obedience, that God and nature have prescribed? And now (Beloved) if these were
speculations only in their schools, or some few men's overlashing, in an
emulation to uphold their own hierarchy, or some doubtful deductions, only
taken by our men at the worst, their doctrine were the more excusable, and
their followers more to be borne with. But when practice shall follow upon such
divelish positions, and apologies be published to the world to maintain that
practice: then cursed be they as Meroz, cursed bitterly be all such subjects,
and inhabitants that take not the Lords part against such miscreants. for what
ears would not tingle to hear, that Pope Sixtus, the fifth, in the consistory
of his Cardinals, should parallel the murder of Henry the third, King of
France, by that desperate villain James Clement, with the fact of Judith, and
conclude it to be a little less mystery then Christ's Incarnations? for
defending of the same fact, though John Guiniard a Jesuit were executed: yet
Richeome in his apology excuses him; Clarus Bonarscius in his Theatrum
honoris, extolls him to the skies. Such tokens these Ignatians leave to
Princes, of their submission and fidelity. What should I speak of Francis
Verona Constantinus, who wrote an apology for John Castile, to justify his
stabbing, and hurting of Henry the Great? Wherein he concludes, that
notwithstanding the decree of the Council of Constance, it is lawful for any
private man to murder Kings and Princes, condemned of heresy and tyranny. And
to come home nearer unto our selves: Anno. 1587.
Stanlies treacherous giving up of Deventrey, had it not Cardinal Allen to
defend it? Had not Oneile before, and Tyrone afterward the determination of
the University of Salamancha to animate them onward in their rebellion? What
marvel is it then that Garnet, and the powder treason, had Eudaemon-Iohannes
his apology? Claudius Aquaviva's approbation, Bellarmines excuse, Hamond the
Jesuits absolution, as Barrier in France had the Jesuit Varrad's, to confirm
him in his purpose, to prevent Ravilliac? No better fruit is to be looked for
upon such wild-figtrees, who care not what they say or do, and turn off all
such prodigies with a slight or scorn. Because the Scythians slew their King
Scyle, for favoring the strange rites of Bacchus, Simancha infers that Iure
and Merito, Inst. Cath. 23. ser. 12.13.
such Princes are to be made away, as receive any kind of doctrine differing
from the papisticall. De reg. instit. lib. 1. cap. 7.
Mariana accounts it a moderate course, to poison a chair or garment for the
killing of a King: but mark his weighty reason for it; Because (says he) I
find the Kings of the Moors have often used it. Whereupon Hoffeus the Jesuit
was wont to say (as Hasenmuller, Histor. Jesuit. cap. 6.
who lived amongst them reports it) that they dragged any Lutheran they could
find, straightway to the fire, vt sic anima eius in curru igneo ad inferos
feratur, that so his soul in a fiery chariot might be hurried to hell. Worse
then all this: they hold it a case of Conscience, not to spare their own side,
to do ours a mischief. Garnet the Provincial being questioned by Catesby,
whether with a safe conscience, they might proceed in their powder-proiect,
seeing in the blowing up of the King, and Protestants, diverse also of the
Papists must necessarily go the same way? replies very profoundly, that no
doubt it might well be done, seeing it should redounde to the good of the
Catholic Church. And this Eudaemon defends with great earnestness. Which
puts me in mind of a story related by Platina in the life of John the four
and twentieth, when one Facinus Canis was hired by the Gibellines, to suppress
their contrary factions of the Gwelphes, in the city of Papia, and the covenant
was, that he should have the goods of the Gwelphes for his pay. He obtaining
the victory, falls a rifling of the Gibellines also, without distinction: and
being accused therefore, as not standing to his promise, replies, That
themselves indeed were Gibellines, and should be safe; but their goods were
Gwelphes, and must go to wrack, as well as those of their adversaries. So
assure your selves (Beloved) if Italians and Spaniards should once come, (which
God of his infinite mercy forbid,) to compose the differences between us, and
our homebred Recusants, howsoever our blood should pay for it, yet their
estates might perhaps be confiscated, as infected by our heresy. Garnets
decision would be of force; such matters must not be stood upon, when the good
of the Catholic cause is thereby advanced. O that religion should ever be
made a cloak for such atheistical practices! What hard measure had been
offered by our King and State, that these traitors should be so exasperated?
Were they hurried to the fire, as in Queen Mary's days? or was there a new
Inquisition erected, in imitation of that of Spain, with tortures and racks to
rectify them? Nay, were they not tolerated at a small rate, or none at all, to
enjoy their possessions and liberty, graced with titles of Honor, admitted to
be about His Majesty, and have the protection of his laws, without any
violence offered? From whence then came the powder plot, but from the devil
himself, and the malice of the whore of Babylon, which delights to carouse
in blood? But God has snared the wicked in the work of his own hands, the
snare is broken, and we are delivered. Isaih. 47.
Come down therefore and sit in the dust, sit on the ground, sit silent, O
daughter of Babylon. Is not thy nakedness uncovered, thy shame seen? art thou
not taken in the crafty wiliness that thou have imagined? O that our poor
besotted recusants would but be brought to an ingenuous examination of these
things, whether it were likely they would lead them to heaven, who devise and
allow of such powder-stratagens from Hell? Whether true Religion has been
ever advanced by such bloody and treacherous snares and engines? Then would
they surely afford their Higgaion and Selah to celebrate with us this day, this
thrice-happy Deliverance. Which is the duty left for us in the last place to
conclude with.

9 Higgaion, Selah] Few words, and obscure; yet importing more matter, then
could be well expressed in any other tongue. And therefore, as they are omitted
in the Greek and vulgar Latin, as also in our Church-booke translation, by
reason of their obscurenesse, and remoteness from popular capacities,
especially in a continuate reading without interpretation: so are they
faithfully restored by our last Translatours, as integrall parts of the text,
which are not to be left out, though the greatest skill of the Learned may be
staggered at their meaning. Needelesse therefore was the exception of some
Critikes, to our Church-Booke, for not reading commonly those words to the
people, seeing they have them otherwise in a more exact translation, and
reserved to the exposition of a learned Preacher. Some there be that slight
both the words as interiections, expressing only a sudden passion, under an
imperfect sense. But others diue deeper, whom we have good reason to follow.
Higgaion is but twice, besides in this place, found in the Scripture, and that
only in the Psalms; once in the 19. Psalm: Let the words of my mouth and
(...) the meditation of my heart be always acceptable in thy sight, Verse. vlt.
O Lord, my strength and my redeemer. And again in the 92. It is a good thing
to give thanks unto the Lord, Verse. 3.
and to sing praises to thy name, O thou most high. To show forth thy loving
kindness in the morning, and thy faithfulness every night; (...) Upon an
instrument of ten strings, and upon the Psalterie, upon the Harp with a
solemn sound. The word Selah we have 92. times, but Higgaion and Selah
together, only in this place; which argues more then an ordinary rejoicing,
proportioned to the Prophets deliverance, which (out of doubt) was
extraordinary. All that I read, derive the word Higgaion from the root. (...),
which signifies to publish with the mouth, to meditate with the heart, to
rowze up all the faculties, with the most serious intention. Agreeable to this
is the word Selah, either from the root (...) (as R. Kimchi would have it) to
lift up, to raise, properly a way to make it more passable, or (...) to tread
down, to make plain. To the same purpose, Avenarius says, that in all the
Commentaries of the Rabbines, he could observe no certain signification of
this word: and Buxtorfius is of the mind, that it signifies nothing but only
a tone, peculiar to the Musicians of those days. It were endless to heap up
all varieties, which either word breeds among the learned. Iunius makes both
joined in this place, to signify, rem meditandam sum, a matter to be
especially thought on. Vatablus, with the Rabbines, and the Chalday Paraphrase
extend it to an everlasting Meditation. They that restrain it to song, or
instruments, differ not in a manner from them upon the point, for that which
the former observe in the subject, they afford us in the tune. All concur in
this, That the greatest deliverances, are to be celebrated with the greatest
thanksgiving: no cherfulness must be wanting, no laudable solemnity of
music: assembling, feasting, congratulation neglected, in performing such
religious duties. Private, and daily, or ordinary blessings may be privately,
and daily, or ordinarily recounted, at least with a single Selah, a stirring,
or chearing up of our particular devotions: but for such deliverances as that
of Eighty eight, and this public and extraordinary freeing of the Church, the
whole State, the preservation of the King, Queen, Prince, all the Nobles, all
the Judges, the Reverend Clergy, and Lawyers, the Worthies of all our Country
and Corporations, upon the point to be blown up, and dismembered by the Devils
engine; together with the utter desolation of so flourishing a Kingdom; here a
Higgaion and Selah must be joined together; Halleluiahs added unto it; Trumpets
and Shalmes must be winded aloud, Asaph's and Iedithun's must show their skill,
new songs, new cantica canticorum, whole new sets of ca^ticles, Mictham's, and
Mismor's, Neginoth's and Mahaloth's, Tehillah's and Tephillah's must be framed
by the Learned. Let every thing that has breath, praise the Lord.

10. And here if the matter it self rowze not your meditations, little help
can be expected from any vncomposed strains. You that have read of so many
heathenish tyrannies, and Turkish cruelties; you that have had occasion to
travel amongst any barbarous nations, or savage Cannibals; you that have heard
of the most prodigious treasons and massacnes, that ever were attempted, or
thought on under the Sun; have you ever read, or seen, or heard of any
monstrous immanity, comparable to this of the Powder Treason? Have ever Turks,
or Tartars, any Nero'es or Caligula's made use of powder, or such engines of
fury, to ruin whole States at one blow? Nay, to blow up their own darlings,
their own Patrons, their own innocent kindred that never offended them; but
only these spuria vitulamina, these bastard imps of the Whore of Babylon? If
the ruin of your living Countrymen had no way affected you, what had the
monuments of the dead deserved, that so many sepulchers of ancient Kings must
be laid on heaps, and utterly defaced? what fault was in the dumb stones, and
stately Edifices of your forefathers, that they should be left as spectacles of
your merciles cruelty? But now perchance they repent it, and are ashamed of
the Actors, and their courses. O no; that scarlet Harlot has not learned to
blush. They are pictured for Confessors and Martyrs, their zeal is
commended, the State condemned for punishing their Ringleaders unjustly, and
their Proselytes here amongst us (which I grieve to speak of) follow the same
doctrine that led them unto it, and are animated to the like attempts, when
their ability shall grow sufficient. For mark but these few words of Bannes a
Spanish Schooleman, (whom a man would take to be none of the worst, especially
in comparison of the Jesuits) Angli (says he) sunt excusandi, quia nonse
eximunt a Superiorum potestate, nec bellum contra eos gerunt, quia non
suppetunt ill is vires ad consequentia pericula: In 2.2. Aquin. q. 12. art. 2.
The English Catholics are to be excused for not taking arms against their
Superiors, because they want sufficient power to go through with the
business. Tolerate them then but to grow to a head, and to make their party
good, and their natural bond to Prince or Country, should little dismay them,
from venturing upon the like Powder-plots. Where be then our Higgaions and
Selah's (Beloved) for the stopping of this brood of vipers, that their force
should not be answerable to their malice? As the Israelites had their Pascha
and Purim, Holydaies set apart for the acknowledgement of their grand
deliverance from Pharaoh, and Hamans treason: why should not this days
solemnity be continued with everlasting thankfulness, for the miraculous
discovery of the Powder Plot? Let the people learn from our Pulpits, with what
kind of Saltpeter their Catholicisme is powdered; let our children understand
in our streets, the barbarousnesse of the plot, the profession of the actours,
the danger that would have fallen on their innocent heads; If the Lord in
Judgment to the enginers, and in mercy to us, had not prevented it, and snared
the wicked in the work of their own hands. At the mentioning of our Church or
King, at the beholding, or remembrance of our Parliaments, and chief places of
Justice, let the villainy of the Powder-proiect be never forgotten. In the
celebrating of the holy Eucharist, let our thankfulness for this deliverance
be an especial part of our Sacrifice: Finally, let us jointly conclude as our
Prophet here begins this Psalm: We will praise thee, O Lord, with our
whole heart, we will show forth all thy wondrous Works. We will be glad and
rejoice in thee, we will sing praise to thy Name, O thou most High. For our
enemies are turned back, they have fallen and perished at thy presence; for
thou have maintained our right and our cause, thou sit in the Throne,
judging right. Now to this God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy
Ghost, three Persons and one Lord, who is known by the Judgment which he
executes, and has snared the wicked in the work of his own hands, be
ascribed with Higgaion and Selah all praises, power, and glory from this time
forth for evermore.

AMEN.
HEZEKIAHS SICKNESS AND RECOVERY.

A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE THE KINGS MAJESTY at Woodstocke.

By JOHN PRIDEAVX, Doctor of Divinity, Regius Professor, and Rector of Exeter
College.

OXFORD, Imprinted by LEONARD LICHFIELD Anno Salutis, 1636.

HEZEKIAHS SICKNESS AND RECOVERY.
2. CHRON. 32. 24. In those days Hezekiah was sick to the death, and prayed
unto the Lord, and he spoke unto him, and he gave him a sign.


1.MY Text is a type of the Worlds uncertainty, Man's security, and Gods mercy,
to those that depend on him. Wherein we have a view of our misery, with the
means and Author of our surest deliverance. The instance is in Hezechiah a
King, a fit pattern for the best, the remedy Prayer, the chiefest refuge for
the devoutest: Which is effectual only by the good will of him in the bush,
who relieueth ever at a pinch, by speaking, and giving a sign, for our
convenient comfort. I will not trespass on your patience, by a tedious
rehearsal of the connection, with that which went before: let it suffice
therefore to take in by the way for an entrance, First, a touch of Hezechiah's
laudable life, expressed more at large in the 2. of Kings, the 18. and 19.
chapters, all one in a manner with the 36. the 37. and 38. of Isaiah: And
secondly, of his wonderful deliverance, whereof I am now to speak. His
goodness, and zeal is summarily here comprised: First, toward the Church, The
Levites must carry the filthiness out of it, verse 5. The Priests must rowze
themselves up to be careful in their places; My sons (says he) be not now
negligent, for the Lord has chosen you to stand before him and serve him.
verse 11. He restores the Church-goods, and sacrifices, by strict command,
verse. 19. and 24. and reviueth the ancient solemnities of Trumpets, and
Church-musicke, ordained, and ordered by his predecessor David, verse 27. and
30. And surely the best method in a reformation, begins ever with God; for
from thence proceeds a Blessing, to prosper all that follows. His care for the
Commonwealth in the next place, comes not short of this. He fortifies his city
(says the son of Syrach) and by digging through a hard rock with Iron,
brought water into the midst thereof, Chap. 48. He built the wall that was
broken, and raised up the towers, and another wall without, prepared Millo,
made darts and shields in abundance, set Captains of war over his people, by
the council of his Princes and Mighty men, and his own comfortable
encouragements, verse the 3. and forward. It were his Courtiers, and the men of
Judah (no doubt by his example and good directions) that copyed out the
Proverbs of Solomon, which now are a part of our Canon, from the beginning of
the 25. Chapter, unto the end of the book (as the 1. verse of that Chapter
shows.) And if we may credit the relations of Genebrard, and Torniellus, he
was a great Patron of the Mathematiques, and took order for the right
reckoning of the year by intercalation of the month Nisan, for which the
Jews now use Adar, (as appears in their Calenders) to the same effect. So
great matters may be brought to pass in a Commonwealth, where Learned men
are in place, and Kings themselves are learned, to give examples and
directions. All which are farther seasoned by his personal and inherent
graces: His dispatch, in execution, his resolution against Idolatry, his
respect to Gods messengers, his patience in affliction, his earnestness in
prayer, his confidence in danger, his wisdom in counsel, his study to reform
others, his thankfulness to God for all blessings received, make his
Miraculous deliverances seem the less strange, which here may be observed to
be Two above the rest: the First, from the invasion of Senacherib, and the
Second, from his dangerous, and deadly disease.

2. What might not Hezekiah look for at Gods hands, whose favor he had found
for so long a space, to prevent his desires, accept his endeavors, prosper all
his actions? from whom he had received so many comfortable promises, and
messages, and whose Angel had so strangely quitted him, from so heavy an
enemy? yet here we see, that amongst all these Blessings and triumphs, he must
come notwithstanding to his trial. For in those days Hezekiah was sick to
the death: he must take the sour among the sweet, to set an edge to his
devotions, and make farther way for mercies, and wonders: wherein we have the
Spiritual Gests, (if I may so speak) of a Christian progress; From care and
industry to do good, to some temporal happiness; from that, to sickness;
from sickness, to Prayer; from Prayer, to recovery, and other comforts and
signs of Gods favor, till all at last come home to the Court of Heaven, and
there we shall be freed from other changes, and removealls.

The words (without farther straining) yield us these 3 circumstances:
Hezekiah's 1. Sickness. 2. Physic. 3. Physicion.


His Sickness dangerous; his Physic, precious; his Physician, always
successful. All which must needs be granted, his sickness being to death;
his physic, Prayer; his physicion, God himself: and for memories sake, may
thus be connected; Because Hezekiah was sick, therefore he prayed, and because
he prayed, therefore God spoke unto him, and afforded him a sign: which
farther notes unto us the commonnesse of sickness, the force of prayer, and
the readiness of Gods help, unto such as earnestly and faithfully repair
unto him for physic. Of all these in their order, briefly and plainly, as
the Spirit of God shall enable me, and your Royal patience give leave. And
first of the first, which is Hezekiah's sickness, in these words:

3 In those days Hezekiah was sick to the death] A sorry entrance to
continue, if the remedy be not the sooner. For sickness is the dashing of all
worldly delights: And true happiness cannot harbor, where that has taken up
a lodging. But he that goes on this way weeping, and bears forth good seed,
shall doubtless come again with joy, and bring his sheaues with him. It would
be tedious for you to hear, or me to undertake the clearing of all those
doubts that interpreters out of these words have raised, rather then resolved.
As first, concerning the time of this sickness, whether it were before, or
after the miraculous delivery from Senacheribs Invasion. Most of the Jewish
Rabbis, with Solomon Iarchi, and Kimchi; and the Papists, with Abulensis and
Lyra, together with some of our reformed, as Musculus and Bullinger, hold that
it was before. Their grounds are two: Otherwise (say they) how could Hezechiah
reign but just nine and twenty years, seeing fifteen years were added by
miracle, after his sickness, and in the fourteenth year of his reign,
Senacherib came against him. Now, likely it is, that so many great matters
could not be dispatched in one year. Besides, he has a promise after his
sickness, to be delivered from the King of Assyria, 2. King. 20.16. Which
argues, that deliverance was not past before. Notwithstanding Saint Hierome,
Saint Augustine, Luther, Calvine, and the mayor part of our Interpreters, who
take after them, out of Josephus, suppose all the war first ended, before
this sickness began. First, because the order of the text (in all three places
where it is mentioned) so casts it. And next, in all these tumults, we find
Hezekiah, either consulting with the Propher, or praying in the Temple, or
giving directions to his people and Council, or otherwise bestirring himself,
without any mention of any sickness. And well might all these troubles come
within the compass of one year, (as Serrarius the Jesuit against his own
side grants) to wit, that fourteenth they speak of, wherein Senacherib came,
and was defeated, Hezekiah sickened, recovered and lived 15 years after, to
make up the nine and twenty. Now, in that God promised to deliver him after his
sickness, it might not be from the Assyrians first Invasion, but from his
return again, that was perchance both threatened, and feared, as the latter
opinion (I think) more probably defends. So the meaning of the text will
fall out to be, (according to this interpretation) In those days.] that is,
not before, or amidst, but after all troubles were ended, when Hezechiah had
best reason to think himself most secute. When many brought Gifts, and
presents unto him (as the words are immediately before my text) so that he was
magnified in the sight of all Nations, then, in the midst of his Prosperity,
when he (perchance) thought least on it, was he seized upon with this deadly
sickness.

4 Now what manner of sickness this should be, Authors also vary; some would
have it to be the Kings Evil, as Aquila, Symmachus and Theodosion. Others, an
Imposthumation. Glycas says, that it was in his foot, which began to rot.
Most conjecture it to be the Plague, in regard of the Byle that appeared
outwardly, and his extreme danger of life. But such conjectures besides the
Text, are vain and needless. Of like nature are the causes of this sickness,
which by diverse are rendered. One is thought to be the Kings refusing to marry,
upon a conceit that he was that Immanuel, the Virgins Son, promised a little
before to his Father Ahaz. So R. Solomon, Lyra, and Glycas, in the 2. part of
his Annals. But Abulensis confutes this mainely, and most Interpreters are
ashamed of it. Others, with the scholasticall History, affirm, that this
sickness was a punishment, for the Kings neglect of thanksgiving, after the
overthrow of Sennacherib. But Josephus, (whotooke most pains to be acquainted
with such matters in the history of his Country) expresses particularly the
Sacrifices and Solemnities that upon that occasion were used. Besides we may
add, that no fault is laid to this good Kings charge before his sickness, but
after. More safely then we may conclude with S. Hierom upon the 38. of Isaiah,
That this disease was rather a restraint from future presumption, then a
punishment for former sins. Not (...), inflicted by way of revenge, or (...),
as a ransom to make satisfaction, but (...), or (...), a lessoning for
himself, or (...), an example to others, a trial for his instruction (says
Bernard) not a forsaking to his destruction. For howsoever all afflictions
presuppose sin: yet all are not inflicted, as the punishment of sin, which
Jobs long disputation with his friends, and the Lords determination in the end,
makes most apparent. Neither want there farther proofs in this kind. When
the Disciples made question, concerning the man that was borneblind, John 9.
Whether it came through his own or his parents fault; our Savior denies both
members of the division, and tells them that it was rather that the works of
God should be made manifest in him. The Tower of Siloa^ fell upon eighteen
persons, not so much for their sins, as for the lessoning of others, Luke 13.
Because of the mixed cup in the Lords hand, Psalm. 75. his children sometimes are
to drink the purer wine, though his enemies shall be sure of the dregs. For
what is this world else, but as the Author of the Sermons de Tempore shows it,
(as it were in a Map) a vast and glowing Furnace, where the wicked are the
dross, the godly, the gold, tribulation, the fire, and God himself, the
Workman? Is it not better therefore (says Saint Augustine) that God should
chastise thee here, then spare thee here, and forsake thee hereafter? He would
have a Champion valiant, without an adversary (says Saint Basil) that
supposes a just man should be free from afflictions. For What are all such
crosses, but as so many penitenti-Ill Sermons, preached by God himself, to
make us know our selves, and bring us home unto him? He that proves not a good
student in this School of the Cross, has small hopes to attain hereafter to
any degree in heaven. The old Testament began almost with Abels slaughter, and
the New, with the butchering of the Infants, and John Baptists imprisonment.
The Patriarks, Prophets, and Apostles, with all Gods chosen, had their part of
this cup. He chastises all that he receives, Prove. 3. So here, good King
Hezechiah, in the height of his prosperity, is remembered with a sickness; to
mind the greatest, of their frailty, and the holiest, of their humiliation,
and the happiest, not to depend upon their own abilities; much more the
meanest here should learn, with patience to undergo such crosses, as their
betters have borne, and with compassion not to censure, but to comfort their
afflicted brethren. For can thou murmr if God should visit thee, when thou
considerest that Hezekiah was sick? Or account thy pain too grievous, when
his was to the death? or complain it comes unseasonably, seeing this happened
to him in those days, wherein nothing was expected but joy and triumphs? I
should distrust your understandings, and religious dispositions, to press this
point further. It is a sad theme to discourse of sickness: the remedy
therefore (I trust) will be the more welcome, which the Text leads unto, in
the words following.

5. And he prayed unto the Lord.] Prayer pierces the clouds, offers
violence to the Kingdom of heaven, and in manner ouer-ruleth him, that
over-ruleth all things, But that this Physic prove strong in operation, it
must be continued, and fervent, as the best Doctors prescribe, and tempered
with the precious ingredients of Faith, Hope, and Charity.

Non vox, sed votum; non musica chordula, sed cor. Not windy words, but
weighty wishes, not the harp strings, but the heart strings, not he that
cries lowdest, but he that loves most, has the best acceptance before the.
Throne of grace. In this form (no doubt) dying Hezekiah commended his
desperate case to the Lord of life; and howsoever, the harsh message of Isaiah
the Prophet, was sufficient to break his heart, so unexpectedly sent, so
peremptorily delivered, so likely to take effect in so great extremity: Set
thine house in order, for thou shall surely dye, and not live: which the
damnable gloss of some Rabbines make yet a great deal more horrid; Thou shall
surely dye] (say they) that is, in this World: And not liue] that is, in the
World to come: Yet faith lets not go it is hold, hope would not be persuaded,
but that God would be entreated; he had heard of his mercies of old, and had
tasted of the sweetness of them in all the passage of his life; and therefore
he now resolves to employ his expiring spirits, and gasping breath, as long as
they should continue, to try at the last cast, what might be obtained. Blessed
King! it was Gods entraordinary grace that settled thee in this directest
course; some would sooner have murmured; Have I been so careful and Zealous
to do God service, and shall this be my recompense, to be cut off before my
time? must I, after so many fair promises, dye thus childlesse in my
flourishing age? and is there no other order to be taken, but only to set my
house in order? Many of the like speeches impatience would have uttered, and
perchance have abused the Prophet for bringing such a dismal doom. But our
Kings broken and contrite heart contains no such dregs: he hears all with
patience, bears all with patience, considers all with patience, and so with
tears in his eyes, death in his face, (yet confidence in his heart (he turns
about unto the wall. This he did (say many Interpreters) because the Temple
stood that way, toward which it was their custom to turn their faces in
prayer. Saint Hierome takes the reason to be rather, that the standers by
might not behold his tears: and Lyra, that they might not hinder him, as
Angelomus further notes, by disturbing his devotion. His tears may be also
thought to proceed, not so much from the horror of instant death; or a loath to
depart from worldly pleasures; or an unmanly sinking under the extremity of
pain (howsoever such brunts most commonly shame the valor of those, who hold
themselves most resolute:) as from a desire he had, to perfect the reformation
which was begun; and to leave an heir behind (for then he had none) to
succeed in his Kingdom, and continue the blessed line. For how could it choose
but grieve him to fore-thinke on the distraction that was like to ensue, in a
State so unsettled? Many yet addicted to Idolatry; false-hearted Shebna the
Treasurer gaping to succeed, which could not be without opposition. Many
particulars besides, (which himself only knew,) and the world could not take
notice of, might justly occasion him to water his couch with tears. And tears
in such a case, either for public good, or private escapes, by David's
practice, Ieremies Lamentations, and our Saviors weeping for Lazarus, and over
Jerusalem, are warranted to be Heroical. We have more sins (Beloved) to
bewail, but fewer tears to shead; greater occasion to hide our faces, but
less contrition to do it: many Physicians shall be first fee'd, before this
remedy be thought upon, that Hezekiah prayed unto the Lord.

6. He prayed.] Simon Magus had not the grace to pray himself, but the face
to entreat others. I make no doubt, but here the Prophet Isaiah prayed, the
Priests prayed, the Courtiers and people prayed, (all were good helps, and it
was their duty) yet this suffices not Hezekiah, except he pray himself: he
could best plead his own cause, and commence his own suit, and have the
better audience. But to whom does he pray? Popery was not then on foot, to
pray to Saints departed before their images, or buying Masses, or applying
relics. Isaiah had instructed them better, that Abraham was ignorant of them,
and the Brazen Serpent was broken down by the Kings command, and called
Nehushtan, that no such praying should be used unto it. He prayed therefore
(as the text has it) unto the Lord] and none other, him he had only
offended, his mercy he had ever found ready, his power he was assured of, he
alone thoroughly knew his woeful case, and therefore not as much as dreamed of
the mediation of any other. The form of his prayer is set down in the
twentieth of the 26. of Kings, and Esaias the 38. in the same words, to teach us
to regard that the more, which the Holy Ghost vouchsafes so precisely to
repeat. From whence if our Puritans hope to draw any instance for their
extemporary brabbling, and brawling against our set forms of prayer; the text
will show them, as repugnant to Hezekiah herein, as commonly they are otherwise
to all their lawful Superiors, For his prayer here was on his bed, upon his
particular and extraordinary necessity; they must vent theirs in the Church,
where no such occasion is offered, to the excluding of better forms, then
their best premeditation can afford us. Hezekiah turned his face to the wall,
that this particular request of his might not be heard, or disturbed: The gift
of these men is vnder-valued, if their proselytes be not about them to applaud,
and admire it. More tolerable therefore it were, that they troubled not the
Church more by their prating, then they help it by such praying. In this case,
if their conceits were not too fleeting, they might consider, that prayer is of
two sorts, Public, or private. Public, may be either solemn in the Church;
or more retired, in a family, or some other occasioned assembly. Now to thrust
in here, with sudden, and unconcocted flashes, were not only to cross
Scripture, Fathers, and the continual practice of all Christian Assemblies,
that ever deserved the name of Churches: but also to abuse such Holy meetings,
by hindering the concurrence of devotions in known petitions, wherein they
ought to join, and the saying Amen to that, they must be sure is warrantable.
Private prayers, (I confess) are of another nature, wherein diverse
notwithstanding may be help what to say, and directed, what to ask, by
public forms, though such particulars may often fall out in regard of
personal grievances, sins, or benefits, that may dictate (as it were) an
ejaculatory prayer, as the occasion shall be offered. Such was Hezekiah's
here, and such were to be wished more rife, among all sorts of people. Notable
examples herein we have of Jacob; O Lord God of my Father Abraham, and God of
my Father Isaac: Genesis 32.9.
The Lord which said unto me, Return into thy Country, and to thy kindred,
and I will deal well with thee: I am not worthy of the lest of all thy
mercies, and all the truth which thou have showed unto thy servant. For with my
staff I passed over this Jordan, and now I am become two bands. Deliver me, I
pray thee, from the hand of my brother, from the hand of Esau, for I fear him.
So Sampson, upon his resolution to dye: O Lord God (says he) remember me, Iud.
16, 28.
I pray thee, and strengthen me, only this once, O God, that I may be at once
avenged of the Philistims, for my two eyes. And what are the most part of
David's Psalms, but a contexture of such heavenly wishes, aptly composed for
his own use, and the direction of others, that expect the same protection? O
how would it become the conversation of Christians, in stead of corrupt
communication, and blasphemous oaths and cursings, to have their mouths
filled with such Praises and Prayers? How well do such speeches sound from the
mouths of good subjects? God save the King: or Give the King thy Judgments, O
Lord, and thy righteousness unto the Kings Son. In the warlike reign of
David, we have a large description in Scripture, of Captains and Worthies;
but in Solomon's succeeding Peaceable government, of stately buildings, notable
examples of Justice, flourishing of the Arts, trafficking with foreign
Nations, and the like. All which are the extraordinary blessings of God, and by
his disposal have their turns, and periods, which most commonly are found in
the body, as the head is affected. Where a King therefore makes the Lords
Prayer, the best Prayer, the subject of his meditations; with what face may
subjects be backward, in following such directions? Hezekiah (as we all know)
wanted not titles, nor treasure, nor friends, nor any other good parts, that
might grace a man: and yet here we see in the vpshot of extremity, his only
refuge is Prayer. And this brings him to the speech of the Physician, which
recovered him. For when he had prayed unto the Lord, the Lord spoke unto him,
and he gave him a sign. Where we have the last words of my Text, and third
member of my division, pointing at the Physician, and the course he took.

7. And he spoke unto him, and he gave him a sign.] (...), at sundry times,
and in diverse manners, has it pleased the Lord of heaven to speak to men here
upon earth, by his Son, by his servants, by Angels, by men, internally,
externally, in dreams, by open visions; as Suarez upon Aquinas's third part,
quest. 30. Peucer in his commentary of the diverse kinds of divination;
Mencelius in a peculiar tract of the knowledge of God, do at large declare.
This speaking here to Hezekiah was by Isaiah the Prophet, as the text, 2. Kings
20. clearly shows. And as the extremity was great, and urgent; so this
speaking was quick, and comfortable, in these most gracious terms, Turn
again and tell Hezekiah (...) the Captain of my people: Thus says the Lord,
the God of David thy Father, I have heard thy prayer, I have seen thy tears;
Behold, I will heal thee on the 3d day, thou shall go up unto the house of
the Lord. Could there be better news to a dying man? Yet this is not all. I
will add (says he) unto thy days 15 years, and I will deliver thee and thy
City, out of the hand of the King of Assyria; and I will defend this City for
mine own sake, and for my servant David's sake. This was more then could be
expected, but thus it pleased the Lord to dispense his favors. Some one
perchance in Isaiah's place, would have here repined at such a message; Good
Lord, what meanest thou by this? art thou so soon changed, or have thou a
double will, one contrary to the other? Can it stand with thy immutability, so
suddenly to do and undo? or with my reputation, to unsay that so quickly,
which by thy express command I so lately delivered? The King and Courtiers,
may hold me for a false prophet, who, upon mine own head, spoke that so
confidently which now I must recall? But Isaiah was no Arminian, he knew, it
was no manners for him to make a question of Gods doings: He was acquainted so
far with his proceedings, that most commonly he reveals not all that he
himself means to do; but so much only, as his Ministers are bound to teach,
and servants to learn. Whence that distinction of Divines, into voluntatem
signi and beneplaciti, His revealed will toward us, and his secret in His
eternal Counsel, notes not two distinct wills in God, (as Lombard well
observes, and the Schoolmen on him at the 45. Did. of the first book of the
sentences) but diverse forms of speaking, concerning the acts and effects of
the same will. Hence among the Ancients there runs a saying, which is
fathered on Gregory, Deus mutat sententiam, sed non consilium. Gods revealed
denunciation may be altered, but never his eternal purpose. For the first may
be uttered according to the disposition of second causes, or our deserts (as
Zanchius well gathers out of Saint Augustine) whereas the latter depends upon
eternal immutability, and therefore in no respect can admit any shadow of
change. Now these are not opposite, but subordinate, the revealed, to the
secret, as part, to the whole; the revealed expressing the means, whereby the
secret is fulfilled. Salomons carriage in the famous cafe between the two
harlots, gives an instance of the like in men. Did he intend (think you) the
barbarous dividing of the infant, that had no way offended? Yet his words at
first are, Bring me a sword, divide the living child in two, and give half to
the one, and half to the other. But his intent, which he concealed, is
afterward expressed; Give the true Mother the living child, and in no wise slay
it: and all Israel saw that this was the wisdom of God in him. His first
command then included not his purpose, but a trial, to find out the truth.
And so God here not peremptorily sets down what should be, but what the
Prophet was to deliver, concealing both from King and Prophet what should ensue
upon it. Where there is no more contrariety then in our Saviors inquiry for
provision for the multitude, John 6. he asked Philip as it were doubtfully,
where so much bread might be bought; but this he said to prove him (says the
text) for he himself knew what he would do. The Prophets deadly message
therefore was true in relation to the second causes, referred to their proper
effect; yet subordinate to Gods secret purpose, in reference to the end: the
ground of all which is closely laid, in the 17. Article of our Church, to
which we subscribe. Gods decrees for the end, include always the means, and
therefore such threatenings serve Gods children to stir them up to use them.

8 This use David made, 2. Sam. 12. The command was peremptory: The child that
is borne unto thee, shall surely die. Yet the King ceased not to fast, and
weep, as long as breath was in it, only upon this ground, Who can tell
whether God will be gracious unto me, that the child may live? I had not dwelt
so long upon this, but that the unsettled wavering of diverse learned men amongst
us, had given just cause. Hence you may guess (beloved) how little reason the
Arminians had, to take part with the Papists, and Lutherans, to slander our
Church, (as for many other things) in this, that we make God to have two
distinct wills, the one dashing the other. This they refer to our Crypticall
Divinity (as it pleases those Theologasters to term it) as though we
maintained any points in secret, that we dare not publicly to justify before
all the World. Iunius at the beginning gave them good counsel, for the peace
of the Church. Consilium de pace Ecclesiae.
Crocius has particularly answered Bertius, to this calumny, in the second and
third Chapter of his Parenaeticus; and all of them of late, by Gods providence,
and your majesty's especial furtherance (I trust) have met with their Masters
at Dort. For such imputations are no news to those who are acquainted with the
objections of the Pelagians, and Semipelagians, against Saint Augustine,
Prosper, and their followers: the Bickerings between the Germane Bishops, and
the French, in the cause of Godescall and Erigena Scotus, the later stirs
between Luther and Erasmus, the Pseudolutherans, and their opposites, Beza and
Castalion, Peter Baro, and our English Divines, the Jesuits and the
Dominicans, which contention is yet fresh on foot, and the Pope for all his
infallibility (often urged thereunto) dares not to decide it, but lets it still
run on. Old Cumel tells Vasquez the Jesuit in plain terms, that most
commonly those that stand most upon their sharp wits, are found, in the
conclusion, most repugnant to grace. Rispolis has set forth a picture of
Aquinas, bearing down with his Buckler, and stabbing those with his pen, that
in any sort shall deny the whole determination of the second causes, by the
first, or contingent effects by Gods immutable decree. Nugno comes upon them
for wresting authors contrary to their meaning, and adds that he verily
thinks they will serve him so too, when once he is dead, notwithstanding his
direct writing against them. But to recall my self from this digression
whereof I am sensible, Aluarez, Bannes, Cabrera, Ripa, with the forenamed
authors, sufficiently show, if a man would go no farther; That the soundest
Schoolmen successively have ever defended in substance, concerning Gods
purpose, and man's will, his grace, and our abilities, that which our Church of
England at this day maintains. For in this they show them Schoolmen, (as
they are commonly termed) whereas otherwise they play the schooleboyes, where
the Popes decrees overawe them. Their learning generally being as an
over-growne wood, amongst many thorns and bushes, which are good for nothing
but fuel. Much good ancient timber may be found out, to serve in the Lords
building, whereas on the other side, Vorstius's Libertas Prophetandi, and
Arminius Meditatio sine lectione, which they and their scholars practice so
much, and plead for, without religious and discreet restraint, would set all in
a combustion. How much better is it therefore for us (Beloved) to hearken with
Hezekiah unto the Lord speaking, as he does at this time to us, by his Word,
and Ministers, who ought not in that regard to be lightly esteemed of you
(howsoever unworthy in themselves) for their Masters sake? He speaks to us in
this point, that notwithstanding he often threaten, and sometime strike, yet
place is left for mercy, where it is sought accordingly. Use but Hezekiah's
tears and prayers, and he is the same God, that will not only speak, but give
comfortable signs of his favor, which is the vpshot of my text, and a sign
that I shall not hold you long. And he gave him a sign.] Signs, and miracles
were frequent among the old Patriarchs, Prophets, and the Apostles, with some
of their successors, in the Primitive Church, for the confirmation of their
vocation, faith, and doctrine. But the Gospel once fully received, we are left
to the text, to arm our selves against Antichrist, who comes with signs and
miracles. And not to rake up old sores: who knows not of late the practices of
Father Edmonds, and Darrell, with their accomplices, to justify Popery, and
Puritanisme, by the casting out of Devils? In which kind of imposture, some
French Monks were put of late to a hard exigent, when Verrine the Devils
discourse, must be put in print, to make good their exorcismes and
superstitions. But above all, I marvel why Bellarmine and Gretser should so
strangely vpbraid our Church for the defect of miracles; the first, in these
terms, Haereticos non potuisse extorquere miracula, neque, a Deo, neque, a
Diabolo, ad confirmandam realem praesentiam, in his 3. book de Eucharistia,
and 8. Chap. The latter, in the like: Diabolum puduisse Lutheri doctrinam
miraculis confirmare. in his defense of the 2. Chap. of Bellarmines first Book
de verbo Dei. Do they take a pride, that the Devil is so forward to advance
their cause by miracles, and so backward to do us any kindness? If this be
the issue, we shall rest content with such miracles, as our Savior, and the
Apostles wrought, at the first propagating of the Gospel; and when we teach
any new doctrine, dissenting from this, then to cast about for new miracles to
confirm it. But here a sign was necessary (as Saint Augustine observes) that
of the two messages the Prophet brought to Hezekiah, in show contradictory, he
might be assured on which to depend. The sign that is here only mentioned in
the general, 2. Kings 20.11.
is another-where particularly set down to be, the going back of the Sun,
or at least the shadow, ten degrees in King Ahaz Dial, where no doubt can be
among Interpreters, whether it were done or no, but of the manner how it might
possibly be accomplished. Of the standing still of the Sun, some instances
are given: one was, at the request of Father Mutius an Hermit, who going to
visit a sick person, was like to be benighted, had not the Sun half only
above the Horizon, for diverse hours stayed his leisure, till he came to his
patient, as it is told us in vitis Patrum, lib. 1. cap. 16. Another is brought
by Turpine, in the life of Charles the Great, the 28. Chap. for a more notable
stay of the Sun in one place, for above three days together, to gratify that
Emperor in the pursuit of his enemies. A third is out of the first book of
Chron. 4. chap. 22. made good only by the vulgar Latin edition, which reads,
Et qui stare fecit solemn.] This last much troubled Torniellus, otherwise a
diligent Historian, so that he professes ingeniously in his Annals, that he
knows not what to make of it. But the first, Serrarius the Jesuit will scarce
admit for a truth. The second, Baronius reiects for a lie, and the third all
may see depends on a false translation. For whereas our English Doway Bibles
render word for word, out of the vulgar Latin; And He that made the Sun to
stand.] The Original has nothing but (...), the Septuagint, (...), our
English, and all other that I have seen, And Iokim] the proper name of a man,
one of Judah's posterity. And therefore they must needs be (...) Men of Lying
(as corruptly almost they render the very next words) who would make that to
signify the standing still of the Sun. Whence we may observe by the way,
what pure Text the Council of Trent would put upon us for authentical, if we
would take it in gross: And how palpably our peevish Recusants in such cases
are abused, in depending on such men, who care not with what husks they feed
them. Once this is certain, that both Sun and Moon stood still together for
a whole days space, in Joshua's time. But here the Miracle seems greater, in
going back of the same ten degrees, especially as it is by most Interpreters
expressed.

10 For they suppose, the Sun had then passed forward ten degrees in the
Dial, before the miracle began: so that two only wanted for his setting.
Ten then spent in the going back, to the point of his rising, and ten to
return to the point where it was first, makes that one artificial day above
thirty hours, whereas that of Ioshuah (for ought we find) and of which the
text says, there was never the like before or after, could not be above 24.
Now if the Sun were here posted forth, and back in an instant, (as some
would salve the matter) how could the motion of the shadow in the Dyall be
distinctly discerned? And to put half degrees for whole, (as others would mend
the reckoning) the text will hardly bear. To let pass then, what explication
here might arise from Copernicus moving of the earth, or Tycho Brahe's fixing
of the Sun, as the center of motion to the rest of the Planets; or
Fracastorius multitude of Homocentricks: take but the old received grounds,
either of eight Orbs, with Aristotle, or nine, with Ptolemy, or ten, with
Alphonsus, or now at the last, of eleven with Maginus and Clavius, not
excluding their Excentricks, Concentrickes, Epicycles, yea and
Excentrepicycles, which they make belonging unto them, to salve all
appearances, and a world of difficulties would follow, if with this Suns
retrogradation, all the heavenly Orbs, according to the same proportion, moved
not backward. Besides the disordering of the Stars aspects, and distances one
unto the other, those that take away all Orbs, and leave the stars to fly
like birds in the air, without the same miracle wrought likewise in all, will
not be able to avoid. To be quitted therefore from this trouble, Burgensis
thinks it safer, with Abarbinel, to affirm, that the Sun kept his course,
and the heavens their order, and the day his length: but the shadow, contrary
to his nature, was miraculously brought back. With those accord Arias Montanus,
Bullinger, and some others: And their reasons are, first, Otherwise the miracle
would have been as conspicuous in other Dyals, as in that of Ahaz: And the
whole world (amazed at the Prodigy) would in those days have yielded some
foreign Mathematicians, to have recorded it. Besides, the text every where
insisteth upon the shadow, and but once mentions the Sun, and then not
going back in the heaven, but brought back in Ahaz his Dyall. To that which is
objected out of the 31. verse, that notice was taken of this in other
Countries, seeing some were sent from Babylon, to inquire of the wonder, they
answer out of the same place: They came to see the wonder that was done in the
Land: whereof they might hear, not of the going back of the Sun, and the
days miraculous length, which at home they had seen: I am not ignorant how
Matthew Toring replies on this of Burgensis If (says he) the shadow should
yield us this miracle, without the Sun, then God should be put to creare a
new light, which should have a motion without a subject, and be brighter then
the Sun, to obscure his shadow, and make his own apparent. But to this
Burgensis might answer, that God might so inflect, and dispose the
Sunne-beames, (which naturally are darted out at a right line) to cast a shadow
forth or back, from any gross body, as His wisdom should hold most
convenient. Howsoever, a great miracle it must needs be, and no less
perchance, to find the shadow go back, when the Sun keeps his course, as
the Sun to change his course, and the shadow to attend on it. In this
difference (being out of my profession) I take not upon me to be vmpire. We
may make use of both. Jn the first, a good King resembles that Sun, that gives
life and influence to all the rest of the stars, cannot have his course
stayed, but by an almighty hand, and leaves darkness and horror, whenever
he departs. In the second, our life is a shadow, every minute moving forward,
in the Dyall of our time, which none can stop, or set back, but he that gave
Hezekiah a sign. And signs he gives also to us (Beloved) of his
extraordinary mercies and favor, in another kind, if our unthankfulness
would but take notice of what we fully enjoy: A most gracious Sovereign, a
flourishing Church, a peaceable Commonwealth, reward for virtue, punishment
for vice. Infinite such signs may be reckned; but what reformation they work
in us, our own conscience can best inform us. Theodoricus, Archbishop of
Colen, mentioned by Aeneas Sylvius, in the second book of his Commentaries of
the deeds of King Alphonsus, when the Emperor Sigismund demanded him of the
directest course to happiness: Perform (says he) when thou art well, what
thou promisedst when thou were sick. And blessed are they that so are visited
by Gods hand, that they pray with Hezekiah; and so pray, that God may speak
unto them; and so speak, that signs accompany it of his merciful favor. The
grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the love of God the Father, and the fellowship
of the Holy Ghost be with us all evermore.

AMEN.
PEREZ-VZZAH. OR The Breach of VZZAH.

As it was delivered in a Sermon before His MAJESTY at Woodstocke, August the
24. Anno 1624.

By JOHN PRIDEAVX, Rector of Exeter College, His MAIESTIE'S Professor in
Divinity, and at that time Vice Chancellor of the University of OXFORD.

1. COR. 7.17. As God has called every man, so let him walk.

printer's or publisher's device AC: OX



OXFORD, Imprinted by LEONARD LICHFIELD Anno Salutis, 1636.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, JAMES, EARL OF ARREN, LORD OF EVENNA ANDINNERDALE,
etc. all the blessings of this life, and that hereafter.
Right Honorable,
Give me leave to present only to your View, that which you heard not long
since distractedly uttered. I have ever observed your extraordinary favors
toward me, which I wish I could as well deserve, as thankefully acknowledge.
When importunity therefore had extorted from me, the publishing of these
troubled Meditations; I could not be to seek of a Patron: Your Heroical
disposition in general, and particular respect to me, being so fresh in
memory. Weak frames need the stronger supporters; and often times a poor
Pamphlet becomes passable by a rich frontispice. I desire this may be
admitted not as an acquittance for former debts, but an obligation for future
payment: which were I as able as ready, should not be long behind. But where
true Nobleness is radical, harmless presumption, and unguarded plainness
for want of Court complement, seldom meets with a check. This emboldens me
to depend on your tried acceptance; who am

Oxford, Exeter College. October. 22. 1624. Your Honors most bounden to be
commanded JOHN PRIDEAVX.

2. SAM. 6. 6 And when they came to Nachons threshing floor, Vzzah put forth
his hand to take the Ark of God, and took hold of it, for the Oxen shook it.

7 And the anger of the Lord was kindled against Vzzah, and God smote him there
for his error, and there he died by the Ark of God.


1 MY Text intimates a kind of progress undertaken by King David, with his
Peers and People, to remove the Ark of God from Gibeah of Kiriath-iearim, 1.
Chro. 16.1.
where it sometimes soiourned, and rest it at Jerusalem in the Tabernacle he
had erected for it. The least reflection on the argument of the former chapter,
will clear the Connection, and show the dependence of this passage upon that
which went before. After the death of Readiness son Ishbosheth, the union of
Israel and Judah, 2. Sam. 4.7. Ib. c. 5.1.3. Ver. 6. Ver. 17. and 22.
and their joint homage performed to David in Hebron, the besieging of
Jerusalem, and winning it from the Iebusites, with two other notable victories
against their bad neighbors the Philistines. The first thing this good King
thinks upon, is the settling of Gods service. He held it a neglect no longer to
be endured, that the Ark of God should want a Tabernacle, or the Tabernacle
be so far from Jerusalem his chief abode, that he might not daily resort
unto it. He considered that Abinadabs private house could not be fit for such
public worship, and all the time of King Saul little harkening was there after
such matters. But now peace being established by the devoluing of the Scepter
to him; Religion began to look out, as the Sun after a storm. Esth. 2.
The Persians perhaps (with Assuerus) would have revelled upon such success,
more then an hundred and fourscore days together; and the Romans have
pageanted our less victories in many an ambitious triumph: But Gods children
seek not their own, but the glory of him that protects them. Impediments may
sometimes hinder, or distractions divert, or crosses disable, their best
designs: but their hearts are always fixed on the right, as here King David's
was, to express it self upon the first opportunity afforded. A Parliament
therefore is proclaimed, and consultation had with the thousands and hundreds
of the choicest Priests and People of all Israel. It would do a man good to
consider the gracious speech of this religious King, then had in this
Parliament (though here omitted, yet) registered in 1. Chron. 13. in these very
words; If it seem good unto you (says he) and that it be of the Lord; let us
send abroad unto our brethren every where, that are left in all the land of
Israel; and with them also to the Priests and Levits which are in their
Cities, and Suburbs, that they may gather themselves unto us, and let us bring
the Arc again unto us, for we enquired not at it in the days of Saul. What
should not such words of a King work with well affected subjects? There wanted
not in himself wisdom to dispose, or authority to command, or resolution to
execute: yet it pleases him to advise with the present, and send for them that
are absent, and make himself a party by calling them Brethren; and acknowledge
the common fault, that all might join for amendment. Such kind usage leaves
most commonly the greatest impression in liberal dispositions, and works
often more sweetly then imperious commands. Here it appears it did, in the
words next following, 1. Chron. 13.4.
And all the Congregation said that they would do so, for the thing was right
in the sight of all the people. All the people therefore from Shihor to Hemah,
(the utmost borders of the kingdom) came flocking with all alacrity to give
their readiest attendance. It could be no small company, when 30000 are noted
for choice men of Israel, and the rest left numberless under their several
Captains and Commanders. These we find here marching from Jerusalem (as it
should seem) to Baalah; from Baalah to Kiriath-iearim: 1. Chron. 13.6.
in which City on a hill (thence called Gibeah) stood Abinadabs house, where
the Arc had remained, after its return from the Philistines; and the plague
of the Bethshemites (for prying into it) full twenty years together. Thence it
is now taken (as a man would think) with the greatest solemnity and reverence
that might be devised. A new cart is made for the purpose, 1. Sam. 7.2.
to prevent the least suspicion of pollution, or profaneness: Abinadabs
sons (who had attended it so long, in their Fathers house) have their charge
continued, to be the nearest Guardians about it: Achio is before, Vzzah comes
after; the rest keep their due distance. A goodly sight it must needs be, of
such well ordered troops, upon so sacred a piece of service. The King
rejoices, the Music sounds, the multitude shouteth; and no doubt but that
prescribed form of prayer, at the Arkes removing, was then often repeated,
Rise up Lord, And let thine enemies be scatterd, and let them that hate thee
fly before thee; Numb. 10.35. But what more usual then men's surest
expectations, to be deceived, and their best intentions crossed. Crosses and
contentments take their turns, not as men would have it, but as God disposes.
They that traveled here so contentedly, with such variety of good company and
music; how suddenly, (not long after their first setting forth) do they meet
with an accident, which puts them all out of heart, and their instruments (as
it were) out of tune. For

2 When they came to Nachons threshing floor, Vzzah put forth his hand to the
Ark of God, and took hold of it, for the Oxen shook it. And the anger of the
Lord was kindled against Vzzah, and Godsmote him there for his error, and
there he died by the Ark of God. Wherein may it please you to observe in
general these three parts 1. The danger that the Arc was in, The Oxen shook
it. 2. Vzzah's fault, he put forth his hand and took hold of it. 3. The
present punishment, inflicted upon the fact, God smote him there for his error
and there he died, etc.


The first intimates against the Papists, that the most settled estate of the
Church, while it is here militant, is not privileged from shaking, nor its
chiefest vpholders from stumbling. The second, against the Puritans; that every
man in such a case, is not to thrust forth his hand to be a Reformer, farther
then his place and calling warrant him. The third, against the Atheistical
Politicians, that God cannot be deluded as men are; he will espy a fault, and
strike (perchance) suddenly, though never so fair a gloss be set upon the
action. Of these in their order, as God shall enable me, and your Royal
patience give way. And first of the first, which is the danger the Arc was in.
This is here prefaced unto us with four circumstances: 1. Of the Time, when.
2. Of the persons, They. 3. Of the progress, Came. Lastly, of the place, to
Nachons threshing-floore. All which to discuss apart, were to show more
curiosity, then judgment: and to insist upon quiddities (as the manner of some
is) to gain applause of wit, in that the Holy Ghost never meant: I came not to
this place with any such intent, but to discharge my duty in preaching Christ
Jesus, for the winning of souls. Their grounds to me are unknown, that dare
to do otherwise. May it please you therefore, to bear with plainness; and
to expect no deeper speculations, then this Historical text affords: which
here in the first entrance puts us to a stand, with David and his chosen
company.

3 And when they came to Nachons threshing floor. That which it pleases the
Holy Ghost to register, is not for man to neglect, according to that of the
Rabbines, (...)
There is not a one title of the text of Scripture, but mountains of matter
may be observed in it. Threshing, and threshing floores, are seldom mentioned
in profane Authors; but in Scripture sometime yield illustration of God's
execution upon the wicked. So Babylon is termed (...) the son of Gods
threshing floor, in respect of the pressure it was to undergo, Isaiah 21.10.
Sometimes of his favor; so Ephraims fair neck was not grated with the
plow-yoake, but appointed a more favorable task, as a Heifar to tread out the
corn, Hos. 10.11. These threshing floores the Israelites esteemed no less
then their stateliest mansions. In the 15. of Numb. we have a heave offering of
the threshing floor, and of this the Levites receive a benefit, cap. 28. And
how many matters of consequence are registered to have happened in threshing
floores? The great mourning of Egypt for Jacob; the miracle on Gedeons fleece;
Genesis 50. Iud. 6. 2. Sam. 24. 2. Chron. 3.
The apparition of an Angel with his sword drawn against Jerusalem; then an
Altar erected by David; after, the Temple it self by Solomon: all in
Threshing-floores. Now this Threshing-floore which is here said to be
Nachon's, in 1. Chron. 13. is styled Chidon's: taking that name (as most
Interpreters have it) from that saying of God to Iosuah, V. 18.
cap. 8. (...) Lift up thy spear or shield toward Ai. But that place in my
map, lies too far out of the way, to have any neighborhood with Nachons
Threshing-floore. The Chaldye Paraphrase reads it by the appellatiue, Locum
praeparatum, and that for two respects, as Caietane gives the reason: Either
that burnt offerings were there then prepared, to entreat God for good success
in that religious action: or that the people in that place were to be orderly
ranged, to proceed with the greater solemnity, and less confusion. The
Jesuits, with some others, hold the difference cleared, by saying, Serearius.
Sanctius.
the owner of this floor had two names, Nachon and Chidon. This may help
(indeed) somewhat to justify their multiplicity of names, to shift from the
stroke of Justice. The matter is not great; but that Scripture must not be
conceived in any part to contradict it self, least the whole may thereby be
questioned. Why may not Chidon then be the places name; and Nachon the owners
at that time (as Peter Martyr has it) since Joshua's action by Ai gave no name
to a place, and this place may be so called without absurdity. But to pass
from this, yet not without some touch for use. When old frugality was in
request, and Great men were better husbands then Courtiers, rich Boaz held it
no disparagement, Ruth. 3.
in person sometimes to follow his reapers, and at night to take a bed in no
better place then a threshing floor. But while our masters follow too much
their pleasures, who oversees the laborers? The very name of Threshing-floore,
should sufficiently tax our idleness and luxury, which cannot be
contemptible, as long as God's word honors it. And what if I should say,
that the pageant of our whole life less resembles a stage, then a
Threshing-floore? There it were a shame to be mute, and should it not here to
loyter? Let John Baptist's application shut up this passage, Math. 3. where
Gods Church is the floor; the chosen, wheat; worldlings, chafe; CHRIST is
ready with his fan, to purge it thoroughly, and set apart those for his
heavenly garner; these, for unquenchable fire. O that our actions may prove so
staid, as to endure his fan, and flaile; and not to fly our of the floor as
chafe, or wild oats, but to remain in the day of trial, united in faith and
charity to his winnowed heap of wheat: which sticking never so close
together, may hap notwithstanding to meet with a shaking, as here it befell the
Arc: the next particle of my text, (though not in order of words, yet of
sense) to be discussed.

4 For the oxen shook it. It never proves well, when men forsake Gods
directions to follow their own devices. In the 4. of Numbers, the Arc (by
Gods appointment) was to be carried on men's shoulders, not by every bigboned
Issachar that would shoulder perchance for place, to make thereof a commodity;
but of the sons of Kohath, whose burden properly it was: and those must keep
at the staves end, least by approaching too nigh, they touch the holy things,
and so dye for their boldness. This so plainly laid down, and often repeated
in diverse places of the Law, and practiced at the first with the precisest
care; is here notwithstanding neglected, as a thing not necessary, and
(perchance) through a 20 years long discontinuance, forgotten. So full of
infirmities, and far from merit, are the best actions, of the best men,
whether Princes or subjects; Priests or people. The People perchance, relied on
the Priests; the Priests; were willing to content the Nobles; the Nobles had
good reason to suspect nothing amiss, where they saw their good King so
forward, and confident. All (out of doubt) meant exceeding well, and a great
deal of holy care and diligence was used: But a little leaven corrupts the
whole mass; and a new patch marreth an old garment. It was fresh in all their
memories that the Philistims new Cart and Kine, 1 Samuel 6.1.
returned this Arc miraculously after seven months captivity: and they made no
doubt but this new Cart of theirs, which of purpose they had provided, was as
good as that, or better; and Oxen a teeme far more staid, then the milch kine
that then drew it, which performed it with reluctance, lowing for their calves.
Ibid.
In this device they might much please themselves, as more compendious and
easy, then the carriage on men's shoulders, especially so long a journey; and
think it, by the former event, to be approved also of God. But soon they
found their error by woeful experience: The Cart was not so sound, nor the
Oxen so sure, nor the drivers so circumspect, nor the guardians so at hand, nor
the way so level, nor the carriage so precious; but beyond expectation, it was
like to catch a fall. What shall a man here say? but that GOD sees not as man,
and man overseeth, at the least casting his eye aside from Gods directions.
Most of the Jews have a conceit, that these Oxen foundreth (as it were) on a
sudden, from a supernatural cause. For if it were present death for man and
beast to touch mount Sinai, when the LORD descended upon it, Exodus 19. in
proportion here must be danger, verse. 13.
for beasts to be made supporters of so sacred a burden. Others observe a
natural wantonness in the Oxen; They kicked, says one; stumbled, says
another; drew diverse ways, according to a third Translation. (...)
The word in the Original is of a doubtful signification. But whatsoever the
cause might be, the effect was certain, that the Arc thereby was shaken, and
in danger to be overthrown; which the more amazed, the less they knew the
reason of it.

5 Few men will make question, but that the Arc in this place (among many
other resemblances) may well bear a type of the Church militant, as that other
Arc of Noah does, by the application of all Interpreters, both ancient and
modern. That had his shaking upon the waters, as this by the Oxen, upon the
new Cart. And was not the ship wherein our SAVIOVR sailed, Math. 8.
in a greater danger by a tempest? The Disciples themselves knew not what would
become of it; as appears by their timorous outcry in the greatest
perplexity, Lord save us, we perish. Such has ever bin the lot of this woman
in the wilderness, the beloved among the Watchmen; Pharaohs oppress her,
Balaams curse her, Ieroboams cause her to sin, Nebuchadnezzars lead her into
captivity: She shall no sooner be quitted from the hypocrisy of Scribes and
Pharisees, but new persecutions of Heathenish Tyrants will make havocke of her
choicest children; Heretics infect her springs, Schismatickes trouble her
peace, Antichrist surprise her liberty; ravening wolves deceive her in sheep
clothing, Frogs and Locusts over-runne her fattest pastures. This Doctrine
needs no enlargement; which woeful experience in all ages has made so
manifest. In her best time, strongest constitution, securest reposes; such
Tertians often return, and give her fits of shaking: Naturalists cannot number
more Earthquakes, then we (if the word may pass) may reckon Church-quakes. So
that sometime she is forced to cry out with the Prophet, My belly, my belly:
Ierem. 4.19. 2. King. 4.19.
other-while with the Shunamites child, My head, my head: And that for the
trial of her patience, the credit of her constancy, the exercise of her
humility, the quickening of her faith, hope, and charity the killing of her
carnal desires, and increase of her longing for a place of better settling.

6 What shall we say then of those ( Beloved) who make temporal felicity a
note of the Church, Bellarm. de Eccles. li. 4. ca. 18
paint her always in pomp, to deceive the credulous gazers, and persuade them
to believe, that the Church was never there, where she showed not always a
glorious outside. The world can witness what a stir the Romish factors have
kept of late, to justify their whore of Babylon, not by faith, (I warrant you)
but by this external visibility; and discard all other Congregations from
being Churches; which oppressed heretofore, (especially by their tyranny) in
the eyes of the world have not been so conspicuous. This point so often, so
thoroughly, by so many discussed, on our side, to the confusion of all
apposites, and satisfaction of the impartial; they reinforce now again, as a
new invention never heard amongst us, before in most of their pamphlets and
parlies: not for any hold (I am persuaded) they find in it themselves; but as
the last cavil to hold out plea before their seduced proselites: who, if it
were not for some such goodly retentiues, would be always flitting from them.
For what can be more impertinent and praeposterous, then when the question is
concerning Doctrine and Discipline, whereby a true Church may be discerned from
a false; to entangle the business with personal circumstances, and knots of
story, and Chronology, which either for want of certain evidence may prove
vndeterminable; or cleared to the utmost, make nothing to the purpose? For,
suppose we had no certainty of our predecessors before Luther, (as our
opposites have always taken the strictest course that we should not) is it not
sufficient we find by the undoubted word of God, we are in the right? from
which, all Churches had their original, (as their own Marinarius tells them
roundly in the Council of Trent) and must be reformed when corruptions grow
intolerable. Now they that reform according to this Rule, erect not a new
Church, but correct enormous novelties, or inveterate deformities in the old.
2. Chron. 29.16.
When good King Ezkiah purged the Temple from all uncleanness, in the Old
Testament; and our SAVIOVR from buyers and sellers, in the New: May they be
said to have set up a New Temple, or rather reduced the Old to its ancient
luster? The reforming of Romish Missals, Pontificals, Ceremonials, and
Breviaries, according to Trent-Constitutions, has not hatched us (I trow) a
new mass of Catholicisme. For if Bellarmines position be passable, Ipsa
Christi Ecclesia non fuit nova respectu Iudaica, sed solum mutatio quaedam
status Ecclesiae; De notis Eccles. l. 4. c. 5. Christianity changed not the
Churches substance, but the condition only from that which it had in the Jewish
Synagogues: why may we not rather tell them upon the same grounds, that our
present Church, compared with that of our forefathers before Luthers
Reformation; Non est nova, sed tantum mutatio quaedam status Ecclesiae: The
place the same; the case altered: the good grain reserved in the same floor,
the chafe and darnell only fanned away. Were it not peevishness here to
imagine, that one Arc should become two, because here it is shaken by the
beasts that drew it; but afterward convayed more staidly on the shoulders of
the Levites? Forged suppositions are poor grounds to make men see their
errors. First let them convince us that our Church is new, and essentially
different from that of our predecessors before Luther, and then we shall cast
about to frame her a genealogy accordingly.

7 This one answer might suffice to stop the months of the clamorous, and
give satisfaction to the impartial of either side. Yet to clear our
proceeding from the least suspicion of factious novelty: we farther make
plain unto them, that the idolatrous and tyrannous additions, which they for
their glory and gain have patched to the common grounds of Christianity, and
we now protest against, have been ever withstood at their first entrance; or
reproved, as they grew on, by the most eminent and honestmen in every age,
according to the hint that it was possible for them to take. These groaned
after the Reformation which we now enjoy: but overborne (as it was
fore-prophecied) by an impetuous mayor part, (which commonly proves the worst)
could never bring it about. They have had Catalogues upon Catalogues of such
names and witnesses, which they never have offered solidly to answer; but by
catching at some extravagancies, and suppressing always the maine, bearing
their proselites in hand that no such matter could be ever showed. Have they
not among their own Professors, Alvarez Pelagius, Nicolaus Clemangis,
Theodoricus a Niem, and diverse other of the same freedom; whose complaint of
the abominations of those times, have never been refuted, or redressed? What
is the cause that the works of William de sancto amore, Peter de Vineis,
Thomas Gascoine, Robert Grosthead, John Wicliffe, with others, have been
suppressed so carefully, but that they were too free against Friars fopperies,
Popes tyrannies, and Romes insufferable purloynings and superstitions? Why
satisfied they not the greivances of the Emperor Maximilian, French, and
Germans, which their own Orthuinus a Graies has bundle up together in
Fasciculo rerum expetendarum? When we read in their own Cardinals, Bellarmine
of the tenth age, Chrono. p. 256 anno. 907.
Ecce seculum infelix; no writers, no Counsels, no Popes took care for the
public good: Baronius of the same; Baron. ad ann. 912. n. 8.
Potentissimae aequee ac sordidissimae meretrices, impetuous and debosht
Curtezans had gotten a hand to Pope and vn-Pope their Paramours, as their
fancies led them: Peter de Alliaco in a book for Reformation offered to the
Council of Constance; wherein the sticks not strangely to aver, that the
Church was then in that case, that it was worthy to be governed only of
reprobats: we conceive that in our moderate reformation we have hit the mark
that these men aimed at. And can this be censured for setting up a new Church
or Religion? No no (Beloved) if Romes Rock, and Peter's Chair they vant of,
had not bin subject to shaking, Fascicul. rerum expetend. p. 172.
(as the Arc here was) why did Pope Adrian the sixth acknowledge their gross
corruptions, and promise the Germans by his Legate Cheregatus that they should
have a reformation? Why did the Trent Fathers assign especial Deputies to
enquire into abuses, if the Church should loose her being by an orderly
Reformation.

8 And here because they slight these instances we bring, ad of disunited
particulars, and require visible congregations, that taught (as we do) from
Luther up ward; in this also their own men shall furnish us, and clear us
from being Novelists, to the shame of our accusers. For do not their own
Wimpina and Cochlaeus tell us, (and that by way of exprobration) that the
Lutherans had nothing singular which they borrowed not from the Hussites? Now
that the Hussites were instructed by the Wiclevists, Bellarmine has a touch,
and Historians of these times are more plentiful. In like manner the
Wicklevists are acknowledged for the Waldenses scholars. And these Waldenses
(branded by their Adversaries at least with 32 nicknames) are by the
confession of Inquisitor Reynerius, about 300 years since: descended either
from the times of Sylvester the first, or (as others are persuaded) from the
Apostles themselves. These men were not so circumvented by policy, or curbed
by cruelty, or severed by calamities, or obscured by calumny; but always they
remained visible to those among whom they lived. For should we imagine those
Hussites invisible, when 40000 of them under the leading of the valiant Zisca
gave their enemies so many affronts and overthrowes, and won Conrade
Archbishop of Prague, Perin. hist. l. 2.
and George Gitziko other wise called Poggiebratius, King of Bohemia, to be of
their opinion? Could 900000 of the Waldois or Abigenses spread through all
Christendom, of whom Bellarmine boasts our of Paulus Aemylius, Lib. 46. de
not. Eccles. cap. 18.
that 100000 were slain at one time, be so obscure that no man should take
notice of them? Or would the Pope grant out his Crusadoes, for the rooting out
of those that could be found no where? It is senseless (Beloved) that our
adversaries contend for in this behalf; had the Bishops, Priests, and Deacons
among them a due form of Church Government? Did they publicly in their
Sermons, writings, and disputations, proclaim the Pope to be Antichrist, and
Rome Babylon, and protest against the chiefest of her other, abominations? did
they suffer for this profession, all kind of exquisite torments? And will
those men, that hunted them as Partridges, butchered them, as brute beasts,
registered them as damned Heretics to all posterity, bear now the world in
hand, that they were invisible? But they dissented (say they) from the new
reformers in many gross opinions. This we may not take upon trust from the
lying Monks their persecutors: but from their own Apologies, Confessions, and
Catechismes (gathered and set forth more carefully of late by Lydius in Latin,
and Perin in French) wherein we can discern no such matter. But say their
reformation were not as full as ours (as indeed it could hardly be, for diverse
reasons) who knows not, that as corruptions came not in all at a clap, but by
degrees, almost insensibly; so they could not be withstood, and purged in one
age, by the same parties, altogether. Time, events, and opportunites discover
many things, which industry cannot foresee, or foreseeing straight amend. It
suffices us they were ours in the maine, and tended to that perfection, which
we (by Gods mercy) have now in better measure attained. But what needs half
this, if men would deal sincerely, and God might be heard to speak? No
Christian (we trust) will be so impudent, as to doubt, whether the Primitive
Church including Christ, and his Apostles, were true and visible without
exception: Let them show our dissent from this in any one particle, we are
ready for conformity and thank them for their directions. Let them now on the
contrary but gratify us so much for recompense, as but to set out any one
Church, in all ages, before Luther, that held all points of Popery in the same
manner, and under the same Anathemaes, as the Tridentine Council hathat length
enjoined, and we shall bear with them, for snarling at our visibility.

9 But this digression has held you to^ long; the minutes therefore that
remain, must be husbanded more thriftily. By this which has been spoken may
be well gathered; that as the Arc was taken before by the Philistines, and
after shaken here among Gods Priests and People, in the presence of the best
King, who could not remedy it: So the Church in nearer ages, has run the
like hazards. Taken it has been (as we all know) by the Romish Philistines;
and shaken it may be, though thence recovered (as it has been of late)
amongst our poor brethren in Germany; and God knows who are next to his
dreadful visitation. You therefore whose shoulders are knit, and consecrated
for this sacred burden; shift it not off on Oxen, which in the plainest floor,
may miss their footing. Has God advanced you to honors, and put you
especially in trust, and must his chiefest service be turned aside, as too
mean for your Greatness? Assure your selves (Bloued) Philistines are no fit
pattern for the Priests of Israel to imitate: New Carts or Cart-wrights,
cannot assure us, that the Arc shall be well carried, when ability grows
negligent, and the weakest are left to that load, which requires the strongest.
It cannot be denied but that Oxen had their use, both in the floor and Temple:
in the one to tread out the corn; in the other to uphold the molten Sea: and
Much increase (says the Wiseman) is by the strength of the Ox. Prove. 14.7.
But must the greatest burden therefore be committed to their convoy, and they
walk by as spectators, who should be the chiefest actors? Oxen (I confess)
are to plow, not to sow; not to break up what ground they list, but to be
guided, and driven. Yet must they then be foddered by the careful plowmen,
that they may continue (as the Psalmist speaks) to be strong to labor. Psalm.
144.14.
And here it would also do well, that they have their full growth, before they
undergo the yoke, and be inured to know their owners, that our spiritual
plow might speed the better. Isaiah. 1.3.
But this good husbandry is sometimes neglected; whence Pharao's lean kine
prove suddenly as fat as bulls of Basan, neither fit for cart or tillage: when
others that sweat in the floor, (contrary to Gods Law, Deuteronomy. 25.4. 2. Cor.
9.9. Math. 10.10. Luke 10.7. 1. Tim. 5.18. Aquinas. 2.2. q. 2. art. 6.
and the Apostles Comment) have their mouths muzzled; Upon that of the 1. of
Job, Boves arabant, and asini pascebantur iuxta cos; the Popish gloss is well
known: per Boves (says Aquinas) significantur maiores, per asinos minores.
That which they drive at, is this: Romish Prelates must prescribe what they
list in matters of belief; and their underlings of all sorts, like Asses, must
accept of it in gross. O let not the injuries of these shifting times giueiust
occasion hereafter, for the inverting of this application, when men of worth
shall complain out of their pinching wants and discouragements; Asini
pascuntur iuxta nos vndequaque, and nos qui iugiter aramus, vix habemus quod
comedamus. Howsoever, by this or other means, the Oxen may faint and stumble,
the Axletree crack, the wheels decline and incline, and the Arc be sensibly
endangered: bold Vzzah must not thrust his hand (upon and religious pretense)
to stay or settle that which he has no warrant to touch: which was observed to
be his fault, in the second part of my Text, and succeeds now in order to be
briefly examined,

10 Vzzah put forth his hand to the Ark of God, and took hold of it. A man
would think that this fact deserved commendation, rather then punishment; for
(alas) what should he have done? The Arc had long soiourned in his Fathers
house, and he, and his brother Ahio had done (at least as he conceived)
acceptable service about it. In this present removal, by the Kings
appointment, (at least, consent) as his brother went before to guide, so his
place was behind to attend and help the carriage, as opportunity and occasion
should require. He saw the Oxen staggering, the Cart shaking, the Arc
rouling; he (as it should seem) was next at hand: and who would not have put
forth his hand in such a case? had the Arc actually fallen through his
neglect, would not the whole multitude have cried shame upon him, and perchance
done worse unto him? The Philistims would have blaspheamed, that the Arc of
the God of Israel had now at length caught a fall, as well as their Dagon had
formerly before the Arc. Devotion in the people would have been abated;
Religion, scandalized; Gods ordinances, and holy Mysteries less reverenced,
and esteemed: But infinite such pretenses weigh nothing, where the Law of God,
and obedience required of man are laid in the contrary scale. Whether Vzzah
were a Levite, or no, diverse dispute upon conjectures, and conclude diversely.
Saint Gregory, Hierome, Rupertus, and Josephus, together with Abulensis, and
Serarius the Jesuit, are for the affirmative: Sanctius another Jesuit, with
Dominicus a Soto, and some others, incline to the negative. Let us take that
which may most excuse him, and admit him to be of the Priests race: yet this
was not enough to privilege him, except he had been descended also from Koah:
and the Koathites had no commission to touch, but only in a due distance at the
bars end to bear the Ark of God, Numb. 4.15. This fault therefore in the
Text is termed (...) the vulgar gives it rashness; our Translation, error.
The Greek and Hebrew intimate a respectlesse kind of forwardness. Wherein
this should chiefly consist, all agree not, but use the freedom of their
private conjectures. Some say, that the dishonor offered to the Arc in
committing it to a waine of Oxen, was that which drew on the stroke: but this
touched also his brother, and all the rest of the company, who consented to it,
and applauded it as well as himself, and yet escaped harmless. Others
censure him for touching the naked Arc: but how could that be (says
Abulensis) because the Arc was never lightly without a threefold covering.
Abulensis therefore himself concludes more probably, that there wanted due
reverence in the action. Non seipsum sanctificavit (says Gregory) holy things
must not be touched with unhallowed hands; For God will be sanctified in
those that come nigh him, and glorified before all the people, Levit. 10. That
this sanctification should be hindered by his wives company, (as some
shauelings would have it) is a fancy fitting their uncleanness, but not to be
reckoned amongst honest men's conjectures. With far more likelihood the Jews
lay the fault on his diffidence, as if God could not have vpheld his own Arc,
without his unlawful assistance. Most of these opinions touch somewhat on
truth, but pass by the chief, which I take to be, (with the most and surest
Interpreters) his inconsiderate laying hold of the Arc, beyond his vocation,
flat against Gods ordinance: which David saw, and amended afterward in removing
it from Obed-Edoms house, 2. Chron. 15. where the Priests sanctified
themselves, and set their own shoulders to it: the Inferiors kept distance;
the Elders were ranged orderly, according to their places, as the Lord
commanded. All which their good King saw religiously executed, and then all
things succeeded according to their hearts desire.

11 This should lesson the pragmaticall itching humorists of these our busy
times., to keep within their compass, and not to have an oar in every boat,
where their carriage lies not. Find we nothing to be managed upon our own
demaines, but needs we must be tampering with other men's freehold? can we
presume our own accounts can pass so easily at the last Audit, that other
men's reckonings must unnecessarily be taken into our scores? The Devil has
not had in these latter times a more dangerous engine to dissolve unity, and
breed confusion, then by disturbing the ranks that God has placed us in; and
animating giddy and ambitious spirits, to be factious in businesses that belong
not to them. What has set all Christendom (for so many ages) so much in an
vproare, as the encroaching of the Romish Clergy on Princes Regalities? which
at length may draw them on, and urge them on the other side to cry quits for
restitution. I might enlarge this point (Beloved) if the time, and awful
regard of your Christian-patience confined not my Meditations. 1. Pet. 4.14.
S. Peter has a good caveat in this case to be thought upon. As a Christian
should abhor to be found guilty of theft or murder; so his care should be,
not to be justly condemned for an (...), a busy body (as our English has
it) in other men's matters. What makes the Subjects hand on the Magistrates
sword? or the Lay-mans on the Priests keys? or the Tradesmans to discharge the
Soldiers artillery? or the Soldiers to prize the Merchants wares? And might
not our Scholars be better busied in the State of Questions, then in Questions
of State? Moses was found with his sheep, Elisha with his Oxen, Peter mending
his nets, Matthew at the receipt of custom, when the LORD preferred them to
higher places. When he says, Friend, sit up higher, or come up hither, Luke
14.10. Rev. 4.1.
then may we make bold to do as he commands: Vzziah, and Vzzah, near in
name, but nearer in the like presumption, both neglected this: whereupon the
first offering to offer incense, departed with the leprosy; 2. Chron. 26.19.
but what befell the latter for his rash handling the Arc, that which
follows shows in a very sudden occasion.

12 And the anger of the Lord was kindled against Vzzah, and God smote him
there for his error and there he died by the Ark of God. As God's blessings,
so his judgments are often sudden, sometimes beyond expectation; never without
cause. Who can endure the brunt of God's anger kindled? If he lift up his hand,
there is no warding of the blow. Die must Vzzah here for his presumptuous
error, and die he must by the Ark of God, that the presentnesse of the
execution might be a president for future ages; and the place mind the guilty,
that when God prosecutes, it is in vain to think of sanctuary. Differences
here also are but of small consequence, concerning this punishment. S. Hierome
thinks that his arm and shoulder only withered: the one for being
with-drawne, when it should have borne the Arc: the other for being too
officious when it should have forborne. But the Text speaks of his death, not
by a lingering, but dispatching blow, as blasted with lightning, says one;
knocked down as with an apoplexy, says another. Once this is plain enough,
that smitten he was; not secretly by a plot of man, but by God, openly, and
that without delay, and that in the midst of a great solemnity, and that before
the Arc, and that when he supposed he did God necessary service, and others
expected nothing less then such an event, to leave a pattern to posterity,
that when men oversee or wink at abuses, God will show himself at length in
his own quarrel, execute his own judgments, and judge of al men's actions,
not as they seem in show, but as he finds them in substance, conformable or
dissenting from his strict prescription. Then pretenses shall not secure, or
good intentions, excuse; but the offenders shall suddenly be smitten, and the
innocent righted, beyond the worlds expectation. And now (Beloved) was Vzzah
the last man that ever was pragmaticall? or this the first exemplary stroke
that ever was inflicted upon medlers in sacred mysteries, beyond their
commission? Nadab and Abihu might have been an ensample to him, as he should
be to us; that Gods anger may be as quick to strike, as our presumption is
peremptory to provoke. Should this poor man's good intention have so heavy a
doom, and our impudent intruding be always borne withal? Shall simple error
dye in the place before the Arc; and malice surviue, perchance to do more
mischief? Perez-Vzzah, Vzzah's Breach, should be a warning-peece to us all
for circumspection in our carriages, humility in our proceedings; fear to
intermeddle in cases reserved to our Superiors, and God's own privy Counsel;
lest his angry stroke prevent all parlye; and a breach be made, which shall
never be repaired. I end. At the sight of one of his company suddenly stricken
dead, (as here Vzzah was) Peter Waldus of Lions proved a convert, and from him
are the Waldenses, so famous for resisting Popery. O that the consideration of
this fall of Vzzah, might work in us the like rising from sin. Which God of
his mercy grant, for his Son Christ Jesus sake; to whom with the Father and
blessed Spirit be all honor and glory now and ever.

AMEN.
ALLOQVIVM SERENISSIMO REGI IACOBO WOODS TO CHIAE HABITVM 24. Augusti. Anno
1624.
QVod Portio Latroni e Scholis in forum protracto, vt peroraret public,
accidisse refert Seneca: illum vsque Coutr. l. 11. prooemio.
eo fuisse confusum, vt a Soloecismo inciperet: vereor, ne mihicontingat hodie
apud Te dicturo, (Regum omnium perspicacissime) qui dicenda anticipas, stupenda
ingenii prolepsi; a qua, quantum deficit, tantum infra rem subsidit vel
meditatissima cujuscunque oration. Cum autem sensibile nimium excellens
labefacter sensum, (ut cum Philosophis tradit experientia) quid mirum, si
prodeunti subito e Musarum umbraculis, caligent oculi ad insoliti Solis radios.
Hosce interim vel deponit cum Phoebo apud Poetam, vel cum Mose potius velo
obducit Sacrata Tua Maiestas, quoties appropinquant tui Academici; quos non
benignius audis, quam invitas: non vt inter caeteros tantum gratulentur pro
more, sed prae caeteris compellent libere. Hinc, si fieri potuisset, octodecim
stipata Collegiis, and septem Aulis, in occursum prodiisset Patrono suo, grata
tua Ancilla, Matter nostra, Oxoniensis Academia: Vide Marianam de adventu S.
Iacobi in Hispan. Baronium Martyrol. ad 25. Iulij
sed quia hoc non datur; quod agnoscit, quod debet, quod meditatur, quod vovet,
repraesentat per filios hosce suos primarios. Peregrinantur plurimi ad IACOBVM
Compostellae, and dum quaerunt ibi Sanctum, inveniunt Idolum. Neque enim inter
Fraterculos adhuc constat, An IACOBVS Apostolus vnquam Hispaniam inviserit.
Quanto compendiosior nostra haec Religio, and certior devotio? Isti prolixum
iter emetiuntur, vt minus forsan accipiant, quam conferunt. Tu vero IACOBVS
noster Tutelaris, non tam expectas, tuorum vota, quam praevenis; and vt
cultores illustres tuos, ipse peregrinaris. Capitale fuit Persis irruentibus in
conspectum Regis absque Esther 4.
venia. At Tua quos invitat fama, benign admittit facilitas; nec tristes
vnquam dimittit, nisi hoc nomine, quia est discedendum.

2 Vincula sunt ista (Rex potentissime) quibus arctius constringuntur ingenui
tui subditi, quam manicis aut compedibus adamantinis Mastigiae vilissimi aut
stigmatici: Legibus quidem tuis vincimur nos omnes; sed dimissa celsitudine,
facili severitate, temperata Maiestate, suavi and demulcienti iugo, vinciuntur
praecipue ij, quialias sunt liberrimi. Atque hic dum intueor, quot dicenda
occurrunt, and quam paucis sit dicendum, non adeo turbat quid dicam, quam quid
praetermitam: Non opus est igitur vt vagetur Oration, cum domi habeat vnde
luxuriet. Bibliotheca publica quotannis intumescens ingenti voluminum auctario;
Scholae publicae, pinnis tandem fastigiatae, and nubibus aemulae; Salaria
publica invidenda benignitate Professoribus collata, and confirmata, themata
fuerunt panegyricis ante hoc in loco dictis; quae fastis jam seponuntur, vt
inclarescant seris nepotibus. Atqui non adeo sterilescit Tunm (o Rex
felicissime) Imperium, vel languent Regiae benignitatis exempla; quin certet
cum ipso temporis decursu, Moecenatum recentior beneficentia. Quid dicam de
Aula Lateportensi, quae ( Aquilae instar) tuo diplomate, post tot saecula,
tandem vetustatem exuit, and transiit in Collegium Pembrokianum, vel ipso
nomine satis dotatum and nobilitatum? Ad marginem praeterlabentis amnis,
Heroicis hodie insurgit sumptibus Hortus Botanicus, qui Patavinis vel
Leydensibus, hac ex part, non cedat deliciis. Ex decreto de aperiendo Flumine,
tuo Regali assensu firmato nuper, and promulgato; quam perenne manabit,
Academicis praesertim tuis, emolumentum, sentient affluentius posteri, quam
praesentes explicent. Postremo ne mutus sim aut ingratus Orator, in mea aut
meorum causa; obtinuit ante annum, Tuis praesertim literis, mandato, and dono,
Exoniense Collegium, haud ita latam terrae portiunculam, sed in illa nunc
eminet non infimae notae Sacellum: deest tantum ad complementum, debita
Consecrationis solennitas, and Divi IACOBI titulus: quo ex voto Fundatoris and
Collegii, innotescat posteris; and in iugi Salvatoris cultu, vna cum
Sanctissimi Apostoli, benignissimi Regis in aeternum recolatur memoria.

3 Ista vero cum sint huiusmodi, vtsi indies repetant, indies admirationem
excitarent, in censum nihilominus vix venient, si cum caeteris, (quae Tuae
Maiestati accepta referimus) conferantur. Gloriamur Academiam inter tot
adversantium cuniculos, a Papismi fermento esse conservatam? Conservavit tua
prudentia: Gratulamur Arminianismum nostras Cathedras non infecisse? Exhibuit
tua providentia Antidotum. Disciplinam, Academias, Episcopatus, susque deque
raptassent jamdudum Puritanismi furores, nisi frigidum suffudisset and
iniecisset fraenum, felicissimo rerum vsu maturatum tuum Iudicium. Quis
obstaret aemulis and feralibus istis Harpiis, qui solum illud detractum
sibiipsis and suis pullis aestimant, quod Academicorum accessit rationibus;
nisi tuus interveniret splendour, and nebulas istas dispelleret. Atque istis
quidem laudibus, nil decerpit Militum virtus, nil Consiliariorum solertia, aut
subsidium. In Aedificiis, stipendiis, and privilegiis, agnoscerent potius
morosi, Regis gratiam and Authoritatem, quam sumptus proprios, aut fabricam.
Sed quod Papismus non invaluit, non praevaluit Arminianismus, non dissipavit
Puritanismus, aut prostravit liuidorum sontica barbaries, ^ot congesta
Maecenatum Trophaea; Tuae (vt ita dicam) praerogativae, (Regum omnium
Sapientissime) est peculium. Non hic se immiscent aliae causae auxiliatrices,
aut casus: sed totum hoc, quantumcunque est, quod certenobis Academicis
praecipuum and palmare est, totum (inquam) est tuum.

4 Illam igitur Academiam, (OREX) quam tot affecisti beneficiis, decorasti
trophaeis, munivisti privilegiis; beasti orthodoxae Professionis liberate,
illustrasti praesentia, donasti scriptis, ituris in sequentium aetatum miracula
and oracula, irrigasti postremo expectata affluentia liberandi Fluminis, habes
hodie prostratam ad debita Maiestatis Tuae obsequia, vt agnoscat quanta
accepit, reddat quod potest, veniam petat vbi deficit, exprimat saltem quod
cupit, cum non habeat quod rependat. Mavult nunquam fuisse felix, mallet semper
haberi vilis, quam ingrata tali Patrono, in cuius Benignissimo Favonio, illos
quibus antea and adhuc animatur, haurit spiritus; and in praecipiti senectute
(vt Iuvencula) fit faecunda. Intra proxime elapsum novennium, (obstetricante
pro modulo, meo qualicunque Professoris tui conatu) septuaginta tres emisit in
S. Theologia Doctores; vt omittam vltra centum and octoginta eiusdem facultatis
Baccalaureos: quos confidenter dicam, non tantum Papismum execrari,
Arminianismum non fouere, Puritanismum explodere; sed etiam pestiferam istam,
and nuper flammis vltricibus expiatam, Bucanani, Paraei, Danaei, and aliorum de
cohibendis Regibus sententiam, merito ferire Anathemate. Nec Medicis,
Iurisconsultis aut Philosophis desunt proprii catalogi, desunt fida pectora,
desunt promptae linguae, ad gratissimam Doctissimi Regis observantiam. Summatim
vt dicam; quotfovet Academia genuinos Filios, tot habet Rex Iacobus Deo
supplices, vt Angelus, qui eripuit Iacobum Patriarcham e cunctis malis,
perpetuet illius felicitatem: per quam agnoscimus, Academias vltra speratam
sortem triumphare. Quam pulchra igitur sunt tabernacula tua (O JACOB) and
tentoria sub te Israelis tuae! vt valles nemorosae, vt Horti iuxta Fluvios
irrigui, vt Arbores Aloes, quas plantavit Jehovah. Fluat aqua de situla tua, ad
perpetuum tuorum Refrigerium; ingemat elatus Agag sub tuo victrice brachio: nec
Gog aut Magog Monocerotas aut Leones tuos impune exsuscitent, aut lacessant. Vt
post quam Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, and omnes ejusdem instituti Alastores,
dehiscentibus terrae faucibus, absorptos conspexeris; post quam Locustas and
Ranas Apocalypticas a tuis finibus and latifundiis procul abegeris; postquam
ingratorum murmura, vel iustitia tua eliseris, vel prudentia and moderamine
plusquam humano sedaueris: postquam Regalem tuam prosapiam, apud exteros (proh
dolor!) tot annos jam exulantem, haereditariis sedibus, and dignitati
restitutam videris: Sicut IACOBVS eius Nominis primus, super extremo adorans
baculo, non prius hoc terrestre relinquas Regnum, quam (raptu quasi ELIAE)
coeleste possideas, and in CAROLVM PRINCIPEM duplicetur Spiritus. Quod faxit
Pater in Filio per Spiritum Sanctum.

Amen. I. P. V.
Oxon.
A SERMON PREACHED ON THE FIFTH OF OCTOBER 1624. AT THE CONSECRATION of St JAMES
Chapel in Exceter College.

By JOHN PRIDEAVX, Rector of Exceter College, His MAIESTIE'S Professor in
Divinity, and at that time Vice Chancellor of the University of OXFORD.

Greg. Nazianz. Orat. 43. in Novam Dominicam. (...).

OXFORD, Imprinted by LEONARD LICHFIELD Anno Salutis, 1636.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL GEORGE HAKEWILL, DOCTOR OF DIVINITY Archdeacon of
SVRREY and founder of St JAMES Chapel in Exceter College.
Reverend and Worthy BROTHER,
IT was well said of one, That Honor as a shadow flies the pursuer; but is
always at the heels of him that flies from it. Amongst thankful men, desert
will sooner be descried, the more it muffleth it self; and published with the
greater applause, the less it is affected. You therefore that have been free
to do, may give us leave to acknowledge; for if we hold our peace, the stones
would speak. It is no new observation, that lesser Societies, as well as
larger, have their periods, of growing, flourishing, and declining; which most
men sooner espy, then few give a reason of. About your standing in Exeter
College, what a knot of noted Scholars appeared in sight one of another, to
the credit of our common Mother, Who supplied her other defects with such a
fair issue? I hope none can censure amiss an innocent boasting of Gods
blessings. It was the Honor of my eminent Predecessor Dr HOLLAND, His
MAJESTY'S Professor in Divinity, and Father of so many famous Bishops and
Doctors, to be Rector here at that time, when Dr CHETWIND, and Dr DAN. PRICE,
now both Deanes, the one of Bristoll, the other of Hereford, D^ CARPENTER, Dr
FLEMMING, D^ WINNYF, Dr WEETCOMB, Dr STANDARD, Dr SAMPSON PRICE, besides Dr
BASKERVILE, and Dr VILVAYN, known to be worthy Physicians, laid those grounds,
which improued since, have attained that height the world now takes notice of.
Most of these began to show themselves in their several stations, together
with your self, under the Moderation especially, of that painful and
judicious Director, M. William Helm, long since a learned Bachelor of
Divinity, but then Deane of the College; my faithful and deserving Tutor,
ever with thankfulness of me to be remembered. With this man, in a godly
emulation of industrious study, and joint care for the College good, lived
those two religious and constant Preachers, Bachelors of Divinity, M. WILLIAM
ORFORD, and M. ISAIAH FARRINGTON; who forgot us not when they left us, but so
wrought upon the pious dispositions of those Excellent Men, Sir John Acland and
M. John Periam Esquire; that Exceter College by their bounty, got a New Hall
and Lodgings, of more charge and worth then all the former Bulding. But a
greater defect then all this was, of a fit House for Gods Service, that which
we had, being too scant for the Company, and otherwise very incommodious: This
God put into your heart to supply, before we complained, or others saw cause;
which resolution could scarce be so natural to any other, as to Great Sir
Thomas Bodley'es Kinsman, and worthy Mr Periam's Nephew. They that view and
consider the Work, will hardly be persuaded, that it was erected at the sole
cost of one, Fellow of Exceter College, not preferred, as many are, and having
two Sons of his own to provide for otherwise. John and George Hak will.
But where God inlargeth the heart, such difficulties restrain not the hands.
Promise, performance, founding, finishing, came freely on together: which (We
trust) in time some other of our Worthies will hereafter imitate, as all are
ready to commend. All succeeded the better, through your own careful presence
and directions; and will prove (I am persuaded) more auspicious, in that it was
contrived by you to be consecrated upon that very Day, which made England most
happy and triumphant, by your Noble Master Prince Charles his Return from
beyond the Seas. This Sermon was overhasty to bear any correspondency with
the solemnity of a Consecration: But such as it is, you may claim it as your
own over-valued purchese; together with the Author; Whom long sithence you
have obliged unto you by many real kindnesses. Which here he thankfully
acknowledges, who desires ever to continue

Exceter College. November. 15. Your ready friend for requital, as God shall
ever enable JOHN PRIDEAVX.

LVKE 19.46. My house is the house of prayer.
FEw passages in Scripture are more often pressed, or precisely recorded, the
the words I have read unto you, Beloved: Our Savior cites them out of the
Prophet Isaiah, chap. 56.7. and three Evangelists distinctly set them down,
and the fourth intimates the matter of them. Which harmony of both Testaments,
and four Evangelists, though it make not this text more authentical then
other, (as being of equal authority from the same Author) yet well may it
invite us to a more serious consideration of them; in regard that is not likely
to be of ordinary consequence, which it pleases the Holy Ghost so often to
repeat and register. It is observed by most interpreters, that twice our
Savior entered into Jerusalem, and purged the Temple; first a little after his
Baptism, Joh. 2. and next not long before his passion, recorded by the three
other Evangelists, Math. 21. Mark 11. Luke 19. Caietane thinks that this last
time, this purging was twice performed; first (as S. Matthew relates it) upon
the first triumphant entrance: and secondly, (which S. Mark mentions) the
very next day after. But by conference of both Evangelists, I find no ground
for this assertion: other Interpreters note it not: we may pass it therefore
as an uncertain conjecture, and observed by the way, upon better evidence;
first, how soon corruptions grow, upon persons, places, and manners, never
carefully reformed; and next, what zeal and resolution is to be used of those
whom it truly concerns; when Religion is profaned, Temples polluted, holy
things perverted by dogs and crafty Merchants, to private gain, Lu^e. 2.7.
with public scandal. He whose birth was the pattern of patience; life, the
Legend of lowliness; Math. 11.29. Philip. 2.8. Isaiah. 53.7.
death, the most submissiue degree of humiliation and true obedience; who as a
Lamb, was brought to the slaughter, and as a sheep before the shearer, 1 Pet.
2.23.
opened not his mouth: who when he was reviled, Isaiah. 42.3. Math. 12.18.
reviled not again; when be suffered, threatened not; never trod so heavy as to
break a bruised reed, or quench through impatience the flax that smoaketh: in
sacrilegious abuses, Religious quarrels, Churches rites and rights, behold how
he loses the raynes to an holy indignation. The multitude of the offenders,
the might and malice of the observers, the danger of the action; the peril of
the consequence, among such a rabble and outcry of exasperated miscreants, stay
not his hands at all, but a scourge is made of small cords to lash them. John.
2.15.
Out must the sheep and Oxen, down must the Tables of Doue-hucksters, and
mony-changers? where, no doubt, but (as S. Hierome has it on the 21. chap. of
Matthew) the rays of his Divinity miraculously darting from his sacred
countenance, Math. 21.12. Mar. 11.15.
stayed all opposition in the guilty, and part-taking in the astonished
beholders. Notwithstanding, that all might be sensible of the fault, and take
notice of the reason that moved him so unexpectedly to such extraordinary
severity: he vpbraides them with that of Jeremy, Is this House which is called
by my name, Cap. 7.11.
become a den of robbers in your eyes? have you no other Exchanges, but
Churches; or Faires for your sheep and Oxen, or markets for pedling-wares and
money, but such places as are consecrated to religious uses? Think not that my
earnestness is without ground, or Zeal without knowledge; you might learn of
the Prophet Isaiah, that I speak not without book. For there you have it
written; My house, not yours; is, and so must ever continue; the house of
prayer, not a den of thieves, and shop for merchandice; as you have impiously
made it. And this I take to be the scope and meaning in general, of the few
words my text consists of.

2 In which may it please you to observe with me these

Three circumstances 1. What God reserues to himself in the general grant of
all things to man, A house. 2. A distinctiue propriety whereby it is set apart
from common use, intimated in the possessiue, My. 3. The principal end of this
separation, by a Synecdoche including all other religious duties, in that it is
termed by an excellency, the house of prayer.


The first includes a ground for Churches and Chappells: the second a warrant
for Consecration; the third, a direction for the chiefest use of both. GOD will
have a House; this House must appear to be his peculiar; this peculiar must
not be made common, 07 as an Ild hall for plays or pleadings; or a shop for
merchandice; or a cloister for idle-walkers; or a gallery for pleasure; or a
banqueting house for riot; much less a brothell for wantonness, or a cage for
idolatrous superstitions but reserved as a sacred Congregation-house, where
penitent and submissiue supplica^ts may learn their duty by Preaching; assure
their good proceedings by Sacraments, obtain their graces by Prayer. Though
Heaven be Gods Throne, the Earth his footstool; his Essence infinitely above
all, through all, in all, and beyond all: yet his delight is such, to be among
the children of men, that it likes him to have a place of assembling them
together for his public worship, Math. 18.23.
where he vouchsafes to be in the midst of the^. And this must be, not a
mountain, a cave, a grove, or obscure hovel; but (as my text has it) a
convenient house: the first point to be discussed.

3 As Time and Place are the inseparable adjuncts of all transerunt actions: so
the Lord requires as well a House, as a Day, for his public worship. Such is
(...) in my text; not a moveable Tabernacle, or an Inn for a nights lodging;
but a fixed Mansion, to dwell in: which the Article: so restrains not to the
Jewish Temple, but that it may well be extended to all public fabrics,
erected in like manner, and set apart for the like religious worship: For this
glorious Cathedral Temple, excluded not among the Jews their Parochial
Synagogues, or (as they may be termed by an Analogy) Chapels of ease. Those
our Savior and his Apostles never spoke against; in those they preached,
prayed, disputed, and catechized the people: and therefore left a warrantable
example for all succeeding ages to follow. And what shall I speak of the
Primitive zeal of Christians in this behalf? No sooner had they got loose in
Constantines time from Heathenish persecutions, but every good man's devotion
was set on fire, his head plotting, his purse open for Churches and Chapels.
Emulations were between Prince and People, who in this kind should go
farthest: most men of any ability held it their chiefest glory to be registered
to posterity for Founders of Churches or Chappells. (...), etc. c. 45
Constantine's decree runs in the second book of his life, written by
Eusebius, Vt diligentes sint Episcopi circa Ecclesiarum structuras; that
Bishops should be extraordinary diligent about the building of Churches and
Chapels; if any were ruinous to repair them, and make them larger; if any
were wanting in convenient places, they were to build them new. He himself
began with unspeakable charges to adorn his new City Constantinople,
especially with Churches and Chapels for Gods service. One Church called
Irene, and the other Apostolica, were eminent Monuments in the n="a" Lib. 2. c.
18. (...). De vita Constant. l 3. c. 23.
Tripartite story of his religious magnificence, to be admired rather then
imitated. In Jerusalem he commands the Bishop Macarius to erect a Church so
far surpassing all other structures in that kind, that Eusebius intimates it
might be the New Jerusalem, so much fore-spoken of by the holy Prophets.
Notwithstanding Justinian was so eager to outvie him in this devout
liberality, that he subtracted the n="b" Zonaras Annal. tom. 3.
stipends from his Readers of the liberal Arts and Sciences, to enable
himself the better to build the n="c" Evagrius hist. Eccles. l. 4. c. 30.
incomparable Church of Sophia. Charles the Great is commended for erecting so
many Churches as there be n="d" Aventin. Annal. l. 4.
letters in the Roman Alphabet. And what shall we imagine that others did, of
greater ability, when n="e" Henricus de Erdfordia.
365 Churches, one for every day in the year, are registered to be in Ireland,
of S. Patricks sole foundation?

4. But that which true devotion first grounded, necessity urged, convenience
furdered, holy ability perfected, and God blessed: Opinion of merit, false
miracles, apish imitation of Paynims, superstition toward Relics and Saints
departed; and perchance in some, an itching ambition to get a name; through the
Devils stratagems, and man's vanity, quickly perverted and abused. What a toy
was it that n="f" Greg. Turonen sis de gloria confess. c. 11.
S. Martins boy should procure a Church to be built in the place where his
Master stood when he cured a lame Priest? A strayed n="g" Pontanus de Bello
Neapolit. l. 2.
Bull, got a Church to be erected for S. Michael the Archangell in mount
Garganus. And S. n="h" Vincent. l. 24. c. 22.
Denis tells Charles the Great, that the sins of all the Spaniards were
forgiven at his request, who had been contributers to the building of a Church
for his Saintship. Upon any dream, or conceit, or vow, or report of a relic,
or any other mistaken accident, up must straightway a Church. And Popes to
foster the humor, for their own gain and glory, and maintenance of their
dependants, must sometimes privilege them with many n="a" See a book called
Fiscus Papalis, in which Pope Sylvester and Gregory have granted so many
Indulgences to the Church of S. John de Lat aran in Rome: quas nemo numerare
potest nisi solus deus: as Pope Boniface witnesses, who confirmed them all,
vid. Chemnicii examen part. 4. page 736. and Bellarmines defense of these
fopperies de Indulgent. l. 1. c. 9 and lib. 2. c. 20. with Greg. de Valent. de
Indulgent. c. 4.
years indulgences, to get custom to their trade; and for the robbing (as
they were wont to say) of the Egyptians; to the deluding of simple people, and
scandal of Christian religion. This made way for superstitious processions,
idle Pilgrimages, sottish vows and oblations; whereby the Priests grew fat as
the Bulls of Basan, but the people lean as Pharaohs kine. Golden Chalices had
wooden Masse-mongers; empty skonces, precious Miters. There were diverse S.
Mary's for one Christ-Church. And no marvel; for Gods word and preaching once
laid aside, and reconciliation by faith in Christ little sought after, or
mistaken; what May Game and outward pomp, which best contented the sense, might
not easily pass for the best Religion; and those for the holiest Professors,
which under the vizor of hypocrisy, practiced the cleaneliest convayance?
Against such insufferable abuses in sacred intentions and expenses, the Fathers
have sometimes let fall somewhat hasty speeches, which might slack their
liberality, who take them not aright. What should gold do there (says n="b"
De offic. l. 2 c. 28. Non auro placent que non emuntur.
S. Ambrose) where it can buy nothing? Martyrs delight not (if we believe n="c"
In Matthew. Hom. 51. et 81
S. Chrysostom) to be honored with that money for want of which the poor
pineth and lamenteth. n="d" Male parietum vos amor cepit. Ad Auxentiu^.
Hilary bids us beware of Antichrist, in such magnificent walls and Palaces.
Saint Hierome suspects not a few of them be built rather for pride, then
piety. It is a wonder to read how tart Saint Bernard is against them in his
Apology to William, n="e" Ep. ad Demetriadem exponente Erasmo. vide. Hieronym.
in Jeremiae, 7. and in ep. ad Nepotianum.
Abbot of S. Theodoricke: not that these good men (with diverse others) misliked
decency, cost, or state, proportional to situations, assemblies, and founders,
and the abilities of such houses for Gods worship; but desired to restrain
excess, curb ostentation, stop superstition, which at length began to be
intolerable in Images and Relics: but especially to beat men off from the
conceit of merit, and rectify their good minds, where circumstances so
required in diverse cases, to more charitable employments. The elegancy of S.
Bernards Caveat deserves to be recited: In Apolog. ad Guliel. Abbatem S.
Theodorici prope finem.
O vanitas vanitatum (says he) sed non vanior quam insanior. Fulget Ecclesia
in parietibus, and in pauperibus eget: suos lapides induit auro, and suos
filios nudos deserit; de sumptibus egenorum servitur oculis divitum. Inveniunt
curiosi quo delectentur, and non inveniunt miseri quo sustententur. Where upon
he concludes afterward, Proh Deum! Si non pudeat ineptiarum, cur vel non piget
expensarum? By which it is clear, that unnecessary structures, superfluous
charges, ambitious pomp, are the things they strike at; where the painting of
the house, is the impouerishing of the household. Otherwise they applauded the
work; Sainted (in a manner) the Founders; acknowledge the Jews comendation of
the Centurion, with our Saviors approbation to be a notable warrant and
encouragement. He is worthy for whom thou should do this; for he loves
our Nation, and has built us a Synagogue, Luke, 7.5.

4 They are not worthy therefore to be confuted, (or scarce deserve to be
mentioned) who in hatred of a Nation, or Religion, or in heat of faction,
overthrowe Gods houses: such as were Nabuchadnezzar, Antiochus, Dioclesian, the
Maniches, Messalians, and Eustathius, reckoned up by n="a" De cultu sanct. l.
3. c. 1.
Bellarmine, de cultu sanct. l. 3. c. 1. With whom when he ranketh the
Petrobrusians, Waldenses, Wickleuists, Taborites; a man may choose whether he
will believe him: For it is no new practice for Papists to make their opposites
odious, by fastening upon the^ such groundless calumniations. Feign also to the
same purpose he would find somewhat against the n="b" Porro Lutherani and
Calvinistae admittunt Templa, sed solum ad concionandum, and sacramento
administranda; reprehendunt autem quod fiant templa adorandum, quod
consecrentur certoritu, quod dignis sumptibus ornentur. De cultu sanctor. l. 3.
c. 1.
Lutherans and Calvinists: but their innocence is so apparent, and his mouth so
toothlesse, that he snarleth rather then biteth. He would give us (forsooth) a
n="c" Ibid. c. 3.
model, how we should build our Churches: First, they must be like Solomon's
Temple, consisting of a (...), and a (...) or (...), of a Porch, a Body, and a
quire: otherwise all is out of frame, and the workmen and contriuers shall be
shent. Then if they point not most an end to the East, for direction of our
faces that way in Prayer, our devotion is like to find cold comfort. It were
pity to omit those five pretty reasons he brings from the depth of School
Divinity to prove it. The first is Geographicall. Paradise was toward the
East, (though not according to the Vulgar, yet according to the Septuagints
Translation: and therefore we should pray toward the East. n="d" Aq. 2.2. q.
84. art. 3.
I marvel whether this plot must hold also with his consorts in the
East Indies, and China; for if their faces likewise in prayer must be settled
Eastward, Paradise (for ought I know) will be cast at their backs. The second
reason is Astronomicall: Because the Heaven begins his motion from the East;
which if the scripture confirm not, Claevius upon Sacrobosco will make it
good. The third is Prophetical: Christ is named vir oriens, n="e" (...)
Zach. 6. And therefore with great reason should be looked for in the East. The
fourth is in some sort moral. Christ upon the Cross looked Westward, and
therefore to look him in the face, we must set our faces Eastward. Also
toward the East he ascended into Heaven; and from the East he shall come as
lightning: Mat. 24.27.
And is not this enough to make all suppliants in their Prayers look Eastward?
His last inducement is altogether Political: Exodus 26.
The Jews prayed toward the West; should not we therefore, to cross them,
pray toward the East? Vt significemus (as he adds) eorum esse Literam
occidentem, n="f" Bellar. de cultu sanct. lib. 3. c. 3.
nostrum autem spiritum vivificantem; to signify that they have the Western
Letter, and we the Eastern Spirit? for so it must be rendered, to make sense
in the point he urges it. These are the great Cardinals reasons for Church
architecture: which I refute not, but leave, for their conversion, who affect
to direct their Prayers by the Rumbes in the Compass. The thing we disallow
not, as in it self merely indifferent; yet embrace it not, on such
Jesuitical inducements, but in regard of a commendable conformity.
Notwithstanding, Tom. 1. p. 932. An. 443. n. 5.
we may take notice by the way, that Pope Leo the fourth, (as Binius and
Baronius acknowledge) in opposition to the Maniches praying to the Sun,
Eastward; made a Decree, that Catholici ad occidentem conversi Deum colerent;
Catholics should worship God with their faces toward the West. Whom
Bellarmine might have done well to have reconciled, Durand. de ritib. l. 5. c.
2.
with his successor Vigilius, who not long after (as Durand tells us) first
determined the contrary.

De cultu sanctorum lib. 3. cap. 2. vid. Hospinianum de Templis lib. 7. cap. 1.
6. Better are his forces employed against the Anabaptists: who though they
maintain a worse opinion against the building of Churches, yet they justify
it with more probability then Bellarmine does their situation. Arguments of the
Anabaptists.
They urge us with the practice of the Patriarchs, who occasionally erected
Altars where they thought meetest, and pleased God by their sacrifices; Church.
They press us with the impossibility of the attempt, and that from Gods own
mouth, Isai. 66.1. Heaven is my throne, and earth is my footstool: where is
the house you will build unto me? which they back with these places of the New
Testament: God dwells not in Temples made with hands, neither is worshipped
with men's hands, as if he needed any thing. Which S. Paul repeateth to the
Athenians, Savior catechized the woman of Samaria before, Ioh. 4. That Gods
worship under the Gospel, should not be restrained to the Mountain of
Samaria, or Temple of Jerusalem, but left free, as the Apostle dispenses; I
will therefore that men pray every where, lifting up pure hands, without wrath
or doubting, 1. Tim. 2. They conclude therefore that the Jewish Temple was but
a type of Christ, pattern for Christian Churches: and that the light of nature
taught diverse Heathens, that which the Stoics delivered positiuely, Answer to
the first.
Churches for the Gods are not to be built at all. But all this is soon
answered. The Patriarchs case and ours is not alike; their own habitations
(for the most part) were moveable Tents; and their families, parochial
Congregations: fixed houses therefore for Gods worship, sorted not with their
condition; yet such places (no doubt) they had, which fitted their
conveniences. That of Isaiah and the Texts of the New Testament generally,
prove no more, To the texts of the Old and New Testament in general. Deus non
approbat Templa quibus se putetur includi. Bell. de cultu sanctor. l. 3. c. 2.
Particularly to the 4. of John. and 1. Tim. 2. To the 6. and 7.
but that God disclaimeth such houses, wherein he might be thought (as the
Heathen Idols) to be included: Not Churches, in which a multitude might
assemble for his worship. This was that which some of the Heathen by the light
of Nature saw and acknowledged. Particularly that of John 4. and 1. Tim. 2.
freeth Christians from restraint to the Jewish Temples, or any other such fixed
palace, not forbids them to build Churches otherwise; in every place where they
found it necessary and useful. And grant that types are now ceased, and that
the Temple were a type, (as in the 3d of John it is intimated) our Churches are
not now so; and therefore that demolished, ours may stand and multiply, by an
analogy also from that, not as it was a type, but a place of public worship:
as their Sabbath abolished, we in imitation retain the Lords day: time and
place convenient, of necessity ever attending all such sacred actions. It were
to be wished therefore, that in building, repayring, and adorning such
religious Houses, our devotion were as forward as our warrant is
uncontrollable. The very Turks may shame us in this behalf, who neglect their
private mansions, to beautify their profane Moskoes. Surely God has need of
no such Houses, but the benefit of them redoundeth to our selves. Yet diverse
are all for the private, and nothing for the public, though never so much to
Gods glory. But can we make a purchase of a firmer tenure, or expect greater
interest then his bounty will afford us? How comes it then to pass, that in
this building age of ours, so few think on Churches? which find commonly no
harsher enemies, then those who are, or have been raised by their ruins? What
examples have we almost of any Patrons, who selling the Benefice, have brought
as much as a load of stones toward the building of Gods house? Nay would not
those wicked caytifes, who unjustly detain the tithes from their right owners,
be content also to have the Church for a barn to put them in? Such a curse
attends sacrilege, to make men senseless of the anger to come. They join
house to house so close together, that Gods House shall find no room to stand
between them: and oftentimes allot more cost for a sepulcher to hide their
carkases, then they and all their progenitors have been at charge to the
Church it stands in. The more precious in Gods sight, and honored of all
good men, are such Religious Shunamites, who build and furnish chambers for
Gods Prophets: 2. King. 4.9.10.
and those heroically Zealous David's, 2. Sam. 7.2.
who take little pleasure in their own palaces of Cedars, where Gods House is
not erected and adorned accordingly. Which how it comes to be appropriated to
him by the title My, succeeds in the next place to be declared.

7. My House. Why this rather then another? Is not the Earth the Lords, and all
that is therein? and are not all Houses his by the same title of Creation and
Preservation? Why challenges he then this, having the like claim to all? but
that, as he had chosen the Jews among all the Nations of the World; so it
pleased him to sever that house before all buildings in the World, by an
especial favor for the time, to put his name there. To make this appear to
all men, who otherwise might excuse their profaneness, through want of notice
of the difference; he ordained solemn ceremonies for the Consecrating and
Dedicating both of the Persons, Things, and Places, to his sacred service: the
consideration whereof might breed a reverence in his worshippers that should
use them; and vindicate them from miscreants that should employ them otherwise.
For this purpose, Tabernacle, Priests, and Altars, with all their
appurtenances, are consecrated by Moses, with great joy and solemnity, Numb. 7.
The Temple is thrice dedicated; first by Solomon, 2. Chron. 7. Secondly by
Ezra, Ezra 6.19. Thirdly under the Maccabees, 1. Maccab. 4. the Anniversary of
which Dedication, our Savior (as it is thought) graced with his presence, and
that notable Sermon for the justifying of his Ministry, and calling of the
Gentiles, Ioh. 12. This was taken up afterward among the Christians, by Decrees
of Councels. In the 5th held at Carthage, the 6th Canon is peremptory; That if
any doubt arise whether a Church were consecrated, without any slacking it
should be performed. The same is ordered also in the sixth Canon of the 2d
Council of Bracara. Gratian cites to the like purpose the Councels of Nice and
Hippo; but n="a" Quanquam isti Canones modo non extant, ni si apud Gratianum.
Vid. Bellarm. de Dedicatione and consecratione Eccle siarum l. 3. de cultu
sanctor. c. 5. Vid. Binium ad Council. Bracarens. 2. Can. 6.
Bellarmine confesses, that in those there is now no such thing extant. This
is clear out of Eusebius in the ninth book of his Ecclesiastical History,
chap. 10. that such dedications of Churches were long in use before his time:
And in his fourth book of the life of Constantine, he relates how the Synod
of Tire was called by the same Emperor, for solemnizing the consecration of a
Church which he had built in Jerusalem. Athanasius accused by the Arrians,
that he had ministered the Communion in a Church not consecrated; excuses
himself in an Epistle to the same Emperor, That necessity through the peoples
concourse, and manifest danger, enforced him thereunto, which otherwise he
would never have done. It would be tedious and superfluous to touch at the
consent of Fathers, for the further countenancing of our assertion. Nazianzen
has an Oration, Chrysostom, and Basil each a Sermon; Gaudentius a Tract,
Hyginus and Gelasius some Decretals. The Collector of the Sermons de Tempore 5;
Gratian. de consecr. d. 1.
S. Bernard 6. Sermons of the approving and manner of such dedications and
consecrations: whence the Canonists and later Writers have gathered what they
thought fit, all allowing the thing, as an ancient and necessary
Church-constitution, but differing somewhat in the ceremonies: whereof some
would have more, some less; this Church, these; another others: All agreeing,
that no Minister inferior to a Bishop, might canonically consecrate it. But
that the Popes consent must be also had, to make it good; we find no such Canon
among the Ancients, whatsoever Socrates, Hist. l. 2. c. 8. Vid. Hosp. de Templ.
4. c. 2.
and the Canonists would needs put upon them.

8. But what advantages takes not Satan in man's prosperity, which he has no
ground for in adversity? Psalm. 49.20.
Man being in honor, has no understanding, but may be compared to the beasts
that perish: And Churchmen once got free from the pressure of Heathenish
bondage, exceeded all measure in aemulations, factions, and vanities. Liberty
brake out into luxury: Superseminations and Superstructions, ouer-grew and
obscured the good seed and building. Which Addition and Multiplication, not
only of points of Doctrine, but superstitious and ridiculous ceremonies;
partly borrowed from the Jews, and partly from the Heathen, began to work a
Substraction of other Churches of Rome, and continues especially the Division
which now all Christendom groans under. To let pass other matters, and on
with the point we have in hand. The reverent and ancient manner of dedicating
Churches to God, may appear by the acts of Constantine in consecrating the
Church at Jerusalem, registered (as you shall find) by Eusebius; De vita
constantin. l. 4. Nicephor. l. 8. c. 26.
Precibus and concionibus decorarunt, with Prayers and Sermons they adorned
their first assembling in it; which was accompanied with alms to the poor,
and great gifts to the Church and Bishops, befitting the estate of the Founder.
Zonaras in Constantin.
And have we any other in the South Church but Conventus, lauds, and gratias,
assemblings, praises, and thanksgiving to God, to make up their consecration?
Per conventus lauds and gratias Deo canentes. Athanas. Apolog. 2.
No more then this, in his 2d Apology, Athanasius affirms Bishop Alexander to
have used. Home to this comes the Church of Helvetia, in their latter
confession, chap. 22. By reason (say they) of the word of God, and holy
Exercises therein celebrated; places dedicated to God and his worship, are not
profane. Which Suarez the Jesuit grants to be sufficient, in his third Tome
upon Aquinas disp. 61. sect. 2. Possit interdum Oratorium per simplicem
voluntatem, and Ecclesiam per simplicem benedictionem: sometime an Oratory by
the simple intention of the will, and a Church by a plain benediction, may be
destined to the Ministry of sacred things. But plain benedictions, expressing
good intentions, come short of the aim that pompous Rome after leuelled at.
When the people of Israel were well under God's immediate patronage; and were
told by Samuel, of the inconveniences that might follow by alteration. Nay (say
they) but we will have a King over us, that we may be like all the Nations. 1.
Sam. 8.19.
All was naught, except they were equal, or passed the Heathen in outward
pomp and curiosity. And was not this the very itch of Rome, which raised the
scabbes that to this day cannot be cured? A Church or Chapel could not be
built, but a cross or more, must be set up before hand, to design the place
where it should be founded. Vid. Durand. Rational. Divin. l. 1. c. 6. Sleidan.
Com. l. 21.
As soon as it is up, twelve crosses must be painted about the walls, with
twelve burning tapers over against each of them. Then Holy water must be had to
wash it, and oil to anoint it, Hospin. de Te^plis l. 4.
and that of no ordinary composition. The Crosses indeed (says Bellarmine)
should be painted at the very act of consecration; De cultu sanct. l. 3. c. 5.
but commonly it is done before, propter commoditatem: nimis enim diu
expectaretur, si in ipsa consecratione pingerentur: It were a great
inconvenience to stay so long at the act of consecration, till the Painter had
finished them all. Then comes the Bishop, and three vagaries he must fetch
about the place with his company; and after hallowing the walls without, with
some water mixed with salt sprinkled with Hyssop, and murmuring some few prayers
at the door being shut, Three times he thumps at it, and cries, Tollite
portas, etc. Lift up your heads O ye gates, and be lift up ye everlasting
doors, and the King of glory shall come in. Then the Deacon, (who for that
purpose is shut within to act his part) must take his kue, and say, Who is the
King of glory? To whom the Bishop replies no more at first, and second course,
but It is the Lord strong and mighty, even the Lord mighty in battle. But all
this making no way, in the third return he takes upon, and tells him stoutly,
it is (Dominus virtutum) the Lord of Hosts, he is the King of glory. Presently
thereupon open flies the door, and in goes the Bishop, with two or three
assistants, and after a few prayers said at the Altar, and exorcising of some
salt, and water, ashes, and wine; and drawing the Greek and Latin Alphabets
crossewise wise on the ashes sprinkled on the floor by the Deacons, with the
end of his Crosiar-staffe: at length it comes to their turn, who stay all this
while at the door without, to bring in the Relics of some one Saint or
other, which they have ready, upon a Beer; and then to perfect the Pageant, De
consecrat. distinct. 1. C. Omnes Basilicae.
a Mass must be said; For without such Relics and Mass, the Consecration
(according to the Canonists) were altogether ineffectuall.

9. Wherefore about a nine or ten years since, when a Church was consecrated
at Gorslebium, in Count Mans-fields Country, by a Lutheran-Superintendent:
because all these ceremonies were not then used, exception was taken by a
Papist (who said he was then present) that it was rather a mere profanation,
then consecration. Which moved John Aeschardus, (the man that did it) to write
against Bellarmine de Templis, which our Hospinian had done before more fully:
both discover so far their Heathenish imitation, and apish tricks in this
behalf; that in have they will not be answered. I have purposely omitted many
things; as, the laying of the first stone, (which of necessity must be square,
and crossed by the Bishop, and sprinkled with holy water) the ado they keep
about Altars, Images, and Vestments, the Baptizing of Bells, and the like: all
which you have fairly expressed in distinct pictures, and red letters, in the
Pontifical of Clement the 8. anno 1595. Where he that cannot read, may see
how it is done. Now if any be further inquisitiue to know the meaning of all
these Hieroglyphics, De Cultu Sanct. l. 3. c. 5.
Bellarmine himself will inform him; That the 12 Crosses, and Tapers before
them, signify the 12 Apostles, that carried this Banner of Christ through all
the world, and by their Preaching enlightened it: Oil is added for excellency:
Holy water, frankincense, and wax-candles, for clarity and neatness: Ad
Munditiem and claritatem.
The Greek and Latin Alphabet in the pauement, show that in those tongues the
Gospel was most generally preached, when these ceremonies were first
instituted. Et quia in Templo non solum docentur homines, sed mouentur and
inflammantur ad virtutem and vitae novitatem; idcirco (says he) fit illa
mixtio aquae, cineris, salis, and vini. Let them take the inference for good,
that see a reason for it: Ideo pulsatur Ostium, and iubetur Diabolus recedere,
vt Reliquiae sanctorum introducantur. Beltar. V.S.
For my own part (I may profess) it goes beyond my Logic. But the
prettiest exposition of all, follows: that by the knocking of the Bishop (as
you have heard) at the Church door, the Devil is dislodged; and (as it were
by a Writ De Eiectione Firmi) forced to give possession to the Saints Relics,
Vincent. l. 23. c. 26. Gaguinus de gestis Francorum. l. 3. Cranzius in Saxonia.
l. 1. c. 22. Fulgosus. lib. 1. c. 6.
which then are to make an entry. Now who would ever have suspected, that the
Devil had possessed all such places before Consecration, more then any other;
except these men had told us of it, who (perhaps) are better acquainted with
him then our poor Ministers are? You have the substance of their Doctrine;
(Beloved) which yet to make passable, with those that must not examine it, they
have Legends of Miracles to confirm. They tell us that diverse of their
Churches have been consecrated by Christ himself, and his Apostles; Fanum
virginis Mariae. An. 948. Sep. 13. in Vigiliam Exaltationis. S. crucis.
Another by Saint Michael the Archangell; of a third, at whose consecration,
was seen a Gregorius Turonen sis de gloria confessorum. cap. 20.
Globe of fire, that filled all the Oratory, with a brightness terrifying the
beholders. They would make us believe, that at such times, Sigebertus in
Chronico.
wicked spirits have been heard to howl, and complain that they have been
forcibly dispossessed of their Tenements; Greg. Dialog. lib. 3. c. 7. citat.
Bellarm.
and that the Devil has been seen in such cases to fly from the Church or
Chapel, in the shape of a filthy Sow. Vid. Hosp. de Templ. l. 4.
What should I speak of our Saint Dunstane, who when water wanted for the like
solemnity, stroke the ground with his Episcopal Staff, and presently there
spouted forth a Spring. The same good Father at another time, being to dedicate
a Church, which stood not just East and West; made no more ado, but set his
shoulders to the building, and presently it was rectified as he would have it.
Last of all, when a Church built to Saint Peter's honor, was to be consecrated
by Melito (I think) Bishop of London: the good Saint came the night before,
and prevented the Bishop; whereof he sent him word by an honest Fisherman;
(and withal an extraordinary Fish caught at that time in the Thames,
miraculously, by the same poor man; with diverse others) that the Bishop should
not take it unkindly. Where Surius, who relates the story, assures us further;
De vitis sanctorum ex Ealredo, Anglo, Abbate Rhieuallensi.
that when the Bishop the next day came to view the Church, he found the two
Alphabets drawn cross wise; upon the pauement, the Relics of 12 lamps,
sticked to so many crosses; the walls in so many places anointed with holy Oil;
and all the place wet (as it were) with the fresh sprinkling of Holy water,
just in the same manner as now the Popish Pontificalls say it should be.

10 These things have I related the more largely (Beloved) in regard that such
occasions as these seldom fall out, to acquaint the younger sort with these
Romish mysteries; the notice whereof may give you a taste, how inclinable the
Italian humors are always to play the Mountebankes; and how blessed our case
is, who so fairly are freed from them. As our Founders disclaim all merit, so
our Reverend Bishops (as you see) pretend no Miracles to credit their
Consecrations. Such devices we leave to them, who have no better warrant to
justify their actions. It suffices us that all things be done (...) and (...),
1. Cor. 14.40.
and tend to edification, without superstition, as the Apostle in such cases
has directed us. Surius himself out of that great Legendary Metaphrastes
relates, that Auxibius S. Mark's Disciple, when he dedicated a Church, (as our
Chapel is at this present) used no other ceremonies but a devout form of
prayer, the pith whereof is set down in these words: Benign and Clemens Deus,
etc. Most bountiful and merciful God, send thy holy spirit to inhabit in this
sacred House, which is built to the worship of thy Holy Name; and confirm and
establish it, to be unalterable for the profession of thy pure doctrine, even
unto the end of the world. And have we not this ground from the Apostle
himself, That every creature is sanctified by the word of God and Prayer? 1.
Tim. 3.5. And what is Sanctification, but that in general which Consecration
is in special, a severing of Places, Persons, and Things, from common use, by
deputing them through convenient rites, to Gods peculiar worship and service.
This procured heretofore respect to the Things, reverence to the Persons, and
an awful regard in men's behaviors, as often as they entered into such
sanctified places. But all this is much decayed in the looseness of these
latter times: Impudency pleads prescription for greater presumption, more
commonly in such Houses and Assemblies, then would be tolerated before a
Chair of State, or a common Court of Justice: Nay, that Pupil or servant, who
in a College quadrangle will honor his Master, at least with a Cap. in a
Church at Sermon time will make bold to affront him covered, howsoever he stand
bare to deliver Gods message. This irreverence would ask a rougher hand
(beloved) then this time affords me to lay on it. What? are we worse men in
the Church or Pulpit, then we are abroad? Or does Gods House, or Service,
detract that from us herein; which otherwise is acknowledged due, and commonly
performed without gainsaying? Exodus 3.5. Joshua 5.13.
Moses and Joshua must off with their shoes, because the ground is holy
whereon they trod. Women must be seemly covered in such places, 1. Cor. 11.10.
Math. 18.23.
because of the Angels: and is not our Savior himself, by promise, in the
midst of them, where two or three are gathered together in his name; and
especially in such consecrated places? Take heed therefore (as the Preacher
catechizeth thee) not only to thy foot, but to thy Head, Hands, and Heart,
Eccles. 5.1.
when thou entrest into the House of God, and be more ready to hear, then to
offer the sacrifice of fools. Bellar. de cult. fanct. l. 3. c. 5.
Not for the inherent sanctity of the place (which our Adversaries press too
far) but through the obiectiue Holiness, adherent to it, by Christ's
promises, sacred meetings, united devotion, joint participating of the Word and
Sacraments, lively incitements through others examples. In such a consecrated
place; 1. Sam. 3.
Samuel, faithfully ministering, became a great Prophet: David, a King,
preferred the Portership before the most pleasant Tents of Worldlings: Psalm.
84.10. Luke 2.28. Psalm. 65.4.
old Simeon had the honor to get Christ into his arms. Blessed is the man
whom thou chusest (O Lord) and receivest unto thee: He shall dwell in thy
courts, and shall be satisfied with the pleasures of thy House, even of thy
Holy Temple: Where the best keeping of our wake-daies, is the awaking from
Sin; the true celebrating of Encoenia, the renewing of Gods Image, defaced in
us; (as the signification of the word admonishes us) the happiest feast of
dedication, the dedicating of our selves to God, by a lively faith) hearty
Repentance, continued and fervant Prayer; which is the maine end, such Houses
are ordained for, and last member of my Text, which makes up the Conclusion.

11 My house is the house of prayer] Praise waits for thee, Psalm. 65.1.
O God, in Sion, and unto thee shall the vow be performed. O thou that hear
prayer, unto thee shall all flesh come. That which is here affirmed by the word
(...) [is the House of Prayer] is expressed by S. Matthew, and S. Mark, by
(...) [shall be called etc.] according to the Original in Esaias, (...) My house
shall be called the house of prayer to all people. But who knows not that [is]
and [called] with the Hebrews, come to one reckoning: to intimate the
conformity that should be between things and names. I will not be curious in
the recital of all such names, whereby those Houses have been styled among
diverse Writers. That which the Hebrew commonly terms (...) either for the
stateliness of the building; or for that God (as a King in his Court) most
gloriously affords his presence in it; the Greeks expressed either by (...),
because of Gods inhabiting in it; or (...) for its Holiness; (...) for the
reverence due unto it; or (...) for its including a Congregation like a Flock
of sheep; or (...) in respect of its separation from common places. It is also
by a Metonymy, especially in later times, called (...), transferring the name
of Congregation, to the place; and sometimes (...), the Lords House; from
whence the Dutch word Kyrk, and our Church, may seem to have their derivation.
Among the Latins, the most general appellation was Templum a tuendo, from
beholding thence the Heavens in a religious contemplation; Then Sacrarium from
its sanctity, from whence the word Sacellum is thought to be a derivatiue:
Fanum a fando; or delubrum a diluendo, from the fatidical oracles of the
Priests, or their superstitious washings is more usual among profane, then
Ecclesiastical writers: Martyria, from Martyrs relics: and Basilica, from
Kings palaces, came in after, when superstitions and affected pomp through
prosperity, had tainted Christianity. In like manner from S. Martins hood,
barbarously called in Latin Capa, or Cappa, and carried about for good luck
by Lewis the French King in all his wars, In Praefat. ad Liturgiam
Chrysostomi.
Beatus Rhenanus with Rational. l. 2. c. 10. Habes per belle Etymologi am
Rhenan. v. s.
Durand, derive the word Capella; whence we have our English Chapels, and
Chaplains; which others deduce rather a pellibus caprarum, from certain
goats skins, wherewith such portable tents were covered, as they removed
with them for Gods service, in their warlike expeditions. Such names
oftentimes, necessity forces us to retain; not in any relation to their
superstitions or untoward originals; but for distinctions sake, and avoiding as
great a scandal, and soloecisme in innovation. For, were it not a ridiculous
peevishness to new-name our weeke-daies, because they had their appellation
from the Planets or Paynim Gods? or must the word Sacrament be rejected,
because it came to us from the Heathen? Hence therefore must we have the
decision of that controversy whether Churches and Chapels now may bear the
names of S. Peter, S. James, S. Mary, or the like? we affirm, they may; nor
for their Relics contained in them, or Invocation directed to them, or Graces
expected from them; as the Bellarm. de cu ltu sanct l. 3. c. 4. prop. 4.
Papists contend to have, and the Vid. Hookerum. l. 5. sect. 12.13.16.
Puritans fondly cavil we give: but for certain notes of difference, the
better to discern one Church or Chapel from another; and a religious
retaining of those in memory, by whom God is honored, and good men excited to
imitation. This is S. Nonne si templum alicui sancto Angelo excellentissimo de
lignis and lapidibus faceremus Anathematizaremur: etc. Aug. cont. Maximil. l.
1. c. 11.
Augustines express doctrine: We erect no Altars to Martyrs, but ipsi Deo
Martyrum; quamvis in memorias Martyrum. And Contra Faustum Manchaeum l. 20.
cap. 21. Revera, Basilicas Christi construere, Culsus latriae est, quem soli
Deo debet sides grata sidelium. Walden sis Tom. 3. Tit. 17. c. 145. sec. 2.
Socrates relates, Histor. l. 2. c. 18.
that Constantine the Great honored Drepane with his Mothers name, and a city
in Palestine with his Sisters; non quidem ad cultum earum, sed differentiae
causa cum aliis vrbibus; not to entitle them thereby to religious worship; but
the better to distinguish by such memorials, these places from other cities.

12 All that has been spoken in this point, comes to this issue, that
particulars exclude not the general: S. Mary's and S. Peter's may be God's
houses of prayer; as S. Mary and S. Peter are Gods Saints: who have left us
examples how to pray, and especially in such Houses. Now these Houses are not
here Christened by the names of Concionatoria, or Sacramentaria; Houses of
Preaching and administering the Sacraments; (though Preaching and Sacraments be
the ordinary and blessed means, for the begetting and confirming true faith in
us, whereby our prayers may be effectual) but of (...), or Oratoria, places of
Prayers, and Courts of Requests to the Great King of Heaven, as both the
Greeks and Latins style them from the primary action; Prayer (...) including,
by a notable Synecdoche, all other Religious duties, which are ordered to it,
and receive a blessing by it. And surely (Beloved) public Prayers and Sermons,
(for ought I find) never trespassed one upon another, till the itching humors
of some men of late, would needs set them together by the ears. For what? must
Sermons needs be long to shorten Prayers? or Prayers be protracted or
multiplied of purpose to exclude Preaching? I pray God there be not a fault of
both sides; of laziness in the one, and vain glory in the other: When those
would excuse their slacknesse, or insufficiency, by a pretended devotion; and
the other draw all devotion to attend on their discourses. Let Preaching
therefore so possess the Pulpit, that Prayer may name the Church, as here it
does; let both take their turns without striving for the wall that God may
have the glory, and Gods people the benefit. For such purposes, this and the
like Chapels are built and consecrated; not to be cages for idolatry, or
chanteries, for superstition in an unknown tongue; or theaters for willworship
to any Saints or Angels; or conventicles for factions, or Receptacles to vent
our spleen, or display our follies; or shelters for our hypocrisy: but for
the perpetual celebrating of Gods great Name, who delights to dwell among
those that dedicate themselves unto him, and serve him in truth and syncerity;
not as humane wisdom prescribes, but as he himself commands. Grant
therefore (O most gracious God) that our negligence in frequenting them, or our
pride in slighting them, or our coldness in using them, or profaneness in
abusing them, or our sacrilege in robbing them, or our contentions in
troubling the^, or our errors in tainting the^, or our barbarousnes in
polluting them, be not an hinderance to the fructifying of thy Word and
Sacraments, the propagating of thy Gospel, and the hearing of our faithful
prayers, and hearty devotions in them. Let thine eyes be always open on this
place, to take notice in it of our wants; thine Ears to receive our
supplications; thy hands to relieve all our necessities. Bless him and his
that founded it, thy Reverend Servant that has now consecrated it; us, and all
our successors in the continual and happy enjoying it; through the merits and
mediation of thy Son CHRIST JESUS: To whom, with thee, and the HOLY GHOST, be
all honor and glory, both now and ever.

AMEN.
JOHN 6.14. Then these men when they had seen the miracle that JESUS did,
Said, This is of a truth that Prophet that should come into the world.


MY Text sorts with the time, wherein we celebrate the Advent of the Prophet
which the people here proclaimed, was come into the world, and the course of
the Gospells appointed to be yearly read on Sundaies in our Church Liturgy,
The 25. Sunday after Trinity.
is closed with the very same words of the coming of this Prophet. The miracle
of feeding five thousand men, besides women and children in a desert place,
with five barley loves only, and two little Fishes, which drew from the people
this acknowledgment of the coming of this Prophet, is registered by the three
other Evangelists, Math. 14. Mark 6. Luke 9. with some little variation of
some circumstances: But this notable confession and profession of the multitude
was reserved (as it should seem by the holy Ghost) for that Evangelists
relation, who had discovered before from his Masters bosom, John. 1.14.
That the word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, and we beheld his glory, as
the glory of the only begotten Son of the Father, full of grace and truth. In
a dispute in the former Chapter, with the Jews of Jerusalem (who took upon
them to be extraordinary zealous for their Sabbaths, and Moses Law) with what
invincible arguments does our Savior make good, That he was HE that should
come, and that they were not to look for any other? He proves it by the
testimony of his Father, proclayming it from heaven in his Baptism, and his
manifest joint working with him, He proves it by John Baptist, whom they held
for a Prophet, and to whom they had sent to know, and what could be fuller
then John Baptists testimony? He that comes after me, is before me: And behold
the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world. He proves it by the
Scriptures, their own grounds, and those he urges them to search, and see
whether they did not testify of him or no. He further adds Moses to prove
it, in whom they trusted; and if ye believed him (says he) you would have
believed me, for he wrote of me. Last of all besides all this, if an
unquestionable miracle might be more prevalent, such a miracle they had also,
in the cure of the man at the poole of Bethesda, who had layne there for remedy
eight and thirty years. But that will satisfy perverse praejudice, and
obdurate malice? Professors of religigion for their own glory and gain, will
hardly be brought to yield, though never so plainly convinced, For how can ye
believe (says our Savior ver. 44.) which receive honor one of another, and
seek not the honor that comes from God only. Chap. 12.43.
That love the praise of men, more then the praise of God. This was the rot
that had then infected the Jewish Synagogue, and happy had it been for
Christians if it had there stayed. Let a miracle of our Saviors be never so
important, they will persecute and seek to slay him, because he did it on the
Sabbath day. Chap. 5. v. 16.
One calumny or other they must needs find out, to set a color upon their
own proceedings, and cast aspersions upon his actions, and doctrine. But must
Christ then have no Church, because some of those chiefest Churchmen were
opposite to him? It appears here to be otherwise. Him whom those leaders
forsake in policy, the Inferiors in simplicity follow. Math. 14.
They follow him from the Towns and Villages, striving who should be the
foremost, they follow him with their wives and children, little regarding the
encumbrances. They follow him into a desert place, not thinking what wants and
hazards they might meet with, Mark. 6.
and this they find at the hands of the bountiful Master they followed. He
compassionats them as Sheep without a Sheapheard, teaching them many things,
makes them a miraculous feast to send them away with content, beyond all
exception or expectation. And then these men when they had seen the Miracle
that JESUS did, said, This is of a truth that Prophet that should come into the
World.

2. The words then are an Acknowledgement of the multitude that the promised
Prophet was come into the world, and that JESUS who did that miracle was He.

Wherein may it please you to take notice of these two Generals, 1. Due
observation, Then those men when they had seen the miracle that Jesus did,
said, 2. True inference, This is of a truth that Prophet that should come into
the world.


To infer without precedent observation is rashness, and to observe and make
nothing of it, Idle speculation. Many are very curious, and censorious in the
first, who fall short in the latter, and others are so precipitant in the
latter, that they conclude often times without the praemisses of the first. The
practice therefore of these simple people, herein appears more rational,
then the hastiness of many greater Scholars. These would see before they
said, and would not lay of a truth, before they were thoroughly assured that
there could be no falsehood in it. Which falls upon the first part, the due
observation, and in that order as the Text leads comes first to be
discussed.

3. Then these men when they had seen the miracle that Jesus did: Said;

In this observation we may well take notice of 1. The Observers, These men] 2.
The manner of their observation, They saw] 3. The thing observed, The miracle
which Jesus did.]


What these men were it easily appears by that which goes here before, (...)]
and the Collation of the three other Evangelists. They were not Scribes and
Pharisees (for ought that we find) nor of Herod's Court, much less any of
Pilats followers, for those (it is likely) as Gallio in the Acts, Act. 18.17.
cared for no such matters; but inferior persons, that admired our Saviors
doctrine, conversation, and miracles, such as lived abroad in the towns, and
villages, and were willing to hear and see something, that might give them
further satisfaction. They knew that by following Christ, they were like to
have small countenance of the Scribes and Pharisees. They understood that John
Baptist was butchered but a little before by Herod, and therefore from the
Herodians they had cause to fear some danger. Nor could they be so ignorant as
to expect any worldly benefit from Christ, who had not as much as a Fox, or
Foul; a hole, or a nest to put his head in, Mat. 8.20.
yet they with some of their wives and children, would needs venture to run
after him, into a desert, and to pass through thick and thin (come of it what
would) so they might enjoy his company. In charity a man would hence gather,
that some divine motion, more then ordinary besides a popular curiosity,
wrought so many to be of one mind. Otherwise how could they have been so
resolute? Let us see now how our Savior takes it, and entertaines them. He
that fills the hungry with good things, and sends away the rich empty, has
compassion on their travel and wants, would not consent to his Disciples
advice, to dismiss them without some real and memorable token of his
acceptance, and therefore examines them, what provision they had. Philip tells
him, that two hundred penny worth of bread would not serve so many, that every
one might have a bit, and perchance they were not so well stored to have two
hundred pence in their stock: and if they had, there was no place to get so
much for their money. Andrew brought some better news, Verse. 9.
that there was (...), a Little Lad who had in readiness five barley loaves,
(...).
and two small fishes, small they must needs be (as the word in the original
signifies) otherwise how could the little Boy have tugged them thither. But
what (says he) are these among so many? Our Savior hears them quietly, and
replies not upon their objections of inconvenience, and distrust, for he
himself knew what he could, and would do. Cap. 6.39.40
Make the people sit down, says he, (...) (says S. Mark) in several
companies, upon several plots of ground, (...), as the green grass would
afford them Cushions, here a hundred, and there fifty, that there might be
distinct passages between them, and all might see what was done. And all this
being done as Christ prescribed; He blesses the Loaves, and Fishes, delivers
them to the Disciples, the Disciples to the guests, the guests are all
satisfied, and twelve Baskets were filled with the fragments after five
thousand and more had eaten as much as they desired.

4 It would prove to small purpose to inquire here farther, whether this
company had any drink to their meat? and where they had it? 2. How this bread
and fish multiplied, and with whom, either the givers or the takers? 3. With
what convenience every single Apostle could minister by computation of some, to
above eight hundred? 4. Whether every Apostle had his several basket, for the
fragments, and how these Baskets came there, with this and the like stuff, it
is a piece of no small learning with some, to furbish up great volumes. But
there is no great mastery in such mysteries, which are more profitably slipped
over, then mentioned. Yet to give no vantage to the scrupulous Sceptique or
Scoptique, 1. For the drink there needed not running to wells or neighboring
Rivers (as Salmeron the Jesuit conjectures) seeing the virtue that multiplied
the food might make it serve both for drink as well as meat. 2. The
multiplying is to be thought to have begun, first in the hands of our Savior
(as S. Augustine notes with S. Hierome) then to have continued under the hands
of the Apostles (as Chrysostom) and lastly to have its complement in the hands
and mouths of the eaters, as S. Ambrose concludes with S. Hilary. 3. The order
of their placing, made them the easier to be served, neither the contrary
appears, but that one might help another in the distribution. 4. What matter
is it from whence these Baskets came, seeing it is manifest they were there,
and received the fragments only, not whole loaves, to put it out of question
that the food there found was multiplied, and not other shifted in by crafty
conveyance. Two things might be more profitably thought upon of us for our
instruction. The first taken from the quality, and act of these men. How ready
are those (...), common people, not worthy the naming to follow our Savior
retyring from them? Amongst us those of better rank scarce give him
admittance, when he seeks them out by his Ambassadors, to do them good. The
danger of the times could not keep these back, but many happy, secure, and
alluring invitations hardly bring us on. These followed our Savior into the
desert, but what shall I say: We fly from him coming home unto us in his word,
Sacraments and benefits. These things well thought upon (B.) by the best, would
make them better, and considered often by the slacker make them ashamed of
their ingratitude. It is a cutting speech of our Savior to his rebellious
countrymen, Luke 13.28.
there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, when ye shall see Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, and all the Prophets in the Kingdom of God, and you your
selves thrust out; and when Publicans and harlots, and the meanest of the
people that believe and are penitent, Math. 31.21.
and follow Christ, shall be set at the right hand with the sheep, and the
Grandyes of this world turned over to the left hand amongst the goats. This
should put the greatest to a present resolution, for altering their dangerous
courses, and for preventing the danger that is to come. Now to direct this
resolution to the most wished effect, here we have (in the second place) our
Saviors own practice for a pattern. How tender a respect had he to these
inferior people, that put themselves upon him? (though perchance the particular
ends of most of them were not to be approved.) How compassionatly does this
good sheapheard take a view of these straggling sheep? how careful he is to
provide for them, and return them to their homes without all dangers, and
discontent? O that all Superiors would but hence think upon their charges, be
they never so mean, never so wayward, never so ill deserving, to be tender
over them, and procure their good, by this deauenly example! In this good way
these (...), these promiscuous Observers, have entered us. The manner of their
observation follows now in the third place.

5 (...) seeing, or when they had seen. It is almost as good (nay perchance
better) to see nothing at all, then to be an idle spectator, and learn
nothing. God has given us our outward senses to inform our understanding, our
understanding, to direct our will, our will to carry a hand over our rebellious
and sensual appetites. And if we make not this use of them, the devil will
quickly cut out work: Greg. l. 7. ep. 5.3.
Nam quem Diabolus non invenit occupatum, ipse occupat, (says one) therefore
it is very commendable in these meaner and plainer people that they were not so
wanting to themselves, or disordered in their sudden concourse, but that they
took a care to see what was done. They saw the barrenness of the place, the
impossibility of supply; the time passed, their return troublesome, and
dangerous, the night drawing on: And from the poor disciples what could they
expect, who had scarce provision for their own necessities? They took notice
(out of doubt) of the little Ladde with his course, and poor pittance, of
their own great number, of our Saviors conference with Philip and Andrew, of
their uncomfortable answer, of his resolute command to have them sit down, of
the distinct ordering their sitting that all might see what was done, that the
least suspicion might not remain of any collusion. In all this Seeing, here
were no evil eyes, wandering eyes, wanton eyes, envious eyes, proud eyes,
covetous eyes, flattering eyes, (...) sand blind, hypocritical winking eyes,
2. Pet. 1.9.
staring one way, and squinting another, or the like. And it were to be wished,
and it is to be religiously endeavored, that no such eyes may be found
amongst us: He that opened so many eyes of the blind, invites us to come to
him for eye salve. Rev. 3.18.
I counsel thee to buy of me gold tried in the fire that thou may be rich,
and white raiment that thou may be clothed, that the shame of thy nakedness
do not appear, and anoint thy eyes with eye salve that thou may see. The
reason of this is given by the best Oculist, The light of the body is the eye.
Mat. 6.22. Luke 11.34.
If therefore thy eye be single, thy whole body shall be full of light, but if
thine eye be evil, thy body shall be full of darkness. The eye therefore
must be constantly directed to the scope we ought to aim at, it must not
glance aside to be too prying into things that belong not to us, or with
watermen to look one way and row another, for this will bring in the end
darkness, discontent, and confusion. These plain men (as it should seem)
regarded not to look after at that time any other thing then was before them,
but fixed their eyes wholly on that, and that was the Miracle which Jesus did;
the thing observed in the third place.

6 Miracles are unusual events wrought above the course of nature (says
Salmeron. Salmer. Tom. 6. Tract. 1. (...).
) To bring in all what the Schoolmen, and latter popish writers have heaped
upon this point, would be too tedious, I shall take therefore only that my text
here occasioneth, and so pass along. S. Augustine puts a difference betwixt
Miracula and Miranda, Miracles and Wonders. Things that we wonder at, are often
performed by Devils, Magicians, and Impostors, because, not on a sudden we
conceive the causes of them, and in true miracles there is a reason given by
Aquinas of their diverse appellations; 2.2. q. 178. art. 1.
they are termed Miracles in regard they exceed the bounds of nature; Signs,
because somewhat else is signified, besides what is done; Prodigies for their
excellency; Portenta for intimating somewhat to come; Virtues, because Gods
power is seen in them extraordinarily. This we have here is called (...), a
sign. A sign to be seen, to manifest the omnipotency of him that did it, and
the truth of his teaching. Two other ends of such signs are eminent in
Scripture; The one to convince perverse, and obdurate men with whom no reason
is prevalent: so Moses convinced hard-hearted Pharaoh with his Magitians, Exodus
8.19.
and brought them at last to this acknowledgement, This is the finger of God.
Elias drove the Baalites to the like confession: by obtaining fire from heaven
to consume not only the Sacrifice, and wood, but the stones, dust, and water
about it. 1. King. 18.39
The Lord is the God, the Lord is the God. The second is to vindicate his
people, or particular servants from the hands of their enemies. So the Sun
stood still, and great hailestones were cast down from heaven, to give a full
overthrow to the Kings of Canaan, Joshua 10.
that had banded themselves against Joshua and his followers: and two she
Bears came out of the wood, 2. Kings 2.24.
and woried those forty and two children that mocked reverend Elisha. But this
difference between the Miracles of Christ, and those of his Apostles, or the
former Prophets is to be observed. They wrought them, not in their own name,
and power. So Elisha in a Miracle of the like nature to this, when he fed a
hundred men with twenty loaves, and some full ears of corn. 2. Kings 4.42.
Give the people that they may eat (says he) For thus says the Lord; They
shall eat and shall leave thereof: Acts 9.34.
So S. Peter cures Aeneas, Jesus Christ makes the whole. But our Savior comes
in a higher strain to the dead Damsel, Talitha Cumi.
I say unto thee arise; to the stormy winds, and seas, peace, and be still;
Mark. 5.41. Ib. 4.39. Ib. 9.25. Luke 4.35. v. 10.
to the raging devil in the possessed, hold thy peace and come out of the man;
as here make the people sit down, and no more ado, He blesses, they eat,
and the little pittance served them, with an overplus of fragments voided, more
then the whole was at first.

7 The Devil finding it his best plea to be Gods ape (in every thing he may
have scope, and take vantage) has never neglected in all ages to furnish his
followers with his miracles to win himself credit, and make them obstinate,
Iannes and Iambres, 2. Tim. 2.8. Act. 8.
are opposed to Moses, Simon Magus, to Peter, Elymas to Paul, and (if that
story of Prochorus, be not counterfeit, Tom. 1. in vita S. Iohannis. ca. 28.
and 29.
which they of Collaine have set forth in the last edition of the Bibliotheca
Patrum) Cynops that dogs face coniurer, (for so the name signifies) to the
blessed Apostle S. John. Nay to disgrace the miracles of our Savior which
neither Jews nor Heathen durst do, at the time they were written, and
witnesses were living that saw them, he imploies Philostratus in eight books,
and a pleasing style, to record the miracles of Apollonius Tyaneus, the
Pythagorean, with one Hierocles, to second him, and paralels that Impostor with
our Savior. But how absurdly, ridiculously, and impudently Eusebius has
excellently demonstrated. Nay Julian the Apostata, though most earnest against
Christians in those ten books, answered by S. Cyril of Alexandria, and
snarles in all that he can, at their doctrine, yet has little or nothing to
say against the Miracles that back it. Those he seems to acknowledge, at the
end of his 6. book, as Josephus the Jew does very ingeniously, Pilate the
Praesident in two Epistles to Tiberius the Emperor, and that gross Impostor
Mahomet himself in his Alcoran. Here then we see that Miracles have been
necessary, and afforded by God himself for the grounding of doctrine, and
confirming of it at the first settling. But being once grounded and settled, and
a platform described and commanded for the right continuing of it, then we are
left to this Scripture and are not to expect, much less to depend upon new
Miracles for the confirming of it; much less bring in new additions; for so
the former Miracles should be slighted, and the latter be found so various, and
multiplied, that none should know whereto to trust. Thus when in the prophet
Isaiah's time the people esteemed not (as they should) of Moses law and the
Prophets, which was brought in by signs and wonders, but would have new signs
and wonders (as fancying that which was written, was not sufficient) the
Prophet takes them up roundly for it, chapter the 8. Bind up the testimony,
(says he) Seal my law among my disciples, and when they shall say unto you,
seek unto them that have familiar spirits, and unto wisards, that peep, and
mutter, should not the people seek unto their God. If they speak not
according to this word, it is because there is no light in them. The same
doctrine is reinforced by Father Abraham in the parable, Luke 16. Where when
Dives could obtain no help for himself to mitigate his hellish torments, he
intercedes to have his five brethren warned by sending Lazarus unto them, that
they might prevent the misery that he was in; but what is Father Abraham's
reply? They have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them: Dives not
satisfied with this, Nay father Abraham (says he) but if one went unto the^
from the dead they will repent, such a Miracle out of doubt would convert them,
but what was Abraham's conclusion? The same that must constantly be ours, If
they hear not Moses and the Prophets, they will not be persuaded, though one
rose from the dead, and if the Scripture, now complete amongst us, be not
sufficient to direct in the right, Miracles will come too late to set us in a
better course.

8 What means then the Church of Rome to tamper so much in blazing, and
urging unto the people a Mass of their Miracles? And Bellarmine (amongst the
rest) to make it a note of that Church, as though this were convincent enough
to make the Christian world believe that Protestants are in the wrong, and they
in the right, because we have no Miracles? But they have more then they know
how to depend upon, or defend, to use, or to excuse. It is a strange speech
that the Cardinal has in his 3. book de Eucharistia, and the 8. Chapter, in
these very words, Haereticos non potuisse extorquere miracula, neque a Deo,
neque a Diabolo, ad confirmandam realem praesentiam. The Heretics could never
wrest miracles, either from God or the Devil, to confirm the real presence,
and his second, James Gretser the Jesuit is yet more open, Tam enim sterilis
and deserta est Lutherana and Calviniana secta vt diabolus ne dignetur quidem
per eam aliquid fallacium, and vmbratalium prodigiorum aggredi; saltem
frequenter, and palam; veritus opinor, ne omnibus ludibrio exponatur.
and general in his defense of the 2. Chapter of his first book de verbo Dei,
Diabolum ne dignari etc. The Devil himself, is as it were ashamed, to
confirm the doctrine of Luther by miracles. It is well then that Luthers and
Calvines doctrine against popery, makes the Devil ashamed, whom I had thought
had been past shame as far as any Jesuit. But what do these men mean in
blurting out such inconsiderate speeches? Do they take pride, that the Devil
is so at hand to advance their cause by Miracles, and so shamefaced and
backward to do us any favor in that behalf? If this be the issue between
us; we shall rest content, and be confident upon such Miracles as our Savior
wrought here, and his Apostles after for the first propagation of the Gospel,
and when we bring in any new doctrine, or add any superstitions dissenting
from this, then we will be venturous to cast about (as the Jesuits do) for new
miracles to confirm it.

9 And here a man would think that in this height of learning, and diligent
inquiry into all such superstitious businesses, they would have left off at
length for shame, to uphold their shattered superstitions, with such known
delusions? For how childishly stupid, and ridiculous, are their Legend
Miracles? As that St Brandon with his Monks should keep three Easters upon
the great fish Iascon's back in the midst of the Sea. That S. Francis should
swallow a spider in the Challice, and have it out afterward at his shinne
boane. That our S. Dunstane should take the Devil by the Nose, with his
tongues, and S. Dominick make him hold the candle, Capgraue in eius vita.
till he burnt his fingers. That S. Patricke should raise out of a Sepulcher
one Glass in Ireland King Loger's hogheard, who was an hundred foot long, and
baptize him after he was dead that he might return no more to hell. Of these
and the like miraculous stories we have the censure of Melchior Canus (I
think as learned a Professor, L. 11. p. 533.
and Bishop as most of that side) Dolenter hoc dico, potius quam contumeliose I
speak it out of grief rather then to disparage any; That Diogenes Laertius
amongst the Greeks, and Suetonius amongst the Latins, have more syncerely and
seriously set down the lives, and acts of the Philosophers and Emperors: then
Catholics have Chronicled the doings of their Martyrs, Virgins, Saints, and
Confessors. By this we might hope of some plainer dealing, and that Miracles
should be no more so palpably forged to infatuate the credulous, but alas we
find it otherwise. Printing and curious painting are now hired to express
these Pageants, with the more grace, so that those who have no other helps of
learning may have the miracles at life in the pictures. In this fashion not
much above twenty years since, the Miracles of the Rosary were set forth at
Antwerpe, and dedicated by the Dominican Friars to the Infanta of Spain: There
in the eight picture you shall find a head of a noble Virgin called Alexandra,
devoted in her life to the Rosary, ascending from the bottom of a pit into
which it had been barbarously thrown, and making Auricular confession to a
Dominican Friar, and thereby preventing her damnation, 150 days after it had
been cut off from the body. In the 12. the blessed Virgin is fetched from
heaven to be a Midwife to a Spanish Lady, and our Savior himself to be
Chaplain for the Christning of the child, and afterward to say Mass at the
Churching, where S. Anne and S. Magdalen also attended in the manner of
gossips. It would be teadious to your patience, but to have a list of the new
Saints in their Miracles, S. Isodore, S. Teresa, S. Francis Xaverius and the
like, who are scarce yet warm in the Calender. Only S. Ignatius the Jesuits
founder may be a little taken notice of, his picture we have in a peculiar
table, set forth by Francis Villamena, and dedicated to the Duke of Bavaria, on
the top of it, is prefixed this Motto, fit for him and his, that have been the
firebrands of so many combustions. Ignem veni mittere in terram, and quid volo
nisi accendatur? I came to set fire on the earth, and what will I but that it
be kindled? About this picture in Ovall rounds, are ranged this Saints Miracles
to the number of 29. Here, you may see him shining, and lifted up from the
earth, and receiving in a moment from God by infusion the knowledge of the
greatest matters, and from the B. Virgin with the child in her arms, the gift
of chastity. Not far from that, you shall find a Landresse cured of a
withered arm, only by washing of his linen. Over against, he sits cudgelling
away with a staff in his left hand an ill favored Fiend, that came to tempt
him; all may not be repeated, but that which is strangest of all is in the
bottom. There is God the Father painted (with his son by, holding in his
hand the Cross) and mediating to his son, for S. Ignatius (there kneeling
before them) that he would receive him and his fellows upon the Fathers
commendation into his protection. The subscription is, A Deo Patre cum sociis
commendatum, Jesus in tutelam recipit. What should we think of this passage,
we acknowledge as the life of our faith, that the Son is our Mediator and
Advocate to the Father, but that the Father should ever mediate to the Son
for the Jesuits to be received into his peculiar patronage, I think it will be
hardly found, but only in this pageant of the Jesuits. But these are but the
fancies of peevish painters, (may some man say) not any way countenanced by the
pillars of that Church; I would willingly have it so too, and wish with all my
heart, there were that sincere dealing amongst them that nothing could he said
against them that might not be as soon answered. But it falls out otherwise,
for have we not under hand and seal of this Pope now being Vrbane the 8. in
the Bull of the Canonizations of Ignatius Loyola, a Catalogue of the like
miracles in the curing of diverse not only by prayer to him, but by applying his
Image to the parts most desperately affected? A copy of which Bull is to be
seen in our public Library in Oxford, I trust his holiness will not father
fancies. But I should dwell here too long, if I persued more particulars.

10 Contra Mirabularios istos cautum me fecit Deus meus, (says S. Augustine.)
Against such miracle-mongers, God has armed me to take heed. In Johan. Tract.
3.
Where he says in the last times many false Prophets shall rise, Math. 24.11.
and shall show great signs and wonders, in so much that if it were possible,
they shall deceive the very elect: Behold I have told you before, V. 24.25.
and the use is there added to this doctrine, wherefore if they shall say unto
you behold, he is in the desert, go not forth, behold he is in the secret
Chambers, (...) (says the original) it will bear in a pix, or sacring box
by Transubstantiation, believe it not. The Apostles second this. S. Paul tells
us that that man of sin, that son of perdition, that wicked one shall come
after the working of Satan, with all power and signs, and lying wonders, 2.
These. 2.9.10.
and with all deceivablenesse of unrighteousness, and therefore we are to take
heed and to stand fast: S. John foretells us of a great beast, Revel. 13.
that should do great wonders, and deceive those that dwell in the earth by
means of those Miracles; and adds this, If any have an ear to hear let him
hear. There were then signs (says an ancient author upon the 24. of Matthew,
Operis Imperfecti.
which usually has gone under the name of S. Schrisostome) whereby heretofore
true Christians might be differenced from their opposites. Hom. 49.
First discipline, then Miracles, thirdly good life. But after the abomination
of desolation once sits in the holy place, the Idolaters shall have Church,
Scriptures, Bishops, Sacraments, in a more pompous manner then the right
believers. They shall stand upon Miracles, make a show of a greater strictness
of life, then any of the true professors, and that with so high a hand, that
then there will be left nothing to know who are in the right, Nist tantummodo
(says he) per Scripturas, but only by the Scriptures. Paris. apud Audoenum
Parvum, in 80.1557.
But this whole passage in one Edition is left out, for some reasons the
Factors for Popery best know. Now for the discerning of true miracles from
false, we need go no farther then tantummodo per Scripturas, De Notis
Ecclesiae c. 14.
here in the text. Bellarmine in refutation of a fond dotage of Mahumet (that
he set the Moon together, when it was cut in too, and restored it to heaven)
thinks it sufficient to reply, Neminem fuisse qui videret hoc miraculum? who
saw this miracle besides him that is said to work it? And may not we likewise
demand who has seen these Indian Miracles and others, that they so much vaunt
of? This miracle here was not done by candle light in a corner, to be seen
through a grate, at a distance, but at bright day. It was fully seen not by
one, but many, not of one sort, but of diverse conditions, not engaged in a
faction, but indifferent. These plain honest men are indifferent trialls,
between realities and forgeries, and therefore the people upon such evidence
inferred as follows, This is of a truth that Prophet that should come into the
World, my last part left to conclude with.

11 (...)] where first we have their assurance, Of a truth: 2. the thing
assured, This is that Prophet that should come into the World. This assurance
of this multitude, no otherwise qualified, may seem somewhat peremptory, and
questionable, for how could they presume on the truth of a conclusion, that had
never learned logique, or sat perchance at the feet of any Gamaliel? Better it
might have beseemed them to have consulted first with their great Rabbines,
what to think, then to have presently proclaimed this to be the promised
Prophet. But here we are to take notice by the way, that consequences are of
two sorts, some immediately flowing from the premises, others farther remote:
The first are obvious to any that have but common sense, and use of reason, as
when our Savior would prove to his affrighted disciples, that he was no
spirit. Luke 24.39.
Handle me and see (says he) for a Spirit has not flesh and bones, as ye see
me have. A spirit has not flesh and bones, but I have flesh and bones,
therefore I am not a spirit. Natural reason in an Infidel will approve of
such a conclusion which faith ever presupposes not opposes, non tollit sed
extollit (says one) it is so far from taking reason away, or abating it,
that it raises it to a higher pitch. In deductions more remote from
principles, there will be need of a guide, to point out the intervenient
dependances, how one truth follows upon another. So in that of Our Savior
against the Saduces, I am the God of Abraham, Luke 20.37.
the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, there is required much skill (that
every man has not) to make good the inference, therefore the dead shall rise.
In such difficulties God has appointed Bishops, Doctors, and Pastors in his
Church, to direct the more vns kilfull, and to mind, and exhort them to apply
all, to their edification, in faith, and manners. They ordinarily by their
calling, are to interpret, but the hearers to attend unto, and examine their
Interpretation, whether it be consonant to the rule, given by God in
Scripture, which cannot deceive. Let Saint Paul therefore urge the Scripture
never so strongly that Christ was the promised Prophet that was to come, yet
the noble Bereans shall be commended for examining it by the rule, whether it
were so or not. It is the Turks course to establish Mahumetisme, Act. 17.11.
by the sword; the Popes, to uphold superstition by fire, and powder-plots, and
where that cannot get ground, by other proiects, and forgeries; the Anabaptists
by Enthusiasmes, and the like. But the Orthodoxe Christian contents himself
wholly with the Canon that is given. Any conclusion evidently drawn from that,
shall sway him; out of that, he himself may profitably collect, whatsoever he
finds there, is warranted, according to that he will censure, whatsoever others
teach him before, he will submit his faith, reason, and conscience to follow
them. This too much admiring of particular Masters, and by a faith implicit,
(which the Papists magnify) pinning (as it were) religion upon other men's
sleeves; when those Masters differ amongst themselves, must needs breed great
distractions, and those can no otherwise be soldered then by repairing to that
one rule which should keep us all in unity. Our Savior appeals to no other
Judge (in this controversy between him, and the Scribes and Pharisees,
whether he were the Prophet that was to come or no, Luke 12.) then to the
people that were his Auditors. v. 14.
When you see a cloud rise out of the West (says he) straight way ye say
there comes a storm, and so it is; and when ye see the South wind blow,
ye say there will be heat, and it comes to pass; ye Hypocrites, ye can
discern the face of the heaven, and of the earth, but how is it that ye do
not discern this time? Yea, and why of your selves judge you not what is
right? Necessary is it that offenses come, and Heresies will ever be on foot,
for the trial of the faithful: we can but propose unto you our grounds, and
inferences for the maintenance of the truth, and that by way of persuasion. It
is left to you to discern by Scripture, who goes the right way, to try whether
ye are in the faith, to prove the spirits whether they are of God, not by the
deceitful waights of men's inventions, but by the balance of the Sanctuary,
that the holy Ghost has ser before. Our Savior here affords a true Miracle,
out the people act their own part in making a due inference. Of a truth.] This
subverteth at once two main points of Popery. The one of their Infallible
Interpreters, yet stood for by all. The other wherein some comply with the
Socinians, taken up of late by Cardinal Perone, Verone, and other French
Jesuits, who will tie us to the (...) the bare words of the Scripture only,
without admitting any consequence. These things will hardly stand together, for
if consequences may not be admitted, what need any Interpreter at all to direct
them Infallibly? And if there be such an infallible Interpreter, what is left
to the judgment of the Auditory? Might not our Savior with St Peter and St
Paul, when they send us to search the Scripture, put us into a surer way, by
directing us unto Christ's Vicar, and S. Peter's successor? I may not stand
longer to make plain the poorness of either of these plots. Let it be our
sincere study (Beloved) to make use of that we read, or hear from any, and
not to suffer good things to slide away without due application. This was the
peoples assurance here, and the thing assured is this. This is that Prophet
that should come into the world. The last circumstance left to dismiss your
patience.

12. That Prophet that should come into the world. (...).
This is the pith of all that went before, and which my Meditations most aimed
after, but I perceive the time has surprised me, and I must comply. Two
things here would have fallen distinctly to be considered of. The first
received by Instruction, this people had heard before, that there was such a
Prophet by them to be expected. The Second conceived by the present Miracle
wrought, that this was He. They had often read and heard in the Law, and the
Prophets: that the seed of the woman should bruise the Serpents head: that when
the Scepter should depart from Judah, and a Lawgiver from between his feet,
that then Shiloh should come. They expected according to undoubted Prophecies,
the Virgins son of the root of Iesse, the branch of Justice, the eminent
Shepherd, the Governor, the King of Sion, the desire of all Nations, etc. But
the special promise they seem to take notice of here, was, that of their
Lawgiver Moses, Deuteronomy. 18.15.
Deuteronomy. 18.15. The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a Prophet from the
midst of thee, of thy Brethren, like unto me, unto him ye shall harken. This
they had heard, this ran in their minds; this they now made use of, and so
comparing the Prophecies with the event, fell upon the right. Fuller
demonstrations have we to depend upon (Beloved) for the establishment of our
Eaith; the animating of our hope; the raising of our thanksgiving, by the
addition of the Gospel; which assures us that this Prophet is come, and what
he has done for us. S. Matthew fets him forth especially as a man of the seed
of David, and Abraham; and proves that he was the Prophet that was to come by
22 Prophecies at least, fulfilled in him. S. Mark aymeth further to
demonstrate, that this man was both our King and Lord, by insisting especially
upon his power, and this he justifies by above twenty of his powerful
Actions. S. Luke the Physician more fully stands upon, that he was not only
Man, and King, and Lord, but the Savior of the World, and the Physician of our
souls. And to make this clear, he more particularly urges the circumstances
of his humble birth, gentle conversation, zeal to win souls, arming them
against all offenses, his tears over Jerusalem, his dolorous passion, his
victorious and triumphant resurrection. S. John (that lived longer then the
rest) and knew of some Heretics that opposed our Saviors deity, begins in
a lofty strain, to prove his Godhead, (which by the Arians heretofore, and now
by the Socinians is eagerly and perfidiously opposed) In the beginning was the
word, and the word was with God, and the word was God, and the word was made
flesh, and dwelt amongst us. This he continues to prove by nineteen arguments,
and then at last concludes in his 20 Chapter, These things are written that
ye might believe that Jesus is the Son of God, and that believing ye might
have life through his name, what life? of grace here, of glory eternal
hereafter. All that these four Evangelists have said, may be contracted into
this one argument. He that was to be promised seed of David and Abraham, to be
King and Lord, to be a Savior, and the Physician of our souls, and to be the
Son of God, and God equal to the Father; was the Prophet that was to come
into the World, But in Jesus the Son of the blessed Virgin Mary, all these
things are fulfilled, therefore he was that King, that Lord, that Savior, that
God, that Prophet, who was to come into the world. Let us go on therefore
(Beloved) with confidence, cheerfulness, and thankfulness (as the time
approaching invites us) to celebrate the Advent of this Prophet that was to
come into the world, and now is certainly come and has performed the work of
our Redemption. There have been and now are diverse that tell us of a second
Advent; wherein he shall come, and reign with the raised Martyrs a thousand
years here upon earth, before his last coming again to judgment. The reason
is out of the 20. of the Revelation, because that Satan was to be so long
bound, and after wards to be loosed; which 1000 years they are confident, are
yet to come; But for mine own part I think (without prejudice to any) that
these 1000 years are past already, and that Satan has been long since
loosed, and so yet continues. And that no other personal coming of our
Savior is hereafter to be expected, but only at the day of judgment. The
Angels intimate no other personal coming, Act. 1.11. We find no other such
coming in our Creed, besides his first, But from thence he shall come, to
judge both the quick and the dead. Beloved, the time is at hand wherein
(according to the custom of our Church) we are to celebrate the memory and
benefits of his first coming into the flesh: Let us not forget to prepare our
selves for his second advent. There is a time to dye, an account to be made, a
Judgment to be passed, and he that shall come will come, how soon, or how
long hence no man knows; let us not neglect therefore seriously to think
upon this in the midst of our worldly contentments. Life is short, the account
certain, the state hereafter immutable, good Lord dispose of us here, so that
in that coming we may be found at thy right hand hereafter, and have that
happiest doom pronounced upon us, come ye blessed of my father inherit the
Kingdom prepared for you, before the foundation of the world. And this O
merciful Father grant us for thy Son Christ Jesus sake, to whom with thee
and the holy Ghost, be all honor, and glory, might, majesty and dominion both
now and ever.

AMEN.
REVERENCE TO RVLERS. A SERMON PREACHED AT THE COURT.

BY JOHN PRIDEAVX, Rector of Exceter College, His MAIESTIE's Professor in
Divinity in the University of OXFORD.

OXFORD, Imprinted by LEONARD LICHFIELD Anno Salutis, 1636.

ACTS 23. v. 5. Then said Paul, I wist not Brethren, that he was the high
Priest, For it is written, thou shall not speak evil of the Ruler of thy
People.


1THe first word of my text Then, intimates a dependence on somewhat going
before: that dependence may be thus gathered. After many hazards run, and
great extremities past of our blessed and most laborious Apostle, in his long
and troublesome peregrination for the Gospel sake, (at large set forth in the
precedent story) here drawing (as he thought) near home, a Cap. 9.
and casting Anchor (as it were) in the haven amongst his own Countrymen, he
found himself nearer shipwreck, then in all the storms he had before
escaped. At Ephesus he fought with beasts after the manner of men, 1. Cor. 15.
At Ephesus here he falls amongst men worse then any beasts. Agabus had
prophesied before, whereto he was to trust, when once he came to Jerusalem,
Chap. 21. and he quickly found it true under the two great chains, wherewith
the Roman Captain caused him to be bound: Chap. 21. But as his resolution
before was heroic all, what mean you to weep, and to break my heart, verse.
13. for I am ready not to be bound only, but also to dye at Jerusalem for the
name of the Lord Jesus: So his performance here was every way answerable. The
vproare of the people upon the point to kill him, his sudden apprehending by
the Captain, wrong imprisonment, torturers standing over him to lash him like
a slave, so abated not his spirits, but that he took heart of grace to defend
himself, before his own Countrymen, in an admirable apology in their own
tongue, and to plead the privilege of a Roman, to quit himself from the
Captain: so true is that of the wisest King, Prover. 28.1.
that howsoever the wicked fly when none persueth him, yet the righteous
continues always bold as a Lion. With the same confidence in his innocence,
hurried, as it were, to hold up his hand before the Priests, his heavier
Adversaries, he hangs not down the head, but resolutely bespeaks them as they
sat in Council, Men and brethren I have lived in all good conscience before
God until this day, v. 1. Now what could be picked out of this most respective
and religious exordium, that might give the least offense? was it for that he
seemed to be too saucy in calling them men and brethren, who were assembled
there as Judges to pass Sentence upon him? or for that he pleaded conscience
among those Lawyers, and Rabbis, who were versed in no such cases, and
delighted not in any touch that way? or for that he appealed to God, for the
uprightness of his carriage, whose only begotten son they had so lately used
as a murderer? Carthusian and some others conceit, that the high Priest took
special distaste at the omitting of their titles of honor, wherein they much
gloried, to be distinguished from the vulgar, as our Savior intimates, Mat.
23.7. Whatsoever the reason might be, once this is plain, that in stead of
lawful audience or advised silencing, a blow on the mouth was awarded him,
which unexpected interrupting, by an insufferable injury, extorted from him
this sharp reply, God shall smite thee thou whited wall, for sit thou to
Judge me after the law, and command me to be smitten contrary to the Law?
whereat vantage being taken by the pickthanke standers by, Revilest thou Gods
high Priest? at the very mention of God, and his high Priest, how presently and
awfully did he take up himself, and that at the intimating of his enemies, to
give all due satisfaction? I wist not Brethren that he was the high Priest, for
it is written, thou shall not speak evil of the ruler of thy people.

3. The words are the Apostles clearing of himself, from the imputation of
vnreverend carriage, or scandalous behavior of himself in public, toward
the high Priest his superior:

Wherein are obvious 1 A fair excuse: I wist not Brethren that he was the high
Priest, 2 A firm instruction: For it is written, thou shall not speak evil
of the ruler of thy People.


In the first he labors to wipe off an aspersion, that might be prejudicial
to his calling, in the second he lays a ground to lesson others better, then
at that time, and in that stir, he had given them example. In all the fore
mentioned passages, I make no doubt (B.) but your religious, and apprehensiue
attentions, have taken notice by the way, 1. Of the manifold and unexpected
crosses, that fall upon the most circumspect, and best of Gods children. 2. Of
their doue-like innocence guided and guarded (as occasion puts them to it) with
a Serpentine wisdom and discretion. 3. Of the brutish harshnesse of their
adversaries. 4. Of the comfort of Gods assistance, and his provident working in
their deliverance. 5. How the best are sometimes liable to be plundered through
humane infirmity, and to overshoot themselves in an opposition before they are
aware. And lastly what good use may be made of the crossing of enemies. Godly
and ingenious men may recollect themselves to be more cautelous for the
future; and satisfy for the present, and direct others not to take their
imperfections, but Gods word to be a rule for their actions. Of all which
remarkable points, I shall insist only upon the two latter, which fall
especially within the verge of my text, whereof the first is our Apostles fair
excuse, I wist not brethren that he was the high Priest.

3 There be more differences then words, (...).
both among Ancient and Modern writers, concerning our Apostles meaning in
this reply to his adversaries. Some would pass it for a Justifying of his
roundnesse with the high Priest, that had so injuriously caused him to be
smitten, and to this purpose, A. Lapide and Lorin. in locum. Ad Nepot.
are cited by some Jesuits those heathen passages of Domitius in S: Hierome,
why should I take thee as a Prince, when thou esteemest not me as a Peer? And
of Crassus in Cicero, De Orat. l. 3.
I shall never account him for a Consul that vndervalues my Senatorship. But
such returns of Inferiors, to their betters, would quickly make way for an
Anarchy, and therefore are shamefully by them mentioned, to have the least
countenance, from any true divinity. S. Hierome (indeed) being but a Priest, is
somewhat high against the errors of John, Ep. 63.
Bishop of Jerusalem: if (says he) he follow the Apostles, and be vigilant
for the salvation of all, without partiality, he shall find that we (as to
all holy men) so in Christ, will of our own accords, submit our selves unto
him. Otherwise, let him know that we reverence Bishops as Fathers, not serve
them as Masters. Somewhat more to that purpose, in the same place has that
excellent Father, who is noted by the judicious, sometimes to be a little too
passionate, yet in his third book of Dialogues against the Pelagians, he is
clear, L. 3. c. 1.
that our Apostle in this particular, came very far short of his Masters
practice. Nam vbi est illa patientia Salvatoris? Tom. 12: Tract. 53.
where is (says he) that patience of our Savior? who was brought as a sheep
to the slaughter, and yet opened not his mouth, and having received a rap by
some of the high Priests servants, Esai. 53. (...) Ioh. 18.23.
with this Item, Answerest thou the high Priest so? forbeares the person, but
Iustifies the cause; if I have spoken evil, bear witness of the evil: but
if well, why smitest thou me? Ep. 5. ad Marcell.
St Augustine is wholly for quitting St Paul from any fault at all, irridenter
(says he) circumstantes admonet, in a scorn he intimates to those that stood
about him, to this sense, (as some of our reformed writers give it) I know not
whether he be the high Priest or no, but of this I am sure, there is little of
the dignity, or carriage of a high Priest appears in this action. And this is
taken for good by diverse ancient, and latter interpreters, who make it a
needless Irony, or at least paraphrase it in this sort. I acknowledge not this
man, being a known and palpable usurper, to be the high Priest: for did I; I
should have forborne him according as it is written. But as the Irony of the
former, little sorted with Apostolical simplicity; so the paraphrase of the
latter, might rather exasperate then mitigate, which seems besides his
purpose. Tom. Prim. An. 58. etc. 1.50.
Baronius here has a conceit by himself, in distinguishing inter summum
Sacerdotem, and Principem Sacerdotum: the high Priest, and the Priests chief
governor: and so would make good the Apostles answer, because in that
confusion (thinks he) he knew not how to distinguish the one from the other.
Lorin. A Lapide.
But some latter Jesuits fall foul on the Cardinal for this poor evasion,
and thus far well confute it, that the Apostle could not be ignorant, who was
the high Priest amongst them, whom he had acknowledged as Judge before, and
taxed for injustice, Sit thou to Judge me after the law, and command me
to be smitten, contrary to the law? They are but silly shifts likewise of
others, to say that S. Paul had been long absent, and therefore knew not the
high Priest, or knew him well, and yet jeares at him, or saw him not in the
throng, and so was mistaken, or was in a strange place, and therefore missed
where to find him, or thought it fit though he knew all this, vulpinare cum
vulpibus, says A Lapide the Jesuit, which may be rendered not amiss, to play
the Jesuit with his opposites: or that which is worse of his fellow Lorinus,
he knew his person, and place to be of little regard, that had so tyrannically
abused his place and person, for this trenches deeper into dangerous and
desperate approaches upon Magistrates, if their persons, and place should be
slighted, because some actions of theirs (perchance) may be justly excepted
against. That which Maldonate notes on the 34. v. of the 2. of Luke, nescio an
facilior hic locus fuisset, si nemo eum exposuisset, may be well here applied
to his fellows; this place (out of doubt) would have been clearer, if no such
comments had gone about to clear it. We must take therefore the text along
with us, if we will not be misled by the commentators. Now in this, why should
the Apostle frame an excuse, where no offense had been committed, or give
direction for amendment where nothing was amiss before. This kind of denial
then in our English translation, I wist not, whereby (...) in the original
(...) in the Syriack (which S. Paul then spoke) has more pith in it, then all
the former intricate disputes; for this signifies not, I knew not absolutely
(as the Rhemists out of the vulgar render it) but, I considered not: I heeded
not: The injury offered made me so over- shoot my self, that I took not
sufficient notice how he was the high Priest, and therefore in my have termed
him whited wall, which term (I confess) might have been well spared, not
because it was false, but because it was not fit, nor consonant to that which
is written. I acknowledge therefore herein my oversight and will not stand to
defend it. Which exposition Erasmus with S. Cyprian in some sort justify.
Behold here a plain hearted Nathaniel in whom there was neither gall nor
guile, pride nor pertinacy, no sooner was he minded of his fault, but presently
he amendeth it. There was no want of wit in him, but will, to maintain what he
had let fall, neither was it a hard task for him, that had been so thoroughly
cured, Act. 9.17.
and catechized by the good Ananias, to make good, that this great Ananias was
as bad as might be. But he chose rather to confess his own, then to aggravate
others faults, leaving an eminent pattern of holy ingenuity for all good
Christians to follow.

4 I Wist not brethren that he was the high Priest.] For in that regard had he
used me worse, it was a fault in me to right my self in unseemly terms. Here
we fall then upon a virtue, which all the heathen Philosophers never took
sufficient notice of, but true Christians have always entertained under the
title of singleness of heart, and ingenious simplicity. This excludes all
double dealing in all our actions, by hypocrisy, circumventions, fraud,
cousenage, shy insinuations, forged pretenses, close whisperings, sophistical
delations, equivocating delusions, crafty conveyances and the like. The
Schoolmen assign it to truth, Aq. 2.2. Q. 109.
as an attendant to keep it from over- lashing, or mincing, according to that
indicious oath administered to such as by law give evidence, they must speak
the truth, without refusal, the whole truth without diminishing, and nothing
but the truth without addition through favor, fear, or affection.
Notwithstanding all this, in simplicity it self, there may be doubling, and in
ingenuity, wit may sometimes prove wily or wanton. There is a simplicity, which
the Scripture taxes for want of due circumspection and discretion. In the
streets and gates, and chief places of concourse, Prove. 1.21.
Wisdom cries against it, How long will ye simple ones love simplicity? that
is never strive to better your knowledge in things that may do you most good,
but suffer your selves to be abused in that, which will overthrow, and shame
you. Through a casement a little after, C. 7.
the like simple youth is discovered, void of understanding, passing to a light
woman's house, as an Ox to the slaughter, or a fool to the stocks, till a dart
strike through his liver. Such Simplicians the Hebrews term (...) a root,
which signifies to be won, or carried every way without sense or reason. Every
flattering speech shall draw them to do any thing. Every forged tale, or
miracle, shall make them change their religion. Every confident calumniation,
set them at odds with their best friends. But that simplicity, which Scripture
here approves, is true meaning in our thoughts, plain truth in our words,
faithful dealing in our actions, Religious constancy in our Professions, an
innocent and harmless intent, even in those slipps of ours, wherein we may be
often overtaken. This Abimelech finds his best plea before God, when he was
threatened death for the rape of Sarah, Genesis 20. v. 4.
Genesis 20. Lord will thou slay also a righteous nation? In simplicity of my
heart, and innocence of my hands have I done this, v. 5. (...), a plain and
upright man, is the chiefest title of honor given to Jacob, and Job, Genesis 25.
and Job the 1. David one of the same profession, is a Suitor to the King of
heaven, for such men's pardon, and preferment, O Lord do well (says he) unto
them that are true of heart, let not the simple go away ashamed. And what is
the meaning of our Savior, when he professes that the kingdom of God
belongs unto such, as resemble best, little children, but that a simple
harmelesnesse, not plotting of purpose, to do a mischief, but being offended
is easy to be reconciled, is a Qualification fit for those that shall have
access unto our blessed Savior, and be his Favorites. So the Corinthians,
which went for the wits of those days, Non cuivis homini, etc. our Apostle
affronteth with this simplicity. Our rejoicing (says he) is this, the
testimony of our conscience: That in simplicity and godly syncerity, 2. Cor.
1.12.
not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, we have had our
conversation in the world, more abundantly to you-ward. And this is the same he
here makes use of. Gamaliels scholar could not have been to seek of evasions
to put off, or Apologies to defend, what he had done or spoken, if he had
thought it warrantable. But he preferres an ingenious acknowledgement before
all Elenches and Sophismes, to teach us, not to stand in a fault, and add
impudency to error, or dishonesty, but to take up our selves at the least
trip, to prevent a fall more dangerous.

5. This doctrine cannot be harsh to any, that desire not to be accounted
wiser then our Apostle, who has closely couched together more practical
merality, in this shortest piece of my Text, for this ingenious simplicity, in
Christian conversation, then may be met with, in most Libraries of other
voluminous Authors. For mark (I beseech you) as the Text leads; 1. he
spares not his own person, but upon consciousnes that he had gone too far,
I] 2. He stands not upon his abilities, but prosesseth he might be in an error,
as well as other men, [I wist not] 3. He complies with those that justly
reproved him, and lovingly bespeaks them, though he knew them to be his mortal
enemies, I wist not Brethren] 4. He balkes not the flaw they taxed him for, but
comes home to give them satisfaction, I wist not Brethren that he was the High
Priest.] Whence we may distinctly gather, that, 1. Impartiality, in first
censuring our selves; 2. Humility in not standing upon, but acknowledging our
failing disabilities; 3. A fair and Christian-like carriage to them that mean
us no good, especially when they tell us right; 4. A full disclaiming the very
thing, without any shifts, or tergiversations, wherein we are delinquents, are
the four branches of this ingenuous simplicity, here practiced by our Apostle,
and effectually put in use by us, would make all our actions, more pleasing to
God, and reviue that Christian charity, which should be more heartily amongst
our selves. A world of matter is here offered (Beloved) if I should stand to
amplify upon all these severalls. But I consider to whom I speak, where a
touch suffices. For the first, It is the Devils title to be (...), Ap. 12.
an Ochel cartzo (as the Syriac has it) a Spreader of calumnies, upon which
he feeds. But Iustus prior est accusator sui: A just ingenious man, Prove.
18.17.
will sooner acknowledge his fault, then his eager Adversary shall take notice
of it, Prove. 18.17. Or if that rendering of the vulgar be excepted against, (as
I think it may justly) I am sure our Saviors rule will not fail. Math. 7.
Thou Hypocrite first cast out the beam of thine own eye, and then shall thou
see clearly to cast out the mote of thy brothers eye. Est quidem huius dulcedo
vitij (says Calvin) vt neminem fere non titillet cupiditas, in aliena vitia
inquirenda. Most men (as it were) make a practice, and take a pleasure in it,
to find a hole in another man's coat, but our best way is to judge our selves,
(as our Church book exhorts us) that we be not judged of the Lord. So David, I
said it was mine own infirmity, so foolish was I, and as it were, a beast
before thee, I said in my have, all men are liars. Which hastiness our Apostle
here excuses not in himself, but exposes his reputation to the censure of
those, which took exceptions against him, that God might be glorified, and
men, though his enemies, receive meet satisfaction. Where his humility is most
eminent in the second circumstance. It is a noted humor, especially amongst
Scholars, that qui vult ingenio cedere, nu llus erit, to be taxed for
loytering, covetousness, luxury, pride, ambition, dissembling, faction,
intrusion into matters that belong not unto us, or the like, are gnats, amongst
the most of us, easily to be swallowed, or brusht away with these put offs, or
the like: it is the fashion of the world, our betters do it, and 'twere pride,
or Stoicisme in us, to be singular: But when once our parts, discretion, or
learning shall be called in question, when our ignorance is laid open before
us, and mistakes, and errors must come to be recanted, how loath are we with
S. Augustine to write retractatio^s, or to be brought to this our Apostle's, I
wist not Brethren.] Nay we shall hardly term them Brethren, that press us to
any such exigent. The more therefore is to be marked the third piece of our
Apostles ingenuitie. There is a kind of Christian and winning complement,
which insensibly makes much for the abating of exasperations amongst enemies,
and the establishing of the Saints Communion, amongst Christian societies. For
it is not Courtship only, but Christianity to give fair language to all men
in their places; provided always, that a heart, and a heart, by double
dealing, do not mar the harmony. Genesis 19.
So Lot called the Sodomites, brethren, when they came to force his house, and
abuse his guests. Our Savior vouchsafed Judas the Traitor, the title of
friend. Mat. 26.
A soft answer (says the wise man) turns away wrath, Prove. 15.1.
but grievous words stir up anger. What an excellent use does Abraham make of
this one word Brethren, here used by our Apostle, Let there be no strife
(says he) to Lot, J pray thee, between thee and me, and between thy
herdsmen, and my herdsmen, for we are Brethren. Surely Abraham's Logic, (a
Father of learning, as well as of the faithful) would here have failed him, if
this argument might not have passed for current, Brethren must have no strife
between them, We are Brethren, ergo there should be no strife between us. To
put a period to some usual and scandalous Ianglings, that much distracted the
new converted Corinthians, our Apostle takes up the same medium, with a kind
of indignation. I speak this to your shame is it so, 1. Cor. 6.5.
that there is not a wise man amongst you? not one that shall be able to judge
between his brethren? but a brother goes to law with a brother? Now therefore
there is utterly a fault amongst you, why do you not rather take wrong? why
do you not rather suffer your selves to be defrauded? Nay you do wrong and
defraud, and that your Brethren. These are all the Apostles words, and his
practice here seconds it in the fourth place. He knew well enough that there
might be a question, whether that this Ananias, were truly high Priest or no?
Josephus leaves it wonderful ambiguous, and others plainly deny it: but S.
Paul found him here in the place, and he knew whatsoever the person were, the
dignity was not to be vilified. It was not then a time to dispute the right,
but to give example of sincere obedience due to Superiors.

6. This he did then, and this now all inferiors should do. But alas
(Beloved) self love puts us all in these times out of this best course, we can
hardly be brought to acknowledge, that we are, or have ever been in fault, we
stand so much upon our policies, learning, and abilities, that our Apostles
ingenious, I wist not, is thought a disparagement in these days. There is
little respect had to Brethren in the violence of our passions. Prince or high
Priest, or whatsoever Superior, shall not escape our lash, if they once cross
our humors, or do not as we would have them. It has been thought by the
religiously judicious heretofore, that plain honesty was the best policy,
plain dealing the greatest credit, plain apparel the best weed, plain and
constant fare the best diet, plain falling upon the point the best oratory,
and (why might I not add) plain teaching the best Preaching. The virulency of
the Papists, that call all Heretics, that in any sort protest against their
tyranny and superstitions, the peevishness of the Puritans, that cry all
profane, that sorteth not with their singularity; the rashness of some
Protestants, that rail on all those, who in any point dissent from their
tenants, or Masters, have been censured by the deliberately moderate, to be
the greatest hinderance of the wished union of all true Christians. But what
should we say in the multitude of such distractions? But, Help Lord, for there
be few godly men left, plain dealing is minished from amongst the children of
men: they talk of vanity, every one with his neighbor, they do but flatter
with their lips, and dissemble with their double heart. The happier then are
they, and more to be honored and prayed for, that keep themselves closest, to
our Apostles ingenious moderation. This bars them not from lawful vantages,
to save themselves harmless, where the right would bear it. For when the
Captain would have scourged our Apostle, he pleads the privilege of a Roman.
When the Pharisees, and Saduces were combined to condemn him, he sets them at
odds, by casting in, a vexed point amongst them, about the resurrection. When
hope was past for justice from the Roman Deputy, he appeals unto Caesar,
Act. 25. Lawful defenses therefore may well stand with this plainness we
speak of, but offenses may not be shifted off, without acknowledgement and
satisfaction. Now our Apostle here censured himself, for an excusable slip;
and stand thou upon thy justification, in apparent faults? He could say, I
wist not, that had more goodness, and knowledge then we all, and must we
count it a disgrace, to be overseene in any thing? He could call them Brethren
with a good heart, whom he felt to be most maliciously bent against him, and
make good use of their reproves, when there was reason in it: and must we
think the worse of our best friends, when they admonish us fairly of our
manifest exorbitances? Last of all, the very name of the high Priest, as Judge,
and Magistrate, howsoever questionable, howsoever wronging him, howsoever
abused by him that bare it, most notoriously, made him stoop to Gods
ordinance; recall that he had said amiss, and tender most hearty obedience:
and must we murmr or repine at the doings of our lawful Magistrates, who
most commonly direct better then we can conceive of? S. Paul was here so far
from this, that to make amends for his vnadvisednesse, he fetches a rule out
of Scripture, to set all in a safer course; for it is written, (says he) Thou
shall not speak evil of the Ruler of thy people. Which is his firm
instruction, and second member of my Text, that now follows in order, to lead
on your Christian attentions.

7. (...)] This is one of the 367. places, or as others reckon 370, which are
cited out of the Old Testament, in the New. It is taken from the 22. of Exodus
verse, 28. (...) the 72 thus give it, (...), and the vulgar Latin, Dijs non
detrahes, which our last translation to the word expresses thus; Thou shall
not revile the Gods, nor curse the ruler of thy people. Magistrates here are
called Gods, (says a learned reformed writer) because they are Gods
vicegerents in Civil, and Ecclesiastical administration. This is reinforced
with a reason by the royal preacher, Ecclesiastes 10. and the last, Curse not
the King, no not in thy thought, nor curse the rich in thy bedchamber, for the
birds of the air shall carry the voice, and that which has wings shall tell
the matter. The same reason is harped upon by the Heathen Satyrist -- Secretum
divitis vllum
Esse putas? servi vt taceunt, Iumenta loquentur,
Et canis, and posts, and Marmora.


Beasts, and Posts, and Walls, will out with it. But that reason is not so
prevalent with Christians, as that God has commanded it. It is Gods own
ordinance which binds not only the outward act, under a temporal penalty, but
the conscience upon forfeiture of eternal damnation, Romans 13. Our Apostle
cites, not the whole passage, but the latter part, which made most to his
purpose, for he had misvsed none there present, but the Ruler Ananias. It was
enough therefore, to show, that no Ruler should be so misvsed. In the doctrine
are remarkable these three circumstances: First, the ground of it: It is
written: 2ly, the prohibition: Thou shall not speak evil: 3ly, the Object: of
the Ruler of thy people. For first, it is the surest way in the search of any
truth, for the contenting of conscience, and settling of our wavering
judgments, to be certain of the ground whereupon we intend to build. The
speculatiue Philosophers in their Metaphysics, (according to their master
Aristotle) generally lay down this first principle, Quodlibet est, velnon est,
Every thing is, or, is not, and he that admits not this, is not fit to be
disputed with, in their Schools. The practical Philosopher stands especially
upon this, Quod tibi non vis fieri, alteri ne feceris, do not that to any
other, which being in his case, thou would not have done to thy self. And
this is canonized by our blessed Savior, whatsoever ye would that men should
do unto you, do ye even so to them, for this is the Law, and the Prophets,
Math. 7.12. The Logicians urge this Maxim, as eminent above the rest,
Contradictories at one time, and in the same respect, cannot be both true:
right reason therefore, and universal experience, must not be faced down in
their Schools, if you will have any thing to do with them. But in Divinity,
we are drawn up to a higher strain, not gathered by humane discourse, but
revealed from heaven, and thence enjoined us not in any case to be waved. And
this is that our Apostle here close sticks to, comprised in this one word
(...), It is written; and this must carry all matters, that belong to true
religion. With this our Savior first beat off the devil, when he set upon him,
fasting in the Wilderness, Mat. 4. It is written, that man shall not live by
bread only. It is written, Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God. It is
written, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve.
And though the devil had there also his scriptu^ est, because he perceaved no
other principle, would pass with our Savior, yet this wrencheth not our
Savior from this hold, as being urged sophistically, in a perverse sense; and
therefore he redoubleth his scriptum est, so long, and strongly upon him, till
he made him to fly. And how do all the Evangelists prove that Jesus the son
of Mary, was the promised Messiah, but (at every turn almost) with a scriptum
est, as they had learned from their Master. Luke 24.46.
Thus it is written, and thus it behooves Christ to suffer, and to rise again
from the dead the third day, and that repentance, and remission of sins, V. 44
should be preached in his name. All things (as he there told them after his
resurrection) must be fulfilled, which were written of him, in the Law of
Moses, and in the Prophets, and in the Psalms. Would we know then, what we
should hold in point of opinion, or duty; concerning God, or our neighbor?
our Apostle out of doubt, foreseeing the need of resolution, prescribes it
thus to the Romans, Cap. 15.4.
Whatsoever things were written afore-time, were written for our learning, that
we, through patience, and comfort of the Scriptures, might have hope. S. Peter
was an eye witness (as he says himself) of our Saviors Majesty in the
Mount, and there he heard the father proclaim him, to be his beloved son,
in whom he was well pleased. Notwithstanding (says he) we have a more sure
word of prophecy, 1 Pet. 1.19.
whereunto ye do well, that ye take heed, as unto a light that shines in a
dark place, until the day dawne, and the day star arise in your hearts.
Where he manifestly prefers that which was written (as says S. Augustine)
before that which he had seen with his own eyes, Certiorem dixit, non
meliorem, non veriorem sermonem. For exceptions might be taken by Infidels
against the tra^sfiguration, as liable to some suspicion of imposture, which
could have no show against that, which was before so long time written.

8. It would make a man wonder, to observe how far those that pretend
themselves to be S. Peter's successors, and S. Paul's scholars, start back both
from S. Peter and S. Paul, in this behalf. But well they understand, that if
this ground of scriptum est stand; their Antichristian hierarchy, and
superstition must needs fall to the ground. It was the mainest aim therefore,
of the Council of Trent, before they ventered further, upon any controverted
points, to take order, that no enemy should be left at their back, nor this
scriptum est, do them any prejudice. Remain it should in show, (for it was
beyond any humane policy, and Impudency to take it quite off the file) but
remain it should, with such clogges, and qualifications, that they might
press it, when in show it makes for them, or quash it, when it is mainly
against them. I will instance no further then in Bellarmines four books, De
verbo Dei scripto, and non scripto, which he contrived of purpose, to justify
that Council. In the first of which because the received, and unquestioned
Canon, would make clearly (as they all saw) for the scriptum est of the
Protestants, the Apocrypha must be taken in, to piece out the matter, and go
for as good proof, as any Canonical scriptum est whatsoever. Secondly,
because some vantages might be taken from the faulty translation of the vulgar
edition; this edition in the next place, with all it is faults, must be as
current, as the scriptum est, of the Original. Nay according to the construing
of most of their Schools, and Professors, who are less practiced in the
tongues, be preferred before it. Thirdly, least all this should fail, the Pope
is brought in, in his third book, as an infallible Judge, and interpreter,
where let the Text, be what it may, the sense must be had from his vnerrable
Holiness. But what and there be not any the least show of any scriptum est,
whevpon any Interpretation may be grounded? (as they are driven to confess in
diverse controversies between them and us) Will they then be content that our
scriptumest shall carry it? No, by no means. Then their Traditum est, is
plucked out at the last cast, in his fourth book, where unwritten Traditions
must supply the defect of scriptum est. And so follow them never so close,
(they have consulted of a starting hole. And thus in this chiefest ground for
settling Religion, the Church of Rome (you see) assumes no less authority to it
self, then God himself. If he give, us a Canon, or rule, they will make
Apocrypha of as firm validity as that. If he afford us the original, their
dissenting translation shall be no less authentical then that. And yet then,
when all the rest fayles, the Popes infallibility, with a Statuimus,
decernimus, and an Anathema to him, that in any sort withstands it, shall bring
in unwritten traditions to decide all the controversies. For what their full
meaning is, in this behalf, Cardinal Bellarmine (upon occasion) blurts out, in
his second book de effectu Sacramentorum, the 25. Chap. Si tollamus,
Authoritatem praesent is Ecclesiae, and praesent is Concilij Tridentini. If we
take away the authority (says he) of this present Church of Rome, and that
present Council of Trent, what then? why then all the decrees of all former
Councills, (he adds) and tot a fides Christiana, and all Christian religion
may be called in question. But what can S. Paul's, or our Saviors scriptum est,
stand Christians in stead, if the Popes proscriptum est, may so easily cancel
it? Is this sound stuff think you, to hold up piety in Church, or policy in
a Commonwealth? Beloved, we must not quit our old grounds received from God,
to entertain such new proiects, devised by partial men, who are all for their
own ends, though all end at length to their own shame and confusion. But
though Israel play the harlot, let not Judah imitate her. Let it be always the
infamy of the Babylonish strumpet, to sow seditions, countenance Rebellions,
blow the Coals in combustions, make Saints of Traitors, and Traitors of such
simple souls as shall be ruled by them. But let us in the mean time hold
constantly close to that which is written, as here our Apostle leads us along.

9. It is written thou shall not speak evil of the Ruler of thy People. (...).
There is a Sect of late Philosophers, who having taken upon them to vindicate
Arts and sciences, from Monkish duncery, insist especially upon these three
rules, out of Aristotle, (...). The first they say is lex veritat is, the law
of truth, and that must be general, without exception. The second, Lex
Iustitiae, The law of Justice, and by that we may not fly out, but keep our
selves to the point. The third is, Lex sapientiae, The law of Wisdom, this
rangeth the truth, and right of the former in their due places and order. An
intimation at least of all these we have in this eminent position, cited here
by our Apostle. Thou, whosoever, whether high, or low, rich, or poor, in
favor, or disgrace, this is (...) a general truth, without exception. Thou
shall not speak evil, in public or private, of thine own accord, or
exasperated, this is (...), to the point, the Apostle was taken upon. Against
the Ruler of thy people, Prince, or Priest, Supreme, or subordinate
Magistrate, this is (...), the rule of wisdom that sets all in their due
places. You see what a mass of matter yet remains to be discussed, if it
needed in this place, and the time would give scope. For any one that can
speak ill, may have enough to say against ill speaking: and ill speaking
against Rulers, when Rulers are in presence, should receive blows rather to
punish, then words to reprove. Against this virulent humor whole volumes have
been written. And out of most of the Psalms of David, out of Solomon's
Proverbs, and Ecclesiastes, out of Jesus the son of Syrach (who has amassed
together the received morality of the Church, as then it stood) how many
passages to this purpose might be produced? But J am to gleane only, and
therefore I urge no more but this. This ill speaking against God, is blaspemie,
against our Governors, scandalum Magnatum, a kind of treason; against our
fellow brethren, uncharitableness; and by our Saviors interpreting the sixth
Commandment a degree of murder. Math. 5.22.
Math. 5. Concerning the first sin that ever was committed, the Fathers,
Schoolmen, and later Divines, have diverse conjectures, some say 'twas pride;
others, infidelity; others, ingratitude; I think 'twas all these together,
and therefore quarrel with none of the^. But for this I have a scriptum est,
that the first sin under a scriptum est, was a (...), against God the supreme
Ruler of us all. For consider but that fetch of Satan? in the third of Genesis,
Yea has God said, that ye shall not eat of every tree of the garden? It was
replied, yes he has said it, that we should not eat of it, nor so much as
touch it, and a penalty is added, least ye dye. What follows? And the
Serpent said unto the woman, Ye shall not surely dye, for God does know that
in the day that ye eat thereof, your eyes shall be opened, you shall be as
Gods, knowing good and evil: you are simple, and mistake the injunction, for
the tree is not named the tree of life and death, but the tree of knowledge of
good and evil; therefore by eating of it there is no fear of death, but
assurance of the knowledge of good and evil, which would make you like God
himself, and that he is loath to afford you. This is the first fault and
fallacy, we read of in Scripture, and this includes detraction from the most
wise, just, and omnipotent Ruler of us all. But who first invented it, and
vented it? The Devil. To what purpose? To dishonor God, and ruin all
mankind. What event had it? The most woeful misery of us all; and is not this
sufficient to make us detest detraction? From this place until upon 2000
years after, we scarce find a scriptum est, of any opposition against the
Rulers of the people, but that dangerous one, in the 16. of Numbers, in the
conspiracy of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram. Their evil speaking (indeed) was high
against Moses and Aaron, Prince and Priest. Numb. 16.3.
Ye take too much upon you, seeing all the Congregation are holy every one of
them. And the Lord is among them, wherefore, then lift ye up your selves above
the congregation of the Lord? But what was theissue of this? Did not Moses
foretell them? If these men dye the common death of men, verse. 29.
and if they be visited after the visitation of all men, then the Lord has not
sent me: But if the Lord make a new thing, and the earth open her mouth, and
swallow them up, and all that appertain unto them, and they go down quick
into the pit: Then ye shall understand that these men have provoked the Lord.
Is not this sufficient to terrify all factious, detracting, and rebellious
spirits? The execution was presently upon it, (as David repeats it) The earth
opened, and swallowed up Dathan, and covered the company of Abiram. But these
men (may some interpose) went too grossly to work. Come we then to Ahitophel,
who wanted not wit, nor crafty conveyance. 2. Sam. 16.23
Whose Counsel in those days (says the Text) was as if a man had enquired of
the oracle of God. But what came all this deep policy to at last, when it was
pernitiously bent against the Ruler of Gods people? I need say no more then
scriptum est; He sadled his Ass, 2. Sam. 17.23
and arose, and got him home to his house, his City, that his neighbors, and
tenants might take notice of it, and put his house in order, and hanged
himself. And so let all thine enemies perish (O God) which think ill, or
speak ill, or much more, plot ill, or act ill, against the Rulers of thy
people.

10 And here I am at a stand (B.) for I know not how well it would relish,
after this down right doctrine, to break out into the curiosities of
Schoolmen, and Postillers, and to discourse of the mother of this evil
speaking against the Rulers: which some make to be Pride, some Anger, others
Envy, I think all concur. Then of her untoward and misshapen sisters, which
are 1. disobedience, 2. contempt, 3. presumption, 4. Morosity, 5. Stubbornness,
6. simulation, 7. whisperings, 8. traducings, 9. groundless suspicions, 10.
implacable hatred, and the like, touched by our Apostle in the 1. to the Romans
and the 5. to the Galatians. My persuasion gives me, that you had rather hear
how to do well, then to be terrified from speaking evil of the rulers of the
people. In this particular then, S. Bernard has a good passage, Detractor
(says he) and libens auditor, vterque Diabolum portat in lingua. The
detractor, and he that gives way, and soothes him in his malignity, both of
them carry the devil upon their tongue. For if thou be poor, they will say,
thou art base and abject, and not worthy to be looked after; if thou be rich,
thou art ambitious, covetous, and grating ever for more. If affable, they will
cast out that thou art dissolute, or altogether complementall. If a Preacher or
Doctor, thou art wholly for humane plausibility, and preferment. If thou say
little, thou art not for employment, and good for nothing. If thou be strict in
thy life, thou art an hypocrite. If free, a wordling or glutton. And thus far
S. Bernard, I may add for these times: if resolute against popish
superstitions, a Puritan. If for the discipline of the Church in upholding and
reuerencing Bishops, in furthering Church structures, ornaments, and all
laudable ceremonies, a Papist, at least in heart. If for due obedience to the
Rulers, a flatterer. If for the Countries common good, a malecontent. If
constant in received tenants, violent and perverse. If warping in any point to
novelty, a Turnecoate. These evil speakings, and the like, (you know) are too
too common, and this would not be so, if S. Paul's ingenuity were better
learned, and S. Bernards position better thought upon, Detractor, et libens
auditor, both the evil speaker, and the applauding hearer, carry the Devil in
their tongue. Necessary it is certainly, Math. 18.7.
that offenses come, (for our Savior has spoken it) but woe be unto the man,
by whom the offense comes. Let every one therefore of us, be religious and
careful to amend one, that by this amendment of the particulars, the whole may
be right. Psalm. 15.
Lord who shall dwell in thy tabernacle, and who shall rest upon thy holy hill?
Not those that will set up Prelates, to depose Princes, or those that maintain
a faction, to pluck down Prelates: but he that leads an vncorrupt life, and
does the thing that is right, and speaks the truth from his heart. He that
uses no deceit in his tongue or does no evil to his neighbor, and has no
slaundered his neighbor, much less spoken evil of the rulers of his people.
And now (B.) if our equals and inferiors, are not to be ill spoken of, what
apologies can these silly dreamers pretend, (they are the words of Saint Jude)
that despise dominions, V. 8.
and speak evil of Dignities. If Michael the Archangell durst not bring
against the Devil himself, in a disputation, a railing accusation, dare
thou (as it were) in cold blood, to vpbraid Rulers, not Rulers only of others,
Baruch 1.11.
but Rulers of thy people? Last of all if Nebuchodonozor must be prayed for,
and Balshasar his son, who (as we all know) heavily oppressed the people of
God, 1. Tim. 3.1.
what supplications and prayers, intercessions and giving of thanks, (that I
may end with our Apostles exhortation, as I began with his precept) are to be
rendered to God, from us of this Land, that our most gracious Ruler of his
people, his Royal Queen, their hopeful Progeny, and all that be in authority
under him, may live a quiet, and peaceable life, in all Godliness, and
Honesty, to the punishment of wickedness and vice, and to the maintenance of
Gods true religion and virtue, as long as the Sun and Moon in dureth? This
grant O King of Kings, for thy Son Christ Jesus sake, to whom, with thee and
the holy Ghost, be all honor and glory world without end.

Amen.
THE DRAVGHT OF THE BROOK. A SERMON PREACHED AT THE COURT.

BY JOHN PRIDEAVX, Rector of Exceter College, His MAIESTIE'S Professor in
Divinity in the University of OXFORD.

OXFORD, Imprinted by LEONARD LICHFIELD Anno Salutis, 1636.

PSALM 110.7. He shall drink of the brook in the way, therefore shall he
lift up the Head.


THe author of this Psalm is David, as the title shows, but the subject
Christ, as appears by the application in the new Testament; where eight times
at least, we find it repeated. 1. To prove our Savior more then a man, and
greater then David, Matthew. 22. Mar. 12. and Luke 20.2. To confirm the
excellency of his nature, and place to surmount the Angels, and his
Priesthood, Aarons, Heb. 1.7.8. cap. 3. To justify his resurrection; and
ascension, Act. 2.4. And last of all, to assure us of his absolute conquest,
and everlasting dominion, 1. Cor. 15. Upon these grounds the Ancients (by
Cassiodorus collection,) term it the sum of our faith, the looking-glass of
heavenly secrets, the treasure of holy writ, verbis brevis, sensu infinitus,
(says Augustine) short in words but in sense infinite. Theodoret notes how it
is connected with the Psalm going before, (which is not usual.) There (says
he) we have his cross and sufferings, here his conquest and trophyes. For
first he comes forth as the heir apparent of the Almighty, the brightness of
his glory, and the express Image of his person, graced with title, 1. My Lord]
2. Place, Sit thou on my right hand.] 3. Power, until I make thine enemies thy
footstool.] v. first. The second verse. limiteth out the beginning of his
kingdom, Sion.] The extent, the midst of his enemies.] Amongst whom his
Prophetical office shall. work such an alteration, that as the drops of dew
are numberless, which pearl from the womb, of the teeming morning: So his
volunteers shall be, that at the striking up of the Gospells alarm, shall
repair to the ensigns of his holy worship, verse. 3. Those, his Priestly
office, warrantable for calling, firm for continuance, free from succession,
shall expiate, refine, and offer up as acceptable sacrifices to God the Father,
v. 4. Their opposites whether Kings, or heads of Nations, shall feel the
weight of his strokes, and dynt of his sword; to their utter overthrow and
confusion, v. 5.6. And yet notwithstanding all this, this Prophet, this Priest,
this King, he, to whom so unspeakable honor assigned, so many trophies
fore-prophecied, so may triumphs decreed, must be content to travel before he
sit at ease; suffer before he enjoy; obey before he rule; stoop, and bend,
and bow, to drink of the troubled brook of this worlds calamities, before he
lift up his head, to take possession of the crown of glory.

2 He shall drink of the brook in the way, therefore shall he lift up the
head.] When the two disciples upon the way to Emmaus, intimated to our Savior,
(then to them unknown) that the condemnation, and crucifying of Jesus of
Nazareth, (which they had seen him undergo, with much disgrace, and
perplexity) had beaten them from the conceit, that he should be the Messiah,
whom they expected should be an other-gates man: they receive this sharp reply
to settle their wavering, and rouse up their dullness: Luke 24.
O fools and slow of heart to believe all that the Prophets have spoken; ought
not Christ to suffer those things, and so enter into his glory. That he ought
so, long before our Prophet could here have informed them sufficiently. Herod
may be troubled at his birth, as ominous to his usurped title. His disciples
dream of a temporal Monarchy, and Zebedee's wife for her children, plot for
preferment in it; but the decree, and proclamation went ever, that this
Kingdom should not be of this world. This King must here find rebellion; this
Prophet and Priest, opposition; this Conqueror, after much travel and sweat,
incounters and hazards, attain the crown of victory. No other way to this
victory but by a brook, no passage at this brook without drinking. Be the
water never so turbule^t, and muddy, no turning aside to search for better, for
better in so durty away there may not be expected. And this was to be foretold
(says Remigius) ne subito veniens horreretur, sed creditum expectaretur: Least
coming on a sudden it should affright, and not be expected as a thing formerly
believed. The words then you see, (Beloved) contain (as it were) the Iornall,
or gestes, of our Lord and Savior, in his progress through this vale of
misery, where

We meet with his 1 Humiliation, he shall drink of the brook in the way. 2
Exaltation, Therefore shall he lift up the head.


The first is in his temporal passage upon the way, the second at his
perpetual residence, at his standing house. That head which in the second
place shall be lifted up to reign, in the first, with all submission must be
bowed down, to drink. This was began in his Incarnation, and continued till
the end of his passion. The consideration of which exemplary humiliation, for
our imitation and advancement, I trust at no time shall be thought
unseasonable, especially now, when we celebrate his first Advent or coming in
the Flesh: the first degree of his Humiliation, and first member of my text.

(...)
3 He shall drink of the brook in the way. The words are figurative, in a
high strain far passing all humane Rhetorique, and carry a Prophetique
Majesty, in a retired profoundnesse, easier to be adored then expressed. Where
obscurity has bred variety, and variety great difficulty to tract
Interpreters. Widest from the mark, is the Chaldy Paraphrase of R. Joseph
Coecus, who without the least warrant from the words, thus blindly renders it:
from the mouth of a Prophet, in the way, he shall receive knowledge.
Attributing that perversely here, either to Abraham, or David, or Ezechiah, and
so misguides the latter Rabbis. Which Jonathan in his Targum of Jerusalem,
Midras, Tehillim, and the ancients ascribe (as we do) only to the Messiah. Of
less importance is the difference in an old English translation, commonly
called Wickliffs Psalter, of the strond, in the way he drank, where the
putting of the preter perfect tense for the future, intimates rather a thing
past, then a prophecy of somewhat to come. But to pass by such critical
cobwebs, which may hide rather then hold. The words being obvious in
themselves, and without difficulty (...), known to all by their roots; yet in
this place may be enforced with that advantage of circumstance, that those that
seem most to dissent, cannot be destitute of their several reasons. Diverse,
in relation to the slaughter, mentioned in the two former verses, continue the
allegory in this, by helping the text with a word, Of the Torrent of blood (say
they) this Conqueror shall drink: consonant to that, he shall wash his
footsteps in the blood of the ungodly Psalm. 58. And that thy foot may be
dipped in the blood of thy enemies, and that the tongue of the dog may be red
through the same. Psalm. 68. Which Phrases are well known, in sacred Rhetorique
to signify a victory, (as that of Israel against Pharaoh) to the utter ruin of
the conquered. In which sense the sword is said to be drunken with blood in the
day of the Lords vengeance, Ier. 46. and the horses to wade up to the bridles
in blood, where the winepresse of Gods wrath is trodden Apocalyp. 14. This
exposition howsoever followed by some later writers of good note, (relying too
much upon R. Iehudi, and Kimchi the first authors of it) will hardly
notwithstanding, be fitted to this place, in regard the lifting up of the head
that follows, presupposes an immediate humiliation goeing before, which the
brandishing of a conquering sword, and the blood of Massacred Miscreants, do
not so naturally represent. Calvin thinks the similitude drawn from the
valiant leaders, who in chase of their rowted enemies, turn not aside (as at
other times) to refresh themselves, with ordinary provision, but catch at a
venture as they pass, (like Gideons lapping soldiers) at the water of a
brook, that thwarts them, least delay give vantage of a slip, and hinder the
pursuit of their conquest. This Iunius and diverse others, take for good. It
was Trivets, an old Minorite Friars long before, as appears in an old
manuscript upon this place; and therefore Maldonate might have spared to lash
Calvin for it, if his aim had not been rather, at the person, then the
opinion. More ingenious is that of Moller. That to drink, and especially of
such a brook; are phrases that in Scripture design extraordinary afflictions.
So Ier. 49. concerning Edoms doom, thou shall not go unpunished, thou shall
surely drink. Can ye drink of the Cup that I shall drink of? (says our
Savior) speaking of his sufferings, to Zebedees children, Math. 20.22. If
drinking then in this place may any way resemble the have of a Captain; the
potion will prove more fulsome then the draught refreshing.

4 I pass over other by expositions, of the brook of the law, the brook of
Baptism, and the like, which Lorinus busieth himself to repeat, and censure.
That which Chrysostom, Basil, Theodoret, and the Greek Fathers, severally
restrain to our Saviors strict conversation, in watching, fasting, lodging,
traveling, preaching, praying, doing all manner of good, without intermission
or remission; The Latins, with greater reason, extend to all the degrees of
his Humiliation, and sufferings; to his Incarnation, to his poverty, to his
dangers, to his death. The brook of Gods anger for sins, the Devils
stratagems, the Jews despite, the worlds contumelies, and disgraces, not only
dashed against him, but entered even in unto his soul. Heavy indignation lay
hard upon him, and he was vexed with all the storms. These storms overtooke
him in this deep way, this dangerous way, which he met with here in this vale
of misery, when he took upon him the progress to deliver Man, and did not
abhor the Virgins womb. And with this fall in the expositions of most of the
Ancients, and modern, he drank of the brook, 1. of mortality by his
Incarnation, 2. of strictness, and hardness in all his passage, by his
voluntary wants, and poverty, 3. of the strong potion of the Law, by his exact
obedience, and subjection, 4. of the Jews malice, by their continual
indignities, 5. of the floods of Belial, by apparent, and unknown tentations,
6. of the heaviest wrath, of his Father by his unspeakable agony, and bloody
sweat in the garden. And last of all, of death it self on the Cross, by his
sad and extremest passion.

5 Have ye no regard, all ye that pass by this way? See to what plunges thy
Savior was put to, for thy sake, in this brook of vnconceiveable miseries,
how he drencheth himself in the midst, to save thee from drowning, how he
struggles among the weeds, and mire, to land thee safe on the farther banks.
Hee] that King, that Priest, that Prophet, must be liable (as we see) to his
Fathers eternal Iniunction. Shall] as a man designed with Socrates to be made
away by ungrateful Citizens. Drinke] not by measure of a cup only, but abrooke
of sorrows, and that in an uncouth way, destitute of any Ferryman, to help
him over, or ford to give him hope of easier passage, or Inn for better
provision, or Companions to help him if need required, and all this for us
wretched Rebels, that desired no such kindness. Now three Torrents in this
dismal brook, put him especially to his plunges: 1. The ungratefulness of
his own. 2. The Rage of the powers of darkness: but most of all at the last
cast. 3. The displeasure of his heavenly Father for our sins, which he had
undertaken to expiate. I should here in a manner make a passion Sermon, but to
repeat only Bethlehem bathed in blood of Innocents upon the first rumor of his
Nativity: his preaching, vilified by his reputed Fathers baseness: his
miracles attributed to a compact with Beelzebub; the Pharisees charge him with
treason; even his own kindred, with madness. Some times they ruffle about him
to make him a King; John 6.14. Luke 4.29.
and anon they hurry him to the brow of a hill, to break his neck from the
top. Those that upon a fit, cry Hosanna to the Son of David, presently in a
fury, change their note into crucify him, crucify him. His Disciples, that
vowed to stand out with him to the last, forsake him presently like cowards, at
the first onset. He is bought and sold as a slave, cried down as more
intolerable then a seditious murderer, and hanged at length like a damned
Rogue, between two notorious thieves: Such billows of humane malice the first
Torrent fometh against him. The second boyleth yet more ghastly, from the sink
of infernal fury. Never imagine that Satan's foil in the wilderness, staved
him off from farther proiects; No, after he enters into Judas, and works him
most desperately to betray his master, he guided and guarded that cursed rabble,
which most barbarously in the garden, laid violent hands on his sacred person.
And well may we think that his confessing of his Deity at other times, and
the dream, and intercession of Pilats wife, were but extorted testimonies, by
a superior command, or disguised plots, by telling some truth, to gain credit,
to deceive upon some other advantage. Last of all, in the deepest Torrent of
his Fathers indignation, a veil must be drawn over that, which cannot be
expressed. Devotion here seeks no farther, then the Evangelists plain
Narration. He that shall but consider him, in that disconsolate night, in the
garden, Blasted (as it were) from heaven with an amasing, thunderclap,
sweating, sighing, sobbing, praying, grovelling, sweating great drops of blood,
that trickled down to the ground, praying once and again, and the third time,
grovelling as often, and entreating the assistance of those drowsy comforters
all that while, which (as though nothing were a doing) slept securely by him,
must needs conclude with himself, that it was not the rascal regiment, which
he knew on the way for his apprehension, nor the Ocean of disgraces, which he
expected from the venom of his enemies, or spittings, or mockings, or
buffetings, or railings, or terror of the scourge, or thorns, or rack of the
cross, or nails, or spear, (a brook full to the brim of gall and vinegar)
that so strangely amazed him; But that heart breaking anguish, which wrung from
him this loud cry, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? That, that, was
the Torrent, and whirlepoole, fowler then the Jewish spittle; tarter then the
vinegar; bitterer then the gall; sharper then the thorns, or nails, or
spear; I dare say, as terrible, and unsupportable, as the lake of fire and
brimstone it self. That I say, was the most dangerous brook and deluge, he
drank of for our sakes. For our sakes, (Beloved) to make the way passable for
us, his followers, who otherwise had sunk into eternal perdition.

6 There be perchance, that would frame here a poetical resemblance, in the
combat of Hercules, with the river Achelous, or Hippomedon, with Ismenus, or
the striving of Achilles, by swimming, to master the streams of the stickle
River Sperchius, but I leave such fancies to their admirers. Three uses are
here obvious to those, that desire to profit. The first a direction to know
whether we are in the right way to Heaven or no. The second an Advise how to
provide our selves for the journey. And the third a comfort to cheer us up,
whatsoever in the progress may befall us. The way to heaven (Beloved) is by a
brook, tossed with outward troubles, and inward vexations, froathing with
crossing tides and unexpected winds, and storms. To pass it without great
hazard, has ever been unusual, and to shun it, by finding out a safer cut,
by land, is altogether impossible. If therefore it have never thwarted thee yet
in all thy courses, it may be suspected, that thou have wandered from the
narrow gate, or have newly set out, and have the further way to go. Noah met
with it in the universal Deluge, when all flesh had corrupted his way, and he
alone with his family, floated upon the waters. Jacob at his passage over the
brook Iabok, to meet with his brother Esau. Moses at the waters of Marah, and
Maribah. The whole Church notoriously, in Captivityes by Forrennors,
Oppressions, by homebred Tyrants, Infections, by heresies, defections, by
hypocritical Professors. What shall I speak of vials, and plagues, and a
succession of Beasts, and Sea Monsters, rising one after another, in the
Apocalypse, to vex her with restless perplexities? Let her be shifted into the
wilderness never so speedily, and the Clouds restrain their bottles, for the
expedition of this passage, the Dragon will empty his own gorge, to raise a
flood to stop her, wherein she should surely be overwhelmed, if she escaped
not by miraculous protection. O how often in this case, shall every good
Christian be forced to cry out with this our Prophet, in another place? Save
me O God, for the waters are come in, even unto my soul! I stick fast in the
deep mire, where no ground is, I am come into the deep waters, so that the
floods run over me. Or with the Disciples upon the point of drowning, Lord
save us, or Master save us, we perish. This is the dangerous passage of those
poor Pilgrims, that travail here from Egypt to the Celestial Canaan; though
the red Sea sometimes in their favor be dried up, and Jordan be driven back,
to make way unto them by the Lords appointment: yet this brook will not be so
quitted without a drinking. The Servant is not greater then the Master, nor the
Soldier then his Leader: if he then stooped so lo for us, shall we take
scorn by his example, to bow for our own advancement? The way would be too
pleasant, if this brook crossed it not, and allure us to erect tabernacles
here, and forget the new Jerusalem, which our Savior has purchased and
provided for us, by no less price then his dearest blood. He that shall but
reflect his thoughts, to take a view how the primitive Confessors, and ancient
Martyrs, in a zealous kind of emulation, iustled (as it were) one the other,
to have the credit of first entering this brook, and to enjoy the glory of the
further side, will be ashamed of our fearful houering, and dissolute
coasting, or gadding by it; who profess our selves to be their Followers, and
yet tremble to touch the Foord, they so courageously have waded, or swam
through. Every man is for the lifting up of the head, by worldly, and sinister
Advancements: but most shun, by all slights possibly the Brook, which we are
to stoop down to drink of. Thus we smatch and smooth our selves to be the
worlds Minions, and neglect the valor and resolution, which our Leader
requires in his trained soldiers. We will choose with Gad, and Ruben, fat
pastures for our sheep, and cattle, on this side the River, but are loath to
venture before our brethren to conduct them over to the land of Promise. We
think by our Policy, to escape better then our forefathers, and make bridges,
or hyre us boats, or skiffes, or wherries; though thousands before our eyes
that have ventured in them, have miscarried. But thou that resoluest to tread
in thy Masters steps, howsoever the way be crossed, thou that art content, and
confident, to venture by his example, fare as he fared, drink as he began the
health, endure as he prescribes as far, as by his grace, and ready
assistance, thou shall be put to, and enabled; Take this comfort by the way,
which S. Hierome affords on this passage, concerning this way. It is but a
brook that crosses thee, not a spring of water for perpetuity, it is
collected by a sudden storm, without any other head, and therefore cannot be
of any long continuance, it always rowleth, and roareth along, the valley, and
in reason cannot harm thee, as soon as thou have recovered any footing on the
higher ground. Let not then a momentary distaste for the present, divert thee
from the pursuit of an everlasting content. Thy Pilot has swamme before thee,
thou must keep stroke to follow. He stands to lift up thy head, never to
be endangered again on the farther shore. Which is the haven, and heaven in
the second place, we have struggled all this while to attain unto.

7. Therefore shall he lift up the head.] (...)
Heaviness may endure for a night, but joy comes in the morning: and to him
that overcommeth (says he, Psalm. 30.
that walks among the Candlesticks) will I give to sit with me in my Throne,
Revel. 3.21.
even as I also overcame, and am set with my Father in his throne. All
Antiquity generally paralleleth this place, with that of the second to the
Philippians, He humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the
death of the Cross, wherefore God also has highly exalted him. This is (...)
(says S. Chrysostom) the fruit and gain of humility, and a strict
conversation. We have here then (Beloved) not only Christ's Exaltation in
general, which was first manifested in the Resurrection, but also the cause of
it, in the word Therefore] and Manner, expressed in the lifting up the head.
The original (...), Therefore, rendered in Greek by (...), and amongst all the
Latins by propterea, is a note either of necessary connection, or causality,
and therefore justly casts us, upon the consideration of that controverted
difficulty; Whether the glory, or lifting up of the head, here attained by our
Savior, upon his precedent sufferings, or drinking of the brook, were
conferred on him only, as a right, belonging to the person, or as wages by way
of merit, proportionable to the sufferings of the humane nature? The Schoolmen
make a great pudder herein, on the third of the Sentences, and 18th
distinction; As also on the third part of Aquinas, the 9. quest. and 4. Art.
whose exorbitances, because Calvin has somewhat freely displaied, in the
seventeenth of the second of his Institutions; Bellarmine takes their part, and
flies upon him in his 5. book, and 9. Chapter, de Christo Mediatore. And
Gretser his second, him again, to fetch off the Cardinal, from the judicious
replies of Daneus, and Iunius. Valentia also, and Suarez come in with their
supplies, in their Comments upon their Master Aquinas, but with much confusion,
and perplexed prolixities, and obscurity. The truth is, the difference upon the
maine, seems not to be of that consequence, to keep men at ods, who
otherwise, are willing to agree, as Iunius and the most of our side ingeniously
acknowledge. In regard whereof, Zanchius herein takes liberty to vary from our
common tenent, and being thereof admonished, to defend it, in the preface
afterward prefixed to his confession of faith, and in a private Epistle, to
William Stuckius of Zurick, wherein he affirms, that Christ, not only merited
for us, but also for himself, as the Schoolmen would infer, out of the
Fathers. For the taking up of this difference, (not to trouble you with more
then may concern the point, or beseem this place) It is first agreed on, on
all hands, that in the question of Christ's merit, the Divine nature being
privileged from the least touch of disparagement, the task will wholly lie on
the shoulders of the manhood. Now that this, in the second place, should be of
that worth, to merit the hypostaticall union, or the graces following
therefrom, none of the Adversaries (for ought I find) ever affirmed, or
whatsoever he did, or suffered in the humane nature, became not meritorious for
us, through the infinite dignity of that union, none of our men on the other
side ever denied. Palud. in 3. sent. d. 18.
The Ieswits therefore, wrong Calvin, when they misconstrue, that he spoke
aright, and yet themselves clear not the point like Schoolmen, as in their
voluminous disputes they undertake.

8. That Christ merited for us by satisfying at full, his Fathers justice, how
earnestly does Calvin maintain in the 17. Chap. of the 2d of his Institutions
above cited? He terms them perperam arguti, perverse, and wayward wranglers,
that in this case make scruple to admit of the word merit. But that the Manhood
should be assumed, and employed to merit that for it self, which was due as a
consequent to the personal union, this he reiects as a subtility, which the
scripture no where countenanceth. Vega says the same by Zuarez own confession,
Hugo de S. Victore was maine in the point long before Scotus, with Biell, and
their followers, who urge so precisely Gods acceptance, and the duty of the
vndertcker, to make satisfaction meritorious, that Zuarez perceaues, and
intimates it may mar their mart of merits, if it be not seen too, the
better, and by him, and his fellows, fitted to their present negotiations.
Hale's accelaratiue, and interpretatiue, will as little steed them, who exact
the hyre they wrought for, as merited due-debt, and will be loath to stand to
Gods courtesy, either for acceptance, or dispatch. For in strict terms
(Beloved) how can any Creature merit of his Creator, seeing the utmost of
endeavors comes under the title of duty? For to a merit (we all know) there
belong these four conditions, 1. That the work be entirely the undertakers.
2. That it be altogether free, not of due-debt. 3. That it be a benefit, or
kindness to him of whom, the Worker contends to meritt. 4. And last of all,
that it be proportionable to the reward in co^mutatiue Justice. In all which,
the humane nature in the abstract, will fall short of infinite reward. And
therefore our men rightly ascribe, all the merit to the person, consisting of
both natures, where the humane, is advanced to that pitch of dignity, by union
with the Godhead, which makes the merit infinite. This Propterea therefore in
this place, and other of the like nature (which our Adversaries so stiffly stand
upon) referred to the dignity of the worker imports a meritorious cause. But in
regard of the work it self, or of the humane Nature apart, a consequent to
that which went before, and a passage to the reward which follows upon it. So
much the word merit commonly among the Ancients signified, and therefore is
fitly expounded by compararare, acquirere, obtinere, adipisci, to get, to
receive, to obtain, to take possession. In which sense the most Advised
Divines, ever understood their Predecessors. But this contents not our modern
Meritmongers. Merit is the Popes Mint, and therefore must be always kept going.
The merit of Christ's humanity, and the merit of blessed Angels, between the
instant of their creation, and possession of eternal happiness, must be so
strictly urged, to make way for Monkish merit, and fill their own Church
Treasure with works of superrarogation. Otherwise, the doctrine of
Justification by faith alone, would quickly make them all turn mendicants. The
more it stands us upon, (Beloved) to weigh their pieces before we take them for
pay, and not to be too liberal in granting them such premises, whereby they
shall be animated to venture upon worse conclusions. In a contrary strain, how
dangerously does Socinus take vantage by affirming, that Christ so meriting for
himself, served his own turn only, and not ours, in that behalf? and
therefore his doings, and sufferings were only exemplary for our imitation, not
satisfactory for our redemption. Which cuts off all the assurance and comfort
of our salvation. Such dangerous heresies may arise from the misconstruing of
one particle; as combustions from the neglect of the smallest spark. The Master
of the sentences shall shut up this point, as being sounder in it, then most of
his Scholars. If Christ's virtues, and Actions (says he) were enough to clear
himself from blame, wherefore should he suffer and dye? His answer is, prote,
non prose, for thee, not for himself. But how for me? Vt ipsius passio tibi
esset forma, and causa: forma virtutis, and humilitatis, causa gloriae, and
libertatis. That his passion might be to thee a pattern, and cause: a pattern
of virtue, and humility, a cause of glory and eternal freedom. And here we
may not let slip that use which a reverend Father of our Church, has wittily
observed upon the like connection, Here (says he) on earth there is an
exaltauit, oftentimes a lifting up of the head to preferment, without a propter
quod: so Sobna, and Haman, and Sanballat, with others of the like merit, are
sometimes exalted, but no man can guess, or imagine why, or wherefore. But
with God it is always otherwise: Propterea, must go before exaltavit: the
race before the meed; the therefore, before the lifting up of the head;
laboring in the vineyard, before the distribution of the penny; faithfulness
in a little before the rule over much. The Corn must first dye before it
blossom out the blade or ear, and we dye, before we rise, and drink our
part of the brook, before the head be lifted up. Which falls on the manner
of our Saviors exaltation, and the matter I intend to conclude with.

9. Shall he lift up the head.] The lifting up of the head most commonly
signifies in scripture, the Advancement from an inferior condition to a
better. So Evilmerodach lifted up the head of Iehoiakim his Captive, to a freer
estate. 2. Kings and the last. Thou art my worship, and the lifter up of my
head. Psalm. 3. In the 52. of Isaiah, we have three words in the same verse,
which note in this kind the three degrees of comparison (...), and (...), and
(...). (...)
Behold my servant shall deal prudently, he shall be exalted, and extolled,
and be very high, v. 13. Which the ancient Rabbis, with the Chalday
Paraphrase, expound expressly of the Messiah. Howsoever the latter, contradict
it: for as in his humiliation, all were amazed, at his visage mangled, and
marred more then any man's: so in his exaltation, they admire the unexpected
change, and Kings shut their mouths, at the hearing and seeing of those things
they thought incredible: as it follows there immediately to the'nd of the
Chapter. All this is here comprised: Hee] not another, says S. Jerome, but the
person that was abased, in the Incarnation and Passion: Shall] by his own
power, not upon a vantage occasionally taken, but by an absolute decree, set
down from eternity: Life up the head] to spoil principalities by his
triumphing over the powers of darkness: to trample the world under his feet,
by his glorious Ascension: Rule in the midst of his enemies, by the Iron rod of
his wrath: conquer, the Nations to be converted, by the two edged sword of his
word: and rescue, and redeem his own elect, by his everlasting Priesthood.
Lift up your heads therefore O ye Gates, and be ye lifted up ye everlasting
doors, that the King of glory may come in. Who is the King of glory? He that
was a man of sorrows, brought as a Lamb to the slaughter, Isai. 53.
and buried in the grave with the wicked. But after he had made his soul an
offering for sin, and quitted himself from the brook of all those miseries,
then the pleasure of the Lord prospered in his hand to divide the spoil among
the mighty. Then brake he the arrows of the bow, the sword, the shield, and
the battle; became of more honor then the hills of the robbers; and showed
himself triumphantly to be the King of glory.

10. And now (Beloved) is it not meet that the members by drinking, and
swimming, with all resolution, and perseverance, should prepare to lift up
their heads also, by following this their head? But alas how should Cain lift
up the head, who has slain his brother Abel, or Achab, that has made away
poor Naboth, to possess his vineyard? Or Judas that has betrayed his Master?
Or Simon Magus that is in the gall of bitterness? or Ananias, and Saphira, who
go about to cosen the holy spirit of God? With what face can that head be
lifted up, which is drowsy with drunkenness, or distracted with idle or
pernicious plots, or whirled about with vain glory, or poring still on muck,
through covetousness, or looking askew through envy, and implacable malice.
Awake thou therefore that sleep, and lift up thy head, and he that beholds
thy tossings will ever keep it above water, never fear of drowning, as long
as he directs, and such a Pilot has thee in his charge. If thou sinking cry
out, with Peter, his hand will be quickly stretched out to save thee, and set
thee at last in the surest landing. Regino reports in the first of his
Chronicles page 19. that Guntranne, a German King sleeping on a time by a
brook, there came a little thing out of his mouth, which sought a passage
over, but dared not to venture. Whereupon his Attendant that watched by him,
laid athwart his sword, the little creature went over, entered at a hole in a
mountain, on the other side, returned the same way, got into the Kings mouth
again, who presently awaking, said he had dreamt of a treasure in that
mountain, and upon trial found it to be so indeed. How true this story may
be, I pass not, but urge the analogy: If the brook here mentioned in the
Text (Beloved) be too tempestious, and impassable, to thy poor and trembling
soul, there shall not want thy Saviors conquering sword, to make thee a
bridge to pass. For his Incarnation, is our encouragement; His Resurrection,
our raising; His Death, our Life; His Ascension, our triumph, and entering into
Gods holy mountain, in which will be discovered inestimable treasures. O thou
therefore that once lifted up, have promised to draw all men unto thee, draw
us after thee (we beseech thee) that we may follow, that pressing through
brooks, and bogges, whatsoever befall us in the way, we may at length lift up
our heads, to be crowned with thy eternal glory. To whom with the Father, and
the blessed Spirit, be all Honor, Praise, Power, and Dominion, both now and
evermore.

AMEN.
DAVID'S REJOICING FOR Christ's Resurrection.

A SERMON PREACHED ON EASTER DAY, AT St PETER'S in the East, in OXFORD.

By JOHN PRIDEAVX, Rector of Exceter College, His MAIESTIE's Professor in
Divinity in the University of OXFORD.

OXFORD, Imprinted by LEONARD LICHFIELD Anno Salutis, 1636.

PSALM. 16.10.11. Wherefore my heart was glad, and my glory rejoiced, my flesh
also shall rest in hope.

For why? Thou shall not leave my soul in Hell, neither shall thou suffer thy
holy one to see Corruption.


THAT which Saint Hierome sometimes spoke of Isaiah, Praefat. in Isaiam.
that he seems rather, to be an Evangelist then a Prophet, in regard of his
clear recording of future Events, as though they had been past already: may
as truly be affirmed of the Author of this Psalm. Mayor est huius Scripturae
authoritas, quam totius humani ingenii capacitas.
The authority of which (says St Augustine) is of greater consequence, then
the wit of Man can comprehend. A new writer says, It shines especially with
three precious stones, the red Rubye of Christ's passion, the green Emerald of
his Resurrection, Daniel Cramerus, in schola Prophetica. p. 158.
and the vnmalleable Adamant of his Everlasting kingdom. The Resurrection must
be my principal theme as fittest for this days solemnity. The title of it
is (...) which the Greeks express by (...), a Memorial graven in a Pillar,
Nyss. de Psalm mor: inscript. Tract. 1. c. 6. and 15. vide Mollerum and Lorinum.
to be viewed and considered of all men. Some of the Latins by a Crown or
Garland, platted of the choycest Mysteries of our salvation. Others as an
excellent Instrument, or heavenly ditty, to cheer up the broken hearted in the
day of affliction. A third sort by pure gold Ore, fit to be set in ouches, to
grace, not only the Neck, but the Heart of every good Christian. All accord in
an Excellency, but in the reason they give, there arises some difference, so
that if any man should ask of this passage (as the Eunuch in the 8th of the
Acts) concerning that place of Isaiah: Isa. 53.
I pray thee of whom speaks the Prophet this, of himself, or some other man?
The Jews with some Heretics, Verse. 34.
will answer perversely, of himself only: that by such a wrong bias they may
draw us from the mark: Diverse Christians therefore, both ancient and modern,
in detestation of such frowardness, will so wholly apply the whole to Christ
our Savior, that David shall not be heard to speak in it, or out of it for
himself. But the truest Interpretation will prove to be that which Calvin
generally urges, (notwithstanding, the virulency of his Adversaries) That is
is principally meant of Christ, but immediately, of David, as herein his type.
So that David is here the speaker, but Christ, the subject of the speech. David
the singer, but Christ the burden of the song. This S. Peter himself
confirms, Acts 2.25. For David (says he) speaks concerning him. And the
Jesuits cannot deny it. Ribera in his first praeludium, to the twelve lesser
Prophets handling the question, concerning such predictions in general,
whether all in them were to be referred to the Messiah, or somewhat, to be
literally expounded; stands stiff against both extremes, that neither all
nor none, are wholly to be interpreted of Christ. But that some are to be
simply taken as they lie. Others include a farther reach, and (as some late
Writers have well delivered) a double accomplishing. The first in the letter
and scope, the second of the thing, in the Anti-tipe. For this is the
privilege of Scripture, above all other writings; Vt vno eodemque sermon,
Moral. l. 20. c. 1.
dum narrat gestum, prodat mysterium, says Gregory, that as the letter is
verified in the history, so the history it self, shall be a token of things to
come. When Jonathan told his boy, that the arrows he was sent to fetch, were
beyond him, 1. Sam. 20. the ladde found it so indeed; but there was a farther
meaning in the matter, that Saul was unappeasable, and David must shift for
himself. Right so in an other passage, a bone of him shall not be broken, the
truth appears immediately, in the Paschall Lamb of the Jews; but principally,
in that Lamb of God, who takes away the sins of the World, Ioh. 19.36. In
Math. 2. v. 23.
For a prophecy, (as Maldonate well observes) may be said to be fulfilled in a
fourefold sense. Either when the thing simply comes to pass, in the same
manner it was foretold: As that of Isaiah behold a Virgin shall conceive and
bear a son, Math. 1.23. or when it is paralel'd with the like; ye
Hypocrites (says our Savior) well did Esaias Prophecy of you. Mat. 15.7. That
is in reproving the dissimalation of his time, he hit right upon their manners.
In a Third sense, the Scripture is said to be fulfilled by Abraham's believing
in God, not when his faith began, but when it was more manifested and
strengthened, James 2.23. But the most notable accomplishment of all is, when
at the appearing of the substance the shadow vanishes, and turned the parable
or semblance, into a plain Narration. So the Rock was Christ, and Sarah and
Hagar by an allegory, the Old and New Testament. In like manner, Lorinus and
Calvin (howsoever otherwise iarring) concur with our last Translators, in
this Psalms Argument. That David in distrust of his own merits, and hatred of
Idolatry, flies here to God for preservation. It is he that boasts of his
delight, in the Saints communion, his portion in the Lords inheritance, his
goodly heritage of the Lords allotting, his blessed lot, in the Lords counsel,
his confidence in his presence, his constancy by his protection, and (which is
the vpshot of all) his security and assurance in the Holy ones resurrection.
Whom here he foresees in the spirit, ransacking the sepulcher, loosing the
bands of death, and opening to the Church a path to heaven, in which all his
members are to follow. This is that which awaketh his lute, and harp, sets his
heart a dancing, his tongue a talking, his very flesh and bones in an
extaticall rapture.

2 Wherefore my heart was glad.] The words you see contain a (...) or (...),
that song of Isaiah, Cap. 25.8. Cap. 13.14.
and Hosea, pricked out again, by the blessed Apostle 1. Cor. 15. by the
swallowing up of death in victory, and without straining yield us,

These two parts, 1 A Triumphing descant, in the 10. v. Wherefore my heart was
glad etc. 2 The Basse, or ground thereof in the 11. For why, thou shall not
leave, etc.


This triumph is here expressed by three circumstances, 1 Gladness, of the
heart. 2 Rejoicing of the tongue. 3 Rest, and hope of the flesh.


Wherefore my heart was glad, and my glory rejoiced, my flesh also shall rest
in hope,]

The ground or basse is settled on these two distinct Props 1 David's
Resurrection, through Christ. For why? thou will not lean my soul in Hell.] 2
Christ's victory over the Grave and Hell, to make way to his resurrection.
Neither shall thou suffer thy Holy one to see corruption.


What happiness may a Christian desire, but here to be merry, and hereafter to
be secure? In this life to enjoy the truest comfort, and from death to be
freed by a joyful resurrection? All which is closely couched in these words J
intend to stand upon. For here we have faith in the heart, charity in the
tongue, hope in the flesh, all these three Theological virtues, with
gladness, joy, and rest, their several attributes. These depend upon that,
which is to be expected hereafter; freedom from the grave, and hell, by
Christ's resurrection and victory. Behold the path of life, by the gates of
death, beginning at man's heart, and ending with the fullness of joy, in the
presence of God. Happy Prophet! that could kenne it so far off, and leave so
fair a trace, for all posterity to follow. He wished before, but at the end of
the 14. Psalm. O that the salvation of Israel were come out of Sion. But here in
a deep speculation, he meets with it, returning with the spoils of hell. And
therefore his heart was glad, which is the first circumstance that appears, in
setting forth our Prophets triumph, and therefore in his due place, may be
first considered.

3 Wherefore my heart was glad.] the voice of joy, (...)
and gladness, is not only in the tents, but in the hearts of the righteous;
where as the joy of the wicked, is but from the teeth outward: (...)] every
word has his weight. Therefore] as a Ianus, looks forward and backward.
Because God was at his right hand, to uphold him, and his holy one, on the
other side, to free him from Hells captivity. Therefore (says he) not an
others, who can not diue so deep, but mine own single heart] is glad as it
was, and was heretofore, as it is, (the word bearing both significations, and
the difference of of the Translations, being not material.) Those desires,
passions, speculations, and designs, which Philosophers leave swimming in the
brain, or sinking in some inferior faculty of the soul, Divinity recalleth to
the heart. The heart seeks, the heart finds, the heart accuses, the heart
acquitteth, the heart understands, and the heart wills. God must be loved,
with all the heart, or else the law is not fulfilled. The heart must be rent,
and not the garment, Deuteronomy. 10.12.
in repentance that is not hypocritical. If our heart smite us, all is not
well; 1. Sam. 24.6. 1. John. 3.21. Psalm. 119.
but if our heart condemn us not, then we have confidence toward God. There
is a brawny heart, of the luxurious, and a fat heart, of the careless, and
uncircumcised heart, of the unregenerate, and a stony heart, of the obstinate,
and a dead heart, of the foolish, and a heart, and a heart, of the dissembler.
But none of these hearts are capable of this gladness, which here our Prophet
inioyeth. This must be a contrite heart, which shall not be despised, a ready
heart, which is ever accepted, a pure heart, which brings us to the sight of
God. For as no grief is comparable to the sorrow of heart: so all mirth that
is not hearty, Eccles. 7.5.
is but as the crackling of thorns under the pot. S. Bernard tells us of three
sorts of hearts, which the Prophet Esaias persuades transgressors to return
unto. An humble heart, and this is wrought by crosses. A relenting heart, and
this is swayed by counsel. A confident, resolved heart, and this is enlarged
and continually raised by heavenly meditations, and desires, to a higher
measure of gladness. But as the heart is deceitful above all things: so the
joy which it affects, may be soonest mistaken. The laughter of the fool, the
self pleasing of the humorist, the merriments of the vainely-affected, the
May-games of the multitude, the preferment of the ambitious, the conquest of
the revengfull, and the gain of the covetous, are commonly presented to our
fancies, under the title of joy and gladness, but (alas) they come not near
the heart, or if they fret so deep, it is but to stupify, and rot it. The
Philistines made themselves sport at Sampsons misery, and Hamans glad heart,
Esther 5.
would break, if it vented not it self to his wife, and friends, but ruin
soon crushed the one, and strangling set a period to the other. What comfort
should then a poor heart find, in Dives sweet meats, and his sour sauce? Or
Belshazzar's carousing, and his sad reckoning? A man may be exceeding glad
with Herod, Mark. 6.20. Luke 23.
at John's Preaching, and at the sight of Christ, and yet through by-respects,
be no nearer to true happiness, then a frantique man to a settled Moderation,
or a stage player, to a Crown and Kingdom. For notwithstanding, some of the
Heathens strictness, in daring the worlds vanities, or resolutenesse of
others, to purchase fame by their bravery, or the cordialls their Masters have
given them, cheer them up, and arm them against all common mishaps; the most
of them have been appalled, at the approach of death, and the best, in a
ma^mering, what should become of them afterward. Whereas St Steven could pray
for his persecutors, Paul desire to be dissolved, the Martyrs embrace the
flames, contemn the tortures, weary the Torturers, and all upon this our
Prophets ground. They set the Lord always before their eyes, they found his
succors ready, at their right hand, they were sure, that his Holy one had
cleared their passage for them, that the Arrest of the grave, and Hell should
do them no harm; and therefore howsoever their adversaries roared, their
friends failed, the rest of their members past the pikes they passed, yet their
hearts were continually glad.

Prove. 15.15.
4. This continual Feast, a merry heart affords, which if we relish not, as
we ought, it argues some great distemper. Surely pleasure is most
correspondent to men's nature, (as our Aristotle tells us) and is attained in
the conjunction of the faculty, Eth. lib. 7. c. 1.
with his desired object. But where may that object be found in this world,
which shall give the heart sat is faction? The Preacher was wise enough, to
have fastened on it, if this life had afforded it; but his long experience
brought him to this short issue, that riches, and glory, and health, and
beauty, and knowledge, and applause of all the world, are but so many pageants
of flitting vanities, which are attained most commonly, with much travail, and
grief, and loss, before the heart can take a full survey of them. O what a
difference may there be discerned, between external delight, and this inward
gladness? This is the true Pratum spirituale, the spiritual meadow, the
Paradise of the soul, that Heaven upon earth, that haven of happiness, which
devout men, in all ages, have felt, and desired. Amongst the fruits of the
spirit, which the Apostle recseoneth Gal. 5. This joy of the heart, is ranged
in the first row, as daughter to love, and sister to peace. Corn, and wine,
and oil, may affect the labourer, Psalm. 4.
but nothing like that gladness of heart, whih flasheth from the light of Gods
countenance. Psalm the 4. Meat and drink may please the appetite of the
hungry, but the king dome of God, consists not in such things, but in
righteousness, and peace, and joy, in the holy Ghost, Romans 14. Wherefore (as
Iehu said to Iehonadab) If thy heart be right, as my heart is with thy heart,
let us on together, in this our Prophets chariot, for a farther discovery of
this hidden treasure; which here is at the tongues end, in the second place to
be spoken of.

(...)
5 And my glory rejoiced.] As out of the abundance of the heart, the mouth
speaks; so the heart, shall no sooner indite a good matter, but the tongue,
will be the pen of a ready writer. He that shall make a doubt why I express
this word (...), which properly signifies glory, so indifferently by the word
tongue, may find it not only in the 72, but also in the Apostles translation
Act. 2.26. And the trope, is elsewhere usual, Genesis 49.6. unto their assembly,
my honor, or glory, be not thou united. That is, God forbid, that my tongue,
should ever approve of Simeons, and Levies bloody fact; So Psalm. the 30.12. how
can that be otherwise interpreted, then of the tongue, My glory shall sing
praise to thee, and not be silent. The reason of this kind of speech, is given
by some, for that the especial office, of the tongue is, to set forth Gods
glory: or that, the inward worth of the mind, is most commonly vented by
speech; Moller.
whence (...) is taken by others, as (...), the light of the mind, the tongue,
being the best member, and the worst according as it is employed. It is placed
(as the Anatomists tell us) between the Brain, Laurent.
and the Heart, that it should faithfully relate the conceits of both. And
moistened it is, with a natural glibnesse, that it stick not to the roof of
the mouth, when the truth should bespoken; and on the other extreme, lest it
should overlash, it is kept within its compass, with a guard of teeth. That
therefore which a bit is for the guiding of a horse, or a helm for the
stirring a ship; the Apostle makes the tongue to be in regard of the whole
body. The managing well of this little member, is the securing of all the rest.
If this be once fired from hell, it defiles the whole body, brings with it a
world of iniquity, and sets the course of nature, in a combustion. And how
hardly it is reduced to temper, when once it has gotten a habit, to be
disorderly lavish, the Apostle Saint James, in plain terms tells us. Every
kind of beasts (says he) and of birds, and serpents, and things in the sea,
is tamed, and has been tamed, but the tongue can no man tame, it is an unruly
evil, full of deadly poison. Therewith bless we God, and therewith curse we
men, which are made after the similitude of God. Seeing then the tongue is so
indifferent in it self, to be abused, or well employed; why should thou
loose it rather to mischief, (says S. Augustine) then restrain it wholly to
set forth Gods glory? De Not. and Great.
Will thou be choice of thy meats, to content thy palate, and careless of
the words, which thy tongue shall utter? The Heathen will tell us, that words,
must be sown as seed, Senec. Ep. 28.
not confusedly, in heaps, for that were wast, but distinctly scattered, that
they may grow, and bring forth fruit. A River overflowing the banks, and a
tongue overlashing, gather nothing but filth, and dirt, as a Father makes the
resemblance. It were easy to exceed, in a theme so plentiful; God confounded
the tongues at Babel, for the separating of those Rebels; but conferred the
gift of tongues, in the new Testament, for the gathering of all Nations into
one Church, to glorify one God: and those appeared fiery, not to sindge the
innocent, but to turn all carnal fuel, into ashes. How should we hear Gods
word, where there is no tongue to speak? Or what communion could there be
among the Saints, where there wanted utterance, to express the hearts consent?
When the feet are at a stand, the hands bound, the rest of the members vnwealdy
to do God service, happy it is for us, that the tongue is free, to glorify him
in our selves, and express, to the chearing up of others, what the heart
thinks.

6 But it too often falls out (Beloved) that this glory will be wanting, when
the heart is otherwise engaged, and the tongue be prattling of that, which the
mind never conceited. Not. Hist. l. 6. c. 30.
Pliny tells us, of some far in the East, that had no tongues at all. And
Diodorus Siculus of others, Hist. l. 2. c. 1.
toward the South; that had two tongues in one mouth, so distinctly parted,
that at one, and the same instant, they could oppose and answer. What credit
is to be given, to such relations, I need not admonish, but better (perchance)
it were, to have no tongue at all, then a heart, and a tongue, deceitefully
divided, and the gladness, or grief of the one, not expressed, but dissembled
in the other. What should I speak of the gross flattery, or virulent
backbiting; or open railing, or corrupt communication, or (that which is worst
of all) the impudent lying, and damnable swearing, and blaspheaming, of these
degenerate times, which a Christian heart trembles to conceive, and the tongue
to utter? Thou have loved to speak all words that may do hurt, O thou false
tongue, Psalm. 52.
therefore shall God destroy thee for ever, he shall take thee, and pluck thee
out of thy dwelling, and root thee out of the land of the living. I make no
doubt but one of the reasons, why our Prophet is called a man after Gods own
heart, was for his plain syncerity, without closing or glozing; and the
faithful agreement of his heart, and tongue together. For when his heart
melted like wax in the midst of his body, his tongue straight cleaued unto
his gummes, Psalm. 22.
and if his heart be once hot within him, at the sight of the ungodly, the fire
must needs be kindled with musing, and the tongue give vent unto it. He cannot
keep his tongue from singing, Psalm. 39. Psalm. 28.
when his heart danceth for joy, so violently the hearts belief breaks out,
into the mouths confession. But we are either sick of that old Jewish
disease, to honor with the lips, when the heart is far off: or else both
heart and tongue are so otherwise engaged, that the setting forth of Gods
glory, shall break no square between them. (...), Nothing is so much affected
in these unsettled times, (which Nazianzen long sithence observed) as that
Athenian Itch of bartering news, and fidling about matters, that least
concern us. Are your minds set upon righteousness, o ye congregation? and
do ye judge, the thing that is right, o ye sons of men? Where are then our
Mictam's of David, in sounding forth the Lords praises, by recounting the
wonders he has wrought, for the settling of our salvation? why are our
discourses so wide from the chief point, we should be talking of? If the round
world, and all that is therein, the blessings, we daily enjoy, the dangers, we
continually escape, the noble works, we successively behold, and hear of,
yield not matter sufficient for the tongues glorying: yet the meditation of the
happiness to come, should fill the mouth with laughter, Psalm. 126
and the tongue with joy, this apprehension should secure the lumpish flesh,
through a joyful hope. Which is the third circumstance, (as you may remember)
that presented it self to our former consideration.

7 My flesh also shall rest in hope.] As Aarons ointment distilled from the
head to the skirts of his clothing, Psalm. 133.
so Gods blessings are imparted, from one member to an other. The method in
Arts, will lead us from the beginning successively, to the end: but divinity
begins in the middle, and thence, (as from the center) most commonly draws
lines, to the whole circumference. Here we see, how from the heart affected,
the tongue gloryeth, and from the tongues rejoicing, how the flesh is
comforted. If our Savior wash but the Disciples feet, John 13.10.
the whole body, shall be held as cleansed, so diffusiue is that good, which
the holy Ghost communicates. The body shall be partaker of the souls
happiness, and at length, bless the time that ever it came to be the casket
of a Jewel so precious. A strange matter, that the flesh which is here so
rebellious, should presume on such quiet hereafter; The flesh which is the
grandmother of original corruption, Genesis 6. Gal. 5.
the mother of so many actual mischiefs, the confederate with the Devil, in
the most of his temptations, plots and invasions, which profits nothing, Iam.
1. John 6. Romans 7. 1. Cor. 15.
Ioh. 6. has no good thing in it, nay, is as it were death it self, and
cannot inherit the Kingdom of God; should not only escape unpunished, but also
rest, and rest in hope, and hope with confidence, and be confident in the
expectation of a joyful resurrection. Notwithstanding yet you hear, what our
Prophet says, (...), the hearts gladness, the tongues glorying, the souls
happiness is not all, but besides this, the flesh] which is so frail in life,
so fearful in death, so forlorn in the grave, also] that flesh of mine shall
dwell in the dust securely. Where by flesh, he means not fleshly lusts, which
fight against the spirit, but the body as it is separated from, and opposed to
the soul. To such a carcass, howsoever laid low, and dissolved, there is hope
of a restoring. And this (no doubt) was the reason, that after the soul was
departed to its last home, a respective care was had, for interring the corpse,
amongst all Nations, that ever professed civility. How solemnly among the
Jews, were the Patriarchs buried together, in the cave of Machpelah? To be laid
in the sepulchers of their Fathers, was counted a blessing to posterity; but to
be left to be meat for the fowls of the air, or a prey, for beasts, 1. Sam.
17.
was the terriblest thing Goliath could think upon, to affright David with.
Much are the men of Iabesh Gilead commended, 2. Sam. 2.
for recovering the carcasses of Saul, and Jonathan, from the walls of
Bethshan, and honoring them, with a decent funeral; whereas it is added to
Iehoiakim, as the extremity of disgrace, and misery, that he should be buried,
with the burial of an Ass, drawn, and cast forth beyond the gates of
Jerusalem. Ier. 22.19.
All which proceeded from the hope, which our Prophet here relyeth on. For to
what purpose, were erected Tombs, and Piramides, or other the like Monuments,
Annointings, Embalmings, Baptizings, or Washings of the dead used, (as the
Apostle argues 1. Cor. 15.) but to testify the confidence, they had, that the
dead should rise again? upon this, Job sets up his rest, Cap. 19 26.
though after my skin, worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see
God. The same quietus est is brought forth by Martha, as the general assurance,
of the people of God, amongst the midst of Pharisees and Sadduces: I know that
my brother shall rise again in the resurrection of the last day, John 11.

8 Thus they comforted themselves; in the loss of friends, and animated their
trembling flesh, against deaths ghastly looks. But our provision for the flesh,
is in another kind. We feed it delitiously, cloth it pompously, no
preservation or recreation shall be neglected, no physic thought too dear,
or troublesome, to give it the best content. But how it shall be disposed in
the grave, and provided for the call of the last trumpe, it puts us into a
melancholy to consider, and bewrays the little hope we have, of our future hope
hereafter. I suppose it would grieve any of us all, to see a Church converted
unto base offices, or holy things polluted by luxurious or superstitious
Miscreants; but know we not that our bodies are the temples of the holy Ghost?
and should there be no care taken, for the keeping of these vessels pure, and
presenting them in the most decent manner, to their Redeemer, and Savior? 1.
These. 4.4.
What hope may he have for rest, that purposely thrusts himself, into
unnecessary tumults? Or what happiness can he promise his flesh hereafter,
that all his life, has abused it, to all uncleanness, and iniquity? This
privilege of the fleshes rest, and Resurrection, Tertullian earnestly
pleads, against the ancient Heretics. Lib. de Carnis resurrectione.
They have scriptures says he) by heart, by which the flesh is vilified, but
little consider other passages, where its dignity is expressed. They read that
all flesh is grass, and quote the place in Isaiah; but the same Prophet could
have told them, that all flesh shall see the Salvation of the Lord. Out of
Genesis, they will urge the Lord speaking, that his spirit shall not always
strive with men, because he is but flesh; but Joel relates a promise, to salve
all this, Cap. 6. C. 2.
I will power out my spirit upon all flesh. How are these things reconciled?
Non Carnis substantia, sed actus inhonoratur (says the same Father) doubtless
it shall go the better, with the substance of the flesh, the sharper its
rebellions are reproved, and subdued. But the maine use of this Doctrine is,
against the terrors of death, where there is most need of encouragement. What
was that which made the martyrs so resolute, to confront all torments, but the
persuasion of the souls better estate, and the securing of the body, for a
happier condition. Say they were to be sawen a sunder with Isaiah, or stoned
with S. Steven, or to be dismembered into a thousand pieces, with popish powder
plots, could they be better armed, then with this meditation, that their flesh
should rest, and rise to the confusion of their deadliest enemies? Art thou
vexed with continual diseases; or pined with penury, or oppressed by tyrants,
or stabd (as it were) at the heart, with remediless crosses and calamities?
Have the pains of Hell beset thee, and the snares of death encompassed thee
round about? O thou of little faith, wherefore do thou doubt and sink? Can
thy soul do amiss, when thy body shall rest in hope? And shall a momentary
brunt dismay thee, that shall be recompensed with the fullness of joy, in the
Lords chamber of Presence? S. Augustine observes in his 22. book de Civitate
Dei, and 5. chapter, three incredible things, which the Heathen, at the first
spreading of Christianity, could no way gainesay, yet were loath to
acknowledge. First, it could not sink into their conceits, that Christ was
raised in the flesh, and so ascended into Heaven. Secondly, they stormed that
the World believed, a thing so incredible. But that which perplexed the^ most
was, that a few, ignoble, and unlearned fishermen, should have that power, to
bring diverse of their best scholars, to think so, and persuade others. But
these were not acquainted with our Prophets ground; For why? thou shall not
leave my soul in Hell.] which had his warrant from Heaven, that all Christians
must stand upon, and succeeds in the next place to be examined.

9 (...), For thou will not leave my soul in Hell.] About these few words, we
have a world of wrangling; what they properly signify, and how they are here to
be taken, upon the Ambiguity of the word (...), which primarily imports, a
breath of life, sometimes the whole living man; other times the soul, and its
facultyes. In a passage or two, a dead Carcass may be understood. Some new
writers have taken the vantage, to clap up those two Periods together, and
burye them in one Sepulcher. For with these men, (...) and (...) shall not
signify in this place Hell, the place of the damned, but the Grave only,
wherein the Carcass corrupts, or at least, the state of the dead, which
consists in the soul and bodies actual separation. So that the latter
member here, should be but an explication of the former, and the whole sum,
according to this sense. Thou shall not leave my soul in Hell] that is my
self, to remain in the sepulcher, but free me therein from Rottenness and
Corruption. Thus Calvin and a great number of our Reformed writers, who
deservedly are highly esteemed of us. But that which S. Augustine answers S.
Hierome, Ep. 19.
alleging many Authors to prove that S. Paul's Reproving S. Peter to his face,
Gal. 2. was but a kind of dispensable untruth, in regard it was not like, that
S. Peter, would so dissemble, as it was objected, Ipse mihi (says he) pro
omnibus immo supra hos omnes, Apostolus Paulus occurrit (dent veniam quidlibet
aliud opinantes) Ego magis credo tanto Apostolo, may be my Apology, for not
admitting this interpretation, howsoever plausible and learnedly defended. S.
Peter in the 2. of the Act. v. 31. purposely repeateth these words, and
expounds them severally, in this manner, Hee] that is David, seeing this
before, spoke of the Resurrection of Christ, But what spoke he? that his soul
was not left in hell, neither his flesh did see corruption; where for (...) we
have (...), for (...), words seldom used in the greek, but to express the
soul of a man, and Prison of the damned. where to prevent (as it were) such
blending of words, and things together, to (...), or soul in the first place,
(...), or flesh, is opposed. And in the second their Attributes are as clearly
distinguished, the soul was not left in Hell, the flesh was not to see
corruption. Sermon. 74. ep. 99. and 57. q. 1. and p. 15. Beda. Fulgent. etc.
In which interpretation, S. Ambrose, Augustine, Hierome, with the rest of the
Fathers, and Schoolmen generally agree. And what needs other figure flinging,
to find out Novelties, where the native sense brings with it no absurdity? I
must crave pardon therefore in this cause, if I forsake the Sons, to follow
the Fathers, and prefer that, I take to be our Apostles interpretation,
before all latter Comments whatsoever. The soul then understood, for the
immortal part of man, and Hell, for the place of the damned, we have the first
maine ground of our Prophets triumph; to wit, an undoubted assurance, for the
freeing of his soul from Hell, by the victory of the blessed seed, which was
to descend thither, as a Conqueror to bruise the Serpents Head, and return,
to tread out the path of life, to all believers. Against this some suppose they
have unanswerable arguments in the word leaue] which thus they prosecute. If
David's soul were not left in Hell, then it was there, and Christ came not
thither, for that is denied by the Apostle to have befallen Christ, which
happened to David. But S. Augustine long since, has fitted us with a solution
in his 99. Epistle to Evodius, concerning this argument. Solvipossunt laquei
venantium, ne teneant, non quiatenuerunt. We may break through (says that
good Father) the hunters snare, not because they have caught us, but that they
caught us not at all. In like manner David's soul may be denied to be left in
Hell, not that he was ever there, but because he was thereto liable, if
Christ had not interposed. Would any man gather from the speech of God to
Abimelech; Behold thou art but a deadman, Genesis 20. that it argued he was dead
indeed? or rather that he deserved so to be, and should surely look for it, if
he proceeded to wrong faithful Abraham, in his wife Sarah. Why then may it not
stand by the same analogy? David was not left to that dungeon, into which Gods
justice through sin would have cast him, if Christ's descent had not freed
him, by a plenary and victorious satisfaction. Christ then alone did the deed,
but David, and all the faithful, both before, and after, receive the benefit:
his sufferings, were our Acquittings; his death, our life; his descending into
Hell, our freedom from thence. Of his soul therefore, our Prophet speaks
principally, but of his own, by a consequent.

10. My soul.] Notwithstanding, diverse had rather hazard an Article of their
Creed, then acknowledge this for good. And surely (Beloved) if we sail in this
proof, the rest will be sooner deluded. And here, I must profess with
Musculus upon these words of my Text; In Ps. 16.
I am not ignorant how diversely learned men do think: It is so mewhat obsoure
indeed (says he) and subject to many disputations. But yet no godly man upon
such an occasion, will, (I trust) resist, or offer violence to the Apostles
words: Thou shall not leave my soul in Hell] But desire rather God, for the
understanding of it. And in the mean time with a single faith, cleave to the
Word of Truth, although he cannot clearly perceive, the Manner how it was
performed. For mine own part, though I ever took that of Basil for an
especial goodrule, (...). Nothing is so proper to a Christian Bishop (I may
extend it to every good Christian) as to be a peacemaker; yet to balk an
Article of our faith, when just occasion leads a man to profess it, in a fit
Auditory; were to neglect that Iniunction of the Apostle; Be ready always, to
give an answer to every man, that asks you, to give a reason of the hope
that is in you, with meekness, and fear, 1. Pet. 3.15, and to lay open a gap,
to such scoffers as Bertius, and the like, that we conceal a certain kind of
Crypticall divinity among our selves, which we are loath the world should take
notice of. In this Point, those that know the confused heap of Authors, and
their differences, will pardon me, if I pass by more, then I shall speak;
especially, the time and place so confining me, that I must not exceed the one,
or forget the other. In a generality therefore, among these that dissent,
concerning the article of the descension of our Savior into Hell; some
discredit it, as crept in, from the margin, into the Text; Others reject it,
Beza in Mat. 27. ver. 52.
as a kind of a legendary Narration. To strengthen the first suspicion, no
Confessions, or Counsels, or Authors, have been vnrifled by Lauater, and
Parker, and others. But few have fallen into the Intemperancy of the latter,
besides Carlisle and Broughton; who are rather to be pitied, then confuted. S.
Augustine is peremptory, and that upon this ground of my text, Ep. 99.
who but an Infidel will deny that Christ was in Hell? And Calvin is clear,
that the omitting of this article would sheere off, Instit. l. 2. c. 16.. 8.
a great deal of the fruit of our redemption. Neither is it material that
diverse Churches, for a long time, had it not, and some Confessions in
Councills, have omitted it. For if such an exception, should pass for current,
it would go hard (as we all know) with diverse parts of Canonical Scripture.
Rather, the general acceptance afterward, of those that first wanted it,
argues the Authority it brought with it, to command their assent: and
Omissions are not denyals, especially of that, which is otherwise supplied. Now
to confound this Article, with the former of his burial, as though this were a
Repetition of that, by way of explication, were a strange kind of Battologie
(as Calvin well observes) for such a popular fumme of Divinity, and an
exposition, that should exceed the Text in obscurity. The Article standing
therefore firm, and distinct, all the difficulty remains about the meaning
of it, some laboring earnestly for a tropicall sense, others, to have the
words as they lie in their native signification. Vide Bell. de Christ. l. 4. c.
6.
Concerning the Trope, there is further no small difference. Some standing for
a Metonymie, expound this descent, of the effect only, and fruit of Christ's
death and passion, which others, in a metaphorical sense, transfer to the
inward sorrows, and hellish anguish, which in the garden, and upon the cross,
he endured. So that the Text, according to these men's conceits must be thus
glossed: He descended into hell, that is, either before his death, he
sustained the horror of Gods wrath, due to us in Justice for our sins, or
afterward, the Effect of his passion was exhibited in Hell it self, to the
perpetual terror of the Devil, and his accomplices. Last of all, those that
stick to the letter, have fallen out about the propriety of the words. One
taking (...) for the grave, and withholding, for descending, makes this to be
the sense, He descended] that is, he lay in bondage, and was held captive: into
Hell] that is, of death, Vid. Lavat. par. 1. c. 8.
in the grave. Another travels as far as Macedon, to confirm out of their
Greek dialect in the Lords prayer, this Interpretation to be proper; He
descended into Hell] that is, his soul retired, or departed to the place of
blessed spirits, almost as much in effect, as though he had said, He ascended
into heaven. The greater part therefore have pitched upon a real descent into
Hell, properly taken: but between these also, there is (...), a great gulf
fixed, that keeps them from concurring in opinion. The Papists maintain, he
descended to free the Fathers out of Limbo, where they were formerly
imprisoned, as in a skirt or gate house of Hell. Others, only acknowledge in
it, his spoiling of principalities and powers, and making a show of them
openly, by triumphing over them, as the Apostle himself speaks, Col. 2.15.
Infinite it were to fifth all particulars, or to except against al fancies, my
purpose is rather to settle the wavering, then to go about to reduce every
wilful wanderer.

11. And first, it will be granted on all sides, that whatsoever sufferings,
required as due for our ransom, were undergone by our Savior in this life,
and fully accomplished in his death. Whereupon the false fire of some, is quite
extinguished, that Christ descended in soul to suffer; as destitute, at length
of any fuel to mainetaine it. Secondly, none deny but that the anguish which
our Savior endured for our sakes, was greater then all creatures could
sustain, or conceive of. Calvin is blamed by some, for exaggerating it too
much; but let all things be rightly considered, he hardly (to my understanding
in that point) goes beyond his warrant. For he never affirmed that Christ
despaired, or suffered the torments of Hell (which some would willingly wrest
from him) but only hellish torments, in regard of the bitterness of his
agony. Not that ever he came, under the lash, in Satan's prison, as a
malefactor; but that he endured the frown of an angry judge, as a surety for
those, who had so deeply run in arrerages. Where the Godhead left him, not to
despair, but to suffer; and the manhood struggling in the combat, cries out,
as forsaken, to be the sooner relieved. All which when we freely allow, his
followers must not thereupon thus infer, Our Savior in the Garden, and on the
Cross endured hellish torments, equal, at least in bitterness, to those of
Hell: therefore after his death, his soul descended not into hell; for then
they mistake the point, it being not, what Christ suffered in this life, but
what became of his soul, in the Interim between his passion and resurrection.
I find in my Creed in plain terms, as also in that of Athanasius,
incorporated to our Church Liturgy, He descended into hell. This particular
amongst the rest, my Sureties in Baptism have undertaken, that I should
profess. To this we have all subscribed in the third Article of our Church.
All our approved translations, hold us to it. My Text, expounded by S. Peter,
in express terms (according to my understanding) warranteth it. The Fathers
and Schoolmen, generally concur with us. The most part of our Reformed
writers approve it; and those that are otherwise persuaded, bring no
unanswerable reason to oppugn it. For what force has that, they commonly
allege? Ob.
This Article may be suspected, as foysted into the Creed? Answ.
By the same liberty discredit all the rest, set at naught all Antiquity, and
call every thing in question. Ob.
But you understand that literally, which had its truth only in a figure of
speech. Answ.
So I am taught to do by S. Augustine, and all Divines, that have lighted
their candles at his lamp, when no absurdity thereupon follows, and the
liberty to the contrary, would give way to greater inconveniences, Ob.
in other verities. But there is no end (say they) why after our debt was paid
on the Cross, our Savior should so descend. Suppose I conceive not the end or
reason, Answ.
should not my faith rely on the weighty authority, that says, it was so?
Many things we must believe, which exceed our capacities, not that the thing
is, but in what manner it is. This prying into the reasons, of things not
revealed, has vexed the Church with many unnecessary dissentions. What
quarrels have the Schoolmen raised, by broaching such quiddities? and how
hardly have we escaped the combustion, that Arminius meditations, with our
reading, Vorstius liberty of prophesying, some others misinquiring, whether
Christ's active or passive justice, sufficed for our justification, has kindled
amongst our neighbors? Notwithstanding our Divines, in this cause, have so
answered, that it might suffice any moderate demander. Christ descended (says
learned Zanchius) into that most dark, and wretched place, not there to suffer
any thing, but to begin his triumph, over the power of the Devil. And this
opinion of the Fathers (says he) I dare not condemn, since it is not
repugnant to the sacred scriptures, and has likely reasons, Ver. 8.9.
upon the 4th Chap. of the Epistle of S. Paul to the Ephesians. Nay, Bucanus (a
compiler as it were of Calvin) and in this point also, sticking to him, in the
censure of that we hold, has no more to say, but this, Non audeo damnare,
quando non pugnat cum sacris literis and nihil habet absurdi. I dare not (says
he, in his 25. common place) condemn that tenent of the Fathers; seeing it
contains nothing repugnant to holy writ, nor brings with it any absurdity,
for surely in such cases, the consent of Fathers, is not lightly to be
regarded. But these men tell us, Ob.
that Christ commended his departing soul, unto his Fathers hands. Answ.
As though it were out of his hands, when it triumphed over hell and Satan. Ob.
But how could he then keep touch with the Thief, to meet with him the very
day of his passion in Paradise. Answ.
S. Augustine will tell us according to his Divinity, or happily (as Titus
Bostrensis says, on the 23. of Luke) he settled first the believing thief,
and then descended afterward. Both these things might be well done, and seeing
we read both, why should we not believe both? I spare the quotation of
Fathers, Councills, Schoolmen, whole reformed Churches, most of the eminentest
writers since the Reformation, that have concurred upon this point, as I have
delivered it; both for easing your patience, my self, and him that is to be
your Remembrancer. As Christ dyed for us, and was buried, so also it is to be
believed, that he went down into Hell. Art. 3.
My conclusion shall be that of S. Augustines; Christ's Divinity, immediately
after his passion, was (as it was ever before, and so continues) every where,
his body rested in the grave, his soul descended into hell; Locally, our
Church ties us not to say, but really and truly, it surely means. That the
devil, who had tempted and insulted over him by his ministers, the damned who
had contemned him, non quasi verbis, sed praesentia (as learned Zanchius
expounds the Fathers) not by hearsay only, In Ephesians. cap. 4. v. 9.
but by his victorious presence might be fully convinced, and his chosen
legally freed. That in their own home, to their eternal confusion, he might
once for all, give the fullest notice of this concluding and canonical
expostulation; I have trodden the winepresse of my Fathers wrath alone,
satisfied his justice, paid the ransom for my chosen. O death where is thy
sting? O grave where is thy victory? O Devil where is thy malice? what part
have any of you, in this soul of mine? Or what exception can your hellish
repining take against it? By the carriage of this whole business, scholars
may learn Moderation, not to censure them presently for Heretics, who in
expounding such hidden mysteries in any sort dissent from them. Others, not to
be offended at every difference amongst the learned, especially, where there
is consent in the maine, and the Revelation (as often it may fall out to be) is
not so manifest to curb curiosities. All may cheer up their souls, with our
Prophets confidence; Praise the Lord O my soul, which saves thy life from
destruction, and has freed thee from that place of horror; by triumphing in
thy nature over it. Which is to be extended also further, unto the body, as it
follows in the last place, to make up the conclusion. (...)


12. Neither shall thou suffer thine holy one to see corruption] As our
Saviors soul triumphed over the powers of darkness; so his flesh, was to be
free among the dead, from the least taynt of corruption. B. Bilson.
For his body and soul (says a Reverend writer) were appointed to be
superior to al contrary powers; that is, the soul, to hell; the flesh, to the
grave; and from both was Christ to rise, as subduer of both. That he might sit
in his heavenly Throne, as Lord over all: not by promise only, as before, but
by proof also, as appears in his Resurrection. Some would have this to be
only a repetition, or reason, of that which went before; David was to be freed
from the grave, because Christ saw no corruption: which sense, howsoever it be
true in it this Text will not bear, as proper. We must repair therefore to
S. Peter, in the second of the Acts, and to S. Paul in the 13. and thence
learn, the right meaning. Who both disprove the common error, which
understood it only of David, by this one sensible demonstration. All the world
might see, by looking into David's sepulcher, that his body was turned to dust,
through corruption; it could not therefore be said, that he was that holy one,
who was to see no corruption. It must needs therefore be some other. This could
be no other, then the Messiah; whose Resurrection the third day, before his
body could be corrupted, they had reason to bleeue, seeing David had so
distinctly foretold it. Whence we may plainly gather, that all the
Immunities, that David here stands upon, as his freehold, came to him but at
the second hand. This holy one then, was Christ, this privilege not to see
corruption, was peculiar only to his sacred body. All the faith full hold it of
him in Capite; when it is attributed to David, it is no way to be understood
or his person, but (...), of the fruit of his loins, as S. Peter speaks.
Take therefore (...) which all our Translatours following Peter, and the 72.
render Holy one) either for corpus sanctificatum, as the Interlineary Gloss,
or for a Favorite, whom it pleases God especially to grace, as Beza, or for
one, that being al-sufficiet in himself, most bountifully dispenses his
favors, as Piscator, It will come all to one, that his body in the grave saw
not, that is, felt not, tried not, endured not any corruption; Corruption (I
mean) of putrefaction, or turning into dust, not dissolution of soul, and
body (as Athanasius well distinguished.) For where the Soul triumphed, over
powers of darkness, the body slept in the grave, in expectation of its speedy
return; which accomplished the third day, there ensued upon it immediately,
this victorious Resurrection, which our Prophet so much rejoices here to
foresee, and we on this day, do thankfully celebrate.

13. And now what belongs to us (Beloved) but to let pass all unnecessary
trifles (as what became of the blood, that was spilt on the ground at our
Saviors circumcision? and the opening of his side at the cross?) and
seriously, to fasten upon that comfort, which here is proposed unto us. O Lord
(says S. Bernard) I have but two mytes, my soul, and my body, with these I
dare not trust my self, and therefore, I cast them into thy treasury, as
knowing then, they shall be in safe custody. That which was proposed in a
vision, concerning JESUS the son of Iosedeck (who by interpretation, is the
Just one of the Lord, in the 3d of Zachary) is here fully accomplished
(according to S. Hieromes application on that place.) The filthy garments,
wherewith he was clothed for our sakes, are taken from our Savior. And now he
shows himself a King, and has put on glorious apparel. 2. Sam. 23.
Among the Worthies of David, we read of one Benaiah, that went down and slew
a Lion in a pit, in the time of snow. But this is but a cold Model of that
victory, of the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, over that roaring, and devouring
Lion, in the pit of Hell, and the Grave. There are none (I suppose) that hear
me this day, but are, or after may be vexed, with discontentments, and feel a
necessary decay, of this earthly Tabernacle. But alas, (beloved) what remedy
may serve us in this world? Look further therefore, with our Prophet
(whosoever thou art) that expectest true comfort, and take these grounds with
thee, which shall never fail thee. Christ's soul has conquered, and triumphed
over the sorrows of Hell, that thou should never be enthralled to them; and
his body has shaken off the shackles of the grave, that thine (in its due
time) might enjoy the same freedom. Beloved, we were al in worse case, in
regard of eternal death, then Peter was (in the 12. of the Acts) bound with
two chains, and lying between two soldiers, with a guard before the prison
door; surely to be executed, the next day after. But our Savior comes in stead
of the Angel, and rayseth us up; the chains fall off, the Iron gate, (which
was held impregnable) opened of its own accord, and the way of life, which
leads unto the fullness of joy, is chalked out unto us. And are not our lots
now fallen unto us, in a good ground? and is not this, a goodly heritage? Let us
thank the Lord therefore, for giving us so often, this effectual warning, and
set him at our right hand, and then we shall never be moved. So leaning with
good old Jacob, upon the top of our staves, and giving up the last gasp, we
may confidently conclude, with our Prophet, in the end of Psalm. 4. I will lay
me down in peace, and take my rest, for it is thou Lord only, that through the
victory of thy son over hell, and the grave, make me dwell safely. Which God
grant of his mercy, we may constantly do, for his son Christ Jesus sake, to
whom with the Father, and the blessed spirit, be all Honor and Glory, now and
evermore.

AMEN.
THE CHRISTIANS EXPECTATION.

A SERMON PREACHED AT THE COURT.

BY JOHN PRIDEAVX, Rector of Exceter College, His MAIESTIE'S Professor in
Divinity in the University of OXFORD.

OXFORD, Imprinted by LEONARD LICHFIELD Anno Salutis, 1636.

2. PET. 3.13. Nevertheless, we according to his promise, look for new
Heavens, and a new earth, wherein dwells righteousness.


1 THe first word of my text, Neverthelesse] sends us back for the fuller
meaning, to some what that went before. That was a serious caveat, of our
Apostle, to beware of five sorts of people, who would turn us, out of the good
way, the preaching of the Gospel had prescribed. Those, Cap. 2. Y. 1.2.3.
in the beginning of the former chapter, ye shall find to be; First false
Prophets, or teachers, who privily shall bring in damnable Heresies; denying
the Lord that bought them. And many shall follow their pernicious ways, by
reason of whom, the way of truth shall be ill spoken of, and through
covetousness, shall they, with fained words, make Merchandise of you.
Secondly, Presumptuous, and selfe-willed detractours, that despise government,
Ib. 10.12.
are not afraid to speak ill of Dignities, and as natural brute beasts made
to be taken and destroyed, speak evil of the things, they understand not.
Thirdly, sensual Epicures, that count it pleasure to riot, Ib 13.14.
having eyes full of Adultery, that cannot cease from sin. Fourthly,
false-hearted undertakers, like Balaam the son of Bosor, who loved the wages
of unrighteousness, tampering much, Ib. 15.
and performing nothing; not so wise as the Ass he rode upon: and this whole
mess, we have in the former chapter. But the fifth sort follows in this, more
desperate, then any of the former, for these are Scoffers and Atheists, 3.3.
that mock at Religion, and bend all their learning and wit, to dispute
against it. Tell them of the end of the world, the resurrection of the dead, or
the coming of Christ to Judgment: these will reply, for ought they can
perceive, V. 6.
things stand as they did at the beginning, and so are like ever to continue.
For since the Fathers fell asleep, the sons have followed in the same trace,
and in the revolution of so many thousand years, there has appeared in that
behalf, no great show of change. Now against such miscreants, our Apostle
binds his maine forces, and stirs up his dispersed countrymen, to stick
close to the holy Prophets and Apostles. For assure your selves (says he)
that as the world, had a beginning, and once perished by water: so hereafter,
it shall have an end; V. 6.
and (whatsoever these mockers prate) be consumed with fire. Neither think you
this time long a coming, V. 7.
for though it seem so to us, it is otherwise with God, to whom one day is as
a thousand years, and a thousand years, V. 8.
are as one day. It is his long suffering (as it were) that puts back the
clock, that we might take the opportunity to repent, and be the better
provided. But come it shall, and that suddenly, as a thief in the night. V. 9.
Appear it shall, and that most terrible, V. 10.
when the Heavens shall pass away with a great noise, the elements melt with
fervent heat, this earth, and all the stately buildings and works therein,
shall be utterly burnt. But howsoever this universal combustion, shall ruin
the fabric of this world, and involue those desperate wretches in it, that
set their hearts upon it; yet you, it shall not touch at all, to procure you
the least trouble. Let the foundations of the earth sink away, under our
feet, our habitations totter about our ears, the air fail our nostrills,
the Heavens above, to cover us, or to give us light. Nevertheless we shall not
be unprovided of a better habitation. For we, according to his promise, look
for a new Heaven, and a new earth, wherein dwells righteousness.

2 My Text therefore sets forth the helps and hopes, that every good Christian
may depend upon, when all this world fails him.

In which, may it please you to observe 1. His Exemption, in these words;
Nevertheless we.] 2. His Evidence, he has to show for this Exemption; Gods
promise: According to his promise.] 3. The Tenure, or Manner of holding this
his evidence, it is not in possession, but expectation: We look for] 4 The
contents of this Tenure: New Heavens, and a New earth.] 5. The excellency of
those Contents: wherein dwells Righteousness.]


What can the heart of every true Believer more desire, then here is put home
unto it? What can be more firm assurance, then here is laid before us? The
Horrors of the last Assizes, be they never so terrible; thy unquestionable
Evidences shall quit thee. Let this worlds uncertainties be never so dangerous,
thou can not be put by thy Expectation, for future possession. This
Possession is no less, then the perpetual inheritance of New Heavens, and a
New Earth: not liable to quarrelling or Law suites, which this world is full
of; because in that dwells righteousness, without shadow of change, or
interruption. Of these Particulars, as they lie, as God shall assist me, and
your Christian patience, with the time, give scope. And first of the first,
which is the true Christians Exemption, included in these words: Nevertheless
we]

3 The particle (...) in the Original, for which we have (...) in the
Syriacke, is not here so much continuatiue, as adversatiue; opposed to the
dangers* before mentioned; Notwithstanding though all the world be in
Combustion, and the wicked in the utmost despair, cry to the mountains to
fall upon them, and the Hills to cover them; yet with the followers of the
Lamb, it shall go well; they shall then be exempted, both from troubles, and
terrors, which shows the unspeakable privilege of Gods servants, above all
the world besides. Just as in the hideous storm of fire and Brimstone, upon
Sodom, and the cities of the Plain, God remembered Abraham (says the text)
and sent Lot out of the midst of the overthrow: So in this universal and
final destruction, the children of God, shall be remembered. As Daniel in the
Lions den, they shall be rescued, not a hair of their heads shall be
sindged, nor smell of fire pass upon them, as happened to the children, in the
Babylonish furnace. David in the 91. Psalm triumphantly sings out this
Privilege; Who so dwells under the defense of the most highest, shall abide
under the shadow of the Almighty: His wings shall protect him, his feathers
shall cover him, his faithfulness and truth shall be his shield and Buckler.
The snare of the Hunter, the noisome Pestilence, the Noone Devil, (as both the
72. and the vulgar give it) or as the Chalday Paraphrase, (...). Demon
Meridianus.
the whole company of Devils, when thousands shall fall besides him, and ten
thousands at his right hand, shall not come near him. Lions and Adders, and
Dragons, shall be securely trampled under his feet. For he shall give his
Angels charge over them, to keep them in all their ways. And howsoever
worldlings think, and speak contemptuously, of this sort of people; yet the
Apostle gives them their due, that they are a chosen Generation, a Royal
Priesthood, a holy Nation (...), 1. Pet. 2.9.
a purchased company, by no less then the dearest blood of our Lord and
Savior Christ Jesus. If these mourn, they shall be comforted, when they
weep, Math. 5.
God will wipe off their tears: Rev. 7.
They startle not, or shrink, at any evil tidings: Though they walk in the
valley and shadow of death, Psalm. 112. Psalm. 23.
there is a rod, and a staff, that frees them from disasters: when all worldly
protection, and supersedeas'es, prove out of date: Titles of all civil honor
have their period: Laws and statutes of men, may no longer privilege, then
this Exemptio clericorum, will be of perpetual force, and retain his full
power, strength and virtue, Nevertheless.]

4 Clemens Alexandrinus out of this doctrine, dehorteth all from unseemly
carriage, Orat. adhort. ad Gentes.
as detracting much from such privileged persons, whom the Lord has graced
with these excellent immunities. And how should earthly greatness exalt it
self (says S. Hilary) when this greater dignity is slighted, In Psalm. 18.
wherein all Gods people are sharers? Our kingdom is (says Saint Ambrose)
that Christ, In locum.
with the father and the holy Ghost, should reign in us. If we by this means
are Kings, why make we our selves slaves, to our inordinate desires? If
Priests, where are the sacrifices of a troubled spirit, of a broken, and
contrite heart, of prayer, and praise, and thanksgiving, of alms deeds, and
other good works, that we should offer continually unto him, that has made us
so? Servaunts freed, through ingratitude, (say the Lawyers) may be plucked
back to their former condition: and privileges (we know) abused, may be soon
forfeited. O how stiff, and peremptory, we stand for any temporal Immunity,
and how little notice is taken of this protection and exemption, which in the
last and terriblest Parliament, will only pass for current? He that is wise
will ponder these things, and thankfully frame in his heart, these or the like
pious meditations: Lord what saw thou in us, to prefer us, before so many
others? That when all the world shall be dissolved, our estate shall be
bettered? How comes it to pass, that among so many nations, we should have
the light of the Gospel amongst us, (as at this day) so long, so peaceably,
under so constant and gracious Defenders of the faith? What virtue of ours,
has effected this, that of those which profess Christianity, we should enjoy
it purged from Idolatry and superstition, wherein so many of our neighbors ly
so dangerously entangled? You might make out the rest, (Beloved) by descending
to more particulars. At hearing the same Sermon, why is Lydia's heart opened,
when others remain obdurate? The Greek Areopagite believes, when the Roman
Gallio cares for no such matter? Certainly somewhat there will be found, to
come from a higher and more effectual operation, then is likely to rise from
our natural dispositions. Last of all, what comfort can be more cordial, or
animating then this; In the midst of extremest dangers, to know our case, to
be exempted with a Nevertheless? In the violence of the greatest storm, to
find our building founded on the rock: so that we may conclude with David,
Psalm 46. God is our hope and strength, a very present hope in trouble;
therefore will we not fear, though the earth be moved, and though the hills
be carried into the midst of the sea, though the waters thereof rage and swell,
and though the mountain shake at the tempest of the same: Nevertheless
Christ's little flock, shall find shelter, his vineyard shall be guarded, his
chosen be provided for, according to his promise. Which brings in the Evidence,
for this Exemption, in the second place to be opened. According to his promise.]

5 Precepts, (...).]
Practice, promises, and prophecies, like the four rivers of paradise, stream
out of the fountain of holy writ, and compass all that therein is contained.
Precepts, are the Lawgivers imperial decrees; which how they have bin
observed, by those to who^ they belonged, Practice shows in particular
examples. Promises, set forth a pattern for the mending of that, which in
examples has been found amiss. And Prophecies of future events, forewarne,
both good and bad, what they are to expect, those Reward, the other Punishment.
Thus we see in the old Testament, the law of Moses is attended with the
Historical books, of Joshua, Judges, Kings, Chronicles, and the rest, to
represent unto posterity, how it has bin observed, or broken. Exhortations and
Promises in general, succeed in Job, David, Solomon, and the rest of the
Hagiographi, to sharpen the Churches industry, for the stricter fulfilling of
the law. To which the predictions, in the greater and lesser Prophets, are
laid; to lead men to the Messiah; who should perfect that which was defective,
and bring in everlasting righteousness of faith, spoken of by Daniel, which
we now proclaim, (...) Dan. 9.24.
in the glad tidings of the Gospel. So in the New Testament, the Evangelists
give us the precepts mixed with Practice: The Acts Practice, interlarded with
precepts; The Epistles, Exhortations, Precepts, and Promises common to all. The
Apocalypse, Prophecies in more particular events. Precepts command, Practice
leads, Promises assure, and encourage, Prophecies prepare before hand. Nothing
in Gods book is omitted, that may make the man of God, to be (...), 2. Tim.
3.16.
(as Paul tells Timothy) perfect and thoroughly furnished unto all good works,
without the supply unwritten Traditions. Our Apostle in this place, te^ders no
worse Assurance, then Gods promise. But where this promise is registered,
particularly, he me^tioneth not. Oecumenius, with the Greek fathers, referres
us to the 14. of St John's Gospel, verses 2. and 3. to that promise of our
Savior: In my Fathers house are many mansions. If it were not so, I would have
told you, I go to prepare a place for you, that where I am, there you may be
also. This promise must needs be meant of our Saviors second coming, and is
somewhat to the matter in hand. But whether this be that, which our Apostle
meant, is more then can be justified. A Translation only there is assured, but
New Heavens, and a New earth are no way mentioned. The latter writers
therefore, send us rather to Isaiah cap. 65. and the 17. Behold I create new
Heavens, and a New earth, and the former shall not be remembered: and the New
heaven, and the New earth which I make shall remain: Cap. 66.22. Here we have
the words, but the sense (according to most Interpreters) reaches no farther
then the times of the Gospel, in the new Testament, wherein all things being
made new, a new creature, a new lump, a new man, a new Covenant, a new spirit,
a new heart, a New and living way, by a Metonymicall Emphasis, import the
qualification of those, who shall attain to this Newness; but in such sort,
as though with the persons contained, the things containing were Innovated. Now
then what Isaiah prophesied, of the first coming of Christ; and Christ of the
second, S. Peter takes for one, and so has relation to both. To the first, as
a type of the second, which drive to the same Issue, citing neither in
particular; upon supposall, that these evidences of so special importance,
were so well known, to the faithful, that the mentioning only of them, needed
no farther direction, where to find them.

6 This might shame our Negligence in hearing Gods word, and not observing, or
remembering it, as we ought. There is scarce any evidence, that pertaines to our
temporal estate, wherein we are not very conversant, and punctual. If any
promise us ought, we may get by, we will be careful to remember it, and be
sure hold them to it. But who almost looks as he should, after the promises
concerning his Eternal happiness? Who studies the case in these points? Who
examines the thoughts Evidences? Who searches the Records where they lie?
Avicenna the Mahumetane could get the Alcaron without book; and we have the
verses of one R. Saadiah, a Jew, wherein he strives to show, how many times
every letter of the Hebrew Alphabet, is found through the old Testament. But we
are better seen in other matters. I press this no farther. There may (I
confess) be an abuse, (by vaineglory and scrupulosity) in the very text of
Scripture, as that, by Anabaptists, and others. But few of us (I persuade my
self) offend in such excess. Rather we entrench upon the abuse, of Gods
gracious promises, as though in the New Covenant, he had tied himself to make
good all on his part, and nothing rested, of us on our part to be performed.
Thus in our practice, we take Gods decrees without the means; a speculatiue
faith, without the fruit thereof; a working grace, without any endeavors of
our illuminated understanding, and convicted will, as though, if we speed not
well, the fault were Gods, and not ours. And this I conceive to be the
colourablest cause, why our doctrine of Justification by faith alone, Art. 11.
which our Church Articles term a wholesome doctrine, and very full of
comfort, together with that of Gods preventing and working grace, has been of
late so dangerously impugned, by some of our own side; in regard our neglect
of good works, and abuse of our freed Abilities, have given such inexcusable
occasions. But new cloth must not be added, to old garments, to make the
greater rent. I follow my text: They must then be here no promise breakers, nor
promise challengers, where none are made: nor misconceiuers of promise, to take
that to themselves, which belongs not to them: or that for absolute, which was
but conditional: But sons of promise, and performers of promise, are those,
and only they, that may look for this land of promise, according to this
promise, which brings in the Expectation, the Tenure, or manner of Holding, my
third Circumstance, that now succeeds to be examined.

7 We look for] It is the Fashion of the world, (...) 1. Cor. 7.31.
to be so ill Grammarians, that they be all for the present, but little for
the preterperfect, or the future tense. Though S. Paul tell us that the fashion
of this world passes away, and wishes us, not to fashion our selves,
according to this world; and S. Peter here, not to stand too much, upon that
which we now possess, but to think upon, and provide for, that we must Look
for. Our surest good therefore, is not in possession, but in Expectation, for
we are saved by hope, Romans 8.24. but hope that is seen, is not hope: for that
a man sees, why does he hope for? but if we hope for that we see not, then do
we with patience wait for it. And is not faith it self, the ground or
substance of things hoped for, Heb. 11.1.
and the evidence of things not seen? The Schools distinguish to this
purpose, between the three Theological virtues, faith, hope and charity, that
faith lays the present ground, Hope seaseth on the future good, and Charity
leads us along to the full possession of it: for we shall hardly possess
hereafter, that which we never hoped for, and no reason have we to hope, where
there is no ground. All these then must go together, the one to second, and
third the other. Our Apostle calls us here, and sets us upon the Claim to our
future inheritance. If we here set up our rest, and think we are well, we may
fail of our hopes hereafter. It was a notable caveat that the Lord commanded
Jeremy to deliver to Baruch: Behold that which I have built, I will break
down, and that which I have planted, J will pluck up; Ier. 45.4.
and seek thou great things for thy self? seek them not. Our Savior told
Pilate that his Kingdom was not of this world. John 18.36.
And in what place should our possessions lie, but where our Savior has
purchased them for us? Abraham having a pattent, or grant, of the Kingdom of
Canaan, for a Donatiue, notwithstanding looked farther, Heb. 11.10.
for a City which has foundations. Foundations then, (as it should seem in
his conceit) were wanting to any building, that should be here erected
before, in this vale of misery. Jacob professes himself, Genesis 47.9.
to King Pharaoh, that he was but a Pilgrim. King David at his highest, that
he was a stranger, and soiourner, as all his fathers were. Psalm. 39.14. Luke
12.
When the ground of that rich man in the gospel, brought forth plenteously,
and his resolution was to pull down his barnes, and build greater, that all
his fruits and goods, might be therein housed; when he applauded himself (as
he thought) in this thrifty course, and sung a Requiem to his soul, Soul thou
have much goods laid up for many years: take thine ease, eat, drink and be
merry: How did God say Amen to this? Thou fool, this night thy soul shall be
required of thee, and then whose shall these things be which thou have
provided? Our Saviors close upon it, may not be omitted, so is he that heapeth
up treasures for himself, and is not rich toward God, who is all for having
here, and looks for nothing hereafter: lives, that he may eat, and eats, that
he may live: is melancholique at the thought of sickness, crosses, age, or
afflictions, the inviting forerunners to his future Inheritance: would part
with all his interest in that, upon easier terines, then Esau did with his
birthright, or Judas with his master. So far sensuality in us prevails,
and faith fails. So dear is present possession, and doubtful our future
Expectation.

8 The tongue of men and Angels, would be here needful, to set on this
doctrine, to our souls and consciences. Not because it is thought doubtful,
but because it is little thought on, by the most of us, I shall not transgress
then I hope, if in our Apostles way, (discovered here in the first verse). I
venture to stir up your pure minds, by way of remembrance. Remember therefore
then, (Beloved) what a vanity, and hazard it is, to fix our hearts here, upon
that, which can never satisfy? All the felicity, it is possible for us Pilgrims
in our passage to touch upon, Arist. Eth. 1.
is reduced (by the Philosopher) to these three heads: the Ornaments of the
mind, as wit, learning, discretion: the abilities of the body, as health,
strength, beauty, the gifts (as they call them) of fortune, as Riches, Honor,
success in vndertakeings, and the like. But what content give any of these,
when they are thoroughly weighed? I will not speak of the ignorance of our
knowledge, the weakness of our strength, the fickleness, of our fortunes, and
the fondness of our undertakings: It will be taken better, from the mouth of
that King-preacher Solomon, in whom all these met; and yet all these together
gave never content. I have seen (faith he) all the works that are done under
the Sun, Cap. 1.14.15.
and behold, all is vanity and vexation of the spirit. That which is crooked
cannot be made straight, and that which is wanting cannot be numbered. I
returned and saw (as it were by a second survey) under the Sun, that the race
is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong, Cap. 9.11.
neither bread to the wise, nor riches to men of understanding, nor favor to
men of skill, but time and chance happens to them all. When King David, 2.
Sam. 18.
invited old Barzillai, the Gileadite, that had done him good service at a
pinch, to follow him to the Court, for a recompense; how wisely does the good
old man, excuse himself? I am this day (says he) fourscore years old, and
can I discern between good and evil? Can thy servant taste what I eat, or
what I drink? can I hear any more the voice of singing men, or singing women?
Let thy servant I pray thee, turn back again, that I may dye in mine own
city, and be buried in the grave of my Father, and of my Mother. My son
Chimham perchance, may be fitter for these courtly employments; other matters
belong unto me to look after. And least this Expectation, should be turned off
to old men only, as though younger had no such thing to look for; The Apostles
instancing in Moses, may be taken for a pattern. Heb. 11.
By faith Moses (says he) when hes was come to years, and thoroughly
understood himself, refused to be called the son of Pharaoh's daughter,
choosing rather to suffer afflictions with the people of God; then to enjoy the
pleasures of sin for a season, esteeming the reproach of Christ, greater
riches, then the treasures of Egypt. And the maine reason is there added, for
he had respect unto the recompense of the reward. How then should the wise man
vainly glory in his wisdom, or the mighty in his strength, or the rich in his
wealth, Ier. 9.
or the advanced in his honor? These are eminent blessings (we must confess)
if they come by good means, and are managed accordingly. But if any of these,
or all together, could give content, it cannot much affect, by reason of its
shortness; nor constantly, in the times uncertainty; nor fully, in the midst
of troubles; nor sincerely, amongst many supplanting emulations; nor safely, in
regard of the after reckoning. That which therefore must satisfy the
understanding, fulfill the desire, joy the heart, is not here to be had, but
hence to be looked for; which are New Heavens and a New earth, the
forementioned inheritance, for the fourth place.

9. New Heavens and a new Earth] Heavens we have herein the plural number,
(...)
and earth in the singular, which casts us upon the distinction of Heavens,
which is two fold, according to the Mathematicians, and according to Divines.
Of the Mathematicians, some hold no difference of Orbs at all, but these are
of the newer stamp, and are not yet so fully received, as the others. The
other agree not upon the number of Orbs. For Aristotle puts but eight;
Ptolomie, nine; Purbachius, with his followers ten; Maginus eleven, by reason
of the distinct motions, they have observed in the wandering and fixed stars.
Yet above all these, they grant an Immovable Heaven, in which Aristotle says,
there is neither place, nor emptiness, nor time, that makes it grow old: but
the Inhabitants thereof are inalterable, impassible, immortal, having
sufficient in all things, in the height of happiness. De caelo l. 1. t. 100.
And this He relates, as the opinion of the Ancients before him. But
Philosophers, and Mathematicians, herein must not be our guide. Men may
dispute upon these things, according to that of Ecclesiastes, in the vulgar
edition: Mundum tradidit* disputationi eorum, cap. 3.11. And one may speak
more probably then another. But that which follows in the same Text may curb
them; No man may find out the work of God, from the beginning to the end. We
are yet here learners, in the lower form, and out of doubt, shall know more
hereafter, when we come to the higher. Divines from Scripture acknowledge, but
3 heavens. The first in the space ascending, from whence we are, as far as
the course of the Moon, which they call the heaven aeriall. The second, which
they name syderiall, from thence to the utmost convexity of the first moveable,
in which are all the revolutions of the Planets, and fixed stars, which we see
and observe here below. The Third, above all these is that which the Schoolmen
call Coelum Empyraeum. But in Scripture I find it to have nine other names. 1.
The third Heaven. 2. The Heaven of heavens. 3. Paradise. 4. The house,
Habitation, and Throne of God. 5. The seat of blessed Angels, and Saints. 6.
Abraham's bosom 7. The new Jerusalem. 8. The heavenly Country. 9. The City
that has foundations. A reverend and learned Bishop of ours, in his Survey of
Christ's sufferings, Bilson. Page 441.
for that Christ is said to have ascended above all heavens. Ephesians. 4.10. But
that may be understood, above all heavens seen. So that this fourth heaven
shall only make the eminent'st place in the third, and so no difference will be
from the Ancients. Thus we see some ground, for the plurality of heavens,
mentioned in the Text, where the earth is notwithstanding one, admitting the
water into it is concavities, to make up one entyre globe, of which there is no
controversy. But what these New Heavens and New Earth should be, that here are
promised, and to be looked for, that will ask some further discovery. 10 New
(as we know) is opposite to old, and the old heavens that are now, are
mentioned before, by our Apostle, ver. 5. New are here to be looked for. Two
things then will come in question, First, what shall become of the Old?
secondly, what these New heavens shall be, and how supply their places? For few
I think will imagine, Heb. 10.
that both shall stand together, but rather conclude, as the Apostle does in
another case, He takes away the first, that he may establish the second. Now
concerning the abolishing of these Heavens, and Earth, which are subject to our
view, there are two opinions: some contend that they shall remain, Others,
that they shall be quite annihilated. They shall remain for ever (say the
Peripateticks) as they never had a beginning. But this tenent, as it had birth
among heathen Philosophers, so it found among the same, the Stoics,
Epicureans, Poets, Sybils, and all the Ancients (as S. Hierom witnesses) to
refute it: In Isaiam 51
who generally held, this world should perish at length by sire. Nay the Turks
in the Alcoran, and Bannians, of the Moguls country, are of the same
persuasion, and therefore, there needs no more to be said herein. Amongst
Christians, most acknowledge a purging, rather then abolishing, by taking off,
the corrupt qualities only, not the substance. Diverse of the Fathers were of
this mind, and most of the Schoolmen, whom most new writers of all sides
follow. But against this refining of these visible celestial bodies, for the
utter abolishing of them, there are 12 pressing Texts of scripture, urged by
Conradus Vorstius, which are seconded by the consent of many Fathers, and
Jesuits; In locum.
who herein make bold to vary from their own consorts. The time will not give
me leave, Serrarius A Lapide.
to examine all differences. I shall go no further therefore, then our
Apostles own arguments, that are premises to my Text. For is it not punctual
in the 7. verse, that the heavens, and the earth which are now, are reserved
unto fire, against the day of judgment? Does he not descend to particulars in
the 10. and 12. verses, that the Heavens which are now, shall pass away with a
great noise? that the Elements shall melt with fervent heat? the earth and
works thereof, shall be burnt up? Does he not infer thereupon in the 11. that
all these things shall be dissolved? And in the words of my Text, that we are
to look for New Heavens and a New Earth? Dissolution mends not a fabrique, (as
Serrarius well urges, against Suarez, Henriquez, and Pineda, his fellow
Jesuits) but destroys it rather. And how may that which passes away, be said
to be reserved, and let stand? The same passing away is prophesied of the
Heavens, as of the Elements, why should these therefore be annihilated, and the
others bettered by the change? Surely if S. Peter, had thought of this refining
only, some words of his would have intimated so much. Now I had rather believe
one Peter affirming this total Abolishing, In Math. 24.
(as Maldonate. says in this very case) then many disagreeing juniors, denying
it; especially, where other places of scripture concur, for this Exposition.
The Sea shall be no more; Time shall be no more; The New Jerusalem shall have
no need of Sun or Moon, as the scripture instructs us. The end that they
were created for, was for man's use, and man using them no more, to what end
should they be reserved? To say for a Monument what has been, or an Outlet
for the Saints, descending sometime from Heaven for their recreation, to solace
themselves; or to be an Habitacle for the beasts restored, or a receptacle for
Infants, or other honest Heathens, as Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle, that had
not deserved hell, nor Heaven, (as Catharinus, and Salmeron the Jesuit, Sixtus
senensis l. 6. annot. 340.
with some other pitiful Divines amongst us, would have us believe) are but
groundless surmises. These Heavens and Earth then, which we see, being utterly
taken away, as a stage removed, when the Pageant is finished: the new Heavens
and new Earth we are to expect, can be no other, but that Heaven of Heavens,
and place of fullness of joy, wherein once being settled, we shall never be
removed. Now these Heavens are here termed New, not in regard of their New
making, but of our New taking possesio^ of them (by a most happy change) for
our new habitation; and heavens they are said to be in the plural, and earth
in the singular number, because they come in stead of that covering, and that
earthly habitation which we now enjoy, but there, upon our final remouall,
shall be utterly abolished. So that, the Text then may well bear this
paraphrase: We look for New Heavens] that is, the supreme Court of Gods
presence; And a New Earth] that is, a New habitation for us, which shall
infinitely exceed the commodities, and happiness, of these Heavens and Earth
which we now enjoy, but then with our Translation shall be dissolved. And this
is that which our Apostle maintains (if the Recognitions of Clement be true)
against Simon Magus, whom Hyppolytus, Irenaeus, Hilary, and diverse others
follow. Nay Aquila and Symmachus make the Text to speak for it (according to
S. Hierom's Testimony) the heaven and earth, comminuentur in Nihilum, shall be
battered into nothing, Isay. 51.6.

11. This takes off then, that ancient error of the Chiliasts, or Millenaries,
which many of our modern writers are so diligent to set on foot, in these our
days again. Of which some talk of a first Resurrection of the Martyrs, who
shall bodily rise, and reign with our Savior in heaven, a thousand year^s,
before the general Resurrection of others. Others say, this reign shall be
with our Savior here upon Earth: and set down the beginning of it to be
about some 60 years hence. All these men agree, that these 1000 years are yet
to come, wherein three things must concur; The binding of Satan: The
national calling of the Jews: and this millenary reign upon earth. And all
before the last day of judgment. But now if these new heavens and new earth,
(which we are to look for) be only the place of the blessed in heaven. If
these are only now, to be looked for, but possessed hereafter, not by the
bodily prepossession of some, a 1000 years, before the rest of their fellow
members, but by all together after the last sentencing of the sheep and the
goats: It will be most requisite for us, to provide our selves, and take
comfort in a constant expectation, of that which undoubtedly shall come to
pass; and not humor our security with such groundless fancies, wherein the
further we wade, our satisfaction will prove the more intricate. Two difficult
places (as I conceive) they especially stand upon. The first, Romans 8. where
(...) an earnest expectation, is attributed to all other creatures, besides
man, at length to be delivered from the bondage of corruption, into the
glorious liberty of the children of God. The second, is Revelat. the 20. where
after the overthrow of the Beast, and false Prophet, with their followers: and
the casting of them into the lake, burning with Brimstone, that is, as most
interpret, the final destruction of Antichrist in the 19. Chapter: the binding
of Satan, first Resurrection, and reign of a thousand years, as things
succeeding, are described in the 20. Chapter. But in the first place, no
immortal being of the bruit creatures is promised: for that were to make them
equal with their Masters, and happier then most of their fellows, that had
done as much service before them: but a simple deliverance and dismission, from
the servitude they were in, to ungrateful men. So Birds, Beasts, and Fish,
must suffer for our diet: Horses, and other beasts of like nature, groan under
burdens, for our necessities and pleasures. They were created of God for that
purpose, and to no further degree of happiness. Their Annihilation therefore
to them, must needs be a kind of deliverance. And therefore when it is
promised, they shall be delivered, into the glorious liberty of the sons of
God: the Text will well bear it (...) pro (...), by the glorious liberty of
the sons of God: that is, when such a deliverance comes of men; these shall
be freed from their servitude, by being not at all, having done the business,
they were ordained for. For the second place of the Apocalypse, wherein the
binding of Satan is related after the destruction of the Beast; This concludes
not, that it must be done afterward. Which briefly may be thus made plain. In
the 12. Chapter, we have the dragon pursuing the flying woman: but in the 13.
ver. 2. This Dragon having done his worst to drown her, and foiled in his
project, he resignes his authority and power, to his Vicar the Beast, who under
a pretext of Religion, might do more hurt then he could being loose, by
heathenish-persecution. How this beast behaved himself in his Vicar-ship, we
have from the 13. to the end of the 19. Chapter: where his ruin is related.
Then the Apocalypt returns to relate, how Satan was bound, in particular,
which he had formerly mentioned only in general. How, I say bound, how
loosed, and what he did after with Gog, and Magog. This the very ordering of
the Text intimates. For in the beginning of the 18, and 19. Chapters, we have
this note of continuation, with that which went before: And after these things]
but in the 20, no such connection appears, the text only running, And I saw an
Angel.] As though he should have said; Thus much concerning the destruction of
the Beast: Now I return to relate what shall become of the Dragon, that
resigned his authority to this Beast, mentioned before in the 13. Chapter. Out
of which exposition, that (for ought I perceive) may pass with greater
probability, then any Chiliasticall, will clearly follow; that the 1000 years
of Satan's binding, and reign of the Saints (which all grant to be the same
time) are not now to be looked for, in New Heavens, and a new Earth, or a
Heaven upon Earth, (as some have fancied) but are expired and past already,
which may be further thus briefly evidenced.

12 For we may conceit of a fourfold binding of Satan, intimated by our
fourefold deliverance from his fourefold Tyranny. The first, from terrifying
us, by his right and might over us, which he had gotten, when by the Apostasy
of our first parents (in whose loins we all were) all became his vassals. The
deliverance from this was, by our Saviors Incarnation, who in the nature of
man, bound the strong man, that we being delivered from the hands of our
enemies, might serve him without fear. The second was from urging the hand
writing that was against us, whereby he claimed us, as it were his villains
or apprentises. The deliverance from this was, by our Saviors passion, whereby
this hand writing that was against us, was blotted out, and nailed to the
cross, and so taken utterly out of the way. The third was from burdening us
with the killing letter, and Ceremonies of the Law, A yoke that neither we,
nor our fathers were ever able to bear. This, some converted Jews ever press,
to have obliged in equal commission, with Christianity. But from this we
were fully acquitted, at the destruction of Jerusalem, and ruin of the Temple,
whereby was also removed that stumbling block. The last, was from the
merciless persecution of heathenish tyrants, which continued (as it is well
known) until Constantine the great, who attaining the Empire, being a
Christian, put a period also to that. Now then, if from these four bindings of
Satan, we account a 1000 years downward, the four loosings will fall out
near about this reckoning: from the Incarnation, the thousand years are
expired about Sylvester the seconds time; from the passion, in Benedicts the
9th; from the Destruction of Jerusalem, in Hildebrands; from the reign of
Constantine the great, in the time of Boniface the eight, and the rising of the
Ottoman family. Now what Monsters these Popes were; and what prodigies then
appeared in the world; and what exclamations there were, of good and learned
men; That Satan was then loosed, the histories of those times approved by all
sides, at large declare, which I may not stand upon. Three things are here
usually opposed: The twofold Resurrection; The temporal felicity of the
Church; here upon Earth; and the National calling of the Jews to
Christianity: which these thousand years reckoned as past, leave no place, nor
space for hereafter. after. But the two first, are taken by judicious
Interpreters spiritually: For we have but one resurrection of the body, in our
Creed. This first then, in the Revelations, may be well expounded, of the rising
of our souls by grace and faith, to a lively apprehension, of the manner of
our salvation. For the second, our Savior professes, that his kingdom is not
of this world; he calls his followers to crosses, and afflictions: who reign
notwithstanding, and triumph in the midst of oppositions, by the inward
testifying of their consciences, and have always the better of their
Adversaries in the end. And therefore last of all, by ought, that has been
before delivered, the calling of the Jews (which S. Paul reveals as a
mystery, Romans 11.) may hereafter take its place, when it shall please God to
bring it about. That after the plucking down of Antichrist, with his horrible
superstitions and Idolatries, (which I take to be the greatest stumbling
block, that yet keeps them back, from embracing Christianity) they may think
upon the evidence of truth, which the fulfilling of the Old Testament in the
New, most apparently suggesteth, and so at length see their obstinate
blindness, and be converted. From all which premises may be concluded, that,
New Heavens, or New Earth, are left to be expected here of us, before the day
of Judgment; but after that, to be inherited eternally, in the highest estate
of our souls and bodies, with God, and his blessed Angels, in the highest
Heavens: In which dwells righteousness. The excellency of this inheritance,
my last part, to conclude with.

13. Wherein, or in which, (...)
dwells righteousness.] There is here a double reading; Beza and Serrarius
the Jesuit, intimate it in this sense; We in whom dwells the righteousness
of faith, look for a New Heaven, and a New Earth. Others, (as our Translation
has it) we, the children of God, look for a New Heaven, and a New
Earth,(...), in which new heaven, and new earth, dwells righteousness. Here
it only soiourneth, there it dwells. Here it has only a moveable tabernacle,
there a mansion. Here it is mixed with manifold imperfections; there entyre,
and in the greatest eminency. Here among some, there in all. Here for a time or
flash, there eternally. What use then should we better conclude with, (Beloved)
then with that, which our Apostle here urges, both before, and after my Text?
Seeing that all these things shall be dissolved, and these better are to be
only looked for, what manner of Persons ought we to be, in all holy
conversation and godliness, looking for, and hasting to, the coming of the
day of God, that we may be found in peace, without spot, and blameless:
Accompting, that the long suffering of the Lord is salvation. To which the Lord
bring us, through his blessed Son CHRIST JESUS; to whom with the Father, and
the holy Ghost, be all Honor and Glory, both now and ever.

AMEN.
WISDOMS JUSTIFICATION.

A SERMON PREACHED AT THE COURT.

BY JOHN PRIDEAVX, Rector of Exceter College, His MAIESTIE'S Professor in
Divinity in the University of OXFORD.

OXFORD, Imprinted by LEONARD LICHFIELD Anno Salutis, 1636.

LVC. 7.35. But wisdom is justified of all her Children.


1 THE words are our Saviors, uttered upon this occasion: John Baptist from
his prison had sent messengers unto him, to know whether he were the expected
Messiah, V. 19.
or that another was to be looked for. This was done, not so much (as most
Interpreters think) to satisfy his own doubting, as to acquaint his Disciples
with Christ, and to turn them over, to a better master. They have their quick,
but a real dispatch. Go and tell John what things ye have seen, and heard:
the Blind see, the Lame walk, V. 22.
the Leapers are cleansed, the Deaf hear, the Dead are raised, to the poor
the Gospel is preached, and blessed is he, whosoever shall not be offended in
me. And hence, upon the departure of these Messengers (for in their presence,
it might have sauored of some courtly insinuation) he takes further occasion
to speak of the poor prisoner, John, to the forgetful, and uncertain
multitude, who ere-while had so admired, and run after, and flocked to his
Baptism. What went ye out into the wilderness to see? a reed shaken with the
wind? I tell you, he was none of your wind-shaken reeds, smooth without, and
hollow within, thriuing better in the mire, then in solid good ground, winding
and crouching every way, as the gust sets him. Was he costly in his diet, or
courtly in his apparel, or ambitious, to be preferred? Who retired himself in
the wilderness, to his single commons, of Locusts and wild honey? Having no
better girdle, then that of Leather, to clasp his Camels course hairy Cassock
about him. But what went ye out to see? a Prophet? Yea I say unto you, much
more then a Prophet. And yet his roughness, and my mildness, his mourning,
and my piping, what good has it wrought upon you? For John truly came to you,
neither eating bread, nor drinking wine, ver. 33.
and ye say, he has a Devil. The son of man is come eating, and drinking,
in a more sociable manner, and ye say: Behold a gluttonous man, and a wine
bibber, a friend of Publicans and sinners. But notwithstanding all these hard,
and undeserved censures of yours, a wisdom in the end will be discovered,
that will shame all these lewd, and way ward calumniations. This Wisdom will
want no Advocates, but shall be in the issue, Justified.] These Advocats are
no strangers, or fee'd hirelings, but of her own breeding, and informing, her
children.] These Children, will not be distracted, or set at variance among
themselves, but come in, roundly together, All] to perform what belongs unto
them. Howsoever therefore, ignorant men mistake her, the proud slight her,
Politicians abuse her, Profane men snuff at her, and few, or none of this
world maintain her, with that respect, as they ought; yet tandem bona causa
triumphat, upon a due hearing, and examination, she will be quitted, to the
shame, and confusion of all her opposites. For perverse, and foolish
oppositions, that are plausible in the beginning, in the end, prove perilous,
and pernicious. But wisdom is justified of all her Children.

In the words are considerable, 1 The connection, in the particle, But] 2 A
direction, wherein it will be requisite to know, 1 What, this wisdom is. 2
How, it may be said to be Justified. 3 Of whom, it is Justified, Of all her
children.



Lo children, and the fruit of the womb (says the kingly Prophet) are an
heritage, and a gift, Psalm. 127.
that comes from the Lord; especially such children of wisdom, or such wise
children, as my Text here treats of. Like as the arrows in the hand of the
Giant; so are such children always in a readiness to justify those that
begat them: Happy is the man, that has his quiver full of them, they shall
not be ashamed, when they speak with their enemies, in the gate: which
parallel's fully my Text. The Connection whereof, by Gods assistance, and your
wonted patience, comes first to be only touched on, in the particle

2. KAI, But] Maldonate the bold Jesuit, is much perplexed with the difficulty
of this Text, and (to say the truth as we find it) there is scarce one word in
it, that one way or other, has not bred a difference amongst Expositors. The
Original,(...)] which we express by the Exceptiue, But] is rendered in the
vulgar Latin, Syriack, Arabique, and Munsters Hebrew translation in S.
Matthew, by the Copulative, And] which gives way to the sense, that Castalion
stands upon, and translates it accordingly, Estque vel, ita suis omnibus aliena
est sapientia, such a stranger is wisdom to her own children. Or (as Luther
has it in the Dutch) is condemned; Lud. de Dieu.
made ashamed, or put to silence, by her own children: which some latter
Critiques also allow. But the words will not bear it, without enforcing the
sense; And it is well known that (...)] is oftentimes put for (...), in the
Greek, and, and] for sed] in the Eastern tongues, (as Beza and others, note
on this place.) And therefore here in reference to that which went before, it
intimates an opposition, which casts us necessarily upon this position? That,
come which way we hold best, either with John's austerity, or our Saviors
mildnes, no direction to truth, and goodness, shall want censurers and
opposers. Noah shall find, in his own family, and own breed, a Cham that will
scoff at his nakedness. Lot has his neighbors, the Sodomites, that will vex
his righteous soul. Isaac lives in the house with his half brother Ismael,
that will laugh at him, before his tender mothers face. And could David's
majesty, or authority, privilege him from the like scandal? with the
flatterers were busy mockers, Psalm. 35.
that gnashed upon him with their teeth. They that sat in the gate, spoke
against him, and the drunkards (in the Original it is, sitters upon their
Ale-benches) made songs upon him. Just as Moses was incountred with Iannes and
Iambres, and Balaam, (besides his domestike stirs) to withstand his heavenly
proceedings; So Elias his fiery zeal, met with a violent Iezabel, that put
him to his shifts; And reverend Elish a shall not pass in peace, by the
unnurtured boys of Bethel but they will call him Bald-head. What shall I
speak of Jeremy, of Amos, of Zacharias the son of Barachias, whose freedom
in performing their duties, exasperated rather, then reclaimed those, who
should have better respected them? The Pharisees in our Saviors time, were
grown so supercilious, that they held it a great countesie, to afford him the
credit of a Coniurer. Say we not well (say they) that thou art a Samaritan,
and have a Devil? what will this babbler say? say the wits of Athens, of S.
Paul, when he preached unto them, Jesus, and the Resurrection. Worshipping of
an Ass his head; promiscuous lusts, and drinking of the blood of Infants, was
objected to the primitive Christians, by the Pagans, without the least ground
of truth, merely to make them odious. You would scarce believe me, if I should
but only touch by the way, the unchristian, and opprobrious imputations, our
Adversaries, have put upon our Church, and innocent Reformers, Luther, Calvin,
and the rest, for no greater reason, (for ought that can be truly alleged) but
that their Diana should down; and their silversmiths loose their gains, if
these honest men stood, and their Doctrine continued for current. S. Paul had a
combat with such beasts at Ephesus. Old Ignatius was ground (as corn in a
mill) by their teeth. The Devil himself is termed Ochel chartzo in the
Syriack, Satan in the Hebrew, and Diabolus in the Greek, for no reason so
much, as for his breeding or feeding, and spreading abroad, such virulent, and
hellish imputations.

3. The less should such hard measure, move or daunt any good man, in the
light of the Gospel, wherein the depths of Satan; and the drifts of his
Emissaries, are so palpably discovered. For has not our Savior, sufficiently
catechized us in this behalf? Math. 10.25.
The Disciple is not above his Master, nor the servant, above his Lord: If they
call the Master of the house, Beelzebub, how much more shall they of his
household be forced to wear the same Livery? And it John Baptist have a
Devil, for his strict life, and our Savior must be a glutton, and a
winebibber, and a base company keeper, for his more familiar conversation; what
marvel is it then, if diverse amongst us (that through apparent infirmities are
deservedly excepted at) undergo the like Censure of malicious tongues? Math.
16.24.
Whosoever will come after me (says our Savior) let him first deny himself,
his own wit, his own will, his own proiects; Then take up his cross, with a
resolution, to undergo whatsoever disaster he meet with, and yet not start
back, or aside, or sink down under the load; but still keep on, and follow.
Such reproaches are some of the Marks, Gal. 6.17.
that S. Paul glories in: From henceforth (says he) let no man trouble me, for
I bear in my body, the marks of the Lord Jesus. And in a safe custody, are
those sheep, that may be discerned by such flesh marks; not superstitiously
gotten, and vaunted of, (as those of him, whom they call S. Francis, and that
counterfeit Abbess of Lisbone, who blessed the Spanish Banner, in 88,
mentioned by that honest Spaniard, Cyprian de Valera) but purchased, as those
of the true Martyrs, and Confessors, in Imitation of our Savior, and John
Baptist, by performing their own duties, for the testimony of a good
conscience. Last of all, this may serve, to stir up Alacrity, in the slackest,
Confidence, in the doubtful, Constancy, in the wavering, Discretion, in the
hasty, Resolution, in the timorous, and suspicious; when they shall seriously
consider with themselves, that all the wiles, and words, and wrongs, of
malicious and deriding gaine-sayers, shall be but as smoke, the higher it
ascends (says Gregory) the sooner it is dispersed, and vanishes. Simon Magus
for a time, may bewitch the Samaritanes, and make the simple people believe,
that he was (...), Act. 8.
some great one. Elymas Bar Jesus (from whom the Jesuits may more fitly fetch
their denomination, who hold it, as it should seem, not enough, from Christ to
be called Christians) may withstand S. Paul's preaching, at the first onset,
Act. 3.
and persuade the deputy against it. The faction of the Arians, make the world
groan under it, and the greatness of the Apocalypticall Beast, bring
Kindreds, and tongues, and nations, to do him homage; yet matters will not be
so packt up, without a further examination. A But] is found in the text, that
makes way for a wisdom, to speak in her own cause. Now what this wisdom is,
(according to my former division) comes in the next place to be discussed.

4 Wisdom.] (...).
It is a received rule among Logicians, that, Aequiuoca sunt prius
distinguenda, quam definienda. Words of an ambiguous meaning, must be first
distinguished, before they can be defined, or rightly ranked in their proper
places. Of this sort, is this word, wisdom, in my text which may be
understood, either to be, Divine, or Humane. Divine sometimes designs Christ
himself, the second Person in the Trinity. In which sense it must needs be
taken afterward; Luke 11.29. Thus says the wisdom of God; I will send them
Prophets and Apostles, compared with 1. Cor. 1.24. unto those that are called,
both Jews and Greeks, Christ is the power of God, and the wisdom of God.
Otherwhere, and more often, it notes the infinite skill of the most high, in
creating, and perfecting all things, and by his Providence, ordering them, to
their appointed ends, and uses. O Lord how manifold are thy works, Psalm. 104.
in wisdom have thou made them all, (says the holy Prophet) the earth is full
of thy riches. But last of all, and more especially, it points out the
inexplicable contriuing of the Eternal; in the mystery of our redemption, with
that Evennesse between Mercy and Justice, that both had their full scope, in
such an inexpressible manner, that the Angels themselves desired to look into
it. 1. Pet. 1.12. as it was opened by the Holy Ghost, in the preaching of the
Gospel. But Humane wisdom is of another mold, and is either Moral, tending,
or pretending to a temporal happiness; or Carnal, which is no better then
earthly, sensual and divellish in St James censure, Cap. 3.
inuoluing and deluding its admirers, in inextricable Labyrinthes. There be
that expound this wisdom (here mentioned) to be Christ himself; but with no
great show of probability. Chrysostom, Theophylact, and S. Hierome somewhat
bend this way; but their meaning is, that wisdom expressed in, and by Christ,
in the mystery of our Redemption, will be ever quitted, upon a due survey, from
all exceptions against it. On the other side, to take this for Humane wisdom,
either Ethicall, or Ethnicall; in the good or bad sense, will have small
Coherence with that which follows: for how can Humane wisdom be justified,
which so many ways is deficient? and hardly shall we find in scripture, so
good a term as justified, to be attributed unto wordlings, or wordlings simply
to be accounted wisdoms children. In what sense therefore to understand
wisdom in this place, we cannot be better informed, then in the 30. verse.
going before my text; But the Pharisees, and Lawyers, rejected the counsel of
God against themselves, being not baptized of John: For that counsel of God
there rejected, is the wisdom that is here justified. There, it finds
Pharisees, and Lawyers, Separatists, and Canonists, Statesmen in their own
conceits, beyond all Subordination, to withstand it; here, it is not
destitute, of dutyfull and intelligent children, that will make good her
proceedings. Herod, may consult with the wisemen, and pretend as much devotion
to Christ as they; Pilate, wash his hands, when he frees a murderer, and
condemns an Innocent; the Kings of the earth stand up, and the rulers take
counsel together, against the Lord, and against his anointed: yet he that
dwells in heaven, shall laugh them to scorn, the Lord shall have them in
derision. For there is no wisdom, nor understanding, nor counsel against the
most high. Hester. 6.
Prove. 21.30. Zeresh his wife, could tell Haman her husband, that no policy
could bear out a man, that once began to fall before the seed of the Jews,
who were then Gods undoubted people. And Gamaliels counsel, was taken for
good, by the same Nation at the worst, that howsoever man's proiects, come to
naught of themselves; the designs of Gods wisdom shall never be overthrown,
Act. 5.38. but be accomplished in their due time. 1. Pet. 5.6.

5 Now those that be wise, will ponder these things, and they shall understand,
the loving kindness of the Lord, Psalm. 107. Least they perish from the right
way, Psalm. 2. through their own imaginations, Psalm. 5. O Lord our God great
are thy wondrous works, Psalm. 40.
which thou have done, like as be also thy thoughts which are to usward, and
yet there is no man, that orders them to thee. Thy wisdom cries in the
chief places of concurse, and utters her voice in the streets, Prove. 1.
but who hearkens after her? she builds her a house, Ib. 8.
with stately pillars, but who sues to be her tenant? she provides her wine,
and victuals, and furnishes her table, but who comes upon her invitation? Nay
Sophistry goes so far now adays, beyond this (...) of my text, and wilynes
beyond wisdom, that for one disciple of true wisdom, it may number a
thousand. St Paul after he had in all wisdom, brought his Colossians to
Christ, in whom are hid the treasures of all wisdom and knowledge, Coll. 2.
Immediately thereupon, schools them, to beware especially of 3. things, which
under a show of wisdom might mislead them, into all absurdityes; the first is
(...), so highly esteemed in these our trifling times; consisting in enticing,
and winning words, without the least purpose of sincerity or performance. And
this I say, (says the blessed Apostle) least any man should beguile you, by
enticing words. v. 4. The second is, (...), passed now, under the habit of a
reaching understanding, and deep judgment, concerning which, follows in the
8. verse. Beware least any man spoil you through Philosophy, and vain deceits;
after the traditions of men, after the rudiments of the world, and not after
Christ. Men may vaunt themselves how they list of their abstruse speculations,
in concurring atom's, and exemplary Idea's, and pretty notions in the imaginary
spaces, without the Primum Mobile, as some Jesuits yet continue to vent; but
wisdom will manifest in the end the emptines of such foperyes; and how much
better it is, to be a good Christian, then a great Philosopher, though both may
well stand together, if they be rightly ranked. The 3. and most dangerous
Abduction follows, in the 18. verse. in a voluntary humility, afterward called
(...), will- worship, verse the last. The Heathen have yielded Cyniques, and
the Mahumetans (at this day) want them not, that put a great deal of wisdom,
in a Bedlem kind of garb, and fantastic devotion. But our Apostle tells us,
in the words of truth, and soberness; Let no man beguile you of your reward,
in a voluntary humility, and worshipping of Angels, intruding into those things
which he has not seen. For does foolish man know, how to please God, better
then God himself? or do Gods commandments want the patching or peecing out,
of the worlds Rudiments? what a stir, and implacable siding, (...).
has continued these many ages in Christianity, about touch not, taste not,
handle not, and such like unnecessary catches, which are all to perish with the
using, as our Apostles tells us? And have indeed a show in will worship and
humility, and neglecting the body, not in any honor, to the satisfying of the
flesh; but are far wide, from that true wisdom, which here we are in pursuit
of.

6 It was a wise observation of ancient Tertullian; That where any thing is
intended, where it ought not to be, Ita plerunque evenit, vt cum aliquid vbi
non oportet adhibetur; illic vbi oportet negligitur. De paenit.
it is neglected most commonly, where it should be. And it is a manifest sign
of the nights approaching, when the shadows grow longer then the substance.
God ought to be worshipped of us (says S. Augustine not as we hold fittest,
but as he commands. Thou shall do, not that which is right in thine own
eyes, Deconsens. Evangelist. l. 1. c. 18. Deuteronomy. 12.
but without addition or diminishing, ( only, adds the vulgar edition) which I
give thee in charge. For this is our wisdom, and understanding, that shall
extort from all at length, this satisfying Approbation, surely this is a wise
and understanding people. But this wisdom has been ever held too trivial,
with the great wits of all ages. Pharaoh will be pursuing the Israelites,
though he sinck himself, and all his, in the prosecution. That Traitor
Achitophel, will unking a man after Gods own heart, David, though it cost him
the making of himself, a long letter in a halter. Witty Lucian will jeere at
Christians, till dogs serve him as they did Iezabel. And what shall weethinke
of the Pagans violence in primitive times, and Julian the Apostata's sly
conveyances? The Popes, joining these both together in a most mysterious,
politic, and plausible way? have they not all been defeated by Luther, and
Calvin, Jewel, and such downeright men and contemptible silly souls, who were
learned in nothing less, then the Circumuenting wisdom of this world? These
men as it is well known, had no pomp to bear them out, or inquisitions to
back them, or powder-plots to make way for them, but the Apostles simple
resolution, Consider what we say, and the Lord give you understanding in all
things. It was somewhat that made S. Paul to mind posterity, 1. Cor. 1. That,
not many wisemen after the flesh, nor many mighty, nor many nobles, (yet some
there are, that are called to this business;) But God has chosen the foolish
things of this world, to confound the wise: and weak, to take down the
mighty: and things that are not, V. 17.
to bring to naught things that are: that noe flesh should glory in his
presence. But all should glory in this, that Jesus Christ is made unto us,
wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification and redemption. V. 30.
Let no man therefore deceive himself, (I go on with the Apostles words) For
if any man amongst you, seem to be wise, in this world, let him become a fool
that he may be wife. And he gives the reason, for the wisdom of this world is
foolishness with God, and he confirms it with two places of scripture; It is
written, he takes the wise in their own craftiness; and again, the Lord
knows the thoughts of the wise, Job 5.13.
that they are but vain. Thus the Ancients were wise, to go to the fountain,
and thence to learn to distinguish between tried gold, and sophisticated Alchy
my: Between precious stones and stubble. Then was true wisdom at a high
esteem, when Job preferred it before the gold of Ophir, Cap. 28.
the Onyx, the Saphir, the Coral, the Pearls, the Rubyes, the Topaz of
Aethiopia, which he pronounces in no sort to be equal to it. The depth (says
he) cannot yield it, the sea says, it is not with me, Destruction and death
say, we have heard only the fame of it. Such a salt is this heavenly wisdom,
that some graynes, of it will make the bitter waters sweet: such a tree, that a
branch of it cast into the water, will make Iron to swim, such a spittle
coming from the mouth of our Savior, that mingled with clay, it will make the
blind to see. But we have the wisdom of Solomon, and of him that is greater
then Solomon, far beyond the wisdom of the Aegiptians, and Chaldaeans, or
any of the the Sons of the East, (wherein Moses and Daniel were so well
versed.) But who lays out for it diligently, or apprehends it faithfully, when
it is brought home unto him? Nay if the choice were now laid before us, 1.
Kings 3.
as it was once to Solomon; whether riches, or long life, or victory, or this
wisdom would best content us, it is much to be feared, that those would be
laid hold on, and this wisdom, be put off, with a Courtly complement. But
howsoever it speed among the vulgar; some friends will be found, that will
stick to her, and justify her. But how far, and in what sense, the third
particle of my text falls in, to evidence.

7 Wisdom is justified.] (...)
The schools have this for a current Axiom, Qui been distinguit been docet.
He that will teach well, must do it distinctly, by freeing that he handles,
from a various meaning. Here, it comes to be of use, by reason of the
different significations, of the word (...), or, justified. This is rendered
sometime properly, by Iustum facere, to make one just, by some inherent
quality: More often, by Justum declarare, by a sufficient satisfaction,
caution, or pardon, interposed, to pronounce one absolved, in a legal course.
In the 6. to the Romans, it can mean no other but a preventing, and quitting,
from an inconvenience: He that is dead is justified from sin; that is, freed
from its seduction, or Infection, as S. Basil, and S. Chrysostom expound it.
But the meaning of the word here, will be best gathered, from the 29. verse.
going before, All the people that heard him, and the Publicans justified God.
Now how may God be said to be justified, by being made, or pronounced
justified? or freed by a change from any inconvenience, to which a creature may
be incident? It can be no less then Blasphemy, to conceive so. To justify
God therefore, is to admire his wisdom, acknowledge his Justice, Captiuate our
judgments, to his all- disposing providence;(...), to confess, to glorify, to
set forth in the most ample manner, his infinite goodness and mercy, with an
humble acknowledgment of our own follyes, faults, mistakes, and errors: That
he may be justified in his sayings, and clear when he is judged. So the
Greek Fathers, Chrysostom, Theophylact, Euthymius, with whom the Latin,
Hilary, Hierome, and S. Augustine, concur: Iustificata; that is, iusta, and
irreprehensibilis, declarata, laudata, and probata est: Wisdom is proved,
praised, declared, to be just, and irreprehensible, beyond all exceptions. Man's
proiects quickly discover flawes, that will hardly be excused: But Gods
disposition, is admired the more, the more it is sifted and thoroughly weighed.
Trial, time, and place, that manifest our weakness, justify this wisdom.
Catching Articles, and cross interrogatoryes, may be put in against it, but
they will be easily answered, to the confusion of the Playntiffes.

8 For we may not imagine (B.) That the serpent, who first seduced our Mother
Eve, by his pestilent suggestion; was afterward less solicitous to disgrace
her promised seed, from whom, he could not choose, but expect a broken pate. And
therefore all the detractiue calumniations that Hell could forge, should be
sure put into the mouths of Porphyry, Julian, Celsus, and such venturous
miscreants, to be forth-comming against him, and his Gospel, upon all
occasions. For, 1. was it (say they) a likely or seemly thing, that the son
of David, and Abraham, should be so meanly provided for, that a Corner of a
poor stable, was hardly allotted him, for his wellcoming into the world, and a
manger for his cradle? And, 2. did not his suddayne departure thence;
Conveyance into Egypt; lurking, after his returning, in secret, as a poor
tradesman, (few know how, or where, for fear of discovery) manifest to the
world, that himself, and his guardians distrusted their own forces, and were
afraid, that God should have lost an heir, if man might have seized upon him?
3. Say that in the Interim, he was presented in the Temple, acknowledged by
Simeon and Hannah, good old people, and after at 12 years of age, gravel'd and
amazed the Doctors in a public disputation; But did any then of the Rulers
take notice of him, or any way upon further proof, seek after him, but only a
Nicodemus, or so, not held one of the wisest in the Synagogue? 4. If his
purpose had been that his preaching, and miracles should have wrought a
reformation, why got he not himself to the Court, as Moses did to Pharaohs,
and wrought the wonders, that otherwise he did so ordinarily before Herod, and
Pilate, and their Active Ladies? Why took he not a wise course, to make Annas
and Caiphas, and the potent factions of the Scribes and Pharisees, to be of his
side? Those quickly might have effected that, which his preaching and miracles
came short off. At least his complying with them, would have abated the edge of
their bitterness, to give the fayrer passage to his proceedings. 5. Now what
was the common scandal and block that most stumbled at? is this the Divinity,
that Moses and the Prophets must give way unto? published by a company of
ignorant and beggarly fishermen; that oppose the established Church discipline,
affront the chief priests and prelates, venture upon preaching, without a
calling or license, reform the temple in a imperious manner, without the least
show of any commission, or canonical authority? 6. Notwithstanding when he
was afterward apprehended, and was most put to it, before the public
magistrates, to quit himself, why opened he not then his mouth, to clear his
own Innocence, and did not one miracle to free himself from danger? when the
passengers reviled, the high Priests vpbrayded, the thieves on both sides
taunted, not without the most provoking blasphemies, could he have abstained
from righting him, and handled them in their kind, if he had had the power? 7.
Last of all where it is voyced, and believed, that he rose again the third
day; why did he not appear to any of the Magistrates, or Prelates, to give
some satisfaction? why was he not seen in the midst of Jerusalem, in the most
eminent places of assemblyes, to be heard, and touched, and handled, to the
conviction, and shame of the most obstinate? To what puxpose chose he, rather
in private to manifest himself, but to a few in comparison, and those of the
meanest rank, and least esteem, among the Priests and People? Thus we see
what Atheistical spirits have ever harped upon, to discredit (as much as in
them lay) the wisdom of the most highest; in managing this greatest mystery of
our redemption. But no such matters are here, or can be objected, which admit
not of easy Justification.

9. For the first, our Saviors mean birth and parent age, in a poor town,
was to grace the place, not to be graced by it, as it was fore-prophecied: and
to free harmless poverty from contempt, seeing that word, that made the
world, was content to under go it. But what? was there not any heavenly
majesty appeared, in this earthly meandness? was there not a star (created,
as it is thought of purpose) appointed to be a guide to the wise Easterlings, to
bring them to the King they sought for? And were there not then a quire of
Angels provided, to welcome him into the world with a heavenly Antheme? Add to
this John Baptist's strange birth, and Zacharies dumbness, and his unexpected
recovery; both the parents prophecies, and the sons performance; and then let
malice speak, whether these matters were not of consequence. For the second,
his sudden subducing for a time, was not out of earthly fear, but heavenly
direction from his father, whom it pleased to preserve his son, not by
miracles, but means, and to lesson us, that miracles are not to be required,
where ordinary means may be had. To the third, Simeon and Hannah, were the
oracles of those times, better thought of, and that deservedly, then all their
great Rabbi'es with their partisans, whom if his stupendous disputation
wrought not upon, the defect was in their malicious hearts, not in the divine
evidence laid before them. From which time, his retyrednesse from the public,
and obedience to his obscure parents, gave way to John Baptists fore-running,
and to all posterity a pattern, not to run before they are ripe and
provided, but to content themselves with that state which God has set them in,
and not be the worse in that, by ambitiously justling for a higher. The fourth
Cavil falls off, by the acknowledgement of his greatest adversaries. Julian
and other heathen writers, (as the Turks do at this day, in their Alcoran)
could not but confess the truth of his miracles. And what need Herod, or
Pilate with the high Priests, to be spectators: seeing that the Scribes, and
Pharisees (as bad as they) were present at the most of them, and their
Emissaries dogged him always, to relate what was done, to their inquisitiue
Masters. Fifthly, To have applied himself further to these great ones, and so
to have compassed his own ends, had questioned his own excellency, and
stained his heavenly proceedings with earthly devices. And how could he any way
be censured, for opposing Church discipline, seeing himself was circumcized,
his Blessed mother purified, his Disciples directed to hear the Scribes and
Pharisees, out of Moses chair; and the Leaper sent to the Priest to show
himself, and offer for his clensing. Neither was it for want of power or
courage (which in the sixth place is objected) that he miraculously freed not
himself, after his apprehension and indurance; seeing he told Peter, (who drew
his sword at first, to defend him, though afterward he forsware him as a
Coward) Think thou that I could not now pray to my Father, Mat. 26.53.
and he shall presently give me more then twelve Legions of Angels? But how
then shall the Scriptures be fulfilled, that thus it must be? To fulfill the
Scriptures then, was his task and care, not to quit himself by miracles.
These scriptures had prescribed what he should do, and suffer, how rise
again, ascend; which Articles, and all the rest were justified, by such men,
whom the world could not suspect of forging them, for politic respects, nor
expect, to come from such breeding; but admire, when they should hear, how it
came from heaven, by the visible appearance of the holy Ghost in fiery tongues,
upon one of their greatest feasts, not by night, but almost midday, not in
private, but to the public view, not of a few, but most nations under heaven,
in their Metropolitan City, Jerusalem. Which clears the seventh and last
exception, before mentioned, and shows how against all the Devils Sophistry,
this heavenly wisdom will stand always justified.

10. This is Justification, so full, so public, so unquestionable, so
heavenly, of that religious wisdom, we adhere unto, that faith cannot find a
surer anchor, whereon to depend; hope, a firmer footing whereon to fasten;
Charity, readier wings to mount her above all earthly machinations, and worldly
stratagems. So that here we may well come in, with that, which the Apostle
cites out of the Prophet; Where is the wise? Where is the Scribe? Where is the
disputer of this world? Will their wisdom, Isa. 33.18. 1. Cor. 1.20.
or scribbling, or disputing justify their own actions, when they shall be
brought to an impartial scanning? How will Esaus wisdom be justified, that
parted with his birthright, for a mess of red pottage? or Balaams, that would
hold with Balak, to curse Gods people, though his Ass might have minded him,
that he ran a desperate way? or Gehazy's that by his cheating and lying,
purchased to him and his heirs, a lineall leprosy? Amongst the manifold
enormities in the Prophet Isaiah's time, there be three especially he
complains of, which the Actors in them notwithstanding, Cap. 29.21.
held for no small piece of their wisdom, and Politiques: The first, is to
make a man an offender for a word. The second, to lay a snare for him, that
reproves in the gate. And last, to turn aside the just, for a thing of
naught. It was grown somewhat worse (if worse might be) in the Prophet
Ieremies days: Cap. 5.31.
A wonderful, and horrible thing (says he) is committed in the land, The
Prophets prophecy falsely, and the Priests bear rule by their means, and my
people love to have it so, and what will ye do in the end thereof? What shall
I do (O blessed Prophet!) Marry follow the advice of thy brother Hosea, in his
last Chapter: O Israel turn unto the Lord, for thy wisdom has misled thee,
thou have fallen by thine iniquity. Take unto you words, and turn unto the
Lord, say unto him, take away all our iniquities, and receive us graciously,
and we will render thee the Calves of our lips. Let us provide then before
hand, with that steward in the Gospel, (who though otherwise unjust) in that,
Luke 16.8.
he is said to have done wisely; that when all the world fayles, we have
somewhat to trust to. This is the care and practice, not in show, but in good
earnest, not of the favorits of this world, but, All wisdoms children, the
residue of my Text, I have left only now, to conclude with. (...).


11. Of all her children.] It was not for naught, our Savior interserts this
Item, in his sermon on the Mount, Mat. 5.18. one jot, or one title, shall in no
wise pass from the law, till all be fulfilled. Iots and titles then in the
law, are not superfluous curiosities, but such as the right use of them, may
make to clear the Text, and are worthy of exactest scanning. A notable
instance hereof, we have here in the Pronoune, (...), Her] Which if we pass
without an aspiration (as Valla and Castalion would have it) it may be referred
to the word (...), generation, in the former 31. verse, and make this sense:
Wisdom is justified, even of the children, of that perverse generation, which
will neither dance to her piping, nor weep to her mourning, neither by fair,
or rougher usage, be brought to any goodness. Yet shall they be so convinced
by wisdoms exact proceeding, that they shall not be able to disgrace that,
which they shun to follow: but be forced to bring in evidence for her
Justification, though it necessarily reflect, upon their own condemnation. And
have we not had long since Balaam, with this kind of acknowledgement? O let me
dye the death of the righteous, and let my last end be like his. How common is
that conviction of Julian the Apostata, Vicisti Galilaee, thou Galilean
(speaking of Christ) at length have overcome me? It was a sad Epitaph, that
Platina relates, was put upon Pope Adrian the 6. his tomb: That he had been a
happy man indeed, if he had never known the happiness of that seat. But the
surliest confession of all, in this kind, seems to be that, of an Italian
Lawyer, with whom Bellarmine was, at his departing, as he relates in his tract
de art been moriendi. And having with much ado, persuaded him, to crave mercy
at Gods hands for his sins, could bring him no further then this; I I pray
thee (O Lord) take compassion on my wife, and children; for my self, I desire
thee not any thing, for I go directly to Hell, and so departed (says the
Cardinal) as if one went from one town to another. Thus the children of
Darkness, give testimony to the light, as the Devil was forced to do of our
Saviors Deity.

12. But the Text will not bear this exposition, (though the doctrine be
otherwise, most true and useful) for here we have (...) aspirated, and
therefore is to be joined with (...), next to it, not (...), four verses
before it, (as Beza notes) and gives this sense expressly; wisdom is
justified, not by its perverse opposers, but the docible believers, not of some
straggling, disagreeing strangers, but of all her own children. For this
exposition makes the Syriack, which according to Tremelius, on the 11. of
Matthew is thus rendered, wisdom is justified of all her worshippers,
according to Guido Fabritius, of her Servants, according to S. Hierome (but
without any ground in the Original) ab operibus, of all her works; And
thereupon he adds, sapientia non quaerit vocis testimonium, sed operam:
Wisdom stands not so much upon words as deeds. All which circumstances laid
together, make it without controversy, that wisdoms children here meant, are
not all those that make themselves so: or would have the world to take them to
be so. But her natural children indeed, who hear her instructions, follow her
directions, and justify the uprightness of all her actions.

13. It was an old exploded course, by all good men heretofore, (but now
reviued too much again, to the scandal of all wisdoms children) to pretend
one thing, and intend another; And so far to justify Gods wisdom, as it
might serve to justify our unwarrantable designs. But my Text here has three
marks of these justifying children, to justify them in this place; Of which if
but one fail it may be justly presumed, that all is not right: Those are, 1.
Unity, 2. Natural affection to their mother, and 3. submissine obedience to
those commands, that shall be justly enjoined them to follow. Wisdom is
justified of All] therefore no backslider, no schismatique, no headlong
Innovator, must be accounted of the number. Of all Her] Therefore, All out
landish Incendiaries, murmurers, detractors, All underhand Ingineers, All
blowers up of states, and massacring miscreants, must be referred to the lists
of Bastards, and generation of vipers. Of all her children] then, Refractory
prescribers to their mother, proscribers of their brethren, must not offer to
put in, here for a child's portion. O that men therefore were wise (as Moses
told the Israelites) then would they lay these things to heart, and not run
headlong in such wild, and irreligious courses, which are no way justifiable,
but precipitate in the broad rode, that hastneth violently to apparent
destruction. Then the detractor would be ashamed of his base suggestions; the
malcontent, of his causeless murmurings; the oppressor of his inhumanity;
the proud, of his histrionicall hautinesse; the Luxurious of his looseness;
the Hypocrite, of his shows; the Machiavilian of his shifts. For what are all
these kickshawes, to solid wisdom? but as a spiders web, which intangleth
some few flies a while, till the beesome come, and then all the work is
marred, and the worker (perchance) ruinated and forgotten. I must end. David's
description of a man in honor, may be a lesson to great ones, what wisdom
they cannot safely depend upon, but what they must trust to in the end, Psalm.
49. and Solomon's, the sons instance, in a poor man, that by his well guided
wisdom, delivered a little city from the beleagring of a great King,
Ecclesiastes the 9. instructs us all sufficiently, how much godly wisdom,
is better then unblessed strength and stratagems, and to be hearkened to, more
in quiet, then the outcries of fools. Let us remember therefore, with the wise
virgins, to be provided always before hand, with this lasting oil in our
lamps; and cast about with that wise merchant in the Gospel, to purchase that
field where this pearl of wisdom lies hidden. And suffer fools gladly (by
S. Paul's direction) to speak, where there is a fault, because ye your selves
are wise. So shall we at length, mount up from these foolish and flitting
vanities, to possess those glorious, and unchangeable mansions, which the
wisdom of the Father, Christ Jesus, has purchased for his elect children,
before the foundations of the world. To whom with the Father and the holy
Ghost, three persons and one God, be ascribed, all wisdom, glory, might, and
majesty both now and ever.

AMEN.
HERESIES PROGRESS.

A SERMON PREACHED AT THE COURT.

BY JOHN PRIDEAVX, Rector of Exceter College, His MAIESTIE'S Professor in
Divinity in the University of OXFORD.

OXFORD, Imprinted by LEONARD LICHFIELD Anno Salutis, 1636.

1. COR. 11.19. For there must be also Heresies among you, that they which are
approved may be made manifest among you.


1 IT is a received observation, that where God sets up his Church, the Devil
will erect a Chapel; and no sooner shall the good husband have sown his
field with good seed, Math. 13.24.
but the enemy will take vantage of the servants drow sinesse, to cast in
Tares. This our Apostle found here, by his troublesome experience: for having
but newly planted a Church, among these witty Corinthians, how soon was it
plundered, and puzzled, with dangerous oppositions, and distractions? A brabble
grew among them at their first initiation, concerning their first teachers, one
was for Paul, C. 1. v. 12.
another for Apollos, a third for Cephas, a fourth for Christ; some were all
for strong lines, and entising words of man's wisdom, others were taken with
unaffected simplicity. Thus they censure their teachers and their gifts, who
should have censured themselves, for the amending of their lives, according to
their increase of knowledge. Their teachers instructed them, to abandon all
fleshly lusts; they could tolerate incest amongst themselves. They pressed them
to put up injuries, or to arbitrate the^ in private; Cap. 5.
their violence drew them to implead their brethren, before heathen-Iudges, to
the scandal of Christianity. They informed them, that single life and marriage,
C. 6.
meats of this kind or that, were to be held, as things indifferent, so that
by the abuse of their Christian liberty, C. 7.
their weaker brethren were not scandalized; yet quarrels, and endless
debates, must be kept on foot also in such petty matters. These drew them
farther, to vnreverend behavior, C. 10.
both of men and women, in the Church it self, C. 11.
at their public meetings, at such time as they came to receive the Lords
Supper; to affect to be accounted great Scholars, rather then to edify one
another. Nay, some of them grew so graceless, C. 15.
as to deny the resurrection, to the overthrow of all, that they had learned
before. Now this must needs stagger the weaker, and cast some of them upon
such, or the like dangerous deliberations: Are these the fruits of
Christianity, and the quietness we shall receive by this Gospel of peace? Is
faith thus founded in fickleness; charity, in disturbances; hope, in hazards;
patience and brotherly kindness, in all kind of injuries and combustions? Our
case seemed far better, when we walked in Gentilisme; now offenses are
multiplied, who shall stop them? injuries are daily offered, who can right us?
Contentions, continually arise, but what effectual means appear to compose
them? These temptations our Apostle foreseeing, endeavors to meet with, and
prevent, by forewarning them, that such things were to be expected, but God
that permits them, will so dispose them, that all shall sort to the best.

2. My Text then, is an Encouragement to the godly, not to be any way cast
down, or daunted, at the rising of divisions, or Heresies, for as much as all
these tend to the manifestation of their constancy. As though he should have
said; I hear that there be divisions amongst you, and I partly believe it. But
what? should these things make our doctrine suspected, or abate your zeal? or
bring you into a conceit, that you were in better case before your conversion?
No, (Beloved) I, that have laid Christ for the foundation, tell you before
hand, that not only gold, and silver, and precious stones, but wood, and hay,
and stubble will be built upon it. Cap. 3.12.
My planting, and Apollo's watring, in their increase will discover noxious
weeds, among the good wheat. Schisms will creep in, to disturb the Churches
unity, Heresies, to corrupt the doctrine; but God will so dispose of all, that
the issue shall be prosperous. For there must be also Heresies among you, that
they which are approved, may be made manifest among you.

The words fall asunder into these 2 parts, 1. A Position: There must be also
Heresies among you. 2. An Exposition: That they which be approved may be made
manifest among you.


The first shows, what will fall out, let the best men do their best: The
second foretells, what will be the Issue, let the worst men work their worst.
In the first, sickle men have a way, to play their parts; in the second, the
Church has a stay, what to think of it, and what to censure. In the first
appears Gods long suffering; in the second his wisdom, and goodness, that
out of darkness brings light, strength out of weakness. The master may steep
(for a time) on a pillow, as in war under hatches, the waves rock, the ship
take in water, Math. 8.23.
the Disciples cry out, Lord save us we perish: But when he arises, and
rebukes the wind, there shall follow a great calm, to the astonishment of
those that were in Ieopardy, beyond expectation. Now of these in their order,
and first of the Position, in these words,

3. For there must be also Heresies among you.] Heresy is a voluntary choosing
of an opinion, (...).
against some article of faith, without ground of Scripture, and an obstinate
maintaining of it, against all lawful determinatio^s of the true Church, for
some Sinister and particular respects. Some Monks derive it from the Latin
haereo, for the stubborn sticking to that which is wrong. But this was their
ignorance in the Greek, where the word (...), (by consent of their better
scholars) signifies nothing but an election. And this is taken sometimes
indifferently, for an opinion, in diverse sects, (...). Act. ^5.5. (...). v. 5.
V. 20.
whether they be good or bad: There rose up certain of the heresy of the
Pharisees, Acts 15. our Translation says, Sect. So Acts 26. St Paul
professes, that after the strictest heresy of religion, he lived a Pharisee.
But in other places of Scripture, it most commonly carries with it a brand of
infamy, as Galat. 5. where it is reckoned with adultery, Idolatry, and
witchcraft, and such other works of the flesh. In the 2. of Peter, 2.1. it is
passed with the Epitheton, of damnable heresy, and since, it has been no
better thought of, on all sides. It is differenced from a simple error, by its
obstinate maintayning; from a Schism, for that this is in doctrine, that in
Discipline; from Heathenish superstition, Jewish perverseness, stupid
Mahumetisme, and the like, because heresy is a revolt from faith, contrary to
the word of God, which such miscreants never had, or professed: and therefore
Avicenna, Averroes, with the old Philosophers, and other Paga^s, are accounted
infidells, not Heretics, as Alphonsus a Castro well notes, against his own
consort Bernard of Lutzenburg. The Father of it is the Devil, the Mother
pride, the nurse, singularity, the attendant, Hypocrisy, the promoters (...),
and (...), intising persuasions, sophistical Philosophy, peremptory
will worship, described by our Apostle, Colos. 2. It frets like a moth, Psalm.
39. 2. Tim. 2.17.
eats like a gangrene, spreads its nets like a spider, to the distractions,
and destructions, of Churches, and commonweals. Apostasy is an eminency in
it, Tit. 3.11.
being a wilful falling away from a truth professed; (...) a selfe-condemning
the top of it, whereby it grows to be a branch of the sin against the Holy
Ghost. The outrages whereof, will be blasphemy against God, and virulent
persecution of his Church, and children; the end final impenitency, and
despair, the dismal forerunners of Eternal Damnation.

4 You see in this short model (Beloved) the haynousnesse of Heresy, and
wretched case of Heretics. Which we detest, and condemn, as much, as those
that thunder the fearful Anathema' es against it. Bellarmine therefore the
Champion, and Gretser his second, need not have spent so much paper, in
invectiues against Heresies, and Heretics, in the forefront of their
controversies; Bellarm. Gretzer.
to show how pernicious they are, comparing them to the plague, that killing
one, infects many, or those rebels against Moses and Aaron, Numb. 16.
whom the earth swallowed. Number. 16. All this we acknowledge, and say further,
that in 3. things the pride of Heretics is most intolerable, beyond other
sinners. 1. They make themselves wiser then God, in presuming to put by his
word, and to prefer a religion, of their own electing and framing. 2. They
scorn the Church, as though Gods promises to it, were but merely
complementall, which their private spirit must control, being never so well
settled, upon public advise, and consent. 3. All their followers must be their
flatterers, admire what they say, not examine what they admire; take their
Glosses, for Gospel, their designs, for oracles. If you once come to be so
scrupulous, as for satisfaction only of a good conscience, to enquire how such
opinions, or proiects may stand with Gods word, and thereupon proceed, to a
Donine cur ita facis? The knot is broken, and the plot, discovered. There must
be no Compeere in this their supremacy; the iustest protesting in this case is
detested. So high flowne is heresy to the prejudice of God, the Church, and
common Christian society. But the difference is not so much between us, and our
opposites what Heresy is, or how pernicious; but who are the Heretics, and
deserve for such to be censured, and punished. S. Augustine at the request of
Quodvultdeus, Tom. 6.
undertaking to give a Catalogue of Heretics from Christ's Ascension, to his
times; tells him, that Phylastrius amongst the Latins, and Epiphanius of the
Greeks, had performed that task before; but they agreed not in the number,
Phylastrius having more then Epiphanius, who was far the better Scholar, and
wrote after him. What the reason should be of this, he intimates, that
Phylastrius was more liberal in making Heretics. For by his reckoning,
Astronomers, and Almanack-makers that talk of 12. signs in the Zodiac, and
name the days of the week according to the Planets, must come under that
censure: when as Epiphanius (being more judicious) has no such matter. We must
take heed therefore, (says that good Father) that in our lists of Heretics,
we leave not out such as are so, nor foyst in, others that are not so. And
Bellarmin himself has the like complaint, of Phylastrius lavishnesse in that
behalf.

5 But what and if the Cardinal himself, and all his accomplices, be more to
blame, then ever Phylastrius was, or any of the Ancients, in the same kind? May
we not well then come upon them with that of our Savior, Ex ore tuo? or that
of the Apostle to the Romans (which the Romans, Luke 19.22.
above all others, should especially take notice of) Thou that teach
another, teach thou not thy self? I will not tire you with a Catalogue of
instances.] It is well known, when our most learned King James, of Blessed
memory, defended his right, and religion, against the Pope, and his adherents,
to their utter confusion; Bellarmine, Page 683.
under the vizard of Tortus, affords his Majesty no milder doom then this,
Iacobus autem (he speaks it in comparing him with Julian the Apostata) cum
catholicus non sit, neque Christianus est. A strange passage of a Christian,
upon the eminentest defender of the faith, in all Christendom. What? no
Christian, because no Roman Catholic? This is somewhat worse then to call all
Heretics; to unchristian all that dissent from them, without any ground. Yet
this is their strongest Logic and mildest Rhetoric, when they deal with us,
which good men rather pity, then are much moved at. Can. 25.
Nay, all blaspheam against the Holy Ghost, (says their Canon Law) that
wilfully oppose their Popish Canons: They are dogs, infidels, magicians, that
have professedly to do with the Devil, Orat de Heresi, and Magia, ad finem.
(says our countryman, Stapleton.) A man would hardly believe, that such
virulency should harbor in the breasts of Christians, if their Catholic
consent, in venting it, proved it not too true. They tattle of converting
Infidels abroad, but who plots the ruin of their neighbors at home? They
complain of charity mistaken; but if this be their charity, how will they
express their hatred? They busy themselves with motives, (as they term them)
to reduce such as they damn for Heretics, to the Mother Church: but what
Christianity and truth can there be in that profession, which makes and takes
Inquisitions, and Massacres, and Powder-plots, and all kind of impudent lies,
Divellish policies, gross Cosenages, deluding Hypocrisies, to persuade and
uphold it? But these things have been foretold, and therefore the less
stagger those, that build their faith upon the rock of Gods grace, and word.
There must be heresies, and there will be Heretics, who put those aspersions
upon others, which they best deserve themselves. All which will be descryed
the more fully, by a more particular survay of the circumstances, the text here
yields.

6 These circumstances are 3. First the necessity of Heresies, before
described: (...).
There must bee] Secondly their connection with schisms, or divisions,
mentioned in the former verse, There must be also Heresies] Thirdly their seat,
and nest, where they are hatched, and reside; In the midst of the church; There
must be also heresies amongst you]. Must, implies a necessity: Necessity has
no law: no law, Romans 4.15. 1. John 3.4.
no transgression, (says the Apostle:) no transgression, no sin. By this
reckoning then, it will come to this, that heresies are no faults, as
proceeding rather from Gods appointment, then man's perversity. Chrysostom.
Theodoret. Oe cumenius.
The Greek Fathers answer, that this (...)] oportet, (which we render, Must)
imports not any determination of God, what shall be, Gemina necessitas, 1.
judicij Dei, seu disponentis, 2. ex qualitate, seu dispositione eorum qui in
illa Ecclesia conveniebant. Musculus in locum.
but a foretelling what would be, that notes the event, not the efficient
cause. This necessity therefore (says Salmeron the Jesuit) is not to be taken
simply, but upon supposall of man's perverseness, and Gods permission: He might
have added, the Devils setting on, men's negligence, and infirmityes, and
natural propensity to novelty. Which causes always remaining, the effects
must needs follow, except God of his infinite grace, and power, please to stop
them; which oftentimes he does, when, and where, and in what measure he holds
it fit. Not always, nor absolutely; because his wisdom hereby takes the hynt,
to turn all to the best for his Church and Children. So that Heresies which in
regard of men, are frailtyes, and faults, in respect of God, are a trial or
punishment: shall there be evil in the city, Amos. 3.6.
and the Lord has not done it? says the Prophet.) Our Savior turns this
(...) oportet, Math. 18.7.
into (...) necesse est, Necessary it is, that offenses come, but woe unto the
man by whom the offense comes. Does it come of necessity, and yet bring a woe
with it? Our Savior says it, and we must believe it. And all this will stand
well together, For as this is to be taken for an infallible ground, that all
things come to pass by God, certain, eternal appointment, (otherwise his
infinite wisdom, providence, power, and prescience might be profanely called in
question:) So this is ever to be conceived withal, that all things come not
to pass, as proper effects, of his appointment, but some as necessary
consequences. The consideration of which difference, well understood, would
satisfy diverse scruples, and make that evident, which many hold most perplexed.
For that is not always the cause, (says Cicero) that goes before, but that
which goes before effectually. Would any man say, that the absence of the
Sun, is the cause of darkness, as its presence is the cause of light?
Darkness is but the consequence of his absence, light the effect of his
presence. In like manner, all good is the effect of Gods appointment, all ill,
a consequent. So heresies here then, are not by any act of God, but by his
sufferance they follow. They are effected necessarily by their proper causes,
the Devils malice, and man's perverseness, which God hinders not, but
orders, to sort that to good, which was meant ill. Vid. Aqu. in locum.
Encheirid.
For God is so good, (it is a known saying of S. Augustine) that by no means
he would permit any evil, except he were also so wise, and powerful, that
out of that very evil, he could pick good.

7. It but agravates therefore our faults, to cast them upon God: and to excuse
our selves by necessity, when we do that which is wicked. Wicked man!
understand this, that Gods revealed will, in his word, is the rule of thy
actions, and not his secret decrees, which thou know not, before they take
effect. David was told by Nathan the Prophet, 2 Samuel 12.14.
that his child borne in adultery should surely dye, notwithstanding he
fasteth, and prays, and lies upon the earth: for he knew these were the
revealed means, for pacifying Gods anger. And afterward instructs his
servants, that wondered at his carriage in that business, while the child was
yet alive, Verse. 22.
(says he) I fasted, and wept, for I said, who can tell whether God will be
gracious unto me, that the child may live: but now he is dead, it is past
remedy; Gods will is manifested, wherefore should I fast? It is one thing
(Beloved) to consider, how reverently we are to think, and believe of Gods
infinite attributes, and another thing, what we are to do according to his
ordinance. He by his prerogative, may do what he pleases, but we by our
duty, must perform what he commands us. When S. Peter commanded to follow
our Savior, John 21.21.
would needs know, what should become of John, who also followed, he received
from his Master this check for his curiosity, If I will that he tarry till I
come, what is that to thee, follow that me. I would to God, (says a good
interpreter) this saying were so engraven in all men's minds, Vtinam haec
sententia omnium animis insculpta esset, vt vnusquisque disceret in suam
vocationem respicere. Brentius apud Marlorat. Deuteronomy. 30.29. John 15.15.
that every one would have an eye to their own calling, and not be
impertinently prying, into things that belong not to them. Secret things belong
to the Lord our God, (it was one of the chief proviso'es of Moses law) but
those that are revealed, to us, and to our children, that we may do all the
words of the law. The servant knows not what his Lord does. It is not for us,
to run on in our wickedness, and to say, with that desperate Monk in S.
Augustine, De hono perseu. l. 2. c. 15.
whatsoever I am now, Talis ero, qualem me Deus futurum esse praesciuit: I
shall be hereafter as God foresees I shall be. He said true, (says that good
Father) but ended like a dog in his own vomit. For it is the Devils method,
to set a man on a pinnacle, Math. 4.
and bid him cast himself down headlong: Luke. 14.10.
but our Savior directs us to begin at the lowest seat, that thence we may
hear, Friend sit up higher. We must ascend then, from the survay of our own
faith, and works, to the most comfortable persuasion, of Gods immutable
decrees, and favor toward us; not begin with predestination, and end in
desperation. For would it not prove a mad kind of Logic, to make an
inference, upon premises, which can be no way known? How can we conjecture,
that we are elected or rejected, but by that We believe, and do? If then our
hearts be good, and hands clean, and our intent sincere, then God has decreed
to do us good, for our encouragement: But if otherwise, we are not yet
altogether past hope, seeing it is impossible for us to know any such
pere^ptory decree, which is past against us; but have the means left to better
us, the Judge merciful, examples many, of convertants received into favor. If
we can be therefore no other, (as the Monk said truly, but perversely
applied) then God foreses we shall be, yet we foreseeing not, what God
foreseeth, may rather resolve, that he foresees rather the good, he has
allotted for us, then the harm we have deserved. Last of all, it is a poor
excuse (Beloved) for our perverseness, or laziness, to say we have not
free will, by nature; when we have a freed will, by grace: or to complain of
an eventuall necessity, that particularly involueth not us. Necessary it is
that scandalls should come, but that they come by thee, or me it is not, to our
knowledge, necessary. So, if heresies must needs be, must we therefore be the
men to bring them in? Nay, may we not rather be the men, to stop and oppose
them, or turn them out again? This will the easier be brought about, if we
observe their connection with Schism, how the one makes way for the other. The
second circumstance, that follows heeresies necessity.

8. For there must be also Heresies] Many Interpreters of good note, will have
divisions, in the former verse, and heresies in this, to be all one. But the
words are diverse in the original, and the things may be differenced. And the
connection of the text gives ground for the difference. I hear (says our
Apostle) there be divisions amongst you, and I partly believe it; then he goes
further: For there must be also heresies, which is somewhat more, and worse
then Schism. Mervaile not therefore at Schisms in a Church, when there may
be, and must be, also heresies. It will be the comfort and credit of those
that constantly stand to the truth, and whosoever be in the fault, to keep
themselves blameless. It is a known policy of Satan, from small sparks, to
raise combustions, and under a pretense of zeal to goodness, to convey in the
greatest evils. To what a plunge were the Apostles themselves put, by the
Jews converted to Christianity, who remained notwithstanding zealous, for the
observing of Moses law? And most commonly it falls out, that they which
begin in Schism, end at length in heresies. And the reason is not obscure:
They hug, and applaud their own conceits, without reference to the unity of
the Church, the approbation, of their lawful superiors, or advise of their
brethren, perchance of more experience, and riper judgment then themselves: And
so become their own teachers; which he that relies too much upon, may happily
at length perceive, that he has gotten a fool to his Master. (...)


9 The manifold heresies which have pestered God Church, ever since our
Saviors ascension, (howsoever other rang the^ otherwise) may be reduced (as I
conceive) conveniently to these 4. heads; Pelagianisme, Manicheisme, Arianisme,
and Donatisme. The first opposes Gods word, the 2, his essence, 3, his grace,
and the 4, his Church. To all which, Schisms more or less, have ever been
the harbingers. Manicheus took vantage of the distractions, that Philosophy
bred amongst Christians. Arius would needs be an heretic, to vent his
spleen against Alexander Bishop of Alexandria. Pelagius had a conceit, that
too much dependence upon Gods grace might disparage his wit, by reason whereof
afterward he oppugned the calling of Bishops. And who knows not, how the
Donatists sprung and spread, from a paltry Schism, Heresis est schisma
inveteratum. August. Vid. Par. in locum.
about choosing of Cecilianus Bishop of Carthage? But to let pass these remote
matters, may we not observe, and come nearer home, how Schism has begotten
heresies, heresy, unchristian hatred, hatred, open war, war, depopulations,
and combustions, that whole Christendom at this day groaneth under? How
seldom shall we find a rent in the Church, that stays where it began? much
less closes together of its own accord? Our new Donatists, prove quickly
Anabaptists, or Enthusiasts. Our new Manichee's, Atheists. Our new Pelagians,
(somewhat worse then old Arians) begin to incorporate themselves with the
Socinians: These put together, what former heretics held in several, and
vent it underhand amongst us, to the staggering and scandal of the weaker. The
greater ought to be your piety, wisdom, and vigilance, (Beloved) whom God has
set at the stern, to see that the ship do not miscarry. For a little hole
neglected may drown the greatest vessels, a little spark, fire a whole City,
and a little leaven, corrupt the whole lump. S. Augustine in his 1. tract upon
John, Page 12.
has a story of a conference, by a catholic troubled with flies; whom a
Manichee thus takes the va^tage of. Who do thou think (said the Manichee)
made these flies, that so molest thee? The fly-bitten honest-man, being angry,
and waspish, would not say God made them, whatsoever he thought. Well, (says
the Manichee) if God made them not, who then? The Devil I think, (says the
other.) If so, (says the Manichee) who made the Be? he could not choose but
grant, the same workman, for the affinity of the work. From a Be then, he
brings him a Locust, from a Locust, to a Lizard, from a Lizard, to a bird, from
a bird, to a sheep, from thence, to an ox, thence, to an elephant, at last to
a man: and so persuaded a man, from such a trivial beginning, that God never
made him. Let not therefore, Beloved these matters of religion seem petty in
your eyes, which may give way at length to such dangerous consequences. It is
not for Sampson to sleep, when the Philistines be upon him, Ier. 7.4.
nor for us to cry, the temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord, our
doctrine and discipline is unquestionable, our peace and prosperity under so
Orthodoxe, and Gracious a King, unalterable, the Lord has made our Hill so
strong. For it will not be amiss, to take this caveat by the way. That the
Serpent made a shift to get into Paradise, Genesis 3.
Satan to present himself among the Sons of God, Job 1.6.
Judas, to hold a Bishoppricke amongst the rest of the Apostles. Acts 1.
Churches, Altars, and sanctuaryes may privilege some offenders, but not keep
out the offenses of factions, and heresies. For there must be heresies as well
as schisms, not only abroad among others, but (...), also among you, in the
heart of the Church. Which points to the nest, or seat of heresies, my third
circumstance.

10 There must be heresies also among you.] corruption optimi pessima, great
men, or learned men, or good men, once falling from their integrity, prove
worse most commonly then other, who had never a tincture of any such eminency.
Where shall we look for tares, but where they may do most hurt? and where may
that be, rather then in the midst of the good seed? my heritage is to me
(says God by his Prophet Jeremiah) as a freckled bird, Ier. 12.9.
the birds round about her are against her. The like complaint was taken up
before by Isaiah, Hear O heaven, Is. 1.2.
and hearken O earth, for the Lord has spoken; I have nourished and brought up
children, and they have rebelled against me. How children? if no way of the
Church? How rebels? if not swarving from their Mothers Doctrine, or
Discipline? As Antichrist therefore, that Arch-heretique, is not to be sought
(I wot not where) at Babylon, from the tribe of Dan; but taken sitting in the
temple of God, 2. These. 2.4.
exalting himself above all that is called God; so heresies are rifest there,
where the grace of God is turned into wantonness, and Gods word made stoop to
serve man's turns and turnings; Rev. 2.13, 14.
and that is in the Church. In Pergamus, commended for holding fast Christ's
name, the Doctrine of Balaam, will have countenance. V. 20.
And notwithstanding Thy atira'es faith and charity be upon the mending hand,
the woman Iezabel will play her part, to seduce Gods servants. No otherwise
here, Paul's planting and Apollo'es watring, could not so secure these
Corinthians, but that it was not only possible, or likely, but necessary, not
only that there should be divisions, but heresies, not darting at them a far
off, or near beleagring them, but (...) just in the midst of them, and
therefore it stood them upon, the more resolutely and warily to guard
themselves. 11. If the Church then be the stage, where heretics play their
parts, and where Satan has his throne; how much then does it concern her, to
have provident seers, vigilant watchmen, able Leaders, willing, obedient, and
painful Ministers, to be always in a readiness, as occasion shall be
offered? That which our Apostle foretold the elders of the Church of Ephesus,
that not only grievous wolves should invade their flock, Acts 20.29.30.
from abroad: But even of themselves should arise men speaking perverse things,
to draw away disciples after them; falls out, to be the case, of most
particular Churches, especially those, whom peace, has made proud; plenty,
wanton; liberty, luxurious; dignities, ambitious; immunities, idle; vilifying
and insulting over, their mean brethren, and commonly muzling the mouths of
those oxen, that take most pains in treading out the corn. Laodicea was much
of this vaunting humor, I am rich, Rev. 13.17.
and increased with good, and have need of nothing. But he that has an ear to
hear, may hear what the spirit says unto such churches; I know thy works,
that thou art neither cold, nor hot, I would thou were cold or hot, so then
because thou art lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot, I will spue thee out of
my mouth. God forbid (Beloved) that our lukewarmenesse in charity, and
coldness to mayntaine the truth, that so long has been a blessing to this
church and state, should any way at length give ground for an application, to
affright us with the like judgment. O God, if thou should spue us out, what
ditch, or sink would receive us? If thou should remove our candlestick,
what Egyptian darkness must needs follow? Those that are well (Beloved) can
never be too careful, to keep themselves so, or too thankful, to him that
protects them so, or too solicitous of the heresies and evils, that may alter
them from being so, or too forward, and zealous for the propagating of that
truth they are entrusted with, that must continue them so. For if neglects
should here breed rents, and rents ruins, inferiors may feel the smart, but
the heauiest doom perchance, would light on superiors, who are not only
accountable for themselves, but others. And they betray them, that sooth their
security, and take not all fair opportunity according to their places and
callings, to mind them of it. There is not such a scarsity of flatterers in
this age, that we need flatter our selves. Brethren, we see our calling,
know the depths of Satan, and the worlds wiliness. How soever therefore (...)
for (...) time-servers reile to and fro, and stagger like drunken men, and
become (...) as the toy takes them in the head, instable (as S. James taxes
them) in all their ways, the Lord will order a good man's going, and do well
unto them that are true of heart, the eater, shall yield him meat, the rock,
honey; Heresies, an opportunity to approve and manifest his goodness. Which is
the exposition of the former position, and the part J have left to conclude
with.

(...).
12. That they which are approved may be made manifest amongst you.] Such is the
tenderness of our great God to the infirmity of his children, that he will
impart so far, his secrets unto them, as may stand for their encouragement. The
multiplication of Schisms and Heresies here mentioned, might much cast them
down, if this Jtem had not been added, that they should do them rather good
then harm. This exposition therefore includes the reason, why God so deals
with his Church, that when such things fall out they may take them for no
news. Brethren (says Peter) think it not strange, concerning the fiery
trial, 1. Pet. 4.12.
as though some strange thing happened unto you, of which you never heard, and
against which ye are altogether unprovided. Abraham's faith had never been so
manifested, if he had not been enjoined to sacrifice his son. Genesis 22.
Job's constancy, had passed in obscurity, if such horrible afflictions had not
fallen upon him. And the resolution of the Martyrs in Gods cause, never shined
brighter, then in the light of those flames that burned them to cinders. For
many may be (...), that are not (...), of abilities and sound resolutions,
that appear not so to the world, and some will needs be (...), which never
were truly (...), make a show to the world of that which was never in them.
They will have their degrees (as we say in the University) before they do
their exercise. But here we see what Gods method is, first he furnishes his
with armor of proof, they shall be first (...), approved, tried, sifted,
weighed in the balance; and not found too light. And then he brings them
forth, for (...), that the world may find them so by conversing with them, and
acknowledge it. This leads on the godly to imitate them, confounds the wicked
in their proiects, glorifieth Gods wisdom, and goodness, in extracting good
out of ill, and clears many useful points of Divinity, which otherwise would
have been too much neglected. To this purpose, De Civit. Dei l. 16. c. 2. vid.
de Genes. ad lit. c. 1. De vera relig. c. 8.
S. Augustine has diverse excellent passages: Multa ad fidem catholicam
pertinentia, etc. Many things (says that judicious Father) which pertain to
the Catholic faith, are cleared far the better, through the opposition of
Heretics; cum ab Adversario mota quaestio, discendi existit occasio: when the
Adversary gives the hynt by his wrangling, to learn that which was not so
seriously thought upon before. We should never have had the mystery of the
Trinity so fully opened by the Fathers, if Arius had not so blaspheamously
stickled against it. The efficacy of Gods grace, and the perverseness of man's
will, by the fall, has been sifted far more exactly, ever since Pelagius,
and his continued adherents stirred in it. And who finds not, that by the
magnifying of humane reason, and humane and unwritten Traditions by the
Romanists, and pressing the oppressing authority of their Pope and Church as
infallible; the solid foundation of Gods word, has been the more closely by
all our reformers stuck unto? The blustering wind in the parable, made the
traveller claspe his cloak the closer about him, where the sunshine of
prosperity quickly caused him to cast it off. And I make no doubt, but as the
Donatisticall humor of the precisians, have occasioned a more exact survey in
discipline, and ceremonies: so this reviued onset of the Socinians, and their
partisans, that are all for wresting Scripture, without the least respect to
Antiquity, or modern Church determinations, will drive us to be more
punctual, in the Text, thereby to convince their blasphemies, by the same
grounds, by which they undertake to maintain them.

13. I need not dwell longer on this point, but hasten to conclude with the
time. All cannot be couched in one Sermon, and enough has been said, if it be
well practiced. For practice, practice (Beloved) is the soul of religion; and
better it were in a sort, not to have heard any thing at all, then to do
nothing at all, much more to do clean contrary, to that we hear and profess
to belecue. Blessed is this our Church above many other, in that so many
approved Champions against schism and heresies, have heretofore (and yet by
Gods great mercy, at this day are, under Gods and our Gracious Kings
protection) so eminently manifested in it. But if true use be not made of this,
and religion (which should have the first place) must attend on policy; if
consciences be fetched over, by indirect proiects, which should be evidently
convinced by the word of God, -- I am loath to utter it, but yet out it must,
(and I trust it will be taken without offense) Cursed may this Church be above
many others, for that so many approved Champions are manifested in it, and so
little true use made of it. Come on therefore (Beloved) in Gods name, in Gods
cause, let us join all together, heartily, willingly, and syncerely, to
manifest our selves approved, every man in his station, while we are upon the
stage, and leave a breed behind us, to manifest themselves approved in the
same cause, when we are gathered to our Fathers. When may a Captain better
approve himself, then in a fight? Or a Seaman, then in a storm? Or a good
Physician, then in a time of sickness? Or a resolute Soldier of Christ, but
where schisms and heresies, are most tumultuous and dangerous? Are not these
oppositions, by Gods most gracious providence, made the harvest of our glory?
How should we be approved, or manifested, if such things were not inoident to
put us to it? There must be a trial then, and there will be found (by Gods
mercy) men approved, and these shall be manifested. O let us strive therefore,
in a religious emulation, who shall be the forwardest, and most constant, in so
blessed a cause. You that are leaders ride on with your Honors, and give
example, and encouragement to those that march after you on foot. You that are
inferiors, strive to keep your ranks, and distances, and not to question your
superiors doings, where you obedience, not your censure is due. These known
schisms and heresies, that must be, should so fully take up our joint forces,
that no leisure should be left us, much less pleasure, to quarrel one
another. For if ye bite and devour one another (as our Apostle tells the
Galatians) take heed that ye be Gal. 5.15.
not consumed one of another. Gal. 5.15.
Last of all, seeing we may well conjecture, that we are fallen into those
last times, Dan. 12.4.
fore-spoken of, by the Prophet Daniel, wherein many shall run to and fro,
and knowledge shall be increased; let us take this for our comfort, from the
same Prophet: That in all these stirs, and distractions of these latter
times, those that be (...) intelligent, wise, and instructing many others,
among the Clergy, shall shine as the brightness of the Firmament. And those
that are (...) great iustitiaries, according to their places, amongst the
Laity: that turn many thereby unto righteousness, shall shine as the stars
for ever and ever. To which unspeakable happiness the Lord of his infinite
mercy bring us, through the blessed mediation, of our Lord and Savior Christ
Jesus. To whom, with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, be all Honor, Glory,
Might, and Majesty, both now and ever.

AMEN.
A PLOT FOR PREFERMENT.

A SERMON PREACHED AT THE COURT.

BY JOHN PRIDEAVX, Rector of Exceter College, His MAIESTIE's Professor in
Divinity in the University of Oxford.

OXFORD, Imprinted by LEONARD LICHFIELD Anno Salutis, 1636.

1. PET. 5.6. Humble your selves therefore under the mighty hand of God, that
he may exalt you in due time.


THERE is not a point more studied in these our days, then to get preferment:
and none there are that put in so stiffly herein, for a supremacy, as those that
claim it by St Peter's Title. The Consideration whereof, has directed me to
this parcel of Scripture (Beloved) wherein the question is stated by him, who
is made the chief occasion of the difference: and a plain course laid down,
for honestmen to take; that may save them great travel, more trouble, heavy
expenses, Ps. 119.51.
and yet nevertheless be still effectual. The proud have had me (says
David) exceedingly in derision, yet have I not shrinked from thy law. And the
same may slight the doctrine I shall now propose; but me it suffices, that I
have S. Peter to build upon. Who having delivered his mind, concerning the
excellency of faith (which those scattered strangers, to whom he wrote had
embraced) Cap. 1. and urged next, the sanctity of conversation, which
thereupon, on their part, was constantly to be performed, 1. In general, to
superiors, equals, inferiors, by doing, suffering: Secondly, in special, to
domestics, Allies, strangers, Chap. 3. and 4. In this fifth Chapter (from
whence my Text is taken) he ascends to Overseers and guides of others, and
that not without great need. For if ought amongst them be amiss, both Church,
and Commonwealth, and families quickly rue it: Now 3 disorders (which ever
since have so much pestered the Church) were creeping in, and growing upon it,
in those harmless times; Idleness in their Callings, filthy lucre in their
dealings, and Ambition in all their proiects, to outstrip and domineere over
their Brethren: Those our Apostle, not maliciously lasheth at, or opens
unadvisedly, to exasperate rather then to rectify: (as the fashion is of diverse
Malcontents in these our days, who must have all as they will, or else all is
out of frame) but so launceth that he may heal; so opens, that he may bind
up again, and to the several sores discovered, applies an agreeing remedy.
Idleness therefore must be shaken off, by a willing and ready mind, not to
famish but feed the flock, which is not so much theirs as Gods; ver. 2. filthy
lucre must not be thought upon, when a Crown of Glory is proposed, a Crown
that fades not, to be received from the chiefest shepherd, verse. 4. And what
a cooling card next follows, against the Lording over Gods inheritance? This
(...), mentioned ver. 3. younger (says he) submit your selves, unto your
elders. All of you be subject one to another, ver. 5. Submit, be subject. No
apparel so befits an honest, hearty Christian, as to be clothed with
humility. If he be proud, he has God for his enemy. If humble, Gods grace for
his erection, and protection. Now because this swelling of Ambition, is fed
with such a confluxe of no cious humors, that one dressing would scarce serve;
and it stood the Apostle upon, not to leave the cure imperfect; He adds the
words of my Text, as a plaster to do the deed; seeing that, domineering is
not for your profession, Mutual subjection is your truest badge, Humility,
your best clothing, God himself the opposer of the proud, and the most
gracious protector of those that are Humble. Humble your selves therefore,
under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due time.]

2. Which according to the express words, and employed consequences, may thus
be paraphrased. You reckon your selves to be Elders, and I hope you take me
for no less. We witness what Christ has suffered, and believe what glory he
has provided for us. But suppose you that his flock is committed unto us,
thereby to feed our selves, and let that pine through want? to pretend an
oversight, and intend nothing less? Is this the example we show? the Crown
we aim at? The Humility we should be clothed with? No certainly, (my
Brethren) Christ has suffered for us, and the servant is not greater then his
master. The inheritance is his, and his stewards must not convert it to their
private pomp and pleasure. Words and Outsides may not satisfy, where real
performance is required. If you have an aim at the highest preferment, the way
to attain it, is by faithfulness in a little. No entrance to his Temple of
honor, but by the Gate of Humility. Humble your selves therefore] or he will
make you stoop, under his mighty hand,] or it shall pluck you down: And
herein you shall not be your own factors, but he will exalt you;] not when or
where you affect, but as he shall think fit, in due time.] And this I take in
general to be, the meaning of this exhortation. The sum is, A never failing
Plot, for the surest attaining, of the best preferment.

Wherein we meet with

1. A Rule to be observed, by way of Precept. Humble your selves under the
mighty hand of God. 2. The success, depending upon an implied promise, That
he may exalt you in due time.
The Rule includes an Action limited to its right obiest, Humble your selves,
But to whom? under the mighty hand of God. The success, is not doubtful, but
restrained to a certainty, He shall exalt you: but when? in due time. It were
small mastery upon so good a ground, to run division, but my aim is
playnenesse, which (I take) will be best apprehended in these 4 particulars,
The 1. Suitors duty, or endeavor, Humble your selves. 2. Patrones ability,
under the mighty hand of God. 3. Business success: that he may exalt you. 4.
Fitness of opportunity: In due time.
Many have the hap, to apply themselves to such, as little respect them, or are
not of ability to do them good: some are earnest and able, but occasion
fayles, or one rub or other, frustrates the endeavor. A third sort speed at
length, and have that they look for; but it comes so unseasonably, that it
scarce quits cost. Now all these things here happily concur, beyond
expectation, to the preventing of all exceptions. No straining beyond thy
power, but restraining thy self by Humility. No striving to make friends, and
please many, where the hand of God will exalt. No importunity needful that
others should not prevent thee, where he sets down the time. All for easier
recalling may be thus connected. As thou show thy self humble, so God will
approve himself mighty, in effecting that for others, which surpasses thy
policy; though not (perchance) when thou will, who art ignorant what is best
for thee, yet in such due sort, and time, as shall do thee most good. Of these
in their order, as the time, and your patience shall give leave. And first of
the first which is the suitors task or Endeavor, in these words,

3. Humble your selves therefore. (...).]
The particle [Therefore] includes an Inference upon somewhat that went
before, which is thus deduced. God is no way to be resisted, but suedvnto for
grace. This is done by humility. Humble your selves therefore. As charity makes
the breadth, patience the length, faith the height of our spiritual building:
So Humility must be vnderlaid all these (says Hugo) as the surest foundation,
De claustris Animae. l. 3.
whence we may infer, that, There is no admission to Gods favor without
humble submission. The word (...) in the original intimates no less, which is
not so rightly rendered passiuely, by the vulgar, Be ye humble, as well
corrected by others, and our latter Translation, actiuely, Humble your selves.
Any coaction here, marres the Action, which must be altogether voluntary.
Whereupon Humility is defined by the Schools to be, A voluntary deiection of a
man's self upon a view of his own unworthiness, and Gods infinite bounty, and
power. Whence the Canonists rightly distinguish, between Humiles, and
Humiliatos. Those that are truly humble, and those whose stubborn stomachs
are violently plucked down. The Hebrews for (...) in the Text, Ps. 9.13. Ps.
9.13.
which barely signifies poor, and needy, read (...) in the margin (according
to the rule of their Keri and Cethib) which not only points out those who are
dejected, and in misery, but such as are gentle, modest, and truly mortified:
Those will the Lord guide in judgment, Ps. 25.
and learn his way. To such poor in spirit, and meek in heart, our Savior
in his list of Beatitudes, assures both heaven and earth, Mat. 5.
Math. 5. And if both Heaven and Earth be taken up for the Humble, (says
Cassiodore) in what place (think you) shall the proud be billetted? Further
delating in a Common place so beaten, can neither be grateful, nor profitable.
For who has not observed, that, of the wise man, How Humility vshers honor?
Prove. 15.33. Prove. 17.12.
Prove. 15. as pride goes before destruction. Prove. 17. The Publican therefore
speeds, sub forma pauper is, when the vaunting Pharisee, Luke 18.
was turned off with a great deal less satisfaction. It was this Lowliness
that exalted the Blessed Virgin, Luke 2.
not commended only, but commanded to the Disciples, when they strove for
superiority. Mat. 20.
The practice of our Savior may well close vpall. Luke 22.
Ye call me master (says he) and ye say well for so I am; If I then your
Lord, and Master, have washed your feet, ye also ought to wash one another
feet, for, I have given you an example, that you should do as I have done to
you. Ioh. 13.13.

4. This Doctrine as it is, and has been ever slighted by diverse Politicians
in all ages: So none (I think) have so contemptuously crossed it, as the
pretended successors of S. Peter, and their adherents. What should I speak of
Dominus Deus Noster Papa, 7744 times and a half, greater then the Emperor?
Ext. Ioh. 22. Tit. 14. c. 4. Decret. 1.33. de Maiorit. et obedient. cap.
Solitae.
whose will must stand for reason, who has coeleste arbitrium, whereby he may
change the nature of things, dispense against the Apostle, against the old
Testament, supra ius, above the law and the like. None of which blasphemous
Elogies, have mer, as yet with any Index expurgatorius in the Cannon Law, to
purge them (as that which is disliked in other books) but pass as current, in
Gregory the thirteenth's late Edition, as in former fogs of superstition. I may
fit you with one passage only, instead of many, that comes nearer home unto us.
When our. King Henry the second, sent to Pope Alexander the third, to have the
matter taken up, between him and Thomas Becket, by two Legate Cardinals of the
Popes appointment; What answer do you think, the King received from this
successor of Humbles S. Peter? surely one that was very Canonical; Esaias 42.
I am the Lord (says he) and my glory will I not give to another. But these
perchance were the Escapes of those silly times, which are now amended in this
critical succession of learning. It should be so (Beloved) but we find these
Leopards so far from changing their spots, that (for ought I see) their
modern Sycophants strive to out-vye their Ancestors. It is not so long since,
that Mosconius Vicar general of Bononia, set forth two books, de Maiestate
Militantis Ecclesiae. Wherein (to let pass other Elegancies) he tells us in
good-sadnesse, that Papa dicitur quasi Papae admirantis, eo quodillius
dignitas, and potestas omnibus est admirabilis; who is also termed Pontifex,
quasi faciens pontem, L. 1. c. 1. Ib. p. 23.
because he is the only Bridgmaker by which we must pass to happiness.
Celsus Mancinus, in his third book de iuribus principum, denies him to be man,
or heaven, or any good besides, but terms him, quid praestantius, some what
more excellent then either of these. Nay when the Cardinal Baronius, shall
apply that saying of the Psalmist, He shall reign from sea to sea (which all
interpret of the Messiah) as a presage of Hildebrands advancement to the
Popedom; Praef. ad cont. 3.
And Cardinal Bellarmine, Cap. 28.16.
fetched in the like prophecy of Isai. Behold I lay in Sion for a foundation, a
stone, a tried stone, a precious corner stone, a sure foundation, to be meant
of the Popes holiness, together with our Savior; And the late Pope Paul the
fifth, shall take no exceptions, to such Inscriptions; Paulo quinto, Vicedeo
Christianae Reipub. Monarchae invictissimo, and Pontificiae omnipotentiae
conservatori acerrimo: But triumph in such titles, as befitting the servant of
servants, and the humility of S. Peter's successor. This is that, which makes
the world justly think, that these men will never be brought to any reasonable
terms, but the Prophecy will still take place upon them: Curavimus Babylona
and nonest sanata, Ier. 51.9:
say what we will, do we what we can, Charity will be ever mistaken.

5. For go but a little further, in view of their Practice, and we shall alw
aies find, this Leopard keep his spots. These men that can assume to
themselves, and digest such intolerable Titles of pride, have not the
Ingenuity, to afford the least good word to any that dissent from them, having
never so well deserved. What a pudder do they now keep in their Indices
Expurgatorii: That our King Edward the sixth must not pass for a towardly wit,
because he was under standingly averse from their palpable superstitions.
Vlrick Hutten, must not be termed a valiant Knight, by reason of his
acquaintance with Martin Luther. Nay a whole Epistle of John Drusius must be
wiped away, for no other reason, (that I can find) but that he gives in it,
to out learned King James, his deserved commendation. I need not trouble you
with particulars, when the rule of Azorius the Jesuit runs this in general;
Moral. l. 8. c. 16.
That the names of reformed writers, must nor at all be mentioned, except it be
to their disgrace. So well these men fit themselves, to S. Peter's humility.
Notwithstanding as the Popes, and his grandies, are of too high a pitch, to
stoop so low; yet there are Mendicants, and Malcontents of the same litter,
who either our of superstitious weakness, or dogged sullenness, or an
ambitious kind of hypocrisy, or out of a frantic conceit, cast themselves
as far in the dirt on the other extreme. But our Apostle makes not for such
sordid baseness, or affected austerity: when here he would have his followers,
to be truly humble. Pride may as well lurk under course rags, (as S.
Augustine observes) as set it self forth in a gorgeous attire. And therefore
S. Hierome wishes Eustochium according to her calling and place, to keep the
mean. Our adversaries to make the simple beleene that they are extraordinarily
Humble, Relat. Diego. Tornez. edit. Venet. 1604.
will tell us stories of Barcena the Jesuit, who in humility rose from his
Chair, to resign it to the Devil, that appeared unto him, professing (in
more them a strong complement) that he deserved it better then himself. And of
his fellow Throgmorton our countryman, who was come to that perfection of
humble submission, that he would not (forsooth) at his last gasp depart this
life, and go to God, without leave first solemnly asked, and obtained of his
superior: D. Everard.
with the like prodigious instances, of the Franciscans fopperies, Sedulius
has stuffed up a book in folio. Thus these Pharisaciall Antiques (who are
wiser in their generation, then the children of light) can play on both hands,
and compass sea and land to hold that they have, and hook in new credulous
proselytes. They have colors for all complexions, and fashions to fit all
fancies; never was there (I think) a conformity in the world, patched together
of such difformity, to make (as they would have it) one Ecclesiastical
Monarchy. What Church has been (at the first settling) more famous, then that,
for goodness, and Integrity? And in what have we read in succeeding age, of the
like abominations? Who more proud then some of their Popes and Cardinals? and
who more stupidly deboisht, then some of their Friars and Anachorites? Few have
generally more learning then the Jesuits, and commonly few more Ignorance then
their common Mass Priests. Their Clergy and Monks must not marry to avoid
pollution, yet concubines, and somewhat worse, shall find Advocates to plead
for them, and Indulgences to allow them. A Nunnery, and a stews, the silent
Carthusian, with the Capuchine, an frollick, Iacobine, the Neat Jesuit, and the
nasty Franciscan shall find a joint entertainment, in the large lap of
Mother Church; The Soldier shall have his sword, the Melancholy, his Cell, the
Superstitious, his Beads and bayre cloth; the dissolute, his pardon, and
absolutions; the incestuous, his dispensation, the Scholar, his Library; and
the Ambitious, his preferment. Every humor shall be pleased, to give all
content, that all may speak for them. So that I may well conclude as the
Orator did of Catiline: Cic. pro Coelio.
There had never been that advantage gotten upon the Commonwealth of Rome, as
it then stood, Nisi tot vitiorum, tanta immunitas, quibusdam facilitatis and
patientiae radicibus niteretur. And so it was impossible that the Pride,
incroaching, and Tyranny of the Pope, and his Accomplices, should have put the
Church of God to such a plunge, but that they masked all their villainies with a
varnish of devotion, and humility.

6 But this is not that humility, which the Apostle makes the groundworke for
true exaltation. The Prophet David advanced from a sheephooke to a scepter,
hits right upon it. Lord I am not high minded, Psalm. 131.
I have no proud looks, I do not exercise my self in great matters, which
are too high for me, but I refrain my soul, aad keep it low, as a child that
is weaned from his mother, yea my soul is even as a weaned child. Such a child
our Savior set in the midst of his disciples, Math. 18.
that contended for superiority, and lesson'd them upon it, Mat. 18. Verily I
say unto you, except ye be converted, and become as little children, ye shall
not enter into the kingdom of heaven. S. Augustine discussing the point why
simple people in primitive times, were more forward to receive Christianity,
then the learned Philosophers, renders this for the apparent reason; Quia
Christus humilis, Illi autem superbi: Because Christ was humble, and meek, but
they supercilious and presumptuous. This, (...) (as S. Basil terms it) haughty
and contemptuous carriage in Augustine the Monk, Epist. 10.
when he came to treat with our playner British Bishops, Bed. Eccles. Hist. l.
2. c. 2.
breaks off all Christian communication between them, to the great
distraction, and almost destruction of the poor Church in this I Will. And I pray
God the like causeless strangeness, and stateliness, of some, so different
from Apostolical humility, to their meaner and weaker brethren, have not made
more Schismatiques, and (as we call them) Puritans, then all the vantages that
could be evertaken, against against the sacred order, of our Reverend Bishops,
or any part of our Church Discipline, or ceremonies. Tell ye the daughter of
Sion, Behold thy King comes unto thee meek, and sitting upon an Ass; Zach.
9.9.
but now most of this meek Kings followers, will stomach to be so meanly
mounted. Pride makes us ashamed of our humble Masters lowliness: we like well
of the promised Crown, but shun the burden and yoke that leads unto it.
Enter we would willingly into the heavenly mansions; but had loath strive, and
stoop to contract our selves, and bow, at the straight gate. But alas
(Beloved) what find we in our selves, to make us proud, or observe in others,
that we should much envy, or despise them? Our root taynted, our birth
lamentable, all the days of our Pilgrimage, few and evil, not assured so much
of any thing, as of infinite vncertaintyes. Those that have most, may quickly
part with it; and those that know most, understand not their own ignorance, we
forget that which is past, stagger, at the present, and ambiguously expect that
which is to come. What a presumption therefore is it to talk of merits,
supererrogation, natural abilityes, to do all, or more then is required, or
the like? No (Beloved) our approches to Gods tribunal, must be by humble
Petition, with fear and trembling, in regard of our own unworthiness.
Abraham has taught the way: Genesis 18.
Behold now I have taken upon me to speak unto the Lord, which am but dust and
ashes. Come let us worship and fall down, and kneel before the Lord our
maker. Jacob treads the same path: O God of my father Abraham, and God of my
father Isaac, I am not worthy of all thy mercyes, and all the truth, Genesis 32.
which thou have shown unto thy servant; Deuteronomy. 26.
Moses has a form for it: A Syrian ready to perish, was my father and he went
down into Egypt, and soiourning there, with a few, there was evil entreated,
thence, was with a mighty hand delivered; now brings unto thee, O Lord, the
first fruits, 2 Samuel 15.
which thou have given me. David most Pathetically practiced it, in his flight
from Absolon: If I shall find favor in the eyes of the Lord, thus and thus
will he do? as it there follows. But if he say thus, I have no delight in
David; behold here I am, fiat voluntas tua, let him do to me, as it seems
good unto him. Such bruised reeds, such smoking flax, such broken and
contrite hearts; Humbling, and prostrating, and begging, and by such means
offering violence to the kingdom of Heaven, the bowels of the tender
compassion of the most highest, will not break, quench, or despise; But show
his strength in their weakness, by extending his mighty hand, which assures
the Patrones ability, in the next place to be considered.

7 Humble your selves therefore under the mighty hand of God. (...).
] As it abateth our presumption, to find our selves underlings: so the mighty
hand of God must needs make us confident. This Might appears, in a twofold
manner, first in plucking down those, who proudly exalt themselves; and next
in exalting the humble, against all oppositions. Whence God is said by some to
have two hands, the one to depresse, the other to lift up. Pharaoh, and
Nebuchadnezar felt the first, and the Church distressed by them, the second.
The Bush may be on fire, but consumes not, the heat of the furnace seven
fold augmented, yet sindgeth not the upper garments, of the children cast into
it, whom the mighty hand of God protecteth. Whence we may safely gather, that,
God has enough in store, to guard, and supply all suitors to their full
content. To make this good unto us, (who are too much bent by nature, to dote
upon our own plots, and to distrust any success we apprehend no evidence for,
in the second causes) the Attribute of Father Almighty, is set in the forefront
of our Creed: as the primo creditum, the first principle, to be taught, and
learned in religion. To assure us at the first entrance, that as God is our
Father, and therefore willing: so he is also Almighty, and therefore able, to
give us what we want, and to augment, what he has given us, and to furnish
us further, with whatsoever he shall see convenient for us. Surely as an
earthly Prince will hardly afford him a kindness, that shall question his
ability, or authority: so much less will the king of kings, be bountiful to
those, that make a doublt of the All Sufficiency of his mighty hand. This
appeared, by his expostulation with Moses, distrusting how more then 600000
should be provided for with flesh in the wilderness, Number. 11.
Is the Lords hand waxed short? Thou shall see now whether my word shall come
to pass: Reinforced in Isaias: Chap. 5.
Is my hand shortened at all, that it cannot redeem? or have I no power to
deliver? Math. 9.
whence our Savior indents with the blind men, before he cure them. Believe
that I am able to do this? There needs no further proofs to justify a truth
so confessed: Unthankful men may sacrifice to their own nets: Job. 22.
proud men may set their nests in the tops of Cedars, and pile up mountain
upon mountain with Giants, to beleiger heaven. But I will stretch out my hand
upon thee (says God) and roll thee down from the rocks. Ib. 51.
The right hand of the Lord will have the pre-eminence, the right hand of the
Lord, brings mighty things to pass. Psalm. 118.
At his stroke the heads of Dragons and Leviathans fly in pieces, and what
can ward the blow, when this mighty hand is whirled about to take vengeance.
This doctrine (Beloved) as it is best for direction, to be sure to speed: so
it ministers the like comfort to encounter any cross, that may thwart us. S.
James so joins in one verse, this submission to Gods mighty hand, with our
resisting the Devil: as though the failing in the first, were the falling into
rebellion by the second. Whereupon he calls upon the double minded sinners, to
cleanse their hands, and purifye their hearts, and so humble themselves in Gods
sight, that not only doing, but speaking ill, of another, should be utterly
bannished, from amongst Christians.

8 This we acknowledge to be true, and like the Apes in the fable, arrayed in
man's apparel, can dance our measures at times, very demurely: but the least
opportunity of commodity, or competition for preferment (as nuts cast in among
them) sets us all a scrabling. Ioab (for ought we find) loved his cosen Amasa
well enough: before he had the place of Captain of the host, which he
conceived belonged to himself, but afterward, he never rested, till he
treacherously laid him at his feet. So far is the mighty hand of God
forgotten, in matters of revenge, and in emulation; we talk of Gods mighty
hand, but walk, as the world leads us. Four faults in this behalf,
especially have been ever here declaimed against, but yet find continual
entertaynment; and sometimes by those especially, who would seem most to
oppose them. Flattery and Bribery, to make our own markets, calumniating, and
supplanting, to mar other men's; The first, most commonly, passes smoothly
under the veil of discreet observance. The second is either excused by
equivocating, or commended, as a provident, or civil kind of thankfulness.
The third, is borne out, under pretense of zeal to the common cause, and the
last, is made as it were an exercise pro forma, to pass from one degree to an
other. Thus when Gods mighty hand should lead us, and his rod, and staff
direct us, we slip (as much as in us lies) from between his fingers. Every
disciple for his vantage, will outrunne Peter, and rather then fail, offer
with Simon Magus, or drive the bargayne with Judas, whatsoever curse, or
Acheldama may be purchased by it. But when all our plottings; and shiftings,
and shows, and shouldrngs, are out of breath, this mighty hand of God will
always prevayle, to the shame of those that oppose it. If it appear not in
the beginning, but let men run along, it will be manifest in the end, to the
astonishment of all contemners. O that flesh and blood therefore, would seek
no further, but rest contented to be wholly guided by this mighty hand of God!
That we would bend our wits, and use all manner of effectual policyes, to be
near, and dear unto this patron: who has every moment enough in store, to
furnish us, and will fit us better, then our own hearts can imagine. Joseph,
by this policy only, came to be a Prince in Egypt: Samuel, to be a Judge:
David, a King: Hester a Queen. In such cases the man of God told old Eli,
whereto he should trust: Those that honor me (says God) I will honor; and
those that despise me, 1 Samuel 2.
howsoever in the eye of the world they flourish for a season, in the end shall
be as the grass on the house top, Psalm. 129.
whereof the mower fills not his hand, nor the passenger wishes them good
luck. Now if experience tell us, that these are tried cases, and our
conscience tell us that these things are true, and that other courses are but
vagrant, and that here lies the certayntie; what unadvisedness will it then
prove in us (Beloved) to shun, or oversee so direct and straight a path, to
involue, and puzzle our selves, in endless and inextricable Labyrinths. Where
our unguided, and ambitious designs, draw on unnecessary troubles, troubles
find crosses, Crosses, Cares, Cares, and disco^tentme^ts leave us to untimely
diseases or unwelcome old age, that to a disquieted conscience, that, to death,
that, to an unavoidable, reckoning. And then perchance this hand of God will be
as terrible to strike, as now it is mighty, to do us good.

9 Last of all, this doctrine may season us with patience, to take all in good
part, that may befall our selves, and not to murmr, or repine at any
advancement of others, but settle at length upon the Apostles moderation, that
in what estate soever we are, therewith to be content. It was a cutting
message, that Samuel brought his Master Eli, 1 Samuel 3.
that his ruin should not be prevented, nor his house purged, by sacrifice or
offerings for ever. But what was the humble man's answer? It is the Lord, let
him do whatsoever seems good unto him. Whatsoever his mighty hand disposes,
we must be content. Joseph had the vantage to be quits with his brethren,
that sold him, after his fathers death, and they shrewdly feared it, but
considering the mighty hand of God had turned their malice, to his advancement,
what an admirable resolution have we from him, fit to be thought upon of all
great ones? when ye thought evil against me, God meant it good: Genesis 50.
Now therefore fear ye not, I will be so far from taking revenge that I
will nourish you, and your little ones; and he comforted the^ and spoke kindly
unto them. Small amends had Job received, and little ease it would have been
to his vexed heart, by railing at the Sabeans, and the Chaldeans, that bereft
him of his Asses, Camells and Oxen, Job. 1.
or storming against the winds, that tumbled his house upon his children.
Wherefore rowsing himself higher in the consideration of Gods providence, and
that the mighty hand of God had the managing of all these matters: how
patiently does he sit down under the Crosses crushing him. The Lord gave, Ib.
5.
and the Lord has taken away, blessed be the name of the Lord. How easily
might king David have righted himself upon railing Shimei? It was but to have
given the word, and Abishai would have had off the head, of that dead dog, as
he termed him. But the humbled King, feeling Gods mighty hand upon himself,
for his passed sins, and assuring himself, that that at length would guide al
to the best; Let him alone (says he) and let him curse, for the Lord has
bidden him: It may be that the Lord will requite good, for his cursing this
day. For want of this devout recourse to Gods mighty hand, stern Tertullian,
upon some hard measure, offered him by the Roman Clergy, took part with the
Montanists. Aerius (as Epiphanius relates) failing to get a Bishoppricke
opposed that sacred calling: So one Julian a witty man (against whom S.
Augustine wrote) upon the like occasion, became an Advocate for the Pelagians.
And how many of our own knowledge, upon the like discontent, have made
shipwreck of a good conscience, and holding themselves undervalued at home, to
work a poor reveng, have turned to the adversary. Whereas if they had but the
grace, to have lighted upon this, or the like meditation. It is the mighty hand
of God, that disposes all these businesses, for ends best known to himself,
though not apparent to us; In prosperity, they would have been more thankful,
in adversity, more patient, for the present, more cheerful, for the future,
more secure, and never have fretted themselves, into a scandalous Apostasy,
upon the crossing mutability of second causes; But have resolved in this very
case with good King David, It is good for me (let the world go how it will) to
stick fast by God, and to put my trust in the Lord God, and to fit my self
wholly, Psalm. 73.
by my faithful, and constant services to him, that he may exalt me. Which
leads to the success of the business, and the 3. part of my division, that
succeedes in order to entertain your attentions.

10. That he may exalt you.] (...)
As the course of our Savior is described Philip. 2. He humbled himself, and
thereupon God exalted him: The same may be the passage to all preferment, which
the mighty hand of God conferreth. A (...) goes before, before a (...) follow;
an under, before an exaltation, as you see in my text. Our Savior gave the
example, and the servant is not greater then his Master; Descendit vt ascendat,
he stoopes to drink of the brook in the way, Psalm. 110.
before God lift up his head. Here we find then, no merit to challenge, or
plotting, to compass, or thrusting, to prevent, or iustling, to put by others,
or bargayning, to make friends, or any other Angleing of the like nature; But
the exalter, God, who does it freely, the exalted, man, who professes his own
unworthiness. And mark how the text runs, it is not, he will, or he shall,
exalt thee, as though by a compact he were tide thereunto, and could by no
means go from it; But humble thou thy self under his mighty hand, that he
may exalt thee: This must be thy qualification, before thou may expect his
exaltation, and then it comes not as due, but at pleasure; not by thy ambitious
soliciting, but his free, and wise disposing. Whence an Inference may be made:
That, exaltation in this world, is not to be purposely sought for, but
thankefully to be accepted, as it freely comes from the most mighty hand of
God. I say in this world; first, to difference this exaltation here, from the
state of glorification hereafter: which if al fail here, may make more then
amends hereafter. For in Gods presence is the fullness of joy, and at his right
hand is pleasure for evermore. And secondly, from Adoption, or spiritual son
ship, which having nothing, possesses all things, and is a treasure beyond the
purchase of all earthly riches. Our Savior himself lays down this
difference, Math. 6. First seek the kingdom of God, and the righteousness
thereof, and all these things shall be added unto you. Here we have plainly
distinguished Quaerenda from Addenda, (...) from (...), Things to be sought,
and Additions that came without seeking: And therefore are to be received only
with thankfulness, when they are put upon us. Gods Kingdom and righteousness
are only worth our seeking, and therefore the search of the^ is only enjoined.
Worldly advancements with their Appurtenances (as honor and wealth, were to
Solomon's wisdom) come with an etc. in the Additions, as cast into the
bargain, not as purchases of our own, but of Gods dedi gift. In this case,
David strangely advanced to a scepter, by Gods providence, may be a sure
Counselor; Promotion comes (says he) neither from the East, nor from the
West, nor from the South; for why? The Lord is King, Psalm. 75.
he puts down one, and sets up another. What then? may it then be
expected from the North? for that seems in the text not to be excepted. The
Original will here help us, (which the note in our English translation, in
the Margin, acknowledges (...) says the Greek, neque a desertis montibus,
as the vulgar, from the desert mountains, which lying on both sides of Canaan
include both North and South, as the Chalday Paraphrase expounds it: and
therefore from no quarter of this world a latere; but perpendioularly, as it
were from God, it is to be only hoped for. The use of this he forgot not at
the beginning of the 123. Psalm. Unto thee do I lift up my eyes, O thou that
dwell in the heavens. As the eyes of servants look unto the hand of their
Masters, and as the eyes of a maiden unto the hand of her Mistress: so our
eyes wayt upon the Lord our God, until he have mercy upon us. To such a song
of degrees, we should tune all our ambitious thoughts, if we would go the
right way to work, that should truly exalt us.

11 But Alas (Beloved) we may pipe long enough, before any will dance to this
tune, which so long time has been out of request. It was the Apostles precept
to the stately Romans; in giving honor to prefer one before another, Romans
12.
which is interpreted by that to the Philippians; Let nothing be done through
strife or vain glory, Philip. 2.
but in lowliness of mind, let each esteem others better then themselves.
But this rule is so far out of practice, that if Jacob get the blessing, Esau
will vow to kill him: If Joseph be favored of Jacob, his own brethren will
conspire to undo him: If Daniel rise to preferment by his extraordinary
eminent parts and goodness, some Courteours will have suggestions to intrappe
him, and bring him into the Lions den. In the mean while, what answer may we
frame to our Saviors interrogation, Ioh. 5.44. How can ye believe, which
receive honor one of another, and seek not the honor that comes from God
only? that love the praise of men, more then the praise of God. And what
exception have we to this general rule of S. James: Iam. 4.
whosoever will be a friend of the world, is the enemy of God? And will a
great man think you favor that perfidious servant, that relyes upon another,
especially that is his enemy? The Hebrews observe a pretty complement between
Esau, and Jacob, at their meeting, Genesis 33. Jacob presents his brother with
certain gifts, to find grace in his sight, verse 8. Esau puts them off with
this (...) I have abundance my brother, and therefore keep that thou have,
unto thy self. Verse. 9. But Jacob urges him unto it with this reply: Take I
pray thee my blessing for (...) I have enough. Upon this passage, A man may
have abundance (says R. Bechai) (as Esau professes) and yet not be
contented, but he that with Jacob thinks he has enough, is the man fittest,
for this exaltation, we speak of. O how well then would it become us, not to
prevent Gods bounty, by our forwardness: that when he comes to exalt us, he
may not find us to be sped to his disliking. In this case what can be more
punctual then that our Apostle adds next my text? Cast your care upon God,
for he cares for you. He knows what thou need, and is able to supply it.
He considers what is convenient, and his wisdom will dispose of it
accordingly: Say thou wait, and want, in the mean season, what art thou, that
should prescribe any thing to such a Lord, and Master? He that was before
all times, in time, will find out the due time, to do thee right, which thy
ignorance and folly cannot attain unto. The last circumstance of my text, that
includes the times opportunity: of which very briefly that I may conclude in
due time.

12 That he may exalt you in due time. Due time. (...).
] To every thing there is a season (says the wise man) and a time to every
purpose under heaven. The word here in my text, is (...) not (...), Eccles. 3.1.
that, signifies but the bare during of a thing, for a certain space: this, a
pict out season, or opportunity for the doing, or omitting ought, which
otherwise would be either too soon or too late. The vulgar reads it in the
time of visitation; And two Greek coppyes, Beza met with, had (...). But he
thinks those words were transferred from the 12. verse of the 2. chap. going
before. The matter is not great, and the reading Canonical either way; Ours
seems most warrantable, according with the Syriac, and Arabique; and Lorinus
the Jesuit, confesses the word, (...), to be an addition of their vulgar.
The Doctrine that hence arises is, that, It is not for us to appoint a time,
when God shall exalt us and dispatch us: but humbly to wait for the due time,
he shall set down. O tarry thou the Lords leisure (says David) be strong,
Psalm. 27.
and he shall comfort thy heart, and put thou thy trust in the Lord. When
Ozias the high Priest promised the Inhabitants of Bethulia, that if releife
came not within five days, he would yield to Holofernes, Judith 7.30.
as they demanded; Judith takes him up sharply for it: why tempt ye God, or
blind his counsels? If he will not help us, Cap. 8. In Alcibiade.
within these five days, he has power to defend us, when he will. Nay, Plato
(because we know not what is best for our selves) would have us not only ask
what is good of God, but leave it wholly to his divine wisdom, when and how it
should be brought about. So when the disciples would needs know of our
Savior, Math. 24.
when the end of the world should be, and the restoring again of the kingdom
unto Israel; his answer was, take heed, that no man deceive you; And, it is
not for you to know the times and seasons: So when the Mother of Zebedee's
children, Math. 20.20.
would have present preferment for them; ye know not what ye ask ( says our
Savior) but such things must pass not as men will, but then and in that
manner, and to them only, as the heavenly father has ordained.

13. There needs no further proof in a point so acknowledged: Practice will be
here the life of precepts, and Patience the best solicitour, for the attaining
of Gods promises. That which most usually sets all out of order, is the
preposterous blending of Gods precepts, and promises, and the doing of that in
the one, which belongs to the other. Precepts should be presently put in
practice, and constantly ever continued; but that we defer, neglect, and will
take Diem ad deliberandum: Promises should be patiently waited for, but of
these we would have present possession; The time must be always Due, if they
make for our Exaltation. Unreasonable and unseasonable Intruders, as we are;
God tarrieth and expects our amendment, that we may be fit: And must we
think the shortest delay too long, when he gives not that, we for our sins
deserve not: He deferres in mercy to strike; and must we prick down, the
due time, when he shall exalt us? This is more then bold begging, no less then
impudent and saucy presumption: I cannot light on a term, sufficient to
express it, and therefore leave it is vnshapennesse to your pious and serious
consideration: You see (Beloved) that of the four things belonging to our true
exaltation, the first only is required of us; Humble thou thy self, as thou
ought, and as it is thy duty: The three other, will be performed on Gods
part: His mighty hand will take thee into his protection, He will exalt thee,
He will pick out the due time for it, and take order for all the rest, to thy
greatest good. Let us rest therefore faithfully in him, and that will bring us
at length, to the highest preferment, his eternal rest, through his dear
son, the highest Master of Requests: To whom, with the Father, and the Holy
Ghost, be all Honor and Glory both now and ever.

AMEN.
THE PATRONAGE OF ANGELS.

A SERMON PREACHED AT THE COURT.

BY JOHN PRIDEAVX, Rector of Exceter College, His MAIESTIE'S Professor in
Divinity in the University of OXFORD.

OXFORD, Imprinted by LEONARD LICHFIELD Anno Salutis, 1636.

MATTHEW. 18.10. Take heed that ye despise not one of these little ones, for I
say unto you, that in heaven their Angels do always behold the face of my
Father which is in heaven.


THERE are no words, or works of our Savior Christ, (says S. Hierome) but
the causes of them are to be religiously sought out. Of these I have read unto
you, diverse reasons are given. Upon an ambitious brabble among the Disciples,
who should be the greatest in the kingdom of heaven, which they a longtime (as
the Jews do at this day) expected, in all pomp and pleasure upon earth,
verse. 1. Our Savior takes a little child, and sets it in the midst of them,
to make them the more sensible, by an ocular demonstration, of that, which he
would deliver unto them. Vult desiderium gloriae (says the same Father)
humilitatis contentione sanare, his purpose was to bring them to emulate, who
should be the humblest rather then the greatest. See you this little one (says
he) that here stands before you. He plots not for preferment, quarrels not,
envies none that goes before him, remembers not an injury, speaks not what he
thinks not, is not much taken with those things this world accounts excellent.
He stands not upon his birth, riches, place, or Wisdom, but makes as much of
his poor nurse, or play-fellow, as of those, that are of better rank. I tell
you, you must stoop to this submission if you take the right way to
greatness, in that kingdom you contend about. Whereupon also, taking an
occasion to instruct them farther, how dangerous it is for man to be offensive
to these innocents whom God so dearly tenders: How a woe is denounced to the
world, because of scandals, how careful all should be, yea more then for a
foot, or an eye, or any of their dearest members, that such mischiefs should
be avoided: he descends to illustrate it more fully in the words of my Text,
which may seem to prevent a tacit scruple to this purpose: You may say
(perchance) you intend to be so far from scandalizing any, or offering the
least injury, that you resolve not to make nor meddle with any such little
ones, nay you will not as much as take notice of them, or their doings, either
to wish them good, or do them harm. But this comes not home to that our
Savior here requires. It is not sufficient to forbear wronging thy brother,
by open scandals; but thou shall not despise him in thy heart, thou shall not
vilify, or set light by him, because thou art great and he a little one, but
shall respect him according to thy opportunities and abilities, to do him
good, because it has pleased God to honor him, with the glorious guard of his
heavenly attendance. Take heed that ye despise not one of these little ones,
for I say unto you, that in heaven their Angels do always behold the face of
my Father which is in heaven.

2. In which words we have 1. First a precept: In the precept is set forth 1.
The Manner, by way of caution, Take heed: see: 2. The Matter, that ye despise
not one of these little ones.
2. The reason of it, For I say unto you that in heaven their Angels do
always behold the face of my father which is in heaven.


Upon both these joined together, S. Hilary plays thus the Logician,
Periculose ille contemnitur, etc. He cannot be slighted without great danger,
who has as it were the Angels, his Agents in the court of heaven. But such are
these little ones, here mentioned, Ergo. Euthymius in this manner, Quos servant
Angeli, hos despicere homines non oportet: whom the heavenly Angels guard,
earthly men should not despise, but this is the case of those little ones, by
our Saviors own testimony, Ergo. Gorran thus, Those who are not contemned of
the best, and greatest, should not be undervalued of the meaner. But Angels
contemn not these little ones: Ergo, men should not. It appears therefore,
how much it stands us upon, to be careful, and diligent, and by all means
take heed, that in no sort we despise them: which is the caveat or manner of
the precept, and first part of my Text, that calls upon your religious
circumspection.

3. Take heed.] (...).
The whole life of man, is so subject to mishaps, that when he is securest, he
may be nearest a shrewd turn. This, as it is too too obvious in temporal
occurrents; so in spiritual, it should be the more feared, by how much it
nearer concerns, our everlasting making or marring. And therefore in such
cases especially, no caution should be accounted too scrupulous. This our
Savior best knew; in regard whereof, he so often, and earnestly urges his
followers to take heed. Take heed (says he) that no man deceive you, Mat. 24.
Take heed how ye hear, Mar. 4. Of which nature are also the Apostles caveats:
See that none render evil for evil, to any man, 1 Thessalonians. 5. See that ye
refuse not him that speaks, Heb. 12. The word in the original is (...),
which the Latins render by videte, and in the scripture has (as it is
observed) no less then 16 significations: properly it expresses the Act of
seeing: but figuratively it imports, to consider, to understand, to examine, to
take heed: which is the reason, that whereas our former translations had it,
see that ye despise not, our last renders it, take heed] which the Syriack,
and Arabique also bear, and is most agreeable to the Text: for scandals are
reckoned here, no small matters; and little ones, may be great in Gods esteem.
To have an eye therefore only that way, to see withal, without more ado, will
not serve, except diligent heed, and circumspection be taken. And should we
persuade our selves, there is no danger, where our Savior bids us so carefully
to take heed? Or reckon it a small favor, when he vouchsafes so providently
to forewarne us? I will thank the Lord (says David) for giving me warning:
Ps. 16. but our neglect is such, that we hardly accept of it, when it is given.
In matters of Temporal advantages, we can be ready to put in caveats, and why
should these be neglected, in things that more concern us? It is not Fate or
misfortune, or want of opportunity, or ability; but want of good take-heed,
that most commonly is the bane of all our untoward actions. This he knew best,
that observed amongst those that were nearest to him, an affectatio^ of a kind
of a Primacy between themselves, with an aptness to give offense, and
undervalue others. The dangerous consequence of which swelling infirmity, they
little suspected, what it might grow to. And therefore he wishes them the
more seriously to take heed. Thus we have heard the Manner of our Saviors
precept, the Matter follows, wherein we must take heed, and the Text tells us,

4. That ye despise not one of these little ones.] Contempt most commonly, is
the root of scandals: (...).]
For those whom we set little by, we reckon not how we use. Two words are here
in my text, which would ask some explication, for the clearing of that which
is to follow. First, what is meant by despising, and next, by little ones. The
word despising, in the original, is expressed by (...), which the Syriack
renders by (...) from the Hebrew (...) or (...) which signifies not only to
disgrace, to debase, or to vilify; but to set light by, neglect, not to
respect as we ought, and is to be understood as well of precepts as persons.
Amongst diverse others, Four things, are registered in the new Testament,
especially not to be despised. First, Gods goodness, in forbearing and long
suffering, Romans 2. Next, the Churches Ordinances, and decent demeanor therein,
1. Cor. 11. Thirdly, the government of our superiors, which God has set over
us, 2. Pet. 2. And this place makes up the fourth, for freeing our equals, or
never so much our inferiors from contempt. In all which passages, the same word
is used. Some will find a difference between contemning, and despising; that
contempt should go no farther then neglect, but despising proceed to disgrace.
But such Criticismes, are more subtle the^ useful, especially being stood
upon too much, where there is no cause. Amongst the Schoolmen, Appreciare rem
minus iusto.
old Altisiodorensis defines contempt to be nothing else, but the prizing of
any thing below it is worth. Aquinas judges it to be, a Refusal of the will,
Voluntas renuit subiici legi vel regulae 2.2. q. 186 art. 9.
to conform it self to law and good order. Howsoever they may otherwise
differ, this is agreed upon, that either truly, or interpretatiuely, every
offense, includes in some measure, a contempt, both of the law, Vere vel
interpretative.
and Lawgiver, which convinces, that no sin, is in its own nature venial,
as these men would have it. Sent. d. 5. q. 2.5.7.
Where, notwithstanding we may stinguish, with Brulifer and Gerson, between, De
vita spiritual. l. 5.
facere aliquid ex contemptu, and cum contemptu, to do somewhat out of
contempt, or with contempt. In the first, contempt appears to be the cause,
and therefore severity in punishment ought to be answerable. In the second, it
only accompanies either ignorance, or weakness, or carelessness, or some
predominant passion, which may sooner be brought to acknowledgement, and with
less ado rectified. And this far the doctrine of the Schools concerning
contempt, is not to be contemned. Howsoever it comes not full home to our
Saviors (...), despise not, in this place, for a man ought to be so far
from contemning or neglecting his inferior brother, that he is tied in
charity, in some sort, to honor him. I mean, as S. Paul exhorts Timothy, to
honor widows that are widows indeed, 1. Tim. 5. that is, to have a care of
them, provide for them, let them duly and truly have that which in any
respect may belong unto them. In which sense the Elders that rule well are
worthy of double honor, that is, respect in their places, recompense for their
pains. The woman must be honored as the weaker vessel, that is, borne with,
provided for, 1. Pet. 3. And whosoever so honors his poor brother, honors
him that made him. Prove. 14.31.

5. I have stood (perchance) too long upon the declaring of what this despising
means in my Text, less may serve for the signification of little ones. For
such may be termed to be so, in five respects; in state, in stature, in age,
in knowledge, and last of all, in the esteem of the world. All which
significations the word (...) here used in my text, may well bear. In the same
sense we have (...) in the Hebrew, and (...) in the Chalday and Syriack, and
the Arabique springs from the same root Gedion complains he was the least of
his fathers house, that is, of esteem, Iud. 6. Bethlem is reckoned but a small
City among the thousands of Judah, Michah 5. Now they are not little one only
in age, or stature, very children indeed, which our Savior here looks after,
but such as believe in him verse. 6. babes and sucklings out of hose mouths,
God has ordained strength, Ps. 8. whom the world counted dross, and of the
most contemptible condition. And we see how high they are in our Saviors
esteem. Mat. 11.
That which is hid from the wise and prudent, shall be revealed to such Babes:
That all the world may take notice, how God respects not worth, in those whom
he casts his favors upon; but by casting his favors upon them, makes them
worthy. According to his own good pleasure, he hat mercy on those only, on whom
he will have mercy, Romans 9 Some are so bold to Particularize, that this child
whom our Savior here sets in the midst, was Martial, afterward Bishop of
Limoges in France. Others say, 'twas Ignatius the Martyr, so famous in
Ecclesiastical story. But these are but forged traditions of those, who will
aver any thing. It is not to the purpose, who it was, but what manner of
little ones these were, of whose despising our Savior would have, such heed to
be taken. The Apostles had some reason, to stand upon their privileges, yet
they must be the men, to whom this caveat, must be directed, especially, least
others should transgress by disesteeming their Inferiors, and despising, not
a company only gathered together in Christ's name, but any one single, of such
little ones, that cannot withstand injuries, or help himself. In which
regard, S. Gregory has an excellent conclusion, in the fifteenth of his
Morals, Timendum it aque (says he) and cavendum ne nobis cadentibus surgat,
qui nobis stantibus irridetur. It stands us therefore upon to be careful, and
fearful, least he rise when we fall, who was scorned of us, while we stood.

6. This doctrine should not seem unseasonable to those that are in high
places. For as their honor is great, and a badge of Gods especial favor; if
thankfulness and devotion be the supporters of their Arms: so can it not
choose but be liable to manifold blemishes, if greatness once grow heedlesse,
in despising Gods little ones. The Bryer on a time, (as we find it in the
Arabian Mythologist) bespake the Gardener: Locman.
O that some one would have a care of me, and plant me in the midst of the
garden, and let me but have sufficient soil and watring, and I would undertake
to bring forth such blossoms and fruits, that Kings should be taken with the
desire of it. All this in pity the gardener did, and expected in plain
honesty, that these protestations should be performed. But what was the issue?
the Bryer so spread his prickles, and filled up the garden, that there was no
access to him, without scratching, or scarce (by his stopping of the passages)
to any of the other trees. I need not add the moral before so understanding
an assembly, every one soon apprehends, how easy it is for greatness to
forget from whence it came: which is neither from the East, nor from the West,
nor yet from the wilderness, which comprehends North and South, but
perpendicularly from him, that sets up one, and plucketh down another.
Psalm. 75. A hoppe will soon start up, to overlooke the pole, by which it
climbed. How quickly the brain not used to it, grows giddy on a sudden, by
looking from high place? What a churlish answer did Nabal give to David's
ingenuous Messengers, because he had some pelf about him, 1. Sam. 25.
and the other stood in distress? What is David? and who is the son of
Iesse? And what are these little ones (say our worldlings) that such ado is
made about them? Senseless and forgetful proud man, these little ones belong
to our Saviors little flock, they carry his Image, appertain to his Court of
Wards, have his stamp upon them, and therefore must not be despised, where
favor is expected from him that protects them. Has God made thee great to
contemn that which is little? Or is it wisdom to make t hem the object of
thy disdain, who should be favorably sheltred under the shadow of thy
protection. If all things were well in this behalf (Beloved) why is there more
respect given oftentimes, to a beast, rather then to our poor Christian
brethren? Iam. 2.
or (as S. James speaks) to gay clothing, or a whispering Sycophant, rather
then to a faithful admonisher? High buildings had need of a firm foundation,
and sure buttresses. Nabuchadnezzor, when he vaunted, he had gotten all, upon
the sudden lost his wits, and degenerated into a beast. And worms will tell
Herod, he is but a man; when applauders would make him believe, that he spoke
like a God. All this makes well for little ones, when superiors are staued
off from contemning them. But is all right on the other side, with these little
ones, who take upon them to be such, and bear the world in hand, that they are
so in very deed? This too often is rather desired, then found, by the most
impartial, and sincere inquisitors, by reason of the bewitching hypocrisy,
that bears up still, in the world, and bids fair, to be counted in the list
of these little ones. These with Diogenes, tread down Plato'es pride, but with
greater pride, in a slyer way: and with that Abbot look demurely on the
ground, till they have gotten the keys of the Abbey, and then advance as
pertly, as those who are most supercilious.

7. Now, if the case of these little ones, be so happy, (as our Savior here
shows it to be, and we are bound to believe it) how comes it about, that most
are not content, with being in the happy case of these little ones, but will
ever be tampering to overtop the greatest? Surely there is too much of old
Adam in most of his posterity. For if thy lot be fallen in a good ground, and
thou have a goodly heritage, in the station that God has set thee; what need
so much casting about, and farther ado, to iustle competitours aside, and go
before them. Every man is ready enough to censure the forementioned Bryer, for
his overspreading prickles, but who thinks on the Thistle of Lebanon, that
would needs have a match between his son and the Cedar's daughter. This
parable is Canonical, and therefore I may propose it with the less offense,
and greater confidence: it is in the 2. of Chron. the 25. and the 18. You shall
have it in the very words, of the text. The Thistle that was in Lebanon, sent
to the Cedar that was in Lebanon, saying, give thy daughter, to my son to
wife; and there passed by a wild beast, that was in Lebanon, and trod down
the Thistle. Here you see, the match was marred, and so it often falls out, with
Hypocritical little ones, who will needs swell with the Toad, to be as great
as the Ox, and then burst in the midst of their foolish attempt. (Beloved) let
every one amend one; and then all will be well. Preferment may be religiously
taken, so it be not ambitiously affected, or procured by synister means.
Joseph, Daniel, and Nehemiah, refused it not, but improued it to the honor of
their Advancers, and the advancement of the Church and state, wherein they
lived. The greatest therefore in dignity, may be little ones, by their true
humility. Little ones, by their submission to God, though the greatest, by
commission from God: And this is the eminency of goodness, to be such little
great ones, or great little ones. (To compose and set all as it should be.) If
the great may be brought to profess syncerity with David, Lord, I am not high
minded, I have no proud looks, Ps. 131.
I do not exercise my self in great matters, which are too high for me. I
would not by any means despise one of thy little ones, but I refrain my
soul, and keep it low, like a child that is weaned from his mother, yea my
soul is as a weaned child, Ps. 131. In all humility and submission, and
singleness of heart, the little ones on the other side, should have also by
heart, S. Paul's lesson: I know how to be abased, and I know how to abound,
every where, and in all things, I am instructed both to be full, and to be
hungry, both to abound, and to suffer need. For I have learned in what estate
soever I am, therewith to be contented. Philip. 4.12. 12. Last of all, let me
make but one collection more from this passage, and then an end of this point.
If Superiors are enjoined to take heed, that they despise not one of Gods
little ones, then a maiori ad minus, and so reciprocally, a minori ad maius,
these little ones are likewise bound to respect, honor, and obey, in all
submission, and syncerity their lawful superiors. But the antecedent is our
Saviors: Therefore these little ones, (who expect salvation) should make good
the consequent; They have a reason to do it heartily, willingly, and truly, by
the true faith of a Christian, as God helps them, and affords them the
protection of his holy Angels, which reason is given here in my text, and now
follows in order to be discussed.

8 For I say unto you that in heaven their Angels do always behold the face
of my Father which is in heaven. (...)
In points of belief that which is extraordinary, and not heard of before, is
not lightly to be received, without good ground. That the Angels in heaven had
such especial charge, of little ones here upon earth, was more, then was ever
plainly taught, before our Saviors coming. For as the mystery and wisdom of
God, in man's redemption, was imparted to principallities, and powers, V. 10.
by the preaching of the Gospel. Ephesians. 3. which things the Angels desired to
look into, 1. Pet. 1. So how these Angels should be in heaven, and yet
minister here on earth; V. 12.
behold always there the fathers face, and yet atte^d hereon little ones, was
more then in reason, could have soon been believed, except we had his word
for it, whose bare affirmation, is as the surest confirmation; This the people
acknowledged, at the hearing of his Sermon on the mount; He taught as one
having authority, and not as the Scribes, Math. 7. The officers sent to take
him, professed that never man spoke like this man. There is a foolish conceit
set a foot of late by the Socinians: That as Moses was taken up into the
mount, and S. Paul, into the third heaven, to gain countenance, to their
doctrine; So our Savior immediately upon his Baptism, was had up into heaven
corporally, and there remained a whole Lent to receive instructions from his
father. No marvel therefore, that at his return also, his word stands for a
law. But these are wild presumptions of wantons, that play with the text,
rather then make use of it. What need this Lent ascending, when the Holy Ghost
descended upon him visibly, at his coming out of Jordan? And the Fathers voice
was audible; This is my beloved Son, in whom alone I am well pleased. And if
this had not gone before, yet the complement of Prophecyes, Math. 3.
in his birth, and course of life; his Doctrine conformable to the law and
Prophets; his stupendous miracles for confirmation of his Doctrine, was a
commission beyond exception: For this (...), I say unto you, this directs us
what we should have recourse unto, in the controversies of these times:
Auferantur de medio chartae nostrae, non audiamus, haec dico, haec dicis, nec
ego Nicoenum, nec tu Ariminense. These are the known words of S. Augustine in
diverse places, In Psalm. 57. de vnitat. c. 3. Cont. Maxim. l. 3. c. 14.
Away with our papers, and those terms, I say, Thou say: I rely not on the
counsel of Nice, neither should thou, on that of Ariminum, hear what Christ
says, hear what the truth speaks. For it is the property of a right
Belieuer, says S. Basil, to dare to go no further. Bellarmine to settle a
Monarchy here in the Church Militant, which the Pope must needs have by
succession, he would fetch it about by the plat-forme of the Church triumphant;
De Pontif. Romans l. 1. c. 9.
For then (says he) upon the fall of Lucifer, Michael presently steps into
his place; and is advanced to be the Prince of Angels. But who told the
Cardinal this, that he was certainly assured of it? S. Paul coming to
himself form the third heaven, acquaints us with no such matter: Secrets
concerning the Angels, and affairs of an other world, are sparingly imparted
unto us, as not so requisite to our calling, but reserved, to be communicated,
when we shall come to be of that upper house. This preface of our Savior
therefore, I say unto you, was necessary in this behalf, For who would
otherwise have found out in any record for these little ones, that

9 In heaven their Angels do always behold the face of my Father which is in
heaven? (...).]
the maine of the reason for not despising them, and remainder of my text that
leads on to be discussed. And here the difficulties that present themselves
at the entrance, (concerning the Angels) might plead for a greater scantling of
time, then I perceive will be allotted me; for the unfolding of them. I shall
but touch therefore at some specialls, and wind up the rest in references.
Those that are curious in this behalf to see much, and find little, have the
Sententiaries, and Summists, with Tostatus on my text, together with our new
Systematicall writers, with their Angelographies, and Pneumatologies to fit
them. All that is amongst them diffused, is commonly reduced to these 4 heads:
1. the nature of Angels, 2. their Properties, 3. their Orders, 4. their
Ministry. Their nature is here supposed that they are (...) existent
substances, or rather subsistent. Not mere imaginations, or abstractions,
against the Saduces, and Plat onicks. That they are 2ly. spirits, not subtle,
or aeriall Bodies, as most of the Fathers, and some others held. That there is
3ly. a certain number of them, indefinite to us, though finite, in it self,
more curiously sought then found of the Schoolmen. Some of the names of them,
we have in Scripture, and others inverted to wicked uses, by vain men, all
which we may well pass over. Their properties concerning their Locality, their
motions, their knowledge, their will, and affections, their language, whereby
they express their intentions one to another, their Persons, their manner of
apparition, and the like, would also ask more labor in discussing, then bring
profit, in the determining. So for their orders and Hierarchies, more is said,
then any ways can be proved. Amongst the Ancients, Theodoret has somewhat
more then the rest, in his 3. Book, de curandis Graecorum affectibus; Others
touch at it, in some passages, on every text of Scripture: Gregory de valentia,
professes that the Shoolemen, l^^^e omnia propemodum, all almost, that Hales,
and Aquinas have spunne out, through so many members, questions, and Articles
from Dionysius Areopagita; whom when he is freed from being a counterfaite, we
shall more willingly give ear unto. In the mean season, we may leave these
men, fishing all night, and taking nothing, whiles we stick to our Saviors
words, I say unto you, as the text has it: wherein we may observe, first
concerning the Angels these 3. particulars as they lie, 1. How these Angels may
be conceived to be in heaven. 2. Why they are termed, their Angels. 3. In what
manner, they always behold the face of God the Father. And secondly concerning
God; 1. why our Savior calls him here my Father. 2. and last of all, in what
sense he is so called.

10 It is a received ground amongst Divines, that as diverse Angels cannot be
together in one proper definitive place: So one cannot-at due time, be in
diverse places, and therefore they approve that saying of Damascene, when they
are in heaven, they are not on earth, and being employed by God upon earth,
they remain not then in Heaven. His reason for all this is, in one word (...)
they are of a confined nature, as all creatures of necessity must be, and
therefore cannot be as the Creator every where. If then these Angels be every
very where in Heaven, how guard they Gods little ones upon earth? do they
extend their power from thence, as the Sun his Beams? Or is their celerity
such, that they may be said to be, at one instant, both in earth, and in
heaven? Or shall we take up that miserable shift of the Vbiquitaries, that
Gods heaven is every where, so that the Devils after their manner; are
contained in it? This were to make the solution more questionable, then the
doubt. The meaning is plain, that such keepers are deputed to Gods little ones
here on earth, who have perpetual access, to his glorious presence in heaven;
that stand before him, to receive his commands, and have his commission, and
beatificall aspect, wheresoever they are employed. But why are they then termed
(...), their, rather then his Angels? quia assignati sunt ijs (says Lira)
because they are assigned to these little ones, not exempted from his service,
that assigns them. Upon this place, and some other (says Maldonate) are
grounded those controuerted assertions, de Angelis custodibus, of those Angels
appointed to be our Guardians, either as Presidents of several Provinces, or
of particular Persons: Whether every one, have not only his good Angel, but his
bad about him, as his superior guids, not inferior attenda^ts. And therefore
they are termed Elohim, mighty ones, Gods nearer servants. The Romanists dare
say any thing, that may back their worshipping of Angels, and make way for
their Invocation of Saints, whereby they suck no little advantage. Hence they
have a peculiar order called the Angellicall sodality, for whom Paul the 5. not
long since appointed a distinct office, and Mass to be celebrated, every
Calends of October, in honor of the protecting Angel. Albertinus the Jesuit
writes a Book, to make it good, whereto this office is annexed. But the
proofs brought for all these things, are exceeding wavering: Whereupon some of
our later writers reject the particular deputations of several Angels, to
distinct Provinces, or Persons, and content themselves with that which is
certain, that the Angels indefinitely have a charge over Gods people, Psalm.
91. That they are all Ministering spirits, sent forth to Minister for them,
which shall be heirs of Salvation, Heb. 1. That they pitch their tents about
them that fear him. Psalm. 34. Howbeit seeing the stream of all the Fathers
and Schoolmen, that I have met withal, run for their distinct employment,
and gather it especially from the words of my text, I think the moderation of
Zanchius cannot be disliked, that it is very probable, De operibus. l. 3. c.
15.
and agreeable to Scripture, that both particular men and Persons, ordinarily,
have their particular protecting Angels, but extraordinarily, more, as need
shall require and as it shall please God to dispose. But whether the same
Angels keep allwaies to the same charge, or parties, or else as leiger
Ambassadors, be removed from one negotiation to another, others succeeding in
their places; is a scruple, that has been less thought upon, Perchance
Damascen's, (...) he that created them, Orthod. sidei. l. 2. c 3.
only knows these things: and Calvin's, pro certo asserere non ausim, I dare
affirm nothing, for certainty: will commend their Judgment more that
determine nothing, then their wits that are too busy.

11 The third point follows, what it is to behold the face of the Father,
(...).]
and in what manner these Angels are said to do it allwaies. It seems to be a
Metaphore taken from the Courts of earthly Princes, who have their attendants
allwaies about them, to execute their commands: as Solomon had, 1. Kings 10.
of which the Queen of Sheba gave this approbation: Happy are thy men, happy
are these thy servants, which stand continually before thee; where the Phrase
of standing continually, is not to be so rackt as though they were fixed there,
to go no other way; but only shows that they were allwaies ready at his
pleasure to be employed. No more does (...), q. 69.
allwaies, signify: Here Abulensis proposes the question, whether those
employed in the guarding of little ones, be hindered thereby from the Divine
vision; and determines it negatiuely, out of this place, that they allwaies
behold the face of the Father; Moral. l. 2. Aq. 1. part. q. 112. art. 1.
And by that of Gregory, Sic ad exteriora prodeunt, vt ab intimis nunquam
recedant: so they perform this, that they loose not that. Pareus
distinguishes Gods glorious face, In locum.
from his essential: and thinks they behold his essential only upon earth,
but not his glorious. To me it seems hard to conceive, that those Angels
should loose any thing by their attendance. S. Stephen here on earth, saw the
glory of God, and the Son of man standing at his right hand, Acts 7. And why
may not Angels do the like? Their sight out of doubt, is of another kind, and
better then ours, where we see nothing at all, or very obscurely, they
clearly may behold their Masters glory. Aq. part. 1. q. 112.
This justifies not that Schoole-distinction of assisting and Ministering
Angels, as though some stood allwaies before Gods throne, as privy
Counselors; others were sent abroad as Inferior Agents: and that these
Ministering Angels never assist, and those Assistants never Minister to men, as
being an employment for Angels of a lower Hierarchy. For all these are no
less unwarrantable, then curious speculations, depending upon the Dreams of
that Areopagita's poetical Hierarchy, whom Erasmus, Valla, and their own
Cajetan have branded long sithence for a Counterfeit. How much sounder is that
of S. Augustine, Quid inter se distant quatuor ista vocabula, what difference
may be picked between these 4 words, Thrones, Dominions, Principalities, and
Powers, say they that can, if they can prove, what they say, ego me ista
ignorare fateor: For mine own part I confess I am ignorant of it. The Papists
have nine orders in their Hierarchies, the Rabbis, ten orders downright,
without Hierarchies in subordination one to another, and their reasons are
pretty for it. There were 4 and 5 Kings fought together (say they) Genesis 14.
which make nine, and Abraham comes upon them for the 10th t, herfore there must
be ten orders of Angels: as also for that our five senses; and four
affections, with reason cast into the reckoning, make another ten, therefore
there are ten orders of Angels; therefore tenthes are to be paid, and ten
Predicaments in Aristotle. The Papists reasons for their Hierarchies, are not
altogether so foolish, yet nothing more conclusiue. We make no question but he
that created all things, in number, weight, and measure, neglected not amongst
his best Creatures the best order; but whom has he made of counsel with him,
in that behalf? What Paul returning from the 3. heaven, has discovered these
secrets? or where have we an, I say unto you, as here, that we may safely
depend upon? Let it suffice us therefore, that those mighty ones have a charge
of us; who have always access to the Almighty, and behold his face, and
receive his commands, to help us in our necessities, shield us in our dangers,
comfort us in our sorrows, back us in our Combats, watch when we sleep, and
stir when we neglect, least the enemy approach to hurt us, or the Son of
wickedness to do us any violence.

12 In all this that has been spoken, nothing makes for the worshipping of
Angels that the Romanists so much stand for; for what can be more plain
against them, then that, Coloss. 2. Let no man beguile you of your reward, in a
voluntary humility, and worshipping of Angels, intruding into those things
which he has not seen? or that of an Angel himself, Rev. 16.10.
see thou do it not, I am thy fellow servant, worship God; whereupon S.
Augustine in Psalm. 96. if you would rightly worship the Angels, you should
learn of the^, not to worship them. I am not ignorant what put-offs there are
for these, and the like evidences, but they entangle rather then resolve. The
time clapsed will not bear the discussing of the point. I forbear; only this
by the way, and by way of Caution: let the Angel-worshippers, or Votaries, take
heed of mistakes, least in their unwarrantable devotions, instead of an Angel
of light, they meet sometime with a worse commodity, then a light Angel, for
they know who can transform himself: 2. Cor. 11. And it may perchance so fall
out, that when (according to the Jesuit Albertinus rules) they have the
familiarity of their guardian Angel, they be fitted with a familiar, they
would feign be rid of. But for us (Beloved) in a surer course, what an
encouragement might this be, in all our exigents to emboulden us, to be
resolute whatsoever befalls us? when Elishah's servant cried out in the midst
of the Aramites, Alas Master! what shall we do? 2. Kings 6.16.
fear not (says the man of God) for they that are with us, are more then they
that are with them. The Mountains are full of Horses, and Chariots of fire, to
rescue Gods little ones, against all opposers. If Pharaoh be at the heels of
Israel, to do them a mischief, the Angel which was before in a pillar of
cloud and fire, will come behind. And if Rabshakeh rail on good King
Hezechiah, and his Master Zenacherib beleager Jerusalem, the Lord has an
Angel to raise the seige. Thou considerest not thine own privileges,
whosoever thou art, who neglectest that comfort which this Doctrine may yield
unto thee. Though thy Birth be never so base, thy state never so mean, thy
reputation never so slighted, at the hands of wordlings, thou have Angels to
attend thee, if thou attend to Gods precepts, the dogs shall not only lick
thy sores, but the Angels convey thy soul into Abraham's bosom. Lord what is
man that thou art so mindful of him? or the Son of man that thou so regardest
him? have we bin so serviceable unto thee, that thy chiefest servants must so
attend, to perform unto us such service? Last of all, what a motive should
this be unto us, (Beloved) that out perverseness grieve, and drive not from
us, these unspotted assistants? For as there is joy in heaven amongst the
Angels, at the conversion of a sinner, so they sorrow in earth (no doubt) when
they find us set on mischief, or careless what may befall hereafter. If
Sampson loose his sacred locks in a Delilah's lap, Iud. 16.
no marvel if the spirit of the Almighty forsake him? And when Saul will not
do as the Lord inioyneth him, instead of protecting Angels, an evil spirit
may haunt him, O quantum debet tibi hoc verbum infer reverentiam, afferre
devotionem, confer fiduciam? What reverence, devotion, and confidence (says
S. Bernard) should this kind of Doctrine administer unto us? Reverence for
their presence, devotion for their love, confidence for their protection. For
if the presence of earthly Potentates, exclude all uncivil behavior, and the
oversight of Iehoiada a subject, 2. King. 12.
could keep King Ioash in order, how much more then, should we respect these
Celestial Tutors, least as smoke does Bees, and an evil savor Doves; so the
stench of our sins (as S. Basil notes) should make these blessed guides loath
our company: this the Father would dislike, who is in heaven and oversees all
that is done; the remainder of my text, which in a word I shall endeavor to
dispatch.

13 The supposall of Gods absence, (...)
or not taking notice of our actions, makes most too venturous, either to act
that which they should not, or to neglect their duty. Perverseness might wrest
my text, to the favoring of such conceits, as that, my Father, and being in
heaven, might be far enough, from having much to do with us. But he whom our
Savior terms, my Father, and affirms to be in heaven, otherwise shows to
be our Father, Mat. 5. Luc. 12.
and your Father, neither his being in heaven, boundeth him from being every
where. My Father, is used here, and elsewhere, to beat down that surmise, that
he might be Joseph's son, and raise them to acknowledge his Godhead; and the
pointing to his heavenly being, takes them off, from sticking too much (as
commonly we do) to things here below. It was not without cause therefore, that
our most learned, and most Judicious King James, of blessed memory, was so
sharp against the two ringleaders of perturbation, in these our wanton times,
Conrade Vorstius, and James Arminius. Vorstius incroached too far, upon
libertas prophetandi, liberty (as he calls it, with the Anabaptist) of
prophesying: and Arminius upon the strength of his wit, was too confident upon
meditation without reading; which savours too strongly of a private spirit.
Both slight Fathers, and Schoolmen, and our latter Reformers; whereas God has
left their directions to be thankfully considered of us, and not to depart from
them rashly, to get a name. What a daring Blasphemy was that of Vorstius, to
circumscribe Gods essence, from being every where? Arminius (for ought I find)
never went so far, but in his course, Gods unsearchable prerogative, to do
with his own as he list, and his operative grace, working all in all, (to say
no more) was little beholding to him. Their reasons are for the discussing of
Schools, where both sides may be fully heard, in sifting of all particulars.
Preaching calls for application, to the amendment of our lives, in those things
which are plainly manifested. The chief reason why we most mis-carry in that
behalf, is, because our great spirits hardly condescend to become Gods little
ones. We think not as we should, upon that in our Church Liturgy, sursum
corda, lift up your hearts, we lift them up unto the Lord. We are only to
seek him here, to climb up by that we find, and apprehend his glory, which
is the complement of our happiness. Do so many blessings descend daily upon
us, from him, and should not we look up in thankfulness, to the place from
whence they come? Is heaven the mark we aim at, and shall we cast our eyes
another way? Unto thee will I lift up mine eyes, O thou that dwell in the
heavens; for where should we so happily find our Elder Brother CHRIST JESUS,
but at the right hand of his, and our Father, where he makes continual
intercession for us? Let our Pater noster therefore, ever go before our daily
bread, the hallowing of his name, before the prosecuting of our own designs,
the promoting of his kingdom, before all earthly promotions. That of little
ones here, we may become great ones in heaven, with Angels, and Archangels,
and all the blessed company of heaven, always to behold his face. Evermore
praising him, and saying, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Hosts, Heaven and Earth
are full of thy Glory, glory be to thee, O Lord, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
three persons, and one God most high. AMEN

AMEN.
IDOLATROVS FEASTING.

A SERMON PREACHED AT THE COURT.

BY JOHN PRIDEAVX, Rector of Exceter College, His MAIESTIE's Professor in
Divinity in the University of OXFORD.

OXFORD, Imprinted by LEONARD LICHFIELD Anno Salutis, 1636.

1. COR. 10.7. Neither be ye Idolaters as were some of them, as it is written,
the people sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to play.


THERE are no enemies more dangerous to a Christian man, then those he has
within him. Lactantius terms them three Furies, Divinar. Instit. Epit. c. 2.
that set all in a combustion, without respect of danger, or discredit. The
first is Anger, hot upon revenge. The second, Covetousness, eager upon pelf.
The third, is Lust, never satisfied with pleasures. These the Stoics would
have rooted out; The Peripatetiques moderated; But the good Christian set in a
right course. That Anger should be for breach of Gods laws: Covetousness, for
heaping up heavenly treasures, and our greatest desire should be, to enjoy that
satisfying presence, which will afford us innumerable, and everlasting
felicity. Our Apostle here had to do with the Corinthians; at that time an
understanding, rich, and flourishing state (though now the case be altered, for
their humiliation, and others example.) Those he found supercilious in
censuring; scrupulous in doubting; Itching for innovations; Heady in abusing
their Christian liberty, to the scandal of their weaker brethren. It was the
harder task therefore for him, so prudently to deal in such points, with such
a people, to keep them in the right, in which he had instructed them, and make
them sensible, how insensibly they might be wrought from it. Thus as he had
endeavored to do, in the former Chapter, by his own example; in this he
presses more fully, out of the Fathers, the Church of Israel? You Corinthians
indeed have great reason to stand upon the preaching of the word, and seals of
the Sacraments, that so graciously have been afforded unto you. But (Brethren)
I would not have you ignorant, that all our Fathers the Jews, had their
Baptism also under the Cloud, and in the passage through the sea; and the
Lords Supper likewise, in their Manna from Heaven, and water out of the Rock:
But when they became Idolaters, Fornicators, Tempters of Christ, Murmurers; did
these privileges bear them out? were they not slain by their Brethren, stung
by Serpents, destroyed by the destroyer, to make them take heed from falling
into further inconveniences? Now these things were our examples, to the intent
we should not lust after evil things, as they also lusted. Neither be
Idolaters as were some of them, As it is written, the people sat down to eat
and drink, and rose again to play.

2. My Text then you see falls fully against Idolatry, the first- begotten of
lust, and here comes not alone, but has fornication, tempting of God, and
murmuring attending on it, wherein may it please you

To take notice of 1 A Prohibition; Neither be ye Idolaters, as were some of
them.] 2 A specification; As it is written, the people sat down to eat, and
drink, and rose again to play.


The first expresses what is forbidden, Idolatry; The second particularizeth
wherein it consisted, In eating, drinking, playing, very common things amongst
us all, and we hope without offense. It is a fashion now adays, and use has
brought it at length to be little excepted against, to call Heretic, or
Puritan, on Papist, at every bout; when God knows those that are fullest of
those terms, have most commonly least insight, how the case stands.
Religion, Charity, and Ingenuity, will first have a sure ground before they
censure, and then will not run on headlong to condemn, and show not
wherefore, Dixit Manicheus and abiit, say the word and away, as S. Augustine
notes of Manichee. Our Apostles practice here, may be a pattern unto us all.
He accuses not all for the faults of some, Neither be ye Idolaters, as were
some of them; and them he calls not so, without a reason, but shows
distinctly wherein they were Idolaters. Neither takes he up here vox populi,
the common same, to make good what he says, or holds his own conjecture, or
suspicion to be sufficient, but has a Scriptum est, for his warrant, as it is
written, to justific his Prohibition, (...).
the first member of my Text, which by Gods most gracious assistance, and your
patience, according to my plain way, I intend to handle as it lies.

3 Neither be ye Idolaters as some of them. To clear this passage, (...).
it will be requisite, first, to be truly informed, what Idolatry is; and
secondly who were those, that are here taxed for it. Upon a due survey of which
premises, our Apostles prohibition, will appear the more legal, and our
deductions thereupon, the more applicable. Idolatry is defined by the
Schoolmen to be, Aq. 2.2. q. 94.
a kind of superstition, in which Divine honor, is attributed to any Creature,
Valent. de Idolat. l. 2. c. 1.
as unto God himself. This the Apostle terms the changing of the glory of
the incorruptible God, into an Image made like to corruptible man, and to
birds, and fowre-footed beasts, and creeping things: Romans 1.25. where to wave
curiosities, which here might scrupulously be waighed. May it please you to
take notice, that as the great Cardinal, Bellarmine, fits such a definition
to the Catholic Church, De 3. Eccles. l. c. 2.
that except the Pope be head, there shall be no true Church at all: so the
great Schooleman, Gregory of Valentia, in his 5 Books concerning Idolatry,
straightneth so much the extent of this superstition, that none of their
palpable will worship shall come within compass of it. For where the true God
(says he) is made the object of the worship, the worshipping by Jmages, or
other intervenie^t Mediators, make it not Idolatry, and they are Theologi sane
simplices, very simple Divines, (they are the terms of the forenamed Jesuit)
that are persuaded otherwise. Lib. 1. c. 1.
But it is known whose censure this is, better is a poor man that walks in
his simplicity, (as their Dowists translate the vulgar) then a rich, writhing
his lips, Ambulans in simplicitate.
and is unwise, or as we read it, is a fool. Prove. 19. 1. We are not so
simple (learned Gregory) But we can tell you, out of your own Schoolmen,
that Idolatry is superstition, and superstition, Aq. 22. q. 22. art. 1.
is a fault opposed to religion: for these 2 reasons, Quia exhibet cultum
divinum, vel cui non debet, vel eo modo quo non debet, because it exhibits
Divine worship, not only to that which it ought not, but also in another
manner, then it ought. Idolaters therefore they are to be accounted, (as one
aptly says on this place) Qui colunt falsum Deum, aut verum falso cultu,
first, those who worship a false God, Paocus.
and then, those that worship the true God falsely. The first is the most
gross, and stupid Idolatry; But the second, the more dangerous, and infectiue,
by reason of it is affinity, and commerce with earnest devotion, for which it is
often mistaken.

4 For further Illustration hereof, two notable instances amongst the rest, the
Scripture it self affords us. The one 1. Kings 16.31. Where Achab is
Chronicled, to have out-strip't in Idolatry, all his Predecessors, for that he
made it but a light matter, to retain Ieroboams Calves, wherein they
worshipped the true God, after an Idolatrous manner; but brought in Baal of the
Sydonians, and built him an Altar, and house, to worship that ridiculous
Block, instead of the living God. The other is as manifest here, in the
twofold Idolatry, practiced by the Israelites in the wilderness, which the
Prophet David, thus expresses. Psalm. 106.
In the first they turned the glory of God into the similitude of a Calfe that
eats hay: In the second they joined themselves to Baal-Peor, which S.
Hierome, and most Interpreters hold, to be the Heathenish Priapus, and ate the
offerings of the dead. Now we know (Beloved) that all turning is dangerous,
especially where the glory of God is any way entrenched upon; but to turn that
glory, which was their only glory, not into a living creature, but into a bare
similitude, not of the chiefest of the Beasts of the field, or a laboring Ox,
that treads out the corn, but into the similitude of an idle Calfe, that is
good for nothing, but to eat hay, and so to come to the shambles; this turning
must needs be an overturning of all their former happiness, and could not
choose but turn from them, all Gods gracious favors, that so compassed them
about. Yet in this, we have not but the worship of the true God, in a false
manner, whereas in the joining afterward to Baal-Peor, Verse. 28.
the true God was wholly excluded, and Priapus had all the devotion. There is
one Philip Monceus, a French man, that has written not long since, a book
which he intitles, Aaron purgatus, and has the picture of this golden Calfe,
set in the Frontispice; his purpose is therein to make good these five points,
amongst others which. I touch not; First that Aaron was no way in fault, but
the people only. Secondly, that this Calfe was but the resemblance of that
Angel which was promised by Moses, should be their conductour into the land of
Canaan: Thirdly, that it was but an unseasonable anticipation, or doing before
hand by Aaron, which was presently after, done by Moses himself, when he
descended from the Mount, and made the Arc, and Cherubims, which came to all
one with this Calfe. Fourthly, that the peoples folly abused it afterward to
Idolatry, much against Aarons will. And last of all, that Ieroboams Calves,
erected also in Dan and Bethel, were not Idolatrous, but only schismatic.
This book is dedicated to Paul the 5. not long since Pope, and allowed by the
chiefest Doctors of Paris, and all because it clears Aaron the first high
Priest, from the blot of Idolatry, which makes for the Popes infallibility. 2.
And then maintains, that worshipping the true God in a Calfe, much less in
other representations, is no Idolatry: which iustifies Romes practice, against
all those that mislike her doings. To such shifts these great Scholars are
brought, who having once grossly overshot themselves, refuse to reform any
thing. One Visorius, a Sorbon Doctor, of purpose writes against this fancy, and
takes the learned, and subtle Cardinal Perrone for his Patron, as Monceus did
Paul the 5. Monceus seems to be cried down, but the opinion, still is
vpheld, that to worship the true God in an Image, or other representation, is
no Idolatry, against which the Apostles prohibition lies here in force.

5 Neither be ye Idolaters. For is it to be imagined, (B.) that this people
of Israel, so miraculously delivered from the bondage of Egypt; so passed
through the red sea; so fed from heaven in the wilderness; so lead by a
guiding pillar of the Lords appointment, and at that instant too, so summoned
in a terrible manner, to receive injunctions from Gods own mouth; could be so
perverse, and stupid, as to attribute Divine worship, unto the similitude of a
Calfe, whose materials they had but newly contributed, out of their wives and
childrens earerings, whose form they saw, how cast, how graven, whose motion
they found none, or station any, but as they erected it. Had their acclamations
(think we) no further aim, These are thy Gods O Israel, that brought thee
out of the land of Egypt, then to a dumb Idol, not in being, when they were
so delivered, and now being, stood to convince them of a gross contradiction,
if by Elohim, thy Gods, they meant not that Deity, which they made this to
represent? And what should we hold of Aaron, so wise a man, and so highly
honored of God, would he think you have offered to build an Altar, and then
offer upon it? would he have proclaimed a feast to Jehovah, afforded the
Incommunicable name of Jehovah, (...), to a blockish representation of a
contemptible beast, so lately of his own hammering? I shall never believe they
were so far engaged in this behalf, Laines Hist. Council. Trident. l. 8.
Bellar. de Imagine. l. 2.21.
as the Jesuits be; to hold that any Divine worship is terminated in an
image, by reason of the reference it has to the Deity, or Saint it represents.
Out of doubt they come no further on, then the wisest amongst the Heathens (as
we have from Lactantius, Institution. lib. 2. Arnob. Clemens Alexand. August.
etc.
and other ancients) who protested they worshipped not the dumb resemblance,
erected in their Temples, but before them, and in them, the Deityes represented
by them. They can then be charged here, with no greater abomination, then that
they represented and worshipped their Elohim, and Jehovah, in the form of a
golden Calfe, and yet their golden invention, and good intention, and zealous
contention, to have all things well, is branded (as you see) with no other
stamp then that of Idolatry.

6 Now to them that hold some Idolatry to be lawful, Neque absurd profeclo
putaveris, B. Petrum insinuauisse, cultum aliquem simulachrorum, nempe sacrarum
Imaginum rectum esse, cum fideles nominatim ab illicitis Idolorum cultibus
deterrere voluit. 1. Pet. 4. Valent. de Idolat. l. 2. c. 7. Vasquez de Adorat.
or no hurt to worship the Devil himself, if he present himself in the
shape of an Angel, or Saint, (as it is well known some prime Jesuits have
vented to the world) this fact of the Israelites would have seemed not so
heinous. But good God! how tenderly does holy Moses take it? As soon as he
descended from the Mount, heard the shouting, saw the dancing, and other
solemnityes performed, before this foure-footed thing, what an unusual
indignation, put this meek man in a manner besides himself? the. Tables
written by Gods own finger, are dashed by him against the ground, and broken,
Aaron (though the high Priest and his elder Brother) is thus sharply taken up
by him; what did this people unto thee, Exodus 32.
that thou have brought so great a sin upon them? The Calfe with a great
deal of have, and eagerness, is burnt in the fire, ground to powder, strawed
upon the water, and forced down the throats of those that served it. Neither
all this satisfies, but the Levites who had continued on the Lords side, they
must also consecrate themselves, and procure a blessing by the slaughter of
their own Sons, and brethren, and yet with what a continued outcry (as
though nothing had been done) does this affrighted man return unto the Lord,
and vent his passion? Oh this people have sinned a great sin, Verse. 31.
and have made them Gods of gold. Verse. 32.
Yet now if thou will forgive their sin, (here forrow, or sobbes, as it
should seem, make the speech imperfect, which recovering, he goes onward, as
it were in a desperate rapture) and if not, blot me I pray thee out of the
Book which thou have written. If this be not enough to affright us from
having the least commerce in the like offense, Gods jealousy may be thought
upon: mentioned in the second commandment, which prosecutes to the third, and
fourth generations, these worshippers of him by images, as those that directly
hate him: His rooting out of the whole families of Jeroboam, Baasha, Zimri, and
Ahab for provoking him with the like abominations: and who observes not, what
unspeakable plunges, and combustions, the palpable, and obstinate Idolatry,
the Romish Church has drawn upon Christendom, to the destruction, and
distraction of Kingdoms, and Commonwealths, and scandal of Turks, and
Jews, who thereby have taken the vantage to deride us, and our Religion? I
forbear to prosecute this further, and mind you only of S. John's conclusion
of his first Epistle, which may serve for a sufficient use, little children
keep your selves from Idols, Amen. Idolaters you see here we have, and have
them punished with a witness, The best is, all were not so, but

6 (...), Some.] The second point to be looked after. As at Moses stroke by
Gods command, the water gushed out of the Rock, and the bread grew in the
disciples hand, by the blessing of their Master to feed multitudes, so the
least particle of Scripture truly weighed, has Mountains of matter in it, as
the Rabbines phrase it. Here is (as it were) a grain of Mustard Seed, and see
how it spreads it self into diverse branches. (...), Some, Therefore not all:
God never forsakes the Church, that he leaves himself without witnesses, Act.
14.17.
except the Lord had left us a seed, or remnant, Isai. 1.9. Romans 9.29.
(as the Apostle cites the Prophet) we had been as Sodom, and been made
like unto Gomorrah. In the trampling therefore of the holy city under foot,
for forty and two months together, Rev. 11.2. some witnesses shall stand up to
Prophecye and speak for it. Idolatry, Heresy, and oppression, shall never so
circumvent, and overspread the Church, but some Protestants will appear to
withstand it, though they spend their lives in the quarrel. 2. (...), some]
what some? how many? A great sum. All the people, all, not scattered here and
there in obscure Conventicles, but all the people gathered together, far the
mayor part, and so far the mayor part, that the better part was forced to
give way unto them, being overborne by the multitude, and in patience to
possess their souls, till God should send a remedy. The mayor part then, or
most voices (Beloved) is no certain rule, to carry a truth in religion, which
some only stand upon; safer it is to be with those eight Persons in Noah's
Arc, 1. Pet. 2.5.
then to be drowned with all the world out of it. Those 7000 which Elias knew
not of, 1. Kings 19.
and which with Elias, bowed not their knees to Baal, were in the right, when
others strayed to their own destruction. 3. (...) not only some, but some of
them] of what sort? how qualified? by conference of this, with the first verse,
we find that they were some, and the greater part of those, whom the Apostle
calls Fathers. I would not have you ignorant (says he) that all our Fathers
were under the cloud, passed through the red sea, ate of Manna, drank of the
Rock, and yet some of them (and the mayor part, as here it is manifest) proved
Idolaters. May not the Fathers then (Beloved) eat sower grapes, whereby the
childrens teeth may be set on edge? As we ought not therefore to follow a
multitude to do evil, Exodus 23* 31.
neither shall thou speak in a cause, to decline after many, to wrest
judgment; so may we not so perversely stick to the traditions of Fathers, as
to be a stubborn, Psalm. 78.
and rebellious generation, a generation that set not their heart aright, with
neglect of our Father which is in Heaven. It is well known, what a cry is
raised for the Fathers, by those that are driven to say some what, to justify
their own superstitions, but these are but delusions to seduce the credulous,
and stagger those that want breeding, and means to find out, and uncase their
impudency. For what pretenses soever are made, Fathers (says Dureus the
Jesuit to our Whitaker) shall be no Fathers: Neque enim Patres censentur, cum
suum aliquid, quod ab Ecclesia non acciperunt, vel scribunt, vel docent. lib.
5. fol. 140. Eatenus non pater est sed vitricus, non doctor sed seductor. De
Iure and More prohibendi libros malos. l. 2. c. 10.
if they cross the designs of mother Church, they are in that relation but
Children, (as Gretser the Jesuit tells us) and therefore must be corrected and
purged as they shall deserve it. Strange practices may be produced in this
kind, how homely the Fathers are handled, by those that stand so much upon
them. n="a" Iacobi Laurentii Reverentia Ecclesiae Roman erga Patres veteres
subdola. Lugdun. Batav. 1624.
One not long since has set forth a just tract, of the Papists slight esteem
of the Fathers, in that behalf. And I may not let slip one instance which he
has not, and I meet with in the argument in hand. One Francis Monceius (as I
mentioned before) excuses Aaaron here from Idolatry, and says the golden
Calfe had the form of a Cherub. The Sorbon Doctor Visorius, that confutes him,
says that all the Fathers are of a contrary opinion. To whom Monceius replies,
that it is not to be heeded so much, what the Fathers wrote, as what they
would, or should have written, if they had lived in these times, or had better
thought upon the matter, by which you may guess of the Fathers credit, with
these men.

8. Thus far we have insisted upon the (...), some of them] that took the
wrong course. All this while there has been little intimation of the
overborne some, that misliked, and withdrew themselves from this Idolatry. Now
those we find to have been the Levites. These fell off from Aaron, and would
by no means join with him in his gross design, though he were their high
Priest, by Gods peculiar appointment. How comes this to pass? The High Priest
an Idolater? Levites against him? Not protesting only by way of appeal, but
resolutely taking part with Moses their Magistrate, to reform that which was
amiss, by Civil authority? What marvel then (Beloved) if that in the
Christian Church, there have been a falling away of the mayor part to the like
Idolatry. That the Chief Priests, and Fathers (by their standing and places)
have been chief actors in it? That some notwithstanding of the sons of
Levi, good and learned men, such as Luther, and Calvin, with their adherents,
and others by their good example, have ever protested against it; though they
were long kept under, as a number not considerable, and forced to give way to
that which they could not redress? That at length there has come a
Reformation (as here by Moses) who put his own hand to it, and sets the
untainted Levites a work, to vindicate Gods glory, and rectify their
disordered Brethren. Here, if any there be so dim-sighted, and unsatisfied, as
to ask where this Church of Israel was, before Moses reformation, most I
think will answer: That it was by Mount Sinai attending Gods further
commands, by his servant Moses; In an excellent way, and orthodox, when Moses
left it, but suddenly fell to Idolatry in his absence, was reformed by his
return, not by making a new people, or bringing new Commandments, but by
taking away Idolatry, and reducing the Congregation to the purity of that
worship, they had so perfidiously contemned, and forsaken. And what has bin
done more by Protestants in reforming Romish Idolatry? Let them never ask
therefore, where our Church was before Luthers time? where was this Church of
the Jews, when the Chief Priest called the Calfe Jehovah, made a holy day for
it, which all the people celebrated, was it not in the same place, though not
in the same case, it was before? Idolatry extinguished it not, but polluted it,
not in all its members, but the mayor part, which reformation cleared again,
not by setting up a new Church, but freeing the old from dross, and retaining
still the good metal, that it ever had continued. Good ground therefore had
Wickliffe before, and Luther afterward, to distinguish inter Ecclesiam Remanam,
and Curiam Romanam. the church of Rome, and the Court of Rome. And had not our
Savior so distinguished before, between the good doctrine of the Scribes and
Pharisees, and their leaven? Mat. 23.
The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses Chair, and therefore whatsoever they
bid you observe, (according to Moses grounds) that observe, and yet take heed,
and beware of the Leaven of the Scribes, and Pharisees; Not the doctrine then,
but the Leaven is here protested against. So when he whips out the buyers, and
sellers, he erects not a new Temple, Ioh. 2.
nor alters their warrantable worship or Ceremonies, but cleares it from those
Thieves, and Cheaters, that had made it a house of Merchandise. By the waters
of Babylon the best of our forefathers, sat down, and wept, when they
remembered thee O Sion. But by the waters of Shiloah, we enjoy the peace of
Sion, purged a Fastu, and Astu, from the tyranny, and treachery, of those that
bear ill will unto it, under the most gracious conduct of our mildest Moses.
But where are our thankfulness, devotion, prayers, praises, to the most
merciful King of Heaven for it? How shall we free our selves from the
aspertion that follows?

9. As it is written, (...).
the people sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to play. This includes
the specification wherein this Idolatry consisted, and whereby it is described.
The Apostle charge them with no more, then that he has ground for, (...),]
As it is written, nor with more particulars, the^ are comprised in their
feasting and playing. For these two daughters of peace, and Idleness, may
claim kindred with most of any vice whatsoever. Now where there is no religion
at all, this scriptum est must plant it, where it is overgrowne with
superstition, this scriptum est must reform it, where there is any doubting,
this must settle it, where doubling, this (...), this scriptum est, rightly
taken, wisely applied, and constantly urged, will discover it. Just as the
pillar of smoke and fire did direct the Israelites: so this scriptum est is
our safest iournall, to carry us through this wilderness of sin. And if in
the hurry of the City, or businesses of the Court, we perchance sometimes may
loose the sight of it, (as the wise men did of the star, Mat. 2.
whiles they were in Jerusalem, yet in lifting our eyes upward, we may find it
again to direct us to the place, and stand right over it, where we shall be
sure to find our Savior. For further proof hereof, we need seek no further,
then how our Savior himself in person has led the way before us. For how
confounded he the Devil himself, in that inexplicable encounter in the
wilderness, but by the sword and buckler of (...), scriptum est, it is
written, Man shall not live by bread only? It is written, Mat. 4.
thou shall not tempt thy Lord thy God? It is written thou shall worship thy
Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve? How stopped he the mouths of
those sacrilegious Hucksters, whose stalles he overthrew in the profaned
Temple, but by this scriptum est, It is written, My house shall be called the
house of prayer; Luke 19.
but ye have made it a den of thieves? The Scribes and Pharisees grumbled at
the applauding Hosanna, of the harmless children: But how does he put them to
a non plus? Have ye never read, out of the mouths of Babes, Mat. 21.
and Sucklings, thou have perfected praise? Who can deny but the testimony of
John Baptist: The voice of the Father from Heaven: the stupendous miracles in
all kinds he daily wrought, were severally, as well as jointly sufficient
proofs that he was the promised Messiah? Yet all this may not satisfy,
without search of these Records. Search the scripture, says he, for against
them, ye have no exception (as ye may have against miracles, and other
evidences: In them ye your selves are convinced in your own consciences, and
think to have eternal life: Now these are they which testify of me. Ioh. 5.
When the Lawyer therefore last of all, would needs have a Rule, whereby to
inherit eternal life, his dispatch was without further ado, What is written?
Luke 10.
How read thou? After such eminent Elogies, from the Master, for the
scriptures supreme esteem, and use, the suffrages of all his followers, may
be well deemed needless.

10. Upon this (...), this scriptum est, the Fathers came in with their
forcible exhortations. It is a manifest revolt from faith, (says the great
Basil) to bring in any thing for religion, Definit. 80, c. 22.
that is not written, and because it is not of faith it must needs be sin;
for who may speak 0 (says Saint Ambrose, De vocat. gent. l. 2. c. 3.
) where the Scripture is silent. That which has not ground from hence (adds
Saint Hierome) is as easily put off as urged. In Mat. 23.
I therefore rest (says Theodoret) only upon the Scriptures. Dial. l. 1. c. 8.
This must end all differences, when all is done, (as S. Augustine affirms,
Cont. Crescon. l. 2. c. 31.
with Origin.) The Schoolmen here fall in full in the maine with the Fathers,
Lumbard. in in praefat. Aq. Scotus.
to whom those that follow them are not opposite, howsoever their practice has
been straggling and dissonant, in the infinite distractions of these syding
times. Thus far these two words (...), as it is written, direct us. But here
we are not to mould the Scriptures according to our fancies, or wrest them to
serve our own turns, or stand upon our own private judgment, in their
doubtful exposition, nor content our selves, that this, or that is written,
except we take it, and partake it, (...) as it is written, Church, Counsels,
Fathers, Schoolmen, new and old Expositors, tongues, Arts, Histories, may, and
ought to be used in their several places, Mat. 13.
for the more judicious clearing and applying of them. For every Scribe, which
is instructed unto the kingdom of heaven, (says our Savior) is like unto a
man that is an householder, who brings forth out of his treasury things new,
and old. How much then does it stand us upon, heartily, and seriously to pray,
as our Church teaches us, in the Collect of the last week? Blessed Lord which
have caused all holy Scriptures to be written for our learning, grant that we
may in such wise hear them, read, mark, learn, and inwardly digest them,
that by patience and comfort of thy holy word, we may embrace, and ever hold
fast, the blessed hope of everlasting life, which thou have given us, in our
Savior Jesus Christ, Amen. For to what end should these things be written
(Beloved) if not to be read, and learned, and pondred, and conferred, and
revised again and again of us, for our eternal good? Precept upon precept,
line upon line must here be taken, according to the Prophets method, least at
any time we should let the^ slip, as our Apostle tells the Hebrews. Records
for our temporal estates will be carefully looked after, Heb. 2.
and shall these heavenly evidences be neglected? No dainties shall be
thought too dear for the bodies welfare, and is not the souls eternal
happiness, worth the looking after? Certainly, when modesty blusheth, fear
faultreth, flattery sootheth, ignorance sticks, craft advises for it is own
ends, hypocrisies makes shows, and performs nothing; This scriptum est will
ever continue, to be bold with the best and greatest, to tell all truth, the
whole truth, and nothing but the truth, as here it does of these debosh't
Israelites.

11. The people sat down to eat and drink, (...).]
and rose up to play. The people, not all (as we had before) but the greater
sum, the most part. Those that gathered themselves together unto Aaron, not
to make them a new leader, in steed of Moses (for I think they greatly cared
not, whether they had any or no) but new Gods instead of Jehovah, not to give
them laws for directions, or punish them when they offended, but to leave them
to their own licentiousness (and when they were disposed to travel) to go
before them; Exodus 32.1.
such is man's corrupt, and selfe-wild nature. We love not Gods, or Governors
that will be punctual, or busy upon us, for the observation of moral,
ceremonial, and judicial laws, that will thunder, or lighten, in the giving,
or breach of their commandments, but galdly admit of those, that will quietly
permit us, to follow our own humors, eat, and drink, without a reckoning;
play, without exception, at unlawful games, or in unfit times or places,
without any restraint, or moderation. Now such Gods must needs be of our own
making, otherwise they would be hardly so fitted to our intemperate desires.
This skill this people had gotten, without a teacher. God they knew made them,
and now in requital, they would make them Gods. But how would they serve them?
Not with grace before meat, in their eating and drinking, nor with the
Psalmists excitation to devotion, piously premised in our Church Liturgy: O
come let us sing unto the Lord, let us heartily rejoice in the strength of our
salvation: Let us come before his presence with thanksgiving, and show our
selves glad in him with Psalms. O come let us worship and fall down, and kneel
before the Lord our maker. Fall down, and kneel, and worship? Nay sit down, to
eat, and drink, and rise again to play. O the ungrateful, and perverse
disposition of us all! the more God in mercy remembers us, the sooner we
forget both our selves, and him, and the better he deals with us, the worse
most commonly we prove. Pius Quintus (that Pope who excommunicated Queen
Elizabeth) was wont to say (I should not relate it, but that I have a Jesuit
for my author, and that is Cornelius a Lapide upon the 11th of Numbers, at the
11th verse) Cum essem religiosus, when I was a religious man (he meant, I
think, a plain Monk, without any Ecclesiastical degree, or dignity) I had a
very good hope, of the salvation of my soul. Being made Cardinal, Extimui, I
was much afraid of it; Nunc Pontifex creatus, but now being Pope, what now?
Pene despero, I almost despair of it. And so thought Clement the 8th (adds my
former Author) that followed after him. An ingenious confession, I must needs
profess, especially from such men so much engaged in the pompes, and vanities
of this wicked world. We can censure such passages at our pleasure, but I pray
God our case prove safer, upon a due survey, that the more blessings we enjoy,
impair us not, rather then better us, that the higher we are advanced, the
further off we are from Heaven, and the less assurance we have, the less
account we make of future happiness. When all the world almost is in a
combustion round about us, those wars, and devastations, and all other
plagues and wants, that eat up our neighbors, yield matter only of discourse
to us, we sit safely as it were on a Theater, to be spectators of others
tragedies, peace spreads her wings over us, as a pavillion, plenty fills
our storehouses; our sons grow up as the young plants; our daughters are as
the polished corners of the Temple; no decay, no leading into Captivity, no
complaining in our streets, Mercy and truth have met together, liberty and
religion have kissed each other. But what thankfulness, what devotion? what
Zeal? what charity? what brotherly kindness, have all these heaps of Gods
mercies stirred up amongst us? You cannot take it amiss, if I bring my text to
tell you,

12. The people sat down to eat, and drink, and rose up again to play. But
how comes this to be Idolatry? If all feasting and revelling incused so heavy
a censure, (...) Gen, 21.8.
how shall Abraham be excused for making a great feast, at the weaning of his
son Isaac? Joseph for the great entertaiment of his brethren? Genesis 43.
King Solomon for the royal feast he made to all his servants? 1 Kings 3.15.
Nay what shall we say of our Savior, (...). Luke 5.29.
was he not at that great feast, made him by S. Matthew, wherein were so many
Publicans and Sinners, that the Scribes and Pharisees took exception at the
company? Luke 19.
did he not also, invite himself to little Zacheus? and help out the feast
with supplying them with wine, Ioh. 2.
at the marriage of Cana, in Galilee, when the poor couple, where like to be
shamed for want of it? To sit down therefore to eat and drink, can have no
such suspicion in it, as to be Idolatrous. But perchance the mischief lay in
the rising up to play? But this seems to be of the same nature, and as
harmless as the former eating, and drinking. The word (...) in the original,
has five significations, 1. To laugh or rejoice in a cheerful and religious
manner: Genesis 18.
as Sarah did at the news she should be a mother in her oldage, whence her
son was named Isaac, of laughing, or rejoicing. 2. To Ieere or mock, as
Ismael did Isaac in spite, Genesis 21.
(out of doubt) because his unexpected birth, cut off his hopes of being old
Abraham's heir. 3. To dally or sport, as Isaac did with Rebeccah, Genesis 26.
so openly that King Abimelech observed them out of a window. 4. To encounter
one the other for proof of valor, so in Abners challenge to Joab, 2. Sam. 2.
Let the young men arise and play before us, but it proved shrewd rough play,
wherein Twelve on a side, at the first bout, took one the other by the heads,
and thrust their sword in their sides, and so fell down all together. Whereof
the place is called Helcath hazzurim, the field of strong men. Last of all,
Rubbi Solomon (whom Tostatus follows) would have it in this place signify to
commit Idolatry: but the word (...) in greek which our Apostle uses, is to be
rendered rather to play for recreation of the body, thereby to cheer up the
mind, to dance, to shout in a light and youthly manner, which will hardly be
aggravated, to come within any compass of Idolatry, especially seeing the
Preacher tells us among other indifferencies, Eccles. 3.
of a time to laugh, a time to dance: and the good old Father in the Gospel
schooleth his repining son, that it is meet to have music, and feast upon
the fatted Calfe, at the recovery of the Prodigal. Luke 15.

13. What then? shall we say, the Apostle cited a place, that proves not what
he intended? That were to derogate from the holy Ghost, who directed his
pen, which cannot be without Blasp hemy. This action therefore of these
Israelites will prove to be Idolatry, in a threefold respect. First, because
those expressions of joy in feasting and sporting, which they were wont to
consecrate to the true God, are here diverted to the solemn worship of a
Calfe, as Aquinas, Lyra, and diverse of the ancients expound it. Secondly, they
presume to make a Holyday of themselves, and ordain it to the Calves worship,
when such solemn feasts should have been set apart for Gods worship only. And
lastly, because their feasting was not upon lawful meats, afforded abundantly
by God, to be received with thanksgiving, but upon such offerings, as the text
shows, had been tendered to the Calves consecration, whereby they became
polluted, and guilty of Idolatry, which the Apostle takes for a strong
argument, to deter his Corinthians, from ventring to eat ought consecrated
unto Idols, 1. Cor. 8.
least contracting the like pollution they should incur the like punishment.
It is a good observation of one, that amongst the burnt offerings thrust upon
the Calfe, and the peace offerings, upon which they feasted themselves, no
sin offerings were here thought upon. The people had got Aaron to be of
their part; Moses was out of the way, who would have surely checked them; all
went on their side, no sin was dreamed of, and then what need offering for
sin? And has not this ever been the proceeding of those, that are in
prosperity? to turn the grace of God into wantonness? To make their belly
their God? their pelf their God? their sportes their God? to be all for peace
offerings, seldom or never for sin offerings. Tush (say they) we shall never
be cast down there shall no evil happen unto us, God hides away his face,
and will never see it. Thus prudent, and noble Hospitality, is turned into
ambitious, and vain glorious bravery; Discreet and moderate recreations, into
desperate, and undoing bettings. Nay the daughters of Syon will not be behind
also with their haughty, and tinkling ornaments, their Caules, their spangles,
their chains, their bracelets, their Bonnets, their changeable and chargeable
suits of apparel. You may find the bill of such costly commodities, Isaiah
3.18. Then Sampson must be had in, to make sport, and drive away the time,
where we have in the original, the very expression of my text, Judges 16.25.
Here are peace offerings too many, but where are our offerings for sin, to
pacify the Almighty for the abuse of his blessings, and the plenty we enjoy
amongst us? Who remembers, or is grieved for the affliction of Joseph, or
stands in the gap with our Moses here, to turn away the Lords indignation,
Amos 6.6.
and for the continuance of his present favor toward us? When the people
wanted water in Beer, after the twice supplying of them in that kind, from the
Rock, Numb. 21. God brought them to a well, whereof he had spoken unto Moses.
But how was the water imparted unto them? The Princes (says the Text) dug
the well, the Nobles of the people dug it, but how? and with what
Instruments? they dug it with their staves (says the Text) by the direction
of the Lawgiuer. As the supreme Lawgiver therefore amongst us, the breath of
our nostrils (whom the King of Kings ever preserve amongst us) carries not the
sword and scepter in vain; So ye Nobles and Princes of the people, Romans 13.
carry not your staves in vain, but for the service of your God, and King, and
for the provision of your selves, and all your inferiors, that have their eyes
fixed upon you. O dig therefore on Gods name with your staves, that the
waters may ascend, and thence descend to the making fertile, of all thirsty
places, where your religious and vigilant care shall find it expedient. You
can foresee by your experienced wisdoms, and redress the inconveniences, of
wast-pipes and secret conveyances, and stopcocks (if such be found) that
convert to the private that which should be public. In your solemn and be
fitting feaslings, and recreations, you may order that there be no Nabals
feasts, where the Master went distempered to bed, and exasperated deserving
David: Nor Absoloms feasts, which brake up in treachery and fratricide: Or
Herod's feasts, so odious for the last course, the Ioule of John Baptist in a
platter: Or Dives feasts, where poor Lazarus for want of an Almoner, is left
to the dogs entertainment. But (...), and (...), feasts of Charity, feasts
of Thankfulness, feasts of true Christian hospitality, and sanctified
magnificence; wherein God may be glorified, Christian unity and sobriety
maintained, wise and free-noble dispositions expressed; holy constitutions, and
commemorations of the Church, and Commonwealth solemnized, till we come all to
sit down at length with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the kingdom of Heaven,
and be feasted with the tree of life, which is in the midst of the Paradise of
God, through the true bread that came down from Heaven, JESUS CHRIST our Lord
and only Savior. To whom with the Father and blessed Spirit, be all Honor and
Glory both now and Ever. AMEN.

FINIS.

