The reward of Wickedness Discoursing the sundry monstrous abuses of wicked
and ungodly worldelinges: in such sort set down and written as the same have
been dyuersely practiced in the persons of Popes, Harlots, Proud Princes,
Tyrauntes, Romish Bishops, and others. With a lively description of
their-seuerall falls and final destruction. Uerye profitable for all sort of
estates to read and look upon.

Newly compiled by Richard Robinson, Servant in household to the right
Honorable Earl of Shrovvsbury.

A dream most pitiful, and to be dreaded

Of things that be strange,
Who loves to reed:
In this Book let him raunge,
His fancy to feed.
To the Worshipful, Gilbert Talbote, Esquier, Second Son to the Right
Honorable Earl of Shrowsburie. etc. Richard Robinson Wishes the fervent
fear of God, Increase of Virtue, Worship and Honor, with Good success, and
many Joyful years.
FOr as much as the little creeping Creatures of the Earth, do teach every
reasonable person to use some kind of trade, whereby for his travail in the
Summer, he may in the blustering blastes of Storming Hiemps, be relieved by
the sweat of his brows, when nothing else is to be reaped upon the soil,
but only Monsterous and huge driftes of Snow: Which is daily put in use by
the little Dormous, who in the Sommertime, ceasseth not from traueyling, till
she be fully persuaded to have sufficient store in her Cabin, to defend the
hungry time of winter: Likewise the crawling Ant, toileth from the first show
of Sir Phoebus face in the morning, till the black Mantelles do obscure the
blasing beams of the same: The Squirrill that lightly Leapes from Branch to
Branch, is ever occupied, as appears by the great store of Nuttes, that
she heapeth together in Summer time, to encounter the barren season: The
fearful Fly is not forgetful of the same, but carries his travails to the
warm hollow reed, wherein he dwells holsomely, and Bankettes merrily of
his late travails: (What shall I say, of the busy Be) whose curious skill
in building of her Lodge, and knowledge in Flowers and Herbs, in chosing the
Good, and leaving for the Spider the ill, never ceasing, but always in
travail, hoping in winter to rest and enjoy the fruits of her travail:
Immediatelye upon the sudden, is not only spoiled of this the fruits of her
great toil, but commonly slain for the lucre thereof: (Even so) Right
Worshipful, as I am not only taught to abandon Idleness, as well by the holy
Scriptures, as also by these creeping Creatures: So am I doubtful, least after
my travail, I shall reap the harmeles Bees reward: Except, (as my trust is)
your Worship do seem by your courtesy, to protect as well me, as this little
portion of my labor: For me thinks that I hear already Envy whet his
Teeth, whose blade would long ago, have been bathed in my blood, if secreate
thwacks could have touched my guiltles Carkas: Yet notwithstanding I see the
blasing brond in his fist, to fiere the great Cannons upon me: for already
false Report his Trumpeter, sounds up his forging Trumpe of Detraction, whose
honest nature is neither content with that which he wishes him self, nor yet
pleased if he might have or obtain, that which other men desire. Many
mofriendes this chafing Champion has, whose Cankered minds, and proud
stomachs, would not much stick to take in hand to Lift with Atlas: To wrestle
with Sampson, or take the club from Hercules. But disdaining further to speak
of Envy, and his said friends, which hates every man, and every man him,
and them, being nothing doubtful of Momus, Zoilus, nor Sicophants wl^elps: I am
as well content to bear with their barking, as many worthy Clerks heretofore
have done, and do daily. So that it may please your VVorshippe, to take in
good part this simpletrauaile of mine, which to eschew Idleness, and
specially i^ such times as my turn came to serve in watch of the Scottishe
Queen, I then every night collected some part thereof, to thend that now it
might the better appear, that I used not altogether to sleep: Though one
time I chaunsed among many vvatchfull nights, to take a slumber, which
incited me to compile this fiction of Poetry, as more largely appears in my
Prologue: And though it be a Drousie Dreaming piece of work, neither
garnished with Rhetorike, Eloquence, Curious terms, nor pleasant matter, to
purchase praise of dainty Dames, and fantastical Knights of Cupids court: (As
it is not painted with these properties) so I am assured that your worship
does not mislike the want thereof. And for that it was thus begun and ended
in my Lord your Fathers house: my singular good Lord and Master, for whom,
and my good Lady my Mistres, I and al mine, daily pray, as we are many ways
bound to do: Do nothing mistrust, but that your worship will the rather take
in good part the same, not weying the gift; but the good will of the gyuer.
And so your worship does as well bind me and mine, to rest yours, to our
power, as also thereby, my poor piece of travail from the spoil of Sclander,
and the blody butcher Envy, by the same, guard and keep, for othervvaies, my
said enemies will not stick to revvard my pains with the poor harmles
Be. Thus I cease, and rest.

Your VVorshippes poor beseecher. Richard Robinson.

The Aucthour to the Reader.
AS Idleness the daughter of destruction, is to be abandoned of all men, that
love to lead the life of good and honest members of a common wealth: so is it
as convenient that every man yield account to his country of his Zeal and
good vvil that he ought by duty to bear unto the same, by some virtuous or
Godly work, for good example sake: In consideration whereof (Gentle reader)
as well to profit my country (to my power) as also to eschevve Idleness: I
have attempted this my second work unto the place of thy indifferent
judgment, not mistrusting, but thou vvilt as thankefully accept the same, as I
have willingly vouchsafed to bestow my travail, to pleasure thy delight in
reading hereof. And though it be escaped my hands, not altogether so well
plained and pollished, as I purposed it should have been: Attribute I pray
thee, the cause to the busy lives, that all my Lord my Masters men do lead
in the service of our Sovereign Lady, the Queens Majesty: Since the
protection of the Scottishe Queen was committed to my said Lord in charge,
whose true and duetifull service therein, to his Prince both night and day:
as well by the travail of his Honors own Person, as also all them that
serve him: I doubt not but FAME has told it to all the Princes in EVROPE and
noble subjects: as it were to be a Mirror to the rest, that shall serve in
credit of their Prince, from age to age, no little to the increasing of his
honor, and all his: (which God maintain). And I, being one of the simplest
of a hundredth in my Lords house, yet notvvithstanding, as the order there is,
I keep my watch, and ward, as time appoints it to me: at the which
times, gentle reader, I collected this together, faining that in my sleep
MORPHEVS took me to PLVTOS Kingdom in a Dream: The which device, I mistrust
not, but thou shall think well of: Notvvithstanding I know that the
Papiste will gnashe his teeth at me: The vvanton Dames will scolde at me:
The Covetous vvorldlinges will disdain me. The vain glorious persons in
Authority, will envy me: False accusers will abhor me, Traitors will
utterly detest this my simple work. Another sort there is, which I namde
not yet: As the Cobbler, and ZOILVS: Whose nature is to play hissing HIDRAS
part, rejecting the virtuous labors of painful persons, Lying Idle them
selves like Buzzing Drones, devouring up the svveete travail of the busy
Bees, (but for these I pass not.) Sith the most noble and famous vvriters of
the world, have not yet hitherto escaped the d^^t of their abominable
tongues. Wherefore Ilothe longer to bestow the time so ill, as to speak of
their beastly behavior against the skillful. Beseeching thee once again
gentle Reader, that I may reap at thy hands, but the revvard of my good
will, which shall not only content my travail: But also bind me another
time, to present some other novelty, more fitter to ^eede thy fantasy. Hoping
in the mean while, thou vvilt in my absence stand an indifferent friend.
Thus vvishing to thee and thine, as to my self and mine: I bid thee fare
well.

From my Chamber in Sheffield Castle. The xix. of May. 1574. Thy Friend. R.
Robinson.

The Aucthour to the Book.
THY woeful plaints, thy rueful face, and careful countenance shoe,
To all the world: be not tonguetide, reveal abroad the woe
That is among the silly souls, in Plutos ouglie lake,
For wickedness done on the Earth, how love does vengeance take.
Blushe not my book, to thunder forth, the torments thou have seen,
Tell vvilfull wits, and hateful hearts, what just deserved teene:
In Plutos pit they shall abide, that headlong plunge in sin,
Be not abashte to tell the best, what plagues be there within.
And whom thou saw in sincke of sorrow, bewail and toil in grief,
Why and wherefore, for whom, and what, they bide in this mischief.
And why thou mournest, tell the cause, and wherefore thou art sad,
No doubt thy tears, and travail both, may thousands make full glad,
Except the Cobbler gin to carpe, that always loves to cauell,
Or sect of Sicophants stur up, ( Zoilus) that drnnken Iauel.
To stamp and scorn against thy talk, that thou art chargde vvithall,
For to reward thy sugered gift, with bitter stinking gall.
(But if they do) no force, no harm, their wonted use is known,
The difference both of them, (and thee) Report has justly blown.
And doubt not but the learned, love, thy company to have,
And hissing Hidras venimde stinge, shall daily from thee save.
And when the skillful heads shall scan, the tale that thou must tell,
I charge thee, pardon crave of them, it does become thee well.
And if they do demand, from whence thou came, or what is thy name,
The Just reward of wickedness, my Lords I am the same,
(Say thou) which came from Plutos-Pit, whom Morpheus led with him,
In drowsy Dream, to see the souls, Rewarded there for sin.
Which sightes, so rare and seldom seen, as in my dream I see,
Good Lords, and Ladus, with the rest, shall straight revealed be,
And doing duty, thus no doubt, but thou shall be imbraste,
Of such as do of honor, or of virtuous learning taste.
FINIS.
I Quoth Richard Robinson.

The Book to the Aucthour.
AND must I needs be packing hence, about such news to bear,
Which shall be to the most, these days, an inward grief to hear?
Why know thou not, that worldlings wish, to dwell on earth for aie,
And may not bide, but them abhor, which say they must away?
How shall I escape the cruel Judge, that is corrupt with gold,
Or crafty Carles and Muckscrapes now, that al from poor men hold?
The Tyrant he will whet his blade, the proud will present puff,
The wanton Dames will skould at me, the Roister strange will snuff.
Piers Pickthanke and Tom teltale, will devise a thousand ways,
Tibbe Tittiuilly, that lowering Less, some ill on me will raise.
Whoremongers, they and al their mates, I doubt will stone me straight,
Flatterers, Filchers, and Sclanderers both, I look but when they sight.
Rent Rackers, that do fleece the poor, and Baillifes false untrue,
With bragging Officers forgetting God, that Conscience bid adue.
Murder, Treason, Theft and Guile, may not abide my face,
The greatest number at these days, will hurt me in each place,
And lusty Youth, stark stamping mad, will be to hear these news*
Wherefore I grieve these Dreams to tell, ifte were in me to choose,
Think thou they will credit Dreams these days, that Christ will scarce
believe?
No, no, I doubt it overmuch: then blame not me to grieve.
But had thou pende some pleasant songs, of Uenus smiling boy,
I not mistrust but almost all, would clappe their hands for Joy.
Or any thing, but that which does, reprove men's silthy vice,
No doubt among the most, it would have been of greatest Price.
But speed, as speed may, abroad I will attempt in haste,
Either of thanks, or else rebukes, the tone or the other taste.
The virtuous sort I not mistrust, the wicked here I warn,
The wise in christ, will thank me much, the fool will laugh me scorn.
And now the pains and plagues below, where Charon rows the barge,
As Thaucthour has commanded me, I shall declare at large.
And if I chaunse to speak amiss, thy pardon here I crave,
Repentance at the sinners hand, Is all Christ seeks to have.
FINIS.
Richard Smith in praise of the Aucthor.
YE Muses all of Thespyas, with sacred Songs that sing,
Now stay your steps give ear a while, and hark what news I bring.
Your Son that lately did indite with sacred silver quill,
In Forest here is fled away, unto Pernassus hill.
Where he among the Muses there, and Ladies of great Fame,
Contrites the time both day and night, in service of the same.
Beholding of these Goddess face, with beauty shining bright:
Like to Diana with her train, Resplendishing by night.
Ambrosia is his food, sweet Nectar is his drink,
What pleasures are not reaped there, that mortal heart can think?
I do him deem in deed, to be sir Orpheus Fe^^*
Who made the stones to understand, and senceles Trees to hear.
The savage Beasts of sundry kind, came thrusting in a throng,
And went out of the vvilsome woods, to hear his sacred song.
Such grace the Muses give to some, for to delight the ear,
And to allure the mortal minds, enchaunted as it were.
A Diamonde for dainty Dames: For Peers a precious Pearl,
This Robinson the Rubi red, a Jewel for an Earl.
Such Pearl can not be bought I know, for all the Gold in Cheap^,
The graces hear have powrd their gifts together on an heap.
Such gifts can not be graft no doubt, without some power divine:
Such cunning hyd in one man's head, as Robinson in thine.
If I might vewe thy pleasant Poemes, and Sonettes that excel,
Then should I not thirst for the floodes of Aganippes well.
Thou proffered prise at Olimpias, and got the chiefest game,
And through the school of cunning skill, have scalde the house of Fame.
Where thou on stage alone, do stand Triumphantlye,
About thy head a Garlande gaye, of liuelye Laurel Tree.
Which that these Noble Nymphs thought good for blasing their renown,
In token of this learned Lore, adorned with that Crown.
If I should pen this praise, as thou do well deserve.
It were a volume for to make, and time ^^ would not serve.
For what needs water to be brought, to power into the Seas,
Or why do I with Pen contend about this Robins praise?
Whom ^^umpe of truth has blown abroad, that hills and Dales resoundes*
With Eccoes from the earth below, up to the sky reboundes.
FINIS.
Quoth Richard Smith, Clark^.

The Prologue.
IN December when days be short and cold,
And irksome nights amid the storms began rore,
That flocks from feeldes forsake their fold,
And Birds from swelling floodes do shrink to shore,
The plowgh does rest that cut the soil of yore.
And toyling Ox in cabin close does stand,
That wonted was to travail painful land^:
And when the hawtie hills and ragged rocks,
In mantels white be clothed round about:
When fowls and beasts, as well by heardes as flocks,
Seeks smoking springes, hot thirst to dowte,
Whose flames does force the frosen banckes throughout,
To yield their flintish ribs, to gushing floods of rain,
And locked streams at large to set again:
When every Tree the ardent coulors lost,
And brave depainted looks of fragrant smelles.
When bragging Boreas thus the soil had tossed,
That Heart and Hind did quake in fields and felles,
With Bull and Bear for cold both cries and yelles.
And shrowling makes each thing that life does bear,
To stand with shaking limbs, the storms to hear.
On either side the hills when blastes do rise,
As sharp as thorns the naked skin does hit,
And Saturn to the earth does show his frosen eyes,
Whose wrath does pinch each creature to the quick,
Which often does cause both young and old fall sick,
With cough, and cold, and stopping rheumes also,
Quotidians, feures, diseases many mo:
And when Eolus his prison had vnlocken,
And all the retchlesse route let run at large*
Whose russhing rage each pleasant brau^ch has broken
Whereof before Dame Flora had the charge,
On Tiber st^rreth neither boat nor Barge.
Tryta^ soundes her trump, and Neptune gins to frown,
The sayler strikes from mast the sails a down.
When young and old their bones with cloth do load,
And hoodes unto their heads do buckle fast:
And when the Boy does rest that bare the goade,
And keeps the chi^neyes end til Hyemps storms be past,
When men do doubt their winter stuff to last,
And careful cattle with open Iawe does crave,
Their keepers meat their carkas for to save.
When men delight to keep the fire side,
And winter tales incline their ears to hear,
When merry mates be met, that will abide,
Each ^illes his pot of Nutbrowne A^e or Bear,
As is the trade of Ale knights every where,
To toss the pottes and plye the flitting boules,
Then pay their pence, and pacl^e with dronken noule^.
In this season it was my lotte to fall,
Among a masque chosen for the ^^nce,
Some reelde, some fell, some held them by the wall,
Some sang, some chid, and swear gogs precious bones,
(Quoth one to me) friend camst thou from saint Jones?
what penance have thou done, thou art so lean and pale*
No force (quoth another) he shall fill his pot of Ale.
Content (quoth I) and thereto I agree,
Fill pot Hostice of Pery, Ale, or Bear:
My head it recreated after study,
To shut forth the time, though rusticall they were,
Thus walked the Kanikin both here and there,
Till the wife cried to bed for saving of hi^ fire,
Contented (quoth I) for that was my desire.
The shot was gathered, and the fire rakte up,
Each man to his lodging began for to draw:
Some stackering stumbled as mad as a Tup,
Some crept under the mattres^e into the straw.
Another sort began to plead the common law.
I looked about and saw them so dight,
Put out the candle and bad them goodnight.
My drowzie heart thus being at his rest,
Took no care for the cold, all sorrows were past:
So late it had been at the good Ale feast,
That the world for ever I thought would last.
In mine ear thunders no sound of winters blast.
I thought none ill, my head was laid full saft,
All carke and care my wandering sprite had la^t.
Not lying thus one hou^e by the clock,
Me thought the chamber shone with Torches bright,
And in the haste at door I heard one knock,
(And said what) Slugge, why sleep all the night?
I starting up beheld one in my sight,
Dashed all in golden rays, before me did appear,
(And said) I am a God, behold that stands here.
Mine ears were filde, with noise of Trumpets sound,
And dazzled were mine eyes, my sense was almost gone*
But yet amazde my knee vaylde to the ground,
And say de hear Lord, thy will and mine be one,
What is thy mind, more ready there is none,
To ride to run, to travel here and there,
By land and seas half worthy if I were.
But ^^^st to know thy name I humbly thee bese^che,
Forgive my ^udenesse this of thee to crave,
He aunswering said* with m^eke and lowly speech,
Morpheus is my name* that always power have,
Dreams to show in Country, Court, or Cave.
In the heavens above, or Plutoes kingdom lo,
Its I that have the power each thing t'unfolde and sho^*
And know (quoth he) that every night and day,
Who shuts up his eyes, his head to feed with sleep,
His wandering spirit attendes on me always,
To trudge and travel, where I shall think it meet,
As well to mount the skies, as in the secrets deep,
As swifte as thought, what God has greater pour,
Then all that is or was, to show thee in an hour?
And whether wilt I go, Lord Morpheus (quoth I)
I here am pressed thy will for to obey.
With an earnest looks (quoth he) I will that by and by,
To Plutoes kingdom with me thou take thy way.
Though frayde I were, I durst not well say nay.
With him I went that irksome place to see,
Where woeful sprites full sore tormented be.
And going by the way these words he said,
Be of good cheer, me thinks thou look pale,
Pluck up thy heart and be no deal afraid,
Although thou go into this ouglie vale.
And thus or he had fynisht half his tale,
Cerberus barckt that griselie hounde of hell,
The earth did quake to hear him houle and yell.
When Morpheus heard this cruel barcking Curre*
For Mercuries rod he send with all the have,
This wondering porter charmde he might not stir,
Till he^ and I throughout his office past,
So to the second ward we came at last.
Where Wrath kept the walls, and Envy the gates,
Associate with Pride and whoredom their mates.
With cruel countinaunce terrible to s^^,
These horrible officers fixed their eyes,
Filthy to behold monstrous and ouglie,
They gathered to the gates like swarms of Bee^,
Gnashing their teeth, asking who were these,
That durst be so bold Plutos kingdom to enter,
Or within their office so rudely to venture.
I am Morpheus (quoth he) mine authority you know,
As well in the heavens as also here,
My nature and quality is dreams for to show,
Therefore give place, and let me come near.
These words scarce said, but the gates opened were.
So to the third ward we came by and by,
Not far from that place where great Pluto did lie.
The ward as I said where Pluto then lay,
Was fortefied with Tirauntes for the nonce,
Some crying, swear yea, and other some nay,
Renting each others flesh from the bones,
Some flang fierbrandes, and other some flang stoanes.
With howling and crying terrible to hear,
What plague could be thought that was not present there?
The chief Captains of all this rablous route, The greatest vices on earth be
chief Captains in Hell.

Were Oppression of the poor and ^ake Private gain,
With a sort of their kin that looked full stout,
That in that vale for ever must remain.
There was Peter Pickethanke and Privy disdain,
Tom Teltale was appointed in a Turret to watch,
Laurence Lurcher a Baylife to snatche and to catch.
There was Darckenesse and Ignorance linckt in a chain, Let us abhorte these
vices and cruel crimes.

With Error and Free Will, Arrogance, and Selfelooue,
Forgetfulness of God, and Transgression did remain,
With Mistrust and Supersticion, which might not remove
Hypocrisy the King in a turret above.
With Lucre, Cruelnesse, and Bludshed his brother,
Domination, and Fullness, Abundaunce, and other.
Pomp he sat puffing as though he were mad,
Symony under hand began to conuaye, Confusion does de^o^^ wickedness.

Iniquity and Sophistry, with countenance full sad,
Sat with Murder, and Tyranny cursing the day,
Certainly to see it was a tragical play,
To behold abomination, what torments she had,
(with the rest) whereat Confusion was glad.
Many thousands there were that I omit,
For want of time fully to describe,
To tell truth the number passes skill and wit,
To be namde of me, that howled there and cryde.
When these loath some leyds, had Morpheus espyde,
They flew on heaps to know from whence he came,
Who answered thus I am a God no man.
And what is thy name (quoth they) Morpheus answered he
Whom Pluto does admire, and honor both I trow,
And Proserpine your Queen, mighty though they be,
And Mynos your Judge will do the same I know.
I am the God that always dreams does show.
I am free this way to guide and lead each man,
without demand to know from whence I came,
Then up start Peter Pickethanke by and by,
These news to Pluto in haste he ran to tell,
And almost mad, with open Jaws began cry,
My Lord (quoth he) there is strangers come to hell,
What ^l^e (quoth Pluto) is not all things well?
Yea Sir (quoth he) its Morpheus that is here,
Then Pluto answered, why bidst him not come near?
The third wa^de opened then at large,
The Palace then approaching in our sight,
Where raging furies of woeful souls had charge,
To torment thousand ways, both day and night,
Miserable darckenesse there was without light,
Grasping and groping, great discord and strife,
Weeping and wayling, and blasphemous life.
The stinking smoke that from that dongeon rose,
Corrupts the skies, and clowdeth all with shade,
The thundering blast that from that furnesse blose,
A dubble pain, the silly sprites has made*
With rufull plaintes to hear in every glade.
That i^ the sorrows half were pende I see,
In tears there would be drowned many an eye.
But when we came this ouglie God before,
Hayle (quoth Morpheus) thou God of darckenesse great,
Hayle Proserpina here Queen for evermore,
Long may thou hold thy place and seat,
I am come (quoth he) my custom for to pleate,
Thou know of old that wont I am to see,
As well thy kingdom, as mighty Jove's on hie.
By Styx (quoth he) thy ancient custom old*
I will not break, but as thou have before,
In all my regiment, I will thou shall be bold.
To do all things as thou wast wont of yore,
But look of me thou seem to crave no ^nore.
Except you two, who is my gates within,
To pray for pardon it profytes not a pin.
Then answered Morpheus I never thought to crave*
The pardon of the prowdst that in thy soil do^th rest,
Nor yet the greedy Tyrant toombde in grisly grave*
Nor any such that pooremen has oppressed.
For gylefull gluttons to speak I thought it least.
All these with other mo, I know must stay with thee,
How wickedness rewarded is that's all I wish to see.
Content (quoth Pluto) and commaundment he gave,
To all his offyc^^^ his kingdom through,
*That Morpheus and I should license then have,
Each place for to search in Hill, Dale, and Clowgh,
In thick or in thin, in smooth or in rough,
In hot or in cold where ever it be,
The wickeds reward we should both hear and see.
This said, we departed from that filthy puddle,
And forth we past, the left side that cave,
Where we found a greater and crueller trouble,
Then all this while I knew any to have,
For one among many we heard rail and rave.
With a woeful voice* me thought it said this,
Come see alas the reward of wickedness.
At length to the place we chaunst for to hit,
Where Alecto had charge to rule and dispose,
There we beheld one lying in a pit,
Sodden in sorrows from the top to the toes.
Their pains for to painte in meeter or prose,
Does pass my skill, the least to describe,
Though Tessiphon her self my pen now should guide.
But what I saw in this my drowsy dream;
And who they* were* as now to mind I call,
Why and wherefore to you I shall proclaim,
That thus they lost the joys supernall,
And have possessed the woeful place infernal*
Lend me your ears for now my tale begins*
How wicked wightes rewarded be for sins.
FINIS.
The reward of wickedness.
HELLEN tormented for her treason to her Husband, and living in fornication
ten years, whose words follow.
O Foulest fuery, that raging hell does guide,
O worse then wrath, or endless wicked life
O swarming plages, y^ passes flesh to bide,
O doubtful dome of Plutos broiling strife.
O Stigion spew thy flames to end this life.
O just reward I say, of wicked deeds:
O greatest mischief, among these puddels rife,
O come make haste, you flames of glowing gleedes.
You Gods that sit in seats of passing bliss,
whose Joys my endless pains surmounteth far:
Do you consent for to reward me this,
that whylome was in Greece, the Lamp, and Star?
What meant you first to make and then to mar?
I am the work of all your whole consentes:
No brute nor fame, of Earthly woman harre,
woe worth my fate, full sore it me repentes.
O worthy Dames, lend me your listening ears,
refrain your Citherons, and pleasant Lutes also:
With Virginalles, delighting many ears,
from out your hearts, let thought of Music go.
Perhaps you daine, that I shall will you so,
but marvel not, ne at my words take scorn:
It is your parts though you were ten times more,
to help my plainte, with tears that I was borne.
Cast of your Golden Rays, and ritche attire,
put on the mourners weeds, see^^e to lament:
Hide your painted faces, that set men's hearts on fire,
learn this of me, your bewtye soon is spent.
You may by me your wicked lives lament,
from spowting Conduites let gushe the sloods of tears
Let scalding si^hes from broyled hearts be sent,
your just reward for wickedness appears.
Although it does abashe each daintye Dame
to read of me, or yet to hear me read:
I am the mark for you to shun like shame,
disdain me not though high you bear your head*
You that of Husbands all this while be sped,
be true to them in all your conversation:
Beware take heed, defile no time their bed,
among the Gods it is great abomination.
I was in bewtye passing all the rest,
and so by nature as curious made and wrought:
That if in me there had been grace possessed,
to match the Gods I might have well been thought.
But virtue is the bewtye, Ladies all, Virtue is the beauty of man and woman.

and not your painted faces and shining glee:
No greater mischief can among you fall,
then for to feed your ficle profane eye.
For once I had my self such profane looks,
twirlde out with eyes that were celestial like,
Whose sparckling twinche were sharper then the hooks,
cast in the stream with bait for Fish to bite*
A thing immortal seemed I to be,
but yet corrupt with manners that were naught*
As painted Tombe^, with bones be inward filthy:
so outward I, but inward vices wrought.
And to her self be wayling thus alas,
in either hand an Ore, she labors sore:
At length she was espide where I and Morpheus was,
then calde she us that stood upon the shore.
Came near good Morpheus, straight thee began to rore,
thou see my pains, thou know not yet my name:
In Stigion lake I bide for evermore,
the wife of Menelaus I am the very same.
And Hellen lo I am that hear abide,
within this ryuen Boat, inuironde as you see:
As just reward for fleshlye lust and pride,
which s^apeth not, but hear rewarded be.
Many a worthy wight lost his life for me,
and dyed all berayde and ^lorried all in blood:
Therefore I pray thee yet come near and see,
the torments I abide within this hellishe flood.
Alas uneath my hand can hold the pen,
my sight devoured is with grievous tears*
When I but think how that I saw her then.
that once did lead the crewe of Uenus pears,
No honest heart but it would rewe her ^late.
that heard and saw as much as we that tide:
But all alas to grieve it is to late,
the Gods ordeine that she shall there abide
Amid a Sea that boyleth fierye floods,
with mixed blood flies up and down the Skies,
Where lurking Rocks with hautie dreadful muds
on every side appeared in our eyes.
About the which most venomous serpents flies,
huge storming blastes this wicked stream does move:
What sparks of gleides rise up like swarms of Bees, A description of the
place where she toweth in a riuen Boat in Stigion

and furies fell their wicked parts do prove.
For in a Boat berent on every side,
(and as I said) she sittes, in every hand an Ore:
And strives still between the wind and Tide,
now haling from the Rocks, and by and by from shore.
The choice is hard, when this refuge is best,
to toil amid these flaming fluddes as she:
Or else t'ariue amid the Serpents nest,
for on the land with blades the Tyrants be.
Which round about this plaguie Stigion pit,
in battle raye and armor black do stand:
Cutthrotes, as egar as any Fish of byt,
that always watch to see her come to land.
Each Butcher holds a mortal Are in hand,
for to revenge the blood she caused shed:
The which for truth, when as I vewde and scande,
with heaps of woe, to Morpheus thus I said.
Alas (quoth I) this greeues me most of all, The Gods have no respect of
persons.

to see her fate, whose bewtye Clerks commend:
Me think the Gods that sit in seats supernall,
some mercy should at length and pitye send.
Each one (quoth Morpheus) who seems to offend,
according to their deeds without respect
Have here reward for wickedness in t'hende,
as pleases Pluto, or whom he has elect.
And as these words were said, we heard her cry, The one fornicator
destroys the other experience tells.

(O Paris, Paris,) for cuermore woe be the time
Thy faigning face, it was my chaunse to spy,
or that it was thy luck to look on mine.
Thou steynde my name, alas so did I thine,
my mischief hit by thee, by me the like thou had*
O wicked Hellen, this all men may define,
And Paris for thy part, thy fortune was as bad.
O worthy Troy, happy had thou binne* What mischief does not a wicked woman
breed?

if sleepie Nurse had strangled me in bed:
Then bloodye mischief had escaped all my kin,
and noble Hector had never lost his head.
Many a worthy man had liude, that now is dead,
Troy had florisht still, whose walls are sact full lo:
Menelaus had never yet polluted bed,
and if the Gods my death had poynted so.
All Greece unto this day, does curse the time, ^n y^^ bargain where no man
^innes. etc.

with many a famous Prince of noble birth:
So Paris, thou art like wise cursed of thine,
for thou and I were troubles to the earth.
Alas therefore now changed is our mirth, It is an old prouerd take heed is
a fair thing.

the bloodshed in our cause does vengeance cry:
Therefore take heed you Dames of mighty birth,
to t'hende of all beginninges, ever cast your eye.
For, had I never painted up my face,
nor shot the boultes of wanton whirling eyes:
Had grace and virtue dwelled in that place,
then had I saved all the lives of these.
For when a man the looks of women sees,
he lies at watch, to see her cast the darte:
Hit whom it happes, (he is no man that flees,)
then blame him not, that does defend his part.
For thou alas good Paris not to blame,
(nor none but I) that cast my secreate looks Old pleasure^ bread new
sorrows.

So sleightfullye, to tyse thee with the same,
before the Gods I wish: none other books.
I cast him sugared baits, I catch on bitter hooks,
or else the suite had Paris never take:
I laid him letters, in secreate holes and noukes,
for to attempt the venture for my sake.
And what was he that would not take in hand, Wickedness destroys it se^e.

to hassarde all, at that time for my sake,
Whose match on earth, did never go nor stand,
then blame him not such enterprise to make?
O Ladies be wittye, and quietness make,
and dread the Gods you worthy Grecian Dames*
For here she lies within this flaming lake,
bewrapt in woe, to quite her youthful games.
My Pageant though I playde in open sight,
and that the world did manifestly know:
I would not wish that you by secreate night,
or closer craft should use your Husbands so.
The Gods above all sleightye secreates show,
to every ear and eye, be straight reuealde:
You hear it read in Scripture long ago,
that naughtye acts were never yet concealde.
And then when Fame h^^^ ^unded up her trumps, A sin and a shame before the
Gods and men also.

and published all your deeds and filthy life:
Then shall confusion put you to your Iumpes,
your Husbands shall disoaine to call you wife.
Your friends shall blushe to hear you namde,
your foes rejoice in every coast about:
To call you mothers, Children are ashamde,
lo this besure, it ever falls out.
And finallye the Gods from joy and bliss,
shall cast you into Stigion lake to frye:
As pleases Pluto so your sorrows is,
mark well my words, I do allege no ly^.
And then it is to late for to repent or cry,
your woeful S^rikes reioyseth hell to hear:
(As for my part) unhappy wretch I try,
whose just reward thou seeist plain appear.
When fowlest thought of treason to your mates, Mark you worthy Matrones the
counsel of ^ofull Hell^^.

shall prick your ^ickle minds as some it does:
Yet let this one thing pearce your peeuishe pates,
that like the slipp^^ yse so glideth from ye youth.
And since there is nothing of greater truth,
through lewdenesse lose not then your noble names.
Be most assured, mischief straight insuth,
alas therefore, take heed you worthy Dames.
And scorn no deal, my rewfull plaintes to hear,
if hap be on your sides, I may such warning be
To every one that is posse^t with fear,
that by my fate like danger for to flee.
Therefore as often as follye feeds your eye,
spend time in reading books, that worthy Clarks have pende:
In steed of Lu^es and other harmony,
your willing ears a while to learning lend.
So Cupid and his Lore you shall forget, The virtuous and godly Wives be
shrinde among the Gods for ever.

with all such driftes as he and his do drive:
Of sclaunder and reproach you shall escape the net,
and Fame with golden trumpe shall sound your virtuous
Thus winning noble name, your lines shall end, line,
so vertuouslye that after vital breath,
The Gods their Angels for your spirit shall send,
to dwell with them in bliss, thus Scripture says.
And with these words cast almost on the shore,
the woeful wretch with toyled wearye bones,
With all the haste in flood does lay the Ore,
that headlong Boat and all, does flee attonce.
Where hissing Serpents swarm as thick as hail,
that likewise waited in their subtle kind
With whetted stinges this Lady to assail,
for to reward her loathsome lustful minds.
And as we did perceive she wished that we,
to every worthy wight report should make,
How fornicatours in hell rewarded be,
and how the Gods upon them vengeance take.
For straight alas amid that ouglye lake,
her hand she puts up, and bad farewell:
Thus endless pains her former talk began slake,
more news of her, I am not able to tell.
For why, the hissing of the wicked worms,
with foam of surging lakes, that rores against the rocks
And furious thondering flames, that boiles and brommes,
beside the fowls of many filthye flocks,
On Helmettes, Bills, yield many mortal knockes,
with thumping of the Cannons cruel shottes:
The noise of Chains, and wrenche of bands and locks,
with smorid smoke, of boiling Pitche in Pottes.
As fearful daunse of Chimneys builded hye, The Innocents blood shed
w^lfullye, craves vengeance.

and fall of Turrets, that sleyeth man and child:
With widows, whose fatherles children do cry,
their plaintes alas, all Joye of hope exilde.
To hear them groan, whom mortal weapon spoilde,
with crashe of staves, that then in pieces flow:
A voice cried vengeance (on them that were defilde
with spilling guiltless blood) that might not do thereto.
Another voice, went hurling up and down,
woe, woe, to such as strife stir up or brewe:
And specially by wars, to sack both City and Town, ^ voice.

lay waste the soil and ploughe, where Oxen drew.
From mirthe to mourning, all to change a new,
wives and children, spoilde before each others face:
The causers ever, the first them selves that rewe,
and woe still be to you, that have so little grace.
These soundes of sorrows, that rose so many ways,
bereu'de us Hellen, poor wretch in flaming Seas.
FINIS.
The Books verdite upon Hellen.
WHo heard me tell this tale, that does their eyes witholde,
Or that their colors does not pale, to hear it read or told?
Is any heart so hard, that would not melt to here?
You Ladies do you not regard, the fall of bewties peer?
And have you locked up, salt flooddes within your eyes?
Why have you kissed Medusas cup? Your hearts why do they frees?
Has Lethea Lake bewicht all you that living be?
Nor has not pity never twicht your hearts to mourn with me?
Perhaps you do disdain to hear such tidings told:
But yet you may be glad again, I say both young and old.
Ulisses wife does loase no fame nor honor here:
No, No, nor any one of those, that live in godly fere.
Nor yet the good Alcest, does catch no blotte nor stain:
Nor Griseld does not loase the leastof Hippos happy gain,
I am assured this, that Cleopatra winnes
Through Fame a triple bliss, lo now my tale begins.
For Creseid she is one, whose face may blush to hear,
Of Hellens life, that now is gone, ungracious Circes peer.
In beauty Venus match, Arcynos worse by mutche:
Medeas sleyghtes she had to catch, whom pleased me to towche.
Isay its such as these, that Synons shifts do use:
And virtuous studies seem to lose, on wanton toys to muse.
I mean such retchelesse dames, that play Sylenos part:
To win such merry pleasant games, as teach sir Cupids art.
Lo these are they and such, that ought with shamefaste look,
To be abasht when they shall touch, or view this simple book.
Since Hellens faults are known, and yours in secret hyd:
Take heed least you be overthrown, as Hellen has be teed.
And blame her vices all, but woeful chance bewail:
For while I live even so I shall, if sorrow might prevail.
And since it was your happes, so worthy a Dame to have:
To warn you from such after claps, as turn you might to scath.
Whose face did stain the rest, of all that earthly were
Adornde in every joint and dressed, most like dame Bewties pere.
Therefore from sacred breast, what scalding sighs straight ^ende,
Let not your crystal eyes have rest, to think of Helens end.
With Niob bathe your face in tears, for Helens sake,
Unto the Gods call, cry, for grace, for to escape the lake,
Where Hellen thus with pains, in riuen boat does row.
In fiery seas she still remains, because she was untrue.
Pope Alexander the sixth rewarded for his wickedness and odible life, with his
college of Cardinals, Bishops, Abbots, Moonckes, Freers,* and Nuns, with the
rabble of greasy Priests, and other members of Idolatry and superstition. etc.
O Hell, O Hell, deserved long ago,
and raging Furies that bear immortal spite,
What do you mean, why spare you any woe,
that should increase our pain, and pleasure our delight?
Where is your woonted wrath, accustomed to through
among the souls unto your charge committed:
Come do your worst, consume us all aro,
dispatche us straight, lets be no longer ^litted.
Thou filthy floode of Lymbos lurcking lake,
From choked pit, come belche abroad thy flames:
Why come you not you Furies for to take
a greater vengaunce, I call you by your names.
Spew out Plegethon, thy furious fiery flake,
O hell why vomitst not thy greatest gorge of all:
Once give consent a final end to make
of us, that do your wrath so gladly call.
Come ougly shapes from old sepulchers sent,
come filthy Fowls from loathsome boiling puddle,
Come monsterous Grypes, that Tyrius guts has rent,
some Judge of Sprits, come, come increase our trouble.
Come Prince of darcknesse, give thy fearful judgment,
O hell unfold thy gates, and let the flaming steame
Make have to increase our punishment,
Dispatche us once, out of this endelesse trouble.
O vile Idolatry, the Prince of perdicion,
the way thou directes to everlasting pains:
O filthy moment, and wicked superstition,
O blind doctrine, Interpretor of dreams.
O rotten relikes with all your addicion,
fie upon you all, since thus it comes to pass.
Falsehoode in the end has no remission,
as witness our deuillishe detestable mase.
And with these words, he cast his head a wrye,
among the shaueling greasy chuffhead Friars:
And seeing Morpheus standing present bye,
the sawsie sort of Priests with Moonks and Nuns appears
At which this Pope began to roar and cry,
alas (quod he) behold where Morpheus stands:
He will proclayme abroad that hear we lie,
that rule of h^ll, and heaven did take vppo'ns.
What shall we do (quod he) best call him hither,
it hayneth so there is none other shifte:
Lets say we came for Souls, they answered altogether, The Tres is known by
his fruit.

and that we mean to make a general shrifte.
Let not be known the cause wherefore and why,
have out of credit thereby our Laws be brought:
And si^h of custom we wonted were to lie,
to tell truth now, at all it profits naught.
But while the rowte of Satan's bond and flock,
ad este them selves to gloase and paint this lie:
( Moegera comes) and cast her fierye block,
among the heap that all in flames does fly.
Then on their Captain, the shorlinges call and knock,
but all in vain, he could not help him self.
His sins had tied him faster then the rock,
he might not part out of that woeful delfe.
Then fast upon Saint Frauncis began they cry,
me thought as it were a mad Mattins they song:
They were so pricked with pains they had no time to lie,
the par^she was beguilde, the seronde peale not r^ng.
Some song Sanctamaria Ora pro nobis,
with Sensars and Candlestickes they brake cache others face:
The Pope swear Gods flesh Pax uobis,
who lost but his labor there was so small grace.
Some cried on Saint James, and some on Saint John,
and some on Saint Austen, Saint Laurence and Leo.
On Saint Peter with his Keys, cried many a one,
but among the whole rowte I heard not Laus deo.
Such raye was never heard, what ever they meant,
the noise shoke the clouds that hang in the Skies:
With na^les and teethe, each others flesh they rent,
that Ecco reports the fearful plaintes and cries.
But when they see that Morpheus kept his place,
this cursed Captain fast upon him cried:
And said come Morpheus and vewe our woeful case,
behold how I and all my mates be fried.

No longer leyn the truth they might for woe,
and Maug^^e of their wills Pluto them compelde: The Traitor and the thief:
both confess the truth when they see no better.

Wherefore and why, they urged were to shoe,
and so at length, these words to him he telde.
I was (quod he) a Pope and of my name,
the Sixth I was and Alexander hight.
But for to hear my life, no man may bide for shame,
that has the dread of God before his sight.
But lend a while thy lystening ears to me,
and I shall frieght thy head in bearing of the least:
Since my reward thou do so perfect see,
to tell the truth at length I call it best.
In learned Schools I had been trained long, Theodore Borgia (...) may ^ope
and called Alexadr^ and surna med the ^i^te.

and hoyste by fortunes wheel, I was a loftye height:
Yet still my heart in high Ambition hong,
my head for higher state, still practisde slight.
From high to harre, I gaped every hour,
first calde Theodore Borgia of birth and line:
A Cardinal I thought not of greatest power,
yet see my fortune in my later time.
(For as I said) from height to harre, yet heart of all,
I thought to sit, unworthy though I were:
There was so many watching for the balle,
whose eyes by deuillishe art, I did deceive and bleare.
Many being of mightier birth and blood,
of greater fame then I by far away,
Would have prevented me with many a snub,
because I sought the seat, and Papalsea.
And when I saw I could not reach the mark
and I wanted power and friendship tooe:
With coniuration I began to play my part,
and craf^^lye their minds I altered new.
Through Nigrom ^ncie and Invocation, I
calde up a Devil with whom I did confarre:
Touching my suit, '^^^o answered by and b^,
to grant him his request, he would exalt me harre.
Thus being conuersaunt with Deuilles leng,
their aid and help I^raued every day:
They answered me with speech of pleasant tongue,
to do their best they would not stick nor stayr,
But first I must both covenant and vow, The promise to the Devil.

in presence of the filthye Prince of darkness:
That all his Laws infernal I should allow,
and thereunto addicte my self by practice.
Which granted was, and not denied at all, Mons Caballus ^^ a secret house
to work kna ue^^e a little with ^^ Rome.

to Mons Caballus, a place not distant far,
In a clear day this Prince infernal
I met, so close no living body war,
In a Chamber there, him self he did present
in Ritche apparel, and Golden rays to see,
Three crowns upon his head, O^cht with stones Orient:
like statelye robes has not been seen with eye.
A seemelye face presenting middle age,
a stature meet as might be thought in mind:
His countenance showed, a person very sage,
whose will to mine, by cruel oaths I ioynde. A Prothonotarie is understand
the greatest writer or C^ar^e in whose lik^ne^ the devil she^d him ^^^f^.

Thus corporate like ^ Prothonotarie,,
or of the world the greatest Prince of all:
What was it then that I calde unto memory:
but it was granted me without denial?
For there he granted me my hearts desire,
and said I should be Pope the next that was:
W^n^^ with the Phenixe set my heart on fire,
such have I made to ^ee it brought to pass.
Then with a gladsome heart I wishte to knoe, Behold the fruits of our holy
Father the Pope.

the time of my (...):
And how I should in state of conquest go,
because I bare a deadlye hate to Italye.
He answered me with great disceyte and said, The deceyt ^^^ and doubt full
promise made by

a Leven and eight I should be Pope of Rome:
But see at length, how I was q^itie and paid,
it prou^de not so when all was said and done.
I made accounte to prosper ninetene year, ^he devil to the Cardinal.

and glad I was as any man might be:
I thought to make them stoop both far and near,
but yet I was deceyude, the Devil failed me.
Innocens of that name the tenthe died straight,
then by the most elections, placed was I:
In the chair of Pomp, I stretchte my self on heyght,
for Pope I was proclaimed by and by.
Then Alexander the sirt I had to name,
and all for Solemnization of degree:
Thus rechelesse Rome agreed to the same,
both Ritche and Poor, then wishte it so to be,
Thus was the Myter, with the Triple crown,
ouchte round about with stones of worthy price,
(Set on my headde) in chair of statelye Rome,
igrauen subtelly by curious crafty vice.
Arrayed in robes of glearing beaten Gold,
with Pearls depotherid here and there in sight:
And at my feet in hands did Cardinals hold,
a Rose of finest metal costlye dighte.
I tread on Tissue, each foot I set on ground,
above my head was borne a shryne of gold:
Each knee fell to the earth, to hear my voice or sound,
who went at liberty, that I bad take or hold?
Kings and Princes, with noble peers I brought
in fear and awe so much, they durst not route,
Them and their countries I sacked and brought to naught
to me and mine that would not bow and stowpe.
All Italy in my wrath I rent and shook,
all Christian Princes I vexed night and day:
I banish Kings, their regal seats I took,
who durst to me, so hardye do or say.
Honored like a God I was in every steed.
Who spoke against my Laws that escaped death?
All faithful men with sword and fire I rid,
alleging that they liu'de out of the Christian faith.
A Leven years the Tyrante thus I playde Tyrants prosper not long.

and eight months, then sick I fell at last:
I wared feeble, my courage quite decade,
I pinde away and Atropos made haste.
Thus I kept my bed long space and time,
the cause thereof I gladlye wished to knoe:
So at the length I calde a man of mine,
that of my secreates many times did knoe.
Modena was his name that best I trust, Popes Manckes Friars. etc. in steed^ of
gods word studied C^^uration Nigroma^cie and other cursed a^s.

into my Waredroabe, my keys withal I sent:
There lay a Book within a Cubbard thrust,
of Nigromancie in Seruius first frequent.
When as my servant into my Waredroabe came,
(A Pope he found) all deckte in Ritche array:
That seemed as he thought a very earthly man,
Of whom afraid, my servant came his way.
And all a freight to me he tells this tale,
which drew me in a maze and musing mind:
Yet after a while, I calde my man by name,
and sent him once again the book to find.
This book with gold and precious stones was bound,
I never loved Christ's Testament half so well:
Of Nygromancie there was containde the ground,
throughout the earth there was not any such.
But when my man the Wardroabe entered
again, he found the Pope iawsting up and down:
Although he were afraid, yet manly ventred,
and fainde himself, as though he sought a gown.
But terriblye this Pope with sparkling look,
(said to my man) my friend what do thou here?
Where at he shranke forgetting of the book,
almost he lost his wind for very dread and f^are.
With trembling flesh anon thus answered he: The answer of the messenger
to the ^^^u, and the answer of the vi^^on again.

for the Pope I come to fetch a Gown (he said)
What Pope? (quod vision) you have no Pope but me,
and I am he, that ought to be obeyde.
With this my man returned back again,
and what he saw revealed in mine ear:
Which when I heard did much augment my pain,
for death at hand, I knew would straight appear.
Then sickness did increase, each hour more and more,
and at the length, time began to draw so nigh:
One like a messenger rapping at the door,
with open mouth away dispatche began cry*
With this the doors abroad began fly,
and rushing in he comes to speak with me:
First word he said: haste haste dispatche (quod he)
the time is come, from death thou can not flee.
Then Jobiected ^o his charge full sore,
the former promise that he made to me: The Pope is deceived by the Deuilles
craftye promise

How I ought to live eyghte year by covenant more:
And if a leven and eight observed be
(Quod he) again my sayings you have mistaken,
eleven years eight months was all I meant:
My promise to observe I have not yet for saken,
of eleven years eight months not one does want.
Full glad I would have crau'de a longer time,
but all was vain to speak him fair at all:
With cruel looks, he answered thou art mine,
thou shall with me, into the lake inf^rnall.
And thus he turnde his back and went his way,
then straight my Corpse, did yield up vital breath:
My woeful spirit he took with him that day,
where now I am tormented with double death.
Lo, what it is to work by Coniuration,
or to deal with devils by wicked art?
Behold the end of all abomination, A fair warning for Loniurers and
Inchanters. etc.

am I not well rewarded for my part?
A Guerdon meet is Hell, for such as I,
that sought so much to sit in statelye seat:
(Now who is Pope) unhappy wretch I try,
that am preparde for Satan's hook a bait.
Lo Morpheus: thus I did begin and end, The saying is, a good beginning
make a good ending.

I left my Son with all my heaps of treasure:
Through all the world, there was not one his friend,
poor and ritche still sought his great displeasure.
I left his Sister (whom both we two)
as often as pleased us did use and take, Godly acts of our holy father the
Popes do^^g^s.

Carnallye each night and day we knew,
a common Concubine, I did my Daughter make.
And with these words, Maegaera comes flying,
a thousand new de^ised plagues she bringes:
Take hear (quod she) your just reward for lying,
and there withal great flames of fire flynges.
This done, she then departes a pace,
to put in use her wanted cancarde nature:
A death it was for to behold her face,
or else to vewe her vglye monstrous stature.
Where at the rabble of all this recheles rank,
immediatelye like bedlems swear and stare*
Into the hollow hole of gleydes they sancke,
where furious ^iendes, their flesh in pieces tare.
Thus they vanished, and fled out of our sight,
with careful cries, our ruthful ears they filde:
The pit with clouds of fearful irksome night,
and dreadful darkness round about was hilde.
Yet many we beheld, with offeringes and oblations
that approached nighe, for have they headlong came:
Friar Rushe bare the Cross, Clarke of the sessions,
a member of their Church, the Popes own man: Friar Rush

Thousands came knip knap, pattering on Beads,
Friars Munkes and Nuns, came after with have,
As vowed Pilgrims, came Wives widows and Maids,
of the holy Popes works the fruits for to taste.
Whom when I saw, their state I did bewail,
with tears I steepte a thousand times my face*
Alas, they sought that might not them prevail,
the Pope their God, was in a woeful case.
He broylde in fire, and endless woe and pain,
and all his sect, they tasted of the same:
For worldly pleasure, Hell is all their gain,
Beside on earth an everlasting shame.
Would God thought I, in this my drearye dream,
my country men, were present now with me:
To vewe the plagues, where Papists do remain,
that then they might that filthye fashion flee.
And turn to Christ, which suffered for their sake,
the bloodye butchering Pope for to detest:
In health and wealth. their prayers for to make,
to God of might that grants our request.
But while that thus, I waylde the want of faith,
away (quod Morpheus) Lets pack and get us hence:
Why hear thou not one gasping for his breathe?
yea (quod I) but know not well from whence
The woeful noise does come, nor where it is,
give me thy hand (quod he) and be not frayd^:
It is some Sprite rewarded for his miss,
Whose careful cries, his wicked life bewrayde.
His name his life, his acts that did complain,
All at few words heareafter do remain.
The books verdite upon this wicked Pope.
O God how worthy is thy name? Thou art our Lord and King.
As many as confess the same, to joy thou do them bring.
And such as do thy name deny, and rob the of thy glory:
Thou do confound them by and by, and dashe them out of memory.
All secreates thou do know full well, no man can hide from thee:
And all that in the earth does dwell, or in the heavens be.
Or in the Seas or stony rocks, from far thou do behold
The fowls that scale the skies by flocks, and more then can be told.
Thinfernal lake quakes at thy voice, each fiend does howl and yel:
And thundreth out an odious noise, when they of the hear tell.
O filthy Tiraunt then to thee, (I speak) that took in hand
Among us all a God to be, to rule both Sea and land.
And heaven where the Lord does sit, and hell where now thou art:
No doubt thou had but little wit, to play that theeuishe part.
It is to Alexander that, with open mouth I cry:
VVoe worth the time he spared not, to lead the flock awrie.
Lo, where he is that ruled the roast, and every kind of feast:
Whose v^unting tongue would boast, he was a Father blessed
As well within the holy throne, as low in Stigian Lake:
And that he could both up and down, bring whom he pleased to take.
Twenty hundredth thousand souls, at Mass he could remove:
With sealing of his Bulls and scrowles, or wagging of his Glove.
So could he pull them down from God, when pleased him again:
As thick as flakie snow abroad, or mistie dropping Rain.
And thus the w^olfe devoured our good, and made us slaves and drudges
Sacked our countries, spoylde our blood, and made us live like snudges.
Kilde our souls and bodies two, deflowred wives and maids:
And kept from us Christ's testament new, and gave us bells and baides.
Old rotten rellickes, stocks, and stones, and Ceremonies blind:
With stinking pardons for the nonce, to feed our foolish mind.
Thus with his Gods both deaf and dumb, he tyste us from the Lord:
Which sent from heaven Christ his son, as scriptures do record.
Whose precious blood has made us free, from hell and all her sting
And hellish Pope from thine and thee, which God his people wring.
I yrke to name him any more, and faint within my breast:
Vengance does upon him rore, the Lord has thee detest.
Thy just reward among thy mates, with lasting pains is quit:
In flashing flames bewail their states, in doleful dread they sit.
Yet would they say that with a mass, they could Plegethon quench:
And all the souls that damned were, deliver with a blenche.
And yet themselves lie broyling there, in fire past the crowns:
And with their Idols sweat and swear, though here they sat in thr^s
Me think them fools that had such skill, in fetching souls from hell:
And be compelde against their will, in careful Cave to dwell.
Since Italy had cause to joy, at this vile Tyrants death:
What cause have we to thank the Lord, that are restorde to faith:
From bondage now are set atlarge, and woolues delivered fro:
And therefore duty gives charge, our thankful hearts to sho.
Lets lift our hands with ioyed heart, that living be this time:
That Gods true word in every part, may flourish still and shine.
Let Alexander save him self, with all his holy skill:
For with his rellickes and such pelf, he may do what he will.
No doubt he lies there for sport, to pass the time away:
Or else to vewe the great resort, shat Ladies Psalter say.
Perhaps that Purgatory pains, he will to blisle convert:
The silly souls that there remains, shall taste no more of smart.
Fie on him fie, and all his mates, the heavens curse him yet:
Of flaming hell he is the gates, and guide to Stigian pit.
His stinking Mas^es let him take, and Ceremonies blind:
Doom Gods a thousand though he make, according to his mind.
Yet he and they do perish all, the scripture proves it plain:
So do as many shppe and fall, as to his loare do lean.
But let us build upon the rock, of Christ's Gospel pure:
So we with him amongst his flock, for ever shall endure.
Where as one God and persons three, be praised day and night:
And where we shall for ever be, always within his sight.
Young Tarquine rewarded for his wickedness.
Away with all your playntes and bloobering tears,
Your careful cries shut up in silence quite:
For here behoulde such cruelnesse appeers,
Of all the rest but I no wight has felt the like.
Hell shows her force on me with double spite,
No pain to mine, nor none so worthy blame,
As I deserve, I well confess the same.
O pride, pride, of mischief root and all,
Woe worth the time I thee delighted so:
Thou made me climb until I caught the fall,
Not only to my shame, but also endless woe.
Through pride, I lost both love, and honor long ago,
Pride ruled me so much, no goodness I regarded*
Therefore for wickedness behold I am rewarded.
Of noble line and race, descerded I,
And a Ruler was, and Ruler mighe have been,
But yet my heart in wretchedness dialye:
I fearde not God, nor forced his laws a pin,
I ran my raze always in deadly sin.
I clean forgot my self, and eke from whence I came,
I rather thought my self a God then mortal man.
For who, had that, which I did lack or want,
Of gold or silver or stones of precious price?
For my body, costlye apparel was not skant,
Nor nothing else that pride might well entice,
Thus virtue decade, but still increased vice.
To pamper up the paunche, the filthy flesh fulfill,
I wholly gave my self with earnest heart and will.
Which caused me to acumilate each hour,
Upon my head more plagues then can be namde:
The Gods agreed their vengance for to pour
On earth for aye: my name I stainde and shamde,
Thus may you hear how I am Justly blamde.
To my disprayse, and to the praise of soome,
That by my loss to honor and great praise have ^oome.
Since Morpheus thou art here, and brought thy friend with thee
Be witness of the woe that Tarquine bydeth here:
Since Poets have pende the wicked life of me,
Of my reward thou may report well bear.
For the purpose none more meeter then thou here:
It is no council that all the world does knoe,
Nor yet forgot, that was done long ago.
Fie on rapine, through guilefull treason wrought,
Fie on the swelling flesh that soul and body kills:
Fie on filthiness, whose end is ever naught,
And fie on folly, that all good manner spils.
Take heed all you that follow fleshly wills.
Of me proud Tarquine made a mirror clear:
So may you shun the pains I suffer here.
Behold, when I did Lucrece find in bed,

Through harmefull slight premeditate before,
With naked sword in hand to her I said:
Consent to me (quoth I) else shall thou live no more:
Thy tender flesh this Lainche shall e^rue full sore:
Then will I slay the worst thy house within,
I Will make report you were committing sin.
Which words did rauishe so her noble sense and wit,
That tremblingly she quakes, as does the Aspen Lea^e:
Fear straight compeld her quakinglye to sit,
Like as she would depart with vital breath,
The naked Sword in sight, still threatening present death,
Thus I ravished a Lady both virtuous and chaste,
Wherefore I am co^pelde, (alas) these sorrows to taste.
Whereat each tongue did talk to my disprayse,
And for the same, I banished was for ever:
(Since then) all my posteriti^ aye evermore decays.
Lo thus the Gods their vengance do deliver:
Bewailed be the day that then I did com thither.
Among my wicked deeds, this only was the worst,
Therefore I was and am for evermore accursed.
I am a sack of sorrow in this sincke
And sti^cking p^dole wherein you see me lie:
Whose faults with mine respondent pende with ink,
Were ever heard or scande with learned eye?
As vice to my reproache, so virtues Fame does fly
Tooth' praise of Lucrecia and example of all such.
As of her do delight, and of me do read much.
For when this wilful act committed was*
And I had fed my lust this noble matron on:
Then for to live, nothing she loved less,
With wringing hands, Alas she makes moan,
Come Atropos (quoth ^^ee) make have that I were gone
And crying still, come Clotho come make speed,
Of Lucrece life, untwine the fatal threede.
Then pardon craved she of Colatine Colatine was the husband of Lucrece.

And of her father Spurius by and by:
I have made offense, woe worth the wicked time,
Thus weeping said this Lady rufully:
I hearing this from thence departed spedilye.
And left in woeful plight, this Dame drowned up with tears,
Whose virtues, in women full rarely now appears.
But al you Ladies, Wives, and Maids each one,
Of what degree or yet estate you be:
No doubt although Lucrecia be gone,
As myr^our may remain, this ^^orye when you see.
So may you learn the gift of chastitye,
What love you ought your husbands for to bear,
In spending of her days, the proof does plain apeare.
O wretched wight (quod he) how dare I show my face?
The earth does threate this wilful act of mine:
It is, and will be Iudgde I wanted grace,
Thus losing honor, I steynde my Auncientes line.
At all that bear my name, the people do rep^^e.
Yea the very stones that in the streates do lie,
Into the Heavens, upon this crime do cry.
Then wished she Ipolas happy chance,
Or Virgineas end, or Didos long ago:
(Quod she) thereof this deed, false Taquine should not vaunce,
That now for ever, shame abroad shall b^o^.
And shall my husband w^^te him served so?
That shall he not, (quod she) a swoorde she took,
In blattering blood, the vit all breath forsook.
Lo Morpheus, alas, now have I told thee all,
And of my being here, the cause wherefore and why.
Now may thou think, my grace was very small,
That in my life could not for mercy cry.
But wickedness cra^es vengeance, to the sky.
And not without a cause the Gods do punish hate,
And so they do al them that live in whoredom state.
But Morpheus, Morpheus. since thou see my lot,
A blessed deed it is, the same for to declare:
From Ritche and Poor, I pray the hide it not,
Proclaim how wicked men rewarded are.
From Pride and whoredom, wish thy friends beware*
The time is short on earth they have to dwell,
But endless torments ever bide in hell.
If mortal men did know, what pain is hear,
Then would they loathe the world they love so well:
Their pomp, their Pride, and all their glittering gear,
To punish the paunche, some fear would sure compel.
All treason and fleshlye fraud, for to expel.
All Tyrants trades no doubt, they would forgo,
And if they felt the least of this my woe.
But he that blinded is, with ease and wealth,
Their ravished hearts has dulde their wits as lead:
Gods fear is gone, and each man for him self,
To purchase pelf the worldling toils his head.
The Child forgettes his Father being dead.
To taste of death him self, no deal mistrust,
Till grizlye ghost do blow, that needs away he must.
Alas how vain is all thing on the earth,
What care to catch, what fear to keep it still:
What sorrow it settes, where should be joy and mirth,
Ingendering hate, there as should be good will.
Provoking wrath, The very spirit to spill.
And yet behold how every man does watch,
And with the trowte the choking hoke does catch.
And thus fare well now get you hence from me,
You know my mind, deal in it as you will:
My wicked act, and just reward you see,
And how my pain increases ever still.
Away (quod he) behold down yonder hill
Alecto comes with flaming flashing wings,
For pride and whordome, a thousand plagues she brings.
Then straight departed we and left him there,
And wandering up and down, those smokye pittes:
Me thought a rufull voice, as it a woman were,
Fast bye, declard what plagues she felt by ^ittes.
To hear her plaint I almost lost my wits.
On whoredom still she cried, woe worth that wicked sin,
That mortal flesh so much deliteth in.
But when I calde to mind the lead wherein,
I saw Tarquinus lie, with flames of Brimstone whose:
In mids whereof, he stood up to the chinne,
All blubberid with blisters, alas not free one spotte,
And how with sodden Pitche, his body all was blotte.
Two fiends shot thonder boltes, at him on either side,
Whereat he dowkes, his careful face to hide.
Thus in this furnace, amid these boiling heates,
He stands to the Chin, but when he dowketh so:
And thus the fezing darts, often in his visage beats,
The fear thereof increases double woe.
Thus Tarquine was rewarded, and so were thousands more.
That had their factes declared to their face,
Which was to late as then, to cry for grace.
The reward of Medea for her wicked acts, and false deceyuing of her father,
sleying of her children and her own Brother, and working by inchauntment. This
history is merueylous tragical, and a good example for Women.
O Dreadful Stix, boil up thy poisoned floodes,
and cruel Cacus torments new devise:
Give sentence Mynos of their guiltless bloodes
that murderers hands have shed in any wise.
You furies fell, why do you yet despise
with greater plagues my pains for to increase,
And for to see the blood of Innocents arise,
whose mouths from crying vengance never cease?
And where she stood, her head she cast awry,
In woeful plight as ever wretch might be,
And so by chance at length did Morpheus spy,
whose open jaws, gryed straight to him and me.
Saying Morpheus come and bring thy frinde with thee,
a greater news to learn thou shall in have*
Of all thou have perused with thine eye,
I worthy am the greatest grief to taste.
I know thou camst from place where Hellen rows,
in th'^rkesome lake where doubtful Dragons be,
And yet her wicked life and mine God knows
are not to be comparde, although that she,
For certain years lived in adultery,
and betrayed her husband, good noble Menelaus,
Set Greece and Troy at great mortality,
shed blood, sacked Cities, banished godly laws.
(Yet this her fact, not half like mine alas)
why does not hell brayde out her stinking breath?
And my deserts much worse then Hellens was,
(Hell spew thy spite) devour me once with death.
Will neither ruthe, nor spite, stir up your hearts?
will none of those once m^^ue you to dispatche,
But will you always play such cruel parts?
more wishing death, more ^^gering life I catch.
(Quoth Morpheus) what is thy name declare it,
where wast thou borne, why art thou plagued tell?
(Quoth she) again, no more I will not spare it,
Make have (quoth he) I may not tarry well.
A'the which, with greenous s^riking yell,
she did describe her wicked crimes and name,
I am (quoth she) so punished here in hell,
that passes wight with tongue to tell the same.
My name is Medea (quoth she) most true,
daughter I was to Oetes that worthy king:
Which had the Ram where fleece of gold ygrewe,
the greatest jewel of any earthly thing.
Which was my fathers, and in his keeping,
watched with a Bull, that was of worthy might,
And a Dragon with mighty poisoned sting,
that stoutly kept this Ram both day and night.
Many a worthy Prince and champion stout,
had lost their lives in venture giving,
Which never brought their purpose yet about, An old saying, al covet, all
love.

nor no man to this day but Jason living.
Devoured they were by the ravening of these two,
he lost his life, that thought to win his shoes:
These beasts so violently did all men pursue,
that for to die might neither will nor choose.
Which was my Fathers chief of exaltacion,
he flourished in wealth no Prince his like:
Drad he was of every land and Nation,
he forste no strength of all his ^o^s a mite.
And yet of treasure all, he set his chief delight
on me his Daughter dear, that sought his grief:
I quite my Fathers love with mortal spite,
I playde the whore, the murdresse and the thief.
Hark now Morpheus, what a part I playde,
by my Father dear my Brother and my Child:
And what a noble queen I afterward betrayed,
with many more by wicked art I broilde.
And other some I banishte and exilde,
by Deuillishe ways as women should not do:
For why they ought with mercy to be mild,
and not their wicked wills for to pursue.
Behold how I did nature quite forsake,
for this I did as true as here I am:
When Jason came this conquest for to make,
(false traitor I) through me the fleece he wanne*
For art of wicked Charm I straight began,
for Jason sake my Parent to betraye:
Dismaide my Father sillye Aged man,
abandoned his house, with Jason ran away.
By incantacion: I brought it so to pass,
that Jason slew both Bull and griesly Beast:
Atchieu'^^ all things as his desire was,
for of my Brother I caused him possessed,
That in the Regal seat, should crown and scepter (...).
in Colcos Land it booted not to rest:
For why my Father so great an host did rear.
with fleese to fly, we thought it was the best.
For why hard by my Father followed fast,
But to escape his hands, hark what I did:
I kilde my Brother, his arms and legs I cast
Throughout the field whereas my Father rid*
Which when my Father saw, so ill betide,
and knew his son thus martyrred for to be:
With woeful cheer to get them up straight hide*
together (alas) each chopped piece laid he.
Then down his Aged face, does tumble tears apace*
and up in arms the Martyred head does get:
Oh Son most dear, alas (quod he) for grace,
and many a kiss on deadlye mouth does set.
And then with nails, his face he rentes and tears,
that down the purple streams of blood do flee:
And ready death within his face appears,
but still he cried, (alas) dear son for thee.
To tell but half the morning that he made,
no doubt your eyes like conduicte spoutes would run,
For very woe he pulls out a blade,
to slay him self for sorrow of his son.
But yet his men and servants chaunste to come,
my careful Father there they did prevent:
Or else no doubt more mischief had been done*
and all through me, accursed and disobedient.
Then after storms of many woeful plaintes,
persuaded by such men as wittye were:
Like as Apelles Agamemnon, paintes,
I may compare my Fathers dreirye cheer:
Then in mean while, that he was stayed there,
with speed from Colcos Jason, and I did pass
For my Brothers funeral, he builded A^lters fair
to Sacrifice upon, as then the manner was.
Lo by my Father thus I playde the the thief,
against nature and womanhood my Brother slew*
And used witchcraft against the true belief,
and like a Traitres, away with Jason flewe.
Haste thou ever hard of any so untrue?
To play like part I think did never none:
Nay Morpheus yet more mischief did I brewe,
for after this I murdered many a one.
Through Nigromancie, Eson being old,
from crabbed crooked Age, I made him young again:
Liuelye and lightsome, active and bold,
and purelye purged in every Pulls and vain.
And Trees being dead I made bear fruit again,
which increased my credit, more then ever it was:
Through false craft, I causde Pelleus be slain,
by his Daughters hands I brought it so pass.
Whom I made believe, as Esondid.
that Pelleus their Father should youth achieue:
And told them plain in doing as I bid,
he should be altered new, not feeling pain nor grefe.
Thus I illuding them, they thought it true,
(So did Pelleus him self) that time good man:
That being slain from age to youth a new,
he should be changed by killing of a Ram.
(The truth was nothing so) it was my fetch,
to cause his Daughters, their Fathers blood to shed:
An old Ram I badde them slay and wittely to watch,
that no man saw, when they to work proceed.
But (quod I) look that your Father bleed
in one vessel, and with this Ram at once:
And doing thus, I said that by and by with speed,
their Father should arise with youthful flesh and bones.
These sillye Sisters and Daughters to this man,
believed well this subtle tale of mine*
And as I bad, they slew an aged Ram,
and so they did their Father dear in fine.
Believing faithfullye by power divine,
that their old Father should be made young:
(Alas) which was not so, but only craft of mine,
to make an end of him whom I had hated long.
Thus exited I, by craft their work alas,
and dead lies their father bleeding fast.
But hark, Morpheus hark, how it then came to pass,
mischief has ever her due reward at last.
I thought this wicked deed, that thus was done and past,
would best have pleased Jason, then my Lord:
Which chaunste not so, for he with all the have
fled from me quite, and all my acts abhorde.
And so to Corinthe, to Creon, Then the King
he took his way as straight as thing might be:
Who had a Daughter called Cruso, (bewties darling)
whom Jason married, and so refused me,
Whereat Dame Fame sound up her Trumpet hye,
each living ear was filled with the same:
Which made me broyle as whot, as gleyde might be,
till I had spilde this tender noble Dame.
Which through Magike, and vile Coniuration,
A cofer I invented with diverse Jewels more:
Subtillye contrived of a strange fashion,
with the which to Creuso, I made my sons to go,
To present the same, that liuelye Lady toe,
who gratefullye received it, but yet (alas) beguilde:
For through my art, when as it was undo,
there flewe forth fire, that burnde both man and child.
Consumde to dust this Lady fresh and gaye,
burnde all the pallas five yardes within ^he ground:
Urged Jason him self to flee away,
or else with fire he had been straight confound.
Many a woeful heart I made within that stounde,
the Clouds themselves, bewayling tears let fall.
The rocks and hills brake out their plainting sound,
beside the guiltless blood, that did for vengance call.
Of noble Jason thus the heart I slew,
who thought to be reuengde of mine iniquity:
Toward me when I perceyu'de he drew,
my two sons left alive, without compassion or pity,
Which were both tender, well made, and witty,
of my body begot, and naturallye borne,
For malice to their father Jason, amyd the City,
I cut their throtes (and made their bodies torn,
With wild horses) up and down the street,
beside much mischief more than this be sure.
In all this stinking vale, yet did thou never meet
with any wretch that did like grief procure.
But who so ever means, in wickedness to bide,
or lead a Tyrauntes life, in thend shall have reward,
According his deserts, this cannot be denied*
Though mortal flesh thereto have no regard.
And then (quod she) thou know my name and why
that I am thus tormente in Stygion pit,
O that witches and Coniurers knew so well as I,
of Joues mighty doom that does in heaven sit,
Then would they mende, if they had grace or wit,
To serve the Lord would set their whole delight:
And disobedient children would their follye flitte,
assuredly the Lord at length does smite.
And with these words her pains increaste so sore,
(But that she said) report good Morpheus thus:
Or else a^ all we heard her say no more,
but that she shrikte as one that tormente is.
Thus seeing the reward of her wicked deeds,
We stayed a while her torments to behold:
Which at a moment, both day and hour breeds,
much more then can by any tongue be told.
To see the staring Deuilles with fiery spears, The torments of Stigion.

on Dragons backs with poisoned pumples pight:
As at a Quintan, at Medea, each Tyrant bears,
and through her runs, that trickling blood appears.
Then from the scalding heart, by violence out tears,
Hot flames of fire, at wounds on every side,
Monsters with horns, and loathsome louped ears,
Ran on this wretch, with gnashing teeth they cried.
The blood by murder, this wicked wretch had shed,
thondered vengeance, whose terrible noise,
Heapte double pains upon her wretched head,
and filde that dreadeful vale, (alas) with woeful noise.
Innumerable of Witches, out of their Cabbins rose,
with screming scrikes, they yielded loud and hye.
Hot Pitche and Brimstone, each one on other throse,
A hell it self, me thought it was to see.
Each one in hand, begrypte a Butchers knife,
the blades in flesh on every side they hide:
The throat, the Guts, or next to rid the life,
the mortal wounds they make on every side.
Then straight with thundering throat Maegaera cryde,
come, Cacus, come, bring double pain and woe:
Let wickedness in endless flames be fride,
come, come, the Gods have sixte it so
At which came Cacus, and Clouds of fire shakes,
more fearful far then blaste of storming wind
Each pit boylde up, the craggye mountain quakes,
all crawling creepes, the Snakes of Serpents kind.
No greater grief, no damned spryte could find,
For out of flashe, to gleydes of glowing coal,
From pain, to pain, from place to place assignde,
and al to toil and tear the woeful soul.
And thus we left this late rewarded Dame,
and so adrestour selves, to crooked Charons bote,
Where many a wandering spirit, had passage by y^ same,
through boiling broth, three times as sulfer hot,
With much a do, at length we passage got,
and down the smoking banckes, we crept^ on knee,
Till at the length by chance it was our lotte,
two men to see tormented woefullye.
The books verdite upon Medea.
HEr cause who can bewail, that plaide this butchers part:
As from her father dear to steal, that lou'de her in his heart,
Her brother thus to slay, the Parents hearts to kill:
And with a stranger run away, to feed her fleshly will.
The guiltless blood to suck, of Creuso worthy Dame:
And all at once upon a rock, to wast in fiery flame.
Beside, her Children dear has wound with mortal knife.
The smiling Babes her body bear, bereft their tender life.
What eyes can stint from fluddes, whose ears do understand
To call to mind the gyltles bloods, shed by this woman's hands:
What harm by witchraft done, it passes tongue to tell:
Or any heart to think the sum, or hand to pen it well.
(Alas) who would have thought, that in a woman's breast:
Dame nature would have let been wrought, to breed so much unrest:
But hard it is to trust, what ever that she be:
That to her father is unjust, she means the same to thee.
But lo you cruel Dames, that love your wills so much:
I speak it now to all your shames, if there be any such.
Medea now is gone, that all the bate did brewe:
Take heed among you there be none, with her to prove untrue.
You witches all take heed, you see how God rewards:
And what appointed is your meede, that devilish acts regardes.
Leave of your invocation, your crossings and your charms:
(Alas) it is abomination, and does increase your harms.
You parents it is time, to look your younglings to:
Least with this Prince, you say in fine, hearts case and child adue.
Keep in your daughters straight, best counsel I can give:
Least that perhaps she catch a bayte, that both your hearts may grieve.
And bring them up in fear, and godly books to reed:
And then be sure that thou shall hear, that well thy chide shall speed
And banish wily will, from out thy daughters place:
His sleyghtie shifts will thousands spill, you know he wants grace
Let bouldenesse banished be, lay liberty aside:
And look you never do agree, to paint them up in pride.
And so you shall rejoice, your daughters days to see:
With Helchias lift up your voice, with praise as glad as he.
Thus farewell Virgins all, God guide you in his way:
I doubt not but Medeas fill, your tender hearts shall fraye.
And since she broils in hell, whereas release is none:
There I am sure that she shall dwell, it helps not to moan.
I cannot weep therefore, to think what parts she playde:
She lost her soul for evermore, her name is quite decade.
Take heed, her gains you see, the Gods not one do spare:
For this or that, look what they be, rewarded well they are.
The words of tormented Tantalus, being rewarded for his extortion and
covetousness: Oppressing of the poor people of his Country: And for other
wicked acts.
IF any here have cause for to complain,
What may I do that pined am for food?
I wish and want, I crave but all in vain,
I see the tempting fruit, and so I do the ^^ood:
Whereof to eat and drink, I wish none other good,
If all the world were mine, sharp hunger gnawes me so,
To have my belly ^ilde, all this I would forgo.
No joy nor pleasure, half does glad the heart,
Nor greatest thing that mind has thought most sweet:
Though all were mine, in every place and part,
And that each man were kneeling at my feet,
Like pleasure to this woe, was not compared yet.
For hunger passes all, who knew his part with me,
No death so bad, as living thus to be.
But wickedness want'h not his just reward. Gregor.

All you that bear rule therefore
How you come thereby, it is best you have regard:
And being mighty, how you use the poor.
Your own infirmityes remember evermore.
Beware of covetousness, it is a slye and slieghtye bait* Bernar.

The father of Ipocrisie, and forger of disceite.
And ambition is a privy poison,
It Is also a pestilens, covered closse:
The nourishe of envy, the fountain of treason, Plutar.

The mouth of make bate, to all men's loss,
The blinder of hearts, as the world now goes.
Making of remedies, diseases great store, Herm.

And of pure salues, many a great sore.
But he that seeks above the rest to be,
And gapes to reach the highest star alofte: Tullius.

No doubt many times forgets equity,
And also Justice, it plain appears often,
Who desires glory, that fortune has not skofte*
Though lulde a while, within her fichle lap,
At length she leaves him cadgde within her cruel trappe.
But al to late alas I do confess,
My wicked crimes, wherefore I suffer now.
In time and space, I would not find redress.
To God nor man, I would not bend nor bow:
No man's Judgment but mine own I would allow.
Repent that life, I thought I had no need,
For as on earth, I thought each where to speed.
Though for my help, confession come to late, August.

Yet in time, confession is a remedy:
It confounds vices, restores virtues to each estate.
Deuilles it vanquisheth, in greatest extremity:
The Gates of Paradise, it opens most freely.
Gods vengeance ceasseth, if man confess betime, Ambros.

But so to do, the grace was never mine.
Since confession is the life of a sinner, Barnar.

A glory to good men, and necessary to thoffendour.
He that will not confess, whereof he was beginner,
His grace with mine may be called sclender.
But happy is he that goods ill got does render
To them again, from whence they came at first,
Be sure otherways they stand to God accursed.
(Alas) how vain is pleasure, that most so much embrace? August.

With what diligence, and expectacion men
Do seek this worldly wealth, that bideth but a space?
Sliding stilye hence, no time appointed when,
Wherefore I wish you all, Gods hasty wrath token:
Boast not to day, what thou will do to morrow, Hier^^.

Or y^ the Sun go down, thy mirth may turn to sorrow.
Set little by richesse, and rich shall thou be, Chrisost.

Set lest by renown, and fa^ne shall love thee best:
Care not for afflictions, take them quietly,
Let reason rule thee, so shall thou be in rest.
He that scapes the wrath of mighty ^oue is bles,
But they that wicked are, no doubt must plagued be,
What needs better proof, or trial but by me. ^^n^^a.

For judgment without mercy is ever due Iacobus.

To them that be unmerciful to the poor:
But sure mighty men, do think Gods word not true,
They think to line, and dure for evermore,
As I my self did, Alas I cry therefore.
My wicked deeds, my woe do still increase,
And puttes me out of doubt, my pains shall never cease.
One day deemeth another from time to time Plinius.

Of this, or that, as things do chance to fall:
But the last day gives judgment, declaring every crime
When each man is compelde to make accountes for all,
Then sweet worldely wealth, does taste like bitter gall.
Who has sustained wrongs, for vengaunce then shall cry.
Th'oppressors of the poor, shall perish by and by.
And with these words, he snatche that the tree,
The fruit whereof, declined to his lip:
Which on the sudden, from his mouth began flee,
And s^oodes with swelling waves upon his chinne do hit.
Yet might he not attain thereof one bit.
But staruing stands, between these two for food:
Disguisde for want of meat, this careful Caitiue stood.
And looking back by chance he Morpheus spyed
(And me) that stood upon a bancke above:
To whom straight way he showted, houlde and cried,
Come near good Morpheus and see the pains I prove.
And warn all them, to whom thou bear love,
my wicked life, that once I led to flee:
Bid them restore the gooddes got wrongfully.
And what is thy name quoth Morpheus would I know?
From whence thou came, of whom thou art descended?
And why thou do endure this cruel woe,
What have thou done, the Gods be thus offended?
My acts (quoth he) might well have been amended.
But when I was on earth, and had the world at will, Lactaneius
I never thought to dye, but to have lived still.
I am the son of Jupiter, a God of mighty fame,
And borne of Plote, as witness writers old,
And at my birth had Tantalus to name,
Lord of many a country. I was a Captain bold,
But the cause of my plague the Poets have mistolde.
Yet Morpheus thou shall here the cause wherefore and why
The Gods awarde me here to wayle and cry.
Some think the Gods took vengaunce ^or my son,
Young Pelop's, whom when I wanted meat,
And that the Gods unto my house did come,
Because some say I slew him for to eat,
The Poets therefore thought that I this fleeing bayfe,
Was judged by the Gods always to want and wish:
(As still I do) but yet the cause was this.
For in my country none but I the chief:
Subject unto me they were both far and ni^.
Who was so hardy but ^a^ger of his teeth,
I plucked him on his knees, and if he looked awry?
But (alas) of wicked counsel each hour may I cry,
Which put it in my head, the poor for to subdue
In Phrigia where I ruled, which now full sore I rue.
What could be thought, that earthly man might please,
To pomp the paunche, or feed the greedy eye?
(Nothing at all) but by the land or seas,
With a word of my mouth, I had it by and by.
I thought to mount above the starry sky.
A woeful chance betide, the causers of my smart,
Which counseld me to play, the Tyrants part.
Alas, alas, what grace had I vile wretch,
To poule, and spoil, my subjects as I did? Repentance to late.

Out of reason, their rentes I did both rack and retche:
And another sort from house and ground I rid:
Compeld them to bandone familye and kindred,
I banished whom me list, each man was glad to please
Both me and mine, that thought to live at ease.
I never had enough, ne could I be content
To take the world as all my elders did:
I famishte the country with fines and double rent.
Esteeming not the mite, that poor men to me offered,
I gapte for gobs of Gold, which greedily I coffred.
Money was my desire, get it how I might,
Of Ritche or Poor, all one, as well by wrong as right.
But Morpheus, now to tell the sum and all, Wicked counsel.

I will not leave the least, for thus it is:
My servants through their counsel were principal,
That thus I was corrupt, I cry therefore alas,
They fed me with fables, to bring their purpose to pass.
And in my name the poor they spoiled quite,
To me unknown, when I receiu'de no mite.
Thus many a score, that served me that time,
That were of base degree, and of the simplest sort:
By title of my name, alofte began to clime,
And sought for seats of greater fame and port:
To spoil my subjects they thought it but a sport.
The simplist knave I had, that any office bear,
Was honored of my Subjects, as I my self it were.
For their own advantage as it did appear,
To pick them thanks, within mine ears they whisper,
Keep down y^ dunghill knaves (quoth they) in dread and fear
The Churles be ritche, let us purge them with a glister:
The poorest widow, be sure they never mist her.
The fatherles, (alas) a begging out they thrust,
Who paid not al and more, a packing needs they must.
And so my subjects hearts (alas) I lost,
My honor eke decaide, each tongue declarde my crime:
Thus I purchaste hate of them that loved me most,
And bare the name, for worst of al my line:
Thus were the poor oppressed, each day by me and mine.
A thousand hungry souls, within one year made I,
For meat and drink, the country through to cry.
I was corrupt with couetise, I never had enough,
For all my worldly treasure, yet ever was I needye,
As fast as I spoilde, all the country through,
Yet with the Cormorant, I gaped always greedye,
Therefore the reward of my wickedness came spedye.
For my extorcion and famishing of the poor,
Behold how I am quitte, with like for evermore.
Morpheus, move thine acquaintance to take good heed
Whom they appoint and put in aucthoritye,
Let them be sure, they shall answer with speed,
For extorting the poor, and other enormitye:
Although they mistrust not, any transformitye.
But always do think, on the earth for to dwell,
Unlookte for comes death, and rewards them full well.
Who h^ted I so ill, as them which lou'de me best?
Who gained at my hands, but such as taught me guile?
Those that wishte me worship, I ever loved least:
My practice was always, my country for to spoil,
By mean whereof I did my name defile,
And such as would in mine affairs have dyed:
Most churlishlye, of thanks I have denied,
Thus on this world, a God I always made, Too many of this condition at these
days.

Wherein I thought to dwell for evermore:
At my pleasure and will, the Country did invade:
Passing not a pin for the curses of the poor.
If he filde not my bags, I thrust him out of door,
As for mercy, at my hand, it booted not to crave,
They did but stir my choler, more cruelly to ^aue.
I lou'de vaineglory most, he was my counsel chief, There wantes no
picktha^ks.

And private gain of whom I spoke before,
And other such, as tear my subjects with their teeth,
As a Dog a bone, they used my people poor,
Of Te^^ales and Pickthanks, I always had great store,
Whose whispering tales, were Gospels in mine head,
And thus in steed of truth, with falsehood was I fed.
My shoulders laden were, with worldly muck,
And yet mine eyes desired what I see:
Though all the world were laid upon a rock
It never might have satisfied mine eye,
If more then enough, had half contented me,
I might have liu'de, in honor al my days,
And of the poor have won immortal praise.
B^^^ye of worldly mucke, fie on it twenty times, P^ulu^.

To mutual envy, most men it does provoke
And vaineglorye, does teach a thousand careful crimes,
In every mischief, these twee, do ever strike a stroke,
A deceytfull sweetness, That binds to Satan's yoke August.

An unfruitful labor, a continual dread and fear,
A dangerous a^^auncement, The aucthor of despair.
Uaineglory always, without repentance ends.
Whose beginning without providence is:
Prouokes the Gods to wrath, the people it offends.
Who gloreth in this globe, that thinks he does amiss? Such there are.

He g^peth like a gu^ton, for glory to be his,
Whose eyes be fixte into the Skies on hye,
And wishes wings above the Sun to flee.
What greater follic can be then to covet Riches, Diog^.

It torments the mind, and breaks the quiet sleeps,
It vexes the heart, and mirth away it twitchis.
Many miserable thoughts, in the conscience it keeps,
It shakes up the stomach, making sowers of sweetes,
It shorteneth the life, as the Philosopher says,
It makes Children, and kinsfolk, wishers of your death.
It keeps from doing Godly charitable deeds; Horae.

It causes the party not cherishe him self,
Being never friendly to any man that needs,
Dispatching each man of their perfi^e health,
Lo, these be the fruits of this vile worldly pelf,
Which causes man, to live a misers life,
Whose end is destruction, to man, maid, and wife.
And with these words, the woeful sillye wretch
His Jaws open cast, that boilde and burnde with heat:
And withered staruen arms, with violence do stretche, eat,
In hope to catch the slieghty tempting bayte,
Which hanges on flattering bows, that flatters him to
And to his mozid mouth declines y^ barked is full dry,
When the hungry soul, would eat, away y^ fruit does fly.
And flood on every side, swells up with boiling waves,
Wherein he stands an inche above the Chinne:
Whose cruel thyrst to drink, no little cra^es,
But when to taste, poor soul he does begin,
It blencheth out of sight, as it had never been.
Then touched fruit, does beat him on the teethe,
Appointed by the Gods, to work him double grief,
With face deformde, al quaking stands he,
Ten times worse then death, the Caiti^e looks:
Naught else upon his legs, but skin and bones to see,
Each finger of his hand, as bare as angling hooks,
His bellye as thin, as out of season flowkes.
Much like a shadow of the Moon he stands,
With rewfull cheer, does wring his careful hands.
And after a while, amid his torments great,
(Quoth he) Oh Marcus Curious, blessed be thy days. Marcus Curious.

Thou wast indifferent, thou dealt not with disceate*
Thou wanst thy subjects hearts, and wanst immortal praise:
Thou wast a loving Captain, to men at al assaies.
For to thy people thou wast a Parent dear,
As by thy noble acts, among them did appear.
Thou did divide the soil, by just and equal line,
And to each man, thou fortye acres gave:
Which ground before allotted was for thine.
^^^*like, for like, with least thou would but have,
The faithful hearts of men, was all that thou did crave.
Therefore thy just reward, is with the Gods on hy^,
And through the earth, thy same, abroad does fly.
And wride his head, and Morpheus straight beheld,
Thou know my name (quoth he) I pray y^ get the hence
To leave my talk, by thyrst I am compelde:
The hungry worm, does also work me vengeance.
Since of my deeds thou have true intelligence,
Declare it to thy frindes, how ever they regard it,
How I for my wickedness of Pluto am rewarded.
That will I do (quoth he) the best I may or can,
To all the world diuolgat shall it be,
My voice shall thunder it out unto each man,
The reward of wickedness that now I see:
Do so (quod Tantalus) and there with all does he
Betwi^t the fruit and guylefull fountains vain,
Watching wishes food to ease his hungry pain.
And thus we both depart, and went our way,
This dreirye doubtful Myser, left we there,
Whose thirste increases grief, to see the pray
That heart would have, in sight does aye appear.
Straight came Alecto, And she began to swear:
(quoth she) thou oppressor, thy hunger still increase,
To reward thy wickedness, hope not to have release*
No sooner from the valley were we gone,
But in our ears we heard a careful cry,
Which said (alas) in Plutos kingdom none
Sustaineth half the plagues that I do taste and try,
Fie one worldely works, fie upon them fie.
(Quoth Morpheus) to me, make haste, we will go see,
Who it is that plains and ^ones so grieuouslye.
The books verdite upon Tantalus.
THe monstrous Camel, that sta^ping beast, and cake the sluggish Ass
And Bayarde bold, I may compare to many men alas*
Which with the Camel bears away, the massy pack of pelf,
Yet twice as slow as sluggish Asle, but only for themself.
The loathsome load of wished wealth, the hearts has so bewitched:
That Justice, friendship, pity, and love, away is from them twitcht.
With brags they bouldly leap and plunge, nothing they do mistrust:
As Baiard does, till at the length, to yield to harm they must.
These Beasts me think do well present, the qualities of such,
That with the Camel, drug and draw, of worldly wealth so much.
As Tantalus the Phrigion did, the Camels part that plaide.
Whose mind from Midas muck, in time, no counsel could have staid.
His Beastly heart bear that away, that body nor bones could do:
As some such Camels at these days, are lately start up new.
Within the circuit of our soil, which members bear of men,
Whose customs in their country is, to beastly now and then.
For often their greedy pau^che deuoures, their neighbors house and ground,
Yea Pastures, Parks, whole fields, and Tounes, and all that may be found.
Which passes beast, or beastly bones, of worldlinges for to bear:
Although their hearts docraue as much, as both they see and hear.
They hoke and hold, with tothe and nail, by slight of wily brain,
That which we see, each time and tide, does waste like snow in rain.
Goods are ill got, which causes loss, of endlesseioy and bliss,
To purchase pains, where lasting grief, and tormente ever is.
Mark this well you mighties whom, the Lord appointesto rule,
Lend not your ears in any wise, to Peter Pickthankes schole.
His flattering fetch does rob you al, offamous honor due,
Whose painting pensels evermore, reprocheful colors hew.
And causes curses of the poor, whose plaints the Lord does hear,
^edressing straight their care and grief, throughout the earth echewhere
VThat Camel then more covetous, what Ass more dull of wit,
What boulder Bayara can be found, to keep the loathsome pit,
The^ are these muckserapers at these days, that swalow up the poor,
Which have to much, yet not content, but proule for more and more?
Whose gluttons eyes are never filde, till gaping chappes be full
Of suddie soil, and slimie slitche, where at this while you pulll:
And then your woeful souls bewail, the days your carcass spend^*
In wickedness, and never could find any time to mende.
But words are wind, what will you more? No virtue is regarded:
Be as be may, the day will come, your works will be rewarded.
FINIS.
The reward of an Ambicious and vain glorious counselor, called Vetronius
Turinus: For his wicked life among them that he might overcome, and for his
Pride: whose words follow in the mids of his torments.
PEace Tantalus hold still thy plainting chaps.
Bewail no more thy state, thy lot is light enough,
And if thou knew of my mischaunsed haps,
And how I am torment, within this stinking clough.
Contented would thou be, where now thou art not so,
And if thou felt but least of this my endless woe.
Fie of the face of fortunes smiling looks,
Whose slye deceyte is sugared baytes to cast:
The foolish sort to catch upon her hooks,
That erste from smiling mouth, the Judas kiss had taste.
And such as she has set the hext of all,
She most delites to give the greatest fall.
Who sittes so sure as in the simple seat?
Who is so Ritche, as he that reason does content?
Who scapes the hook, that leapes at every bait?
Who meddles much at last that is not shent?
Or yet who deals with craft that is not spide?
Who has not al men's wrath, that evermore has lide?
The sure pathe I never found as yet,
Which was to set all worldly things at naught.
With Phaeton, I thought above the stars to sit,
On worldly wealth was evermore my thought. Isiodorus.

But custom teaches al things shall little be,
That to the show semes great, too worldly eye.
Who dwelles in Princes favors that knows him self,
Or at the least for gettes not what he was?
Who looks not hye, that catches worldly wealth,
Which slippes away as dew upon the grass. Hermes.

Fie, on it fie, it leads to endless fire,
And meare destruction bringes, on them that it desire.
But in valleys low, the qiuetst dwelling is,
On loftye mountains, the storming blast does blow:
The mounting Phoenix, shall witness be of this, Phoenix.

Who does full well, the hearts of climbers show.
Whose end with her, does meare destruction call,
Which does from loftye skies, below to ashes fall.
Who with Icarus seems to fly a lofte,
Or with the Pine, his fellows ouergrowes,
That many times, with fortune is not skofte,
And with the Pine, be rent and spoilde of bows?
Who stands in conceyte, with folishe fond Nessus,
That in the end of his misfortune misses?
But what auailde the Books that I have read?
The wicked end of none, might cause me to amend:
I saw long sith, how every Tyrant spead,
By worthy writers, wose acts had Clerkly pende.
And their succes, that in such vice abounded,
How short they rainde, and were by God confounded.
But let me be, for so I may no doubt,
Full well be made a mirror to each one:
That be in Princes favor, and make them selves so stout,
(As I) unhappy wretch, have been not long a gone.
I had so deep a wit to purchase worldly wealth,
In virtue a very fool, and clean deceiu de my self.
And with these words his pains so much encreaste,
That worse then mad, a thousand times he flinges:
Then to the brinke of loathsome lake he priest,
And cried, behold, what wicked doings bringes.
Draw near good Morpheus, harken what I say,
And to thy friends report another day.
I was (quoth he) aduaunste to such degree,
And in the favor stood, of Alexanders grace:

So much at last, that in all causes he
Look mine advise, in things that doubtful was.
My counsel lead him, ever as my list,
Who had a s^te, I not his friend, his purpose mist.
All men gave place, when I in counsel close,
Unto this noble Emperor, both night and day:
My fame each hour, increased still and rose,
I saved whom my list, again I put away
(Whom pleased me) and ruled me at will,
I made both good, and bad, full glad to please me still.
Vetronius Turinus, is my proper name, Uetronius Turinus.

Chief counselor, this famous Emprour too:
Which bleard my inward eyes in tasting of the same,
I could not know my self, as I was wont to do.
Such incomparable sweetness, is found in Princes favor,
Whom Fortune calls so high, forgets their own behavior.
Such hap a while exceeds Loios taste,
Whose sinatch some lickoras lips, the most do wish:
Yet whosoever to gape, therefore does haste
Sal try in the end, Serdonia, plain it is.
For sweetest meats, sour sauce they say is best,
This is, and evermore, was used at each feast.
Thus I elect, and chosen chief of all,
In secreate familiarity, with this noble man:
I was so pufte with pride, I did mistrust no fall,
Thus each man's heart, through dread and fear I wan.
A while I plaide the B^are, I nipt both young and old,
I kept them so in awe, to bark none durst be bold.
Thus every man of me did stand in fear,
Each one with bending knees, to me did bow:
They honored me, ^s I the* Emproure were,
I gaped for such glory, as was not meet nor dew.
Thus like a chowgh, depaint in peacoks tails,
Amid the gulf of Cille, I hoyst my rotten sails.
And at the length this one thing blinded me,
When every man my lawful favor sought,
Then I began to look both stowte and hie,
I spoke them fair, when inward ill I thought.
Great bribes I did receive, and made all men believe,
That whom my list, I could both glad and grieve.
Thus ritche I made my self, and most men poor,
That to this noble Emproure any suit procurde:
And those of whom the Emproure made a store,
Such means I wrought, that long he not indurde.
And yet a greater sleyght then this I used long,
I daily sought to wrest all men with wrong.
Fair words I ^edde them with, and nothing else,
On either part their money I received,
I eat their kirnels, and fed them with the shelles.
Who trusted me that escaped vndeceyued?
I playde the Mariner, that looks back and rows,
And yet with floode, his boat contrary flows.
For where these suitors did awayte to know,
By me this noble Emperor his pleasure,
Then would I nodde my head, and frindely countenance (show.
(As who should say) abide a another leisure.
Thus of the Emprours grave determination,
I made a trade as twere an occupation.
Till at the length, all men with murmuration,
Perceiving that I fabled with them so,
With open Jaws, made open exclamation,
And earnest looks cast on me too and fro,
Whereat report, a Post did send for Fame,
Which causd her crooked Trumpets sound abroad the same
Thus to this noble Princes ears at length it came,
And published all abroad, it was on every side.
And of the same accusde of every man,
That round about me stood, and to the Emprour cryde:
O famous noble prince, incline thine ears to hear.
Turinus wickedness, to thee shall now appear.
Then all my former life disclosed was,
And prooude by credible persons before my face:
When the Emperor understood both more and les,
He iudgde me to be led into the market place.
Where strangers were of countries far and nigh,
Which grieude me worse, then twenty times to die.
In the market place, sometime where I with pride,
More like a Prince then otherwise had walkd the stones
There to a stake, my limbs full fast they tide,
With cruel engines invented for the nonce,
Where young and old, stood round about to see,
The fall of him, which erst did look full hie.
Then hidden malice did show his furious face,
Whose tongues before as sweet as sugar seemde:
(And crying said) thou Tyrant void of grace,
The proof is plain, it was not as thou weende,
Thou thought thou had our hearts, because we capt and kneelde,
Which inwardely with spiteful hate we steelde.
Then curses black into the skies they send, His execution makes people glad.

To all the Gods where mighty Jove does sit,
That after all this shame, I might be torn and rent,
Within the puddle of Plutos stinking pit.
And there withal, their hands a pace they clappe,
Green sticks and stubble, about the stake they wrap,
And fire thereto, on every side they set,
Whose powdering smoke, mountes up the lofty skies,
The flashing flame each man was prone to let,
To the end thereby my doubled pain might rise,
Thus lingered life, with torments worse then death,
By means of smoke compelde to yield my breath.
Whereat with gladsome hearts rejoiced many a one,
Tooth' great reproach of all my blood and line,
With have a Bedle The Emperor calde on,
And straightly chargde, about the stake that time,
To sound these words in the ears of young and old,
With fumes lo here he dies, that fumes has ever sold.
Thus confusion my guerdon quitte full well,
And paid my hyre which I deserved best,
The Gods also condemnde me into hell,
Among the wicked sort with whom I am possessed,
of yrkesome Stigion whereas Phlegethons flames,
The pomp of cruel Tyrauntes ever daily tames.
Lo this the lotte of wicked life in the end,
Look to your states you that Counselors be,
You that persuade the nobles to offend,
Leave of betime for my reward you see,
Be sure whosoever in wickedness proceeds,
In the end the Gods do recompense their deeds.
How say thou Morpheus have thou heard the like?
Whom have thou known to have a fall like mine?
Could Fortune work to me a greater spite,
Then first to whirle me up, then cast me down in fine,
When least of all her wrath I did mistrust?
From hext of Pelops turret, no help but down I must.
Thus through the cost I got each poor man's curse,
With shameful death, and hell at latter day:
A dear bought treasure, thus to fill my purse,
To lose the joys among the Gods for aye.
These words no sooner said, so much increast his pains
His tongue with ruful voice his perfect talk constrains.
This sincke of sorrow wherein he stands and cries,
With pitche and Brimstone boyles up like a floode,
Where serpents with their triple heads still yelling flies,
Whose crooked claws are bathed in his blood.
From out whose mouths such foming flames arise,
Which lights in his face, or spowteth in his eyes.
Each finger of his hand was turnde to ougly snakes, A man deformed.

His teeth were chaungde to worms Cerestres like:
His legs all serpents, that daily vengaunce takes,
Upon each other, that venomly began smite.
His toes upon his feets, were filthy Todes to see,
That swelde with poison as big as they might be,
His heart the Captain of his sleyghtie tongue,
Transformd in likeness of a Hedgehogge kind:
Before whose greedy mouth such riped fruit was hong,
As monstrous beast in heart did wish to find.
Which when he touched, they turnde to Scorpions all,
Perforce his lips from gaping chappes lets fall.
His guilefull tongue was turnde to Crocadyle,
Amidde whose sleightie head brast out consuming coals,
From out whose eyes fell drops like gaddes of steel,
Wherewith sometime he trapt poor silly souls.
And molten gold into his mouth was pourde,
Whose gasping gummes most greedely deuourde.
And yet a greater grief then this had he,
A plagie pain above the rest no doubt:
An horrible feend, none such in hell to see,
Before him stands, whose voice does roar and shoute,
What joys among the Gods they lose that wicked are,
This ougly Geylor to him straight did declare. The scripture alleged then.
Psalm. 84. Psalm. 24. Psalm. 3.

And with the Psalms began this cruel Clarke,
To taunte the torment wretch with grief to hear,
Saying Turinus incline thine ear and hark:
I am thy Curate, thou art my Parishner.
Give ear (quoth he) and mark my sayings well,
Else shall these hooks, with care thy corpse compel.
And then these places of scripture straight he reads,
And shakes his Snakie head, with grinning teeth: Roma 8. Apoca. 22. Math 24.
1. These. 4. Math 25. Apoca. 7. Apoca. 4. Apoca. 21.

And scoffs him still, with all his old done deeds,
That then to hear, no little was his grief.
And then this frouning Curate, braggingly began host,
And tells the wretch, what endless joys he lost.
Thou have lost (quoth he) mirth out of measure,

, All liberty, all Light, all rejoicing and health: Esaias. 43. Esaias. 1. Esaias.
5. Math. 11. John. 3. John. 5. Luke. 5.

, All wealth, all joy, and glorious pleasure,
, All honor, all power, al long of thy self.
, With solace, and love, unity, concord, and peace,
, Wisdom, virtuous melodye, and felicities increase.
, Meekenes, and beatitude, from the is fled and gone,
, And that in most glorious heavenly City:
, Hope for no redress, be sure hear is none,
, But ever more, unspeakable miserye.
, This Den (quoth he), is still the place of pains,
, For thee and such, of whom the poor complains.
, Now have thou lost the company of Archangels,
, With Thapostles, Patriarchs, and Cherubins:
, Powers, Thrones, Dominione, and Angels,
, Confessors, Uirgins, Martyrs, with blessed Zeraphins.
, Where righteous sprites, cease not, but always sing.
, Holy, Holy, Holy, God of earth, and heaven King.
And with these words, with have he shut the book,
To some place else he ran to execute his spite:
Whereat Turine cast up a woeful look.
(Quoth he) good Morpheus take forth thy pen and write,
(Alas) regester up my rewfull wicked end.
It may prevent much harm, and if the same were pende.
But Morpheus ^asting down his head for woe,
Uneth one word, could well pronounce almost,
But said, come Robinson, I pray thee let us go,
My heart does w^rche to see this gr^slye ghost.
And then he wished that all offenders see,
How Pluto does reward all them that wicked be.
And thus we left Turinus in his pains,
Whose want of grace, we both lamented much:
And there in Jayle he shakes his lincked chains,
Whose bands to break, no mortal hands may tuch.
His endless pains it boots not to be wayle.
No sacrifice to Jove, can ought at all pr^uayle.
The Books verdit.
LO thus to see him pulde, with raging hagges of hell,
That whilom thousands ruide, esteemd with Princes well.
I meruell in my mind, such men should plagued be,
Whom Fortune has assinde, unto such dignity.
But now I do perceive, none such the Gods will spare:
That poor men do bereave, of money goods or ware.
Or whom by counsel seems, to blind their Noble eyes:
Whose judgments best esteems, and quites with double fees.
Or such as sentence sell, by slye and cloked craft:
And harmless souls compel, a fruitelesse tree to grafte.
On these the Gods do pour, their wrath by whole consent:
And alter in an hour, the wickeds ill intent.
Regarding not at all, their stately hie degree:
But shortly give the fall to such as climb to hie.
Turinus now has lost his prince that lou'de him best:
And such as hate him most, ioyde thus to see him dressed.
What profittes blubbred tears? The Gods have judged thee:
How long or few years, (they know) so do not we.
To leave thee in thy pains, of very* force I must:
No hope but this remains, a warning fair I trust*
FINIS.
The woeful complaint of the monstrous Emperor Heliogabalus for spending of
his days in abominable whoredom.
Sith Morpheus thou art come to take the dew
of Plutos kingdom where the wicked guerdon have:
Of all the rest thou ever see or knew,
I am the mark to guide the rest from scath*
Lo how I lie, that erst did flourish brave*
and yet Turinus thinks he has much wrong,
I hear him hither, upon the furies rave,
yet not such cause as I* Turinus hold thy tongue
Oh how tickle is the stay of honors hie?
what does avail a while to guide the earth?
The Example plain appears now by me,
an Emprour once descend of noble birth*
My triple crown that was abundaunce worth*
my Scepture set with Saphirs rich to see:
My sword that held in fear such murt^*
as never yet was dewde by any eye.
Nor yet the sound of great renoumed ^ame,
though all the world I held in fear and awe,
That can excuse the least of blotted blame,
nor that the Gods at all regard a straw.
(No Morpheus no) who does offend their law*
although he were ten times as high again:
Upon the snap they catch him in a flawe,
their hautie maste flies over board amain.
Upon the rock the shaken Hull is cast,
that prowdely hoyst her sail before on hie*
And so unawares they perish with a blast,
the which before mistrusted not to die.
Then from the stinking gayle the sprite does flee:
and as the dunghill secke, has spent his days,
The ^^llie soul, in bale or bliss shall be,
thus vice or virtue has reward always.
Unhappie wretch I was of Rome elect*
and by consent of all the rulers there,
The noble Senate chose me to protect,
but when in hand the fearful sword I bear,
Not only Rome, but through the whole Empire,
I quight forgot my self, and place they set me in:
Then did my filthy nature straight appear,
the hidden smoke, to flashing flames begin.
For after that I had in hand to rule,
and that my word to lose and bind had power,
I brought the Senate to a another school,
exalting vice much hier then Pelops tower.
The Sages grave e^pulsing every hour,
new Lords, new laws, it did appear by me:
Thus Rome to ruin I brought from honor,
from virtue to vice, great shame and infamy.
Thus first of all, when I from Syria came,
to Rome to rule, and royal scepture guide: Varius Heliogabalus.

Heliogabalus the Roman blood may banne,
I was a mean to lay their same aside.
Wisdom nor virtue I never might abide,
In brute and beastly toys always I dwelde.
All such as sin correct I did deride,
to filthy living a thousand I compelde.
And thus of Rome that was a mirror clear,
from whom at first all nations knowledge had,
Of honor, virtue and prowes the name did bear,
in myste of filthy slander by me was ladde
Whereat the prudent men wept tears full sad,
to see the vile abuse that then I set aloft:
Uertuous Uirgins then to fly were glad,
vurauisht few escaped, that might be caught.
Insatiable was my swelling lust,
my pampered flesh to whoredom was addicte:
I lookte on none but needs consent they must:
Lo thus (alas) with vice I was afflicte.
I would the mortal lance in tender youth had stickte
my wicked heart that wickedness desired:
Then should not now no Plutos furye pricked
this soul of mine, that here in flames lies fyred.
If Atis chance betime I had sustainde,
then had I squencht the spark that bred unrest:
My wretched sprite, that now in hell is painde,
among the Gods in bliss had been possessed.
Whom now thou see with torments still oppressed,
and also scapte on earth, reproach and shame:
Unhappy Rome, then had thou twice been blessed,
that now for evermore bewayles the same.
The last Assirian King in filthy life, Sardanapalus the last Assirian king
lived too vile a life to be rehearsed.

I did exceed a thousand kind of ways:
All Rome throughout, I ravished Maid and Wi^e,
of Uirgins ever, I made them common prays.
Thus spent I my wicked fleshly days,
I made a Senate, of harlottes and bands:
In open sight I kept no better plays,
then filthilye to use these common Iades.
Thus houses builded I, for schools of sin,
to aid them with I gave them largely treasure:
The virtuous Matrons, I plucked them quickly in,
compelling them unto this filthy pleasure:
(Alas, alas) I past al Godly measure,
there was no ho, with me: who durst deny?
But if they had, I spied such a leisure,
that from their shoulders, I made their heads to fly.
Into the hands of Bawdes, I did commit,
the greatest dignitye of the Public weal:
To common Rybawdes, void of grace and wit,
I gave aucthoritye, as well to chose as deal,
Who had a suit to me that did prevail,
except in Lechery he did exceed?
The virtuous sort were ever sure to fail,
when as the wicked at every turn did speedr.
Luxurious meats and drinckes, I ever sought,
a thousand ways I studied for the same:
Upon the Public weal the least I thought,
to labor after lust, that was my game.
If I should publishe half by proper name,
the life of late, I lewdlye led in sin,
The finest head it would both tire and tame,
therefore to trouble thee, I will not now begin.
What should I speak of noble famous Dukes, Yt is needful for Princes and
noble men to call sage, wise and learned men to be of their counsel, and such
as be Gentlemen, well brought vy.

that from the Senate, by violence I put:
Or of the sage wise Masters, that with rebukes,
I cruellye, out of the Senate shut?
I caught the bitter buske, and lost the pleasant Nut,
two Carters I chose to be my counsel chief:
I blindlye drew to shote at blanked But:
which was the cause at leangth of all my grief.
Protogenes the tone of these were calde Protogenes and Cordius two sleues
borne.

Cordius, the other had by proper name:
These two through Rome the common wealth forstald,
to the loss of my honor, and great increase of shame.
For vice flourished, and virtue waxed lame:
Vitellus in gluttouy, always I did exceed: Vitellus at one supper was set
ued with. 7 thousand fishes, and. 5 thousand Fowls.

Wanton meats for the nonce, then I began frame,
to pamper the paunche, when nature list not feed.
What should I tell of the strange kind of Fishes,
so rare uneath no man can know them well:
Which at one meal, ten thousand dishes,
with as many Fowls as do the Fish excel,
The like ere now, has any man heard tell?
an Emperor to lead (alas) like gluttons life?
Young tender Maids, always I did compel,
throughout Italy, with many a noble wife.
And when I had suffisde by violence, ^n abominable thing and damnable.

my filthye flesh, yet not contented so:
I ripte their wombes in open audience,
their tender bowelles, and secreates for to shoe.
In progress, when I did delight to go,
with me six hundredth Chariots of harlots went:
In steed of Sage, and noble counsels los,
thus I my time in wickedness still spent.
And such as chief to me I did appoint,
and ordain greatest rule of all to bear:
The sentence of my fame, the villans joint,
I innocent, the suitors not the near.
They fed me with follye they whispered in mine ear,
Zoticus that variette, a slave and dunghill borne: Zoticus.

Whom of naught to noblenes, I did up rear,
in the end rewarded me with double scorn.
He playde by me, as Turinus did before,
by noble Alexander, who guerdon gave:
(So well) that fame, for evermore,
soundes up his praise for quiting of that knave.
What should I say, it is but vain to ra^e,
for in time I had no grace this to prenent:
But he that will thus much exalt a slave,
him self shall be the first, that shall repent.
Because this variette, Zoticus did excel
in all wicked vices most abominable:
I preferde him to the greatest living that fell,
both Realms and Kingdoms, with countries honorable:
To no man virtuous I seemed conformable,
but only to such as abounded in sin:
To these and such like, I was ever tra^able.
when each man lost, these knaves did winns.
The Devil so kindled his stre in my breast.
and fostered in me such detestable vice:
Because Alexander was not slain, I could not rest.
that was mine Awntes son both learned and wise.
To poison him I offered, Jewelles of great price,
because my wickedness so much he hated:
One while treason, I conspired with spice,
in diverse drinks and meats, his death I animated.
But now behold the guerdon and reward,
of filthy vile and detestable life:
And how the Gods their servants do regard,
defending them from murders bloody knife.
My endeful well, may warn both man and wife,
for Alexander, whom I thought to kill:
He scapte the snare, when I began to drife,
the first I was my self, that in the same did sy^^^.
For he through virtue, wanne the noble hearts,
of thancient Senate, and commons of the same:
In whose safegarde, not one from other starles,
but with consent, together jointly frame.
And thus began with me, that tragicallike game:
Tyrants can not reign, experience long has taught:
The Gods that suffer long, at length do blame,
the wicked imagination, they ever bring to naught.
For by procuring Alexanders death.
I hasted mine own to my life agreeing:
My wicked servants, like Traitors false of faith,
were thonely conspiratours, and causers of my dying.
They slew my adherentes, and put me to flying.
my familiers a thousand ways they kilde
Before my face. I standing by and seeing,
for life durst not speak, but as a coward yield.
But how I yielded, it is shame to make relation, S^m^^mir^ his mother ^ ^icious
woman.

I f^ed into a privy, and there was take,
My mother murdered on the same sort and fashion,
Our funeralles together, amidde that dounge we make.
Lo my reward for filthy whoredoms sake.
The Gods forgot me not, they quitt^ me home:
They cast me headelong into this f^ery lake,
upon the earth for aye good fame is gone.
(Alas) Morpheus yet thou know not all,
I pray thee ^ide a while and hear the rest,
I am sure as yet, thou never heard like fall,
of noble birth, hatched in so high a nest.
But what preuailes where vice is so possessed.
A while I ruled, and tumbled in my sin:
I wanted nothing, that mostrous life request,
of fear I frustrate was, I dred not God a pin.
Therefore mine odious corpse throughout the City,
with hooks they drew, both up and down the streets
With ordure fylde, no man of me had pity,
haulters of ^empe were both our winding sheets.
Fie on him villain, they skrickt and cryde like sprites,
with clapping hands each one reioyst to see,
With words of great reproach the furies had delites,
my old deserved deeds to wreake on me.
Then to the common ^akes they dregged me,
at the filthiest conduict down they would me cast,
But that it was to narrow, at least by fingers three,
or else I had been shrinde within that dongue at last.
But then tied to a mighty mylstone full fast,
into the floode of Tiber was I thrown:
Where many a worthy ship has past,
the tumbling streams was made my tumbe and throne.
Lo Morpheus lo, thus was I seru'de of such,
that erst from naught to Princes mates I brought:
Behold their acts, to whom I gave so much,
above the rest, my misaduentures sought:
But alas, the end of wickedness is naught,
the Gods always, take vengeance at the length:
I thought I should the fixed stars have raught.
but yet abated was my hawtye heart and strength.
At the age of one and twentye years I dyed,
and monstrous Heliogabalus they calde my name:
To my reproach, report the same has cried,
who heard thereof, that made not sport and game?
And look who leads my life, shall ever taste the same,
utter confusion, hastes for his pray:
Perdurable mischief, comes after fast with shame,
and makes their pasporte at the latter day.
But Morpheus, to tell thee all my beastly acts,
an hundredth Clerks were not able to pen them:
And again whosoever should hear of like factes,
so detestable they are, it would but offend them.
But I pray thee warn thy friends to amend them,
my gilte thou have hard, my pains thou do see:
To repent betime, I pray God to send them,
for be sure wicked deeds, are rewarded wickedly.
Bid them fly whoredom, and vile vicious deeds,
they are sure to loase Gods kingdom for ever:
Honest men do hate them, as nettles or weeds,
but shame and ill report leaves them never.
At length their own Minions do seek their decay,
on whom pursues death, of life the bereuer:
Which makes an end of beggary, committing hell the pray,
if they in wickedness, unto the end persevere.
And with these words this wicked wretch,
among his torments, was toyled so sore,
With a pitiful looks, his hand forth did stretche,
as who say a dew, I can speak no more.
His mother in a flaming puddle began to roar,
each Devil put in use his terrible trade:
With greater spite then accustomed before,
to terrible to hear the noise that then they made.
This monstrous Emperor in hell thus stood,
tied fast by the members on a snakie wheel:
Which ran about as if it were wood,
Invironde with Bawdes as black as the De'yle
Hooked for the no^ce with hot glowing steel,
which Butchered his bowels about his feet:
And for to reward his wickedness we will,
Thinfernall fire, straight way they beyte.
Whereat anon such smoke there does arise,
with lead that boyles, in storms like raging seas,
And with a twinche, a thousand Dragons flies,
ten times as fast as snow in windy days.
Grypes as greedy as Woolues that seek their prays,
and on him gnawe, that myser tied full fast:
The cruel wheel does bounse, and never stays,
Lo, thus his pains for ever more does last.
And thus we left this wretch (that dwells in endless pain)
A number for to vewe, that crying did complain.
The Books verdit.
WHen filthy lust does guide, and has the helm in fist:
Beware the wind and tide, take heed of had I wist.
A wilful mate is he, for to direct the way:
He doubts no peril nie, in sailing on the sea.
But hoyse aloft he cries, it blows a merry blast:
And so at random flies, while youthful life will last.
At Caphars lamp they run, with hoysed sail amain:
Which seems like the Sun, in sight of feeble brain.
A stale that leads the way, to Scyllas sandy cost:
Which drinks every day, their blood through folly lost.
Caribdes greedy Jaws, lie gaping every hour:
And whom she catches in her claws, she spares not to devour.
But lo the prancke of pride, and race that rudeness runs:
The end of wanton works are spide, se how destruction comes,
Mark rushing youth, how vain he spendes his retchelesse days:
Note well how pleasure breeds pain, a thowsande kind of ways.
If puffing pomp with gold, might ease this Princes pain:
Or force of armed champions bold, could help his grief again:
Then all his scrikes and cries, had quite been hushed and stilde:
So had his ears and eyes, with worldly works been filde.
If I should make rehearse, what his offenses were:
Although in prose or verse, it would corrupt the ear.
The Gods abhorde his days, the world does sound his shame:
And vengaunce vengaunce many ways, agrees to the same?
What profits now his sport, wherein he playde the beast,
With all his bawdes resort, or eke his gluttons feast.
What now auailes his crown, with precious stones beset?
Or and he had as great renown, as mortal man might get.
Since mighties know not when, the Gods will knock and call,
No more then other poorest men, that simplest be of all,
Therefore look well about, keep filthy lust away:
Beware I say the hidden doubt, that lies in secret sea.
Let virtue guide the helm, and wisdom hoyse the sail:
So shall you void the dangers great, that might your voyage quayle.
FINIS.
The two Judges for slaundering of Susanna: and bearing false witness against
her, be rewarded for the same most terribly.
First to this place when happed us to hytte,
A room we found where best we might behold
Of every side that stinking Stygion pit,
That all the rest excelde a thousand fold,
Stuffed full to the top it was of young and old,
(But as I said before) a couple there we see,
Whose tongues behind were halde with hooks full hie.
Before their faces with trumpet hoarse and dim,
To powting mouth a monster fell does set,
Whose voice increases care that be the hearing in,
With foming iawe, his teeth begins to whet.
His gloring eyes with sparks of fire fret,
He casts under clouds, and stints his trumpet streite,
And with a rattling speech declares these words on heite.
(Quoth he) since slander is committed to my charge,
And that it pleases Pluto my service to accept,
Within this pit mine office wide and large,
His laws and statutes straight shall be full truly kept.
And there withal aloft anon he lept,
From the gibbet cuts their tongues whereby they hang,
And like a mad man in a rage into a furnasse flange.
Where molten brass does boil as red as gleedes,
I blende with sulfer, pitche and stinking tar,
And scaldes the scoffered tongues that wounded bleedes.
Whose fyring stream may well be spied a far,
From bottom low which mounth from height to harre.
And dims the crystal skies, and beams of glering light,
But that we stood so nie else had we lost the sight.
Tartarus has this pit to proper name,
Which is in hell most yrksome place indeed, Tartarus.

And is appointed wicked tongues to tame,
That do delight in sclaunders to proceed,
Who brueth bate that well does after speed?
Who stains the virtuous man by false surmised way*
That in the end least penny does not pay?
For mighty Jove that does in heavens sit,
To forge commaundes Vulcanus fast to hye,
New thundering boltes to make for every pit,
Whereas these slaundrous wretched verlottes lie.
Who many thousands wrought, and down send by and by,
Which boltes the cruel Jailer in sturdy Bow does set,
And cruelly flinges, with heads full sharp iwhet.
Into the mouth and through the tongues they fli^,
Of either of these lyther slanderous mates:
Where as consuming coals as red as serpents eye,
Do ever lodge as porters of the gates,
Two serpents ever sat upon their pelled pates.
And ever through the skull they pell the brain,
Yet always as it wasted it still increast again.
In shooting thunderboltes and arrows as I said,
At these false accusers, and breeders of unrest,
That ougly Geylor chaunst hold up his head,
And Morpheus spide, whom then he did request,
To come and see how liars there were dressed.
For this the place (quod he) that slander does reward,
Though many thousands not the same regard.
And then with filthy forke their jaws abroad he set,
Within whose mouths were broodes of scorpions hatched,
Whose hunger not slackt but they might always get Some
Some part of wicked lime, thus at his tongue they snatch:
And yet it does increase, their greedy guts to hatche.
Yet they be never filde, nor he consumde no deal,
Lo, thus they taste of woe, that sclanderous lies do tell.
I say come near, this Jayler said again,
And what thou see among thy friends report:
Though sclaunder be torment with double pain,
Yet every day thou see I have resort:
No doubt I trow, they think it but a sport.
For else their tongues from lies they would apply,
To mighty Jove they ought for mercy cry.
For if they do not mende in haste, be sure
I will mine office yield (quoth he) no double:
Else a larger dominion, I mean for to procure,
For this is full you see, already round about:
And now such sclanderers come, that be so stout*
And with so Clarkly cunning, their matter forge and fain,
That certainly I can yield them equal pain.
But chiefly who be these (quod Morpheus) would I know
That thus above the rest, so cruelly be used?
(Quoth he) two Judges in Israel long ago,
That sclandered Susanna, whom they would abused,
By fleshly deeds they thought to have misused,
This virtuous wife and noble worthy Dame,
Whom when she would not, accusde her with the same.
But bide a while (quoth he) them selves shall make report,
And when thou hear them, Judge as thou think best:
And with these words out of that filthy sort,
With crooked hook, he halde them by the breast:
Whom when I vewed, with hand my self I blessed.
If I should tell of their deformed looks,
The rediest tongue, would fire to read the Eookes.
When up they cast their eyes, and Morpheus there beheld,
With woefuls^e look, that ever eye did vewe: Daniel. 13.

For verysorrow with whorsy noise they yield,
And crying said, oh happy days a dew.
Woe worth the day alas, that Father us begot,
And cursed be our birth, our mother slew us not.
We two in Israel whilome Judges were,
That al thing ruled among the Jewishe Nation:
In Babylon one Ioachim, dwelling there,
And then among the Jews in mighty estimation,
By means whereof to our contentation,
No house so fit as his, for us to lie and be,
Of whom again no man more glad then he.
Which Ioachim one Susanna took to wife,
The only Daughter of Helchia Just:
That lived chaste and virtuous all her life,
Who in the Lord did ever put her trust:
Whose ardent beawty, styred up our lust
So flamingly that like a gleyde we broild,
This noble Dames chaste life to have defilde.
As in the thirteenth of Daniel, there it does appear, Daniel. 13.

What sleyght we used burning in her love:
To come by cur purpose, we brought her in despair,
For thus we swear by all the Gods above:
Except she did consent that she should hastily prove,
For that we had her there, we said we would accuse her
In filthy fornication we found aman abuse her.
We stealing in before the Drcharde doors were hard,
The rather then we thought our purpose to have had:
But naked though she stood our talk she not regard,
O Lord (quoth she) now am I hard beestad:
Alas she said, these ylles are both two bad.
Yet had I rather bide these Tyrants accusation,
Then for to yield and work abomination.
Which when we saw with open mouths we cried,
Fie upon this woman, an adulteress (quod we)
At the which all the servants hasted fast and hyed,
And up they brake the doors, and in with speed they flee:
We accusing her, reported this we see.
Whereat the servants sad, made sorrow for the same,
For why before, no man could stain her name.
Upon the morrow before the elders all,
We falselye did accuse her there, upon the same:
But she in prayer, upon her knees did fall,
And calde upon the Lord, in praising of his name:
Whose ears heard well her plaint: for she from shame,
By God delivered was: and we to thraldom brought,
The same we had, as we this Lady thought.
For by an Infauntes mouth, sturde up by God,
The very truth of all our thoughts reuealde:
And in a worthy sentence, divulgate al abroad,
So that there was no Jot nor title once concealde:
And that we both, since then have sore bewailde.
Daniel was his name, the Prophet of the Lord,
That sau'de his servant, according to his word.
And thus we were reproved of our false intent,
Susanna, set at liberty with joy and triple praise:
Daniel upon us, gave his cruel judgment,
Lo, thus at mischief ended we our days:
The Gods condemn us, hear to lie always.
In pains perpetual, whose endless woe no tongue
Is able to describe, that we have suffered long.
And world with worlds, withouten end and ends,
Shall here bewail our wilful sclaunderous tongues:
And yet on earth are some that in the same offendes,
And think the Gods forget, because they suffer long:
(No no Morpheus) they do revenge each wrong.
And sclaunder scapeth not, but hear is double quitte.
Be judge, that see us thus formented in this pit.
This odious vale throughout thou shall not see,
The like to us, our plagues so fast increase:
Wish al thy friends therefore, like sclander for to flee,
For hear their pains lo, never have release.
Cry therefore betime, their tongues from sclander cease.
He that from one or other their honest name does take,
Before the Gods a great offense does make.
For we unhappy wretches so much desired,
To have the use of this said noble Dame:
That like a gleide our inward sprites were fyred,
Our purpose to obtain, we forced no sin nor shame:
But when we were denied, we falsely laid the blame
Upon that virtuous wight, that never did offend,
For our reward therefore behold the end.
Some think their heels be hoist, where head shall never come,
Whose eyes be bleard in glory vain and balde,
And in their doultes conceyts, they think to give y^ dome,
Where they were never yet to counsel calde,
Whose purpose miste, their wilful blood do scalde.
Their Lordly hearts mand up with beggars purse,
Does work the thing which afterward they curse.
But yet at mischief the sclandering tongue does end,
The proof is plain, if grace might guide the way:
The Gods do still their servants true defend,
The wicked man does ever lose his pray:
And in his pride comes sonest to decay.
He falls through his own imagination,
As here by us the end does make probation.
O sclaunder, sclander, alas, woe worth the time,
That ever we from hateful heart let flee:
By trifling tongue, those wicked darts of thine,
To wound their states that lived vertuouslye.
Take heed therefore al you that sclaunderers be.
Though our fault therefore with you be not regarded.
Assure you yet, with us you are rewarded.
And with these words the cruel Jailer straight,
With horrible gromeling noise his trumpet soundes:
Where at like Cadmus seed they brawle and fight,
With crooked hooks each one an other wounds.
To whom comes Alecto and scowling frowns,
With greater plagues for to reward these liars,
And with her breath settes all on flaming fires.
Whereat I blessed me to behold their pains,
Ravished of my wit almost, I went away.
Then when I thought how many here remains,
Which practice nothing more then slander night and day^:
Thought I it is best from slander that you stay.
Accuse not true Susanna, the Lord protects her still,
His servant he defends and you shall want your will.
Away (quod Morpheus) I hear a meruels cry,
It seems not far, I wonder what it is:
With seeking up and down, at length did there epsy,
Another was rewarded for his wickedness,
I long (quoth Morpheus) to know what noise is this,
And so we stayde, whereas we heard one say,
Lo wicked men your just reward for aye.
The Aucthor to the two Judges.
WHose tongue has been defylde with slanders heretofore*
That humbly weeps not like a child, with great repe^ting sore.
O wicked wretches fie, your Guerdon now is quit:
In Tartarus lo where you lie, that did in judgment sit.
Take heed you boasting blabbes, that Innocents defyle:
You shall be whipped with cruel rods, within this little while.
What sinful deed is this, that woman to accuse,
That never yet was known amiss, her body to abuse?
How dare you be so bold, your neyghbors for to spoil,
Of greater treasure then of gold, or fields of fertile soil?
The mountes of Mydas pelf, no crowns that Princes were:
Nor yet king Alexanders wealth, to sell not half so dear
As is the honest name, whom evil tongues devour,
Er now, that never yerned blame, are blotted in an hour.
But you that slaunderers be, to mind Susanna call:
And praise the Lord, so shall you see Gods vengaunce on them fall*
For Jacob was accusde, poor man that thought none ill:
Alas how long has spite been used, of them that want their will?
The slaundering tongue is such, if thought do wag awry:
To win the wager heel not grutche, thus to proclayme and cry:
That this or that I might, and will, and pleases me:
And thu. I ought to have of right, and sweres it so to be.
Thus have I done says he, when truth is nothing so:
Or else he says that this I see, to work the parties woe.
And thus accused are, it pitieth me to hear,
Susannas that be guiltless, a thousand in a year.
Therefore you filthy Judges your end Iioye to see:
Now lie without refuge in hell eternally.
You sprang of Cadmus seed, your nature plain does sho:
But yet the Gods at length do w^^^e, all such his servants fro.
With Joachim I do rejoice, Susanna thus to see
Elected by Gods holy voice, with Angels for to be.
Pope Ihoan rewarded for her wickedness.
THe time that mortal men do here abide,
Within this world that lasts not an hour:
If fortune chance to smile upon their side,
Then still they strive from har to higher power.
Content with present state not one there lives,
But such as should live best, the worst example gives.
Much would have more, the proverb old does say,
It Is true indeed, much no man does content:
For more and more all men do gape each day,
They think the world will last and not be spent.
Oh very fools, deceived foul ye be:
If hap be on your sides example take by me.
To know my life, and what I was sometime,
Who lives and sees me lie amiddes this endelesse woe,
That would not doubt the like reward in fine,
That I deserved justly long ago?
I must confess my pain to little is,
Though twenty times it were much worse then this.
Hark what I say the stoutst among you all,
Who fitteth hext that has not cause to fear?
Some blast does blow that gives the grievous fall,
Its often seen even once in twenty year,
Though Fortune hoyse the seats of some aloft,
Yet she delights to cast them down as often.
Nothing more brittle is then state of man,
Both night and day exp^^ience does appear:
Yet notwithstanding, who do not what they can,
To live like Gods as long as they be here?
Though time do teach, al things begun mast end
No mendement yet I see of such as do offend.
Except the Gods they thought for to displace,
From out their seats wherein they sit on hie:
Or that from Jove for to dispose the mace,
Wherewith he rules the earth and all the sky:
Else wot I not what all this mischief means,
For Codrus lou'de of Gods, rich men disdains.
On heaps to Pluto headlong here they run,
Hell scarce is able the half part to hold:
The father is torment for wronging of his son,
And eke the son for like in triple fold.
The mother for the daughter sustaines woe:
The daughter for the mother, and many other mo.
But how happy be they that wealth do not taste,
And that with poverty yield thanks to the Gods?
No doubt above the stars all such men are plaste,
They be not scourged nor whipped with our rods.
Therefore by our harms learn to be warned,
Else shall you be sure with us to be charmed.
At the which words then Morpheus alofte did call,
What art thou (quod he) tell me thy name straight way?
(She answered) and said: even so with speed I shall,
If it please thee here a while to bide and stay.
And if it be not long I am content (quoth he)
And so with woeful plainte these words declared she.
O Morpheus Morpheus I am that woeful wight, His words spoken to Mor^heus

That once did sit in Peter's seat and place:
A man I seemde to be alas in all men's sight,
And yet a wicked woman the less my grace.
I did take upon me the Gospel for to guide,
Yet contrary both I and mine did live beside.
And Johan was I calde, and of my birth a City,
Named Maience took her proper name:
Brought up in learned scooles the more great pity,
That grace had not been lincked to the same.
Learning I loved of all ritchesse under heaven,
Till I conquered the knowledge of Sciences seven.
I refused my country and frindes every one,
Many a Pro^ince I trauaylde to and fro,
Better learned then my self I met not with one,
Of what estate or degree he were, high or lo.
And in all these places where ever I came,
I was thought among the people to be a very man.
In England once I was the country to peruse,
From thence to Room I did return with speed,
Within the which I did no deal refuse,
Gramer, Sophistry, Logike, and Rethorike, for to read.
My fellow not found, so ready was my brain,
Nothing wanted Morpheus, but grace I tell thee plain.
In Lotaries time, that Emperor was then,
After the death of Leo by full election,
I was chosen for my wisdom above al men,
To have the Papal dignitye in my protection.
And so was made Pope, and ruled as my list,
Till my abomination accusde me or I wist.
For having at my will what heart could best think,
And ruling as it were all men as pleased me:
Then laid I away both Book, Pen, and Ink,
The swelling flesh with them could not agree.
I spared neither Cardinal Bishop, Munke nor Friar,
To fulfill my desire, I past not who they were.
Till at the last I chaunsed great with Child,
At Saint John's Laterans delivered was I:
And thus the Seat of Peter by me was defilde,
Alas therefore full often to late I cry.
Afterward deposed I was, and so put down,
And begged my bread both in Country and Town.
At this filthye act the Gods were offended,
And sent me to Pluto, his Judgment to try:
Out of all the Heavens I was then suspended,
And hear am adlotted in pains still to lie,
Lo, now thou know both the cause and my name,
Therefore I pray thee warn thy friends of the same.
Tell women, that have fine pollytike wits,
That except they dread the Gods with honor due:
Whom Fortune hexte of all, with Scepture hits,
The hurtful fall be they sure does ensue.
Although her nature be sometime to smile,
It Is best yet take heed she wink them not a wile.
From valley low, when Titan mounts the Hills,
He does dismount as fast as rise before:
The Phoenix scaling skies with singed quilles,
Turns to the Earth again, what needs more?
For fluddes that rise, when at the hexte they be,
Do fall as fast again, the proof we see.
And finallye, will every kind of wight,
As well as women them selves, to know and see:
And that in time of wealth, they set their sight
To vewe what such do want that simpler be.
Their goods and Lands with state of noble rain,
Bewty, Youth, and al things else, shall shrink again.
You know the nine worthies lasted but a time,
The monstrous mountes do waste and wear away:
Then what is it that is made of sliche and slime,
That can upon the earth long stand or stay?
All is but flesh which wastes like the snow,
When life shall part, the wisest does not know.
Now alas, since the world is thus unsure,
And flesh so frail, what fools be mortal men:
That have such hope in that for to endure,
That straight shall slip away they know not when?
What gains get they that win a little pelf,
For which the Gods at last condemn him self?
These words thus said, the rage of furious hell,
With new invented miseries began then to increase:
That very woe and sorrow did compel,
This new found Pope from further talk to cease.
Within my secreate heart, I pitied much her case,
Because she was a woman, and had so little grace.
But then to see the great Souseheaded Friars,
With Iommarnold Muncks, on heaps how fast they fell,
Beside platterfasde Abbots, and Priests with prick ears:
How busy they were it passes tongue to tell.
I think they sang for they gaped so wide,
That to hear their service I might not abide.
Each nowke was full of Nuns, as busye as the best,
Properly apparelled like new fashioned Players:
Prating Pardoners, were Cooks of the Feast,
Whose scullions were a number of beastly Southsaier^.
Every one occupied, not one of them was idle,
But neither with Testament nor with Sacred Bible.
At length they fell out what so ever was the matter,
They fought with Sensars, and holy water Cans:
Great Beads about each others face they clatter,
I little thought they had been such men of their hands.
We saw them so disquiet, we stood from them afar,
For fear of blows before that we were war.
I saw no man there that seemde to make peace,
The like maistries at Olimpus, were never so made:
Thick and threefold on heaps they lie like Beasts,
Their nails were so long no man calde for a blade.
Thus violently they disguised one of them the other,
In such fury, that the son tormented his own Mother.
It was a wonder to me very strange,
To see what May games they made in that pit:
Like Masters of Fence (great strokes they did change
One with another) stark mad out of wit.
A maruailous Music, a prayer most painful,
Among Christian people nothing more dainfull.
Whereat (quod Morpheus) looking on me,
Do thou behold (quoth he) what miserye is here,
And what presumption in some women may be,
And how to come by their purpose, full little they fear*
But what mischief is this, hear for to find,
These Popes and these prelates y^ to preach were assinde?
These are they which bear the world in hand,
That in heaven and hell, they had evermore power:
(As they said) so it was, and with God did stand,
Out of hell to fetch thousands of souls in one hour.
And no word true all was fables and lies.
With false Doctrine and Idolatry the blearid our eyes.
These are the Bellye Gods, that outward did appear,
To be most holy, and just always in their living:
Which before God very Ipocrites were,
And liu'de like brute Beasts, without any thanks giving.
They plead a Privilege, to do what their list,
As if hell and Heaven were both in their fist.
And thus we departed and left the new found Pope,
With her College of Cardinals, and other her mates:
At hext of their service without vestment or Cope,
With nails large and long, they bispte each others pates.
So down the dales, we drew to behold,
The manifold mischief among young and old.
Whom then to see through many a knaggy crust,
And brethles blast, with storms as Kasor kene:
And scaping darts all red with cankred rust,
We passed through, of any one not seen.
Yet by the way a thousand sightes we see,
Of which to think, full oft^ it greeueth me.
Till at the last, we drew unto the place,
And hurtful hole in cruel Stigion lake:
Whereas we heard a man bewail his case.
No pained soul, might greater sorrow make.
These words me thought, the woeful wretch did cry,
Come see (alas alas) the torments where we lie.
FINIS*
News between the Pope and Pluto, and of the Proclamation about the Ladder
twixt Hell and Heaven.
THus leaving Helen in endless woe and pain,
Through yrkesome vale from crag to crag we crept:
Tormented sprites we heard of each side plain,
Thousands thousands, schryking cried and wept,
Linckt fast in chains, with cruel Keepers kept.
Whose name and acts we listed not to crave,
But passed forth to vewe the monstrous cave.
Till at the length to a steep and hawtie hill* Sisiphus for his desolute and
vicious living.

We chaunst to come whereas me thought I see,
One rolling up a stone that tumbleth on him still.
Thus night and day from toyling rests not he.
Also Duke Theseus for his tirannys,
Bitten with ^ipers and torn with Toades in sunder,
In a pit or puddle, that belched light and thunder.
Eneas following Sibil round about that den,
Up hill from cragto crooked Torre he runs,
His wandering limbs still treades the filthy fenne,
In hope to have in sight that always shunnes.
Also women drew water in buckets that runs.
With very many mo to long to name,
As then me thought had plagues much like the same.
But as we went me thought I saw a glade, There are more ways to hell then
one.

That made a shoe as it a passage were,
Which was in deed of very purpose made,
From thence to Rome erectes a mighty stere* This is the way^ from Rome to
Pluto.

And Gorgon with a Clubbe was Porter there,
Except from Rome, in, there he might not pass,
Or else some such as trusted in the Mass.
This way pass souls from pains to endelesse bliss, The way that souls
pass through between heaven and hell.

When please the Pope to send his letters thither,
Morpheus and I experience saw of this,
The Popes man and we met altogether,
Who brought Pardons packt up in a bouget of lether.
Besides letters that to Pluto then he delivered,
On the which Pluto looked, perusde, and considered.
Whereupon Pluto his counsel calde straight,
A filthy heap of crooked noble states,
To here their minds because it was of weight,
To gratify the Pope and all his holy mates,
Send for the messenger, and so these words debates.
My friend (quoth he) tha'rt welcome to this place,
So are they all that love thy masters grace.
But by the floodes of dreadful flaming Styx,
The news thy master writtes do grieve my guts full sore,
For revenge, these claws as sharp as thornie pricks,
Shall toss and tear the sprites of many a score,
(Ah worthy Pope) thy decay I much deplore*
A Cater for my Kitchine, prouider of the pray,
What meruell though I curse the cause of thy decay?
And with these words his scowling face lets pour,
The gushing floodes and spowtes of fire red,
He gnasht his teeth and began to glowte full sour,
With belching breath, to the messenger thus said:
Take here an answer unto my supreme head.
(Bid him be merye) I shall assistaunce send,
To tax all such, as with him do contend.
With a romish thanks, the messenger packeth,
Charged with the letters that Pluto does send,
Post horses by commission in each place he takes,
Until he arrived at the stayers end,
Whereas from Lymbo to Room he should ascend,
Being a lusty Lurdaine a Friar of Saint Fraunces,
Twixt Rome and hell from step to step he daunces.
Thus the Friar fled we heard no more of him,
But straight on a stage a Trumpet sounded was,
Whereunto assembled such souls as for sin,
Were sent by the Pope to be punished alas,
Who thought to be pardoned by virtue of the mass.
Else hoping to hear of the Popes coming thither,
Then thinking to be releast from thence altogether.
When silence was made with much a do,
This ill fast Herraulde these words then declared:
That many men to the Pope were untrue,
And their large offerings and devotions now spared,
For to come to God other means they prepared.
Having no trust in the Pope nor his traditions,
But call him the Captain of Idolatrous superstitions.
To our Prince Pluto his letters do declare,
That toward the North Pole Gods word is so embraste:
That no man for pardons will give money nor ware,
(In England especially) he is utterly disgraste*
Except among a few here and there that are plaste.
That with their friends in nowkes and odd holes,
Sing a mass of Requiem for all christian souls.
Which is to no purpose the money being gone,
That maintained his grace and all his whole rowte,
His Cardinals, his Abbottes, his Friars, with sir John,
His Nuns, and his Ancrees, and all be thrust out,
His Pardnors go begging and wandering about.
The shauelings be shronken that once bare the swaye,
Their credit and customs be run to decay.
And Boner that bolstred the beams of his glory,
Lies Sunk in the sands that onse bear the blade:
That many a Christian therewith made full sorry,
A while in Christ's Uineyarde he cut a great glade,
And stout Story that all the stir made. Story* Gardener. Fecknam.

Gardener is wanting that was the blood letter,
And Fecknam is fast that was the clock setter.
Beside an infinite number within that same I Will,
That now be decayed and worn out of mind:
Banished is Babylon that florishter^ while,
And the way to Jerusalem by the Gospel they find
The Pope they repute to be a guide blind.
They pass not a pin, for his blessings nor curses,
Let him say what he will, they hold fast their purses.
And in place of his friends are starte up his foes,
And one cruel Captain that works all the grief,
A Jewel of Christ Jesus gave Harding the bloes, Iuell. ^arding*

Confuting his fables in spite of his teeth,
He feeds the poor flock with Christian belief.
Squencht is the confidence I say of our Harding,
There Is none young nor old that esteems him a farding.
One Barthlet we may ban throughout this whole vale:
And so may the Pope with Candle, Book and Bell,
In the Papal pedigrewe, he tells such a tale,
That all Romish Roges may rore to hear tell,
That Christians had knowledge of the trumprye they se^^.
For he tippes up the sack, and all pours out,
From the first to the last, he rappes the whole route.
(This and much more) being the just cause,
Of the Popes great plague and miserable want:
(I mean of money) to maintain his laws,
Perforce must persuade you, that here make your plaint,
Considering Gods word has him on the tainte.
You woeful souls that in Purgatory lie,
Must yet here remain there is good cause why.
(Which is this) you know the Pope has been at cost,
To found betwixt Pluto and Rome these stayres:
And now it is like, that his labor is lost,
Because that his customs and credit thus wears:
Yet he has set Priests, Munkes, Nuns, and Friars.
And the rest of his Rabble in hand for to make,
A Ladder to reach into Heaven for your sake.
And up it was reared* years long a go, The building of the Lader and the
timber with the workmen.

And well underset with Dyrges and Masses:
With Popish Props, thousands on a roe,
As Pardons, Bulls, Idols, Holy water, and Ashes:
Palms, and holy Bread, and many old Trashes,
Lamps, Lights, Crossing and Creeping,
And all to redress your pitiful weeping.
Singing, and Ringing, with Belles every where,
Sensing, and Fensing with Book Bell and Candle:
Cursing, and Praying, of Muncke, Nun, and Friar,
Night, day and hour, al thing for to handle:
Like workmen worthy, not bunglers to Scamble.
A building to bolte so hye in the skies,
does crave Cunning workmen, and such as are wise.
But lo (alas) the Popes willing mind, The cause of the fall thereof.

For money to release you of these bitter pains:
So many thousands strove this Ladder to climb,
That you mist the Heaven, and he his great gains:
For bending it brake, with weight of your Chains.
By means whereof, therein, who put trust,
World without end, remain here they must.
And too short it was, by full ten degrees, The tormented ^oules persuaded to
dwell for eve in pains.

And never could reach Gods glory and bliss:
Although he, and his, were as busy as Bees,
In the end it would have provided but this:
Wherefore be contented no remeedye is,
Till the Ladder be mended, hence to dispatche ye,
Or el^ that the Pope, come him self for to fetch ye.
The Gospel of Christ, has thoroughly confounded,
Not only this Ladder, of the Popes own device:
But also destroyde al them that first founded
The painted helles, and paper Paradise:
Hear among us, they shall play their Price.
Their stinking Idolatrye, and vile Superstition,
As holy as they be, hear finds no remission.
Therefore it is Pultos pleasure that you know,
What fortune has happened, your Father the Pope:
He him self to Heaven, is not able to go,
Except Saint Peter, hale him up in a Roape:
Or that he chaunse to be pulde by his Coape,
By our Lady of Walsingham, and sweet Roode of Chester
Else his portion in Heaven, is scant worth a Testar.
These words being said, he dismounteth the stage,
Saying, vengeance, and torment, protect Plutos grace:
At the which cried out with terrible rage,
Both young and old that were in that place:
A sight to sorrowful, in beholding their case.
(I mean) of al such, as put trust in the Mass,
These News made their torments much worse then (it was.
To see the sorrowful sort hale one another,
Crying out on the Popes, and his shauelinges there:
The Father, the Son, the Daughter, the Mother,
The Uncle, the Aunte, and Grandsier appear:
To the ninthe degree, thousands there were
Both Rich and Poor, that trusted to the Mass,
Not one of themall, but I am sure there he was.
Some cryde fie of Idols, and some of holy water,
Some of Supersticion, and some of Scalaceli:
Other some lamented, the mumbling of Lady Psalter,
(Alas) quod another, this will not prevail ye,
Now may you see, their trumprye does fail ye.
So it does them selves, for lo where they lie,
That late hoyst their Gods, in Haulters full hye.
And lo (quoth he) where they he singing a Mass,
Pope Alexander, Pope Ioane, and both under a stoale:
See you not the sweet blood of hayles in a glass,
Which Idol brought hither many a poor soul?
A Pardoner me think stands by with a scrowle.
Some officer be like of Saint John's sweet Frary,
Look who is in his books it is best you prepare ye.
At which words such a number brake out,
Of Caves and Sinkes on every side:
As Tippling Bibs, and Suckers of grow^e,
Se^ Sowers, and Brewbates, thither fast bide:
Tutors, and Teltales, in every nowke cryde.
Pickethankes and Prow^ers, bear holy water,
Their masters (being worldlings) said Confiteor, and ( Misereator.
Flattery light Lamps, to our Lady of grace,
Ipocrisie, calde them up to the offering,
Saint Anne of Buckstones was washing a pace:
But Lucre was lifting small pence to the Coffering.
At shrieft they were close in every place.
Tw^^ faces in one hoode, the Cross then did bear,
Whereat abomination, began for to swear.
Great deui^ion there seemed to be,
All that were there* did knock on their breast:
But (alas) to late for to cry then Peccaui,
Although the Pope both Crossed and bleste,
For when he lookte back, at Ite missa est:
When Dan Limli^ter, the Candles should out,
All flewe on a fire their College through out.
How the Ladder was amended, that lately was craish^,
After that time truly of no man I aihste.
FINIS.
The torment of Tyranny, and the reward for his wickedness; Being a King
called Mydas: Which Tirannouslye, swallowed not only his Country for Lucre
sake, but his householde Servants also.
THus as we left these Romish Roges, of whom I spoke of late,
We chaunste ^^ hear a woeful wight, y^ did bewail his state.
And Tyranny his name was calde, who loved to leime the poor,
And suppe the gain of sweating brows, for to increase his store.
This mighty mate ne mercy minds, when he on soil did dwell,
But eat up all on every side, as they that want can tell.
The widow and the Fatherles, the Stranger that does toil:
His household Seruitours and al, he seeks for to spoil.
Whom lended he his ^ares unto, but only unto such,
As unto Pluto sacrifizde their souls to gain him much?
Till at the last his Tyranny, the air corrupt with smell,
Whereat the Skies, did turn their hew, and Limbo began to yell.
The Mountains roar by Eccos voice, into the Heavens hye,
The scrikes and cries of wronged wights, and al together fly.
The Preachers powered tears apace, repentance still they cryde,
But al in vain, his ears were stopte, such news he might not bide.
His stoared ground, his racked rents, his herds of goats, with sheep and
His prouling pick^ha^ks, made him to forget his duty clean:
Whom when y^ Jove perusde, and searchte his flintish Pharaos heart, grain,
Upon the snappe grimme Mors he sends, to stick him with his Dart.
Who wound him so, that Atropos to line straight laid the lance,
Gods people by this Tyrants death, from bondage to advance.
Whose wandering ghost, to Carons bote, with fearful grenes is gone,
To dwell among the damned sprites, for other hope is none:
Where, in a pit, a place is pitchte, a woeful chair to sit,
In molten metal to the Crown, a place for Tyrants fit.
His officers band him round about, with bags of money thrust,
Which never cease, with gnashing teeth, to lend him many a dust.
Medusa is his Coke, to dress this wretch his meat,
Which sets before him crawling Snakes, and ugly Todes to eat.
His counselors be retcht on length, their Guts on hooks be torn,
Whose foul deformed filthy tongus bewail that they were borne*
Thus tossed and torn, with torments great, with thu^derbolts bethwakt,
On forkes and fleshhooks streind and stretched, each joint from other crakt,
And to augment this Misers grief, with hooks they hale him out
Upon a frosen scaffolde hoyst, this Tyrant looks about:
Where hellish Hegges and Furies show a sight to increase his pain
Which is the joyful Eden fields, where saved souls remain.
The blisfull banks there might he see, the valleys sweet and fair,
Where wants no flowers of noble taste, for to perfume the air.
All kind of fruits do show themselves, and ready ripe they hynge,
Of pleasures passing man to wish, there wantes no kind of thing*
Pernassus hill to base a bancke, to be comparde to this,
Or Helicon in such respect, a weedie pyngle is.
Nor Cithera pearl of all the earth, is ought but counterfeit,
Though it were decked with all the gold, that Alexander ge^.
Tho I had drunk and supped up, sweet Aganippes well,
Or G^ba^elus skillful floodes, yet want I skill to tell
The heaps of joys, this joyful field is garnished with all,
Does much surmount this worldly bliss, thrice more then sugar gall
For there Sir Tellus does not taste of Hiemps frosen face,
Nor Boreas bragges the weakest twigge, sturs not within that place*
For Phoebus he his golden beams, disperseth here and there:
And Jupiter the silver drops from skies does cause retire.
(In season due) to mol fie these fields of endelesse bliss,
Where none may come but such as by the Gods appointed is.
Whose garments be as white as snow, on instruments they sing.
And never cease, but praising God, of earth, and heaven king.
And crowns upon their heads they were, and angels food they eat,
Still Gloria ^^ excel^^^ sing to*th Lamb upon the seat.
There might this Tyrant well behold the poor whom he oprest*
Amid these joys for evermore, appointed for to rest.
And such as least he did esteem, and all be rent with wrong,
Their happy life each hour did see, and daily heard their song.
Which when he heard, a triple pain assaults this caytiues ghost.
When he did way his mund^^^ mucke, and heavens treasure lost:
In equal ballaunce when he tried, how Conscience him accusde,
(Quoth he) fie on you Im^es of hell, that thus have me abusde.
Meaning by the muckhill Mates, which whispred in his ear,
And taught him how Gods people poor, for gains to rend and tear.
To ride, to run, to hale, and draw, as bondeslaues every hour,
To whippe and scourge no mo then all, that were within his pour.
But Oh (quoth he) let all the world example take by me,
Let never greatest Prince on earth think other but to dye.
Oh, fie on goods, thryse fie on gold, and tentimes fie on such
As shall procure great mighty men, the poor by wrong to touch.
And then he wrange his hands for woe, what hap had I (quoth he)
To lend my ears to Dunghill Doltes, at their command to be,
And banished from my service quite, the blood of gentle race,
Which always counsaylde me to mind, mine honor and my grace?
But as the Ravens seek their pray, or Woolfe the spoil pursues,
So did the Churles by means of me, each where their fury use.
The sons of Thieves and rustic Carles, might lead me as they list,
So that the gobs of gloring gold, they brought to freight my fist.
Yet as they spoylde the coast abroad (from me) so did they pinche,
So that at every elne, I scarce received half an inche.
I pitied not the Wydowes cause, nor fatherless I wayde,
Both towns and countries round about, to pastures great I laid*
Yet had I mines, with vineyardes large, with corn and cattle store
Yea Lordships, lands, parckes houge and wide, yet still I looked for more.
Mules and Camels infinite, Towns and Castles great,
Thus Fortune with her smiling looks, her worldly hooks can bayte
To catch the covetous Tyrant with, to present to Plutos grace,
Whose wickedness he does reward full well within this place.
And then he looked upon these slaves, much ill (quoth he) betide,
You verlots borne, that thus bewitched a Prince of such a pride*
Much ill and woe may hap to thee, thou foul deformed slave.
And all thy mates that moved me, this mundan mucke to crave.
The child unborn curse you and yours, the hills shall sound the same,
The stones in streets cry out on you, the skies proclaim your shame.
The heavens abhor both you and yours: hell rend you with his jaws,
And Furies all in Stigion streams, torment you with their claws*
Much more he said but what it was, for skrikes we could not tell,
His men of trust and he that time, in torments so did yell.
But still they bang him with these bags, like madmen in their rage
And streite these furies with their hooks, did mount him from ye stage.
Where tumbling he in molten gold, does walter here and there,
Till at the length, of him nor his, we could not see nor here.
But over the pit with letters black, this sentence there was pende
This is the place of just reward for Tyrauntes in the end.
Then by and by, a thundering voice came poudering up the pit,
(Which said) remember the end you men, in chayres of state that sit.
For Pluto is the Iaylor here, to mighty Jove above:
He pardons none but all alike, (take heed it does behooue)
Which words did make my heart to shrink, as flowers do in June,
So that to speak one word for life, I durst not once presume.
But in my heart I wished all men, King Mydas mucke to flee,
And specially the number that of mighty honor be.
For they that read the Poets works, shall here of Mydas much,
And how he crau'de all to be gold that he might feel or touch.
But though the Poets fabled so, and I in dreams do feign,
Yet let not Tyrauntes better trust, but taste of Plutos pain.
The reward that Rosamond had in hell, for murdering of her husband Albonius
and living vitiouslie in her husbands days.
WHen from this Pope we were depart and gone,
Meaning to return, the night was almost spent:
But there fast by we heard one cry a non,
Which said (Alas, alas) to late I do repent,
My wanton days, my lusty youthful toys,
Have banished me from Angels part of joys.
The sound there of a woman did present,
For S^reminglie it rang among the caves,
Which when we heard we could not be content:
But scalde the cragges among the flaming waves.
Till at the last a dungeon had we spyde,
Wherein the woman was that latelye cryde.
And as we stood thereof to take the vewe,
In scalding furnesse whose flash does still increase,
A seeming noble Dame with crown and scepture n^ we
(Among a number) ga^ first of all to prease,
And said (Oh Morpheus) such haste why do thou make*
I pray thee bide a while, yet for a woman's sake.
Wherefore (quoth he) my presence does no good,
And ill I may abide, the night is almost spent:
She hearing this, cried out as one were wood,
Abide and bear two words, then go I am content.
Dispatche (quoth he) for long I cannot bide,
But first of all, thy name and cause describe.
(Oh quoth she) this place prepared is,
For wickedness the just reward to be,
And such as live against the Gods amiss,
Be used here with torments as you see.
Since Morpheus thou all dreams do show each where,
Publish this abroad how we are used here.
And let them know how Rosamonde the Queen,
To Albonyus late wife that was sometime,
Lies torment here as thou have present seen,
For filthy life, and odious bloody crime.
My life did crave none other end but this,
Therefore behold reward of wickedness.
Therefore let me to women warning be,
To honor God the best, and next their spoused mates:
And say that Rosamonde thus said to thee,
Who does not so, shall enter at these gates.
It does become each woman night and day,
To hold them well content, at what their husbands say,
You lusty bloodes possessed with hawtie hearts*
Your lofty looks correct with meaner state,
Refuse to play these wanton wilful parts,
From follye flee, least you repent to late.
Sometime I lookte as hye as hexte of you,
Which is the only cause I bid al joys adewe.
Seem not to swell a have ye word to hear,
No vauntage seek, nor quarrels frame to breed:
An honest woman's part is ever to forbear
The sayings of her husband, if well she think to speed.
Where love is linkte, words cannot brewe the bate,
But where dissemblers are, few words then causes hate.
And lay aside your new disguised raye,
Leave prancking of your selves with painted face:
From whirling heir and there your eyes profaned stay,
Be faithful Matrons found in every place.
Who does her spowsed Mate in any case betraye,
Shall sure repent it sore, with me another day.
For if that grace had light upon my side,
Then had I dread before the doubtful end:
And so escaped that which now alas I bide,
As Guerdon meet for them that so offend.
For through one word I heard my husband say,
My stomach was so stowte, I made him straight away.
Which was but small and easy to be borne,
But that the wicked sprite me tempte to seek his blood,
For even as Judas his Masters death had sworn,
Infect with like temptacion, that present time I stood.
Uengeance I invented, and vengeance have I caught*
To seek my Husbands life, mine own destruction brought.
Lo, this was the cause. At my Husbands return,
From doing great Battles in Countries full far:
Being his pleasure a while for to Soiourne,
To rest him at ease after his War:
Let call a Triumph, and made a great Feast,
To the which assembled all his Lords of the best.
And being in his meriment, Thus Jested with me:
Took a Goblet with Wine, and these words the^ he said:
(Drink a tawnt to thy Father, Wife quoth he)
Who before in Battle was wounded to dead.
Thus for to say, much is not a mis,
Who ever does speak it, where any grace is.
But (alas) vnhappilye I, as most women be,
Was pufte full of Pride, and mutable mind:
I swelde as a Toade his death for to see,
Yet spoke I him fair his senses to blind:
O God what mischief can women invent,
And if a man alter but once their intent.
When I spoke him as fair as heart might devise,
And made the greatst show of Faithful true love:
Inwardlye then I did hate and despise,
My noble Husband all Creatures above.
Therefore I confess, it is hard for to know,
When a woman speaks fair, if she means it or no.
I polluted filthilye my Husbands bed,
With one of his servants, whom after I made
Most Traitorously to smite of his head,
As he lay a sleep with his own sword or blade.
And so took his Treasure, and to the Seas we fled,
There leaving my Husband wounded to dead.
This Squiers name, that did this wicked deed,
Melchis was called a stout worthy Knight:
In Rauenne there became to proceed
A mighty Prince of great power and might.
Yet for all this, with him straight I tired,
For each day on my filthy lust beastly desired.
Were he Gentle or simple, I spared none,
Of one above another, I made no store:
For shame, Fear, and Grace, from me were quite gone,
I paste not a pin were they Ritche or poor^:
My filthy flesh so wickedly was set,
That all was but fish that came to the nett^.
But among all the rest one noble man,
That then of Rauenne was a governor:
As often as pleased him now and than,
Had great delight to hold me as Paramour.
On whom a while my flitting mind did run,
As erst it had of Melchis latelye done.
For whose sake Melchis my husband new,
Through treason framde, and vile Duplicitye,
Within my heart his death, I began to brewe,
Because at large I thought to live more viciously.
To work the feate by sleyght, and escape the blame,
I privily poisoned wine, and made him drink the same.
To the mids drank Melchis this Cup of Wine,
Which made him look with color dead and wan:
But when he saw that Traytresse heart of mine,
With much a do these words declare he began
With rufull face. Thou wicked wretch (quoth he)
Albonius thou through Treason slew, so have done me.
And there withal his hand upon me laid,
And urged me in ^angre of my head,
To drink the the other half before I staide,
Which was no sooner done but down we both fell dead,
And thus at mischief ended I my life,
That sometime was a Famous Princes Wife.
Lo Morpheus, this is the sum and all:
Now thou know my name, my wicked fact and deed:
I pray thee yet what haste soever fall,
Warn women of the like, it is not a little need.
To their Spowsed mates, bid them be meek and true,
Or tell them else confution does ensue.
Bid them meeken their minds with all due obedience,
And to humble them selves to their Husbands always:
For it is commonly seen by ancient experience,
That none but the wilful do catch their decaies.
Though wylye in working the crafty Dames be,
Them selves they deceive in the ^^oe you may see.
And now farewell Morpheus thou wotes what I mean,
Thou may say thou met with a miserable wight:
That first procured her Husband to be slain,
And also poisoned a valiant Knight.
This was my act and the cause of my fall,
Quite murder, for murder, my self last of all.
And with these words a Tyrant with a hook,
In tender sides, the mortal wounds he printes,
Another on a forke this wicked woman shook,
Nothing prevailed less, then for to cry with plaintes
A thousand naked blades in her they thrust,
And still (quoth they) this woman was unjust.
Me thought it was a fearful sight to see,
Pitye wrought such grief in me, I wept for woe:
I thought that in a woman's heart, had layen more pitye,
Then for to serve her faithful Husband so.
Why do thou muse (quoth Morpheus) then to me?
This is the just reward of them that wicked be.
The night is almost spent (quoth he) come let us go,
The least of their pains passes our help:
I will bring thee safe to the place thou came fro,
Be not doubtful of Cerberus that foul currishe whelpe,
Nor of any that is hear, I will answer them all:
Be of good cheer what ever do be fall.
Thus wandering back, we looked about,
And or ever we wist, were at Plutoes Pallaice:
At the which we heard so cruel a showte,
As if they had all gone together in malice,
Yet when we came near them the truth then appeered,
It was but a triumph, and naught to be feared.
Then after a while upon a stage full hye,
An ill fast yoman a black Trumpet blew:
And when silence was made, he proclaimed a cry,
In the name of Pluto for tydinges most true.
(Quoth he) bloody Boner the Butcher comes here,
That has furnished our kitchen this many a year.
Moreover (quoth he) it is Plutos high pleasure,
That all men prepare in the best sort they can,
Since he is to Pluto and Proserpin such treasure,
To receive him among us as becomes such a man,
You know what his service has been heretofore,
Look to your duties what needs any more?
This said, he departed strait from the stage,
And to Plutos Palace he then took the way.
But then to see both man boy and Page,
To set new deuentions in order and raye,
The half to declare, it passes my wit,
I am sure the like, was never seen yet.
There was fyling of fire boltes in holes and in noukee,
Headding of daries, and poynting of spittes,
Skouring of blades, and bending of hooks,
Mending of fireforkes, and wyring new whipes,
Barreling of Pitche, Sulfur, and Saltepeeter,
With more then can be described in meeter.
But for to be brief so willing they were,
That nothing was wanting to set out the show,
As by their diligence full well did appear,
No man could be more welcome there I know.
Boner (quoth one) Boner quoth another,
Welcome as hartelye as Father or Mother.
With all things point vice, and fit for the nonce,
Forth came Pluto, and Proserpin the Queen,
To meet Boner the sucker of souls, flesh, and bones,
In such order and sort as has not been seen.
I shall make a description as nie as I can,
How they went in order to meet him each man.
First two and two came marching together,
With a Pickeforke or Fleshooke in every fist,
A black banner displayed that wauered in the weather,
Which obscured the light with darcke stinking mist.
Ill fast Trumpiters a number there were,
From whose mouths flewe a thunder odible to here.
The number I knew not so many there were,
But brave and fine they were out of doubt:
In hattes like hiues, and hoase bumde with hear
With rough courlde heads, they looked full stout,
They were so lusty they seemde to be cutters,
For they made it tentimes as big as swarfe Rutters.
Next after these there came in a raye,
By heaps whole swarms of Plutos nobility,
Which did ride upon Bears that did gape for their pray,
That always were fed with the spoil of simplicity,
About their necks hang double chains of gold*
But to ask their names I durst not be bold.
Then came his Chapleins by two and by three,
And after them followed the great Uicare of all,
And on his head a triple Crown ware he,
Arrayed in robes that were full Pontifical,
On a ramping Lion that gaped full wide,
This greasy Prelate that present did ride.
And then followed Pluto and Proserpin his Queen,
Upon as strange horses as ever I see,
For like the hot gleydes glowed their eine,
Mighty and monstrous, long, large, and hie
With a number of Lords, and Ladies also,
Came after in order, beside other more.
Cerberus was taught in the Porters ward,
The gutes were set open against Boner came,
Of Morpheus, and me no man took regard,
Their mind ran so much of this noble man.
By means whereof without more a do,
We gate out o'th gates or any man knew.
Being out of the gates we scaled a rock,
To see if we might there spy Boner coming,
Who in deed appeared in sight with a flock,
That came like Bedlems hedlong then running.
Himself led the way like a Champion stout,
On a Dragons back that spoylde round about.
He kept no order nor the company that he brought,
For headelong came reeling both old and young,
As thick as haylestones, a man would have thought,
Whereof some cried, and othersome soung.
But down the hill one and other came tumbling,
With Sancta Maria, I heard them fast mumbling.
A Banner was borne with red all to spotted,
Before this butcher that pity was to see,
Whose arms in the mids was rufully blotted,
With the blood of Martires whom he caused to die.
And in the shield painted as plain did appear,
An innocent Lamb, a cruel Woolfe, and a Bear.
In a field all black, on the other side his flagge,
Was depainted a faggot that glowed like a gleede,
And a bludd^e hand with a sword that did brag,
Against all that professed Christ's Gospel in deed.
With a poasie that threatened both aged and young,
To be leeue in his lore, or else how their tongue.
But then to see what a meeting there was,
Between Pluto, Proserpin, and Boner that time,
For want of skill I must let it pass,
I cannot mention the one half in this rhyme.
(No displeasure to the Pope) if himself had been there,
It had not been possible to made him better cheer.
Mary what they said, that, we did not know,
But there was for joy such colling and kissing:
Some laughed that teeth a foot long they did show,
And clawde each other by the pate without missing.
To see the triumph made with fleshhookes and spits,
Had been able to have brought a man from his wits.
For thunder and lightning flew fizing about.
Darts and firebrandes walked here and there,
Bonfiers were made in all hell throughout,
For joy that Boner was coming so near.
Whose face I frayde least he should have spide me,
For when he was living he might not abide me.
Behind Morpheus I crept, till they marched by,
And were past as far as Cerberus ward,
But when they were within we heard such a cry,
As among all the sorrows before I not heard.
They set bell on fire with making a feast,
And all was to welcome this lately come gest.
What was Boners Business that I do not knows*
Peradventure he went to fetch souls away thence.
But judge as you list therein yea or no,
I would not be with him for all the Popes pence.
But if Boners babes do think that I lie,
Then let them go thither the truth for to try.
The end of the Reward of Wickedness.
Retourning from Plutos Kingdom, To Noble Helicon: The place of Infinite Joy.
WHen we from Plutos Pallaice came, and vewed had this woe.
(Quod Morpheus) yet I have a walk, a little way to go.
For since I have take all this pain, the doleful place to see,
My friends shall know of my affairs, for that I am so nigh.
This viage hight I long a go, performde my promise is,
As thou thy self who ear demand, shall witness be of this.
My Ladies lookte for me long since, some uncouth news to hear.
And how in Stigion flames they sped, that living, wicked were.
Therefore it stands me much upon, my promise to perform,
For that unto these worthy Dames, so firmly I have sworn.
It nothing does behoue (quoth he) with them to bawke or blooke,
For why they do from mighty Gods, descend of Sacred stock.
Of Mercury the only said Mineruas dearlinges dear,
Whose mighty Muse, and learned skill, had never yet their peer.
In Helicon their dwelling is, with Cytheron full hye,
Pernassus for their pleasure have, when they thereto agree.
And lo, where ( Helicon) appears of truth a princely place,
Where thou and I, these Ladies with, must commen face to face.
At which mine eyes I lifted up: The fore said place I see,
Which was me thought so passing fine, as never thing might be.
The Redrose, and the Rosemarye, Environed this Hill,
In every nooke the G^lyflower, him self presented still.
The comely Bancks with Daysies decked, and Primrose out of cry,
The Uiolets and Cowleslops sweet, abought in sight I spy.
With other Herbs that pleasant were, which did me good to see.
Whose fragrant smells perfume the air, y^ from this place does flee,
The Thrustel and the Nightingale, with Music sweet they Pipe,
So pleasauntlye the Gods them selves to hear would much delight.
^^^, here do yield the Crystal Springs, their trickling silver floods,
And there Pomgarnet Tree with fruit, to earth does veil his buds.
The F^lbeard in another place, as brown as Beryes shoe,
^^^s^nes I spyed the Orrange hyng, with Quince and many more.
What wast that wanted there (nothing) that might delight the mind*
But he that lookte (in every place) the same should present find.
In triple wise the Arbours cast, I made of sweetest Briar,
Mirt with the Uine, that up and down the ripest grape does bear.
Of Bore are Turrets dubbed round, and stayres by ar^e well wrought*
Tascende into the tops thereof, as fine as may be thought.
Wherein these Ladies often do sit, this Joyful sight to vewe,
For there they may afar, behold what strangers come a new.
And when we had perusde this place, of high and mighty ^ame,
In hexte of al these Turret tops, we spied a noble Dame,
Adornde and deckte, in comelye raye, and seemly to behold,
Her face was like an Angel bright, whose hair that steinde the gold*
Not curld and fruzulde her brows about, but combde in order fair,
And on her head of Laurel made, a garlande which she ware.
No double Ruffes about her neck, no guarded Gown ware she,
Nor on her hands that steinde the snow, no ringes there were to see.
Her eyes stood steadfast in her head, they whirlde not here and there*
Nor in her face you co^uld espy, ought else but grace appear.
A comely Gown she had upon, of color sad and sage,
As best became a worthy Dame, presenting middle age.
To whom we drew in all the haste, our reverence for to use,
Whom when she saw, first word she said, welcome (quoth she). what news*
But further or I do proceed, her name I shall describe,
And in what order that I see, her Sisters in that tide.
Melpomina, this Lady hight, the eldest of the nine,
That there among her Sisters sat, within that Turret green.
And every Lady with a Book, in study sat full fast,
And reading of the worthy acts, that had been done and past.
The works of Poets all they had, and scanning there they were*
Who was best worthy in his time, a Poets name to bear.
And Instruments in every nowke, these noble Ladies had,
To recreate their Muses with, and for to make them glad.
And every one appareyld like, whose face like stars did shiu^,
Respondent to Melpomina, In gracious gifts divine.
Among them were no wanton songs, nor Bacchus banequets sought*
Nor new device of prancking Pride, nor sign of evil thought.
There was no care to purchase land, nor fleessing of the poor,
Nor renting Houses out of cry, nor hording for a store.
There was no ^^riuing for such pelf, as worldlinges now delight,
^om Teltale could not there be found, that works all the spite.
Nor Peter Pickthancke bear no swaye, for all his craftye fatche,
The Bai^fe Laurence Lurcher, there has nothing for to catch.
There is no Tyrant there, that spoils nor does y^ poor man wrong,
No taking in of Commons is, within that circuit long.
One seeks not there another blood, his liuinges to obtain,
No privy hate, nor open wrath, among them does remain.
Hypocrisy does take no place, among these worthy Dames,
Of any Crime it is not heard, that one another blames.
The ruggie blast of Boreas mouth, at no time takes place,
There Ver, and Flora, both do show their gorgious face.
Nor Zephirus does shake no branch, within that sacred Hill,
But every thing in former state, always continues still.
Nor Hiemps has no power there, the flakye Snow to cast,
There is nothing that takes taste, of cruel Winters blast.
And as I said ere while, hawe that we did these Ladies spy,
(So what we said) and they to us, I Will tell you by and by.
When we in order found them thus: Hail Lady Morpheus said,
With Cap in hand I vailde to earth: (They bad me hele my head)
(And welcome Morpheus) one and all, they said reioysinglie,
Why have thou been so long (quod they) what news have brought with thee*
What news (quod Morphe) news enough, aread from whence I came
I have performoe my promise made, as ought an honest man.
You did request and I agreede to vewe vile Stigion lakes,
And to peruse with wicked sort, what order Pluto takes.
And how they are rewarded there, it was your wills to know,
That did delight in evil acts to work poor people woe.
(Quoth they that's true) and were you there? I came from thence (quod he)
Then all at once they gave him thanks, as glad as they might be.
With modest words tell us (quod they) what sightes that you have seen
For thanks is all you get of us, to quite your toyled pain.
But what we can or may be boulde, that honest seems to be,
(To pleasure you) in any wise, we shall thereto agree.
But speak, tell on, lets lose no time (quoth one) we think it long,
Begin good Morpheus (quoth the rest) and we will hold our tongue.
So Morpheus straight began his tale, and t^ulde them how that he*
Among a Masque of merye mates, by chance did light on me.
And how we past from ward to ward, and what was done and said,
And when we came to Plutoes place, among them how we sped.
And whom we saw, and what they did, and what their sayings was,
Correspondent to the truth discribed, more and les.
But when he told them of the Pope, that Alexander hight,
And of the Service that they sang, and used day and night:
And what resort of Shauelings he, had with him every hour,
The Ladies all on Laughing fell, yea, round about the Tower.
Yet woeful for the rest they were, because they wanted grace,
For very zeal these worthy Dames, in tears did wash their face.
Where at when Morpheus did behold, these Ladies woeful cheer,
(Quod he) if I had thought on this, I would not have come hear.
But cease your dolor yet a while, your listening ears lend me,
And wipe away those plainting tears, which greeueth me to see.
For certs I have, of woefuluesse and dyrefull destnye told,
Of pleasant Pageantes I Will rehearse, and Triumphs many fold.
In wandering up and down the vale, to see these vglye fightes,
About the place where Pluto lay, we saw great Lamps and lights.
With Pageands played, and Tragedies, and noise of Trumpets sound,
Yea, Bo^fires blasde, with thumping guns, that shook the trembling ground.
Which when we hard, and did behold, we hasted fast to know,
What was the cause, wherefore or why, those trumpets began to blow.
And coming to the Pallaice Gates, we need not crave them why,
For Boner comes with open Iawe, both young and old began cry.
So Morpheus set the Tale an end* and as I said of late,
^ne so as Boner welcomd^ was, at large di^cride the state.
Where at the Ladies every one, with comely smiling cheer,
Laid by their Books, and lawght full fast, those news of him to hear
A ha (quoth they) is Boner there? That's Plutoes Butcher bold*
It Is Plutoes part to welcome him, for service done of old.
And reason good another said, deserts must needs be quit,
And so they are I do perceive, by you in Plutos pit.
Some scoste and said, he went for Souls, that long in Stigion dwelde*
And other some to preach and teach, a great opinion held.
But in the fine a thousand thanks, they yielded Morpheus there:
(And said) they would deserve his pains, if able that they were,
And young man (quoth Melpomina) since thou have taken pain,
We do confess for recompense, thy debtors to remain.
But much I wonder how thy wit did serve these sights to see,
Nay marvel not (quoth Morpheus then) al while he was with me.
But otherwise in deed (not he) nor any mortal man,
That could or might at any time, Phlegetons fires scan.
That's true, but what is his name (quoth one) he looks with musing mood:
He is (quoth Morpheus) toward you al, and sproong of Robins blood,
Whose painful pen has aye been pressed, for to advance this place,
As at these days, his acts full well, shall witness to your grace.
And certainelye his chirping tongue, delites to bawke no truth,
But plain song parts each where does sing, as well to age as youth.
Therefore since I had promise made, this vglye place to see,
Me thought a fitter man to take, I could not find then he.
(Quoth Vranye) with seemly looks, Good sir ye say full true.
For had you not some body take, no man had known but you.
And the^ your la^er had been lost, which now great thanks does crave.
Nor the reward had been known, that wicked people have.
And since you light upon our friend, ten times the gladder we.
To warning of the rest we trust, these news in Print to see.
And with these words they took their books, from Turret straight descend,
With one accord they chargde me al, to have y^ this were pend.
In verse (quoth Clio) pithilye according to your Dream,
We charge you that to all the world, your pen do straight proclaim,
And the Reward of wickedness your Book shall have to name,
No better title can be found to gree unto the same.
But when I hard these words in deed, so full of care I was,
That when I should have answer made, no word from me could pas.
My wits were wast, my sense was fled, and still I stood amasde,
Like Heart before the Hounde afright, or Bird in pitfall dasde.
And what to say I read^es was, they gave so straight a charge,
Yet at a venture by and by, these words I spoke at large.
Madames (quoth I) my willing mind aye always yours has been,
Although the grosenesse of my head, deseru'de no praise to win.
And more then twentye times ashamde, assuredlye I am,
That any of my barren works, your learned eyes should scan,
Apollos prudent worthy skill, nor Pallas active feats,
(I never knew) to promise this, how shall I pay my debtes?
My silly ears Mineruas voice could never understand,
Alas good Ladies would you I should take this work in hand?
If Caliope ruled my pen, and did thereto agree,
Then should you well and easy spy at all no fault in me.
And since as yet I never taste, your milk of sacred breast,
I do beseech you every one, forget your last request.
And place some other in my steed, this work in hand to take,
And so you shall your little Bird a cheerful Robin make.
And otherwise when all is done, for to acquit my pains,
With loss of all my labor I shall purchase Cherils gains.
What, will you so (quoth one indeed,) by this what do you mean?
Who might for shame deny us all to take so mickle pain?
What need you to aleadge such doubts, you are to blame (quoth she)
Who want you to assist you with, when we thus friendly be?
And are we not both some and all, for to erect the same?
Who ever yet took pain for us, but wan immortal Fame?
And then she held me fast bith hand, come Sisters then (quoth she)
Come bring your keys undo your locks, and let this young man see
How we exalte the studious sort, whose paynefull hand and quill,
Is apt at any time to yield their fruits unto this hill,
I hearing this, uneath one word, durst say but held me still.
And countnaunce made as if I would consent unto their will.
And so they brought us to the place, that all the rest exceedes,
Ten times as much as in sweet May, the Cowslops stinking weed.
And meet upon the mountain top, bolt up into the skies,
This noble place of endelesse fame, most curiously does rise,
Whose Turrets here and there do show the cunning workmans skill,
That first by art that stately place began on sacred hill.
Epowdered were the Walls abroad, with stones of Onix kind,
The rest was Crystal, finely wrought, that like the Orient shinde,
Meet square it was on every side, as could be thought in mind*
Set out with Phanes, that here and there, flew up and down the wind.
No doors but one, where on was set, nine locks made for y^ nones,
Of finest Gold, with curioust works, outcht round with precious stones*
And every Sister had a key, respondent to the same,
Which by the use of Custom old, did know their ancient name*
To which each Sister put her keye, abroad the Gates were cas^,
They had me come and there he hold, my Guerdon due at last.
And as we passed through the Court, the pleasant house to vewe,
Amid the same I did epsy, a Laurel where it grew.
Wherein a thousand Birds I think, or me with sweetly voice,
On every spray the littleones sit, and gladsomelie rejoice.
Upon each Laurel twigge there hang, the pens of every one,
Whose painful hands their learned Muse, declared long agone*
And grau'd in gold was each man's name, and what their travels were
For monumentes tacquite their pains, shall hang for ever there,
Thus when we had beheld at will the fashion of this tree,
These Ladies bid us yet abide a greater sight to see.
And then they brought us to a place, where all the Poets be,
In Pictures drawn by cunning art, each man in his degree.
And as their travels did appear, to challenge praise or fame,
Even so each one exalted was according to the same.
Among a number some I knew, whose works full often I read,
That picturde were in lively form, as they had not been dead*
The first of all, old Homer sat with visage sage and sad,
Upon his head of Laurel made, a triple garlande had.
Then Virgill as their order is, with wan and paled looks,
Was placed in a comely seat, of either side his Books.
^uid next to Virgill sat, as lean as he might be,
Whose musing mood in all respects, did with the same agree.
And Chawcer for his merry tales, was well esteemed there,
And on his head as well ought best, a Laurel garland were.
All these I knew and many more, that were to long to name,
That for their travels were reward, for evermore with Fame.
And looking round about that house, to see and if I might
By chance of any country men of mine to have a sight:
At length I was espide there of Skeleton and Lydgat,
Wager, Heywood, and Barnabe Googe, all these together sat.
With diverse other English men, whose names I will omit,
That in that place enjoy the like, of whom I spoke not yet.
And meet behind the door I saw a place where Cherill sat,
Art there thought I unto my self? I am like to be thy mate.
By then we had beheld all this, the night was almost gone,
Therefore I Will take my leave of you (quoth Morpheus) every one,
There Is no remedy but depart, this youngman must away,
Behold where ^os shows her face, and does disclose the day.
With all our hearts these Ladies said: and thanks we thousands give,
And what we may good Morpheus do, its yours eue^ while we live.
With veyled knee unto the ground, my leave of them I took,
Who gentlye bid me all farewell, and chargde me with the boo^^
And good young man (quoth they) take pains these few news to pen,
So shall thou earne great thanks of us, and of all English men.
And for our aid be sure of it, gainste Zoilus and his whelps,
For to defend thy Book and thee, we promise hear our helps.
Lo hear you see, how we acquit our servants at the last,
We cause them live, when cruel death has take the vital blast.
And here a place we will prepare, for thee among these men,
That have immortal glory won, by painfulness of pen.
At which most courteously, I craude, and veiled with my knee,
And said good Ladies call again, this charge if it may be.
Commit it to some other man, that has much better skill,
And better knowth an hundredth times, to scale your learned Hill.
Your Honors have in Th'innes of Court, a sort of Gentlemen,
That fine would fit your whole intentes, with stately style to Pen.
Let Studley, Hake, or Fulwood take, that William has to name*
This piece of work in hand, that be more fitter for the same.
But when they hard me speak these words, they were offended sore
We say look to thy charge (quoth they) and let us hear no more*
And then they whyrled to the Gate, away they vanished straight,
Which when we saw we there withal descended down the hight.
So Morpheus brought me home again, from whence I came before,
And bade me lay me down and sleep, for I had traueylde sore*
But look (quoth he) unto thy charge: as thou will answer make,
Forget nothing that thou have seen, in flaming Stigion Lake.
And then he took his leave and went, no more I might him see,
But with this travail out of hand, full sore he charged me.
And as a man whose silly sprightes, had wandered all the night,
So in a slumber waked I, and up I gat me right,
And called for the merry mates in th'euening that were there,
I meruell where they be (quoth I) another aunswerd here.
Alas it was a death to see their looks so dead and pale,
And how both purse, and head of wit, were sacte and spoilde with ^l*
Some Gaged Daggers, some their Coats, when al was gone and spe
The Ale wife she would needs be paid, before that any went.
Some had surfette, some took cold, and some for sleep were lost,
(What tho) when pe^ce were out of purse, be gone straight cride my host
And seude his Gestes by Crosselesie lane, and little wittame home,
They need not doubt the thief byth way, for Money had they none.
Yet ouernight he that had seen, the carping of mine Host,
How welcome were his newcome Gestes, and how the Churl could bost
Of this and that, and fill the Pots, lay Apples in the fire,
And now I Will drink unto you all, thus cried the Aple squire.
Come Kate* go Wife, fill bowl again: Ioane look unto the door,
Pipe Minstrum, make us Murth a while, God sends al men store:
That like the Cyrents song, my Host playde Synons part,
And made them lend their listening ears unto his guileful art.
To every Feast he biddes a Gest, fetch drink good Dame says he,
And make this Gentleman some Cheer, yare welcome sir says she.
And thus they bid you to the Roast, and heart of all shall sit:
But or you part, I hold a crown, they will beat you with the spit.
I found their fetch, no force thought I, since you such Cutthrotes be,
No more then need, or force compels, no gro^te you get of me.
And there withal my Hostess calde: I paid and got me thence,
No favor there was to be had, but for the little pence.
And then I calde my Dream to mind, whereat straight way I went,
To put in use the promise made, The time in study spent.
Till I had made a final end, of this my little Book,
To haste the same to Printers hands, al travails else forsook.
What thanks therefore I shall deserve, God knowth so do not I.
But as my meaning is herein, let Fame proclaim and cry.
(Be as be may) isle take my chance, as hap shall cast the Dice,
Since once I know yet hitherto, my travail paid the Price.
FINIS.
Quoth. R. Robinson.

Imprinted at London in Pawles Church Yard, by William Williamson.


