ALARM To England, foreshewing what perilles are procured, where the people
live without regard of Martial law.

With a short discourse containing the decay of warlike discipline, convenient
to be perused by Gentlemen, such as are desirous by service, to seek their
own deserved praise, and the preservation of their country. Newly devised and
written by Barnabe Rich Gentleman.

Malui me diuitem esse quam vocari.

Perused and allowed.

1578.

To the right honorable Sir Christopher Hatton, Knight, Captain of her
Majesty's Guard, Vicechamberlayne to her Highness, and one of her Majesty's most
honorable privy Counsayll, Barnabe Rich wishes long and happy life, with
increase of Honor, as your Noble heart both desires and deserves.
THE common and vulgar sort of people (Right Honorable) are accustomed to
estimate and valewe of such things as shall happen to their sight, more rather
according to the credit and opinion that they have conceived in the author,
then for the substance or matter of that is either said, or written.

For better proof I could allege sundry examples, but leaving many others,
this fable may suffice (feigned by the Poets) of the man, which by the consent
of all the gods, was deemed for his feauture in every proportion to be so
pure and perfect, that with one general verdite they all commended him to be
without any manner imperfection.

In the end Momus taking the vewe of this goodly personage, and thoroughly
perusing the excellency of this creature, perceived yet one fault which all
the rest had missed: which was, that there wanted a window in his breast,
through which his thoughts might be looked into, whereby might be seen what
there remained within him.

Meaning that there were no man that almost might be found, how comely so
ever he was in his personage, how gallantly so ever he went in his apparel,
how smoothly so ever he could speak with his tongue, how demurely so ever he
seemed in countenance, nor how plausible so ever he appeared in his other
demeanours, yet if his secret thoughts might be seen into, and that the
priuities of his heart might be thoroughly considered of, there is no doubt, but
there would be found some great corruption yet remaining.

If this fault had been found by Pallas or Apollo, questionless it would have
been registered amongst the sayings and sentences of the wise: but proceeding
from him whom they rather had in contempt, then esteemed in any credit, it was
reputed to be but a mock and a scorn.

I have here (right Honorable) rashly and aduenterously taken upon me to
become a writer, wherein a great number (I know) will likewise condemn me,
and the rather considering my simplicity and trayning up, which has not been
so much with my pen, but more with my pyke, nor in the schools amongst
learned clerks, but rather in the fields amongst vnletered companions, or as
some will term them, amongst a company of rustike soldiers.

Wherefore most humbly I desire your Honor to accept of these my slender
trauayles in good part, the which I do here present unto you with my simple
service during my life, to be at your Honorable disposition: And although I do
know both the one and the other to be to far insufficient to be presented
unto you, yet though not according to mine own deserving, either for the value
of that I have written, yet according to your accustomed clemency and goodness,
that you would vouchsafe to protect and shroud them with your favorable
countenance, whereby they may be made more acceptable to the readers, and be
the better welcome to such as shall peruse them.

I do here omit to follow the order of some writers, which is with great
circumstance to blase the virtues of such as they choose to be patrons of their
works: for what may be said sounding more to your advancement, then what
your self have already gained, whose noblenes has not only advanced you to
so great honor, but also in every man's judgment has made you to be deemed
worthy to enjoy it?

But I may not here omit, that amongst other honorable rooms whereto you have
been called, what a president you have begun, whereby our captains of
England may learn and gather light.

I mean where her Majesty has worthily appointed you to be Captain of a
worthy band, what care and consideration you have ever had, as well of the
manners and conditions, as otherwise of the personage and ability of any one
that you would permit, whereby her Majesty is guarded with a band of men, not
only endued with actiuitie, but also with honesty.

How much they be bound to your Honor, that was the only mean to her
Majesty, for the amending of their pay, whereby they are made the better able
to do her service, I leave for them selves to report, and do but only wish
that our Captains of England would by your Honorable example, take such
light, whereby they might be made the more renowned.

Thus desiring your Honor to pardon my boldness and simplicity, I humbly take
my leave.

Your humble and obedient servant, Barnabe Rich.

To the gentle and friendly Reader.
ALlarmes (gentle Reader) as they are given upon diverse and sundry occasions,
so they are many times offered as well by friends as foes.

By foes to further their pretenses when they practice to deceive: by friends,
but to see how they be prepared, and in what readiness they stand. Who if they
shall be negligent or unprovided, to give them as it were a friendly caveat,
hereafter to use greater circumspection and care.

I have in like manner adventured to give a friendly warning, the which I have
termed by the name of an Alarm, wherein, I know, there be a great number will
confess I have bewrayed mine own simplicity, in that I should think to give
any Alarm to those that stand in doubt neither of King nor Keyser.

But because I would not be thought to arrogate so great presumption to my
self, I have rather but used the part of some poor bell ringer, or of some
other inferior person, that sometimes being more afraid then hurt, has rong
the larume bell, or has run through the camp in great haste, crying, Arm,
arm, arm, wherewith every one has run to his furniture, and being prepared
to make defense, seeking on every side where the foe should make assault, it
has in the end fallen out, that the poor man was but stared in his own
conceyte, or else afraid of some shadow in the Mooneshine. Now it may be
likewise, that I am but afraid of mine own shadow, the which if it be so, my
simplicity yet ought the rather to be borne withal, considering it proceeds
of good will that I bear to my country.

But what excuse might seem here sufficient, wherewith to avoid me from so
many quipping tauntes, which I know will be pronounced against me, by our
carping cauillers, such as will be correcting of every man's doing? Some will find
fault with my homely manner of inditing, and will say, This is no good sense, or
this is no true English, here he has been something to tedious, and this
matter asked longer circumstance, this manner of phrase is but bad, and by this
he showed his eloquence was but small, and here it is not well poynted, and so
forth with many other faults, I know not what.

Wherefore I would these superficial heads would take this for mine answer,
that what I have written, it has not been to prove my self artificial or
eloquent, but to show things more needful, which I have noted by experience.

Some others there be, which are of such excellent memory, that there is
nothing may be written which they do not already know, and will say, This is
but borrowed in such a place, and this I have read in this or in that book.

Surely I must confess I have used the help of sundry writers, but not of so
many as I would have done, if I had been in place where I might have come by
them: for what I have written, was only done in Ireland, where there is no
great choice of books to be had*

But what then? Is this sufficient cause to condemn what I have written? is
not the be accustomed to gather out of every flower what likes her best,
wherewith she makes honey? Or I pray you, what is the medicine the worse,
although the Physician be sometimes driven to borowe a handful of herbs out of
his neighbors garden, shall his composition be any thing the vnwholesomer,
because the simples were not al his own?

There is yet an other sort, that because they think it a shame to read over
any thing, and not to be able to minister some correction, because they will not
be thought to be so dull witted, will find some fault, if it be but with the
Orthographie, and will say, It was pity this man would take in hand to write
before he could spell.

To these I answer, As great folly might be ascribed to those that were their
bringers up, that would learn them to go, before they had taught them to
speak well.

But such is the delicacie of our readers at the time, that there are none may
be allowed of to write, but such as have been trained at school with Pallas, or
at the lest have been fostered up with the Muses, and for my part (without
vaunt be it spoken) I have been a trauayler, I have sailed in Grauesende Barge
as far as Billings gate, I have trauayled from Buckelers bery to
Basingstocke, I have gone from S. Pankeridge church to Kentish town by land,
where I was combred with many hedges, ditches, and other slippery banks, but
yet I could never come to those learned banks of Helicon, neither was I ever
able to scale Parnassus hyl, although I have travailed over Gaddes hill in
Kente, and that sundry times and often.

No marueill then good reader, although I want such sugered sape, wherewith to
sauce my sense, whereby it might seem delightful unto thee: such curious
Coxcombes therefore, which can not dance but after Apollos pype, I wish them
to cease any further to read what I have written: but thou which can endure
to read in homely style of matters, more behooueful and necessary, then
either curiouse or fyled, go thou forward on Gods name, and I doubt not, but
by that time thou have perused to the end, thou shall find some thing to
satisfy thy desire, whereby thou will confess that al thy labor has not
been bestowed in vain. And thus I bid thee heartily Farewell.

To the valiant Captains and renowned Soldiers of England, Barnabe Rich
wishes for their better encouragement, increase of credit, estimation and
necessary maintenance, according to their due deserts.
ALthough (right noble Captains and worthy Soldiers) I may seem too rash
and bold to enter into those discourses so far surpassing my capacity, the
which I know I have finished not according as the argument has required, but
according as the slendernes of my skyll would permit me: yet I protest, I have
not taken in hand to write, for any vain glory or presumption in my self, but
rather to incite some one amongst you, that is more able and sufficient, to
perform a greater enterprise, to a much better perfection: and for my part, I
have but used the office of the meanest laboring man, and (as it were) have
but brought lyme and stone together, wherewith the master workman may erecte
his building in brave and sumptuous sort.

Thus craving pardon for this my bold attempt, I submit altogether what I have
done to your noble judgments, to correct and amend what you shall see
needful and requisite. And thus I rest, yours to dispose

Barnabe Rich.

To my very loving friend Captain Barnabe Rich.
I Have perused your book, as far as the shortness of the time would suffer
me: which was not so far by a great deal as I gladlyest would, if it might
have longer continued with me. Your travail and good mind most justly
deserves in my opinion, both thanks and commendations of all your country
men. I wish with all my heart it may so be accepted of those, in whose hands
the only remedy lies, that some good order may be devised for the relief and
encouragement of such virtuous minds as are contented with the expens of
their blood to benefit their country. Which kind of men above all others,
ought most to be esteemed as the very sinowes and strength of every common
weal, how mighty or wealthy so ever she be. For according to the opinion of
a late learned writer, Pertinet autem maxim ad Reipub. fortitudinem, vti
milites peritos and exercitatos habeat. Sic enim and tranquilla vita fruetur,
and a terroribus tumultibusque vacua erit. The only strength of every common
wealth is, To have skillful and well trained soldiers: so shall they live in
happiness, being free from all kind of terror and tumult. And again, Dum
belli furor insurgit, hostisque Reipub. bonis occupandis inhiat, eoru^ in
manibus Reipub. Salus, Religio, Fides, Libertas est reposita. When the rage of
wars does suddenly burst out, and the enemy at hand, gaping for the spoil
of the country, then both Safety, Religion, Faith and Liberty rests wholly
in the hand of the soldiers: who are the only terror to the enemy,
defend their country from present danger, and bring the common wealth to
safety and quietness. But our country has always had that fault (and I am
afraid will never be without it) of being unnatural and unthankful to such
as with their great hazard, pains and charges have sought to attain to the
knowledge of arms, by which she is chiefly mainteyned, succored and
defended. To bring one example amongst thousands* What a number was there of
noble Gentlemen, and worthy soldiers, that in the days of that victorious
prince King Henry the fifth (after the honorable behauing of them selves, as
well at Agincort, as other places, to the discomfiture and utter overthrow of
the whole Chiualry of France) returning to their country, were pitifully
constrained (and which was in deed most miserable) in their old and
honorable age for very want and necessity to beg, while a great number of
unworthy wretches that lived at home, enjoyed all kinds of felicities. That
Noble Gentleman Sir William Drurie a Paragon of arms at this day, was wont (I
remember) to say, that the soldiers of England had always one of these three
ends to look for: To be slain, To beg, or To be hanged. No doubt a gentle
recompense for such a merit. Yet want there not some, yt dare affirm it a
vain burden to a common wealth, to maintain soldiers, as the common
disturbers and hinderers of public peace. Such a one was sometime Sir Thomas
More, who having more skyll in sealing of a writ, then surueying of a Camp,
was not ashamed most unwisely to write (if I may so speak of so wise a man)
that the common labourer of England, taken from the plowe, was he, that when
it came to the matter, did the deed: whose goodly service in time of need, is
better known then I need to speak of. But what has this Realm gained by
her small account of soldiers? She has of barbarous people been four or
five times invaded and ouertunne. I pray God the sixth be not nearer then men
look for. It is not money nor multitude of men that in extremetie preuayleth,
but skyll and experience that safely mainteyneth and preserves. Rome, while
she maynteyned her soldiers, was mystresse and commandresse of the whole
world: but when she fell to her own delicacies, and neglecting of them, she
became not only a triumph, and contempt to the rude Vandale and barbarous
Gothe, but as yet she remaynes a spectacle of miserable ruin to the
universal world. We have a number of Captains, such as never came yet under
enseigne in their life: happy shall that realm be, that shall have need of
such expert soldiers, but most unhappy and unjust men that dare challenge to
them selves the place of so great a charge Soldiers enough we have that in
time of peace can range their battailles, cast out their skirmishes, assault
towns, and co^quer kingdoms, that a man would judge them at the first sight,
for very Hectors and Hanniballes. But these be they, (I know not how it
happens) that are the first that will be gone, when they come to it. We have
on the other side, a number of good captains, who by their skillful
experience, are well able to train and lead a gallant company of soldiers,
who perceiving their cold entertaynement, do daily (as no man can blame them)
abandon, and utterly renounce their profession, or serve in other places where
they should not. These disorders and great numbers more, your book (if it
continue according to that part that I have seen) will sufficiently lay out at
large, and with his larum awake (I trust) the minds of those, in whose hands
it lies to redress them: whether it do or do not, your well doing deserves of
all men to be embraced, that have with learned authorities, and sufficient
eloquence, done what in you lies to move it: the rest is to be supplied by
him, that being of that Majesty, vouchsafes, in sign of his well liking of
so noble a profession, to be called by the name of Dominus exercituum, the Lord
of Armies. And thus with my hearty thanks, I send you your book again. From
Kingstone in haste.

Your assured friend, Barnabe Googe.

Lodowick Flood in the behalf of the Author.
MArch forth with Mars, clap costlets on, ring larum loud apace,
strike on the drum, sound out the trumpe, defy your foes in face.
Shake Morpheus of, set Vatia by, flee Bacchus bankets fro,
shun Ceres seat, let Venus be, to Mars your service show.
In India loiterers were looked to, in Egypt youth were taught,
and in Lacena idle men, as men suspect were caught.
With sword and shield, in warlike w^eds the Romans Mars obeyed,
each Martial feate the Greeks to Mars, in mount Olympus played.
Had Pyrrhus praise bin pend in books, had Alexander fame,
had Phrygia fields such fame by blood, had Mars not spread the same?
Scipio got by Hannibal praise, by Pompey Caesar fame:
by Hector stout, Achilles strong, did win his noble name.
What worthy Cyrus gaynd by wars, what noble Ninus wanne,
that Sardanapalus lost by sloth, even from thassyrians than.
What noble courage does attempt, what haughty hearts do win,
that sluggish minds do lose again, as had no conquest binne.
A cowarde vile, a dastard he, that dares not march in field,
whom dread of greesly gu^ne may daunt, to leave both spear and shield
What greater glory can be got, what greater praise be won,
then Curtius feats or Decius deeds, to do as they have done?
Darius wished Zopyrus like, to have but twenty men,
and Agamemnon wished again, to have but Nestors ten,
Whereby that Troy and Ilion proud, by Nestors wisdom won,
and by Zopyrus brought to ground, the pride of Persia done.
One subtle Sinon with some slight, like Lasthenes one to be
is better then a thousand such, that bragges and bost and flee.
Then pace this path the tracte is plain, that Rich has trodden out,
and leads thee lightly to the place, where honor should be sought.
Since Rich of right did run this race, and painted forth with pen,
his trauaill tried commend you must to Mars and to his men:
And give of right to Rich his praise, that rings the larum bell,
enroll his name, record his fame, and say to Rich far well.
Thomas Churchyard Gentleman, in commendation of this work.
IF child thatt goes to skoell, did any warning tack
at fellows fawtts who feells the rod (when they offense do maek)
His ortographie and manner of writing observed.
him selff should skaep the skorge, and construe many a lain
and lawghe to skorn the whisking whyp, thatt maeks the skollars whyen
But neither child nor man, will warnyng taek you se
till tempest coms with thonder crak, and stryeks down staetly tree
owre nebors house a fire, byds wyes to loek a bowtt
and rack up coells in imbers cloes, and putt the candell owtt
least sparkulls creep in straw, and smothryng smoek a ryes
and styeffull sylly sleepyng Soells, in bed that caerles lies
The wars at hand we here, maeks hollow peace to bloeshe
byds call for wars and coetts off steell, to stand and byed the poeshe
A man who long gyvs aem, may shoett him selff at leynth
A heddy horse must corbbed be, by connyng or by streynth
A wyelly wykked world, byds wantton heds bewaer
Whatt needs moer words when peace is craktt, for lufty wars prepaer
loes not your old renown, O baebs off bryttayn bloed
Dance afftter drom, let tabber go, the musyck is not good
that maeks men loek lyek gyrlls, and mynce on carpaytts gaye
as thoghe maid marry on mentt to martch, and Iuen should bring in May
The sownd off trompett suer, will change your maidens face
to loek lyek men or lions whelpps, or tigers in the chase
A gallantt stoering horse, thatt maeks a manneg ryghtt
wear fytter than a lady fyen, for myghtty marssys Knightt
The wars for marshall mynds, and peace for Venus men
The sword and soldior best agrees, the lawyer for the pen
The wars calls corraeg up, and peace breeds cowards still
maeks people proud, dystroyes greatt hartts, and pampers wantton will
peace prowlls a bowtt for pence, and wars the mock will spend
that gredy gayn hords up in hoells, god knoes to little end
the wealth that peace does bring, maeks many a myscheeff ryeff
and peace rons hedlong in to vice, and wars refforms leawd lyeff
for fear off sword or sho^t, man's mind loeks throw the stars
the hartt fawlls flatt beffoer his face, that maeks boeth peace and wars
the noghtty natuerd wyghtt, by wars is broghtt in fraem
the baddest putts on better mind, the wyeldest waxes taem
peace fills the land with pomp, thatt gyvs a pryuey wownd
feeds folly fatt, maeks virtue lean, and floeds off vice a bownd,
Daem lust her pleasuer taeks, in peace and banketts sweett
and wars does quench owr hott desyers, and dawntts the dallyng spreete
in wars we honor wyn, on peace reproetch does groe
and wars contentts owr noblest frynds, and peace does pleas owr foe
peace putts up sundry wrongs, and wars does right mentayn
and suer a battayll is well lost, thatt does a kingdom gayn
To feyght in forrayn soyll, apawlls the enmyes pryed
and better fare abroed to martch, than here the brontt to byed
not many hold with peace, thoghe wars is called a shreawe
nor many aer by peace maed rytch, for wealth butt fawlls to feawe
and thoes thatt thryvs by peace, aer fy^n and full off sleyghtt
who takes owtt off measuer still, and gyvs again by weyghtt
yff any win by wars (as diverse do in deed)
they loes the saem again by peace, thus peace myslyek does breed
for peace restoers the goods, thatt war haeth concquerd well
yelds up the fortts, gyvs back perfforce, the towns whearin we dwell
and war trayns soldyors up, (which keeps the world in awe)
putts rebels down, mentayns good men, thatt still vpholds the law
When Roem soghtt wars from hoem, in peace the staett remaynd
when common wealth with peace was cloyd, proud people peace dysdaynd
This peace I do compaer, to calmye wether fair
thatt smoethly loeks till doskye clouds, have clean oercast the air
butt when the stordy storms, rons rattling throw the skies
The rack goes swyfftt the clouds wax dark, and ragyng wynds aryes
and tears up trees by roetts: such store a tempest maeks
thatt at the clapp, low caves of earth, and highest heaven shaeks
war is not liek to this, whear baddest war you find
butt peace moer liek a swellinge soer, thatt festers sowndest mind
and so bursts owtt in byells, in botch or vlcerrs greatt
which vtters by thear smokyng fuem, a cuerles inward heatt
let peace give place to war, off force hytt must be so
off force the gallantts off this land, must needs a warrffaer go
Thoghe stowttnes strive you se, the quarrel is the staetts
thatt steps in to thoes bloddy broylls, by feyghtt to end debaetts
admit thatt myllions dye, and perish on the plain
in pryncys cawse and conttreys ryghtt, thear must be thowsandes slain
To hold the enmyes short, and maek our manhoed known
whoes value in our elders days, a boutt the world was blown.
and we wear vyctors called, and feared of forrayn foe
whear now transformd to wemens wylls, liek carpett knights we go
O Eangland loek thoue back, whatt noble elders did
shall strangers braggs and boests give fear, to boldness god forbid
Thyen honor so wear staynd. Than pluck up corraeg now
and waesh away thatt spyetffull spott, that blotts thy noble browe
To give thy soldyors lyeff, this boek is nuely maed
by oen who c^n for conttreys cause, well use boeth pen and blaed
Accept his wylling work, give other corraeg to
(by fauryng thatt is worthy prays) the lyek off this to do
This setts forth many greeffs, and sercheth sundry soers
not fraemd ^o fawn and flatter world, a soldyor that a boers
Loek for the lyek in haest, from me if layser will
and thatt you pleas to taek in worth, the payns of barrayn quyll.
S. Strong, in the behalf of the Author.
IF painful pilgryme for his toil, deserves a guerdon due
In seeking of the sacred sort, which virtue does pursue:
Or if the wakeful watch in war, do merit like reward,
Or cunning pylot that with skill, does take his due regard,
To cut in twain the billows huge, that swell in Occean sea,
And keeps the keele aright his course, till wished port he wray:
Then (Ritche) that rings this larum bell, to warn his countries thrall,
And sorts (much like the busy be) the hunny from the gall,
Deserves no less, in lieu thereof: such fruit I reap thereby,
As for my part, a double praise, I may him not deny.
The toil to him no profit yields, he bites on bitter pain:
He hales home harvest for the chafe, the reader reapes the grain.
He gives the sword and shield in hand, to shroud thee from annoy,
He wisely warnes thee of the worse, lest foes might thee destroy:
He treades thee out a perfect path, oh England loud I cry,
Refuse therefore thy follies past, he sees thee go awrye:
And leave of al thy lustful life, and eke thy great excess,
Thy dainty fare, thy fine array, and eke thy wantonness.
Leave of likewise thy vsance great, and leave thy lawing vain,
Lest for the present guyle thereof, there hap some future pain.
Yet God forbid but justice should in each thing bear the sway,
And law is good where law is used, I cannot this denay.
But so your Common laws are courst, at will of every pelth,
That common is the woe (God knows) but private is the wealth.
Do sort thy self from Comedies, and foolish plays of love,
Lest tragical and worse perhaps in fine thee chance to prove.
Take sword in hand, and leave of ease, for now the time is comme,
The bell is rong, the trumpettes sound, all arm does strike the dromme.
And thank good (Rich) that rings the same, to wake thee out of sleep,
That thou thy self, that live at peace, in safety still might keep.
A jewel ritche and gemme of price, the same no doubt does seem,
A ritcher gift for thy behoof, he could not give, I deem.
Thomas Lupton, in commendation of this work.
WHat beter thing, then perilles to prevent?
What danger more, then careless still to sleep?
Then is it not good, in peace for to frequent
The thing that us from force of foes may keep?
What harm in heat, to make for cold a hoode?
The Ante prouides, in summer wynters food.
Therefore who lothes his loss and countries spoil,
Let him peruse this book with griedie mind,
Which vtters how his foe may have the foil,
And eke what hurt through want of skill we find.
And thank thou Rich, that gives this larum bell,
A richer gift, he could not give thee well.
The Author to the reader, why he took in hand to write this book.
IN dolful dumpes of deep despair, and unacquainted fyt,
with troubled head but here of late, I chanced for to sit,
reuoluing what revenge the gods do yield to those of right,
that have their godheds in disdain, or yet contemnes their might:
What justice Jove did rightly use, and Juno also show
on Priams race for Paris fact, the Troyans all did know.
Acteon felt Dianas force, she yielded him for hyre:
and what it is for mortal men, to move the gods to ire
Narcissus may a mirror be, of Venus scourge to such
as have her darlings in disdain, or at her laws will grutch.
The Spider shows how vain it is, to such as will contemn,
and Piers daughters for like fact, the Muses did condemn.
And Bacchus birds had dew reward, for that they would despise,
and what reuengement has been used by Ceres may suffice.
Though I omit a number mo, that here I could recite,
who for contemning of the gods, have felt their force and might:
But here my muse is in a maze, my senses all do shake,
my fainting wits do fail for fear, my quiuering quil does quake,
To blaze the bloody broils of Mars, the mighty god of war,
wherewith he plagues such rebels stout, as at his laws will snarre.
How he does scourge the careless crewe, that lives deuoide of awe,
in secure sort without regard of Mars or martial law.
No stories strange I need recite a hundred years forepast,
but such as chaunst in these our days, and at this hour does last.
Let Holland make discourse at large, if I have said amiss,
whose state sometime in all respects, surmounted most in bliss.
Whose towns were seated in such sort, by nature framed so strong,
as no assault of foreign foe, might do them sudden wrong.
No want of wealth might work their woe, no coin with the^ was sca^t,
of ships great store in every port, no pleasure they did want.
Lecker cost is good chere.
They livd at case in vile excess, they sought for (Lecker cost)
their paunches stuffed with double beer, was that they card for most.
They honored Bacchus as their god, and Venus had her dew,
but as for Mars they knew not him, they were not of his crewe.
they scornd to learn the laws of arms, their country to defend,
they livd in peace, which as they thought, should never have an end.
But mighty Mars, who long had winkte, and borne with their contempt
perceiving that from him and his, them selves would still exempt,
To teach such rebels to resist, his godhed did devise
a strange revenge, if wisely waid: for whom they did despise,
And whom they held in most contempt, even they did rule the roast,
and such had them at their command, as they despised most.
Lo here of Mars the judgment just, prepared but of right,
that those which had both him and his, but late in such despite,
Those that disdaind all martial wightes, and scornd to learn their law
by martial might were soon suppressed, and brought to live in awe.
Of men of war by vow professed, a troop of Mars his train,
though number small more haughty hearts, came never out of spain
And these were planted in their towns, throughout in every place,
and soldiers now prescrybd them laws, a woeful altered case.
They swaid the sword where they became, for who durst them resist?
they took their lives as they thought good, and pardond whom they list
Their lives and goods were at command, their coin at spaniards call,
their virgins fair, their married wives, the spaniardes held as thrall.
their scutes must scour with fristers fraught who^ spaniards must co^uoy
their waggans trould with lusty frowes, that never made it coy.
Their husbands they must be content, they durst not seek redress:
the spaniardes held them in good awe, their deeds did show no less.
A hundredth Spanyardes in a town would govern thousands five,
the Hollanders were men of peace, they lovd not they to strive.
Good men they took all in good part, but if they hapt to quarrel,
their strife at first was stird about, that (Shellam) in the barrel.
But though of Holland all this while, my tale has been pretended,
yet other places in like case, with Holland have offended,
And have with Holland felt the scourge, of Mars his force and might
wherewith he dauntes the rebel route, that has him in despite.
Has Seland think you escaped free, let Flanders make report.
let Brabant brag what gains they get, that lives in secure sort.
But Antwerpe thou thy woeful wrack, thy spoil has proved plain
where martial minds do want, no state in safety may remain.
For thou that sometime did excel, whose wealth did so abound,
whose daily traffyque did surmount, whose like might not be found,
Whose streets with marcha^ts so did swarm, who by their painful toil
did bring their goods by sea and land, from every foreign soil.
Of Europe thou the storehouse rich, were sometime called by name,
in wealth I say a perelesse piece, so passing was thy fame.
Thy houses built in brauest sort, with walls enuirond round,
a platform of a greater force, might not in haste be found.
Artillery both great and small, abundant was thy store,
for armor, weapon, powlder, shot, what should I speak of more?
For all provisions for the war, great store thou did possess,
thou naught did want but martial minds, the sequel showed no less
For thou ne durst at all contend, what Spaniardes would gainesay
thou paydst for building of a slot, that wrought thy own decay. A slot is a
castle.

In bondage thus at Spaniardes call, thy self thou did bequest,
by means whereof thy store became, a scourge to all the rest.
What did ensue is to well known, I need not here express,
I rewe thy wrack, but yet I say, thou did deserve no less.
For had thou traind but half the troop, to bin of Mars his train,
that practisd daily to be drunk, in Bacchus beastly vain:
Or had thou spent but half the pelf, to maintain martial wightes
that was consumde in vile excess, by Bacchus drunken knights,
What keyser could have wroght thy woe, what prince have done thee wrong
what foreign foe have thee anoid, thy force had been so strong?
But Mars might be of no account, thou knew no such a god,
his laws were never called to mind, before thou felt his rod.
Who will not here confess a truth, that all thy spoil and wrack,
was but for want of martial minds? thou had no other lack.
For better proof this may suffice, to such as will confess
a trothe apparent to be true, what should I more express
Then this, the spoil the Spaniardes gave to Antwerpe in such sort,
that all the world does wonder yet to hear the true report?
Five thousand Spaniardes at the most, by force in bloody broyle,
should so subdue a famous town, and bear away the spoil.
Where such provision of defense, in store did so abound,
where hundred thousands able men were daily to be found.
Enough to eat the Spanyardes up, had they been bakte in pyes,
or had been brued in double beer, because the Flemings gyes
Do better serve to drink then eat, the Spaniardes had been dead,
they would have drunk them all up quite, without a byt of bread.
But here enough to make my proof, and still of this be sure:
where Mars is had in no account, no state may long endure.
May rebels (think you) escape his scourge, may such contempt go quite
will Mars the mighty god of war be had in such despite?
No no, he may defer a time, ere he reuengement take:
but in the end he pays them home, the stoutest then does quake.
O England would thou did regard, what plagues in time do hap
to such as so without respect are luld in pleasures lap,
And fears no force of future fits, that after may ensue,
till dangers do beset them round, and then to late to rue.
And would to God by others harms, thou might so warned be,
that thou into thine own estate, would vouchsafe to see.
And tell me then if Mars be had in honor like a god,
if not, how think thou to escape the rigor of his rod?
May peace procure so great contempt, and alter kind so far,
that yr should make thee quite forget there is a god of war?
Shall martial feats be still neclect, as though we were so sure,
that this our time of pleasant peace, should evermore endure?
Would God it might, but so to wish, I know is but in vain,
our foes are ready pressed no doubt, they seek but time to gain.
What though in secret yet they lie, who knows not why they stay?
their quarrel is not now to seek, they hope but for a day.
Lo here the cause that urged me first, to take in hand to wright
this blunt discourse, good reader, here presented to thy sight.
Which if thou will vouchsafe to read, do judge as thou shall find:
give sentence then, and I will mend, if ought mislike thy mind.
FINIS.
Felix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum.
The first part entreating of war.
I Doubt not, but a great number will think I have taken pains more then
enough, The first objection.
to write of wars, or of warlike disciplines. First, because wars have ever
bin accounted a most grieuouse plague, and of it self is reputed so evil, so
strange, and so pernicious, that it comprehends and surmounteth, al other
kind of evils: for it afflicts as well the poor and innocents, The fruits
of war.
as those that be wicked and evil disposed: for by it good laws are decayed,
humanity is defaced, equity is suppressed, holy places are profaned,
murders are committed, virgins are defloured, chaste matrons are defiled,
kingdoms be subdued, cities be ruinated: as warlike Numace, sumptuouse Corinth,
stately Thebes, delicate Tire, learned Athens, holy Jerusalem, contentious
Carthage, mighty Rome, and now lastly wealthy Antwerpe. These with many other
more, by wars have been sacked, spoiled, robbed, defaced, and sometime laid
waste and desolate: for war, pestilence, and famine, are the three darts,
which the almighty God is wont to shoot against the earth, when he is
displeased: and is holden so yrcksome amongst us, that in our letanie we daily
use this prayer, From plague, pestilence, famine, battle, and murder, good
Lord deliver us.

A second reason, why I should be condemned, is this: A second objection.
Because as the war of it self is an evil, and that so lothsomly detested:
even so, to be professors, followers, and ministers in the same, is esteemed a
thing more fit for ruffians, roysters, blasphemers, and people of the vylest
condition, rather then an exercise for honest men, in whom there is any fear
of God, or any love toward their neighbor: in so much that Cornelius Agrippa
says, That if you would call a tyrant, a blasphemer, a murderer, a robber, a
spoyler, a deflowrer, an oppressor, with many other such like: if you would
(says he) include all these into one short name, you may call him by the name
of a soldier.

A third objection.
But now thirdly and especially, I know a number will scorn me, and think me
to be to simple to write any thing of wars, in this so peaceable a time, but
would rather have allowed of my discretion, if I could have framed some
conceit according to the time, some pleasant discourse, some strange novel,
some amorous history, some far fette or unknown device: this might have
purchaced me credit: the Printer might have gained by selling of my book: but
to give men sudden Allarmes of war, that be quietly minded, Such is the
effect of security.
pleasantly disposed, and peaceably pretended, I know it is but a mockery:
and even now I begin to muse with my self, what madness at the first should
drive such a conceyte into my brain: but seeing I have begun to enter into
this fondness, pardon me, I pray you, the hearing of my excuse, which I trust
you shall find to be reasonable.

Of war.
Then first to speak of war, because I know there be many whose consciences
be so scrupulous, that they think no wars may be lawfully attempted, allowed
of by Gods word, or agreeing with true christianity, for the number of
outrages which by it are committed.

I think it therefore convenient to see, what proofs may be alleged in the
defense of war, although not in general, yet in the holy Scriptures where
they have been allowed of, and many times commanded by the almighty God him
self.

Genesis 14.
In the 14. Chapter of Genesis it is written: When Abram heard his brother was
taken, he harnessed his fresh young men, borne in his own house, three hundred
and eighteen, and followed on them until Dan: and he was set in array upon
them by night, he and his servants: and he smote them, and pursued them unto
Hoba, which lies on the left hand of Damascus, and recovered all the goods,
and brought again his brother Lot, and his goods, etc.

By this it seems, that Abram executed as well the part of a King, Abram
executed the part of a King.
as the duty of a Captain: in that he took upon him to leauy a band, and
to enter into battle with these that before had oppressed his friends: which
he did of his own head: and yet this part did nothing offend God, Wars
nothing offended God.
as the sequel does evidently prove.

But in the 31. Chapter of Numeri, Numeri. 31.
by the express commandment from God, Moses is willed to make war upon the
Madianites, the words be these: Wars commanded by God.
And the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying: Avenge the children of Israel of the
Madianites: and afterward shall thou be gathered unto thy people. And Moses
spoke unto the folk, saying: Harness some of you unto war, and avenge the
Lord of the Madianites, etc. And in the 8. chapter of the book of Joshua: And
the Lord spoke unto Joshua, Fear not, neither be thou faint hearted, take all
the men of war with thee, and up, and get thee to Hai: Behold, I have given
into thy hand the King of Hai, and his people, and his city, and his land:
and thou shall do to Hai and her King, as thou did unto Jericho and her
king: nevertheless, the spoil and cattle thereof shall ye take unto your
selves, etc.

Saul in the first book of Kings the 15. chapter, 1. King. 15.
has the like commandment: and these be the words: Samuel said unto Saul,
The Lord sent me to anoint thee King over his people Israel: now therefore
hearken thou unto the voice of the Lord: Thus says the Lord of hosts: I
remember that which Amalek did to Israel, how they laid wait for the^ in the
way, as they came out of Egypt: Now therefore go and smite Amalek, and destroy
ye all that pertayneth unto him, and see that thou have no compassion on them,
and covet nothing that they have: slay both man and woman, infant and suckling,
ox and sheep, camel and ass, etc.

By this commandment we may perceive, GOD gave charge to Saul, that he should
sack the countries of the Amalechites, and to pass by the edge of the sword,
men, women, children, and beasts, without dispense or grace, giving a reason of
that extreme justice: because those people had done many oppressions to
Israel, in the voyage out of Egypt into Chanaan, and wills him in no wise to
show mercy, or to have compassion, not so much as upon women and children.
This place might seem over cruel to such as would have men go to war, and
to kill no body, nor to commit any spoil: neither do I allege this, to
maintain tyranny, for there is time and occasion to use, both rigor and
pity, justice and mercy, as hereafter I will further show. I mean now but to
make proof, yt God has not been displeased with wars, but is called in many
places, the God of hosts. And Moses cites a place of the wars of the Lord:
and in the 20. chap. of the second book of Chronicles it is written, 2. Chron.
20 cap.
that when Iosaphat had understanding of the multitude of his enemies the
Moabites, the Ammonites, and the Syrians that were gathered against him,
Iosaphat assembling his people into the Temple, made this prayer unto God.

The prayer of Iosaphat.
O Lord God of our Fathers, art thou not God in heaven, and raignest not thou
over all the kingdoms of the heathen? and in thy hand is power and might: and
there is no man that is able to withstand thee: art not thou our God, which
did cast out the inhabiters of this land, before thy people Israel, and
gave it to the seed of Abraham thy lover for ever? and they dwelt therein
for thy name, saying: If evil come upon us, as the sword of judgment,
pestilence, or hunger: then if we stand before this house, and cry unto thee
in our tribulation, hear thou and help. And now behold, the children of
Ammon, and Moab, and mount Seir, by whom thou would not let them of Israel
go, when they came out of the land of Egypt, but they departed by them, and
destroyed them not, see how they would reward us, that would cast us out of
thy possession, which thou have given us to inherit: O our God, will thou not
judge them, for we have no might against this great company that comes
against us, neither wot we what to do, but our eyes attend upon thee. And as
he continued thus in prayer, behold, the Prophet spoke unto him: Fear not
this multitude, it shall not be thy war, but the wars of God, etc.

I could here cite a number of like places, but these may seem sufficient,
Wars sometime pleasing God better then peace.
to prove that wars have been acceptable before the majesty of God, and
sometimes more auaylable then peace, as in the second chapter of the book of
Judges it appears, where the children of Israel were blamed for making of
peace with the Cananites.

And like as out of the scriptures, many other probable reasons might be
gathered: so there be diverse excellent authors, and sundry learned writers,
which seem not only to allow of wars, but think them to be many times very
meet and convenient to be attempted and to be taken in hand: and that it is
many times necessary for Princes to become enemies, to the end they may be
perfect friends. A happy war which brings assured peace.
And a most happy begun war may that be called, whereby is wrought the
safety of the state: so contrary, most miserable is ye peace, A miserable
peace.
which brings with it, the hazard of a country.

Cicero says in his book of Offices, Tull. officiis lib. ^.
To this end and purpose we must enter into war, that without injury we may
live in peace. And in an other place of the same book he says: We must
beware that we take not up the matter by advice, more to avoid war, then for
cause of profit: Wars must be taken in hand to the end to have peace.
for we must never by seeking to escape peril, deserve to seem cowardes and
dastards, but so let wars be taken in hand, as no other thing but peace, may
seem to have bin sought. This was the cause that made Demosthenes so mightily
to inuey against king Philip: for he perceiving the insatiable desire of king
Philip, and that he meant to make a conquest of all Grecia, and had already
begun with the Olynthians, who^ if he had once overthrown, there was nothing
then to let his passage to Athens, the which Demosthenes very well foreseeing,
by sundry orations persuaded the Athenians not only to send help to the
Olynthians, but also to send an army into the parts of Macedonie, a mean
whereby to make king Philip to have withdrawe^ his force from the Olynthians,
Better offend then defend.
to defend his own country: alleging by many persuasions, that aid to
their neighbors was very needful and necessary, when their own safety did
chiefly consist in the others good success: for who withdraws him self when
his neighbors house is on fire, may want help to quench his own. Wars
sometime attempted, occasion of better peace.
Thus we may see, although that peace be chiefly to be desired, yet many times
by entering into wars it is the more safely and quietly maintained: Like to a
ship which many times by some extraordinary wind, forsakes ye quiet harbor,
and seeks her safety in the wild and raging seas.

Time best taken when it serves.
So as Solomon says, There is a time of peace, a time of war, a time of
mirth, a time of mourning: and therefore to use time in time, as occasion does
serve, is a point of the greatest wisdom. Tull. de officiis lib. 1.
And Cicero to ye same effect uses these words: To run to the field rashly
all upon the head, and to enter conflict and skirmish with the enemy, is no
point of humanity, but the property of a savage beast: but when time and
necessity requires, then on with armor, and fight for life, preferring death
before servitude and misery.

As great injustice not to defend an injury as to offer an injury.
And in an other place of the same book, he speaks of two kinds of
injustice: the first in him that will offer it: the second in him that will take
it, and being able will not defend it. But here peradventure some will
allege against me the saying of Christ, where he wills, that he who had
received a blow on the one ear, should likewise turn the other: and he that
would take thy cloak, thou must likewise give him thy coat. But I trust they
will not maintain by this, that a Prince, when he is oppressed by any tyrant,
should surrender up his crown and seigneurie, for that he should be counted a
quiet man and the child of God, or that Gods word does any where forbid a
Prince to maintain his right, or that it should not be lawful for him to enter
into wars, either for the maintenance of Gods true religion, For how many
causes a Prince may enter into arms.
either for his own security, as did the Athenians against king Philip:
either for the subversion of any tyrant or oppressor, or such as shall
wrongfully usurp upon any other, that are not able to defend their own cause.
And in the ancient time, it has been thought very convenient, that where a
tyrant does reign over his own people with cruelty, rauine, rape, murder, or
other like oppressions, wherein a Prince may do his subjects manifest wrong,
and is not by them to be redressed, for that it is not lawful for the subject
to stand in arms against his Prince: it has been always therefore thought
requisite, that such Princes as have been borderers next upon him, should
chastise and correct so great enormities, to the end that the name of a King
might not seem odious and hateful to the common sort of people: as was Nero,
Heliogabulus, Dionysius, and others.

This got Hercules such immortal glory, What gained Hercules such immortal
glory.
yt he was rekoned amongst the number of the gods, only for his valiance and
prowess, used upon monsters, tyrants, oppressors, and such other.

But something the better to satisfy such as in their opinions are so precise,
to think that no wars, how soever it be attempted, may be either good or
godly: I will therefore here recyte the words of that learned and excellent
man Hieronymus Osorius, in order as they be written in his book entitled, Of
Christian nobility, which follow in this manner:

Hieronymus Osorius in his book entitled, Christian nobility.
First therefore, I can conceive no reason why they should despise warfare when
it is rightfully begun and taken in hand in the defense of religion, whereas
we see it wonderfully extold in innumerable places of holy scripture, which
they do not deny: but what say they? many things (say they) were contained in
the old law, which rather for the times sake were tolerated, then worthy dew
commendation: as to make a divorce, to take usury of foraine countries, of
which sort they say is to make wars upon our enemies: but what semblance or
similitude has either usury or divorces with martial affairs? for they were
not commended, but tolerated because of men's weakness and imbecillitie: but he
that durst presume not to obey, when commandment was given to wage battle,
committed an offense so heinous, that he could redeem the same by no
satisfaction. For in what place read we that it was decreed, that he should
either abide a pain, or be subject to a curse if any man (whereas after the
first offense his wife counted it was lawful so to do) did not depart from
his wife, or exacted no usury of forriners and strangers? but in many places
we have well noted, that men ravished and replenished with the holy spirit,
have decreed that they should dye ye death which through cowardice refused to
come forth into the field. But what should I in this place make mention of
Debora, who being inspired with the holy ghost, curses the^, which for as much
as in them lies, take not in hand the wars of the Lord, and inueyeth against
their cowardice in sharp and vehement words? And again, they lay to our
charges circumcision, the offering up of a lamb, old sacrifices, which were in
old time with great devotion kept, and after the coming of Christ did want
their wonted reverence: as though warfare did any whit appertain to the
ceremonies and mysteries of holy things, and were not rather ordained for the
preservation of the common wealth: for those holy rightes, in which were
foreshadowed the express signs and tokens of Justice and salvation, to be
procured by our high and mighty Savior Christ, after the coming of the thing
it self, which was by those signs declared, were by good right and just desert
abrogated and disanulled: but this can not be thought of the noble knowledge of
feats of arms, for as much as it is not comprised under the nature of
ceremonies, but embraced for the maintenance and preservation of the common
safety, and wholly appertains to civil policy: and to confound those
things which are to be distinguished, it is either the property of extreme
madness, or an argument of wonderful temeritie and rashenes. And whereas the
state of the common wealth can not be established, but it must needs be
stayde, and as it were propped up with strength and force of arms, for as much
as all things in the time of peace to be practiced and exercised, are under the
tuition and defense of martial prowess: he that takes away the knowledge of
feats of arms, works the overthrow of the common wealth: which thing if it
had happened through christian discipline, then mad men moved with some
reason, might lay to our charge, that some common wealth by means of
Christian discipline was overthrown: which slanderous accusation how wicked
and vain it is, we have before declared. For Christ would not that the state
of civil policy should be overthrown, but rather established and confirmed:
and therefore as he has not wrested the sword out of the hand of a
Magistrate, so neither would he have a soldier to want his weapon, to the
intent that a Magistrate being armed with authority of laws, might with
severity of the same laws, suppress wickedness amongst the members and inward
parts of the common wealth, and the soldier clad in armor, might with dint
of sword repelle and put aside from the common wealth all imminent danger.
For this cause John never exhorted men from applying themselves to the
knowledge of feats of arms, but prescribes laws unto soldiers of
harmless usage, and temperat behavior: And Paul calls those Magistrates
the servants of God, which with the sword punish wicked and desperate
persons. Truly nothing were more heartily to be desired of a Christian man,
then that all men would refrain them selves from wickedness and sinful lust:
but for as much as that can not always fall out, and in stead of continency,
unbridled lust: in stead of justice, either forayne force or civil broils
use to arise: then of necessity either force of the enemy is with weapons and
maine strength to be beaten back, or the outrage of our citizens with sword
to be repressed. That say they is contrary to christian charity: as though any
kind of cruelty were greater the^ to be dissolute and negligent in a general
distress and misery. Christ has commanded that we should not be revenged of
our enemies: no doubt it is the property of perfect and absolute virtue, when
privately we sustain wrongs and injuries, to show a singular and wonderful
patience of the mind: but when either the common wealth or safety of our
country, or the honor or estate of religion is impugned, then against outrage
and vilanie, to take an invincible stomach. Christ has especially commended
us unto peace: no doubt, that peace he has commended, which he him self
gave us, which does not consist in pleasant rest and quietness, that man's
nature is prone to require (for who can suppose that he has granted unto us
that kind of security, when he suffered his own disciples to be tossed, as it
were, with troublesome waves of man's outrageous fury?) but that peace, by the
which we were reconciled into the grace and favor of God, which had conceived
great wrath and indignation against us, and to whose religion our wilful
appetites were most repugnant: these enimities therefore and dislikings between
us and God, Christ (as Paul testifies in many places) with his own preciouse
blood has done away, and has purchased for us a peace continual and
everlasting. The which we may then especially enjoy, when we most vehemently
and egerly fight, either for the safety of our country, or maintenance of the
faith of Christ and his religion: unless peradventure we suppose, that Abraham
wanted the benefit of this peace, at what time he gathering a band of men of
his own domestical servants, encountered with a huge and puissant host of
his enemies, and valiantly (far exceeding the estimation of man) vanquished
four mighty Kings, and his enemies being part of them slain, the other put to
the worse, he carried away the spoil. Or if we think likewise of Gedeon, who
being guarded only with three hundred men of war, slew innumerable
multitudes of his enemies. Again, what think you of Joshua, Moses his
successor? what of Iephthah? What should I rehearse many other noble men,
honored as well for their fervent zeal of religion, as magnified for their
worthy exploytes in martial affairs? may we think that they did offend God,
when they most valiantly set upon their enemies? or shall we not rather say,
that then especially the peace of GOD took effect amongst them, when in the
cause of righteousness, against godless people they waged battle? Thus far
Osorius.

But because it shall not be thought that this is but one doctors opinion, we
find many other that do give the like commendation. Divine Plato prayseth this
art of war, Commendation of the art of war.
and commands that children should learn it, and as soon as they be of
ability, to become soldiers. Cyrus said, It was as necessary as husbandry.
Augustine and Barnard, both catholic doctors, do approve it.

But the people of Rome, who amongst all other did most exceed in noblenes of
courage and in desire of martial glory, (as may appear by their images of
honor, which for the most part are set up in warlike array) they appointed for
their chief officers two Consulles, the one to deal in city matters, the
other still occupied in warlike causes. For they very well foresawe, that it was
not possible to live at quietness within the walls of the city, if the enemy
were not kept back from inuading their bounds and territories.

Hippodamus Mylesius, a man excellent well learned in the study of good arts,
thought it very convenient for that country or city that would live in quiet
safety, that they should divide and separate their people into three sorts:
the one to artificers, the other to husbandmen, and the third to warriors.

No renown so honorable as yt which is gained by martial prowess.
And in the ancient time, there has been no glory thought so great, no renoume
esteemed so honorable, as that which has been gained by force of martial
prowess: and of purpose to provoke and prick forward each manly wight, great
rewards have been appointed to such as have deserved well.

What reward has been used to such as have showed the^ selves courageous in
ye wars Nombers 14. Joshua. 15.
The noble Caleb, who by his great courage and constancy of mind, had again
persuaded the children of Israel, that were in a muttering to have returned
into Egypt, to continue in their former manhood and virtue: and had therefore
his reward promised him by Gods own mouth. This Caleb having a very beautiful
daughter whose name was Achsah, would bestow her on no man but upon him that
could take the city named Cariathe, which in the end was taken by Othniel,
his brothers son.

1. Kings. 17. 2. King. 7.
David likewise received great riches with the daughter of king Saul for
killing Goliath: and David him self promised great reward to such as should
overthrow the Iebusites.

Amongst the Carthagians, they had so many rings given them, as they had been
present at battles.

Amongst the Scythians, they only might drink in a broad bowl of gold (that
was carried about) who had slain an enemy.

The Romans above the rest to stir up men's minds to worthiness, and with
the better will to provoke them to martial exploites, invented glorious
triumphs, whereby he that deserved fame, might be for ever renoumed: so
contrariwise, to such as were cowardes, dastardes, What reproach* was used to
carpet knights.
or of the affinity of our carpet knights, to such most bitter cauntes and
shameful reproaches were most justly appointed.

The Macedonians ordained a law, that he who had not in fight of battle
overcome one, should in the sight of al men be trussed up in a haulter.

The women of Cimbria would kill those that first fled the field, yea,
although they were their next friends and kinsmen.

The women of Spraca would go into the field to see in what place their
husbands and friends were wounded, if it were before, they would with joy and
gladness show them to every man, and so bury them with great solemnity: if
behind, they al ashamed would depart leaving them unburied.

Tirrias a woman of Lacedemonia, having understanding that her son was slain
in a battle, answered, Was it not requisite, that my son going to the wars
should slay others? Wherefore should I then lament, if he him self be slain?
no surely, I more joyfully take knowledge of my sons death worthy of me and
his predecessors, the^ if with shame in sloth and idleness he should yet
have lived. Let cowardes complain, for I without tears will bury my son.

An other woman of Lacedemonia killed her own son, for that he had returned
from the wars, in whose reproach this Epitaphe was written: Thou dastard
knight Damatrion, thy mother has thee slain:
That did both her and Spratayne blood with cowardice distayne.


Solon, who for his wisdom is most renowned, being demanded of Cresus king of
Lidia, whom he judged of al other to be most happy, answered: one Tellus an
Athenian, which had begotten (in a country abounding with all commodities)
children excelling in goodlines of personage, and strength of body, and
afterward, defending his country manfully, ended his life with great glory.

Thus we may perceive, how in ye ancient time, they thought the knowledge and
practice of war to be in great reputation, that by so many means would seek
to encourage men to ye exercise of it: and what inco^moditie has happened unto
those, that have so wholly sought their felicity in peace, yt they have not
only despised war, but utterly refused to learn any martial discipline, or
warlike exercise, hereafter shall be showed.

The occasions that make men to hate war.
But the occasions that make men so extreemely to hate war, are sundry: but
that which does most of all vex the greatest number, is this: not so much for
any special love they have to peace, as for fear of taxes, payme^ts, and other
charges hanging upon war: for otherwise war or peace were all one with
them, so they might live in quietness, without any charge. And yet I dare
undertake, not one of these peacemongers, that will think he has been so
ouercharged, if he have bestowed but x. shillings toward the setting forth of a
soldier, that goes to spend his life in his prince or countries cause, but
will with more willing mind bestow x.li. amongst the lawiers to do his
neighbor a shrewed turn.

Other some would love ye wars well enough, so themselves might be free from
preassing, for that they had rather live like idle loytering lubbers, then
offer their service any way to defend or maintain the liberties of their
country: in condition to be compared to cur dogs, yt will fawn upon any man
as long as he feed the^, but when they should be farther used for pleasure in
the field, then adue, they go to their kenels: so these people, they are borne,
fostered up, and enjoy the laws and liberties of their country: and when
their country stands in need, do show themselves every way to aid and
assistance, with as willing minds, as a bear comes to a stake: these be
right bastards to their country, and are in deed worthy to enjoy no benefit
of their country. Plutarch makes mention of an I Will yt is in Greece, called the
I Will of Cobde: in this isle there is a lineage descended of ye noble Greek
captain called Agis the good: amongst these Agites, this law is especially
observed, that none dare call him self to be natural of the isle, unless he
has done some valiant act, or by some means showed him self forward in his
countries defense. If this law were in England observed, we should have to few
natural Englismen

There are an other sort, that only cowardlines and fear make them hate the
wars: these deserve little to be spoken of, and less to be accounted of.

There is yet a last sort, whose consciences be so pure (as they say
themselves) yt they can allow of no wars, either to be good or godly,
considering what murders, spoils and other outrages by the^ are committed.
This in deed seems to carry reason with it: but notwithstanding it is not
sufficient to co^de^ne a just quarrel: for Saul lost the especial grace and
favor of god, 1. King. 15.
for preserving the best of the pray he had taken from the Amalechites, which
he should have utterly destroyed.

And Joshua, Joshua 10.
fearing the day would have bin to short for him to kill his enemies which fled
before him, commanded ye su^ne to stand still, which was obedient to his
commandment: and shall we therefore condemn his quarrel, because he seemed to
carry a murtherous mind? Not so: for his quarrel was most just, and his fact
best pleased God. Neither have I brought forth these examples as necessary for
all to follow, but as probable for my purpose: Mercy a special virtue in a
captain, so it be used in time.
for mercy I acknowledge to be one of the greatest virtues, wherewt a noble
captain may be endued: but to be used out of time, as occasion may fall out,
has greater resemblance to foolish pity the^ to be called mercy, and is
rather to be holden a vice then a virtue, as hereafter I mean further to show.

A fond manner of reasoning.
But I do not a little wonder, what madness should moon men's minds to frame such
arguments, that because murders, spoils, and other like hauockes be
committed in the wars, the wars therefore can not please God, and what
soever pleases not God, can not be good.

The fruits that spring in the time of peace.
By the like argument, peace is the most greatest and the most detestable
enormitie that of al others may happen, and amongst Christians most to be
abhorred: for peace is the nourisher of vices, the root of evils, the proppe
of pride, and to be short, What means to come by riches.
it is the mother of al mischiefs. For in the time of peace we set our minds
only to wax rich, for the attayning whereof, what extortion, what deceit,
what fraud, what flattery, what lying, what forswearing is used to come by
them? and when they be had, they are the only instruments to vanity, the
ready ministers to vices, the very occasion why so great wars be many times
arreared between Princes, a special cause of commotions amongst subjects, they
breed quarelles amongst friends, suites between brethren, they make him that
shall possess them proud, presumptuous, vain glorious, and of a good man to
become evil and wicked.

Furthermore, in peace men grow to be slouthful, idle, proud, couetouse,
dissolute, incontinent, vicious, following al manner of vanities, given al to
delights, to inordinat lust, gluttony, swearing, and to be short, to al manner
of filthiness: which was very well perceived by S. Augustine, Augustine de
ciuitate Dei.
who in a book that he wrote entitled, De ciuitate Dei, has these words:

More hurtful was the city of Carthage to Rome after her destruction, then
during the whole course and season of the wars which the Romans had with
her: for that whylest they had enemies in Affrike, they knew not what vices
meant in Rome.

And what greater argument may there be of the displeasure of God, then where
he sends amongst them such peace and quietness? for as the scriptures
witness, Whom he loves, them he chastises: but a small sign of care should
seem, where he gives the people over to their own vanities, and suffers
them to wallowe in all vice and wickedness.

Thus you may see, by such manner of reasoning, vice may be made to seem
virtue, Vice may be made to seem virtue.
and contrary virtue appear to be vice. But here if any man would conjecture,
that by this which I have alleged, I meant in deed to persuade, that wars
were more convenient then peace, they should do me great wrong: for, although
I do know I have said nothing but what is true, and that in the time of peace
al kind of vices do most wickedly abound, yet I do very well know, that the
time of peace is not therefore to be condemned: so likewise, in the time of
war, although there be many disorders and sundry outrages committed, yet the
wars therefore are not absolutely to be reproved. For as peace is the great
benefit and blessing of God, so wars being attempted upon due consideration,
do nothing at all offend him: but like as the sun when it shines in some
pleasant garden, the herbs and flowers do yield a most delectable verdure, so
where it shines upon some filthy dunghill, the stench and lothsomenesse to
the passers by, is most noisome.

As the sun which was prepared of the almighty God to be a comfort to every
humane thing, is not the cause of the one nor the other, but the quality of
the places: so those abuses which are used either in peace or war, Leude
disposed people good at no season.
are not to be imputed to the time, but to the disposition and lewdnes of the
people, which like to filthy dunghilles, at every time and season, are more
noisome then profitable.

Let this suffice then: that what I have written, is but only to prove that
wars are not always to be comdemned, and that it is not against the laws
of God, that Princes should erect wars upon sufficient cause, but sometime
for civil policies sake, most requisite to be done: Concluding, that assured
peace is ever to be preferred before doubtful war, so it may be had without
prejudice or injury.

Thus ends the first part of war.
The second part entreating of Soldiers.
The second objection.
THe second objection is, Whether he that is honest, may take upon him the
profession of a Soldier? As who should say, that to be a soldier may not be
an honest man's profession, because in the wars they be the ministers of so
many mischiefs: this is their reason. But in this place I will but reason of
soldiers, as I have already done of wars: that is, but to show what manner
of people soldiers have been: As for such as do but usurp the name of
soldiers, I leave them, till another occasion.

We find in the 14. chapter of the book of Genesis, that Abraham was a
captain and a leader of men, Genesis. 14.
unto whom Melchizedech the king of Salem brought forth bread and wine: albeit
he were a priest of the most high God. And S. Paul in his epistle to the
Hebrews the 6. chapter, Hebr. 6.
speaking of our Savior Christ, says, That he was made a high Priest for
ever after the order of Melchizedech: and all the divines and ancient doctors
by general consent do agree, that the first true figure of Christ, was here
offered to soldiers, The first figure of Christ offered to soldiers.
that were returned from the slaughter and spoil of their enemies.

A special cause wherein soldiers may worthily triumph, and a choke pear
sufficient, to stop their mouths, that would so absolutely condemn them.

Moses, though he were otherwise a Prophet, What manner of men have been
soldiers. Exodus 18.21. Deuteronomy. 1.13.15.
yet he was likewise a captain, to whom Iethro his father in law by the motion
of Gods spirit, gave counsel to provide such to be judges over the rest, which
should be found to be men of courage, to fear God, to be lovers of truth, and
hating covetousness, etc. and that of them he should make some millenaries to
rule over thousands: and that he should create others centeniers, to rule over
hundreds: others Cinquantiniers, to bear authority over fifties: and
Disiniers to command over tennes.

Joshua at whose commandment the sun was obedient, was a soldier and a
leader of an army.

When the whole host of ye children of Israel was utterly dismayde for the
multitude of their enemies, Judges. 7.
whose nu^bre was like the sands of the sea, the Lord commanded Gedeon to make
his choice of such to serve for soldiers to encounter them, as were most
faithful, that doubted not of his promises made unto them, which were in number
but 300. and were chosen by lapping of water.

Who ever stood more in the good grace and favor of God, then that noble king
and captain David, whom the Lord termed to be a man after his own hearts
desire?

What should I here speak of Iephthah, of Iehu, of Judas Machabeus, and of
many other, which were notable soldiers? shall they be condemned to be wicked
and evil, because they were warriors? or shall we think of them that in that
vocation they offended God?

When the soldiers demanded of John Baptist, Luke. 3.
what they ought to do, he willed them to hurt no man wrongfully, but to live
by their wages: he said not unto them, Forsake your vile profession, you can
not be the children of god, to follow any such manner of exercise: the which
questionless he would have done, if he had so thought.

And when the captain who had sent unto Jesus, for the healing of his servant
that lay sick, as Jesus was going toward his house: Luke 7.
Nay Lord (quoth the captain) I am not worthy that thou should enter under
my roof, do but speak the word only, and my servant shall be safe: for I
also am a man set under power, and have under me soldiers: and I say unto
one go, and he goes: to another come, and he comes: and to my servant do
this, and he does it. Jesus marueyling at his words, turning him about to
those that followed, said: I have not found so great faith, no not in Israel.

And what godlier commendation may be given to any man, Acts 10.
then we find in the.10. chapter of the Acts of the Apostles, where it is
written as follows:

There was a certain man in Cesarea whose name was Cornelius, a captain of
the soldiers of Italy: a devout man, and one that feared God with all his
household, etc. To this Cornelius the Angel of the Lord appeared and willed him
to send into Ioppa, and to enquire for one Simon Peter, who should instruct
him and baptize him in the name of Jesus: and when the Angel was departed, thus
says the text: He called unto him two of his household servants, and a devout
soldier, that waited on him, and told them all the matter, and sent them to
Ioppa, etc.

This may seem sufficient to prove, that not only captains, but also
private soldiers, have bin found to be both zealous, and fervent in the love
and fear of God, and that he has likewise accepted them into his special
grace and favor.

With how many virtues noble captains have been endewed.
But what should I stand here to manifest the virtues wherewith a number of
noble captains has bin most plenteously indewed: as the bounty and
liberality of Alexander, the continency of Scipio, the justice and equity of
Julius Caesar, the patience and humility of Agathocles, the mercy and pity of
Agesilaus, the faith and fidelity of Regulus to his very enemies? Here might
(I say) even of this only matter a huge volume be written, only of the
virtuous dispositions of noble soldiers: in so much that this oath, By the
faith of a Soldier.
By the faith of a Soldier, has been so inuiolably kept, that a soldier
has been better to have been credited by that oath, the^ some merchants now by
their obligations.

But here if any will conjecture, that in time past soldiers have so exceeded
in virtues, that at the time present they have none at all left for them to
boast on: although in England our multitude be not many, yet amongst those few
there be both honorable and worshipful, whose magnanimity in the time of
wars has made them famous in foreign countries, and whose noblenes and
virtues now in the time of peace, do shine coequal with the best.

But here peradventure some curiouse cauiller will reply that these may better
be called sage and wise counsailers, the^ bloody or cruel captains, and rather
may be termed sober and discrete Justices, then rash and harebrayned
soldiers: and thus by denying of them to be soldiers, will think I am never
the nearer my proof: But here if there were no other shift, or that the matter
were so needful to be reasoned on: it were very easy to prove, that the best
and noblest soldiers be ever found to be the wisest and meetest counsaylers:
Soldiers most meet to have rule.
and for this cause the Poets have feigned* Minerua to be armed, signifying
that Captains and soldiers should be as wise in counsailing, as courageous in
conquering: as politic in keeping, as valiant in getting.

And Tullie in his first book of Offices speaks of a double commodity that
these men do yield to their country, Tull. de offi. li. 1.
who armed, do make wars: and roabed, do govern the common wealth.

But leaving these, Small choice of soldiers in England.
we have in England but one only place to make any choice on, which is the
garrison lying in Barwicke: where I doubt not but he that does know ye
government of the captains, and the orderly living of the Soldiers, The
noble captains and soldiers of Barwicke.
will confess them to be as virtuous in their living, as valiant in their
acts: as modest in their manners, as hardy in their courage: as mylde in the
town, as manly in the fyelde: as faithful to their friends, as furious to
their foes: to be short, amongst them liars are contemned, swearers are
reproved, deflowrers are punished, brawlers are banished, drunkardes are not
regarded, all manner of vices are corrected: that of my conscience, the old
soldiers of Barwicke may be a spectacle for orderly living to any other, what
kind of trade so ever he would seem to profess.

Some become soldiers rather to spoil then to do any service.
What though there be some that in the time of service will intrude them selves,
and become soldiers, of purpose rather to spoil, rob and filtch, then to
do any good service, shall the honest Soldier therefore be condemned? so
every profession, how necessary so ever it seem, would be misliked, and men
of every faculty would be despised.

Of merchants.
As first for example, the marchantes, whose trade, as Pliny says, was
invented for the necessity of man's life, transporting from one region to
another, that which lacks in the one and abounds in the other: yet there be
many that under this cloak and good pretense, continually do practice, to
transporte out of their own native countries, such commodities as may not well
be spared: whereby many times great scarcity and dearth does happen, wherein
the people are piteously oppressed.

No worse thieves then merchants.
In England once a year we find the extremity, either for want of corn,
lether, hydes, tallowe, butter, cheese, bacon, beef, biere, and many other
such like, which by her Majesty are prohibited: but no restrainte may serve
against those thieves, unnatural robbers and spoylers of their own country.

And yet these are commonly the greatest find faults that will inuaye against
Soldiers, whose spoils are much more tolerable, because they spoil but
their enemies: these rob and spoil their friends, What trafique is used by
many merchants.
and make wrack of their own countries, by conueying away their commodities,
and by returning of incommodities, vain tryfles which are not necessary for
our humane life, but only to maynteyne women and children in pride, pomp, and
vain glory: such things as do procure delights, wantonness and delicacie:
the very vanities and vices of every Nation by these men are brought home. And
then what perjury, what fraud, what deceyte, by them selves, their brokers,
and retaylers is used to utter them, my wits be to weak, nor I think there
is no other that is able to express, unless it be a merchant him self that
has used the trade.

Furthermore, under this trade and traffic they have conference with strange
Princes, and utter unto them the secrets of countries, lend them money, and
in the end will not stick to betray their own country, and common wealth.

There is an other kind of merchants, Very hard to know one from another.
that deck their shoppes with other men's goods, borowing here of one, and
there of another: and when they have gotten into their hand some great mass
or valewe, then they become bankeroutes, and live in a corner with other men's
goods.

Thus you may see, that although this trade or traffic of merchandise is very
beneficial to every estate and common wealth, and that there have been many
wise and notable men that have used it, as Thalust, Solon, Hippocrates, and
others, yet it is by other some abused: but shall we therefore condemn the
trade, or other good and honest marchantes that use it? not so: for the
exercise of it may not be forborne, and the honest trading merchant is to be
had in reverence and estimation.

Of lawyers.
In like manner amongst the lawyers, are there not found many that creep into
the Innes of court, that seek by law to overthrow law, such as be termed by
the name of peti foggers, Pety foggers.
brethelles, that practice nothing but to breed dissensions, strifes, suites,
quarrels and debates between neighbor and neighbor, brother and brother, yea,
sometimes between the father and the son?

Mark the order of these fellows.
First they animate them to co^mence actions, persuading them that their
quarelles be just, and will very well stand with law: but when they have once
gotten them in, then they feed them with delays, procrastinating their suites
from day to day, from term to term, yea from year to year: in the end, when
the matter is like to fall out against them, the^ they blame their clients, yt
in the beginning they did not thoroughly instruct them.

Lawyers the authors of civil dissensions.
These be the people that of all other are most to be detested: for in the time
of peace, these procure continual wars and civil dissensions, not amongst
enemies, but amongst friends, not amongst foreign foes, but amongst their
natural country men, rejoicing when any brawle or brabble do fall out amongst
their neighbors.

Lawyers would be the authors of peace.
And yet they would be accounted the authors of peace, and will not let to
exclaim against the soldier, and condemn him, because they do think him to
be like unto themselves, that is, to be desirous of wars and troubles.

There is no Parliament or co^uocation that is called, but if there be any good
motion had in question, for the quietness or quick dispatche of matters in
controversy, but ye lawyers be the only lettes, Lawiers the lettes of many
good ordinances.
that it shall not come forth: because that if it were not for delays and
shifts, the one half, nay not a quarter of them might be able to thrive by
their occupatio^, there are such a shameful company.

Yea many times there are found great corruptions even amongst ye Judges them
selves: yt for fear to offend a prince or some noble man, will not stick with
Pilat, to condemn Christ. Sometime with Gold and Silver or other gifts,
they be so corrupted, The virtue of Gold.
that they regard more the presents that are given them, then either justice
or equity: they are diligent in rich men's causes, but the poor they defer:
the complaint of the widow or fatherless, can not be heard amongst them.

But shall we therefore reprove the law, which is the only prop and stay to
every common wealth, without the which we could not live in any good order,
otherwise then as brute beasts, neither could those that be good and
harmless, enjoy either goods or possessions from cruel Tyrants and
oppressors? neither were any one man assured of his life or living, were there
not law to punish murderers, and to maintain right: or shall the abuses of
some, condemn all honest and true dealing Lawyers, who in their profession of
al men are worthy to be honored? as there is no reason in the one, so they be
to much to blame, No reason that some should condemn all.
that for the lewdnes of some lossels, that do but usurp the names of
soldiers, will therefore so absolutely condemn all soldiers: thinking there
can none be good, because some are ill.

But what profession may there be, The manners of our clergy.
wherein wicked men will not seek to cloak and cover them selves: be there
not that enter even into the ministry of the holy sacraments, proud
prelates, blind guides, and lazy lubbers: some that during the space of
twenty years, have received the fruits of benefices, that have not three
times visited their flock: but commits them to Sir John lack latin and his
fellow, poor ignorant chaplines: such, as they may hire best cheap: while
they them selves live in pleasure, pomp, and pride: not like Saint Peter nor
Saint John, that had not one penie to give to the poor lame man, that sat
begging at the Temple gate: and yet they would be called their successors. Ezec
34. Mi^h^. 3. Esai. ^6.
These be they of whom the Prophet Ezechiel so exclameth, saying they serve for
nothing, but to serve them selves, and in steed of feeding their flock, they
take the fleece, draw the milk, kill the fattest, eat the flesh, break the
bones, they are dumb dogs, that know nothing, they dare not bark, but are
very curious to have horskeepers for their palfries, faulconers for their
hawks, cooks for their paunches, but the poor sheep perish through their
default. I know likewise that there be a number of learned Pastors, godly
Ministers, diligent Preachers, and faithful followers: they which God defend
should bear the abuses of the others. Then if the holy temple of God, can not
be cleansed from such Ministers of mischiefs: they be something too nice, that
would have soldiers to be all Saints, and much more to blame that would make
them all diuelles, because some do amiss. And here with all I must think
them to be very parciall, that with such blunt terms will entitle soldiers
in the time of war: and in the time of peace, can so cleanly cloak the very
same actors, with names and titles of credit and estimation. For in the time
of wars, he that is found to be bloudily minded, killing without compassion
all that lights in his wrath, they term him by the name of a Tyrant and a
murderer, where in the time of peace, they sometime shadow him under the title
of my Lord Judge, but many times by the name of Master Justice of peace and
Quoru^. In the time of war who^ they term a seditious mutiner, a peruerter of
good laws, a mainteiner of ungodly quarells: in the time of peace they call
him Master Sargeant of the quoyfe, a wise cou^seller in the law, or an honest
diligent Atturnie. In the time of war, whom they term a thief, a robber,
and spoyler: in the time of peace they call him an honest trading merchaunt. In
the time of war whom they call a violatour of women, a rauisher, and
deflowrer: in the time of peace they call him a friendly and loving gentleman:
yea and some foolish soother that will speak they know not what, will say he is
a right Courtier, and a courtlike gentleman. In the time of war, he yt can
tell a fyled tale, and that can creep into men's bosoms to serve his own
turn, they call him a Parasite, a flatterer, and a dissembler: in the time of
peace they call him an excellent learned man, and a very good Preacher.

Such parcialitie (I say) is amongst them, that no faults are espied, but
such as be committed amongst soldiers: neither do I here go about to excuse
al soldiers, as though there were none ill: but those that be, are commonly
found in these new levied bands, and not amongst old soldiers as
hereafter I will show.

But here peradventure, some will think that although many of them may be
excused from a number of vices, wherewith they have been charged: yet that they
of force must be all murderers, may not be denied: for they go into the
feelde as well weaponed to kill, as armed (...) defend* This objection I have
many timeshard, but those people are in too scrupulous an opinion, considering
how many examples we may find in the holy Bible: where God has not been
offended, with those that have killed their enemies: but that it is sometimes
lawful in the presence of God to shake off the yoke of bondage by the death of
Tyrants, as Judith by Holofernes, and many other like. But as justice without
temperance is reputed injury: so magnanimity without mercy is accounted
Tyranny: and as it cannot be counted a noble victory which brings not with
it some clemency, Mercy not always to be used.
so to use pity out of time and season is as great folly: as to use mercy in
any conflict till victory be atteined.

Policy sometime excludes pity.
And sometime policy excludes pity, as the Greeks who after the destruction
of Troy, flewe Astianax the son of Hector, to the end that there might
remain no occasion of quarrel, fearing if he had lived he would have sought
some revenge.

But leaving all other foreign histories, I will come but to this one example
which is most familiar among us for the proof of the premises, which is
this: That the greatest cause of those endless wars, that are holden in
Ireland, To much pity the cause of so much disquietnesse in Ireland. The
very mean to bring Ireland to be quiet.
do only proceed of the mercy and lenity that is used amongst them: and
that the only means to bring the people soonest to conformity, and the
country to quietness, is without compassion to punish the offenders, and
without either grace or mercy to execute the rebels, and such as be
malefactors.

And seeing my occasion falls out so fitly to speak of Ireland, I crave
pardon here a little to digress from my matter, and to speak something of the
manner of the country: considering it was my fortune to be there, when I first
took in hand to write this simple devise, and so continued til I had fully
finished it: ye which time I confess was very short for me to understand the
very true and perfect estate of the country: which in every condition,
Ireland is in most miserable condition.
is so confused, so overthwart, and disordered: that I think there is none so
uncharitable, which will not lament to hear it.

The causes are too many, and do far surpass my capacity to bewray them,
yet as near as I can I will glaunce at some part of them: and although I know
my cunning will not serve to hit the very prick, yet he may well be passed for
an archer, that can shoot fair and something about his mark: the which I may
so much the better do, considering there be such a many that do stand and
give aim: some with open exclamations, cry out how they be spoiled, robbed,
reued, and burned, by the rebels.

But this is that which most of all does make me to muse, that almost every
man will seem as though he knew a remedy, and yet there is no reformation
can be had, amongst them: Well (say some) these rebels could not continue, were
it not that they had other helps then them selves: They have mainteiners, and
ayders, neither can they be without receivers, but if those that be borderers
would do their best upon them: they could not hold out.

But there is amongst them, Forbear me, and I will not see thee: Hurt not me,
and I will not hinder thee. The orders of Ireland.


And many be driven in deed perforce, to aid them, and currie favor with
them, for fear of being spoiled.

And although there be diverse laws, and sundry good ordinances, to punish
such as shall be found guilty in the premises: yet they are so cleanly
conveyed and so cuningly handled, that the Lord Deputy shall never
understand it. But if there happen any to be accused, and brought forth to
answer the law: then there is such cloaking, such covering, such shifting,
such bowlstering, and such bribing: that it was not he that did it: some
chief horse, some fine ambling hackney, or some half score or a hundred cowes
will salve all the sore.

But here perchance you would know amongst who^ this is used: nay I must not
tell you that, so I might get my self such enemies, as I might not tarry in
Ireland.

In like manner it has been often seen, that when a rascal (a rebel I would
term him) has done many spoils, and committed many outrages, yet in the end
has been received upon composition, and many times have their pardons begged,
by some that be about the Lord Deputy: and many times they have friends in
England to purchase them pardons, and to send them over: and this is the very
cause that gives them boldness to do ill, so that there is no assured trust
to be found in the greatest number of them: but when they may see time and
occasion, The very occasion that makes Ireland so troublesome.
to do a shrewd turn, then they get them a company of breechles beggars
(folowers they call them) and when they have played their parts to the
uttermost, they assure them selves that a hundred of stolen cowes will buy a
pardone: where otherwise if all hope were cut from them, and that no pardons
might be granted unto them, and that such as should be found favorers unto
them, might without favor feel the force of the law, without any exceptions
from the best to the worst, and that every one like duetiful subjects would put
to their helping hand, to the suppressing of them, there is no question, but
Irelande would soon wax civil, and the country would quickly grow to be
quiet.

Idleness the greatest enemy to a common wealth
In like manner, forasmuch as it is evidently known, that idleness amongst
all people has ever been accounted most hateful, and that in every well
governed Commonwealth it is found to be a vice most hurtful: the which to
prevent ye Romans used very straight means: insomuch that none durst go in
the streates, but he must bear a show whereby or how he lived, in
consideration whereof, the Consul did bear a battle axe, the Tribunes a mace,
the Priests a hatt, the Cutlers a sword, the Tailors a pair of sheres, the
Smithes a hammar, and thus every one according to his exercise, to the end it
might appear he lived by his own labor, and not by the sweat of others, as
commonly these followers do in Ireland. For remedy whereof, it were very fit
and most convenient, that such straight laws and sharp ordinances were
provided, that not one that should be found, might be suffered to escape or
in any wise to pass, til ye manner of his life were thoroughly examined, and the
order of his living very well known.

Some would think me here to be too seueare to be made a Justice of peace, and
would say unto me that the country that were conquered by force, ought rather
to be governed with more clemency and mildness: for that the inhabitants,
with the better will would prepare their hearts to obedience: but that
experience has been tried long enough, and this is most certain, that who so
ever will think to prevail in Ireland, The best way to govern Ireland
it must be by using of justice with extremity, and not with lenity. And what
pity is to be used to those, that so without pity will not spare to oppress
the poor and simple farmer, such as labors duly for his living? How
lamentable is the case of those that be honest, and such as would gladly
endeavor them selves to live orderly, which can not so much as enjoy a poor
flock bed to lie upon, but must content them selves with homelier beds then a
bundle of sweet straw: and in steed of other cates, do only live by
grass, herbs, and roots: and then to see what labor, what toil, and what
pain they endure, but to get some small portion of money, wherewith to buy a
loaf of bread, of the which neither he, his wife, nor his children, shall
never eat so much as one crumbe: but must serve to content those idle roges,
where the poor man him self, if he be able to keep a cow for his better
relief, lets her blood in a vein in her neck, the which blood being
boiled in a clod, serves his turn in stead of the finest manchet.

A miserable case.
Thus (I say) those that would be honest, be still kept under in most
miserable manner, contented to yield them selves to any manner of thraldom, so
they might be defended from these helhoundes, as may better appear by a
Proverb that they use, which is: Defend me, and spend me. But the multitude
of these Idelers are such, that it cannot be. These be the people, through
whom the greatest part of the disorder does spring, there cannot be therefore
too great punishments to correct them, nor too much cruelty used to rid
them: and even like as bitter and sharp punishments should be rewards for
those that be evil: so for those that be good, there ought likewise to be some
encouragements, whereby they might still continue in their goodness: and a mean
whereby to incite other to do the like. But this amongst other matters, is
especially to be lamented: that in all the country there is not erected some
University, wherein they might be trained up in good letters, whereby they
might learn to serve God aright: who I think amongst the greatest number of
them, is neither known nor feared: and yet they will seem to have a zeal to
religion, for there be amongst them, A sound religion.
that during the time of Lent, will refrain from eating of eggs, butter, and
cheese: and yet will make no conscience, if it were upon good friday, to go
steal an hundred cowes to their breakefast.

As I have heard, it has been in question, and profers have been made to the
erecting of a University: but howsoever it happens, it is deferred: but this
is most certain, they be neither friends, nor well willers to the country,
that will stand against it.

For if it were well considered, what a benefit it would be to the country,
if there were a place, where gentlemen might bring up their children in
learning, where now they bring them up in lewdness, in filching and stealing:
where they might be brought up in knowledge of good arts and sciences, in
manners and civility, where now they remain in ignorance, and be only
trained but in brutish beastliness.

Neither is it much to be meruelled at, for besides that there is no place in
the country, where they might attain to knowledge and learning: no more there
is any one mean whereby they might almost know vice from virtue: for they
are likewise beereued of one of the greatest benefits, that gives light and
understanding, which is by reading of histories: considering that there is
nothing which may be either pleasant, profitable, or necessary for man: but
is written in books, The light that reading of histories do bring
wherein are reported, the manners, conditions, gouernementes, counsels, and
affairs of every country: the gestes acts, behavior, and manner of living
of every people: the forms of sundry Common wealths, with their
augmentations, and decays, and the occasions thereof: the precepts,
exhortations, counsels, and good persuasions comprehended in quick sentences:
to conclude, in books and histories are actually expressed, the beauty of
virtue, and the lothsomnes of vice. Wherefore Lactantius says thou must needs
perish, if thou know not what is to thy self profitable, that thou may
seek for it: and what is dangerous, that thou may fly and eschew it. Which
knowledge and light comes chiefly unto us by reading of histories: but how
should they come by this profit or commodity in Ireland: where they have no
manner of books, neither yet the use of printing: so that for them there is no
mean either to learn civility or good order: but by the example of us that be
English, whom naturally they do hate: A proverb used in England.
and we have a Proverb in England which is this: Love me and love my dog, so
contrary, it may be said, Hate me and hate all that comes from me: the which
questionless is proved true amongst the greatest number of them: but
especially in the wild parts, The nature of the wild parts
where in the stead of liking, they fall to lothing any thing that comes from
the English: where they had rather continue in their own beastly and brutishe
manners, then reform themselves to any conformity either in their manners
either in their conditions. And in their fashions of their apparel they be as
confused as in the rest: the men go more beastly and savage like then the
people of America, where the people in most places has ever seen any
civility: the women attired after such a manner as in Europe there are none
that does come near their fashion: but has greatest similitude to the manner
of the Egyptian women. Although this seem but a small fault to be picked out
of a number of others: yet it were very good that this fault were reformed.
And seeing we go about to amend them in their manners and to bring them to
civility, it could not be amiss likewise that they were brought into such
apparel, as to the view of the world they might seem to have some mean of
modesty: for as a man may be partly coniectured by his apparel, and may well
be deemed what exercise he does profess (as the clergy by their apparel are
known from the laytie, ye lawyer from the merchaunt, and so of others: and
amongst all men and in all places and countries it is holde^ convenient, that
so it should be:) Even so questionless the manner of apparel is of no small
effect to feed men's minds either with grace or disgrace: as for example. A
proud man clothed in sumptuous or costly array, it makes him the more proud
and hautie in his mind: or a whore that is bedect in light and garish apparel,
it makes her in her mind to be the more whorishe. And like as a fool is not
in his right kind without a yellowe coat, so fond or indecent apparel, may
sometimes confuse the wisest heads. As to see a learned preacher go into a
pulpit pretending to make some solemn sermon, appareled like some lusty
courtier, it would not only breed laughter to his audience, but it would
likewise so amase him in his own conceipte, that it would be a great let to
the tale that he meant to tell. And like as Semiramis, when she governed the
Assyrians, took on her ye habit of a man, the better to show her manly
courage: and as Sardanapalus disguised himself into womanes attire, the more
lively to express his effeminate mind: so I am of this opinion that these
Irish do the rather desire this rogish manner of apparel, because it is most
suitable and best agreing to their conditions: neither were it amiss if by
co^pulsion they were restrained from it as much as conveniently it might be.

I do here over pass many other abuses, neither will I speak of an infinite
number of privy practices, that are sometimes used in the Superlatiue degree,
you may choose how you will construe it, either to some of those that are of
noble parentage in the country, and gentlemen that be of the greatest
credit, and would be accounted the best Subjects: either else to the number
of their slye devises which in deed does exceed in the highest degree, but
some times rather then fail, you may construe it both for the one and the
other, so expert they be in devising of treachery, and in the mainteining and
relieuing of rebels, and that by so many means and such sundry shifts, as
it passes my conceit, neither will I take upon me to discipher. But these
matters cannot be proved, and therefore may the easilier pass: but I cannot
see almost how it is possible, that any thing should be proved that should
make against them, for there are very few amongst them that will make any
conscience to forswear them selves upon a book: but if Ananias, with Saphira
his wife, received both death, Acts. 5.
but for denying of that portion which was their own, what punishment could be
sufficient for these people, that will so ordinarily deny GOD, and that almost
for every trifle?

And here, (I know,) I shall offend the patience of a great number, for that
they find me still in one manner of song, and would exact nothing but
punishementes, and sharp corrections upon them: but I trust I shall not
offend those that be good and honest, considering that my pen does not in
any respect touch them. And I know there are in the country many honorable
houses, as the houses of Ormunde and Kyldare, the Lord of Doluin, the Lord of
Vprosore, the Lord of Louthe, with many other (though not expressed by name)
both honorable and worshipful, and others of inferior calling, that may not
any ways be detected with any thing that I have written. So I know likewise,
that there be a great number, of such as I have spoken of, that are not to be
reformed, but by most bitter and sharp punishments in deed: for the better
trial, how long time have they been governed by sundry noble Princes, but
now lastly, and especially, by a most gracious Queen, who of her great
mercy and clemency, spends not only such revenues as rise by the country
it self: but also adds no small portion out of her own pursse, only to
keep the country in quietness if it might be: which otherwise would be at
strife and wars in it self, the one killing and murdering the other, as it
daily falls out notwithstanding: and with no less care, she provides for
them good and wholesome laws and ordinances, where of them selves they would
rather live like beasts, void of law and all good order: where otherwise, if
her majesty pretended to rule by rigor over them, who knows not that she
could send such a power over into Irelande, as in very short space, would
make quick riddaunce of all that ragged rowt, which now so vexes and
molesteth the country: but she rather seeks with mercy to reclaim them, and
with lenity to reform the^, sending them over from time to time, such
governors to direct them, as are neither found to be rigorous, cruel, nor
merciless. But how much is the country bound to her Majesty at this
present, in sending that noble gentleman, Sir Henry Sidney, to be their
governor, the only man that they themselves have so much desired, and so
long time wished for: whose only carke and care, has been to seek the
countries Common wealth, and the quietness of the people. And with what
humanity and gentleness, has he still continued his government: what pity
and mercy has he from time to time extended to those that little deserve it:
considering with what treason, with what treachery, with what fraud, and with
what deceit, they requite him? There is no hope of their promise, no hold of
their word, no credit in their oath, nor no truth in their dealings toward
him.

Therefore, to conclude as I began at the first, there needs no longer
circumstaunce, nor better trial to prove, that courtesy in the Irishe
government, is not the readiest way to win: but only by severe justice
without mercy, to him that shall offend: for this hope of forgiveness is the
only marring of all together.

Thus far I have spoken partly by report, and as it were by vox populi: but
if vox populi be vox Dei, as some will affirm, it is not only the Irishe
alone, that altogether confuseth the government, but sometimes there is
falsehood in fellowship played amongst the English: but let him that is guilty
accuse him self: I speak but by report. And seeing I am entered into reports,
I will not let to make report how a great many do report, that some of those
that be sent over, to be ayders and assistaunts to the government, and such
as should help to boult out such matters, have greater care to seek their
own gain, and to make them selves rich: yea, and so they may be rewarded
with a bribe, will rather seek to help cover and cloak such causes, then to
give their consentes to punish them: such is the effect of this filthy vice
covetousness, The effect of covetousness.
that when it once inrageth the minds of men, it draws from them all fear,
religion, love, reverence, and knowledge of GOD: it peruerteth justice and true
dealing toward men: and he that thirsts only for gain, of force must
run into actions of injuries and oppressions.

And now to show what reports runs amongst the ministers of the laws,
whereof some be English, and some be Irishe.

The Irishe (they say) favor no English men's causes, but foades them off
with further delays then may well stand with law or reason. The English yet
be found to be most indifferent, for they respect no countries, but favor his
cause that has most money to bribe them: such parcialitie there is used
amongst them, and so far they be estraunged from piety and justice, that
the miserable poor oppressed people, do hold it less evil to suffer their
injuries, then to plead their suites, before such as have greater regard to
the brybes that are given them, then either to the equity or innocence of
their causes.

Thus, I have not thought it good, with secret silence to dissemble and smother
inwardly in my mind, what I have heard: considering, that men ought rather to
esteem the words of him that tells the truth with simplicity, then ye
smooth speeches of him that speaks all to currie favor, and yet in deed
say nothing that is worthy of commendation.

And thus, wishing to Irelande as good success, as he that was borne in the
country, I return to my first purpose to speak again of Soldiers: neither
shall I need spend any longer time, in that I pretended to prove: that to
become Soldiers, or warfaring men, is no profession for those that be honest:
considering that there is already sufficiently said, The Soldiers of England
in most miserable estate.
to those that be reasonable. Wherefore now I will direct my tale to the poor
Soldiers of England, whose number as it is very small, so their case is
likewise most miserable, if it be well considered.

First in the time of wars, they spare not in their countries behalf, to
forsake their wife, children, father, mother, brother, sister, to leave their
friends, and only betake them against their enemies: To what extremities
soldiers do commit them selves in the time of war.
contented to yield them selves to continual watch, ward, fasting, hunger,
thirst, cold, heat, travail, toil, over hills, woods, deserts, wading through
rivers, where many sometimes lose their lives by the way, lying in the feeld,
in rain, wind, frost and snow, aduenturing against ye enemy, the lack of
lims, the loss of life, making their bodies a fence and bulwark, against the
shot of the cannon.

But the wars being once finished, and that there is no need of them, how
be they rewarded, how be they cherished, what accounte is there made of them,
what other thing gain they then slander, misreporte, false impositions,
hatred and despite?

A cold ward.
How small is the number, that be in England of sufficient men, such I mean as
be able in deed, in the time of service, to stand their country in stead, to
any purpose, and yet how many of this small number, has ever been brought to
credit, or been any thing preferred, for the service they have done? There be
some that have served twenty or thirty years as occasions have hapened, and
in the wars have spent part of their blood, and received many grievous
wounds, but their estate of living, I would to God were known to those that
might amend it.

There is that small garrison of Barwicke, which for the value of their minds,
and the nobleness of their courage, I know may well compare with the best:
but for their other riches, I have seen a hundred Spaniardes or a hundred
French men as they have been marching toward service, that only but in their
apparel and furniture, have been more welthy then all ye soldiers of Barwicke
were able to make, if all their riches were brought together: and yet if there
were any occasion to use any number of men from thence must the conducters and
leaders be brought, The number of able soldiers to small in England.
that should be found able and sufficient when it came to the pinche. Some
others there be, whereof many be dispersed here and there, for want of other
stay of living, but sure the number is so small, as I fear me it would be
found, if any soudaine assault should be offered unto us.

God preserve her majesty therefore, long to govern and reign over us,
through whose providence and foresight, we have been so long time preserved in
peace and quietness.

And O England, would to God so many presidents of others mishapes, might
make thee take heed, and call thy self to remembrance, consider thy enemies
be not so secret, but they be as malicious: and have staide all this while
neither for want of quarrel, neither for want of will, if they them selves were
once at quiet: nor flatter not thy self because thou have inioyed a peaceable
time, that it shall still endure: but remember the longer it has been calm,
the sooner the storm is looked for, and the greater the rage when it falls.

If thou do well look into thy self, and ponder thy own case, thou shall
find that if any soudaine alarm should happen, thou shall find that thy
greatest want shall be only of those men that now thou hold in so small
estimation, and do esteem of so little account.

If thou think thy great numbers of untrained men, are sufficient to defend
thee, do but remember what happened to Antwerpe, where they wanted neither
men, nor any other provision for the wars. But they wanted soldiers to direct
them, and men of understanding to encourage them: For the want of knowledge,
breeds the want of courage: as Solomon says: A wise man is ever strong:
Prou. 24.
yea, a man of understanding increases with strength: for with wisdom must
war be taken in hand, and where there are many that can give counsel, there
is the victory, etc.

And Xerxes who with a great army, was put to the worst, but with 300.
Lacedaemonians, confessed that he forced not so much for the multitude, as for
their knowledge and experience. I could here rehearse many other examples of
like effect, but I leave the^ til other occasion, and will conclude with what
care and provision sundry noble Princes have provided for their soldiers, not
only in the time of war when they have had need of them: but as well in ye time
of peace for their service already done, that they should not want: according
to the mind of Alexander Seuerus, who says that, The soldier is worthy his
keeping in the time of peace, that has honestly served his country in the
time of war, although for age he cannot travel, his counsel yet may not be
spared. And Jesus the son of Sirach says, Eccle. 27.
There be two things that grieve my heart, and in the third is a displeasure
come upon me, when an expert man of war suffers scarceness and poverty,
when men of understanding and wisdom are not set by, and when one departes
from righteousness to sin, etc.

Octauian Augustus honored soldiers with this law: What so ever thou be that
shall serve with us in wars x. years space, so that thou shall be xl. years
old, whether thou have served on foot or on horseback, hereafter be thou
free from wars, be thou Heroes, an old soldier: let no man forbid thee the
city, the street, the temple, nor his house: let no man lay any blame to thy
charge, put any burden upon thee, or ask thee any money: if thou shall offend
in any thing, look to be chastised by Caesar and by no man else. In all
dishonestie that men shall commit, I will that thou be the Judge, and
discloser, whether they be private or officers: that which thou shall say and
affirm for truth, no man shall reprove for false. I will that all ways and
places be open for thee, thou shall have authority to eat and drink at
Princes tables: thou shall yearly have wages of the common treasury to find
thee and thy household: let her be preferred before other women, whom thou
shalt take to be thy lawefull wife: and he that thou shall call infamous, let
him be wicked and infamous: thou being Heroes, shall have authority to bear
arms, badges, names, and ornaments, which be decent for a King: do what thou
list in every place and country where thou come, if any do thee wrong let
his head be cut off, etc.

Charles the great, when he had translated the name of the Empire to the
Germans, after the Saxons and Lombards were vanquished, gave this honor to his
soldiers saying: You shall be called Heroes, the companions of Kings, and
Judges of offenses: live ye hereafter void of labor, counsel Kings in the
public authority, reprove dishonest things, favor women, help Orphans,
let not Princes lack, your counsel, and ask of them meat, drink, and money,
if any shall deny it, let him be vnrenowmed and infamous: if any do you
injury, let him know he has offended the Emperors majesty: but ye shall
forsee, that ye distaine not so great an honor, and so great a privilege,
gotten by the great labor of war, with drunkenness, railing, or any other
vice: to the end, that that which we have given you for glory, redounde not
to punishment, which we will for ever reserve to be given you by us and our
successors, Emperors of Rome, as often as you shall transgress.

And Polycrates of Samos, appointed living for the wives and children of the
dead soldiers, straightly commanding, that no man should offend them, or do
them any wrong.

Solon made this law, that those children whose fathers had spent their lives
in fighting in the defense of the common wealth, should be brought up at the
charges of the common treasure.

But what do I stand reciting of strange histories, forepassed so many years
since? Why do I not remember, the French men and Spaniards, amongst whom at
this instant, men of service be not a little honored, and had in estimation?
And go to the dronken contries of Denmark and Swethen, and those other parts
of the East, and how be soldiers cherrished, and men of service provided for?

The manner of England in the ^^me of need
But in England, when there is occasion to use them, then, Help noble
captains, Now show your selves courageous, and worthy soldiers: but service
once being ended, they be quite forgotten, that ever there was any need of
them, for any thing they are like to get. And yet I must impute it but to their
own misfortuns, and not for any want of liberality: Every one has his time.
for who knows not, how many fees, pensions, stipends, and many other
offices, are daily to be given in England, but very few fall to the shares of
these unthrifty soldiers: but such do many times get them, as can thrive
by them, and play the good husbands: Soldiers the gretest unthrifts that live
in these seasons, there are very few of them that are able to give his fellow
a dinner.
such as can build sumptuous houses, purchase fair liuinges, run in the
Queens debte, till they come in the thousands, and then the price of a velvet
gown, or some odd hundred pounds, bestowed upon some ye Queens women, will
stall the debt. The Queen will be content to take it by a hundred or two
hundred pounds a year, this is the way to thrive, these be the fellows that
do gain. But how ungrateful may that country be called, Soldiers of all
others had in least estimation.
where those that must fight in the defense, and offer them selves to the
slaughter in their countries quarrel, do only receive for recompense, but
hateful words, slanderous reports, and are no better accounted of, then as
the abiects, and holden inferiors to every other people?

Here might be many other things said in the behalf of soldiers, the which I
omit, and leaving them to the benefit of better fortune, will come to speak
of the abuse of the time.

The third part speaking of the time.
I Know there be some will condemn me (as I have said) to write any thing of
war, in this so peaceable a time, the causes I have showed be partly before:
for there be many unto whom the name of war is so odious, that with a good
will they would never hear them spoken of: and will conjecture that I rather
allow of war then peace, that will so busy my self to write any thing of
them, now while there is no need.

But those that be wise can very well consider, that there is no man ought more
rather to desire peace, Which are soldiers.
then such as by war may soonest catch harm.

I speak this in mine own excuse, considering that I have served her
Majesty, as occasion has happened, and am still in a readiness to serve,
when need shall require.

And as I know it is but the part of a fool at the sea, to wish for a storm,
when the wether is calm: so I know likewise in the time of calm, to provide
for a storm, is the point of a wise mariner: for who so well considers, to
what disposition Kings and Princes be commonly inclined unto* in these latter
days, which is to have greater felicity, with Tyranny to offend others,
then with justice and equity to keep their own: it ought therefore with
great diligence to be provided for, that like as in the time of war,
circumspect care of peace may not be omitted: so in the time of peace, such
things may be foreseen, apperteining to the war, that the want of warlike
provisions, be not prejudicial to the maintenance of this sweet and quiet
peace.

And the very occasion that urges me to write, is to wish that in England we
were expert warriors, though not war lovers: and that we had many that were
wise, rather then willing soldiers. But where peace is so inordinatly desired,
that in ye preferring thereof they forgett all Martial exercises, which is the
very preserver, The custody of peace consists in the knowledge of war.

Careless people nerest their own harm.


and mainteiner of peace, (according to the mind of Valerius Maximus, who says
That the custody of blessed peace consists in the knowledge of war.) It
can not be chosen therefore, but those people be ever nearest their own harm,
that will so carelessly spend the time of peace, as though they should never
more have occasion to enter into war.

Pleasure brings pain.
And generally it is seen, where pleasure is preferred so excessiuely, and the
people follow it so inordinately, that they lie and wallowe in it so
carelessly, they commonly end with it most miserably.

For how many Cities, how many Countries, which sometime most of all
flourished, only by reason of their far stretched Empire, glory and renown,
purchased by famous and noble acts: are now beaten flatt to the ground,
covered with moulde, and almost out of remembrance?

Where are now become the dominions of the Assyrians and Persians? What is
become of the glory of the rich City of Athens: which had been so often
forewarned by ye excellent Orator Demosthenes? Or where is now the pomp and
power of the Macedonians? Or what has wasted the fame and renown of the city
of Rome, that it had not been perpetual?

What other thing then this inordinate delicacie, Idleness and delicacie the
decay of many common wealths.
riot, and ydlenes. For when they over neglected the feats of war, laid aside
their weapons, sought more for their own private advancement, then for the
liberties of their country: then came their kingdoms to calamity, and
began headlong to fall to the ground: and then in the stead of frugalitie
sproung up outrageous riot: in stead of hardiness and courage in the wars,
exceeding tenderness, and niceness, both of body and mind: and thus when the
knowledge of souldier-fare was extinguished, then insatiable desire of riches
made entry amongst them, and nothing so much practiced, as to have experience
in buying and selling: that in the end, the Imperial crown was bought and
soulde for money amongst them: and the Roman Empire which so mightily had
flourished, was now made subject to common thraldom.

But for that there are some, that are nothing moved with reading of histories,
monuments, or the examples of ancient writers, unless they have known the
like in their age, or seen with their eyes, or as it were touched with their
finger, I will therefore put such in remembrance, of ye state and condition, of
Holland, Zeland, Flanders Brabant, and other parts of the low countries: How
many years continued they in peace and quietness, in drunkenness, in
lechery, in riot, in excess, in gluttony, in wantonness, (I will not say in
the like predicament that we now remain in England) the which to continue,
they were contented to submit them selves, to any manner of thraldom, and to
every kind of slavery, to receive the Spaniards into their cities and towns,
which were naturaly seated so strong, yt no foreign prince could forcably have
made entry into them.

How the Spaniards governed them, with what rigor they ruled them, and how
tyrannously they reigned over them, is so well known as I will not spend the
time to relate: in the end, to disburden them selves from that which before
they had yealded unto, (...) the steed (...) stolen they shut the stable door.
by necessity they were enforced to go to Mars his schole, and to practice
the art of war, which had ever been most loathsome unto them, not without
great ruin and wrack, of many noble cities and towns, and with no less
spoil and havoc, of infinite goods and riches.

For like as the desire to have dominion over many kingdoms, and to have
souereigntie over far stretched Empires, is a common infirmity amongst kings
and princes: Where the style is low every dog will over.
so there is nothing may sooner provoke them to give attempt, then where they
see such forgetfulness amongst the people: that slouthe and idleness bears
the whole sway among them: As Plutarch, in his Apophthegmaes, makes report of
a famous captain, to whom a certain reader of the Atheniens made his
complaint, that the men of arms in his camp, reproched them of Athens, to
whom the captain made answer, that as the thing that is well kept, is hardly
lost, and that nothing prouokes the thief sooner then negligence: So, if the
Atheniens, had tied care and circumspection to their words and deeds, they
had never fallen into the hands of the Lacedaemonians.

And Cambyses the father of Cyrus king of Persia, being asked by what means
Cities might best be kept in safety, answered, if they that kept the same
cities, Mistrustfulnesse a very good remedy.
do think they can never be wary enough of their enemies: the which in the
Massilians was charily performed, who kept both ward and watch in their
cities in the time of peace, as if they had been continually vexed and
troubled with war, and to that purpose, instituted sundry good ordinances,
upon the holy days to see their soldiers standing upon the walls, and
exercising them selves in the feats of arms. And that notable Captain
Epaminondas, while the citizens of Thebes gave them selves to feasting,
banqueting and belly cheer, ran hastily to arm him self, and marched
toward the city walls, to the end the rest might b^ the safelyer drunk, and
as well to signify, that the safety of their City should at no time be
forgotten.

And although king Solomon, who in the holy Scriptures is called Rex
pacificus, and was promised by the mouth of God a peaceable reign, and was
still busied, and turmoyled with the buylding of the holy temple: yet
notwithstanding, he was not forgetful to furnishe his garrisons, with
innumerable men of war, horses and charriots. To be short, there is, neither
has been any well governed Common wealth, but the laws of Arms be as
carefully provided for, as any other city causes: but where delicacie once
prevails, and gets the upper hand, there adewe Martial minds: and
farewell magnanimity, where slothfulness has once made entry: for the
nobleness that is to be looked for in a Princely and hautie courage, though it
be cheefely wrought by the force of the mind: so the body must be exercised,
and brought in such plight, as it may be made able to follow pain and travel.

Were not the old soldiers of Hanibal, in lying but one winter in Capua,
spe^ding the time in wantonness amongst the delicate dames, so effeminated and
infeebled, both in body and mind, that they never did any thing afterward,
that was worthy of report?

And Xerxes being offended with the Babylonians, because they traitorously had
shronke from him, when he had again brought them under: he forbad them to
bear any more weapons, and further commanded them, that they should singe to
the Lute, and other instruments, learn to keep harlotes, and haunte
tauernes: which policy he of purpose prepared, to weaken their courages,
whereby he might the better keep them under awe.

The knowledge of war therefore and the exercise of arms are especially to
be sought, neither can I tell whether any thing be more noble, by the which so
great dominions and noble Empires, have been purchased, kingdoms enlarged,
princes preserved, justice maintained, good laws protected, and the Common
wealth defended.

Great is the glory in the knowledge of war therefore: neither has the city
of Athens, achieved so great renoume and glory, although it merited to be
called the mother of all arts and sciences, as Rome has done, only by
magnanimity, and force of Martial might: which brought such reputation to
their Commonwealth, that far and strange regions, sought their aliaunce and
friendship, and thought them selves assured against their enemies, if they had
confederation with them, yt in the end, they grew to such admiration, that for
their lenity and surmounting courtesy, they were of all men beloved, and for
their valiante magnanimity, they were of all men feared. Neither was this
magnificence, vpholde^ by doing wrong and injury, for they never attempted
wars but for things in claim, or in defense of league friends. Then as
Cicero says? The Senate might rather have been termed, the protection, haven,
Tull. officiis. Lib. i.
and refuge of kings, people, and nations, more truly then the Empire of the
world. Neither were they found rash to enter into wars hedily, although they
had occasion, as did appear at ye city of Sagunto, where ye people of
Carthage brake ye league, and defied peace: yet the Senate sent thither
Ambassador Fabius Maximus, with two tables, the one containing peace, the other
wars, putting the election to their own choice, as it liked them selves to
choose, although the Romans them selves, could best defend their cause. But did
the Romans gain this glory by enuring themselves, to live in delicat
idleness, in dicing, in carding, in dansing, in whoring, in banqueting, in
reueling, and in roysting: no, but ordained most sharp and bitter punishments
to expel them, and with disgrace to dant those, that were the practisers, and
followers of them.

Where contrarily, to provoke and prick forward Martial minds, and manly
wightes, to the study of chivalry and Martial affairs, they ordained
glorious triumphs, liberal rewards, and honorable titles: which was the very
cause, that the city grew to be so great, and large in Empire: for where
valiaunce, and prowess, was so honorably rewarded, not only noble men, but
also inferior persons, were so inflamed with desire of renown, that no
danger was left vndelte withal, nor no peril left unproven, where there was
glory to be gained, or ye safety of their contrie might be preserved.

The two Decii, by race and birth were no gentlemen borne, yet by their
valiaunce and fortitude, they aspired to the highest type of dignity in their
Commonwealth, and in their countries defense, consecrated themselves, as
valiant and vowed vessels, to glory and immortality.

Neither was Lucius Martius, borne but of a mean parentage, yet for his
puissaunce showed in Spain, he received of his country, great honor and
principality.

By these means, the liberties of their countries were most strongly defended,
and the indifferency of their laws were chiefly maintained, where well doing
is so liberally rewarded.

For what greater dishonor may there be in a Common wealth, then where worthy
acts and high attempts receive but cold reward? Or what reward may that
country think too much to bestow on him that has not spared his own life
to fight in the defense?

There be sundry examples in the holy scripture, tending to the same effect:
for when the children of Israel, were pursued by Pharaoh, and that they began
to stagger in the promises of God: the Tribe of Judah, did manifestly show
forth, far greater courage and valiance, then the rest, who lingered not nor
drew back, but with a marvelous constancy, by the example of Moses
adventured first the sea, by whose stout stomaches, the rest were encouraged to
follow: For which fact, the people of Judah, were ever afterward, more
honored then the rest, and such had the principality amongst the twelve
tribes, as were descended of this tribe of Judah.

Cronicles. 2. Cap 8.
In like manner Solomon, made the Hethites, the Amorites, the Pheresites, the
Heuites, and the Iebusites, to become tributaries, and to labor in the
buildinges: but of the children of Israel, he made men of war, capteines,
great Lords, and rulers,

And Socrates in a certain fable uses these words: All you that live in one
city, are brethren, being straightly linked and united together: but when God
created you, he gave not every one a like property, for they that were most
mete to rule, he tempered with gold: and those that in defense of their
country would valiantly assist kings and princes, he mingled them with silver:
and to such as should apply themselves to tillage, and other mean
occupations, he bestowed brass and iron: now it falls out generally, that
they engender children like to them selves: but sometimes it happens, a
golden father to have a child of silver: some other time, a silver father, to
have a golden son. He wills therefore, that they should take in no one
thing, more special regard, then diligently to search, with what metal
their childrens minds be tempered with, so that if there be found any brass
or iron in their childrens senses, they should assign them, such a trade
convenient, and agreeing with their gross and rude nature: but if they find
in them any gold, or silver, they should bestow on them honorable rooms,
and that they should be trained up, in the knowledge of Martial affairs.

The Romans, ordained for that purpose, a long and spacious field, which they
called, Campus Martius, wherein the youth of the city, were exercised in
Martial feats, and to enure their bodies, both for their own health, and
also that they might be made, the more profitable members for their Common
wealth in the time of wars.

The Lacedaemonians used their children to go barefooted, exercising them in
running, in leaping, and in casting ye darte, in which exercises, they were
continually practiced: from whence Diogenes, on a time returning, and going to
Athens, was asked from whence he came, and whither he would: I come (said he)
from amongst men, and am going among women.

I wonder if Diogenes were now living, and going into England, whither he
would say he were going, if he were demanded: where we be wholly nouseled in
wantonness, and only nourished in deintinesse, both in mind, manners, and
diet: where we be altogether made strangers to Martial actions, and utterly
alienated from laws, and deeds of arms, where no consideration is had of
Martial minds: where provision for defense is never called in question.

Here peradventure, some will say unto me, Good sir, if you would but put on
your spectacles, and look into the Tower of London, you might see that neither
ordinance, shot, poulder, pike, caliuer, armor, nor any other furnitures
convenient for the wars were any whit lacking: from thence, if it pleased you
but to sail down in Grauesend Barge, you have but five miles to Rochester,
where you might likewise take ye view of so worthy a fleet of royal ships,
as no Prince in Europe may make comparison with the like. Call you not these
provisions of defense, where no munitions fit for the wars, are any whitt
wanting?

Very true in deed, which does argue the special care her Majesty has ever
had, not only in making of such provision, but also at sundry times, she
has likewise instituted diverse good ordinances for the trayning of men, the
which has been still discontinued, by her subjects, such as will pyne at the
spending of one pound of poulder toward the practicing of those that should
fight for their safety.

Wherefore I need use no other answer, then king Philip used to that noble
Captain Antipater, which was this.

What fear thou man, any Captain of Athens? Their Galleys and their Peer
are but trifles and toys unto me: For what account is to be made of those
fellows that give themselves to daunsing, hoyting, banqueting, and to belly
cheer, that if Demosthenes only were not amongst them, I would sooner get
Athens then Thebes, or Thessalia, etc. So, to what effect serve all these
warrelike furnitures, where there are not men experienced to use them: and
where men be trained only in pleasure, how unapt be they to endure the
perplexities of war: and how hardly are they fashioned to the use of
weapons, that never have had any exercise in them: and with what difficulty
are they prepared to the field, when they have never been accustomed to march?

But I have heard many say, that soldiers may well be trained in one month,
and made fit for the wars: and in deed I am of this opinion, that he that in
one month will not learn the use of his weapon, whereto he shall be sorted,
and to learn to march in order of array, being thoroughly instructed by a
diligent and painful Captain, I am fully resolved, that that man will never
make good soldier. But as our Soldiers in England are acustomably levied, a
Captain shall have much to do, to make a great part of them for ever being
Soldiers at all.

But admit, that Soldiers may be trained and made ready in one month, yet
during that space, our enemies would committ greater spoils upon us, then we
should be able to recover again in six weeks after.

Moreover in the day of service, I had rather have one thousand such as have
already seen and entered skirmishe with the enemy, then four thousand of
such hasty mad Soldiers, that are but trained up, as it were at a Midsummer
sight, or at the fetching home of a Maypole. For proof hereof, I could show
many examples, but it were but in vain, considering there is no man of reason,
but will conceive it to be true: and such as have experience will confess I am
nothing deceived in my opinion.

And to say the truth, if in England we should have need to use any
reasonable number, there would hardly be found conductors, such as be
sufficient in deed for the training of them.

For Gentlemen that are descended of honorable families, in these days, give
themselves rather to become Battalus knights, Battalus an effeminate man.
then Martial wights, and have greater desire to be practiced in Carpet trade,
then in that kind of virtue, which extends it self to the common profit,
and preservation of the country.

And I cannot but marvel, what moves so many men, to make such great account
of their gentilitie, that they think themselves worthy of such honor and
estimation: and yet have no regard to the renown or preeminence, that is
annexed unto it: for as Cicero says: Tull. officiis. Lib. i.
Truly, the best inheritance that fathers leave to their children, and more
worthy then all liuelod, is the glory of virtue, and worthy deeds,
whereunto to be a stain, it is to be accounted both vice and shame.

But what reputation bring they to their houses, that licentiously, in riot,
rometh to and fro, not knowing in what fashion to disguise them selves, what
countenance they should bear in the streates, nor with what curiosity they
should give intertainment, furnished with three or four French, Italian, or
Spanishe words, thinking that the whole glory consisted in being newfangled
in their apparel, strange in their conceiptes, and as dainty in their
dietes, as dame Folly her self, when she is going of her first child. To
be short, in England, A good exchang
Gentlemen have robbed our women of their minds, and our women have beereued
us of half our apparel.

Where Gentlemen ought rather to endeavor themselves to such exercises of
virtuous acts, whereby they might give such clear light, and purchase true
fame to their posterity, according as their predecessors have left unto them,
of which they them selves do so mightily boast of: and especially, to give them
selves to such exercises, wherein labor prepares the body to hardiness,
and the mind to couragiousnesse, neither suffering the one to be marred with
tenderness, nor the other to be hurt with idleness.

As we read of Sardanapalus, who was scorned as an effeminate King, who chose
rather to sit and spinne amongst women, then to learn to weld weapons: against
whom, when Belochas and Arbases made insurrection, he fled and durst not show
him self in the field.

Xenophon makes mention how Hercules being but a young man, musing whereunto
he might apply his noble mind, there appeared unto him two goodly young
women, the one very gorgious and brave, with ringes on her fingers, a chain
about her neck, her hair set and frizeled, with pearls and diamonds in her
ears: the other sober in her cheer, comely in her apparel, modest in her
behavior, shamefast in her countenance. The first said: Hercules, if thou will serve me, thou shall have gold and silver enough, thou shall feed
deintily, thou shall live Princely, thou shall enjoy pleasures, embrace
delights, possess mirth. In fine, thou shall have all things to thine own
contentation, that apperteine to ease, rest, and quietness. Then spoke the
other with demure countenance: If thou will serve me Hercules, thou shall be
a Victor of Conquerours, thou shall subdue kingdoms, and overthrow kings:
thou shall be advanced unto fame, renowned in the world, and shall deserve
praise both of man and woman. Hercules perceiving the idle service of the
first, and the fame and renown that was to be gained by the second, chose her
for his maistris: and I think sent the other into England, where at this
present she is dutifully served. The cause why gentlemen do not desire to be
soldiers.
But I think the very occasion why many do not endeavor themselves to
practice to be soldiers now in England, is because they see those few that be
there already to thrive so ilfauouredly by their occupation, yt they rather
seek to endeavor themselves, where there is either pleasure or profit to be
gained, which is not in souldierfare, and therefore makes them to become either
Courtiers, Lawyers, or Lovers. The Court, I confess is a place requisite for
gentlemen to know, so their minds might not be seduced with the vanities
thereof, whereby they should be enticed, not to follow other exercises,
tending more to their honor and estimation: and forsake those places, where
greater glory is to be gained then any does ordinarily atteine unto, that
consumes their days wholly in the court: for he yt fully frames him self to
become a courtier, must likewise fraught his head so full of courting toys,
that there will be no room left, to consider of matters aperteining more to
his credit. The manner of our young courtiers.
For the most in number of our young courtly gentlemen think that ye gretest
grace of courting consists in proud and hautie countenaunces to such as
know them not, to be very fair spoken, bountiful and liberal in wor^ to
all men, But nothing in deeds.
to be curious in cauilling, propou^ding captious questions, thereby to show a
singularity of their wisdoms: for the helping whereof, they diligently
study books for the purpose, as Cornelius Agrippa, de vanitate scientiarum,
and other like: to seem to talk of far and strange countries, of the
manners of the people, of the fertility of soyles, and by ye way of
communication, able to dispute of all things, but in deed to know nothing, to
apply their pleasant wits to scoffing, quipping, gybing, and taunting, whereby
they may be accounted merry conceipted gentlemen, and with all, they must
learn to play the parasites, or else I can tell them, they will never learn
to thrive. And in their apparel, they must be very nyce and neat, with their
ruffes finely set, a great bundle of feathers thrust into a cappe, which must
likewise be of such a bigness, that it shall be able to hold more wit then
three of them have in their heads. They must be rash in their judgments,
curious in their conceiptes, they must be bold, saucie, and mallapert, which
they them selves term to be good audacitie. They must be ready to epsy every
man's faults, but not to see their own folly. But what should I stand to
decypher the vanities of our courtiers, which are already so painted forth in
their colors, and that by so many men, as I do but waste the time in vain
about them. I do likewise acknowledge, that the law is especially to be
practiced by gentlemen. Of Lawyers.
For as the law it self is most honorable amongst men: so those that should
be practisers, professors, and ministers of the laws, ought likewise to be of
credit and estimation.

But our Innes of court in these days are so furnished with shomakers sons,
taylers sons, Inholders sons, farmers sons, and almost there is not so
mean a man, but his son must go to the Innes of court, and they when they
have gotten a little law, because they will not mend shoes, and do as their
fathers have done before them, there is no ho in their getting, no measure in
their taking, no mean in their bribing, nor no reason in their extorting.

These be they, that by law will pervert law, and what one law does make,
they will bring another law shall mar. These be they that laughe, when other
men mourn, and that make them selves rich, by other men's follies: and these
be the only men that bring Law and Lawyers into such exclamations.

Of Lovers.
But of all other people that do most surmount in vanities, are those that in
such contagious passions, consume their time in love, that as Marcus Aurelius
does affirm, he that does once fall in love with another, does even then begin
to hate him self.

It has many times been had in question, from whence the fury of this malady
should spring, but the greatest part do conclude, that the original thereof
does proceed of idleness.

Love, where it once takes hold, it tormenteth the patients with such
strange and bitter passions, that it reduces reason into rage, The effect of
Love.
pleasure into pain, quietness into carefulnes, mirth into madness, neither
makes it any exceptions of persons, either old or young, rich or poor, weak
or strong, foolish or discreet, that as Peter Bouaystuan, a notable French
author does write, that if all the lovers that are in the world, were made in
one whole army, Cupides band.
there is neither Emperor, nor Monarche, but would be amazed to see such a
company of Bedlem fools in a cluster.

But he that should take the view of their countenaunces, gests, manners,
furies and al their frantike toys, might confess that he never saw a more
strange Metamorphosis, or a spectacle more ridiculous to laugh at. If at any
time they have received a merry countenance of their beloved, good God how gay
shall you see them in their apparel, how cheerful in their countenance,
how pleasant in their conceiptes, how merry in their moodes: then they bathe
in brooks of bliss, they swim in seas of joy, they flow in floudes of
felicity, they houer all in happiness, they fly in sweet delights, they
banish all annoy.

Contrarily, if they receive a lowering look, then you shall see them drowned
in dumpes, they plead with pitious plaintes, they cry with continual
clamours, they forge, they fain, they flatter, they lie, they forswere,
otherwhiles falling into desperate moodes, that they spare not to blaspheme the
gods, to curse the heavens, to blame the planetes, to rail on the destinies,
to cry out upon the furies, to forge hell, to counterfeite Sisiphus, to play
Tantalus, to feign Titius, to groan with Prometheus, to burn the winter, to
freese the summer, to loathe the night, to hate the day, with a thousand other
such superstitious follies, too long for me to rehearse.

Now, if he be learned, and that he be able to write a verse, then his pen
must plie to paint his maistresse praise, she must then be a Pallas for her
wit, a Diana for her chastity, a Venus for her face, then she shall be
praised by proportion, first her hairs are wires of gold, her cheeks are
made of Lillies and red Roses, her brows be arches, her eyes Saphires at the
least, her looks lighteninges, her mouth Coral, her teeth Pearls, her pappes
Alabaster balls, her body straight, her belly soft, from thence downwarde to
her knees I think is made of Sugar Candy, her arms, her hands, her fingers,
her legs, her feet, and all the rest of her body, shall be so perfect, and
so pure, that of my conscience the worst part they will leave in her, shall be
her soul.

But what need I heap up so many words in this matter? My pen has not ye
power to paint their doting devises: neither do I mind otherwise then to wish,
ye gentlemen should set aside all such trifling affairs, and vain follies,
and to shake off those delightful desires, and rather to endeavor them selves,
to such exercises, which have gained Hercules, Achilles, Theseus, Caius Marius,
Epaminondas, The best exercises for gentlemen to follow.
Themistocles, Alexander, Pyrrhus, Hanibal, Scipio, Pompeie, Caesar, with
diverse others, such immortal glory, as neither the envious rage of cruel
death may blemishe, neither the furious force of fortunes fickle wheel may
diminish, neither the tracts of devouring time shall ever be able to remove from
memory. And I would to God, that while time does yet serve us in England,
that such care might be had for the training and practicing of men, that we
should not be found altogether so careless, that to satisfy all our
voluptuous pleasures, A special cause to be considered on, if it be not too
late.
we never consider the preservation of our country and Common wealth. So
likewise, if it be not altogether too late, as I fear me it is, I would wish
that an other thing were looked unto, and that very narrowly, wherein we have
made such a rod for our own tails, as there is no question, but in the end it
must of force endure to be our own scourge: and this it is. We had in
England, so great a benefit, as it might have been used, as no other
country inuironing about us, is possessed with ye like, which is the casting
of iron ordinance: but as the proverb is, that every commodity brings his
discommoditie, so this commodity, brings us double disco^moditie. First in
the casting, it consumes us our woods and timber, in such sort, that one of
the first things that England shall want, will be of timber for ships, which is
all made havoc on, only about those iron mills, in the end comes M. merchant,
who cares not for his own private gain, what mischief he works to his
country: or sometimes some old bruised soldier, that has served the Queen in
her wars, about London, Lambeth Marshes, or the out Isles of Islington, all the
days of his life, and in respect of his good service, must get a commission,
to sell two or three hundred pieces of this iron ordinance out of the realm,
that between M. merchant and him, I dare undertake, there is thrice as much
ordinance sold out of the Realm, as is within the Realm, and that some of
our merchaunts have fealt. For John the French man, has been at host with
some of their ships, and Dauie dronkarde of Flushing, and his fellows have not
been behind, and these with other mo, were not able to go so strongly to ye
sea, were it not that they were furnished with our English ordinance. The
Spaniards and Portingales, have some pretty store of it. In France there is
Rochel, Rosco, S. Mallous, and Deep, their ships be generally as well
furnished with our ordinance as any merchaunts ships in the Thames. The mighty
hound of Dunkerke, and the rest of the begels that were of her consort, God
knows, had been able to have made but a slender cry, when they had come to
chase, had it not bin for our English barks. The other parts of Flanders,
Zeland, and Holland, both upon the walls of their towns, and also in their
shipping, are furnished with the like. I have seen every streate in Flushing,
lie as full of English ordinance, as if it had been the Tower Wharfe of
London. To be short, there are diverse towns in East Freesland, with Emden,
Hambrougbe, Denmark, Danske, Lubeck, Rye, Revel, Swethen, with diverse other
cities, and towns, of those East parts, that she is but a very mean and
simple Hulke, aperteining to any of these places, which has less then a dozen
or sixteen pieces, of our English ordinance in her.

Such has been the carelesnes of this our peaceable time, that it has not
only made us weak, by our own neglecting the feats of arms, but also with
our own artillery, and our warlike munitions, we have made such strong, as
be our doubtful friends, nay rather, I may say our assured enemies, as I
fear me we shall find, if they were at quietness amongst themselves.

And thus once again I can but wish, that such consideration might be had of
the time that is present, as in the time that is to come, we should not have
cause to rue it.

And here although I know my skill will not serve me, nor my occasion at this
time may well permit me, to speak of Martial discipline, how far it is
decayed from the first ordinance, and institution, yet gentle reader, not
doubting but thou will bear with me, as well for the want of the one, as for
the necessity of the other, I will adventure to speak some thing thereof.

The fourth part containing the decay of Martial discipline.
I Have already showed in the first part of this book, how upon sundry
quarells, wars may be attempted without any offense to the majesty of God.

In those wars therefore thus taken in hand, and upon such sufficient cause,
it should seem likewise as requisite and necessary that as great regard
should be used in the appointing of laws, disciplines, and orders, the which
not only among them selves, but also to their utter enemies ought inuiolably to
be kept according to the justice and equity of the cause: for the which they
be entered into arms.

We do find in the holy scriptures, and that in several places, both in the
books of Moses, in the book of Joshua, and others, where they have used no
little regard as well in the choosing of their capteines, leaders, and
conductors, as also in their prescribing laws, and disciplines of war, which
were many times appointed by the almighty God himself.

But let us peruse the examples of ye Romans, which of all other people did
most exceed, as well for the greatness of their glory, as in all their other
Martial actions, and we shall find, that they had not only consideration to
the equity of their cause, for the which they would enter into wars (as by
these words of Tullie, in his first book of Offices may better appear: And
the justice of war, is most sincerely described in the Phesiall law of the
people of Rome, whereby it may be perceived, that no war is just, but which
either for things in claim is moved, or else proclaimed before, and bidden by
defiance etc.) But also they had as great regard, to maintain their quarelles,
with like equity and justice, The Romans allowed of no war which was
unfaithful, either that was maintained by unlawful means.
not suffering their capteines to enter into actions of treason or treachery,
where their wars were altogether arreared upon causes of honesty, as by many
examples they did plainly show.

When king Pyrrhus, unprovoked had moved wars against the Romans, one
Timochares whose son was yeoman for the mouth to the king, promised to
Fabricius, then being Consul, to slay king Pyrrhus, which thing being reported
to the Senate, they presently warned king Pyrrhus, to beware of such manner of
treasons, saying, the Romans maintained their wars with arms, and not by
treason or treachery.

Likewise, when Lucius Pius, in a banquet that he made, had filled the people
of Sarmatia full of wine, and made them so drunk, that they yielded themselves
subject to Rome, for which exploit, Lucius Pius at his return required
triumph, but when the Senators understanding the manner of his fact, caused
him openly to be beheaded, and a slanderous epitaph set upon his grave.
Neither would they suffer that soldier, which amongst other being taken by
Hanibal, and licenced upon his oath to depart, conditionally that he should
either make return, or else send his ransom, the soldier with others of
his companions, being departed the camp of Hanibal, feigned an arrand back
again, for something that he had forgotten, and thus coming to Rome, did
think him self discharged of his oath: but the Senate alowing of no such
deceit to be used, made a decree, that the same soldier, should be carried
pinioned to Hanibal. And ten other, that in like manner, were dismissed by
Hanibal, upon their oath: were sessed at a yearly fine, as long as any of them
did live, for being for sworn. So nobly were the Romans disposed, and so
honorably minded, that no act was allowed of amongst them, seemed it never so
profitable, wherein was found either fraud or deceit. And this magnificence,
gate the^ condign co^mendations of their very enemies, and between whom
there had been mortal hostility, and many times was of greater effect to
subdue the^, then huge or mighty armies. And as they did excel in the
excellency of these virtues, justice and equity, to such as were able to
stand in arms against them: so likewise they did surmount in humanity and
courtesy, and in ministering of comfort, to such as they had already
vanquished and subdued, as by no example may be better expressed, then by a
letter written, by Marcus Aurelius Emperor of Rome, to Popilio, captein of the
Parthies, a notable discourse for capteines to peruse, and follows in this
manner. I can not deny the glory I have gained by this battle, neither may I
hide the perplexity I feel for thy present misfortune: for noble minds are
bound to show no less compassion, to such as are subdued, then to express joy
and gladness with those that are victors. Thou being the chief of the
Parthies, did show great courage to resist, and in me the leader of the
Romans, was found no want of force to fight: notwithstanding, though thou lost
the battle, and I remain possessed of the victory, yet as I know, that thou will not acknowledge this chance to happen for any want of stomache in thee, so
it belongs to my gravity not to attribute it altogether to the greatness of my
virtue, since God does always minister victories, not to such as do their
duties best, but to those that he loves most: for the effect of al things
depending upon God, man can have no power to command the destiny of a
battle, seeing he is not able to stay the course of the least planet in heaven.
Darius against Alexander, Pompeius against Caesar, Hanibal against Scipio, had
above all equality, far greater armies then their enemies, by which thou have
reason to conclude with me, that against the anger of the sovereign God, can
not prevail most huge and mighty hoastes. I meruell Popilio, that being great
in birth, valiant of stomach, welthy in goods and mighty in estate and
dignity, why thou bear with such sorrow, the loss of this batel, seeing that
in no worldly things fortune is more uncertain and variable, then in the
action of war. It is told me, thou drawest to solitary corners, and seek
out shaded places, thou eschewest the conversation of men, and complainest of
the gods, which extreme perplexities, since thou were not wont to suffer in
others much less ought thou to give place in thy self: for that the
valiant man, loses no reputation, for that fortune fails him, but is the
less esteemed of, if he want discretion to bear her mutabilitie.

To assemble great armies, is the office of Princes, to levy huge treasures,
belongs to sovereign Magistrates, to strike the enemy is the part of a
courageous captain: but to suffer infirmities and to dissemble mishaps, is a
property duly annexed to noble and resolute minds: so that one of the
greatest virtues that worldly men can express, in the common behavior of this
life, is neither to rise proud by prosperity, nor to fall into despair by
adversity. For Fortune having a free will, to come and go when she list: the
wise man ought not to be sorry to lose her, nor rejoice to hold her. Such as
in their misery show heavy countenance, do well prove, that they made
account to be always in prosperity, which is a great folly to think, and no
less simplicity to hope for: Seeing the gifts and graces of Fortune have no
better thing more certain in them, then to be for the most part, in all
things most uncertain, according to the success of the day, wherein thou
gave me battle: for there thou orderedst thy camp according to a wise
captain, made choice of the place, in great policy, tookest advantage of
the sun, as a leader of long experience, in consideration of which things,
thou have cause to complain against thy fortune, which favored not thy
virtue, and not blame thy discretion, wherein could be found no error.

Consider that in wise and grave men, it is an office, that if they cannot do
what they will, at the least they yield to time, and are content with what they
may. And as the virtuous and valiant mind, ought not to grieve for not
obteining that which he would, but because he desired that which he ought not:
so Popilio, I wish thee take heed, that the honor which so many times thou
have wonn, with the hazard of thy valiant person, in enterprises of war, be
not lost at this present, for want of bearing well thy fortune: assuring thee,
that he bears his misery best, that hides it most. And as of all voluble
things, there is nothing more light then renown: so in cases of war and
hazard, it is not enough for the valiant man to do what he may, but also he is
bound to attempt nothing but what he ought: for as well the consideration as the
execution of a fact, belonges duly to a discreet mind.

I hear thou wanderest here and there in great uncertainty of mind, fearing
that if thou be taken of my soldiers thou shall be evil entreated of me,
which if no man have told thee, it is against reason thou believe it of thy
self, because to us Princes of Rome, it is familiar to show our liberality
to such as yield to us, and with others that are our prisoners to communicate in
great clemency. We raise armies against camps proudly furnished, and Cities
strongly walled, but to captives in thy condition, we hold it more honorable
to minister comfort then to add increase of affliction. For as it suffices the
valiant Captain to fight against the enemy that resists him, and dissemble
with him that flies: so the wise man ought to require no more of his enemy,
then that he acknowledge that he stands in fear of him, because to a daunted
and timorous heart, is sildome left courage to renew an enterprise. And
therefore a man takes greater revenge, when he puts his enemy to flight,
then if he take his life from him. For the sword dispatcheth a man in a day,
but fear and remorse torments the mind continually. And better it were to
suffer without fear that which we expect in grief and sorrow, then by fear
to be always in martyrdom. It is right terrible to flesh and blood to dye of
a sword, but to be in perpetual sorrow and disquiet of mind, is the very
fury and torment of hell.

If thou eschewest my presence, in fear that I will not use pity to thee,
thou art abused in the opinion of my disposition, and do wrong to the
reputation and experience of my actions past. For I never refused to show
mercy to him that asked it, and much less deceived him that put his trust in
me. The doubt and fear that thus do travel thy mind, ought not to be so much
of my person, as of the custom of fortune, who uses not to unloose her sharp
arrows with better will against any then such, as think they be in best
security of her: her nature being such, as not to meddle with those that she
finds prepared, the better to assure them, but follows the fearful and
negligent, to the end to deceive them: yea, she preuailes even over the
counsels and actions of men, and being exempt to make reckoning to any, her
prerogative is to require account of all men. I assure thee Popilio, that more
do I fear the revolution of Fortune at this hour, then I doubted her before
the battle. For she delights not so much to keep under the vanquished, as
to bridle and check the victors. And worsse does she mean, when she smiles
the fairest, then when she frowns most. But to speak on thy behalf, I tell
thee that without danger thou may resort to my presence, since in thy estate
is no cause of suspicion, and in my heart no malice to thy person: for in
deed, that cannot be called true victory, which brings not with it some
clemency. And therefore he cannot be called victorious, in whom rests
intent of rigor and cruelty. For, Alexander, Julius Augustus, Titus, and
Traianus, won more renown by the clemency they used to their enemies, then
by all the victories they obtained in strange regions. To obtain a victory
is a thing natural and humane, but to give pardon and life, is the gift and
blessing of God. By which it comes to pass, that men fear not so much the
greatness of the immortal God, for the punishments he does, as for the mercy
he uses. Notwithstanding as I cannot deny, but that great is the value and
estimation, which we Roman Princes make of a victory won by battle: so
also I assure thee, we hold it more honorable, to pardon such as do offend
us, then to chastise those that do resist our power.

Therefore, if thou fly from my presence as fearing the justice which I have
executed upon the Romans, thou ought to take security and courage even in
that which makes thee gelous and doubtful: for so much greater ought to be
clemency, by how much the offender is in fault. And therefore as there is no
offense which cannot be either forgiven or favored, so right worthily may that
pardon be called honorable and famous, which is given to an injury malicious
and manifest, since all other common and light wrongs with greater reason we
may say we disse^ble them, then that we pardon the^.

The thing that most draws me to enter friendship with thee, is for that in
our first capitulations and truce, thou perfourmedst all things that were
concluded for the peace, and yet in the battle thou did express the parts
of a valiant Captain, the same giving me cause to believe, that as in war I
found thee a just enemy, so in the time of peace, thou would prove an
assured friend. Alexander never repented the pardon he gave to Diomedes the
tyrant, nor Marcus Antonius the favor he showed to the great Orator Cicero.
Neither shall I have cause (I hope) to forethink the respite I give to thy
life. For the noble mind, albeit he may have occasion to be sorry for the
unthankfulness of his friend: yet has he no license to repent him of his good
turns done for him: and therefore, in the case of liberality or clemency, by
how much the person is unworthy that receives the benefit, by so much more
he is to be commended that bestows it: for that only may be said is given,
when he that gives, gives without respect.

So that he that gives in hope of recompense, deserves not to be called
liberal, but to pretend usury.

Thou know well that in the time of the battle, and when the encounter was
most hot, I offered thee nothing worthy of reproach: even so, thou have now to
judge, that if in the fury of the war, thou foundest me faithful, and
merciful, I have now no reason, to exercise rigor, holding thee within the
precinct of my house: so that if thou saw mercy in me at that instant, when
thy hands were busy to spill my blood, think not that my clemency shall
fail, calling thee to the fellowship of my table.

The prisoners of thy camp, can assure thee of my dealing, amongst whom the
hurt are cured at my charges, and the dead are buried according to the place
of soldiers: wherein if I extend this care upon such as sought to spoil me,
think there is far greater plenty of grace, to thee that come to serve
me. And so leaving thee in the hands of thine own counsel, I wish thee
those felicities, which thy honorable heart desires.

Lo her a mirror, meet to be perused by kings and princes, wherein they may
learn, with what consideration they should first enter into wars, with what
valiaunce and courage they should prosequute them, and with what justice,
temperaunce, and mercy, they should use their enemies.

Capteines may likewise learn how to use fortune, either when she favors,
either when she frowns.

But leaving a great number of necessary lessons, worthy to be noted, how is
it posible in so few lines, more amply to describe ye glory of the Romans:
neither are their virtues here so lively painted forth in words, as they them
selves, did nobly show it in their deeds.

But all other examples of humanity, amongst a great number used to their
enemies, this in my opinion deserves not the least commendation, that having
taken Siphax king of Numantia, who being kept prisoner in the house of
Tiberias, died of sickness before he was ransomed, notwithstanding now when
there was no manner of hope of requital, his funeralles were yet performed,
with such solemnity, such pomp, and such honor, such large gifts were
given, and such liberality used, being but a Roman prisoner, as might have
wanted at Numantia, where he was Lord and King over all. I have thus far
briefly, and in this short manner, showed some small part of the magnificence
of the Romans, in their Martial actions, whereby may be perceived, how far
we be digressed, and how clean we be degenerate at this present, Princes more
desireous with tyranie to offend others, then with justice to keep their own.
from their honorable institutions. For if we consider in these days, the
impiety that is found amongst Princes, which for the most part are so led
by the fury of ambition, where they think they may oppress, that without any
other respect of cause they are ready to accompany themselves, with a sort of
bloody capteines, that should have the leading of a company of as lewd and
ungracious soldiers, and even according to their quarelles and to the quality
of their own dispositions, they prosecute their wars, and perform all their
enterprises, the which for the most part are executed with such treason, and
treachery, as no Prince almost may be so surely guarded, but his life shall be
finished with some deadly blow with a weapon, with some soudeine shot of a
pistol, or at the least practiced with some secret poison: neither is there
any town, that may be so surely walled, so strongly rampered, or so thoroughly
fortified, which shall not be betrayed.

The manner how to prosequute wars in these days.
For in our wars we be now come to this pass, that fraud and deceipte is
reputed for policy, and treason and treachery are called gravity and
wisdom, and he is holden the noblest champion, that by any of these means
can best deceive: where, in the opinion of all men, Deceit has ever been
holden most hateful.
which exactly do honor justice, it has ever ben condemned, and accounted
most horrible. And no doubts it cannot be acceptable in ye sight and judgment
of God, who in ye Scripture is called ye God of truth and verity: but rather
proceeds from the devil, who is (in deed) the father of fraud, and the
forger of all deceipte.

By whom treachery is chiefly practiced in wars.
And these enormities have ever been especially practiced amongst those yt
have arreared wars, rather to oppress and rauishe the goods of others, then
amongst such as have but defended their own right, or entered into wars
only upon causes of justice and equity, for that it has been ever holden a
matter most inconvenient, The best mean to incite men to valiaunce and courage.
of an honest quarrel, to make an dishonest victory. Neither is there any mean
more rather, to incite men to valiaunce and courage, then when they shall
remember, they go to fight in a righteous cause, according to the opinion of
Cicero. Therefore (says he) manliness is well defended of the Stoikes, where
they say it is a virtue, that fights in defense of equity: Wherefore no man
that has atteined the glory of manliness, has ever got praise, by wily
trains and craftines, for nothing may be honest, that is void of justice.

And proceeding further in the same place, he expresses a saying of Plato,
tending to the same effect, which is this.

That not only the knowledge which is severed from justice is rather to be
called subtlety, then wisdom, but also the courage which is forward to
danger, if it be set on for our own greediness, and not for a common profit,
may rather bear the name of lewd hardiness, then of manliness.

And for as much as my self about a three years since, did set forth a
book entitled (A dialogue between Mercury and an English Soldier) wherein
I have described, what mildness should be mixed with this manhood, with many
mo examples of humanity, and sundry other virtues, wherewith noble capteins
should be endued, I will therefore omit to use any further circumstance in
those causes, neither will I further speak of the decay of Martial discipline
in general, but of certain private abuses, that are used amongst our selves
in England, in our institutions in the time of war, Great abuse in England
both in choosing of capteines and in appointing of soldiers.
but especially in the election of our capteines, for the most part, and our
ordinary manner of appointing of soldiers, the which although I have
likewise in the same book before mentioned, something touched, yet in my
opinion, there cannot be too much said, considering the peril that might ensue
by so great a negligence, and so ordinarily committed.

To speak generally of our capteines, they are many times appointed more for
favor then for knowledge more for friendship then for experience, and more for
affection borne them by some noble man, then either for valiance or virtue: for
they are not to be accounted valiant, Not valiaunce but folishe hardiness.
that will offer them selves into danger without judgment: but rather to be
esteemed men puffed up with a vain desire, and pricked forwards with a kind of
desperate boldness.

Aristotle would in no wise that Diomedes, should be reputed either valiant
or wise: for that when the Greeks were put to flight, he remained alone, and
adventured him self against the force of Hector, which he rather did to seek
the vain praise, and brute of the people, because he would not be accounted a
runneaway, then in respect of the true and sovereign good, wherein consists
the end of virtue, and the glory immortal.

In like manner he judged of Hector, who many times beholding his wife, and
other women standing upon the walls of Troy, would more boldly and
courageously adventure his life, having greater care, least any rumors might
have been raised by women to his dishonor, then otherwise he would have done,
to have deserved the title of true honor and virtue.

But what would Aristotle judge, of a many of our gentlemen in England, that
will take upon them to be capteines and conductours, that God knows are
utterly ignorant, in the least duty that apperteineth to a simple soldier?
And how many times does it fall out, that where battelles be ordered, by such
rash and harebrained governors, that they ordinarily do bring forth but
unhappy issues?

What auailed the boldness of Varro, and Flaminius, two Roman capteines, which
despising the prowess and craft of Hanibal, and contemning the sober counsel
of Fabius, having only trust in their own hardines, lost two noble armies
whereby the power of the Romans, was near utterly perished?

What avails boldenes without experience.
They are therefore far from the true praise of valliaunce in deed, that will
so rashly run, to hazard the^ selves without any manner of knowledge. We be
of this opinion in England, (and else where,) that a man may not come to be
exactly perfected, in ye meanest occupation without seven years practice, and
therefore ordinarily, such as bind their children apprentices, bind them for
that space: Is it possible then that the art of war should be so soudeinly
learned, Never so perfect a soldier but has been to learn.
wherein yet there has not been any one found, though he have followed the
wars all the days of his life, which has not been in some things to seek?
Philip king of Macedonia, marvelled why ye Atheniens did every year choose new
Generalles and Capteines of their wars, since he in all his life had found
but one good, which was Parmenio. Plato would not wish, that any man should
have authority in wars, till he were 30. years old.

But Alexander admitted none to the room of a captain, that was under the age
of 60. finally by the general assent of all, there ought no small regard to
be used in the choosing of Capteines. What is requisie in a captain,
Cicero prescribes four things that ought to be in a Captain, but especially
in a governor or general, which is experience, valiaunce, authority, and
felicity, to the which if you add these four more, which is justice,
fortitude, policy, and temperance, first justice to revenge, fortitude to
execute reuengment, policy to prepare the mean whereby to revenge, and
temperaunce to limit and measure out how far they ought to revenge: capteines
thus endued with these virtues, there is no doubt but they shall greatly
prevail.

Our manner of appointing of soldiers, How soldiers be appointed in England.
is yet more confused then the rest, they be appointed in the country as it
pleases Master Constable: for if there be any within his circuit, that he is
in displeasure withal, he thinks it some part of revenge, if he sets him
forth to be a soldier, but if Master Constable be in love and charity with
his neighbors, then some odd fellow must be picked out that does least good
in the parish, it is no matter for his conditions, they think he can not be
too ill to make a soldier of. In London when they set forth soldiers, either
they scour their prisons of thieves, or their streates of roges and
vagabondes, for he that is bound to find a man, will seek such a one as were
better lost then found: but they care not, so they may have them good cheap,
what he is, nor from whence he comes, they put him in a suit of blew, and bring
him before master warden of their company, and then if he can shoot in a
gonne, he is bild a gonner, but he dares not let his soldier go out of his
sight with his furniture and his new apparel, before he has delivered him
over to his Captain, for if he should, he might fortune to miss him when he
would have him.

He that would further see the manner of our appointing of capteines and
soldiers, both how they be and how they ought to be appointed let him peruse a
book entitled, A dialogue between Mercury and an English soldier, which
book was of my own setting forth.
These be they through whose abuses, the name of a soldier is beecome so odious
to the common people: God grant us, that we be never driven to try the
service of such soldiers. But because in my other book before mentioned, I
have more effectually spoken of soldiers, and have given special note how
soldiers should be chosen, which makes me thus breefely to pass them over:
and in like manner I have done of capteines, there rests now, to show what
severity should be used, in punishing of such as be mutiners, or yt by any
manner of mean, will break or infringe ye laws and order of arms, or any
other institution or ordinance, directed by the general captain or any other
officer, for what shall it avail to make good orders, unless they should be
surely kept?

Nume. 1. Cap. 16. Mutiny in soldiers punished by God.
In the book of Numerie, we do find how Corath, Dathan, and Abiram, were
swallowed up in the earth, for mutining against the captain Moses, an evident
proof whereby may be perceived, how odious it is in the sight of God, that
soldiers should rebel against their capteines: They ought therefore to be
restrained with sharp and bitter punishments, and that as often as they shall
transgress, or make any offenses.

But I would not in any wise wish, that a soldier should be punished by the
purse, or that his pay should be diminished, whereby he should not be able to
maintain him self in service: other punishments therefore ought to be
provided, according to the quality of their offenses.

Manlius Torquatus caused his sons head to be stricken off, because he had
forsaken the place whereto he was appointed: although he went to fight with an
enemy that had challenged him, and slew him.

Salust does report, yt there were more soldiers put to death amongst the
Romans, for setting on their enemies before they had license, then for running
out of the field before they had fought.

And in very deed, in that respect there ought no little regard to be used: for
it is not requisite, that every private captain, or any other, should rashly
enter into attemptes, of their own heads, further then they be directed: for
otherwise, they commonly conclude with unhappy ends, and many times it does
fall out, that when there is some exploite to be used, through the wilfulnes of
some harebrained captain, or any other that is more forward then wise, that
will adventure for his own glory, further then his direction, it brings
overthrow of altogether. For example. When ye Spaniards lay in siege at
Zurickzeas, ye Prince of Orange, by good espiall, had understanding where to
annoy them, he sent certain ba^ds into S. Anna land, where they should have
fortified the^ selves, in ij. several places upon ye diches, which they might
well have don, considering ye nature and situation of ye place, by which means
the passage by land should have been quite cut off, that no victuals could
have come to the camp by land: and by sea it was as well guarded, with the
Princes ships. These companies coming thither by sea, landed, and did take
the places to the which they were directed, now when they should^ have fallen
to fortifying, and to have made them selves strong: the one of the companies,
persuaded by two or three Duche capteines, which were amongst them (as there
was in the company both English, French, Wallan, Scotishe, and Duche) would
needs go charge certain Spaniards, which did lie hard by them, in a
straight they had made: although there were some that foresawe what danger
might ensue, of this pretense, yet they would use no dissuasions, because it
would have been coniectured, that it had rather proceeded of want of courage,
then for any other thing. There was no delay in the matter, but the charge was
given with courage enough, but so much to their costs, as the Spaniards at
that charge, overthrew the greatest part of their best and principal men. I will
not say they were English men, because I have termed them the best and
principal men. I might be thought to speak parcially. But yet the matter
being so lately done, and so well known, I need not doubt to tell the
truth, they were English men in deed, that received the greatest overthrow:
for how could it otherwise fall out, they were the formest that were in the
fray: now the Spaniards perceiving what spoil they had given, followed the
chase of the rest, killing and spoiling of them as they retired, til they were
come to a slender strength, that was cast up, which the Spaniardes had entered,
had it not been valiauntly defended, by the rest of the English men that were
left, who in the end, as the Spaniardes did retire, courageously pursued them
again to their own strength. By this foolish attempt, this company was made
so weak and so feeble, that they were driven to forsake the ground, and to get
them again aborde of their ships, and the Spaniards sent presently thither a
fresh supply of men, by which means the Prince could never get the like
opportunity again. The other company kept the strength five or six days,
in the end gave it over, and came away: for that it was to small purpose,
considering the loss of the first. There were many like parts played in those
Holland services, where I think as little Martial discipline was used, as in
any wars that ever were attempted: Neither had it been possible that the
country could so long have holden out, but that it was by nature seated so
strong: for they might so drown the country about them, that it was not
possible that any enemy should conquer them. The Prince him self was very
wise and politic in all his directions, but many times they had but unhappy
success, by the rashness of some of his Capteines, which only did proceed
for want of experience. For many of them were chosen after the English manner,
I mean they had little knowledge, what them selves ought to do, and less
experience how to rule their soldiers. But leaving Holland causes, and to
return again to the examples of the Romans, who I say were very severe in
the punishing of those offenses, The Romans used to adioyne the authority of
God to their own prescriptions, the better to keep their soldiers in awe.
and the rather to keep their soldiers under awe and discipline, they
adjoined to their own laws and ordinances, the authority of God, and used
with great ceremonies to make them swear to keep the disciplines of war.
Cicero makes mention how Pompilius, when he was general of the Romans in
the Persian wars, had discharged one legion, in the which Catoes son had
served for a soldier, and notwithstanding that he was discharged, he remained
yet amongst the other soldiers, desirous to see the wars: which Cato
understanding, did write to Pompilius, that if he would suffer his son to
remain in the army, he should swear him soldier again, because it was not
otherwise lawful for his son to fight with the enemy, being discharged from
his former oath, it did likewise discharge him for being a soldier. The
Grecians used to swear their soldiers in this manner, being armed they were
brought to the church, The oath that the Grecians gave to their soldiers.
where they received this oath following. I will not do any thing unworthy the
sacred and holy wars, neither will I abandon or forsake my band and
Captain, to whom I am appointed. I will fight for the right of the Church,
and safety of the state. I will not make my country to be in worse case then
it is: but I will make it better then I found it. And I will ever frame my self
reverently to obey such orders as are decreed and adjudged: and to laws
established I will still yield my self: and obey those laws also, that the
state hereafter, shall by common assent, enacte or set forth: that if any one
man shall change the laws or not obey them, I will not suffer him to my power,
much less will I allow in so doing: But I will be a sure defender of right, as
well by my self alone, as when I am with others: And I will ever more honor
the religion of my country: No profession more honorable then a soldier.
to these my sayings, I call the gods to witness. If this oath were thoroughly
considered on among us in England, it might peradventure bring many to have a
better opinion of soldiers. For what profession may be more honorable, then
where a man shall be so solemnly sworn, to offer himself as it were to
martyrdom for the maintenance of religion: and with the like vow does profess
to defend the laws and liberties of his country, with the price of his
blood, and the hazard of his life.

But especially by this example, both of the Romans and Grecians, may very
well be coniectured, that as they had such consideration to swear their
soldiers, and men of war, they would use the like respect and care, in the
choosing of such as had regard of their oath, for otherwise as good unsworn,
as to minister an oath unto such as care not to be foresworne. But what oath
might be ministered unto our soldiers, as they be ordinarily chosen in England,
or by what gods might they be made to swear by, that stand in awe of none at
all, neither yet are inclined to any manner of religion?

But if this example in choosing of soldiers were used, and that in the time
of service such might be appointed, as should be found to be honest, zealous
in religion, and that had the fear of God before their eyes, there is no
question, but the disciplines of war would be more better observed, and
capteines should have the greater obedience and government of their
soldiers, whereby we might the better prosper in our wars, according to the
opinion of Xenophon, who says, That soldier which first serves God, and then
obeys his captain, may boldly with all courage, hope to overthrow his
enemy.

And Alexander Seuerus says, Obedience the greatest virtue that may be in
soldiers.
The strength of war lies in the soldier, whose gretest virtue consists in
obedience toward his captain. When Scipio went into Africa, to destroy
Carthage, resting his army by the way in Sicilia, a noble man of ye country,
seeing his soldiers exercising the feats of arms, demanded of Scipio wherein
lay his chief hope to overcome Carthage, who answered, in yonder fellows that
you se, whom if I command to run to ye top of this high castle, and to cast
themselves backward upon ye rocks, they will not refuse, they are in such
odedience.

Xenophon makes mention of a soldier, who in a skirmishe having overthrown
an enemy, as he was aduauncing his weapon to have slain him, the trumpet
sounded a retreat, wherewith the soldier stayed his blow, and retired
himself, this being espied by some of the company that was next unto him,
demanded what he meant to let his enemy so to pass, having him at such
advantage: A good lesson for soldiers to learn.
the soldier answered, because (quoth he) I do hold it far more
honorable, to obey my captain then to kill my enemy. A noble saying of a
soldier, and worthy to be had in perpetual memory.

How obedience is nourished in soldiers.
This obedience in soldiers is nourished by fear and love: fear is kept by
true justice and equity: love is gotten by wisdom joined with liberality:
for that captain, that with such righteousness can so rule his soldiers,
that he will suffer them, neither to do wrong, neither to receive injury, but
with wisdom and liberality will maintain him in that which is right, that
Captain must needs be loved and feared of his soldiers, of the which
proceeds true and unfeigned obedience.

Thus to conclude, the army that should be continued in order and discipline,
must be kept well paid, and surely punished: Discipline of war best maintained
where soldiers be kept paid and punished.
for many times where slacknes of payment is used, it turns into great
inconveniences: and I cannot think, but it was the only cause, that lost
king Philip the low countries: for when the Spaniardes had taken Zurickzeas,
it did so amase and daunt the states of Holland, as it was thought and looked
for, that they rather would have submitted them selves to the kings mercy, and
have sought by composition, to have received the Spaniardes again, then
otherwise to have made head against them: and there were diverse towns, as
Tregoe for one, where the chief Burgers had sought sundry means to have
surrendered them selves unto the Spaniardes.

The Prince was then in Zeland, in the Isle which is called by the name of
Waulkerland, which is the Isle wherein Middleborough, Flushing, Camphyre, and
Armue are seated, and there it was thought he would have remained, they never
looked for him more in Holland. And while the Hollanders were thus in the
midst of their dumps, listening ever when ye Spaniardes should have taken ye
Plaate Island, which was hard adjoining upon Zurickzeas, wherein lay a few
faint bands (God knows) to small purpose: From thence the Bryel Island was
next adjoining, the which could not have been defended, if the Spaniardes
had once been commanders of the Plaate. The first thing the Spaniardes would
there have sought for, should have been the Bryel head, which is now very
strongly fortified, but at ye instant nothing begun: which if they had once
taken, Holland had been no longer able to have holden out, for their trade by
sea would have been soudeinly cut off, without the which they may not
endure, considering it is the only wealth of all their towns, that are to be
accounted of, as Skeydame, Delftes haven, Roterdame, Delfte, Dorte, Gorcom, all
these with many other, standing upon the river called the Maase, would have
been shut up, that they should have had no traffike or passage to the sea.

Thus (as I said) as the Hollanders were in these muses, coniecturing with
themselves, that this (in deed) was the mark which the Spaniardes shot at,
neither wist they how to prevent it: for the taking of Zurickzeas had so
quailed their courages, and now their malice and their money was well nigh
spent, that they were hardly able to pay those soldiers they had retained. In
so much that a great number of them were providing what they were able to make,
to pack them into England. But in the midst of this perplexity, and when
they were most amazed with this terror, the Spaniardes which were entered
Zurickzeas fell in a mutiny amongst them selves for a pay which had been of
long time behind, protesting that they would never prosecute further service,
before they were paid: thus they discontinued service, forsaking so good
occasion, which even then had happened unto them. In the end, having laid a
platte amongst them selves, for the pacifying of these matters, all their
practices were laid open and manifest, by letters which were intercepted, by
those of Bridges, whereby Flaunders and Brabant, presently put them selves in
arms against them, and were now of friends become mortal enemies: by which
means the Spaniardes were driven to draw them selves from all parts into one
maine strength. The Prince of Orange in the mean while, forslowed no time, but
he recovered Zurickzeas again, with Harlam, Vtricke, Sconehouen, Hardame, with
diverse other towns in Holand, which before were in the possessions of the
Spaniards, the sequel of the matter is so well kn^wen, as I need not spend
the time to rehearse. Thus gentle reader, trusting thou will accept in good
part these lines, the which I know to be more convenient, and necessary,
then learned, or eloquent, and when my time and occasion shall better serve
me, I will not foreslowe some other thing, the which I trust shall be more to
thy liking.

Imprinted at London, by Henry Middleton, for C. B.


