An exposition of certain difficult and obscure words, and terms of the laws
of this Realm, newly set forth and augmented, both in french and English, for
the help of such young students as are desirous to attain the knowledge of
ye same. whereunto are also added the old Tenures.

In aedibus Richardi Tottelli. 1579.

Cum priuilegio.

Le Table.
ABatement de brief on plaint fol. 1 Abateme^t en terres 1 Abbe 2 Abbettours 2
Abeyance 2 Abishersing 4 Abiuration 4 Abridgement de plaint on demand 5
Acceptance 5 Accessories 6 Accion 7 Actions personals 7 Actions populer 7
Actions reals 8 Accord 8 Acquital 8 Acquitance 9 Additions 10 Adiournement 11
Administratour 11 Acts 11 Admiral 12 Aduowson 12 Age prier 12 Agreement 13
Aid 16 Alien 17 Alienation 17 Ambidexter 17 Amendment 18 Amercement 18
Amercement royal 18 An, iour, et wast 18 Annuitie 19 Appell 19 Appellant 20
Appellor 20 Appendant et appurtenant 20 Apportionment 20 Appropriations 22
Approuement 23 Arditerment 23 Arrest 23 Arrerages 24 Assets 24 Assignee 25
Attainder 26 Auerment 26 Auerpenie 26 Auncien demesne 26 Auowry 27
B
Bail 27 Baylement 28 Baylife 28 Bakberind thief 28 Bargain et sale 29 Bar
29 Bastard 30 Battle 31 Bigamy 31 Blodewit 32 Boot 32 Brodehalpeny 33
Brugbote 33 Burghbote 33 Burghbrech 33 Burgh English 33 Burglary 34
C
Car^age 34 Cession 34 Challenge 35 Champertour^ 36 Charge 36 Charters de
terres 36 Chattels 37 Childwite 37 Chimni 37 Chose en action 37 Circuit de
action 38 Claim 39 Clergy 39 Clerk attaynt, et Clerk convict 41 Color 41
Color de office 43 Coilusion 43 Common lcy 43 Common 45 Condition 46
Con^iscate biens 48 Contract 48 Conusance 49 Corody 50 Coroner 51 Corporation
52 Corpse politic 53 Corruption de sangue 53 Covenant 54 Couerture 54 Couin 54
Counterplea 54 Cinque ports 55
D
Damage fefants 60 Danegelde 61 Dcane et chapter 61 Declaration 61 Defendaunt
62 Demaines 62 Demaundant 62 Demi sanke ou sangue 62 Demurrer 63 Denizen 63
Deodande 64 Departure de son plea ou matter 64 Departure in despite del court
64 Deputy 64 Deuastauerunt bona testatoris 65 Devise 66 Descent 70 Disclaimer
70 Dismes 70 Disperagement 71 Disseisin 72 Disseysin sur disscisin 72
Diss^ysour et disseisee 72 Distrcsse. 72 Divorce 75 Donour et donee 55 Double
plee 75 Droit 76 Droit dentrie 76 Dures. 76
E.
Eire Justices 77 Embrasour, ou Embraceour 77 Encrochment 77 Enheritance 78
Equity 78 Escape 80 Esplces 81 Essoine 81 Estoppel 82 Estraungers 84 Estraye
84 Exco^mengement 84 Exchange 85 Execution 86 Executour 87 Extinguishment 87
Extortion 88
F.
Failer de record 89 Fait 89 Farm on farm 95 Fee farm 96 Feoffement 96
Feffour et feffee 96 Fir^bote 96 Fledwite. 97 Flemeswite 97 Fletwite 97 Forstal
97 Forstaller 97 Fraunches roial 98 Frankemariage 98 Franktenement 98 Freshsuit
99
G.
Gager de deliverance 100 Guard 101 Garden. 101 Garnishment. 102 Gauelate 103
Gauelkinde 104 Gelde 135 Grithbrech 135
H.
Hangwite 135 Hariot 136 Haybote o^ hedgebote 136 Hidage 137 Hotchpot 137
Homesoken 138 Homicide ou manslaughter 138 Hornegeld 139. Housebote 139 Hundred
139 Hundredum 140
I.
Idiot 140 Illoyal assembly 141 Imparlance 141 Imprisonment 142 Insangethe^e
142 Information 142 Jointure 142
L.
Larc^ny. 144 Lastage 144 Lessor et lessee 144 Leuant et couchant 145 Ley gager
145 Li^ery de seisin 145 Lother^it 148
M.
Mahim 148 Mainprise 149 Manor 149 Ma^^ission 150 Ma^imes 250 Mayno^r 151
Misprision 151 Monstrans de faits on records 152 Mortgage on morgag 153
Mo^t^aine 154 Mulier 154 Murder 155
N.
Negatiua preignans 155 Niefe 157 Nihil dicit 158 Nomination 158 Nonability.
158 N^de contra^t 158
O.
Or^d^lfe 159 O^^fa^gthiefe 159 Oweltie 159 Oyer de records et faits 160
P.
Pape 160 Particion 161 Parties 163 Patron 163 Perquisities 163 Plei^tife 164
Pledinge 164 Pound 164 Possession 165 Preamble 165 Prescription 166 Presentment
166 Pretensed dr^t ou title 166 Privy ou priuitie et priuies 167 Privileges
168 Prochen amy 169 Protestation 170 Purchase 170
Q.
Quarentine 170 Quinzim 171
R.
Regratour 171 Reioynder 172 Relief 172 Remainder 174 Replication 175 Reprises
175 Resceit 175 Reservation 175 Retraxit 176 Reave 176 Reuersion 177 Riot 178
Robbery 178 Rout 178
S.
Sake 179 Scot 179 Shewinge 179 Socke 179 Sokemans 179 Spol^ation 281 Stallage
183 Suit covenant 183 Suit custom 183 Suit real 183 Suit service 184
T.
Tax et Tallage 184 Tenure in capitie 184 Testament 185 Them 186 Thesehoote
186 Title 186 Title de entry 187 Toll ou tolne 187 Turn del viscont 189
Treasure troue 189
U.
U^^we. 190 Uiscount 190 Uoucher 19^ Uses 19^ Usurie 193 Utlagaries 194
W.
Waise 194 Waiue 196 Wa^wite. 196 Wrecke 197
FINIS.
La table del Tenures.
Service de chi^aler 198 2 Grau^d serieanty 198 3 Petit serieantie 198 4
Est^^ge 199 5 Homage auncestrel 199 6 Curtesy Dengle^ 200 7 Fee simple 200 8
Frank tenure 201 9 Dower 201 10 Term dans 201 11 Mortgage 201 12 Burgage 203
13 Socage 203 14 Fee ferme 205 15 Frank fee 205 16 Base fee 205 17 Uillenage
205 18 Tail 208 19 Tail apres possibility diss^e extinct 208 20 Fanke marriage
211 21 Frank almoigne 212 22 Elegit 213 23 Statut merchant 216 24 Rent service
218 25 Rent charge 219 26 Rent secke 221 27 Suit service 224
FINIS.
Terms of the law.
Abatement of a writ or plaint.
ABatement of a writ or plaint, is when an action is brought by writ or
plaint, wherein is lack of sufficient and good matter, or else the matter
alleged, is not certeinely set down, or if the plaintiff, or defendant, or
place, are misnamed, or if there appear variance between the writ and the
specialtie, or record, or that the writ or the declaration be uncertain, or
for death of the playntife or defendant, and for diverse other like causes which
I omit of purpose, for thereof alone, a man might make a large discourse, and I
determine to satisfy you* (good brother Nicholas,) as well as I may, with as
much ^reuitie and as little trouble to my self as I can, then upon those
defaultes, the defendant may pray, that the writ or plaint may abate, that is
to say, that y^ plaintifes suit against him may cease for that time, and that
he shall begin again his suite, and bring a new writ or plaint if he be
so disposed to do.

Abatement in Lands.
ABatement in lands or tenementes, is when a man dies seized of land or
tenementes, and a stranger, that is to say, one that has no right, enters
into the same lands or tenementes, before the heir makes his entry: this
entry of the stranger, is called an abatement, and he, an abator: But if y^
heir e^ter first after the death of his auncestour, and the stranger enter
upon the possession of the heir, this Entry of the stranger, is a disseisin
to the heir.

Abbot.
ABbot, was the sovereign head, or chief of those houses of popish religion,
which when they stood, were called abbeies, and this abbot together with ye
monks of ye same house, who were called the covent, made a corporation.

Abbettours.
ABbettor are indiuers cases diuersely taken, one kind of Abbettours are they
that maliciously without just cause or desert do procure other to sue false
appeals of murder, or felony, against men, to the intent to trouble, and
grieve them, and to bring them into infamye and sclaunder. Abbettours in
murder, are those that command, procure, counsel, or comfort others to
murder. And in some case, such Abbettors shall be taken as principals, and in
some case but as Accessories. So in other felonies, And their presence at the
deed doing, and their abse^ce, makes a difference in the case. There are
abbettors also in Treason, but they are in case as principalles, for in Treason
there are noe accessories.

Abeyance.
ABeyaunce is when a leas is made for terms of life, the remainder to the right
heirs of I. S. which. I. S. is living at y^ time of the grant: Now this
grant of rem. passes from the grauntour presentlye, yet it vesteth not
presently, nor takes hold in the grauntee, that is to say, the right heir of
I. S. but is said to be in abeyance, or as the Logiciens term it in power, or
in understanding, and as we say in the clouds: That is to wit in the
consideration of the law. That if I. S. die leaving a rightheire lyuinge, and
living the Lessee for life, then this is a good rem', and now vesteth and
comes into that right heir, in such sort as that he may grant, forfayte,
or otherwise dyspose the same, and cesseth to be any more in abeyaunce, for
that there is one now of Abilitye to take it, because that I. S. is dead and
has left a right heir in life, which could not be living I. S. for that
duringe his life, none could properlye be said his heir. Also if a man be
patron of a church, and presentethe one to the same. Now is the fee in the
person, but if the person die, and the church is become void, then is the fee
in abeyaunce, until there be a new person presented, for ye patron has
not the fee, but only the right to present, and ye fee is in yt incu^bent ye
is presented, and after his death, it is in no body, but in abeia^ce til
therebe a new incu^bent as aforesaid.

Abishersing.
ABishersinge (and in some copyes mishersinge) that is to be quite of
amercements before who^ soever of transumptyon proved.

Abiuration.
ABiuration is an oath that a man or womanne shall take, when they have
committed felonye, and fly to that church or church yard, for safegarde of
their lives, chosinge rather perpetual banishement out of the Realm, then to
stand to the law, and to be tried of the felonye. And this law was
instituted by Saint Edward the confessor a King of this Realm before the
conqueste, and was grounded upon the law of mercys, and for the love and
reverence, noe doubt, that he and other his successors, did bear unto the
house of God, or place of prayer and administration of his word and
sacraments, which we call the church. But how uncomely a thing it was or is,
and how far from the nature of the house of god, to make her a succorour and
defender of horrible murderers and thieves, you may consider (brother Nicholas)
and the rather when you remember what our savior Chiste said, reprehending
the Jews, and parauenture also propheseinge of this: My house shall be called
the house of prayer, but you have made it a den of thieves.

Abridgement of a plaint or demand.
ABridgeme^t of a plaint or demand, is where one brings an assyse, writ of
dower, writ of ward, or such like, where the writ is, de libero tenemento, as
in a writ of dower the writ is, rationabilem dotem que eam contingit de libero
tenemento. W. her husband. And in a writ of ward the writ is, custod' terr' et
hered' etc. and the plaintiff or demaundant demands diverse acres or parcels
of land, and the tenant pleads non tenure, or iointenancy, or some other such
like plea to parcel of the land demanded, in abatement of the writ: then the
plaintiff or demaundant, may abridge his plaint or demand to that parcel
that is to say, he may leave that part out and pray that the tenant shall
answer to the rest to which he has not yet pleaded any thing: The cause is,
for that in such writs the certeintie is not set down, but the demand
runs generally, de libero tenemento, and notwithstanding the demaundaunt
has abridged his playnt or demand in part, yet the writ remains good still,
de libero tenemento for the rest.

Acceptance.
ACceptance is a taking in good part and as it were an agreeinge unto some act
don before, which might have byne undone and avoided (if such acceptance had not
bin) by him or them that so accepted As for example if an Abbot lease land of
his house for term of years reserving rent and dies, and after an other is
made abbot, who accepts, that is to say, takes or receives the rent when it
is due, and ought to be paid: Now by this acceptance the lease is made
perfect and good, which else the Abbot might very well have avoided and made
frustrate. The like law is, i^ a man and his wife seysed of land in y^ right of
y^ wife ^ome and make a lease, or feoffeme^t reserving rent, and the husband
dies, she accepts or receives the rent by which the feoffement or lease is
made perfect and good, and shall bar her to bring her writ called Cui in vita.

Accessories.
ACcessories are in ii. sorts, the one before the offense, the other after the
offense is done.

Accessorie before the fact, or offense is he that commands or procures
an other to do felony and is not there present him self when the other does
it, but if he be present, then he is also principal.

Accessorie after the offense or fact, is he that receives, favors, or
aydeth a felon, knowing well of the deed that he has done.

Also one may be accessorie to an accessorie, as if one feloniously receive an
other that is accessorie of a felony, there the receyuer is an accessorie.

Accion.
ACcion is a suit given by the law to recover a thing, as an accion of debt
and such like.

Accions personals.
ACcions personals be such accions whereby a man claymeth debt, or other goods
or cattle, or damage for them, or damages for wrong done to his person.

Accion populer.
ACcion populer is an accion which is given upon the breach of some penal
statute, which accion every man that will, may sue, for him self and the
Queen, by information, or otherwise as the statute allows and the case
requires, And of these accions there be an infintts number, but one for
example is when any of the Jurye that are impanelled and sworn to pass
between party and party indifferentlye, do take any thing of the one side, or
other, or of both parties, to say their verdicts at that side: Then any man
that will within the year next followynge the offense made, may sue a writ
called Decies tantum against him or them that so did take to geeue their
verdicte, and because that this accyon is not geeuen one man specially but
generally to the Queens people that will sue, it is called an accyon populer.

Actions Reals.
ACtions Reals, be such actyons whereby the demaundaunt claymethe title to any
lands ortenementes, rentes or common in fee simple, fee tail or for term of
life.

Accord.
ACcordeis an agreement between ij. at the least, either to satysfie an
offense, that the one has made to the other: Or else, it is a contracte, with
diverse articles, to be done, some on the one part, and some on the other,
where there shall be one thing for an other etc. The first is when a man has
done a trespass, or such like unto an other for which he has agreed with him,
satysfyed and contented him, with some recompense alredie executed and done in
deed. And because that this recompense, is a full satisfactyon for the
offense, it shall be a good bar in ye law, if the other should sue again
any actyon for the same trespass. The other is, when as I. S. lets a chamber
for years to H. G. and it is farther agreed beetweene them, that the said H.
G. shall be at Boorde with the said I. S. and shall for the same chamber and
Boorde, pay to the said I. S. a certain some etc. this is a contract and
accord with articles on both sides.

Acquital.
ACquital, is where there is lord, mesne, and tenant, and the tenant holds of
the mesne certain lands or teneme^ts, in fra^kalmoigne, frankemariage or such
like, and the mesne holds over also of the Lord paramount, (or above him.)
Now ought the mesne to acquit or discharge y^ tenant of al and every manner of
service, y^ any other would have or demand of him concerning the same lands
or tenementes, for that the tenant must do his service to the mesne only, and
not to diverse lords for o^e tenement, or parcel of land. The sa^e law is,
wherthere is lord, mesne, and tenant, as aforesaid, and the mesne granted to
the tenant (upon the tenure made between the^) to acquit, and dyscharge him of
al rentes seruyces, and such like. This dyscharge is called acquitall.

Acquitance.
ACquitaunce is a discharge in writing, of a sum of money, or other duty
which ought to be paid, or don. As if one be bound to pay money upon an
obligation, or rent reserved upon a lease, or such like, and the party to whom
the money, or duty should be paid, or don, upon the resceit thereof, or
upon other agreement between them had, makes a writing, or bill of his hand,
in discharge thereof, witnessing, that he is paid, or otherwise contented, and
therefore does acquit, and discharge him of ye same, which acquitance is such
a discharge and bar in the law, that he cannot demand, and recover that
su^me or duty again, contrary thereunto if he can show the acquitance.

Additions.
ADdition is that, that is given unto a man, but chiefly to the defendant, in
accions where process of outlawrie do lie, as in det, and such like, over and
besides his proper name and surname, that is to say to show of what estate or
degree, or mystery he is, and of what Town or Hamlet or County.

Additions of Estate ar these, yeoman, Gentleman, Esquire, and such like

Additions of degree are those that we call names of dignity, as Knight,
Earl, Marquis, and Duke.

Additions of mystery are such, Scriuener, Printer, Mason, Carpenter, Tailor,
Smith, and so al other of like nature, for mystery is the craft or occupatio^,
whereby a man gets his living.

Addicions of towns as Sale Dale and such, and so of the rest.

And where a man has household in ii. places, he shall be said dwelli^g i^ both
of them, so yt his addicion in one of the^ does suffice.

And this was ordained by a statute made in the first year of H. 5. cap. 5. to
the intent that one man should not be grieved nor troubled by the vtlary of an
other, but that by reason of the certain addicion, every man might be
certainly known, and bear his own burden.

Adiournement.
ADiournement is when any court is dissolved, and determined, and assigned to
be kept again at an other place, or time.

Administratour.
ADministratour is he to who^ the ordinary commits thadministration of y^
goods of a dead man, for defaut of an executour, and an accio^ shall lie against
him and for him as for an executour, and he shall be charged to the value of the
goods of y^ dead man and no further, if it be not by his own false plee, or
for that that he has wasted the goods of the dead, but if thadministratour
die his executours be not Administrators: but it behooves the Ordinary to
commit a new administration, but if a stranger that is not administratour nor
executoure take the goods of the dead and minister of his own wrong, he
shall be charged and ^ued as an executour and not as administratour in any accio^
that is brought against him by any creditour. But if yt ordinary make a letter
ad collige^du^ bona defu^cti, he that has such a letter is not Administratour,
but the accion lies against the Ordinary, as well as if he took yt goods to his
own hand, or by the hand of any of his servants by any other commandment.

Acts.
Acts of parliament are positive laws which consyst of two parts, that is to
say, of y^ words of y^ act, and of the sense thereof, and they both joined
together make the law.

Admiral.
Admiral is an officer under the Queen that has authority, upon the sea
only to see the navy repaired, and maintained, to suppress, and chase away
robbers, and rouers and to deal in matters between party, and party,
concerning things done there, and for that purpose has his court called the
Admirally: yet he may cause his Citation to be served upon the land; and take
the parties body, or goods, in execution upon the land. Also he has
cognisa^ce of the death or mayhem of a man committed i any great ship fleetinge
in great rivers in the land benethe the bridges of the same next the sea, also
to arrest ships in y^ great streams for y^ viages of y^ Queen and Realm, and
has iurisdiccio^ in y^ said streams during the same viages.

Aduowson.
ADuowson is where a man, and his heirs have right to present their Clerk to
the ordinary, to a personage, or other spiritual benefice when it becomes
boide. And he that has such right to present, is called patron.

Age prier.
AGe prier is when an accion is brought against an infant of lands that he
has by descent, there he shall show the matter to the court, and shall pray
that the action shall abide til his full age of one and twenty years, and so by
awarde of the court, the suit shall surcesse: But in a writ of Dower and in
Assise, and also in such actions where the infa^t comes in of his own wrong
he shall not have his age.

Also note well, y^ there be many diversities of ages, for y^ Lord shall have
aid of his tenant in socage for to marye his daughter when y^ daughter of the
lord is of thage of vii. years, and also aid for to make his son and heir
knight, when he is of the age of seven years.

Also a woman which is married at the age of ix. years, if her husband die
seysed, shall have dower and not before nine years,

Also xiiij. years is y^ age of a woman y^ she shall not be in ward if she were
of such age at y^ time of the death of her au^cester, but if she were wtin y^
age of xiiii. years and in ward of ye lord, the^ she shall be in ward til y^ age
of 16. yers and also xxj. years is the age of y^ heir male to ^ee in ward,
and after y^ out of ward, and also it is y^ age of male and female to sue and
to be sued of lands which they have or claim by descent and to make al manner
of contractes and bargains and not before: But if such an infaunt with the age
of xxj. years give his goods, and the donee take them, he may have an action
of trespass but otherwise it is if he deliver them him self.

Agreement.
A Greeme^t is after this sort defined or expounded in master Plowde^s
Come^taries: Aggreamentu^ is a word compounded of two words namely of
Aggregatio, and Mentium, that is to say agreement of minds, so that agreement is
a consent of minds in some thing done, or to be done, and by drawinge
together of the ij. words Aggregatio, and me^tiu^, and by the hasty and short
pronouncing of the^, they be made one word, to wit, Aggreame^t', which is no
other thing, then a ioining, putting, cuppling, and knitting together of ij. or
more minds in any thing done, or to be don. See after in Testament.

And this agreement is in iij. manners. The j. is an agreement executed al ready,
at y^ beginning. The second is an agreement after an act done, by an other, and
is an agreement executed also. The third is an agreement executorie or to be don
in time yet to come. The first, which is an agreement executed already at y^
beginning, is such where of mention is made in y^ stat of 25. E. 3. cap. 3. of
clothes. in y^ iiij. statute which says, that y^ goods and things bought by
forestallers being thereof attainted shall be forfait to the Queen, if the
huyer have therefore made gree with the seller, in which case, this word
(Gree) which is otherwise called agreement, shall be understood agreement executed,
y^ is, payment for y^ things. The seco^dmaner of agreement, is where one does a
thing, or act, and an other agrees or assentes thereto afterward, as if one do
a disseisin to my use, and after I agree to it, now I shall be a disseisour from
the beginning, and such agreement is an agreement after an act don.

The iij. agreement is when both parties at one time are agreed, that such a
thing shall be done in time to come, and this agreement is executory, in as much
as the thing shall be done after, and yet there, their ^^indes agreed at one
tyms, but because the perfourmance shall be afterward, and so the thing upon
which the agreement was made remaynes to be done, y^ agreement shall be said
executory. And y^ the statute of 26. H. 8. cap. 3. does prove, where it says,
that every vicar, person, and such like etc. before their actual possession or
meddling with the profits of their benifice, shall satisfy, content etc. or agree
to pay to the use of the Queen, the first fruits etc. and if any such person
vicar etc. enter in actual possession etc. this agreement is to be understood
executory as y^ common use proves, for it is used, y^ he, with one, or ij. with
him do make two, or three obligations for it, to be paid at certain days
after. And this agreement executorye, is denided in ij. points, One is an
agreement executory, which is certain at the beginning, as is said last
before of the first fruits.

The other is, where y^ certentye does not appear at the first, and y^ parties
are agreed, y^ the thing shall be performed, or paid, upon the certenty
known. As if one sell to an other, al his wheat in such a tasse in his barn
^nthreshed, and it is agreed between the^, y^ he shall pay for every bushel xij.
d. when it is threshed cleaned and measured.

Aid.
Aid is when tenant for term of life, tenant in dower, tenant by courtesy,
or tenant in tail, after possibility of issue extinct is impleded, then for
that, y^ they have noe estate but for term of life, they shall pray in aid of
him in the reuersion, and process shall be made by writ against him, to come and
plede with the tenant in the defense of the land if he will, but it behooves
that they agree in plee, for if they vary, the plee of the tenant shall be taken
and then the aid prayer is void, but if he come not at the second writ,
then the tenant shall answer sole. Also tenant for term of years, tenant
at will, tenant by Elegit, and tenant by statute merchaunt, shall have aid of
him in the reuersion, and theseruant and baylie of their master when they have
done any thing lawfully in the right of their master, shall have aid.

Aid of the King is in like case as it is said before of a common person,
and also in many other cases where the king may have loss, although that the
tenant be tenant in fee simple he shall have aid, as if a rent be demanded
against the kings tenant which holds in chief, he shall have aid, and so
he shall not have of a common person.

Also where a City or borough has a fee ferme of the king and any thing be
demanded against them which beelongeth to the fee ferme, they shall have aid
for the loss of the king.

Also a man shall have aid of the king in the steed of voucher. Also the
kings Bailife, the collector and purueyour shall have aid of the king as
well as the officers of other persons.

Alien.
ALien is he whose father and him self were both borne out of the Queens
legeance, and if such an alien being none of y^ Queens enemies, but am alien
friend, come and dwell here in England and have issue, this issue is no alien but
English so if an English man go over the Seas with the Queens license, and
there has issue, this issue is noe Alien.

Alienation.
ALienatio^ is as much to say, as to make a thing an other man's, to alter or
put the possession of land or other thing from one man to an other.

Ambidexter.
AMbidexter, is he, that when a matter is in suite between men, takes money
of y^ one side and of the other, either to la bour the suit, or such like, or
if he be of the jury, to say his verdict.

Amendment.
AMendment is when error is in the process, the Justices may a mend it after
judgment. But if there be error i^ giving of judgment, they may not amend it,
but y^ party is put to his writ of error: And in many cases where the defaut
appears in the clarke y^ writes the Record, it shall be amended: but such
things as come by Information of the party, as the town, mystery* and such
like, shall not be amended, for he must inform true upon his peril.

Amercement.
AMercement most properly is that in a court Baron, Leete, or Lawday, which in
a court of Record before Justices, is called a fine. And is a penalty assessed
by the homage for an offense doneagaist y^ same court, as for lake of suit of
court or for not amendinge of some thing that he was appointed to redress by
a certain time at the last court day before, or for such like cause.

Amercement Royal.
AMercement Royal is when a sheriff, coroner, or other such officer of y^
Queen is amerced by the Justices for his abuse in the office.

An, iour, et wast.
AN, iour, et wast is a forfaiture when a man has committed petit Treason, or
felony, and has lands which he holds of some common person which shall be
seized for the Queen, and remain in her hands by the space of one year and a
day next after y^ attainder, and then the trees shall be dug up, the houses
shall be rased and pulled down, and the pastures and medows eared and plowed
up, a thing the more to grieve the offenders, and terrefy others to fall into
the like, in showing how the law does detest their offense, so far forth as
that it does execute judgment and punishment even upon their dome and dead
things.

Annuitie.
ANnuitie is a certain su^me of money granted to an other, in fee simple, f^e
tail, for term of life, or for term of years, to receive of the grau^tor or
his heirs, so that noe freehold is charged therewith.

Appell.
APpell is where one hathdon murder robery or felonye, then the wife of him
that is slain shall have an accion of appeal against the murderer: but if he
have noe wife, then his next heir male shall have the appeal at any time
within the year and day after ye deed. And also he that is so robbed, shall
have his appeal with in ye same time: And if the defe^dant be acquitted he
shall recover damages against the appellour, and thabettours, and they shall
have thenprisonme^t of a year, and shall make fine to ye king. An appeal of
mayhem, is in manner but an accio^ of trespass, for he shall recover but damages,

Appellant.
APpellant is ye plaintiff in the appel.

Appellor.
APpellor, or approuer, is he who has committed so^e felony, which he
confesses, and now appelleth, or approves, that is to say, accuses other
that were coadintours, or helpers we him, in doing the same, or other felonies,
which thing he will approve, and therefore is called i^ latin, Probator.

Appendant, et Appurtena^t.
APpenda^t et appurten^t are things ye by time of prescripcio^, have belo^ged,
pertained, and are joined to an other principal thing with which they pass,
and go as accessory to the same principal thing, by virtue of these words,
Pertinencijs: As la^d, aduowso^s, Como^s, Piscaries, ways, courts, and diverse
such like, to a manner, house, office, or such other.

Apportionment.
APporcionment is a dividing into parts of a rent (which is deuidable and not
entier) or whole, and for so much as the thing for which, or of which it was
to be paid, is separated and divided, the rent also shall be divided having
respect to the parts: As if a man have a rent service issuing out of lands,
and h^e purchases parcel of the land, the rent shall be apporcioned according to
the value of the land.

So if a man hold his land of an other by Homage, Fealty, Escuage, and
certain rent, if the Lord of whom the land is holden purchase parcel of the
land, the rent shall be apporcioned.

Also if a man let lands and goods for years reseruinge rent, and after a
stranger recouereth the land, then the rent shall be apportioned, because the
goods are not recovered but remain: And so it is if but part of the land
be recovered the rent shall be apportioned, that is to say divided, and the
lessee shall pay, having respect to yt which is recovered, and to that which
yet remaynes in his hands, according to the value.

But a rent charge c^not be apportioned, nor things that are entier, as if
one hold lands by service to pay to his Lord yearly at such a feast a
Horse, a Hawk, a Rose, a Cherie, or such like: There if the Lord purchase
parcel of the land, that service is gone altogether, because a Horse, a
Hawk, a Rose, a Cherye, and such other, cannot be divided severed, nor
apporcioned without hurt to the hole.

Appropriations.
APpropriatyons were when those houses of the Roomishe religion, and those
religious persons, as Abbots, Priours and such like had y^ aduowson of any
personage to the^ and to their successors, and obtained license of their holy
father the Pope, that they them selves and their successoures from thence
forth should be persons there, and serve the cure. And so at the
beginning appropriations were made only to those persons spiritual that
could minister the sacraments and say divine service, as Abbotes, P^^oures,
Deanes and such like, after by little and little, they were enlarged and made to
other, as namelye, to a Deane and Chapter, which is a body corporate consisting
of many, which body together, could not say divine service, and what more
was to Nuns that were Prioresses of some Nunry, which was a wicked thing, in
so much as they could neither minister sacraments, nor preach, nor say
divine service to y^ parishioners. And all this was upon pretense of
hospitalitye, and mayntenaunce thereof. And to supply these defects, a vicar
was devised, who should be deputy to ye prioresse, or to the Deane and
chapter, and also at the last to the said Abbots and others, to say divine
service and should have for his labor but a little portion, and they to whom
the appropryation was made, should retain the great revenues, and they did
nothing for it, by means whereof hospitalyty decayed in the place where it
ought to have be^ chefelye mayntained, namelye in the parish where the
benefice was, and where the profits did grow, and so it continues to this
day, to y^ great hinderance of lerninge y^ empouerishme^t of y^ ministry, and
y^ infamy of y^ gospel and professor thereof.

Approouement.
APproueme^t is where a man has common in the lords wast ground, and the Lord
encloseth part of the wast for himself, leapinge never the less sufficient
common, with egresse and regresse for the co^moners: This enclosinge is called
approouement.

Arbiterment.
ARbiterment is an awarde, determination, or judgment, which one or more,
makes at the request of ij. parties at the least, for, and upon some det
trespass, or other controversy, had between the said parties: And this is
called in latin Arbitratus, and arbitrium, and they that make ye award, or
arbiterment, are called Arbitri, in english Arbitrators.

Arest.
ARest is when one is taken and resirayned from his liberty none shall be
arrested for debt, trespass, detinue, or other cause of action, but by virtue of
precepte, or commandment out of some court. But for treason, felony, or
breaking of the peace, every man has aucthority to arest without warrant or
precept, and where one shall be arrested for felony, it behooves y^ there has
been some felony done, and that he be suspected of ye same felonye, or
otherwise he may have against him that so did arest him, a writ of false
imprisonment.

Arrerages.
ARrerages, are duities behind unpaid after the days, and times, in which
they were due, and ought to have been paid whether they be re^t of a manner
orany other thing reserved.

Assets.
ASsets is in ij sorts, the one called Assets per descent, the other Assets
enter maynes. Assets per descent, is where a man is bound in an obligation and
dies seized of lands in fee simple which descend to his heir, but makes no
executors, or if he make executors leaves not sufficient goods to discharge
this obligation, the^ this land shall be called assets that is to say enough or
sufficient to pay the same det, and by that means the heir shall be charged,
as far as the land so to him dyscended will stretch: But if he have aliened
before the obligation be put in suite, he is discharged.

Also when a man seysed of lands in tail, or in ye right of his wife, alieneth
the same wit, warrantie, and has in value as much land in fee simple which
discendeth to his heir, who is also heir in tail, or heir to ye woman: Now
if the heir after the discease, of his auncestour bring a writ of formedon, or
sur Cui in vita for the land so aliened, then he shall be barred by reason of
the warranty and ye land so disce^ded, which is as much in value as that that
was sold, and so thereby he has received noe prejudice, and therefore this
land is called Assets per disce^t Assets ent' mains, is when a man indebted as
before is said, makes executors and leaves to the^ sufficient to pay, or some
commodity or profit is coe^ to the^ in right of their testator, this is said
as^^ts i^ their hands.

Assignee.
ASsignee is he to who^ a thing is appointed, or assigned to be occupied,
paid, or don, and is always such a person which occupies or has y^ thing so
assigned in his own right, and for him self. And of assignees there be ii.
sorts. Na^ely assignee in deed, and assignee in law. Assignee in deed, is when
a leas is granted to a man and to his assignees or with out those words,
assignees and y^ grantee gives, grau^teth, or felleth the same leas to an
other, he is his assignee in deed.

Assignee in law is every executor named by y^ testator i^ his testament, as if
a leas be made to a man and to his assignees (as is aforesaid) and he makes
his executours and dies without assigneme^t of the leas to any other, now ye
executors shall have ye sa^e leas because they are his assignees in law, and so
it is in diverse other like cases.

Attainder.
ATtainder is a co^uiction of any person, of a crime, or fault, whereof he was
not co^uiet before, as if a man have committed felony, Treason, or such like,
and thereof is endited, arraigned, and found guilty, and has judgment: then he
is said to be attainted. And this may be ii. ways the one upon appearance, the
other upon default.

The attainder upon appearance is by confession, Battle, or verdict.

The attainder upon default is by process.

Auerment.
AUerment is where a man pleads a plee in abatement of the writ or bar of
the accion which he says he is ready to prove as the court will award: this
offer to prove his plee is called an auerment.

Auerpeny.
AUerpeny that is to be quite of diverse su^mes of money for the kings
auerages.

Auncien demesne.
AUncien demesne, are certain tenures holden of those mannours that were in the
hands of saint Edward the confessor, and the which he made to be written in a
book called Domes day. subtitulo regis, and all the lands holden of the said
manours be auncien demesne, and the tenaunts shall not be impleded out of the
said manor, and if they be, they may show the matter, and abate the writ,
but if they answer to the writ, and judgment be given, then the lands
become frank see for ever. Also the tenauntes in auncien demesne be free of
toll for all things concerning their sustena^ce and husbandry in auncien
demesne, and for such lands they shall not be put or impaneled upon any
enquest. But all the lands in auncie^ demesne that are in the Kings hands be
frank fee, and pledable at the common law. See more after in the title
Sokmanes.

Auowry.
AUowry is where one takes a distress for rent or other thing, and the other
sueth a repleuin, the^ he yt has taken it, shall justify in his plee for what
cause he took it, and so auowe the taking, and yt is called his auowry.

Bail.
Bail is when a man is taken, or arrested, for felony, suspicion of felony,
endited of felony, or any such case so that he is restrained of his liberty:
And being by law baileable offreth suerty, to those that have authority to
bail him which suerties are bound for him to the Queens use in a certain
su^me of money, or body for body, yt he shall appear before the Justices of
jail delivery at y^ next sessio^ etc. The^ upon the bonds of these suerties,
as is aforesaid, he is bailed, that is to say set at liberty, until the day
appointed for his appearance.

Bailement.
BAilement is a delivery of things (whether it be of writings goods or stuff)
to an other, some times to be redeliuered back to y^ bailor, yt is to say, to
him yt so delivered it, sometimes to the use of yt baily, yt is to say of him to
who^ it is delivered, and so^etimes also it is delivered over to y^ third
person. This delivery is called a bailement.

Bailife.
BAilife is an officer that belongs to a manor to order the husbandry, and
has authority, to pay quitrents issuing out of ye manor, fell trees,
repair houses, make pales, hedges, distreine beasts upon the ground, and
diverse such like. This officer is he whom the ancient saxons called a Reeue:
for the name (bailife) was not then known among the^ but came in with the
Normans, and is called in lattin villicus.

Bakeberinde thief.
BAkberinde Thief, is a thief that is taken with the manner, that is to say,
having y^ found upon him (being followed with the hue and cry, which he has
stolle^ whether: it be money, linen, woolle^, or other stufe, but it is most
properly said when he is taken, caryinge those things, y^ he has stolen in a
bundel, or fardel, upon his back.

Bargain and sale.
Bargain and sale, is when a recompense is given by both the parties to the
bargain. As if one bargain and sell his land to an other for money. Here the
land is a reco^pe^ce to him for the money, and the money is a recompense to
the other for the land, and this is a good contract and bargain, and fee
simple passes, notwithsta^dinge he does not say, to have and to hold the land
to him and to his heirs. And by such a bargain and sale, lands may pass
without livery of seysin, if the bargayne and sale be by deed indented sealed
and enrolled, either in the county where y^ land lies, or in one of the
Queens courts of Records at Westminster, within vjmonethes next after the
date of the same writing endented according to y^ statute in that beehalfe
made in the 27. year of H. 8. ca. 16.

Bar.
Bar is when the defendant in any action pledeth a ple which is a sufficient
answer, and that distroyeth the action of the pleintife for ever.

Bastard.
Bastard is he that is borne of any woman not married so yt his father is not
known by the order of the law, and therefore he is called the child of y^
people. But by the law spiritual if one get a child upon a woman which child
is borne out of wedloke, and after he mary the same woman, the^ such a child
shall be said mulier and not bastard. But by y^ law of England it is a bastard:
and for yt cause when such special bastardy is alleged, it shall be tried by the
country and not by the bishop. But general bastardy alleged shall be tried by
y^ certificat of ye Bishop.

And if a woman be great with child by her husband who dies and she takes
an other husband, and after ye child is borne, this child shall be said the
child of the first husband. But if she were privily with child at the time
of the death of her first husband, then it shall be said ye child of ye second
husband, but enquire farther, and see ye opinion of Thorp. 21. E. 3. 39.

Also if a man take a wife which is great we child by an other that was not
her husband, and after the child is borne wein the espousels, then he shall be
said the child of the husband, though it were borne but one day after ye
espousels solempnised.

Battle.
Battle is an ancient trial in our law, which the defendaunt in an appeal
of felony may choose, that is to say, to fight with the appellant, for proof
whether he be culpable of the felony or not: which combat if it fall out so
well on ye part of the defendant, that he do vanquish the appellant, he shall
go quite, and bar him of his appel for ever. But if one be indicted of
felonye, and an appel is brought upon the same indictment, there the defendant
shall not wage battle. Battle also may be in a writ of right.

Bigamy.
BIgamy was a counterplea (devised at the Council of Lions upon mislike of
second marriage) to be objected when the prisoner demands the benefit of the
Clergy, to wit his book, as namely to say, that he which demands the
privilege of the clergy, was married to such a woman, at such a place within
such a diocese, and that she is dead, and that he has since married an other
woman, within the same dioces, or with in some other diocese, and so is
Bigamus. Or if he have bin but once married, then to say that she whom he has
married, is or was a widow, that is to say the left woman of such a one etc.
which thing shall be tried by the Bishop of ye diocese, where the marriages are
alleged. And beeinge so certifyed by the Bishop, the prisoner shall lose the
benefit of the clergy. But at this day, by force of the Act made in Anno 1.
E. 6. cap. 12. this is n^e plea, but that he may have his Clergy yet not
wythstandinge.

So is Brook titulo Clergy placito 20. to the same purpose. And hereuppon,
if you be desirous, (Brother Nicholas) to see what reasons they have that
persuade against second marriages, read, among many other, Fraunches Petrarch
of Remedies for both fortunes the first book and lxxvi. Dialogue entitled of
second marriage, which book now of late our brother master Thomas Twyne has
very well and with good grace (as they y^ can judge do say) translated out of
latin into english, and most aptly called it Physic against fortune.

Blodewit.
BLodewit, that is to be quite of amercements for blodsheding, and what pleas
are holden in your court you shall have the Amercementes thereof coming,
because (wit) in english is Misericordia in latin.

Boot.
Boot is an old word, and signifyethe help succor, aid, or advantage, and
is commonly joined with an other word whose signification, it does augeme^t as
these brighoot, burghboote, fireboote, hedgboot, plowboote, and diverse such
like, for whose significations, look in their proper titles.

Broad halpeny.
Broad halpeny (in so^e copies Bordehalpeny) that is to be quite of a certain
custom exacted for settinge up of tables.

Brugbote.
BRugbote (and in some copies Brigebote) that is to be quite of giuinge aid to
the repairinge of bridges.

Burghbote.
BUrghbote, that is to be quite of giuinge aid to make a borough Castle, city
or walls throne down.

Burchbrech.
Burghbrech, that is to be quite of trespasses don in City or borough against
the peace.

Burgh English.
BUrgh English or borow english is a custom in so^e ancient borough, that if
a man have issue diverse sons, and dies, yet the youngest son only shall
enherit and have all the lands and tenementes, that were his fathers whereof
he died seysed within the same burgh by dyscent, as heir to his father, by
force of the custom of the same.

Burglary.
BUrglary is when one breaks and enters into y^ house of an other in the
night with felonious intent to rob, or kill, or to do some other felony, in
which cases, although he carry away nothing yet it is felony, for which he shall
suffer death. Otherwise it is if it be in the day time, or that he break the
house in the night, and enter not therein at that time.

But if a servant will conspire with other men to rob his master, and to that
intent he opens his masters doors, or windows in the night for them, and
they come into the house by that way, this is burglary in the strangers, and
the servant is a thief but noe burglar: And this was the opinion of the right
worshipful Sir Roger Manwood knight, most worthy Lord Chief Baron of the
Eschequer at the quarter Sessions holden in Cau^terburie in Januarie last 1579.
21. Elizabeth.

Caruage.
CAruage, that is to be quite if the king shall tax al hisla^d by Carues
Note that a Carue of land is a plowland.

Cession.
CEssion, is when an Ecclesiastical person is created bishop, or when a person
of a personage takes an other benefice without dispensation, or otherwise not
qualified etc. In both cases, their first benefices are beco^e void, and to
those that he had who was created Bishop, the Queen shall present for that
time, whosoever be patron of them: And in the other case, the patron may
present.

Challenge.
CHallenge is where Jurours appear to try an issue, then if any of the
parties suppose y^ they are not indifferent, they may there Challenge and
refuse them.

There be diverse challenges, one is challenge to the array, the other to the
polles. Challenge to tharray is when the panel is favorably made by the
sheriff or other officer. Challenge by the poles, are some principal, and some
by cause as they call it. Principal is when one of the Juroures is the son,
brother, or cosine to the plaintiff, or defendaunt, or tenant to him, or y^ he
has espoused the daughter of the pleintife, and for those causes he shall be
withdrawn.

Also in a plee of y^ death of a man, and in every other accion real, and in
accions personal, if the debt or da^mages amount to xl. marks it is a good
challenge that he cannot dispende xl. s. by the year of free hold.

Challenge by cause, is where the party does allege a matter which is no
principal chelle^ge, as y^ y^ son of one of y^ Jurrours has espoused the
daughter of the pleintif, and then he does conclude and therefore he is so
favorable, which shall be tried by others of the^quest whether he be favorable or
indifferent, and if they say that he is favorable and not indifferent, the^ he
shall be drawn out, otherwise he shall be sworn. Also a felon that is arraigned
may challenge xx. Jurrours paremptory without any cause, and that is in favor
of life, and as many as he will with cause, but then it shall be tried if for
such cause he be indifferent or not.

Champertours.
CHampertours be they yt move pleas and suites, or cause to be moved by own, or
others procurement, and sue them at their own costs to have part of the land,
or gains in variance.

Charge.
CHarge is where a man grau^teth a rent out of his ground, and that if the
rent be beehinde, that it shall be lawful for him his heirs and assigns to
distraine till the rent be paid, This is called a rent charge. But if one
grant a re^t charge out of the land of an other, and after purchase the land,
the grant is void.

Charters of lands.
CHarters of lands, are writings, deeds, euide^ces, and instruments, made from
one man to an other upon some estate co^ueied or passed between the^, of lands
or teneme^ts, showing the name, place, and quantity of the land, the estate,
time, and manner of the doing thereof, the parties to the estate delivered and
taken, the witnesses pres e^t at the same with other circumstaunces.

Chattels.
CHattels are in ij. sort that isto say, Chattels Reals, and Chattels
personals. Chattels Reals, are leases for years, wards, and to hold at will
etc.

Chattels personals ar al mouable goods, as money, plate, householde stuff,
horses, kine, corn and such like.

Childewite.
CHildwite, that is y^ you may take a fine of your bondwoman defiled and
begotten with child without your license.

Chimin.
CHimine is the hye way where every man goethe, which is called via Regia, and
yet the King has noe other thing there but the passage for him and his
people, for the free hold is in the Lord of the soil, and all the profit
growinge there, as trees and other things.

Thing in action.
Thing in action, is when a man has cause, or may bring an action for some
duity due to him, as an action of det upon an obligation, a^nuity, Rent,
Covenant, ward, goods, trespass, or such like. And because they are things
whereof a man is not possessed, but for recovery of them is driven to his
actio^, they are called things in action, and those things in action that are
certain, the Queen may grant, and the grau^tee may use an actyon for them in
his own name only. But a common person cannot grant his thing in actio^ nor
the Queen her fel^e cannot grant her thing in actio^ which is uncertain, as
trespass and such like.

Circuit of action.
Circuit of action, is when an actyon is rightly brought for a duty: but yet
about ye bush as it were: for y^ it might as well been otherwise answered, and
determined, and that suit saved, and because that the^ same actio^ was more
then needful, it is called circuit of action. As if a man grant a rent
charge of x. li. out of his manner of dale, and after, the grauntee disseise y^
grau^tour of the same manner of dale, and he brings an assise, and recouereth
the land and xx. li. damages, which xx. li. being paid, the grauntee of the
rent sueth his action for x. li. of his rent due duringe the time of the
disseison, which if noe disseisin had been, he must have had. This is called
circuit of action, because it might have been more shortly answered, for
where as the grauntour should receive xx. li. damages, and pay x. li. rent, he
might have received but the x. li. only for the damages, and the grauntee
might have cut of and kept back the other x. li. in his hands by way of
detayner for his rent, and so thereby might have saved his action.

Claim.
Claim is a challenge by any man of the property, or ownershippe of a thing
which he has not in possession, but which is with holden from him wrongfully.

Clergy.
Clergy is an ancient liberty of the popish Church, which has also been
confyrmed with us in diverse Parlyamentes. And it is when a priest, or one
within holy orders (as they term it) or any other whoesoeuer, in whom is noe
impedyment or impossibilitye to be a priest, is arraigned of felonye or such
like before a temporal Judge etc. and the prisoner prays his clergy, that
is to say, to have his book, which is as much as if he desired to be
dismyssed from the Temporal Judge, and to be delivered to the Ordinary to
purge him self of the same offense. This priuyledge at the first was not so
general, in respect of the parties that should take benefit thereby, as it
afterward beecame to be, for at the beginning, being a popish inuentyon
the patrons thereof were very partial, and would not that any should reap
commodity thereby, but their popish priests only and such as were within
orders, as aforesayed: and this arose among them, partlye through their great
pride, dysdayninge to be under the obedience of their natural kings and
temporal correctyon, and partelye of polycie, for shame lest the leude manners
of their spiritualty, should come to the open view and examination of ye
layetie (as they distinguish them) noe marvel at al for wtin a few of the
first years of king Henry ye seco^ds reign: the clergy of the Realm had
committed above one hundred several murders upon his subjects, as the King
was certainly informed, besides many robberies and other outrages, for remedy
whereof, order was taken by ye king, his nobility, and with much a do the
Clergy consented thereto, yt if any clerk from thence forth committed felony
or treason, he should first be degraded, and afterward delivered to the lay
power, there to receive as to his offense belonged etc. at y^ last in favor of
life (a thing to be showed indifferently toward al mankind) and for the love
of lerninge, it was granted to al men that could read, though they were
neither priests, nor wtin orders. And since in parliament made upon good
considerations, it has been restreined and taken away in diverse cases, as in
wilful murder, Burglary, and such others.

Clerk attaint. Clerk convict.
Clerks are in ii. sorts, that is to say Clerks attaint, and Clerks convict.
Clerk attaint, is he which prays his clergy after judgment given upon him
of the felony, and has his clergy allowed, such a Clerk may not make his
purgatio^.

Clerk convict is he which prays his clergy before judgment given upon him
of the felony, and has his clergy to him granted, such a clerk may make his
purgation.

Color.
Color, is a feigned matter which the defendant or tenant uses in his bar
when an accion of trespass, or an assise is brought against him, in which he
gives the demandant or plaintiff a show at the first sight that he has good
cause of accion where in troth it is no just cause, but only a color and face
of a cause: And it is used to the intent that the determynatyon of the accion
should be by the Judges, and not by an ignorant Jury of xii. men. And
therefore a color ought to be a matter in law or doubtful to the common
people, as for example. A. bringes an assise of land against B. and B. says
that he him self did let the same land to one C. for term of life, and
afterward did grant the reuersion to A. the demaundaunt, and after C. the
tenant for term of life died, after whose decease A. the demaundaunt claiming
the reuersion by force of that grant (whereto C. the tenant for life did
never atturne) entered, upon whom B. entered, against whom A. for y^ enter
bringes this assise etc. this is a good color because the common people think
that the land will pass by the grant without atturnement, where in deed it
will not pass etc.

Also in an accion of trespass color must be given, and of them are an
infinite number, one for example: In an accion of trespass for taking away of
the playntifes beasts, the defendaunt says, that before ye pleintife had any
thing in the^ he himself was possessed of the^ as of his proper goods, and
delivered them to A. B. to redeliuer them to him again when etc. and A. B.
gave them unto the plaintiff, and the plaintiff supposing the property to be
in A. B. at y^ time of the gift, took them, and the defendant took them from
the plaintiff, whereupon the plaintiff brings ye accion, this is a good
color, and a good plea.

Color of office.
Color of office, is always taken in ye worst part, and signifies an act
euel done, by the countenance of an office, and it bears a dissemblinge face
of the right office, where as the office is but avail to the falsehod and the
thing is grounded upon vice, and the office is as a shadow to it.

But reason of the office, and virtue of the office are taken always in the
best part, and where the office is the just cause of the thing, and the thing
is pursuing to the office.

Collusion.
COllusio^ is where an accion is brought against another by his own agreement,
if the plaintiff recover, then such recovery is called by collusion: and in
some cases the collusion shall be enquired of, as in a Quare impedit, an
assise and such like: But in auowry, nor in a writ of entry, or any accyon
personal, the collusion shall not be inquyred.

Common law.
COmmon law, is for the most part taken 3. ways, first for the laws of this
Realm simple without any other law, as customary law, Civil law, Spiritual
law, or whatsoeuurr else law joined unto it, as when it is disputed in our
laws of England, what ought of right to be determined by the common law, and
what by the spiritual law, or Admirales Court, or such like,

Secondly it is taken for the kings courts, as the kings bench, or common
place only, to show a difference beetweene them and y^ base courts, as
Customary courts, courts barons, county courts, pipouders, and such like, as
when a plea of land is removed out of ancient demesne, because the la^d is
frank fee and pleadable at the common law, yt is to say in y^ kings court, and
not in auncien demesne, or in any other base court.

Thirdly, and most usually by the common law is understood, such laws as were
generally taken and holden for law before any statute was made to alter the
same: as for example. Tenant for life, nor for years, were not to be punished
for doing wast at the common law, till the statute of Gloucester ca. 5. was
made which does give an action of wast against them: But tenant by the curte^y,
and tenant in dower, were punishable of wast at the common law, that is to say
by the usual and common received laws of y^ Realm, before the said statute of
Gloucester was made.

Common.
COmmon is the right yt a man has to put his beasts to pasture, or to use and
to occupy the ground that is not his own.

And note y^ there be diverse commons, that is to say common in gross, common
appendaunt, common appurtenant, and common because of neighborhood.

Common in gross is where I by my deed grant to an other that he shall have
common in my land.

Common appendaunt is where a man is seized of certain land, to the which he
has common in another ground, al they that shall be seysed of that land,
shall have the said common only for those Beasts which compeste that land
to which it is appendaunt exceptinge geese, gotes, and hogs.

And always this common is by prescription and of common right, and it is
appendaunt to erable land only, and not to any other land or house.

Common appurtena^t is in the same manner as common appendant, but it is with al
manner of beasts, as well hogs goats and such like, as horses, kyne, oxen,
sheep and such as compeste the ground. And such common may be made at this
day, and may be severed from y^ land to which it is appurtenant, but so cannot
common appenda^t.

Common by cause of neighbourhode, is where the tenants of two lords which he
seized of two towns where one lies nigh another, and every of them have used
from ye time whereof no mind runs to have come^ in the other town, with all
manner of beasts comynable.

But the one may not put his cattle in ye others ground, for so they of the
other town may dystreine the^ damage fesa^t, or may have an action of trespass,
but they may put the^ into their own feeldes, and if so they straie into the
feeldes of the other town, they there ought to suffer the^. And ye inahbitants
of ye on town ought not to put in as many beasts as they will. but having
regard to y^ inhabitants of the other town, for otherwise it were noe good
neighborhoode, upon which all this matter does depend.

Condition.
Condition is a restraint or bridle, annexed, and joined to a thing, so that by
ye not performance or not doing thereof, the party to ye condition shall
receive prejudice and loss, and by the performance and doing of y^ sa^e,
commodity and advantage.

And al conditions are either conditions actual and expressed, which be called
conditions in deed, orels they be co^ditio^s implied or covert and not
expressed, which are called conditions in law.

Also al conditions are either conditions precedent and goinge before the
estate and are executed, or else subsequent and following after y^ estate and
executorie.

The condition precedent, does gain and get the thing or estate made upon
condition by the performance of y^ same.

The condition subsequent, does keep and continue the thing or estate made
upon condition, by y^ performance thereof.

Actual and expressed condition, which is called a condition in deed: is a
condition knit and annexed by express words to the feoffement, leas, or grant
either in writing or without writing, as if I enfeffe a man in lands reserving
re^t to be paid at such a feast upon condition that if the feoffee fail of
payment at the day, yt then it shall be lawful for me to ree^ter.

Condition implied or covert and not expressed which is called a condition in
law, is when a man grau^teth to one the office to be keeper of a park,
Steward, Bedle Bailife, or such like, for term of life: and though there be no
condition at al expressed in y^ grant, yet y^ law speaks covertly of a
condition, which is that if the grau^ tee do not execute all points
apperteininge to his office by himself or his sufficient deputy, the^ it
shall be lawful for y^ gra^tor to enter and discharge him of his office.
Co^ditio^ precede^t and goinge before is when a leas is made to one for life
upon condition that if the lessee for life, will pay to the lessor xx. li. at
such a day y^ then he shall have fee simple: here y^ condition preceedes and
goes before the estate in fee simple, and upon the performaunce of the
condition, does gain and get the fee simple. Condition subsequent and
following after, is when one graunts to I. S. his manner of dale in fee simple,
upon condition, that the grau^tee shall pay to him at such a day xx. li. or else
yt his estate shall cease, here y^ condition is subseque^t and following ye
estate in fee simple, and upon the performaunce thereof, does keep and
continue the estate.

Confiscate goods.
COnfiscate goods are goods to which ye law intitleth the Queen, when they
are not claymed by any other. As if a man be indicted that he feloniously stole
the good of I. S. where in truith they are his own goods, and they are brought
into the court against him as a maineur, and then it is demanded, what he
says to those goods, and he denies the^, now by this denyinge of them, he
shall lose those goods, although that afterward he be acquitted of the felony,
and so in other like cases.

Contract.
COntract is a bargain or covenant between two parties, where one thing is
geeuen for an other, which is called quid pro quo, as if I sell my horse for
money, or if I cauenant to make you a lease of my manner of Dale in
consideration of xx. li. that you shall give me, these are good contracts
because there is one thing for an other. But if a man make promise to me
that I shall have twenty shillinges, and that he will be debtour to me thereof,
and after I ask the xx. s. and he will not deliner it, yet I shall never have
any accyon to recover this xx. s. for that, that this promise was no contract
but a bare promise, and ex nudo pacto non oritur actio: but if any thing were
given for ye xx. s. though it were not but is y^ value of a penny, then it had
bin a good contract.

Conusance.
COnusaunce of plee, is a privilege that a city or Town has of the kings
grant to hold plee of all contracts, and of lands within the precinct of the
fraunchise: and when any man is impleaded for any such thing in the Court of
Westminster: the Mayor and baylifes of such fraunches or their attorney may
ask conusaunce of the plee, that is to say, that the plee and the matter
shall be pleaded and determined before them:

But if the Court at Westminster be lawefully seized of the plea, before
conusance be demanded, then they shall not have conusance for y^ suite, because
they have neglige^tly surcessed their time of demand, but this shall be no
bar to them to have conusance in an other accion, for they may demand
conusance in one accyon, and omit it in an other accion at their pleasure. And
note that conusance lies not in prescription, but it behooves to show the
kings letters.

Corody.
COrodye, was a reasonable allowaunce of Meat, bread, Drink, money,
clothinge, Lodging, and such like sustenance, which of common right every
founder of Abbeies, Priories, Nu^ries, and other house of religion, had in ye
same house when any were standing, for his father, brother, cousin, or other man
that he would appoint should take it, if it were a house of Monks, and if he
were founder of a house of Nuns, or women, the^ the same for his mother Sister,
Cousin, or other woman that he would direct thither. And always this was
provided for that he that had Corody in a house of Monks, might not se^d a
woman to take it: Nor where Corody was due in a Nunry, there it was not lawful
to appoint a man to receive y^ same, for in both cases, such presentation was
to be rejected.

And this Corody was due, as well to a common person y^ was foundor, as where
the king him self was foundor. But where the house was holden in frankalmoign
there the tenure itself was a discharge of Corody against al men, Except it
were afterward charged voluntaryly, as when the king would send his writ to
the Abbey for a Corody for such a one who^ they admit, there the house should
be charged for ever whether the king were foundor or not,

Crowner.
CRowner is an ancient officer of trust and of great authority, ordained to
be a principal conseruator, or keeper of the peace, to bear record of the
pleas of the Crown, and of his own sight, and of diverse other things many in
number, etc. But at this day, either ye authority of the Coroner is not so
great, as in fore time it was, whereby the office is not had in like
estimation: Or else the Shirife and those y^ have authority to choose the
Coroner are not so careful as they should be in their election: and therefore,
it is now almost come again into that plight, that it was in king Edward the
firsts days, when this statute followinge was made. Forasmuch as mean men
and indiscreet now of late are commonly chosen to the office of Coroner where
it is requisite that wise men, lawful, and able should occupy such offices:
It is provided that through all Shires sufficient m^n should be chosen to be
coroners out of the most wise and discreetest knights etc. And although the
letter of this statute be not precisely observed: yet at the least the entend
should be followed as nigh as might be, that for the default of knights
Ge^tlemen furnished with such qualities as the statute sets down (of which
sort there be many) might be chosen: with this addicio^ that they be virtuous
and good known Christians.

Corporation.
COrporation is a permanent thing y^ may have succession: And is an assembly
and ioining together of many into one fellowshipp, brother hoode and mind,
whereof one is hedde and chief, the rest are the body: and this hedde and body
knitte together make the corporation.

And of corporatyons some are called spiritual, and some temporal, and of those
that are spiritual, some are corporations of dead persons in law, and some
otherwise, and some are by authority of the king only, and some have been of
a mixed authority, and of those that are temporal some are by authority of
the king also, and some by the common law of the Realm.

Corporation spiritual, and of dead persons in law, is where the corporation
consists of an Abbot, and Covent, and these had beginning of the king and
the man of Room when he had to do here.

Corporation spiritual and of able persons in law, is where the corporation
consists of a Deane and chapter, and his corporation had beeginninge of the
King only.

Corporation Temporal by the king, is where there is a maier and co^minalty.

Corporation Temporal, by authority of the common law, is the assemble in
parliament, which consists of the Queen, the hedde of the corporation, and
of the Lords spiritual and temporal, and the commons of ye realm, y^ body of
y^ corporation.

Bodies politic.
BOdies politic are Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Deans, person of a church and
such like which have succession.

Corruption of Blodde.
COrruption of blodde is when the father is attaynted of felonye or treason,
then his blood is said to be corrupt, by means whereof his children cannot be
heirs to him nor to any other au^cestour. And if he were a noble man or
gentlemanne before, he, and al his children thereby are made unnoble and
ungentle, having regard to the nobility or gentrye that they claim by their
father, which cannot be made hole again without aucthority of parliament.

Covenant.
Covenant is an agreement had beeweene two persons, where every of them is
bounden to the other, to parfourme certain couenauntes for his part.

Couerture.
COuerture, is when a man and a woman ar married together: Now the time of the
contynuaunce of this marriage between them is called couerture, and the wife is
called a woman covert.

Couin.
COuin is a secret assent, determined in the hearts of ij. or more, to the
prejudice of any other: As if tenant for term of life, will secretly conspire
with an other, that y^ other shall recover against the tenant for life the
land which he holds etc. in prejudice of him in the reuersion.

Counterplea.
COunterplee, is where one brings an actyon, and the tenant in his answer
and plee, voucheth or calls for any manne to warraunt his title, or prays
in aid of an other, which has better estate then he, as of him that is in
the reuersion, or if one that is a stranger to the action, come and pray to
be resceyued to save his estate, if the demaundaunt reply thereto, and show
cause that he ought not to vouche such one or that he ought not of such one to
have aid, or that such one ought not to be resceyued, this plee is called a
counterplee.

Cinque ports.
CInque ports, be certain haven towns, five in number, to which have been
long since, granted many libertyes (that other port Towns have not) and
that first in the time of king Edward called y^ co^fessor (who was before y^
conquest) and has be^ increased since chiefly in ye dates of ye ij. Edwards
the first, and second (since y^ conquest) as appears in the book of Domesday,
and other old monuments, which in this work being to long to cite I mean
bro. N. to omit, and set you here down y^ copy of an ancient record in french
which ye worship full, our loving and very good father master John Tvvine of
Caunterbury gave me out of his book called W. Biholt, sometime a monck of y^
abbey of Saint Augustines, wherein you shall learn which were au^cie^tly
accounted y^ v. ports; and their memberz, what services they ow, where their
court ought to be kept, before whom, and of what matters they may hold plee, with
such like worthy to be known, and thereby you shall perceive also y^ ye old
rude verse does falsely name ye v. ports, in reckninge them up after this sort:
Dover, Sandwicus, Rye, Ru^ney, Frigmareuentus, Dover, Sandwich, Rye, Rumney,
Wichelsey which is me^thy Frigmareue^tus etc. which record I will english as
well, as my small skill in y^ old french will give me leave. And thus it is.

These are the chief towns of the Cinque ports.

1 Mastinge. 2 Romney. 3 Meth 4 Dover. 5 and Sandwich.
The members of the ports of Mastinge are these.

1. Peuenese. 2 Bolewareheth. 3 Petite James. 4 Bekesborne. 5. Breneth. 6 Rye.
7 et Winchelse.
Some add to these the Seashore in Sefford, Hydeney, and Northye.

The chief port of Hastinge, with the members aforesaid ought to find to the
king from year, to year, if need be, upon the sea twenty and one ships:
That is to say the town of Hastinge three ships, Peuenese one ship, wole
worcherye and Petite Iha^me one ship, Bekesburne one ship, Greneshe ij. men
with two armours, with them of Hastinge, The Town of Rye five Ships, the
Town of Wynchelsce Ten ships.

The me^bres of y^ port of Romney are. 2.

1. Old Romney, and 2. Lyde

Some add to these, Prormhell, Oswardestone and Denge Marreis, Romney with the
before said members, owes to the king as is before said five ships, whereof
Lyde owes one ship, The port of Heth with the member west Heth, ought to find
five ships to the king as is aforesaid.

The members of the port of dover are these.

1. Folkestone, and 2. Fauersham.
So^e add Meregate etc.

This part of Dover, with the aforesaid members, ought to find to the king.
21. ships, that is to say, Dover 19. ships Folkestone one shipe, and
Fauersham one ship.

The members of the port of Sandwich are these.

1. Stonor. 2. Fordwich, 3. Dale. 4. Seire.
So^e add Reaculure.

This port of Sandwich, with the memberz aforesaid, ought to find in the kings
service as is before said, five ships,

Some lvii. ships.

When the king would have his service of the aforesaid ships, they shall have
xl. days su^mons, and they shall find to ye king in every ship. 20. men, and
the master well armed, and well appointed to do the kings service.

And the ships shall go at the proper costs of the Cinque ports thither
whether they shall be summoned. And when the ships are thither come, they
shall continue xv. days in the kings service, at the proper costs of the
Cinque ports. And after the 15. days are past they shall be at the charges of
the king: if he have any thing for the^ to do.

The master of the ship shall take six pence a day, the Constable six pence,
and every of the other mariners three pence.

And it is to be known that the court of Shipwaye, which is the chief court of
y^ Cinque ports where every Mayor of every port, or 12. 10. 6. or 4. and the
Mayor of every port as they by letters of the warden of the Cinque ports have
been su^moned, and as the port is greater or lesser, without essoyne ought to
come, ought to be su^moned by the letters of the said warden to all the ports
that ought to do suit there.

And the su^mons ought to be upon suit made to su^mon any comminalte to
answer to any of any plee, containing 40. days from the day of the receyte
of the Letters of the said warden.

And the aforesaid Court ought to be su^moned chieefelye for Treason done
against the king or kings: for counterfaytynge of the kings seal: or of his
money, for treasure found under the ground: For the kings service denied, or
withholden, for falls Judgment given by any co^munaltie.

And no commoner to any plea against him brought shall answer but at the
court aforesaid.

And pleas there had against any Baron of the Cinque ports being challenged
by the Bailife of the same port of which the said Baron is: ought to be
adiourned unto the port, whereof the same Baron is, (if it be not for trespass
don against the king) because that the said Barons have conusance of all
manner of pleas except pleas of the Crown. And when those Barons have failed
to do right: The said warden at the complaynt of him to whom they have failed
to do right, shall go to the same port to do right, as is contained in the
Charter.

Moreover, the aforesaied court ought not to be holden from the feast of the
nativity of saint Mary, until the feast of saint Andrewe, because of the
martes of Germany.

Also when the Barons of the Cinque ports are in the Kings service upon the
Sea, or at the kings summons, or at the kings commandment.

Furthermore, it ought not to be holden but one day.

And one Essoine only yeth in the aforesayed Court in every plea.

O f suit no Essoigne lies, as is before said, and therefore if the mayor,
who because of sickness or other sodeine infirmity cannot come thither, an
other may at that day keep his place, so notwithstanding that return be
made by his Baylife.

Nor others principally ought to be charged of any judgment given in the same
Court but those names who by the Baylifes there have been returned.

Besides all this, provision of ships and men as is aforesaid: I have seen
in an other record (shortly written) that every ship ought to have a boy,
which there is called a Gromet: so y^ in some the Cinque ports are charged
with 57. ships 1197. men, and 57. boys or Gromets.

Damage fesants.
DAmage fesauntes, is when a strangers beasts are in an other man's ground,
without authority of the law, or license of the tenant of the ground, and
there do feed, tread, or otherwise spoil the corn, grass, woods, or such
like: in which case the tenant whom they hurt, may therefore there take,
distreigne, and impou^d them, as well if it be in ye night, as in the day time.
But in other cases as for rent and services and such like, none may distreine
in ye night season.

Danegelde.
DAnegelde, that is to be quite of a certain custom which has run some
times, which the Danes did levy in England.

This began first in king Etheldreds days, who being sore distressed by
the continual invasions of the Danes, to purchase peace was compelled to charge
his country and people with importable payements: for he first gave them at
v. several paies 113000 li. and afterward granted the^ 48000. li. yearly.

Deane and Chapter.
DEane and chapter is a body spiritual corporate, consisting of many able
persons in law as namely the deane (who is the chief) and the prebendes, and
they together make the corporation. And as this corporation may jointly
purchase lands and tenements to the use of their Church and successors: So
likewise every of them severally may purchase to the use of him self and his
heirs, as we daily see them do most abundantly.

Declaration.
Declaration is a showing forth in writing, of the grief and complaynt of the
demaundant or plaintiff against the tenant or defendant, wherein he supposes
to have received wrong. And this declaratyon ought to be plain and certain,
both because it impeacheth the defendaunt or tenant, and also compels him to
make answer thereto.

Defendant.
DEfendant is he that is sued in an actyon personal, and he is called tenant in
an action real.

Demaines.
DEmaines, or demesnes, is the lords chief manner place, which he and his
ancestors have from time out of mind, kept in their own hands, and have
occupied same, together with al buldinges and houses whatsoever, also ye
meadows, pastures, woods, errable land, and such like, beelonginge thereunto.

Demaundant.
DEmaundaunt is he that suethe or complayneth in an actyon real, for title of
land, and he is called playntife in an assise, and in an action personal as
in an action of debt, trespass, disceit, detinue, and such other.

Half blodde.
Half blodde, is when a man marieth a wife. and has issue by her a son, and
she dies, and then he takes an other womanne, and has by her also a son,
Now these two sons are after a sort Brothers, or as they are termed, half
Brothers, or Brothers of the half blodde, that is to say brothers by the
Fathers side because they had both one father, and are both of his blood and
not brothers at all by the mothers side, nor of blodde ne kin that way, and
therefore the one of them cannot be heir to other, for he that will claim as
heir to one by dyscent, must be of ye whole blood to him from whom he
claims.

Demurrer.
DEmurrer is when any action is brought, and the defendaunt pleads a plee,
to which the pleintife says that he will not answer, for that, y^ it is not a
sufficient ple in the law, and the defendaunt says to the contrary, that it
is a sufficyent plee, this doubt of the law is called a demurrer.

Denizen.
DEnizen is where an alien becomes the Queens subject and obteyneth her
letters patentes to enjoy al privileges as an englishma^. But yet not with
standinge, he shall pay customs and diverse other things as aliens do etc.

Deodande.
DEodande is when any man by misfortune is slain by an horse or by a cart, or
by any other thing that moves, the^ this thing that is cause of his death,
and which at the time of the mysfortune moved, shall be forfayte to the Queen,
and that is called deodande, and that pertains to y^ Queens Almener for to
dispose in alms and in deeds of charity.

Departure from a plee or matter.
DEparture from his plea or matter, is where a man pledeth a plee in bar,
and the plaintiff replieth thereto, and he after in his reioinder pleads or
shows an other matter contrary to his first plee, yt is called a de parter
from his bar etc.

Departure in dispite of the court.
DEparture in dispite of the court, is when the tenant or defendant appears to
the actyon brought against him, and has a day over in yt sa^e term, or is
called after without day in the same term, and does not appear, but makes
defant, this is a departure in dispite of the court, and therefore he shall be
condemned.

Deputy.
Deputy, is he ye occupies in an other man's right, whether it be office or
any other thig else and his forf* or misdemener shall cause the officer, or him
whose deputy he is to lose his office or thing. But a man can not make his
deputy in all cases, except the grant so be as if it be with these or such like
words, to exercise or use by himself or his sufficient deputy: or if ye
words go further, by himself or his deputy, or the deputy of his deputy, then
he may make a deputy, and his deputy also may make a deputy, else not.

Deuastauerunt.
DEuastauerunt bona testatoris, is when Executours will deliver the legacies
that their testator has given, or make restytutyon for wrongs don by him, or
pay his debts due upon contractes, or other dets upon specialtyes, whose days
of payments are not yet come etc. And keep not sufficient in their hands, to
discharge those debts upon specialties that they are compellable presently by
the law to satisfy: Then they shall be constrained to pay of their own goods
those duetyes, which at the first by the law they were compelled to pay:
according to the value of that that they delivered or paid without
compulsion: For such paymentes of debts or delivery of legacies, as is
aforesaid, before debtes paid upon specialtyes, whose days of payment are
already come: are accounted in the law a wasting of the goods of the
testator, as much as if they had given them away without cause, or sold them,
and converted them to their own use.

Devise.
DEuyse is where a man in his testament geeueth or beequeaueth his goods or
his lands to an other after his decease.

And where such devise is made of goods, if the executours will not deliver
the goods to the deuisee, the deuisee has no remedy by the common law, but
it behooves him to have a cytation against y^ executors of the testator, to
appear before the Ordinary to show why he perfourmeth not the will of the
testatour, for the deuisee may not take the legacy and serve himself, but it
must be delivered to him by the executours.

And here to the end to show you (Brother Nicholas) how much the laws of
this Realm, and the wise dyscreete Judges of ye same, who are the interpreters
of the law, do favor wills, and testaments, and so devises in yelding to
them such a reasonable construction, as they think might best agree with the
minds of the dead, consideringe that wills and testaments are for the most
part, and by common intendment, made when the testator is now very sick,
weak, and past al hope of recovery, for it is a received opinion in ye
country among most yt if a man should chance to be so wise, as to make his
will in his good health, when he is strong, of good memory, has time and
leisure, and might ask counsel if any doubt were, of the learned, that then he
should not live long after, and therefore they defer it, to such time, when
as it were more convenient to apply them selves to the disposition of their
souls, then of their lands or goods, except it were, that by the fresh
memory, and recital of them at that time, it might be a cause to put them in
mind of some of their goods, or lands falsely gotten, andso move them to
restitutyon etc. And at that time, the penning of such wills, are commonly
committed to the minister of the parish, or to some other more ignorant then
he if y^ may be, who knows not what words are necessary to make an
estate in fee simple, fee tail, for term of life, or such like, besides many
other mischiefs. I will therefore set you here down some of those cases that
are most common in ignorant men's mouths, and do carry, by the wise
interpretatio^s of ye Judges as is aforesaid, a larger and more favorable sense
in wills the^ in deeds: first therefore if one devise to I. S. by his will, all
his lands and tenementes, here not only all those lands y^ he has in poss.
do pass, but also those that he has the reuersion of by virtue of these
words tenements*

(...) ^e deui^ed to a man to have to him for evermore, or to have to hi^ and
his assigns, in these. ii. cases ye deuisee shall have a fee s^ple. But if it
be given by feoffement in such manner, he has but an estate for term of life.

Also if a man deuyse his land to an other, to give, sell, or do therewith at
his pleasure or will, this is fee simple.

A devise made to one and to his heirs males, does make an estate tail, but
if such words be put in a deed of feoffement, it shall be taken in fee simple,
because it does it does not appear of what body the heirs males shall be
begotten.

If lands be given by deed to I. S. and to the heirs males of his body etc.
who has issue a daughter, who has issue a son, and dies, there the land
shall return to the donour, and the son of the daughter shall not have it,
because he cannot convey himself by heirs males, for his mother is a let
thereto: But otherwise it is of such a devise, for there ye son of ye daughter
shall have it, rather the^ y^ will shall be void.

If one devise to an infant in his mothers belly, it is a good devise,
otherwise it is by feoffement, grant, or gift, for in those cases there ought
to be one of hability to take presently, or otherwise it is void.

A devise made (in fee simple) without express words of heirs, is good in
fee simple.

But if a devise be to I. N. he shall have the land but for term of life, for
those words will carry noe gerater estate.

If one will y^ his son I. shall have his land after the death of his wife,
here the wife of the deuisour shall have the land first for term of her life.
So likewise if a man devise his goods to his wife, and that after the decease
of his wife, his son and heir shall have the house where y^ goods are, there
the son shall not have the house during the life of the wife, for it does
appear y^ his intent was, that his wife should have the house also for term of
her life, notwithstandi^g it were not devised to her by express words.

If a devise be to I. N. and to y^ heirs females of his body begotten: after
the deuisee has issue a son and a daughter and dies, here ye daughter shall
have the land, and not the son, and yet he is the most worthy person, and
heir to his father, but because the will of the dead is, that the daughter
should have itlawe and conscience will so also, And herein the very hethens were
precyse, as appears by these verses of Octauius Augustus which Donatus
reports, he made after that Uirgil at his death, gave commandment that his
books should be burnt, because they were imperfect, and yet some persuaded
that they should be saved as in deed they very happily were, to whom he
au^swered thus. But faith of laws must needs be kept, and what last will does
say, and what it does co^mau^d be done, y^ needs we must obey.

Descent.
Descent is in ij. sorts, either linial, or collateral.

Linial descent, is when the descent is conveyed in y^ same line of the whole
blood, as Grandfather, father, son, sonns son and so downwarde.

Collateral descent, is out in an other branch from above, of y^ whole blood,
as the graund fathers bro. fathers brother, and so downewarde.

Disclaimer.
DIsclaimer, is where the Lord dystraineth his tenant, and he sueth a
repleuin, and the lord auoweth the taking by reason that he holds of him, if
the tenant say that he dysclaimeth to hold of him, this is called a
dysclaimer, and if y^ lord thereuppon bring a writ of right sur dysclaimer,
and it be found against the tenant, he shall lose the land.

Tithes.
TIthes are in three sorts divided, to wit, Prejudicial tithes, Parsonal
tithes, and Mixed tithes.

Predial tithes, are tithes that be paid of things that come of the ground
only, as Corn, Hay, fruits of Trees, and such like.

Parsonal tithes, are tithes that be paid of such profits as come by the
labor, and industry of a man's person, as by buyinge, sellinge, gains of
merchandise: and of handicraftes men, laborers, and such as work for hyer, as
Carpenters, Masons and such like.

Myxt tithes are the tithes of Calves, Lambs, Pigges, and such like, that
increase partlye of the ground that they be fed upon, and partly ^

Disseisin upon disseisin.
DIsseisin upon disseysin is, when the disseisor is disseised by an other.

Disseisor and disseisee.
DIsseysoure*, is he which puts any manne out of his land without order
of y^ law, and disseisee is he that is so put out.

Distress.
Distress is the thing which is taken and dystrayned upon any land, for rent
beehinde, or other duty or for hurt don, although that the property of the
thing beelongeth to a stranger, but if they be beasts that belong to a
stranger, it behooves that they be leuant and couchant upon the same ground,
y^ is to say, that the beasts have been upon y^ ground by certain space y^ they
have themself well rested there or else they be not distrainable. And if one
distraine for rent or other thing without cause lawful, then the party
grieved shall have a repleuin upon suertie found to pursue his accion, and
shall have y^ distress to him delivered again.

But there be diverse things which be not distrainable, y^ is to say an other
man's gown in the house of a tailor, or cloth in the house of a fuller,
sherema^, or weyuer, for that, that they be commen artificers, and that the
common presu^ption is, that such things belong not to the artificer, but to
other persons which put them there to be wrought.

Also vitaile is not distrainable, nor corn in sheues, but if they be in a
carte, for that that a distress ought to be always of such things whereof the
sheriff may make Repleuin, and deliver again in as good case as it was at the
time of the taking.

A man may dystrayne for homage, and fealty, and escuage, and other
seruyces: for fynes and amercements which be assessed in a leete but not in a
court baron: and also for damage fesaunt, that is to say, when he finds the
beasts or goods of an other, doing hurt or cumbringe his ground. But a man may
not distraine for any re^t or thing due for any la^d, but upon the same land
yt is charged therewith, but in case where I come to distraine, and the other
seeing my purpose, chaseth the beasts or bears the thing out to the intent y^
I shall not take it for a distress upon the ground, the^ I may well pursue, and
if I take it presently in the hye way or in an others ground, y^ taking is
lawful as well there as upon the land charged to whomsoever y^ property of the
goods be. Also for fines and amerceme^ts which be assessed in a leete, one
may always take the goods of him that is so amerced, in whose ground so ever
they be within the iurisdictyon of the court as it is said. And when one has
taken a distress, it beeh^^ueth him to bring it to the commen pound, or else
he may keep it in an others ground so that he geeue notice to the party,
that he (if the distress be a quick beast) may geeue to it food, and then
if the beast dye for defaut of food, he that was dystrayned shall be at the
loss, and then the other may distrayne again for the same rent or duitie. But
if he bring the dystresse to a hold or out of the cou^ty, that the sheriff
may not make deliverance upon the repleuin, then the party upon the return
of the sheriff, shall have a writ of Withernam, directed to the sheriff, that
he take as many of his beasts, or as much goods of the other in his keepinge,
till that he has made deliverance of the first distres. Also if they be in a
forfelet or Castle, the Sheriff may take with him the power of the County, and
beat down the Castle, as it appears by y^ statute Westminster. 1. cap. xvii.
Therefore look the statute.

Divorce.
Divorce so called of diuortium, coming of the verb diuorto, which
signifies to return back. As when a man is divorced from his wife, he
returns her back home to her father or other friends, or to the place from
whe^^e he had her, and by such divorce the marriage is defeated and undone.

Donor, and donee.
DOnor is he which gives lands or tenements to an other in tail, and he to
whom the same is so given, is called donee.

Double plea.
DOuble plee, is where the defendaunt or tenant in any accion, pleads a plee
in the which ii. matters be comprehended, and every one by himself is a
sufficyent bar or answer to the action, then such a doublee plee shall not
be admitted for a plee except one depend upon an other, and in such case if he
may not have the last plee without the first plee then such a double plee
shall be well suffered.

Right.
RIght is where one has a thing that was taken from an other wrongfully, as by
disseisin, or putting out, or such like. And the challenge or claim that he
has, who should have ye thing is called right.

Right of entry.
RIght of entry, is when one seysed of land in fee, is thereof disseised: Now
the disseisee has right to enter into y^ land, and may so do when he will: or
else he may have a writ of right against the disseisour.

Dures.
DUres is where one is kept in prison or restrained from his liberty contrary
to the order of the law, and if such a person so being in dures make any
especialtie or obligation by reason of such imprisonment, such a deed is void
in the law: and in an actyon brought upon such an especialtie, he may say
that it was made by dures of imprysonment, but if a man be arrested upon any
accion, at the suite of an other, though the cause of the accion be not good
nor true, if he make any obligation to a stranger beeinge in prison by such
arrest, yet it shall not be said by dures: but if he make an obligation to
him at whose suit he was arrested to be dyscharged of such imprisonment, then
it shall be said dures.

Eire Justices.
EIre Justices, or Itinerant as we call them, were Justices that used to ride
from place to place through out the realm, to administer Justice.

Embrasour or Embraceour.
EMbrasour or Embraceour, is he that when a matter is in trial beetweene party
and party comes to the Bar with one of the parties (having received some
reward so to do) and speaks in the case, or privily laboreth the Jurie, or
stands there to furuey, or ouerlooke the^, thereby to put them in fear and
doubt of y^ matter. But men that are learned in the laws, may speak in the
case for their fee, but they may not labor the Jurye, and if they take money
so to do, they also are embrasors.

Encrochment.
ENcrochment is said, when the Lord has gotten seisine of more rent, or
services, of his tonaunt, then of right is due, or ought to be paid or done
unto him: As if the tenant hold slande of his Lord by fealtye and ij. s.
rent yerelye, And now of late time, the Lord has gotten seysine of three
shillings rent, or of homage, or Escuage, or such like, Then this is called an
Encrochment of that rent or service.

Enheritance.
ENheritaunce, is such estate in lands, or tenements; or other things as may
be inherited by the heir, whether it be of estate in fee simple, or tail, by
descent from any of his* Auncesters, or by his own purchase.

And Enheritaunce is divided into two sorts, that is to say, enherita^ce
corporate, and enheritance incorporate.

Enheritance corporate are mesuages, lands, meadows, pastures, rentes, and
such like that have substance in them selves, and may have contynuaunce
always. And these ar called corporal things.

Enheritaunce incorporate, are aduowsens, villaynes, ways, commons, Courts,
fishings, and such like that are, or may be appendant, or appurtenant to
inheritances corporate,

Equity.
Equity is in two sorts, differing much the one from the other, and are of
contrary effects, for the one does abridge, diminishe and take from ye letter
of y^ law. The other does enlarge amplify and add thereunto.

The first is thus defined, Equity is the correction of a law generally made,
in that part wherein it fails, which correction of ye general words, is
much used in our law: As if for example, when an act of parliament is made,
that whoesoeuer does such a thing, shall be a sclon, and shall suffer death: yet
if a mad manne, or an infaunt of young years that has noe discretion, do
the same, they shall be no felo^s, nor suffer death therefore.

Also if a statute were made that al persons that shall receive, or gene meat
and drink, or other succor, to any that shall do such a thing, shall be
accessorie to his offense, and shall suffer death if they did know of the fact,
yet not withstandinge one does such an act, and comes to his wife who
knowing thereof does receive him and gives him meat and drink, she shall not
be accessory nor felon, for in the generaltie of the said words of ye law,
he that is mad, nor ye infant, nor the wife were included in meaning. And thus
equity does correct y^ generality of y^ law in those cases, and the general
words are by equitye abrydged.

The other equity is defined after this sort, Equitye is when the words of
the law are effectually directed, and one thing only provided by y^ words of
the law, to the end y^ althigs of like kind may be provided by the same. And
so when the words enact one thing, theye enact all other things that are of
like degree. As the statute which ordeines that in an actyon of debt against
executours, he that does appear by distress shall answer, does extend by
Equity to Administratours, for he of them that does first appear by distress
shall answer by equity of the said act. Because they are of like kind.

So likewise the statute of Gloucester geues the actyon of wast and the pain
thereof, against him that holds for life, or years, and by ye equity of the
same a man shall have an action of waste against him that holds but for one
year, or half year, and yet yt is without the words of y^ statut, for h^ that
holds but for half a year, or on year, does not hold for years, but y^ is ye
meaning, and the words yt enact ye one by equity, enact y^ other.

Escape.
EScape is in two sorts, that is to say voluntary, and necligent.

Uoluntary escape, is when one does arrest an other for felony, or other crime,
and after lets him go where he will, this letting of him to go is a volu^tary
escape. And if y^ arrest of hi^ y^ escaped were for felony, the^ y^ shall be
felony in him ye did suffer y^ escape, and if for treason, then it shall be
treason in him, and if for trespass, then trespass, and so of other.

Negligent escape, is when one is arrested and after escapes against the will
of him that did so arrest him, and is not freshly pursued and taken before the
pursuer loses ye sight of him, this shall be said a negligent escape,
notwithstanding, yt he out of whose possession he escaped, do take him after
he lost sight of him.

There is an escape also without arrest, as if a murder be made in the day, and
the murderer be not taken, then it is an escape for the which the town where
the murder was done shall be amerced.

Esples.
ESples is as it were, y^ seysin, or poss. of a thing profit, or commodity y^
is to be taken. As of a common y^ esplees is the taking of the grass or common
by y^ mouths of the beasts y^ common there: Of an aduowson the taking of
gross tithes: Of a wood, the selling of wood, of an orchard the selling of
Aples or other fruit growing there: of a mill in taking of tol is the esplees:
and of such like.

Essoine.
ESsoine is where an actyon is brought, and the plaintiff or defenda^t may not
well appear at the day in court, for one of y^ v. causes under expressed, the^
he shall be essoined to save his defaut, whereupon note well that there be v.
manner of essoines, that is to say, essoyne de ouster le mere, and that is by
xl. days, the second essoyne is de terra sancta, and that shall be by a year and
a day, and these two shall be laid in y^ beginning of ye plee. The iii. essoin
is de male vener, and that shall be at common days, as the action requires,
and this is called y^ common essoin. The iiii. essoyne is de malo lecti, and
that is only in a writ of right and there upon there shall a writ go out
of the Chauncerie, directed to the shirife, that he shall send iiii. knights to
the tenant to see the tenant, and if he be sick, to geeue him a day after a
year and a day. The v. essoyne is de service le roy, and it lies in all
accions, except in Assyse of nouel disseisin, writ of dower, darein
prese^tment, and in appel of murder: but in this essoin, it behooves at the day
to show his warrant, or else it shall torn into a defaut, if it be in a plee
real, or he shall lose xx. s. for the plaintifs journey, or more by the
discretion of the Justices, if it be in plee personal, as it appears by the
statute of Gloucester. ca. Octauo.

Estoppel.
EStoppell is when one is concluded, and forbidden in law to speak against
his own act, or deed, yea, although it be to say the truith: And of
estoppels there are a great many, one for example is, when I. S. is bound in an
obligation by the name of Thomas Style, or any other name, and is after ward
sued according to ye same name put in the obligation, that is to say Thomas
Style, Now he shall not be received to say y^ he is misnamed, but shall be
driven to answer according to the name put in ye obligation yt is to say T.
S. for peradventure yt obligee did not know his name, but by y^ report only of
the obligor himself: and in as much, as he is y^ same man y^ was bound: he
shall be estopped and forbidden in law to say y^ contrary against his own deed:
for otherwise he might take advantage of his own wrong, which the law will
not suffer a man to do.

Also if the daughter yt is only heir to her father, will sue livery with her
Sister that is a bastard: she shall not afterward be received to say yt her
Sister is bastard: insomuche that if her bastard sister take half y^ la^d with
her, there is noe remedy by law.

Also if a man seysed of lands in fee simple, will take a lease for years
of the same land of a stranger by deed indented, this is an estoppel during
ye term of years. And the lessee is thereby barred to say the troth, for the
troth is, that he that lessed the land had nothing in it at time of the lease
made, and that the fee simple was in him that did take ye lease: but this he
shall not be received to say, till after the years are determined, because it
appears that he has an estate for years, and it was his folly, to take a
lease of his own lands, and therefore shall thus be punished for his folly.

Estraungers.
EStraungers are they, that are not parties, nor priuies to the leuyinge of a
fine, or making of a deed.

Estray.
EStray, is where any beast or cattle, is in any lordshippe, and none knows
y^ owner thereof, then it shall be seized to the use of the Queen or of the Lord
y^ has such estray by the Queens grant or by prescription: and if the owner
come and make claim thereto, within a year and a day, then he shall have it
again payinge for his meat, or else after the year, the property thereof
shall be to the Lord, so that the Lord make proclamation thereof according to the
law in ii. market towns.

Excommunication.
EXco^municatio^, is when a man by judgment in the spiritual court is accursed,
the^ he is disabled to sue any accyon in the Queens court, and if he remain
excommunicate xl. days, and will not be justified by his Ordinary, then the
Bishop shall send his letter patent to the Chancellor, and thereupon it
shall be commanded to the sheriff to take the body of him y^ is accursed, by a
writ called de Excommunicato capiendo til he has made agreement with the
Church for the contempt and wrong, and when he is justified and has made
greement, then the bishop shall send his letters to y^ Queen, certifiyng the
same, and then it shall be commanded to the shirife to deuer him by a writ
called Excommunicato deliberando.

Exchange.
Exchange, is where a man is seysed of certain land, and an other manne is
seysed of other land, if they by a deed indented, or without deed) if the
Lands be in one self county) exchange the lands, so that every of them
shall have others lands to him so exchaunged, in fee, fee tail, or for term
of life, that is called an exchange, and it is good without lyuere and seysin.
And in exchange it behooves that the estates to them limited by thexchange be
equal, for if one have an estate in fee in his land, and the other has estate
in the other land but for term of life, or in tail, then such eschaunge is
void, but if ye estates be equal, and the lands be not of equal value, yet
the exchange is good. Also an exchange of rent for Lands is good, so an
exchange beetwene rent and common is good and that ought to be by deed. And
it beehoueth always, that these words (exchange) be in the deed, or else
nothing passes by the deed, except that he have livery and seisin.

Execution.
Execution is where judgment is given in any actyon that the playntife shall
recover the land, the debt, or damages, as the case is, and when yt writ is
awarded to pute him in possession, that is called a writ of Executyon, and
when he has the possession of the land, or is paid of the debt, or damages,
or has the body of the defendant awarded to prison, then he has executyon,
and if the plee be in the county, or court barron, or hundred, and they
defer the judgment in favor of the party, or for other cause, then the
demaundaunt shall have a writ of Executione iuditij. But in a writ of Debt, a
man shall not have recouerye of any land, but of that which the defendaunt
has the day of the judgment yielded. And of chattelles a man shall have
executyon only of the chattelles which he has the day of executyon sued.

Executour.
EXecutour is when a man makes his testament and last will, and therein names
the person that shall execute his testament, then he that is so named, is
his executour, and such an executour shall have an actyon against every
debtour of his testatour, and if the executors have assets, every one to who^
the testator was in debt, shall have an action against the executor, if he
have an obligation or specialtie, but in every case where y^ testator might
wage his law, no actio^ lies against the executour.

Extinguishment.
EXtynguishement is, where a Lord of a manor or any other, has a rent going
out of land, and he purchases the same land, so that he has such estate
in the land as he has in the rent, then the rent is extinct, for that, that
a man may not have rent goinge out of his own land. And when any rent
shall be extinct, it behooves that the land and the rent be in one hand, and
also that the estate that he has be not defesible: and that he have as good
estate in the land as in the rent, for if he have estate in the land but for
term of life or years, and has a fee simple in the rent, then the rent is
not extinct but is in suspense for that time, and then after the term, the
rent is revived. Also if there be Lord, mesne, and tenant, and the Lord
purchases the tenauncy, then the menaltie is extinct, but that mesne shall
have the surplusage of the rent, if there be any, as a rent secke. Also if a man have a hye way appendant, and after purchase the land wherein the hye
way is, then the way is extinct, and so it is of a common appendaunt.

Extortion.
EXtortion is a wrong don by an officer, as a Maier, Bailife, Sheriff,
Eschetor or other offycer by color of his office, in taking excessive reward
or fee, for executyon of his said office or otherwise, and is no other thing
in deed then plain robbery or rather more odius then robbery, for robbery is
apparent, and always has with it the countenance of vice, but extortion being
as great a vice as robbery is, carries with it a countenance of virtue, by
means whereof, it is the more hard to be tried, or dyscerned, and therefore
the more odious, and yet some there be, that will not stick to stretch their
office, credit, and conscience, to purchase money as well by extortion as
otherwise according to y^ saying of ye poet Uirgil.

What can be told? or what is that that hunger sweet of gold does not
constrain men mortal to attempt?

Failing of record.
FAilynge of record, is when an action of trespass, or such like, is brought
against one, and the defendaunt says, that the plaintiff before this brought
an accyon for the same trespass in an other court, and recovered damage etc. And
demau^deth judgment of the court, if he shall again have this actio^ etc. And
y^ plaintiff says there is ^o^ such record. Whereupon y^ defendant has a day
given him, to bring in the record, at which day he fails or brings in such
a one, as is nor bar to this action, the^ he is said to fail of his record,
and thereupon the plaintiff shall have judgment to recover etc.

Deed.
DEode is a proof and testimony of the agreement of the party whose deed it
is, to the thing contained in the deed: as a deed of feoffement is a proof of
the livery of seysin: for ye land passes by the livery of seysin, but when y^
deed and the livery are joined together, that is a proof of the livery, and
that the feoffour is content, that the feoffee shall have the land.

And note that al deeds are either inde^ted, whereof there be two, three, or
more as the case requires, of which ye feoffour, grauntor, or lessour has
one, the feofree, gra^tee, or lessee an other, and peradventure some other body
also another etc. or else they are poll deeds or single, and but one, which the
feoffee grauntee or lessee has etc.

And every deed consists of three pryncipal points (and if those three be
not joined together, it is noe perfect deed to bynd the parties) namely,
writing, sealing, and delivery.

The first point is writing, whereby is shelved y^ parties names to the deed,
their dwelling places, their degrees, ye thing granted, upon what
co^sideratio^s, the state limited, the time when it was granted, and whether
simply, or upon condition, with other such like circumstances. But whether the
parties unto the deed, writ in the end their own names, or set thereto their
marks (as it is commonly used) it makes noe matter at al (as I think)* for
that is not meant where it is said, that every deed ought to have writing.

The second point is sealinge, which is a farther testimony of their consents to
that contained in the deed as appears by these words: In witness whereof
etc. always put in the later end of deeds, without which words, ye deed is
insuffycient.

And because we are about sealing and signing of deeds, it shall not be a
miss, (brother Nicholas) here to show you, for antiquities sake, the manner of
signing and subscribing of deeds, in our ancestors the Saxons times,
alfashion different from that we use in these ourdaies in this, that they to
their deeds subscribed their names (commonly addinge the sign of the cross)
and in the end did set down a great number of witnesses, not using at that
time any kind of seal. And we at this day for more suerty, both subscribe
our names (although that be not very necessary as I have aforesaid) put to
our seals, and use the help of testimony besides. That former fashion
continued throughout, until the time of the conquest by the Normans, whose
manner by little and little at the length prevailed amongst us, for the first
sealed Charter in England, is thought to be that of king Edward the
confessor to the Abbey of Westminster: who (being brought up in Normandy)
brought into this Realm that, and some other of their guises with him: And
after the coming of William the Conqueror, the Normans, liking their own
country custom (as naturally all nations do) rejected the manner y^ they sound
here, and retained their own, as Ingulphus, ye Abbot of Croyland, who came in
with the conquest witnesses saying: The Normans do change the making of
writings, which were want to be firmed in England with Crosses of Gold, and
other holy signs, into the printing wax, and they reject also the manner of y^
English writing. Howebeit this was not don all at once but it increased and
came forward by certain steps and degrees, so that first, and for a season,
the king only, or a few other of ye nobility besides him, used to seal:
Then y^ noble men for the most part, and none other, which thing a man may
see in the hystory of Battle Abbey where Richard Lucy chyefe Justice of
England in the time of king Henry the second is reported to have blamed a mean
subject, for that he used a private seal when as that pertayned (as he said)
to the king and nobility only. At which time also (as John Rosse notes it)
they used to ingraue in their seals, their own pictures, and counterfaites,
covered with a long coat over their Armours. But after this the Gentlemen of
the better sort took up the fashion, and because they were not al warriors,
they made seals engraven with their several Coats, or shyeldes of arms, for
difference sake, as the same aucthour reports. At the length, about the time
of king Edward the third, seals became ver^ common, so that not only such
as bore arms used to seal, but other men also fashioned to them selves
signets of their own devise, some taking the letters of their own names,
some flowers, some knottes, and florishes, some birds, or beasts, and some
other things, as we now yet daily behold in use. Some other manner of
sealinge beesides these have been herd of among us, as namelye that of king
Edward the third by which he gave, To Norman y^ hunter, the hop and the
hoptowne, with all the bounds up side down, And in witness that it was sooth,
he bit the wax with his fore tooth.

The like to this (Brother Nicholas) our reverend and good father, among other
antiquities serving my purpose, showed me in a lose paper, but not very
au^tie^tly written, and therefore he willed me to esteem of it as I thought
good, it was as follows.

I William king give to thee Powlen Koiden, my hope and my hoplandes, with the
bounds up and down, from heaven to earth, from earth to hell, for thee and
thin^ to dwell, from me and mine, to thee and thine, for a bow and a broad
sagit qua^t ieo veigne pur hu^ter sur yarrowe, En testmoigne que ceo est very,
ieo mord cest cere oue madent, En la prence de Magg, Maud, and Margery. Et mon
iij. fits Henry.

Item ceo de Alberic de veer, conteinaunt le donation de Hatfield, al quel il
fix un curt noyer haft cuttell semblable al un viel demi denierwhit tle, en
stead de un sigille, oue diu^s tiels se^blables. Mes asc' peradventure voilent
pe^se q' ceux fueront receive en common use et custom, et que ils ne fuerount
les deuifes and pleasures dun peu singular persons, such are no less deceived,
then they that deem every charter and wrytinge that has no seal annexed, to
be as ancient as the Conquest, whereas (in deed) sealinge was not commonly
used, til the time of king Edward the iij. as has been already said.

The third point is delivery, which although it be set last, is not the least
for after that a deed be written, and sealed, if it be not delivered al ye
rest is to noe purpose. And this delivery ought to be done by the party him
self, or his sufficyent warraunt, and so it shall bind him, whosoever wrote,
or sealed the same, and by this last act the deed is made perfect according to
the intent and effect thereof, and therefore in deeds the delivery is to be
proved etc. So thus you see, y^ writing and sealing without delivery, is
nothing to purpose, That sealing and delivery, where there is noe writing,
woorketh nothing, Nor writing and delyuerie without sealinge also makes noe
deed. Therefore they al ought ^oyntlye to concur to make a perfect deed, as
is before said.

Farm, or ferme.
Farm, or ferme, is the chief measuage in a village, or town, and thereto
belonginge great demeasnes of al sorts, and has been used to be let for term
of life, years, or at will.

Also the rent y^is reserved upon such or like leases, is called farm, or
ferme.

And farmor, or fermor is he that occupies the farm, or ferme, or is lessee
thereof.

Also in some places, and counties every lessee, for life, years, or at will,
although it be of never so small a cottage or house, is called farmor, or
fermour.

And note, that they a^ called farms, or fermes, of y^ Saxon word Feormian,
which signifies to feed, or yield victual. For in the ancient time, their
reseruations were as well (or for the more part) in victualles, as money,
until at the last, and that chiefly in the time of King Henry the first (by
agreement) the reservation of victuals, was turned into ready money, and so
hitherto has continued among most men.

Fee farm.
FEe farm is when a tenant holds of his lord in fee simple, payinge to him
the value of half, or of the third, or of the fowerth part or of other part of
the land, by the year. And he that holds by fee ferme, ought to do noe
other thing then is contained in the feoffement, but only fealty, for that
belongs to al kind of tenures.

Feoffement.
FEoffement is where a man gives lands to an other in fee simple, and
delivers seiu^n and possession orthe land, that is a feffement.

Feoffor, et feffee.
FEoffor is he that infeffeth, or makes a feoffement to an other of lands,
or tenements, in fee simple. And feoffee is he, who is infeffed, or to who^ y^
feffement is so made.

Fireboote.
FIreboote is necessary wood to burn, which by the common law, less^e for
years, or for life, may take in his ground, although it be not expressed in
his lease^ and although it be a leas by word only without writing: But y^
sake more then is needful, he shall be punished in wast.

Fledwite.
FLedwite, that is to be quite from amercements when an outlawed fugitive
comes to the kings peace of his own will, or being licenced.

Flemeswite.
FLemeswit, that is, y^ you may have the cattle, or amercementes of your man or
fugitive.

Fletwie.
Fletwit (or Flitwit) that is to be quit from contention and conuiets and that
you may have plea thereof in your court and the amercements, for (Flit) in
english is Tensone in french.

Forstal.
FOrstal, that is to be quite of amerceme^ts and cattelles arrested wtin your
land, and the amercements thereof coming.

Forstaller.
FOrstaller is he that buieth Corn, Cattle, or other marchaundize whatsoever
is salable, by the way as it comes to markets, faires, or such like places to
be sold to the intent that he may sell the same again at a more high and dear
price in prejudice and hurt of the commonwealth and people etc.

The pain for such as are convict thereof etc. is the first time, amerceme^t,
and loss of ye thing so bought, the second time judgment of the pillory:

The third time imprysonment and Rau^some: The fowerth time abiuratio^ of the
town etc.

Franches Royal.
FRanches Royal, is where ye Queen gra^ts to one and to his heirs, that they
shall be quit of Toll, or such like.

Free marriage.
FRee marriage, is when a man seized of lands in fee simple, gives it to an
other man, and to his wife, (who is daughter Sister or otherwise of kin to
ye donor) in free marriage, by virtue of which words they have an estate in
special tail and shall hold the land of the bonor quit of al manner of services
until the fowerth degree be past accomptynge themselves in the first degree,
except fealty, which they shall do because it is incident to all tenures
sauinge free alms. And such gift may be made as well after marriage solemnized
as before. And a man may give lands to his son in free marriage, as well as
to his daughter by the opinion of master Fitzh. in his writ of Champertie. H.
But it appears otherwise in master Litt', and in M. Brook ti. Fra^kmariage.
P. 10. And so it was holden clear in Graies Inn in le^t An* 1576. 18. El. by
ye right worshipful master Rhodes then Reader there.

Freeholde.
FReehold is an estate yt a man has in lands or tenements, or profit to be
taken in fee simple, tail, for term of his own life, or for term of an
others life. And under that, there is no free hold: for he that has estate
for years or holds at will has no free hold: but they are called Chattels.

And of freeholds there are ii. sorts, that is to say freeholde in deed, and
freehold in law.

Freehold in deed, is when a man has entered into lands, or teneme^tes and is
seysed thereof really, actually and in deed: as if the father seysed of lands
or tenementes in fee simple dies, and his son enters into the same, as
heir to his father, then he has a freehold in deed by his entry.

Freehold in law, is when lands or teneme^ts, are disce^ded to a man and he
may enter into them when he will, but has not yet made his entry in deed, as
in the case aforesaid, if the father being seysed of lands in fee simple die
seysed, and they disce^d to his son, but ye son has not yet entered into
them in deed, now before his entry he has a frehold in law.

Freshsuit.
FReshsuit, is when a man is robbed, and the party so robbed, follows the
felon immediately, and takes him with the manner, or otherwise, and then
brings an appeal against him and does convince him of the felony by verdict,
which thing being inquired of for the Queen and found, the party robbed shall
have restitution of his goods agame.

Also it may be said y^ the party made freshsute although he take not the
these presently, but that it be half a year, or a year after the robbery
don, before he be taken: ifso be that the party robbed do what lies in him,
by diligent inquire and search to take him, yea, and although he be taken by
some other body, yet this shall be said good freshsuit.

And so freshsuit is when the lord comes to dystreine for rent or service,
and the owner of y^ beasts does make rescous, and drives them into other
ground that is not holden of the Lord, and the lord follows presently and
takes them: this called fresh suit, and so in other like cases.

Gager of deliverance.
GAger of deliverance is, where one sueth a repleuin of goods taken, but he
has not delivery of the goods, and the other auoweth, and the plaintiff
shows y^ the def. is yet seysed etc. and prays that the def. shall gage the
deliverance, then he shall put in suerty or pledges for the deliverance, and a
writ shall go forth to the sheriff for to redeliuer the goods etc. but if a man
claim property, he shall not gage the deliverance. Also if he say that the
beasts be dead in the pound, he shall not gage etc. Also a man shall never
gage the deliverance before that they be at issue, or demurrer in the law.

Ward.
Ward is when an infant whose auncester held by knights service, is in the
ward or keepinge of the Lord of whom those lands were holden, And if the
tenant hold of dyurrs Lords diverse lands, the lord of whom the land is
holden by prioritie, that is to say, by the more elder tenure, shall have the
wardshippe of the infant, but if one tenure be as old as the other, then he
that first happeth to have y^ ward of the body shall keep it, but in that
case every lord shall have the ward of y^ land y^ is holden of him, but if the
tenant hold of the Queen in chief, then she by her prerogative shall have
the ward of the body, and of all the land y^ is holden of her, and of every
other lord.

Warden.
WArden most properly is he that has ye ward ship or keepinge of an heir,
and of land holden by knights service, or of one of them to his own use,
duringe the nonage of the heir, and within that time has the bestowinge of
the body of the heir, in marriage at his pleasure, without disperagment.

And of wardens there be ij. sorts namely, garden in right, and garden in deed.

Garden in right is he that by reason of his s^ry is seized of the wardship or
keepinge of the land, and of the heir, duringe the nonage of the heir.

Garden in deed, is where the lord after his seisin, as aforesaid, grau^teth
by deed, or without deed, the wardshippe of the land, or of the heir or of
both to an other, by force of which gran^t, the grauntee is in possess. ^^^ is
ye grauntee called garden in deed.

And this garden in deed may grant the heir to an other also, b^^ that
other is not preperlye called garden in deed for that is y^ grant tee of the
garden in right only, and here you may see (Brother Nicholas) what misery
follows that tenure by knights service if the tenant die leauinge his heir
within age, how the poor child may be tossed, and tumbled, chopped and
changed, bought and sold like a Jade in Smithfild, and y^ more is married to
whom it pleases his garden, whereof ensue many euels.

VV arning.
WArninge is when an action of detynue of charters is brought against one, and
the defendaunt says, that the charters were delivered to him by the playntife,
and by an other; upon certain conditions, and prays y^ the other may be
warned to plede with the pleintife whether the conditions be performed or not, and thereuppon a writ of Scire facias shall go forth against him. And
that is called warninge.

Gauelate.
GAuelate, is a special and ancient kind of Cessauit used in Kent where the
Custom of Gauelkind continues: whereby the tenant shall forfeit his lands and
tenementes, to the lord of whom they are holden, if he withdraw from his Lord
his due rents and seruyces, after this manner as follows.

If any tenant in Gauelkind, withholde his rent, and his services of y^
tenement which he holds of his lord, let the Lord seek by the award of his
court from 3. wekes to 3. weeks, to find so^e distress upon the tenement
until the sowerth court, always with witnesses: And if within y^ time, he can
find noe distress in that tenement, whereby he may have i(...) of his
tenant: The^ ar y^ fowerth court let it be awarded, y^ he shall take that
tenement into his hand, in y^ name of a distress, as if it were an ox, or a
cow, and let him keep it a year, and a day, in his hand without manuring it:
wtin which term if y^ tenant come, and pay his arrerages, and make reasonable
ame^des for y^ wtholding: The^ let hi have, and enjoy his teneme^t as his
auncest ours and he before held it. And if he do not come before the year,
and the day past, then let the Lord go to the next Countye Court with the
witnesses of his own court, and pronounce there this process, to have further
witness, and by the award of his court (After y^ Countye court holden) he
shall enter, and manure in those lands and tenements as in his own. And if the
tenant come after ward, and will rehaue his tenements, and hold them as he did
before, let him make agreement with the lord according as it is aunciently
said.

Has he not since any thing given, nor has he not since any thing paid, The^
let him pay v. pound for his were before he be come t'or holder again.

There be some copies y^ have the first verse thus written.

Nisith yield, and nisith gelde.

And others thus.

Nighesith yield, and nighesith gelde,

But these differ not in signification, other coppyes have it after this sort.

Nigondsith selde, and nigondsith geld.

That is to say, let him ix. times pay, and ix. times repaye.

Gauelkinde.
GAuelkinde is a custom annexed, and goinge with lands in Kent called
Gauelkind lands, holde^ by ancient Socage tenure. And is thought by the
skillful in Antiquities, to be called Gauelkind of Give all kyn, that is to
say, to all the kyndred in one line, according as it is used among the Germans
from whom we Englyshmen, and chiefly of Ke^t come: Or else it is called
Gauelkynd, of give all kind, that is to say, to all the male children, for kind
in dutch signifies a male child: and diverse other like co^iectures are made by
them of ye name (Gauelkind) which I omit of purpose for shortness sake,
because that here you look (Brother Nicholas) as you desired me, that I should
speak some what largly concerning other more needful matters for your
purpose, which you are desirous to know as touching Gauelkind lands, both
because you were borne in kent, and also are most abiding there, and therefore
you think to be ignorant of y^ manners or customs of your native country were a
foul sha^e.

To satisfy your request in this: I have therefore set you here down, the
ancient customs of Kent, as they have very truly and carefully of late bin
published, with some cases upon them, gathered out of those books, that make
any mencyon hereof, which will I think, co^te^t your desire at full. And first
you must know, that these gauelkind customs are of good antiquytie, brought
in hither by y^ Saxons, Intes, and Angles, Germans, from whom we Englishmen
descend (as is aforesaied) and were by them used, and left here, and so
continued in force, until William duke of Normandy, conquered al England (Ke^t
only excepted) which he had by composition, and not by conquest: And in this
composition the valyant Kentishmen obtained a grant of the continuation of
their customs of Gauelkynde, which ever sins they have used in the same
country: and thus they are as follows.

The customs of Kent.
THese are the vsages, and customs, the which the co^munalty of kent claims
to have in the tenementes of Gauelkynd, and in the men of Gauelkynd, allowed in
Eire before John of Berwike, and his companions, the Justices in Eire, in
kent, y^ 21. year of king Ed. the son of king Henry.

That is to say, y^ all y^ bodies of Kentishme^ be free as well as the other
free bodies of England.

This things has been since confessed to be true as it appears in 30. E. I. in
Fitzh. titulo Uillenage placi^. 46. where it is holden sufficient for a man to
avoid the objection of bondage, to say yt his father was borne in Kent: But
whether it will serve in that case to say, that himself was borne in Kent it
is (for good reason) to be doubted.

^. And yt they ought not ye Eschetor of the king to choose, nor ever in any
time did they: But the king shall take, or cause to be taken such a one as
it shall please him, to serve him in that which shall be needeful.

3 And that they may their lands and their teneme^ts give and sell, without
license asked of their lords: Saving unto the Lords the rents and ye services
due out of the same tenements.

4 And that al, and every of them, may by writ of the king, or by playnt, plede
for ye obtaininge of their right as well of their Lords as of other men.

5 And they claim also, yt the co^minaltie of Gauelkind men which hold none
other then teneme^ts of Gauelkind nature, ought not to come to ye common
summons of ye Eire but only by the Borsholder, and four me^ of the Borowe:
Except the towns which ought to answer by twelve men in the Eire.

The like to this privilege is enjoyed at this day in y^ sherifes Lathe, where
many whole borowes be excused by the only apparaunce of a Borsholder, and two,
four or six other of y^ inhabitants. Borsholder is so named of ye sa^o^
words Borber caldor, yt is to say, the most ancient or elder of the pledges.

6 And they claim also, that if any tenant in gauelkynd be attainted of
selony, for the which he suffers Judgment of death, the king shall have al
his goods, and his heir sorthwt after his death shall be inheritable to al his
lands and teneme^ts which held in Gauelkind in fee, and inheritance: And he
shall hold them by the same services and customs, as his ancestors held them:
whereupon it is said in Kentish.

The father to the bough, And the son to the plough.
But this rule holds in case of felony, and of murder only, and not in case
of Treason at al^ And it holds also in case where ye offender is iustised by
order of law and not where he withdraws himself after the fault committed,
and will not abide his lawful trial. And because that this custom shall not
be co^strued by equity but by a straight and literal interpretation: it has
therefore bin doubted, whether the brother or uncle shall have y^ advantage
thereof, because the words extend to y^ son only.

See 22. E. 3. abridged by master Brook tit. Custom. 54.

7 And if he have a wife, forthwith be she endowed by the heir, if he be of
age, of the one half of all the lands and tenements which her husband held of
Gauelkynd nature in fee: to have and to hold according to the form hereafter
declared. And of such lands y^ king shall not have the year, nor wast, but
only the goods, as is before said. The wife shall not lose her dower for the
default of her husband, but in such case where the heir shall lose his
inheritance for the offense of his father 8. Henry. 3. 8 And if any manne of
Gauelkinde, either for felony, or for suspicion of felony, withdraw him out
of the country, and be demanded in the county as he ought, and be
afterward vtlawed, or put himself into the holy church, and abjure the land
and the Realm, the king shall have the year and the wast of his lands and
of al his tenementes, together with all his goods and chattels: So that after
the year, and the day, the next Lord, or lords, shall have their Eschetes of
those lands, and tenements, every lord that which is immediately holden of
him. So is it holden in the books 8. E. 2. abridged by master Fitz. ti.
Prescriptio^ 50. and 22. E. 3. abridged by master Brook ti. Custom 54.

9 And they claim also, that if any tenant in Gauelkinde, and be an
inheritor of lands and teneme^ts in Gauelkind, y^ al his sons shall part y^
inheritance by equal portio^s

10 And if there be noe heir male, let ye partitio^ be made between the
females, even as between bro. But y^ statut of Praerog. regis cap. 16. says,
That the females, shall not divide with the males, which is to be understood,
of such as be in equal degree of kynred as Brothers and sisters, as in this
ix. and. x. division. For if a man have issue iij. sons, and the eldest have
issue a daughter, and die in the life of his father, and the father dies. In
this case the daughter shalioyne with the two other brethren her uncles, for
that she is not in equal degree with them, as her father was, whose heir
nevertheless she must of necessity be.

11 And let the message also be departed between them, but the Astre shall
remain to the youngest son or daughter, and be the value thereof delivered to
each of the parceners of y^ heritage, from xl. feet from yt Astre, if y^
tenement will so suffer.

By this word (Astre) is meant (as is co^iectured) either the hall or chief
room of the house* either else the well for water, or the south side of the
buildinge, for (Astre) beeinge sounded without (s) may come of the latin word
Atrium, which signifies a Hall, or of Haustrum, whichbe tokeneth the bucket of
a well, or of Austrum, the south side, every of which have their particular
commodities above the rest of y^ house or tenement, Or otherwise being sou^ded
with (s) it may be deduced from ye french word (Asistre) by contraction (Astre)
which is as much as a site, or situation, and with the article (le) before it
(Lester) a churchyard, or Court about a house. But at this day there is no
such regard made i^ y^ particio^, but only consideration had, that the parts
them selves be equal and indifferent.

12 And then let the eldest brother have y^ first thoyse, and the others
afterward according to their degree.

13 Likewise of houses which shall be found in such messuages, let them be
departed amongst the heirs by equal portyons, that is to weete, by foot if
need be, Sauinge the Covert of the Astre which shall remain to the youngest
son, or daughter, as is beforesaid So nevertheless, that y^ youngest make
reasonable amends to his parceners for the part which to them belongs, by the
awarde of good men.

14 And of the aforesaid tenements, whereof one only suit mas wont to be made
before time, be there not by reason of y^ particion but one sole suit made, as
it was before accustomed, but yet let all the parceners make contribution to y^
parcener which makes y^ sint for them.

15 In like sortlet y^ goods of Gauelkind persons be parted into three parts,
after the funerals and y^ debts paid, if there be lawful issu on live, so yt
ye dead have one part, and his lawful sons and daughters an other part, and
the wife the iij. part.

Where it is said here, that y^ dead shall have one part, it is meant for
performance of his legacies by his executours if he make a testament, or by
the dyscretyon of the ordinary if he die intestate.

16 And if there be no law full issue on live, let y^ dead have the one half,
and y^ wife on live y^ other half. The self same order y^ the custo^e here
speaks of in y^ xv. and xvj. division, is at this day observed in y^ City of
London, and the same in effect, was long since used throughout the whole
Realm. For it is euydent both by the law of king Canutus, by master
Glanuile, by y^ words of Magna carta ca. 18. by master Fitz. in his Natura
breuiu^ in the writ d' Rationabili part bonor' f. 122. L. y^ y^ wife and
children had their reasonable parts of the goods by the common law of ye
realm, and that y^ common law was so, it appears also in 30. E. 3. 25. et
21. 30. H. 6. And it was said for law M. 31. H. 8. abridged by master Bro. ti*
Rationabili part bonarum pl'. 6. that it has been often put in ure as a common
law, and never de murred upon, and therefore it seems that it is common law,
howsoeeuer it came to pass at length y^ it was admitted for law, but in such
countries only, where it was continued by daily usage, and that al ye writs in
the Register, de Rationabili perte bonoru^ have mention of the special custo^e
of the shire, in which the part is demanded, and so is the Book 28. Henrici
6. 4. But as at this day partycion of Chattelles is not used throughout the
whole Realm, though in the mean time it has not lost the force of common
law as many think, and as may be gathered by the opinion aforesaid holden
for law an. 31. H. 8. So is it (as some think) vanished quit out of all ure
within this Country of Rent also.

17 And if the heir or heirs, shall be under the age of 15. years, let the
nouriture of the^ be committed by y^ lord, to the next of the blood to who^ the
enheritaunce cannot descend, so y^ ye Lord take nothing for the committing
thereof.

18 And let not ye heir be married by the Lord but by his own will, and by the advice of his friends if he will.

19 And when such heir, or heirs, shall come to yt full age of 15. years, let
their lands and tenements be delivered unto the^, together with their goods
and profits of the same lands, remaininge above their reasonable sustenance:
of the which profits and goods, let him be bound to make answer which had y^
education of the heir, or else the lord, or his heirs which committed y^ same
education.

The lord ought to take good heed, that he credit not the custody to any
person that shall not be able to answer therefore. For if ye heir at his
full age of 15. years shall come to y^ Lords court, and demand his enheritance,
although y^ Lord may distreine the garden to yield his account (as it appears
18. E. 2. Auowry 220,) yet in default of his ability, the Lord him self, and
his heirs, remain charged to the heir for the same: But I do not hear, that
the Lords take upon the^ at this day to commit the custody of these infants,
but yt they leave it altogether to the order of ye next of kyn, peradventure to
avoid the danger in which they are, if they intermedle as is a foresaid.

20 And this is to be understood, yt from such time as th^se heirs in
Gauelkind, be of, or have passed y^ age of 15. years, it is lawful for them,
their lands or tenementes, to give and sell at their pleasure, Saving ye
services to ye chief lords, as is beforesayd.

Although that this custom enable the heir to make away his lands and
tenementes very soon, namely at the fiftenth year of his age, by means whereof
it might be thought unreasonable in giving such scope and liberty to so young
years: yet upon the good consideration thereof it may appear, that the custom
it self does reasonably and carefully provide in the behalf of the heir for
so much as it licenceth hi^ at yt years not to give his lands, for yt he might
do for nothing, but to give and sell his lands, which it means he should not
do without sufficient recompense. Such like interpretation, the common law also
seems to make of this custom both by the opinion of Vauasor and Keble 5. H.
7. 31. et 41. what said, yt it was (...) y^ a releas made by w^^h an enfant was
void, By y^ sentence of ye b^oke 21. E. 4. 24. where it is said, yt an infant
can not declare his will upon such a feoffement. And by the judgment of Hank 11.
H. 4. 33. who also held, that a warranty or grant of a reuersion made at such
age; was to no purpose at all, although a lease with release might hapely be
good by the custom, because that amou^teth to a feoffement. And it is not fit
that this custom should be construed by equity, for as much as it stands
not with any equity, to enable an infant, of little discretion, and less
experience, to sell his land, and not to provide withal y^ he should have Quid
pro quo, and some reasonable recompense for the same: for y^ were not to defend
the pupil and fatherless, but to lay him wide open to every slye deceit and
circumue^tion. In which respect, their opinion is very well to be liked of, who
hold, y^ if an infa^t in Gauelkind, at this day will sell at xv. years of age,
these three things ought of necessity to co^cure, if he will have y^ sale good
and effectual. The first y^ he be an heir, and not a purchaser of y^ land y^
he departs wtal. The second y^ he have reco^pe^ce for it: and y^ third, y^ he
do it with livery of seysin by his own hand, and not by warrant of attorney,
nor by any other manner of assurance. And these me^ for proof of the first and
second point of their assertion, do build upon y^ words of this custom, where
it is said from such time as those heirs in Gauelkind be of or have passed the
age of fifteen years, it is lawful for the^, their lands or tenements, to
give and sell, in which y^ words (those heirs) do restreine the infant that
comes in by purchase. And (give and sell) in the copulative, do of necessity
imply a recompense, for so much as selling cannot be without so^e price or thing
given for it. And for mayntenaunce of the third matter, they have of their part
besides the common usage of the country, y^ common law of the Realm also, which
expounds the word (Give) to mean a feoffement, and which not only
disalloweth of any gift made by an infant, but also punishes the taker in
trespass, unless he have it by livery from y^ infants own ^^ndes as appears
in 26. H. 8. 2. 9. H. 7. 24. 18. E. 4. 2. 22. H. 6. 3. and diverse other books.

21 And if any such tenant in Gauelkind dye, and have a wife that ouerliueth
him, let that wife by and by be endowed of y^ one half of the tenements
whereof her husband died vested and seized by y^ heirs, if they be of age, or
by the Lords, if y^ heirs be not of age, so that she may have the one half
of those lands, and tenements, to hold so long as she keeps her a widow,
or shall be attainted of child birth* after the ancient usage, that is to say,
that i^ w^^ she is delivered of child, and the infant be herd cry, and that
the hue and (...) be raised, and the country assembled, and have the view of
the child so borne, and the mother, then let her loose her dower wholye* and
otherwise not, so long as she holds her a widow, whereof it is said in
kentish.

He that does wend her, Let him lend her.
This custo^e has been ^llowed of, by the common law long time since, as may
be read, Praerog. regis cap. 16. and 2. H. 3. in Fitz. to Prescriptio^ 59.
etc. But it is a doubt whether a woman shall be endowed by this custo^e of a
possession in law or not, for that y^ words be (of ye tenements whereof her
husband died vested and seized) which word (vested) inforceth a possession in
deed, and not in law only. And therefore, if lands in Gauelkynde descend to
a married man* which dies before he make his entry into the same, Inquire
whether it be ye manner to endowe his wife thereof or not? A woman shall not be
endowed by this custom of a bailliwike, or fair, or such like profitte by the
oppynyon of M. Parkins fo. 84. because y^ words of this customary dower be
terres et tenements, and al customs shall find a litteral and straight
interpretation. And where she is to be endowed by this custom she may very
well be endowed of a moytie, to be holden in common with the heir yt e^ioyeth
y^ other half etc. It is a doubt whether y^ a woman entitled to dower in
gauelkind may waiue her dower of the half after this custom, and bring her
accio^ to be e^dowed of ye 3. at ye common law, and so exe^pt her self from
al danger of ye customary conditions or no? So^e have been of opinion y^ she is
at liberty to take y^ o^e and refuse y^ other at her pleasure: and therefore
inquire thereof etc.

22 And they claim also, that if a man take a wife which has inheritance of
Gauelkinde, and the wife dies before him, let the husband have the one half
of those lands and tenements whereof she dies seized so long as he holds
him a widower, without doing any strippe, or wast, or banishment, whether there
were issue between the^ or no. And if he take another wife, let him lose al.

23 And if any tenement of Gauelkinde do escheat (and that escheat be to any
lord which holds by fee of Hawberke, or by Serieancie) by death, or by
gauelate as is her after said, or be to him re^dred up by his tenant which
before held it of him by quite claim thereof made, or if his escheat be by
Gauelate as is hereafter said, let this land remain to y^ heirs vnpartable:
And this is to be understood, where the tenant so rendringe, does retain no
service to himself, but saves nevertheless to the other lords their fees,
fermes, and the rentes wherewith the aforesaid tenementes of Gauelkynde (so
rendered) were before charged, by him, or them which might charge the^. To hold
by fee of Hawberke, or by Serieancie (if it be graund Serieancie) is to hold
by knights service. Heahbeony in Saxo^, is a high defense: and the Customs of
Normandy call y^ fiefe or fee de Haubert which owes to defend the land by full
arms, yt is, by horse, haubert, target, sword, or helm. And it consists of
300. acres of land, which is y^ same (as some think) that we called a whole
Knights fee.

24 And they claim also, that if any tenant in Gauelkinde wythholde his rent,
and his services of the tenement which he holds of his lord, let the lord
seek by the awarde of his court from iij. wekes, to three weeks, to find
some distress upon that tenement, until the iiij. court always with
witness. And if wtin that time he can find no distress in y^ teneme^t,
whereby he may have justice of his tenant, the^ at y^ iiij. court let it be
awarded, that he shall take that tenement into his hand in the name of a
distress, as if it were an Ox, or acowe, and let him keep it a year, and a
day, in his hand without manuringe it, within which term, if the tenant
come, and pay his arrerages, and make reasonable amends for the withholdinge:
Then let him have and enjoy his tenement as his au^cestors and he before held
it. And if he do not come before y^ year, and ye day past, the^ let y^ lord go
to ye next County court with the witnesses of his own court and pronounce there
this process, to have further witness. And by the awarde of his court (after
y^ cou^tie court holden) he shall enter, and manure in those lands and
tenementes, as in his own demeanes. And if the tenant come afterward, and
will rehaue his tenements, and hold them as he did before, let him make agreement
with ye lord according as it is au^cie^tly said

Has he not since any thing given? nor has le not since any thing paid: Then
let him pay five pound for his were, before he beco^e tenant or holder
again. Some copies have the first verses thus.

Let him ix. times pay, and ix. times repaye.

This custo^e is touched by the way by master Frowike 21. H. 7. 15. and by him
thought to be good but whether it be at this day put in ure, enquire further.

25 Also they claim, that no man ought to make an oath upon a book,
(neither by dystresse, nor by the power of the lord, nor his Bailife) against
his will, without y^ writ of the king (unless it be for fealty to be done to
his Lord) but only before the Coroner, or such other minister of the king, yt
has Royal power to enquire of trespass committed against y^ Crown of our
Lord the king.

26 And they claim, y^ every Ke^tishman may essoine an other, either in y^
kings court, or in the county or in y^ hundredth or in the court of his lord
where essoine lies, and that as well in case of common suit, as of plea.

Moreover they claim by an especial deed of king Henry, the father of king
Edward that of the tenements which are holden in Gauelkinde, there shall no
battle be joined, nor graund assise taken by xii. knights, as it is used in
other places of ye Realm: yt is to wit, where the tenant and demaundant hold
by Gauelkind: But in place of these graund assizes, let Juries be taken by xii.
men being tenaunts in Gauelkind, so y^ four tena^ts of Gauelkind choose xii.
tenaunts of Gauelkynd to be Jurors.

And yt Charter of the king of this especialty, is in the custody of Sir John
of Norwood, the day of S. Elphey, in Caunterbury the year of king Edward ye
son of king Henry the xxi.

These be the vsages of Gauelkind, and of Gauelkindmen in Kent, which were
before the conquest, and the Conquest, and ever since till now.

The end of the customs.

Having thus ended ye custo^es as you see (Brother Nicholas) there remains
now to be showed what lands wtin this Country of Kent, be of the nature of
Gauelkind, and what not.

First therefore, it is to be understood, yt all y^ lands wtin this Shire
which be of ancient Socage tenure (as was said at the beegynnynge) be also of
the nature of Gauelkind. And y^ lands holden by ancient tenure of knights
service, be at the common law, and are not departible after the order of this
custom except certain which being holden of old time by knights service of
the Archbishop of Canterbury, are never the less departible, as it may appear
by ye book 26. H. 8. 4. And that grew by reason of a grant made by king
John, to Hubert the Archbishop there, the tenor of which is as follows.

John by the grace of God King of England* Lord of Ireland, Duke of
Norma^dye, of Aquitane, and Earl of Angieu: To all Archbyshoppes, Bishops,
Abbots, Earls, Barons, Justices, Shirifes, Governors, and officers, and al
Bailifes, and his faithful subjects, greeting. Know ye yt we have granted,
and by this our present Charter have confirmed to our reverend and dearly
beloved father Hubert Archbishop of Caunterbury, and his successors for ever,
that it shall be lawful for them, to convert those lands which men of the
fee of the Church of Caunterbury do hold in Gauelkind in to knights fee.

And yt ye same Bishops and their successors, have the like power and liberty
for ever, over those men and their heirs, that shall hold those lands so
^^uerted into knights see which the Archbishop has, and his successors after
him shall have, over other knights of ye see of the Church of Caunterbury and
their heirs. And that those men and their heirs have the same and al such
liberty for ever which other knights of the sea of the Church of Caunterbury
and their heirs have. Provided always yt nevertheless their accustomed rent
of pence, be holy paid out of their lands as before time their gifts,
auerages, and other services which issued out of the same lands be converted
into a re^t of pence of like value. And y^ y^ same rent be paid as y^ other
re^t of pence is. Wherefore we will and straightly command, y^ whatsoever the
aforenamed Archbishop and his successors after him shall do concerning those
lands which are to be converted into knights fee according to the form and
manner above written, abide ratified and confirmed for ever. Forbiddinge any
person to presume against the deed of the Archbishop or his successors in
this behalf. Witness E. Bishop of Ely, and S. of Bathe G. y^ son of Peter
Earl of Essex, William Marshall Earl of Pe^brooke, To. of Harecourt, Garine
y^ son of Gerald, Peter of Stoke, Ric. of Reuers Rob. of Tateshal, yeuen by
y^ hand of S. Archdeacon unto William at Rupem auriual, y^ 4. day of May the
third year of our reign.

But for as much as it is disputable, whether this Charter of King John, be of
sufficient virtue to change ye nature of Gauelkynde land, or no, and for that
the certeintie of the lands so converted into knights fee, does not any where
appear, (save only that in the book of Aid levied in this shire, Anno 20. E.
3. it is four or five times noted, that certain lands in Kent be holden in
knights service, by the new license granted to the Archbishop) this shall
suffice for that, and it shall follow to be proved, that all the lands of
ancient tenure in knights service, be subject to the ordinary course of
descent at the common law: And that may sufficiently be done both by the
express words of a note in 9. H. 3. abridged by master Brook ti. Customs
57. and in master Fitzherb ti. Prescription 63. And by the opinion of the
Justices 26. H. 8. 4. as also by pleyne recital in the act of parliament made
31. H. 8. ca. 3. by which statute, the possessions of certain gentelmen there
were delivered from this customary descent, and incorporated to the common
law, for (amongst other things) in that act it is said, That from thence
forth such their lands shall be changed from the said custom, and shall
descend, as lands at the common law, and as other lands being in the said
cou^ty of kent, which never were holde^ by service of Socage, but always have
been holden by knights service, do discende. By which words, it is very
evident, that y^ makers of that estatute understood al lands holden by knights
service, to be of their proper nature, discendable after y^ common law, and
that Socage tenure was the only subject, in which this our custom of
Gauelkinde descent prevailed, and held place.

But when mention is here made of Socage, and knights fee, it must always be
understood a tenure long since, and of ancient time continued, and not now
newely, or lately created, for so it may fall out otherwise, then is already
reported. As for example, if land auncie^tlye holden by knights service, come
to y^ Queens hands, who afterward gives ye same out again to a co^on
person, to be holde^ of her manor of East Grene within Socage, this land (not
with standinge the alteration of y^ tenure) remains dis^^dable to y^ eldest
son only, as it was before, as also, in like sort, if lands of ancient
Socage seruite come to ye Crown, and be delivered out again, to be holden
either of the Queen in Capite, or by knights service of any manor, it ought
to disce^d according to y^ custde not wtstanding yt ye tenure be altered, and
if this be true in the grant of ye Queen her self: then much less may the
Archbishope by a new creation of tenure, make to his tenants any alteration of
this old custom and manner, For as the pleadinge is, That the lands
aforesayed, are of the tenure and nature of Gauelkynde, even so the truith is,
that the present tenure only guides not the dyscent, but that the tenure and
the nature together, do govern it. And therefore, as on the one side, the
custom cannot attache, or take hold of that which was not before in nature
subject to the custom, that is to say, accustomably departed: So on the other
side, the practice of the custom, long time continued, may not be
interrupted by a bare alteration of the tenure, as it was holden by the
Justices, Annd 4. et 5. Phi, et Mary, as Judge Dalison has left reported. And
also as it appears by the book 26. H. 8. 4. where it is said, that if a man
seysed of Gauelkinde land holden in Socage, make a gift in tail and create a
tenure in knights service, that yet this land must descend after the custom
it did before the change of the tenure.

Moreover, as y^ change of the tenure cannot prenaile against this custom: So
neither the continuance of a contrary usage, may alter this prescription. For
it is holden 16. E. 3. in Fitz. ti. Prescription 52. that albeit the eldest
son only has (and that for many discents together) entered into Gauelkind
la^d and occupied it without any co^tradiction of the younger brothers, that yet
the land remains partible between them, when soever they will put to their
claim. Against which assertion, y^ which is said 10. H. 3. in Fitzh. titulo
Prescription 64. namely of the issue taken thus. Whether the land were parted
or no, is not greatly forceable. For all though it be foe, that the land were
never parted in deed, yet if it remain partible in nature, it may be parted
whensouer occasion shall be ministered. And therefore, even in the form of
pleadinge used at this day (That the land always etc. was partible, and
parted) it is playnelie taken, that the word (partible) only is of
substance, and that the word (parted) is but a word of form, and not
material, or trauersable at al, yea so inseparable is this custom from the
land in which it obtains, that a contrary dyscent (continued in the case of
the Crown it self) cannot hinder, but that (after such time as the land shall
resort again to a common person) the fourmer old custom shall govern it.
As if lands of Gauelkind nature come to the queens hands by purchase, or by
Eschete as holden of her manor of Dale, now after her death, al her sons
shall inherit and divide them. But if they come to her by forfaiture in
treason, or by gift in parliament, so y^ her grace is seized of the^ in right
of the crown, then her eldest son only (which shall be king after her) shall
enjoy them, in which case although those lands which the eldest son (being
king) did possess, do come to his eldest son after him (being king also)
and so from one to an other, by sundry discentes, yet the oppinion of Sir
Anthonye Brown was 7. Elizabeth, that if at any time after the same lands be
grannted to a common person, they shall revolt to their former nature of
Gauelkynde and be partible amongst his heirs males, notwithstanding that they
have run a contrary course in diverse the discentes of the kings before. But
much less may the unity of possession in the Lord frustrate the custom of
Gauelkind descent as it may appear, 14. H. 4. in y^ long Recordare, abridged
by master Brook tit. Auowry 46. and tit. Customs 19.

Now follows to be spoken how far this custom extends it self within
this our Country of Kent etc.

It is commonly taken that the custom of Gauelkynde is general, and spreads
it self throughout the whole Shire into al lands subject by ancient tenure
unto the same, such places only excepted, where it is altered by act of
parliament. And therefore in 5. E. 4. 18. and 14. H, 4. 8. it is said, that the
custom of Gauelkynde is (as it were) a common law in Kent. And the book 22.
E. 4. 19. affirms, that in demanding Gauelkind land, a man shall not need
to prescribe in certain, and to show that the Town, Borough, or City, where
the lands be, is an Ancient Town, Borough, or City, and that the custom
has been there (time out of mind) that the lands within the same Town,
Borough, or City, should descend to all the heirs males etc. But that is
sufficyentlye enough to show the Custom at large, and to say, that the land
lies in Kent, and that all the lands there be of the nature of Gauelkynd.
For a writ of partition of lands in Gauelkynde (says M. Littleton) shall be
as general, as if the lands were at the common law, although the declaratyon
ought specially to contain mention of the Custom of the Country. This
vnyuersalytie considered, and also the strayte bond (whereby the custom is so
inseperably knit to the land, as in manner nothing but an act of parliament
can clearly disseuer them) it follows, that no place City, Town, or
Borough within this shire, can be exempt from this custom although the same
has not at any time been there put in ure, no more then the Eldest son (in
the case before) may for the like reason prescribe against his you^ger
Brethren etc.

Thus much being spoken touching the name, tenure, nature, generalty, and
order of Gauelkynde: it shall now be showed of what quality the rents,
remaynders, actyons, and such other things (of the which some b^e issuing out
of these lands, some be annexed unto them, and some be raised by reason of
them) shall be. And of the^ some shall ensue the nature of the land, and other
some shall keep y^ same course that common law has appointed. And therefore if
a rent be granted in fee out of Gauelkynde land, it shall descend to all the
males as the land it self shall do, as appears in 14. H. 8. 5. 26. H. 8. 4.
and 4. E. 3.

But if ii. iointenantes of land in Gauelkynde grant a rent charge out of that
land to I. S. and to his heirs: And I. S. dies having issue ii. sons, this
re^t shall not disce^d to both y^ sons of I. S. but to the heir at the common
law because that the custom is in suspense during the ioynture by the opinion
of the right worshipful Christopher Yeluerton Esquire, at his readyng in
Grayes Inn in lent An. 1573.

So if a tenauncy be of Gauelkynde nature, yet the rent service by which it is
holden may descend according to the common law, as Ald' and Chart' in 7. E. 3.
were of opinion.

If a remainder of Gauelkind land be tayled to the heirs males, they
altogether shall inherit as Fitzherbert and Norwich thought 26. H. 8. 4. But
that is to be understood of a descent only, for if lands of Gauelkynde
nature be leassed for life, the Remaynder to the right heirs of John Style
which has issue four sons and dies, and after the lessee for life dies,
now the eldest son only of I. Style shall have this land, for he is right
heir, and that is a good name of purchase 37. H. 8. in master Brook ti. Done
et Remaynder 42. But if the lands had been given to John Style for life, the
remaynder to his next heir male, this had been an estate tail in John Style
him self, and then the land should have descended to al his sons, in so
much as in that case ye words (next heir male) be not a name of purchase.
Howbeit it was greatly doubted 3. and 4. Phil. et Mariae (as Justice Dalison
reports) if a remainder be devised by testament (to the next heir male)
whether in that case the eldest brother only shall have it, in so much as (in
the understanding of the law, which is a judge over al customs) he is the
next heir male and therefore inquire of it.

As touching vouchers, it appears 11. E. 3. that all the heirs in Gauelkynd
shall be vouched for the warraunty of their Auncester, and not the eldest only.
But the opinion of Master Littleton li. 3. cap. 13. and of the Justices 22. E.
4. is clear yt the elde^^ son only shall be rebutted, or barred by the
warranty of the auncestour, to be short, the eldest son only shall enter for
the breach of a condition: But the rest of the brethren shall be joined with
him in suinge a writ of Attaynt to refourme a false verdict, or Error to
reuerse an erroneous judgment: And they al shall be charged for the debt of their
auncestour, if so be yt they al have assets in their hands. But if the eldest
only have assets remayninge, and the residue have aliened their parts, then
he only shall be charged after the mind of the book 11. E. 3. etc. And thus
much for this part shall suffice.

Now a word or ij. of other things confusely, yet apertaininge to this
matter, notwythdinge not so necessary for your purpose to be known as those
aforesaid. It appears in a written report at large of 16. Edwardi 2. which is
also partlye abridged by master Fitzherbert, titulo Prescription, that it was
tried by verdicte, that noe manne ought to have common in Lands of Gauelkinde,
howbeit the contrary is well known at this day, and that in many places ye
same book says, yt the usage of Gauelkinde is, that a man may lawfullye
inchase, or drive out into the high way to their adventure, the beasts of any
other person that he shall find doing damage in his land, and yt he is
not compellable to impounde them, which thing is practiced at this day.

The parlyament 15. Henrici sexti cap 3. mindinge to amplifye the privileges
of Gauelkynde, granted to the tenauntes of that land, exemption in Attaints,
in such sort as the inhabitaunts of ancient demean, and of the five ports
before had: But within three years after upon complaynt of some of the
Country which enfourmed the Parlyament house that there was not in the whole
Shire thirtye or fortye persons, that hold to the value of xx. pound land,
out of Gauelkinde, who in default of others, and by reason of that exemption,
were continuallye molested by returns in Attaintes, that act was utterly
repealed.

The statute 14. H. 8. cap. 6. gives liberty to every manne (having highwaie
through his land in the welde that is worn deep, and incommodious for
passage) to lay out another way in ome such other place of his land, as
shall be thought meet by the vyewe of two Justyces of the peace, and twelve
other men of wisdom and discretion.

The general law, made 35. H. 8. 17. for the preservation of Copeises woods
thorough out the Realm, makes plain exception of all woods within this
wealde, unless it be of such as be common etc. And here an end of this
matter. sauinge that I will make master Litteltons annswere to such as happelye
will demand what reason this custom of gauelkinde descent has thus to deuyde
land a monge all the males contrary to the manner of the whole Realm beesides:
The younger sonns (says he) be as good gen telmen as the elder, and they
(being a like dear to their common auncestour, from whom they claim) have so
much the more need of their friends help as (through their minority) they be
less able then the elder Brother to help themselves etc.

Gelde.
GElde, that is to be quite of servile customs which were wo^t to be geeuen,
and are yet given, as hornegelde and such like.

Grithbrech.
GRithbrech that is the kings peace broken, because (Grith) in English is pax
in latin.

Hangwite.
HAngwite, that is to be quite of a thief or relon hanged without judgment, or
escaped out of your custody.

Hariot.
HAriot is in ii. sorts the one hariot Custom, the other haryot service.

Hariot service (some fay) is always expressed in a man's grant, or deed that
he holds by such service to pay hariot at the time of his death, and this
hariot is payable after ye death of the tenant in fee simsimple.

Hariot Custom, is where hariotes have been paid time out of mind by custom.
And this may be after the death of tenant for life etc. But to speak thereof
generally.

Hariot is the best beast (whether it be horse Ox, or Cow) that the tenant
had at the time of his death. And may be either seysed, or a distress taken
for it, whether it be hariot service, or hariot custom, to the Lords use of
whom the tenant held, by his Bailife, or other officer beelonginge to his
manor.

But of right the Lord, nor his officer should not take hariot before it be
presented at the next court holden, that the tenant is dead, and that such a
beast is due to the Lord for his hariot.

Haybote, or Hedgebote.
HAybote, or hedgebote, is necessary stuff to make and mend hedges, which
lessee for years, or for life of common right may take upon the ground to him
leased, although it be not expressed in his lease, and although it be a lease
by words without wrytinge.

Haybote also may be taken for necessary stuff, to make Rakes forkes and such
like instruments wherewith men use in summer to tedde and make hay: and so a
lessee for years took it, and it was allowed him by his lessor, the rather,
as I suppose, for that such instruments are commonly made of slender under
wood, which by the common law lessee for years may cut and take as is
aforesaid.

Hidage.
HIdage, that is to be quit if the king shall tax all the land by hides.

Note that a hyde of land is a whole ploweland. And this kind of taxinge by
hides was much used in old time, as well for provision of armor, as paymentes
of money, and that chefely in king Etheldredes days (a king in this Country
before ye conquest) who in the year of Christ 1006. when as the Danes landed
at Sandwich in Ke^t, taxed al his la^d by hides thus. That every 310. hydes of
land should find one ship fornished, and every 8. hides should find one Jacke
and one sallet, for ye defense of ye Realm.

Hotchpot.
HOtchpot, is a medlynge, or mixinge together, and a partition of lands given
in frankmariage, with other lands in fee simple dysce^ded as for example, a man
seysed of 30. acres of land in fee simple has issue ii. daughters, and gives
with one of his daughters to a man yt marieth her x. acres of the same land in
frankemariage, and dies seysed of the other 20. acres: Now if she that is
thus married will have any part of the 20. acres whereof her father dyed seysed:
She must put her lands given in frankmariage, in hotchpot, that is to say she
must refuse that gift in frankemariage, and suffer the land to be commixt and
mingled together, with the other land whereof her father dyed seysed, so that an
equal division may be made of the whole between her and her Sister: and thus
for her 10. acres she shall have xv. else her Sister will have the xx. acres,
of which their father died seysed.

Home Sokene.
HOme soken (or hane soken) y^ is to be quit of amercements for entringe into
houses vyolently and without license, and contrary to the peace of the king.
And that you hold plea of such trespass done in your court, and in your land.

Homicide or ma^slaughter.
HOmicide or manslaughter, is the killing of a man feloniously, without malice
fore thought: It is also defined thus: Homicide is the killing of a man, by a
man: and if such kyllinge be don by a dog, ox, or other thing, it is not
properly called homicide: for it is called homicide of a man, and to kill as y^
killing of a man.

Hornegeld.
HOrnegeld, y^ is to be quit of a certain custom exacted by tallage through
all the land, as of whatsoever horn beast.

Housebote.
HOusebote is necessary timber, y^ lessee for years, or for life of common
right may take upon y^ ground to repair y^ houses upon y^ sa^e ground to him
leased, although it be not expressed in ye lease, and although it be a lease
by words without deed: But if he take more then is needful, he may be
punished by an action of wast.

Hundred.
HUndredes were devised by Alfred y^ king, after that he had divided the
whole Realm into certain parts or Sections, which of the Saxon word Scynan
signifyinge to cut, he termed Shires, or (as we yet speak.) Shares, and
portions: These Shires he also brake into smaller parts, whereof some were
called Lathes of y^ word Ielapian, which is to assemble together: others
Tithinges so named because there were in each of them to the number of ten
persons, whereof each one was suertie and pledge for others good abearinge:
others hundreds because they contained jurisdiction over an hundred men or
pledges, dwellinge paraduenture in ii. or iii. or more parishes Boroughes, or
towns, lyinge and adioyninge nevertheless somewhat nere together, in which he
appointed adminystration of Justice to be exercysed severally among them of
ye same hundred, and not that one should run out disorderly into an others
hundred, lath, or tithing, wherein he dwelled not. These hundreds continue to
this day in force, although not altogether to y^ sa^e purpose, wheru^to at the
first they were appointed yet still very needful both in time of peace for good
order of gouerme^t diverse ways, and also in war for certeinty of leuying of
me^: as else for the more ready collections of payments granted in parliament
to the kings and Queens of this Realm.

Hundred.
HUndredum, that is to be quit of money or customs to be done to the
governors and hundredors.

Idiot.
Idiot is he that is a fool naturally from his birth, and knows not how to
account or number twenty pence nor cannot name his father, or mother, nor of
what age himself is, or such like easy and common matters: so that it
appears he has noe manner of understanding of reason nor government of him
self what is for his profit, or disprofit etc. But if he have so much
knowledge that he can read, or learn to read by instruction and informatyon of
others, or can measure an elle of cloth, or name the days in the week, or
begette a child, son or daughter, or such like, whereby it may appear that
he has some light of reason, then such a one is noe Idiot naturallye.

Unlawful assembly.
Unlawful assemblye, is where people assemble them selves together to do some
unlawful thing against the peace, although that they execute not their purpose
in deed.

Imparlance.
IMparlaunce is when an action of debt, trespass, or such like is brought
against a man, and after that the pleintife has counted, or declared, the
defendaunt prays the Court that he may have time to put in his answer, at
an other day in the same term, or in the next term followinge, this stay of
answer is called imparlaunce.

Imprisonment.
IMprysonment is noe other thing, but the restraynt of a man's liberty,
whether it be in the open feelde, or in the Stocks, or Cage in the streates,
or in a man's own house as well as in the common jail. And in all these places
the party so restrained is said to be a prisoner, so long as he has not
his lybertye freely to go at al times whether he will, without bail,
mainprise, or other aucthoritye.

Infangethefe.
INfangethefe, that is that thieves taken with in your demesne or fee
convicted of thefts, shall be judged in your court.

Information.
INformation for the Queen is that which for a common parson is called a
declaration, and is not always done directly by the Queen, or her attorney,
but rather by some other man who sueth or infourmeth as well for ye Queen, as
for him self upon ye breach of some penal law or stat wherein a penalty is
given to ye party that will sue for ye same, but no action of det to recover it,
then it must be had by information.

Ioynture.
IOynture is an estate and assurance made to a woman in consideration of
marriage for term of her life, or otherwise, whether it be before or after ye
marriage. And if it be after the marriage then she may at her liberty after
the death of her husband refuse to take or have the lands so assured for her
Jointure, and demand her dower at the common law.

But if it be made before marriage then she may not refuse such ioiniure, nor
have dower according to the common law, unless that when she brings her
writ of dower, the defendaunt pleads such a plea that will not bar her of
her dower, then she shall be endowed As if he say in bar, that her husband
was not seized of such estate where of she might be endowed, or any such plea,
and does not show that she h^th a ^^mture made etc. and therefore demand
judgment of that action, or judgment if she shall be also endowed, or any such
like plea etc. and this was the oppinion of y^ right worshipful master Brograue
at his reading in Graies June in So^mer Anno 1576. 18. Eliz. upon a branch of
the stat made An. 27. H. 8. c. 10. concerning iointures and dowers.

And by him of those things whereof a woman may be endowed, she may have
ioynture, as of mines, vesturam terr^, woods, Towns, Isles, meadows, and such
like. Also of an aduowson, of a reuersion depending upon an estate for life, of
a windmil, a high chamber, a rectorie and such other, and they are called
teneme^ts, Also of a villen, for he is an heredytament, and of all these
profet may come to the woman. But of those things whereof noe profet will
come, but rather a charge, a ioynture cannot be made.

Theft.
THeft is a deceiptfull taking away of an other man's goods, but not from his
parson, with a mind to steal them, a gaynst his will whose goods they were.

And theft is in two sorts, ye one so called simply, and the other pety or
little theft. The first is where the thing stolen exceeds the value of xij.
d. and y^ is felony.

The other (which is called littel or p^tiet theft) is where the thing stolen
does not excede ye value of xij. d. and that is no felony.

Lastage.
LAstage, that is to be quite of a certain custom exacted in faires any
markets for caryinge of things where a man will.

Lessor and lessee.
LEssor is he that lesseth lands or tenementes to an other for term of life,
years, or at will, and he to whom the lease is made, is called lessee.

Leuant, and couchant.
LEuant, and Couchant is said, when the beasts or Cattle of a stranger are
come into an other man's ground, and there have remained a certain good space of
time so long that they have well fed, and also rested them selves.

Wager of law.
WAger of law, is when an accion is brought against one without especialty she
wed, or other matter of record, as an accion of debt upon contract or detinue,
then the defenda^t may wage his law, that is to say, swear upon a book, and
certain persons with him, that he owes nothing to the playntife in manner
and form as he has declared. But in an action of debt upon a lease for
term of years, or upon the arrerages of account before auditors assigned, a
man shall not wage his law. And when one shall wage his law, he shall bring
with him vi. viii. or xii. of his neighbors as the court shall assign him, to
swear with him. And if at that day assign he fail of his law, then he shall be
condemned.

Livery of seysin.
Livery of seysin, is a ceremony used in conueyance of lands or teneme^ts
where an estate in fee simple, fee tail, or a freehold shall pass: and it is a
testimonial of the willing departing from all that which he who makes the
liuerie has in the thing whereof liuerie is made: And the receyuinge of the
livery, is a wyllyng acceptance by the other party of all that whereof the
other has dismissed him self: And was invented as an open and notorious
thing, by means whereof the common people might have knowledge of the passinge
or alteration of estates from manne to manne, that thereby they might be the
better able to try in who^ the right and possession of lands and tenements
were if they should be impanelled in Juries, or otherwise have to do
concerning the same.

The common manner of delivery of seysin is after this sort done: If it be in
the open feelde where is no building or house, then one that can read takes
the writing in his hand, if the estate shall pas by deed, and declares to the
sta^ders by, the cause of their meetyng there together etc. and then openly
reads the deed in English, and after that it is sealed, the party who is to
depart from the ground, takes the deed in his hands together with a clodde
of the earth, and a twigge or bow if any there be, and all this he delyuereth
to the other party in the name of possession or seysin, according to the form
and effect of the deed, which before them was there read. But if there be a
dwelling house or buildinge upon the land, then this is done there at the
door of the same none being left at that time within the house, and y^ party
delivers all the aforesaid together with the ring of the door, in the name
of seysin or possession, and he that receives the liberty enters in first
alone and shuts to the door, and presently opens it again, and lets
them in etc. If it be of a house whereto is noe land or ground, the liuerye is
made and poss. taken, by the delivery of y^ ringe of the door and deed only.
And where it is without deed either of lands, or tenementes, there the party
declares by word of mouth before witness, the estate that he means to
depart with, and then delivers seysin or possession in manner as is before
say^e: and so the land or tenement does pass as well where there is no deed
as by deed, and that by force of the lyuerie of seysin: It was agreed in
Grayes Inn by the right warshipful master Snagge, at his readyng there in
So^mer an. 1574 that if a feoffour deliver the view of the land, in name of
seysin, that it is good, because that he has a possessyon in him self. But
otherwise yt is of an attorney, for he must go to the land, and take
possession him self, before that he can give possession to an other,
according to the words of his letter etc. And where liuerie of seysin is by
view, if the feoffee do not enter after etc. nothing passes, for he ought
to enter in deed.

Lotherwite.
LOtherwite, that is y^ you may take ame^des of him which does defile your
bondwoman without your license.

Mahim, or maim.
MAhim, is where any member is hurt or taken away, whereby ye party so hurt is
made imperfect to fight: As if a bone be taken out of the hedde: or a bone be
broken in any other part of the body: or a foot, or hand, or finger, or joint
of a foot, or any member be cut: or by some wound the sinews be made to
shrink, or other member, or the fingers made crooked, or if an eye be put
out, or the foreteeth broken, or any other thing hurt in a man's body by
means whereof he is made the less able to defend him self.

But the cuttinge off of an ear, or nose, or breaking of the hinder teeth, or
such like, is no may* him, because it is rather a deformity of ye body, the^
diminishing of strength. And if the Justyces stand in doubt whether the hurt be
a maihim or not, they use, and will of their great discretion take the help and
opinion of some skilful Surgeon, to consider thereof, before they determine
upon the case.

Mainprise.
MAinprise is when a man is arrested by capi as, then the Judges may deliver
his body to certain men for to keep and to bring him before them, at a
certain day, and these be called mainpernours, and if the party appear not
at the day assigned, the mainpernoures shall be amerced.

Manor.
Manor, is a thing compounde of diverse things, as of a house land,
arrable, pasture, meadowe, wood, rent, auowson, court baron, and such like
make a manor, and this ought to be by long contynuaunce of time, to the
contrary^ whereof man's memory cannot tell, for at this day a manor cannot be
made, because a court baron cannot now be made, and a manor cannot be without a
court baron, and suitors, or freeholders, two at the least, for if all the
freeholdes except one escheate to the lord, or if he purchase al except one,
there his manor is gone, for that it cannot. be a manor without a court Baron
(as is aforesaid) and a court baron cannot be holden but before suitors, and
not before one suter, and therefore where but one freehold or freeholder is,
there cannot be a manor.

Manumission.
MAnumission is in ii. sorts, the one is a manumission expressed, the other a
manumissio^ employed or secreat.

Manumission expressed is when the Lord makes a deed to his villen to
enfraunches him by this word ( Manumittere) which is as much to say as to let
one go out of an other man's hands or power.

The manner of manumittinge or infraunchising in old time most usually was
thus. The Lord (in presence of his neighbors) took the bond manne by the
head saying, I will that this manne be free, and therewyth showed him forward
out of his hands, and by this he was free without any more a do.
Manumissyon employed without this wood ( Manumittere) is when the lord makes
an obligation to his ville^ to pay him money at a certain day, or suith him
where he might enter without suit, or grants unto his vyllen an annitie, or
lesseth land to him by deed for years, or for life, and in diverse such like
cases, ye villen thereby is made free.

Maxims.
Maxims be the foundations of the law, and the conclusions of reason, and are
causes efficient, and certain universal propositions so sure and perfect that
they may not be at any time impeached or impugned, but ought always to be
observed and holden as strong principalles and aucthorities of themselves
although they cannot be proved by force of argument or demonstratio^s logical,
but are known by enduction by ye way of sense and memory. As for example, it
is a maxim that if a man have issue 2. sons by diverse women, and the one of
them purchase lands in fee and dies without issue, the other brother shall
never be his heir etc.

Also it is an othermaxime that lands shall disce^d from the father to ye son*
but not from the son to ye father for that is an ascension etc. and diverse
such like there be.

Maynour.
MAynour is when a thief has stolen, and is followed with hue and cry, and
taken, having yt found about him which he stole, that is called the maynour.
And so we commonly use to say when we find one doing of an unlawful act,
that we took him with the maynour, or manner.

Misprision.
MIsprision, is when on knows that an other has committed treason or felony,
and will not discover him to the Q. or to her council or to any magistrate, but
does conceal the same.

A chapleine had fixed an old seal of a patent to a new patent of non
residence, and this was holden to be misprision of treason only, and noe
counterfeiting of the Q. seal.

Also if a man know money to be counterfeit, and bring the same out of Ireland
hither into England and utter it in payment, this is but mysprision of treason,
and no treason, and so it is in diverse such like cases.

And in all cases of misprision of treason ye party offender shall forfayt his
goods for ever, and y^ profets of his lands for term of his life, and his
body to prison at the Q. pleasure.

And for misprision of felony or trespass ye offe^dour shall be committed to
prison until he have found suerties or pledges for his fine, which shall be
assessed by ye ducretion of yt Justices before whom he was convict.

And note, that in every treason or felonye is included misprision, and where
any has committed treason or felony, the Q. may cause ye sa^e to be indicted
and arramed but of misprision only if she will.

Shewinge of deeds, or Records.
SHewinge of deeds, or Records, is as if for example, an actyon of debt be
brought against one upon an obligation or by Executors etc. there after that
the pleyntife has declared, he ought to show his obligation, or y^ executour
the testament to the court, and so it is of Records.

And the diuersitye beetwene showing of deeds or Records and hering of deeds
or records is thus, he y^ pleades the deed or record, or declares upon it, to
him it does appertain to show the same. And the other against whom such deed
or record is pleaded or declared, and is thereby to be charged, may demand
hearing of the same deed or record, which his adversary brigeth or pleads
against him.

Mortgage or Morgage.
MOrtgage or Morgage is when a man makes a feoffement to another on such
condition, that if the feoffour pay to the feoffee at a certain day xl. li. of
money, that then the feoffour may reenter, etc. In this case the feffee is
called tenant in morgage. And as a man may make a feoffement in fee in
morgage, so he may make a gift in tail, or a lease for term of life, or for
term of years in morgage. And it seems that the cause why it is called
morgage, is for that it stands in doubt whether the feoffor will pay the
money at the day appointed or not, and if he fail to pay, then y^ land which
he laid in gage upon condition of payment of ye money, is gone from him for
ever, and so dead to him upon co^ditio^: But if he pay y^ money, then is the
gage dead as to y^ tenant, yt is to say the feoffee, and for this cause it is
called in latin mortuum vadium as master Littleton says, or rather mortuum
vas, as I think.

Mortmaine.
MOrtmaine was when lands were given to a house of religion, or to a company
which be corporat by ye kings grant, then the land is come into mortmain, that
is to say in English a dead hand, and the king or the lord of who^ ye la^d to
holden may enter into the^.

Mulier.
MUlier, is a word used in our law, but how aptly I cannot tell nor do well
know how it should come in y^ sense as we there take it: For according to
the proper signification, mulier is a defiled woman like as it is used by
vlpianus in a certain place after this sort, if I thought that I had bought a
virgin, when it was a defiled woman, the bargayne was not good. Hereby you may
see yt multer is a woman that has had ye company of a man: But to leave the
right signification: Mulier is taken in our law for one that is lawfully
begotten and borne: and is always used in comparison with a bastard, only to
show a difference between the^, as thus for example: A man has a son by a
woman before marriage, that issue is called a bastard, and unlawful: And after
they entermary, and have an other son, this second son is called mulier,
that is to say lawful, and shall be heir to his father: but that other cannot
be heir to any manne, because it is not known nor certain in the judgment of
the law, who was his father, and for that cause is said to be no man's
son, or ye son of the people, and so without father, according to this old
verse:

To whom the people father is, to him is father none and all.

To whom the people father is, well fatherless we may him call.

And always you shall find this addition to the^ (bastard eldest, and mulier
youngest) when they be compared together.

Murder.
MUrder is a wilful killinge of a man upon malice forethought, and seems to
comeof the Saxon word Mordren which so signifies: And Mordridus, is the
murderer even until this day among them in Sexonie, from whence we have most
of our words as has been often said.

Negatiua preignans.
NEgatiua preignans, is when an action, or information, or such like, is
brought against one, and the defendant pleads in bar of the actyon, or
otherwise, a negative plea, which is not so special an answer to the actyon
but that it includes also an affirmative. As for example: if he in reuersion
enter upon tenant for life supposinge that he has aliened in fee, (which is
a forfaiture of his estate) and the tenant for life says that he has not
aliened in fee, this is a negatyue wherein is included an affirmative: for
although it be true, that he have not aliened in fee: yet it may be that he
has made an estate in tail (which is also a forfayture) and then the entry of
him in the reuersion is lawefull etc. Also in a Quare impedit the Queen makes
title to present to a Prebende for that the Temporaltyes of the Bishopric were
in her hands by the death of W. late Bishop etc. The defendant says that it
was not void being the temporalties in the Queens hands by the death of W.
this is a negative preignans, for it may be in the Queens hands otherwise
then by the death of W. and it suffiseth the Queen if it be in her hands by
any means etc. So it is where an Information was brought in the Cheker
against John Style, for that he bought wool beetweene shering time and the
Assumptyon, such a year of John N. The defendaunt says that he did not buy
any of John N. as it is alleged etc. this is called a negative preignans, for
if he bought it of any other, yet he is culpable for the buyinge.

Niefe.
NIefe is a woman that is bond, or a vyllen woman, but if she mary a free
manne, she is thereby made free for ever (although yt her husband die and she
survive him) because that she and her husband are but one person in law, and
she ought to be of the same nature and condytion in law to al intents that
her husband is. But her husband is free to all intentes without any condityon
in law or otherwise, and so by consequens the wife ought to be, and is free
according to y^ nature of her free husband, and then if she were once free and
clearly discharged of bondage to al entents, she cannot be niefe after, without
especial act done by her, as divorce, or confession in court of Record, and
that is in favor of liberty, and therefore a free woman shall not be bound by
taking of a ville^ to her husband. But their issue shall be villens as their
father was, which is contrary to the Civil law, for there it is said, y^
birth follows the belly. Bondage or villenage had beginning among y^
Hebrews and his original proceeding of Canaan y^ son of Cham, who because
that he had mocked his father Noe to scorn lying desolutly when he was
drunk, was punished in his son Chanaan with penalty of bondage.

Nihil dicit.
NIhil dicit is when an action is brought against a man, and the defe^dant
appeeres, the plaintiff declares, and the defendant will not answer, or
pleades to the action, and does not maintain his plea, but makes defaut, now
upon this defaut, he shall be condemned because he says nothing.

Nomination.
NOmination is where one may in right of his manner or otherwise, nominate and
appoint a worthy clarke or man to a personage, vicarage or such like spiritual
promotion.

Nonabilitie.
NOnabylitye is where an action is brought against one, and the defendaunt
says, that the playntife is not able to sue any action, and demands
judgment if he. shall be answered. There are vj. causes of nonability in the
pleintife, as if he be an outlawe, or an alien borne, but that dysabilitye is
in actions reales and mixed only, and not in actyons personalles, except he be
an alien enemy, or condemned in praemunire, or professed in religion, that is
to say, the Roomish religion, or accursed, or a villen and sueth his Lord,
but this last is noe ple for an other y^ is not lord to the villen.

Bare, or naked Contract.
BAre Contract, or naked promise, is where a man bargaineth, or sells his
lands or goods, or promises to give to one money or a horse, or to build a
house, or do such a thing at such a day, and there is no recompense
appointed to him for the doing thereof: As if one say to an other, I sell or
give to you al my lands or goods, and there is nothing appointed assigned or
agreed upon what the other shall give or pay for it, so yt there is not one
thing for an other, this is a naked contract, and void in law, and for not
perfourmaunce thereof noe action lies, for of a naked contract comes noe
action.

Oredelfe.
O Redelfe is where one claims to have y^ ore that is found in his soil or
ground.

Outfanthefe.
OUtfangthiefe, that is y^ thieves orfelo^s of your la^d or fee out of your la^d
or fee taken, with felony or a stealing, shall be brought back to your court, and
there judged.

Owelte.
OWelte is when there is Lord mesne and tenant, and ye tenant holds of the
mesne by the same services, that the mean holds over of y^ lord above him.
As if y^ tenant hold of y^ mesne by homage, fealty, and xx. s. of re^t yearly,
and ye mesne holds over of ye lord above by homage fealty, and xx. s. rent
also, this is called owelty of services.

Hearing of Records and deeds etc.
Hearing of Records and deeds is if for example an actio^ of det be brought
against a man upon an obligation, and the defendant appeeres to the action,
and then prays yt he may hear the obligation where with the plaintiff
charge him.

So it is when as executors bring an action ofdet, and the defendant
demands to hear the testament, upon this demand it shall be read unto the
desendaunt, But if it be in an other ^erme or after y^ the defendant has
imparled, then he shall not hear it. And so as is said of deeds, is to be
understood of records that are alleged against him.

Pape.
PApe is an ancient name falsely arrogated, or proudly usurped by ye Bishop of
the only City of Room in Italy, and is commonly englished the Pope, a name
truly much frequented in our ancient year books, specially in the times of
those kings, who to much aba^doning their imperial authority, and abasinge
themselves far beneath their estate, were not a shamed, to suffer an alyen and
outlandish Bishop, that dwelt above fifteen hundred miles from them, to be
sovereign over them in their own dominions, and to take from them not only
the disposition of certain small trisles of none account, but also the
nomination of Archbishoppes, Bishops, Abbots, Deanes, prouosts appropriations
of benefices prese^ta^' to personages, vicarages, and generally of al
spiritual persons to their preferments sometimes by lapse, and sometimes
otherwise whereby the kings princely prerogative was very much abridged wtin
their own Realms.

Partition.
PArtityon is a deuyding of lands disce^ded by the common law, or by custom
among coheires or parceners where there be ii. at y^ least whether they be
sons, daughters, sisters, au^tes, or otherwise of hyn to the auncestour from
whom the la^d descended to the^.

And this particion is made iiij. ways for the most part, whereof three are at
pleasure and by agreement among them, the fourth is by compulsion.

One particyon by agreement is when they them selves divide the land equally
into so many parts, as there be of them coparceners, and each to choose one
share or part, the eldest first, and so y^ one after other, as they be of age,
except y^ the eldest by consent make the particion, then the choice belongs
to y^ next, and so to the eldest last according as it is said. Who so
makes the partition, the other must have the choice.

An other partition by agreement is when they choose certain of their friends to
make division for them.

The third partition by agreement is by drawing of lots thus: first to divide
the land into so many parts as there be parceners, then to writ every part
severally in a little scrolle, or piece of paper or parchment, and to put the
same scrolles up close into a hat, cap, or other such like thing, and then each
parcener one after an other as they be of age to draw out thereof one piece
or scrolle wherein is written a part of the land which by this drawinge is now
severally allotted unto them in fee simple.

The fowerth partition which is by compulsion is when one or some of the
coparceners would have partition and other some will not agree there to: The^
they y^ so would have partitio^ may bring a writ de partitione facicienda
against y^ others that would not make partition, by virtue whereof they shall be
compelled to depart etc. We in Kent (Brother Nicholas) where the lands are of
Gauelkynd nature, call at this day our partition Shiftinge even y^ very same
word that the Saxons used namely ( Scystan,) which signifies to make
partitio^ between coheires, and to assign to each of them their portion, in
latin it is called Herciscere.

Parties.
PArties to a fine, or deed, are those that levy the same fine, and also they
to whom the fine is levied: And they that make a deed of feoffement, and they
to who^ it is made are called parties to the deed, and so in any other like
cases.

Patron.
PAtron is he that has a parsonage, vicarage, free chapel, or such like
spiritual promotion beelongynge to his manner, and may or ought to give the same
beneu^ce when and as often as it falls void. And this being patron, or
patronage had beginning for the most part by one of these three ways, namely
either by reason of the foundation, for that the patron or his ancestors, or
those from whom he claims were sounders o^ builders of the Church, or by
reason of Dotation, for y^ they did endowe or give ia^ds to the same for
mayntenaunce thereof, or else by reason of the ground because the Church was set
or builded upon their soil or ground: and many times by reason of them al
three.

Perquisites.
PErquisites are adua^tages and profits that come to a manner by casualtie, and
not yearly: as Escheates, Heriots, Reliefes, waifes, straies forfaytures,
amercementes in Courts, wards, marriages goods and lands purchased by
villains of ye same manor, and diverse such like things that are not certain
but happen by chance, sometimes more often then at other times.

Plaintiff.
PLayntife is he that sueth or complains in an ass. or in an action
personal, as in an action of det, trespass, disceit, detinue, and such other.

Pledinge.
PLeding is y^ which comes after y^ count, namely y^ which is contained in
the bar, replication, and reioynder, and not that contained in the count it
self, and therefore defauts in the matter of the Count are not comprised
within mispleading, or insufficient pleading, nor are remedied by yt statute of
Jeofailes: But only that mispleading, or insufficient pleading, committed in
the bar, replication, and reioynder, are there provided for.

Pound.
Pounds are in two sorts, the one pounds open, the other pounds close.

Pound open, is every place wherein a dystresse is put, whether it be common
pound such as are in every Town or lordship, or whether it be backside, Court,
yard, pasture, or else whatsoever, where the owner of the distress may come to
give them meat and drink without offense for their being there, or his
coming thither.

Pound Close is such a place, where the owner of the distress may not come to
give them meat and drink, without offense, as in a close house, or whatsoever
else place.

Possession.
POssession is said two ways, either actual possession, or possession in
law.

Actual possession, is when a man enters in deed into lands or tenements to
him disce^ded, or otherwise. Possession in law is when lands, or teneme^ts are
descended to a man, and he has not as yet really, actually, and in deed
entered into them And it is called possession in law, because that in the eye,
and consideration of the law, he is demed to be in possession, for as much as
he is tenant to every man's action that will sue concerning ye same lands, or
tenementes.

Preamble.
PReamble takes his name of the preposition ( Pre) before, and the verb (
Ambulo) to go, see joined together, they make a compound verb of the first
coniugatyon ( Preambulo) to go before, and h^^^of the first part or beeginning
of an act, is called y^ preamble of the act, which preamble is a key to open
the minds of the makers of the act, and ye mischiefs that they in tend to
remedy by the same, as for example the statute made at West* minster the first,
the 37. chapter which gives an attaint, the preamble of which is thus. For as
much as certain people of ye realm, dout very little to give false verdictes
or oaths, which they ought not to do, whereby many people are disherited and
lose their right, it is provided etc.

Prescription.
PRescription is when one has had or used any thing since the time whereof no
mind is to to the contrary.

Presentment.
PResentment is when a man which has right to geeue a benefice spiritual
names the person to whom he will give it, and makes a writing to the
Bishop for him, that is a presentation or presentme^t.

Pretensedright or Title.
PRetensed right or title is where one is in possession of lands, or
tenements, and an other who is out of possession, claims it, or sueth for it.
Now the pretensed right or title is said in him, who so does sue or claim.
And if he afterward come to ye possession of the same lands, or tenements, his
right or title is extin^t, or suspendedin the land.

Privy or priuite and Pris uies.
Privy, or priuite is where a lease is made to hold at will, for years, for
life, or a feoffement in fee, and in diverse other cases, now because of this
that has passed between these parties, they are called priuies, in respect of
strangers between whom noe such dealinges, or conueyances has been.

Also if there be Lord and tenant, and the tenant holds of ye lord by
certain service, there is a priuitie between the^ because of the tenure, and if
the tenant be disseysed by a stranger, there is no priuitie beetweene the
diss^^our and y^ lord, but the priuitie still remains beetweene the Lord and
the tenant that is disseysed, and the Lord shall auowe upon him, for that he is
his tenant in right and in the judgment of the law, Priuies are in diverse
sorts, as namely priuies in estate, priuies in deed, priuies in law, priuies
in right, and priuies in blood.

Priuies in estate is where a lease is made of the manner of dale to A. for
life, the rem^ynder to B. in see, there both A. and B. are priuies in estate,
for their estates were both made at one time. And so is it in the first case
hear where a lease is made at will, for life or years or a feoffement in fee,
y^ lessees, or feoffees, are called priuies in estate, and so are their heirs
etc.

Priuyes in deed is where a lease is made for life, and afterward by an other
deed the reuersion is granted to a stranger in fee, this grauntee of the
reuersion is called pryuie in deed, because that he has the reuersyon by
deed.

Privy in law^is where there is Lord and tenant, the tenant lesseth the
tenauncye for life and dies without heir, and the reuersion escheates to the
lord, he is said privy in law, because that he has his estate only by
she law, that is to say by escheat.

Privy in right, is where one possessed of a term for years graunts his
estate to an other upon condition, and makes his executours and dies, now
these executors are priuies in right, for if the condityon be broken, and they
enter into the land, they shall have it in the right of their testatour, and
to his use. privy of blade is the heir of y^ feoffour or donor etc.

Also if a fine be levied, the heirs of him yt levied the fine are called
priuies.

Privileges.
Privileges are lyberties, and Fraunchises, granted to an office, place,
Town, or manner by the Queens great Charter, letters patentes, or act of
parliament. As Toll, sake, Socke, Infangtheefe, vtfangetheefe, turn toll,
oredelfe, and diverse such like, for which look in their proper titles and
places.

Next friend.
NExt friend and warden in Socage is all one, and is where a man seysed of
lands holden in Socage dies, his issue within age of 14. years, then the
next frind, or next of kin to whom the lands cannot come or discende, shall
have the keepinge of the heir, and of the land, to the only use of the heir,
until he come to the age of 14. years, and then at that years he may enter
and put him out, and bring him to account: but in that account he shall be
allowed for all reasonable costs and expenses beestowed either upon the
heir, or his land.

And the next frind or next of kynne to whom the inheritance cannot descend is
thus to be understood: if the lands descend to the heir from his father, or
any of the kyn of his fathers side: the^ the mother, or other of the mothers
side, are called the next of kynne to whom the inheritance cannot dyscende, for
before that it shall so dyscende, it shall rather escheat to the Lord of whom
it is holden: and so it is to be understood where the lands come to the heir
from his mother or any of ye kyn of his mothers side: The^ the father or other
of the fathers side, are called the next of kin to whom the inheritance cannot
discende: but shall rather escheat to the Lord of whom it is holden.

Protestation.
Protestation is a sauinge to the party (that so pleads by protestation) to
be concluded by any matter alleged or objected against him, upon which he
cannot ioin issu: And is no other thing but an exclusion of the conclusion, for
he that takes the protestation excludes the other party to conclude him. And
this protestatyon ought to stand with the sequel of the plea, and not to be
repugnant, or otherwise contrary.

Purchase.
PUrchase is the possess. that a man has in lands or tenements by his own
act, means or agreement, and not by title of ^iscent, from any of his
ancestors.

Quarentine.
QUarentine is where a man dies seysed of a manner place and other lands
whereof his wife ought to be endowed, then the woman shall hold the manner
place xl. days, within which time her dower shall be assigned.

But if she marie wtin the 40. days, she shall loose her quarentine.

Fifteen.
Fifteen is a payment granted in parliament to the Queen, by the
Temporaltie, namely the 15. part of their goods: And was used in ancient time,
to be levied upon their Cattayle going in their grounds, which thing was
very troublesome, and therefore now for the most part, that way is altered,
and they use to leuy the same by the yard, or Acre, or other measure of land:
By means whereof it is now less troublesome, and more certain, then before it
was. And every Town, and country do know, what sum is to be paid among
them, and how the same shall be raised. We read that Moses was the first that
did number the people, for he nu^bred the Israelits, and therefore the first
tax, subsidy, tribute, or fifteen was invented by him among the Hebrews, as
Polidore Uirgil does think.

Regrator.
REgrator is he that has corn, vittailes or other things sufficient for his
own necessary need, occupation, or spendinge, and does nevertheless
engrosse, and buy up, into his hands more Corn, vittailes, or other such
things to the intent to sell the same again at a high rand deerer price, in
faires, marketes, or such like places.

Reioynder.
REioynder, is when the defendant makes answer to the Replication of the
plaintyfe.

And every Reioynder ought to have these ii. properties specially, that is to
say, it ought to be a sufficient answer to the Replication and also to
follow and enforce the matter of the bar.

Relief.
Relief is sometimes a certain some of money that the heir shall pay to the
Lord of who^ those lands are holden, which after the discease of his
auncestour are to him dyscended as next heir: sometimes it is the payment of
an other thing, and not money: And therefore relief is not certain, and a like
for all tenures, but every sundry tenure has (for the most part) his special
relief certain in it self: Neither is it to be paid always at a certain
age, but varyeth therein also acording to the tenure. As if the tenant had
lands holden by knights seruics (except great Sergeantie) and die his heir
being of full age, and held his lands by the service of a whole knights fee,
the Lord of whom that lands are so holden shall have of the heir 100. s. in
the name of relyefe, And if he held by less then a knights fee, he shall pay
less, and if more then more, having respect always to the rate for every
knights fee an hundred shillinges. And if he held by graunde serieantie
(which is always of the Queen, and is also knights service) then the relyefe
shall be the value of the land by the year, besides al charges issuinge out of
the same.

Relief that the lord shall have for lands holde^ in Socage, is so much more
as the rent that the tenant holds his land in Socage by, as if he hold by
a penye rent and die, the lord shall have that penny rent, and a penny over for
relief, of what age soever the tenant be, at the death of his auncestour. And
note that insome cases the lord shall have his relief immediately after the
death of his tenant, if it so be, that the time of the year will suffer the
same to be gotten, as money, corn, flesh, fish, spices, or any such like, and
for default of payement, the lord may therefore of common right presently
distraine.

But in some cases the Lord must stay for his relief a certain time, when
necessity so constrains. As if the tenant held by a rose, a chery, a
strawbery, or such like, and die in winter, he shall not have relief til roses,
cheries, and strawberies are naturally fresh and ripe, which is about midsomer,
and then he shall have one for rent, and an other for relief.

There is an other kind of relief that is paid after the death, change, or
alienation of freeholders that hold in ancient demesne, and otherwise, and is
paid as a knowledge of the tenure between ye lord and the tenant. The same is
not certain how much, But does vary according to ye custom of the manor, or
tenure, and is to be presented by the homage or sutours at the next court day
of the same manner.

And note that always when the relief is due, it must be paid at one whole
payment and not by parts, although that the rent be to be paid at several
festes.

Remainder.
REmaynder of land is the land that shall remain after the particular estate
determined, As if one grant lanoe for term of years or for life, the
remaynder to I. S. that is to say, that when the lease for years is
determined, or lessee for life is dead, that then y^ land shall remain, shall be,
or abide, with, to, or in I. S.

Replication.
REplication is when y^ defendaunt in any action makes an answer, and the
plaintiff makes an answer to that, that is called the replicatio^ of the
plaintiff.

Reprises*
REprises, are deductions, payments, and duties that go yearly and are paid
out of a manor. As rent charge, rent secke, pentions, corodies, annuities, and
such like.

Resceipt.
REsceit is when an action is brought against the tenant for term of life, or
tenant for term of years, and he in the reuersion comes in and prays to
be received to defend the land, and to plede with the demaundaunt. And when
he comes it behooves that he be always ready to plede with the demaundant.

Reservation.
Reservation is taken diverse ways, and has diverse natures, as some times by
way of exception to keep that which a man had before in him, as if a lease be
made for years of ground reserving ye great trees growing upon the same, now
ye lessee may not meddle with the^ nor with any thing yt comes by reason of the^
so long as it abides in, or upon the trees, as mast of Oak, Chestnut, Aples,
or such like, but if they fall from the trees to the ground, then they are in
right the lessees, for y^ ground is set to him, and al theruppon not reserved
etc.

Sometimes a reservation does get and bring forth an other thing which was
not before. As if a m^ lease his lands reserving yearly for ye sa^e xx. li.
etc. and diverse other such reseruatio^s thereby.

And note ye in ancient time, their reseruations, were as well (or for the more
part) in victualles whether flesh, fish, corn, bread, drink, or what else, as
in money until at the last, and that chiefly in the reign of king Henry the
first by agreement, y^ reservation of victuals, was changed into ready money, as
it has hither so since continued,

Retraxit.
REtraxit is the preterperfecte^ce of Retraho compound of Re, and Traho, which
make Retraho, to pull back, and is when the party plaintiff or demaundant
comes in proper person into the court where his plea is, and says that he
will not proceed any farther in the same etc. Now this shall be a bar to the
accion for ever.

Reeue,
REeue is an officer, but more known in ancient time then at this day: for
almost every manor had then a Reeue, and yet still in many copy hold manners
(where the old custom any thing preuayleth) the name and office is not
altogether forgotten: And is in effect that which now every Bailife of a
manor practices: Although the name of Bailise was not then in ure among us
being since brought in by the Normans: But the name of Reeue, au^ciently called
Gereue, (which particle (Ge) in continuance of time was altogether left out and
lost) came from the Saxon word Gerefa, which signifies a ruler: And so in
deed his rule and authority was large within the compass of his Lords manor
and among his men and tenauntes as well in matters of government in peace
and war, as in the skylfull use and trade of husbandry: For as he did gather
his Lords rentes, pay Reprises, or duetyes issuings out of the manner: set the
servants to work, fell and cut down Trees to repair the buildinges, and
enclosures, with diverse such like for his Lords commoditity: So also he had
aucthority to govern and keep the tenants in peace, and if need required, to
lead them forth in war.

Reuersion.
REuersion of land, is a certain estate remaining in the lessour or donour,
after the particular estate and possession conveyed to an other.

And it is called a reuersion in respect of the possession separated from it:
so that he that has y^ one has not the other at the same time, for beeinge
in one body together, there cannot be said a reuersion, because by the
vnitinge, the one of them is drowned in the other: And so the reuersion of
land, is the land itself when it falls.

Riot.
RIot is where 3 (at the least) or more do some unlawful act: as to beat a man, Enter upon the possess. of an other, or such like.

Robbery.
RObbery is when a man takes any thing from the parson of an other
feloniousely, although the thing so taken be not to the value but of a penny,
yet it is felony, for which the offender shall suffer death.

Rout.
ROut, is when people do assemble themselves together and after do proceed,
or ride, or go forth, or do move by the instigation of one, or more who is
their leader: This is called a Rout, because they do move, and proceed in
Routes and numbers.

Also where many assemble them selves together upon their own quarrels and
braules, as if the inhabitaunts of a Town will gather them selves together, to
break hedges, wales, ditches, pales, or such like to have common there, or to
beat an other that has done to them a common displeasure or such like, that
is a Rout and against the law although they have not done or put in executyon
their mischeuous intent.

Sake.
SAk, this is plea and correction of trespass of men in your court, because
(Sak) in English is Ache^o^ in french, and Sak is put for Sik as to say for sik
sak, also for what hurt, and Sak is put for forfait.

Scot.
SCot, that is to be quite of a certain custom, as of common tallage made to
the use of y^ shirife or his Bailifes.

Shewinge.
Showing that is to be quit with attachment in any court and before whomsoever
in plaintes showed and not auowed.

Sok.
SOk this is suit of me^ in your court according to the custom of y^ Realm.

Sokmans.
SOkmans, are the tenants in ancient demesne, that hold their lands by
Socage, that is by service with y^ plough, and therefore they are called
Sokmans, which is as much to say, as tenants or me^ that hold by service of the
plough, or plowmen. For Sok signifies a plough.

And these Sokmans, or tenants in ancient demesne, have many and diverse
liberties given and granted to them by the law, as well these tenants that
hold of a common person in ancient demesne as those that hold of the Queen
in ancient demesue: as namely to be free from payinge toll in every Market,
Fair, town, and City throughout the whole Realm, as well for their goods
and cattels that they sell to others, as for those things that they buy for
their provision, of other. And thereuppon every of them may sue to have letters
patentes under ye Queens seal directed to her officers, and to ye Maires,
Bailifes and other officers in the Realm to suffer them to be toll free.
Also to be quit of po^tage, murage, and passage, as also of taxes and tallages
granted by parlyament, except that the Queen tax auncien demesne as she may
at her pleasure for some great cause. Also to be free from payments toward
the expenses* of the knights of the Shire yt come to the parliament.

And if the shirife will distreine them or any of them to be contributory for
their lands in ancient demesne, then one of the^ or all as the case requires
may sue a writ directed to the shirife commanding him that he do not
compel them to be contrybutories to the expenses of the knights, and the
same writ does command him also, that if he have already dystrayned them
therefore, that he redelyuer the same distress.

Also that they ought not to be impanelled, nor put in iuries and enquestes
in the country out of their manner or lordship of auncyen demesne, for the
lands that they hold there (except that they have other lands at the common
law, for which they ought to be charged) and if the sheriff do return them
in panelles, then they may have a writ against him de non ponen dis in assisis
et iuratis. And if he do to the contrary, then lies an attachme^t upon yt
against him. And so it is also, if the bailifes of fraunchises that have
return of writtes will return any of the tenauntes which hold in ancient
demesne in assizes or iures.

And also to be exempt from leetes, and the shirifes turn, with diverse other
such like lyberties.

Spoliation.
SPoliation is a suit for the fruits of a church or for the church itself,
and is to be sued in the spyrytuall Court, and not in our courts. And this
suyt lies for one incumbent against an other incumbent, where they both claim
by one patron, and where the right of the patronage does not come in question
or debate. As if a parsonne be created a Bishop, and has dispensation to
keep his be nefice still, and afterward the patron presents an other
incumbe^t which is instituted, and inducted: Now ye Bishop may have against
that incumbent a Spoliation in the spiritual court, because they claim both by
one patron, and the right of the patronage does not come in debate, and
because that the other incumbent came to the possession of ye benefice by the
couse of the spiritual law, that is to say by institutyon and induction, so
that he has color to have it and to be person by the spiritual law, for
otherwise if he be not instituted and inducted etc. spoliatyon lies not
against him, but rather a writ of trespass, or an assise of nouel disseisin etc.

So it is also where a person does accept an other benefice, by reason
whereof the patron presents an other clerk who is instituted and inducted,
now the one of them may have spoliation against the other, and the^ shall come
in debate if he have plurality or not. And so it is of deprivation etc.

The same law, is where one says to the patron, that his clerk is dead,
where upon he presents an other. There the first incumbent which was
supposed to be dead may have a spoliation against the other, and so in diverse
other such like cases.

Stallage.
STallage that is to be quite of a certain custom exacted for ye streat
taken or assigned in faires and markets.

Suit covenant.
SUit covenant is when your ancestors have couenaunted with my ancestors to
sue to the court of my ancestors.

Suit custom.
SUit custom is when I and my ancestors have been seysed of your own
suitand your ancestors, time out of mind etc.

Suit rial.
SUit ^^al is when men come to the shiriffes turn or leets, to which court al
men shall be compelled to come to know the laws, so that they shall not be
ignorant of the things that shall be declared there how they shall be governed.
And it is called rial suyt because of their allegeaunce, and this appears by
common experience when one is sworn, his oath is that he shall be a loyal and
faithful manne to the Queen. And this suyt is not for the land which he
holds within the County, but by reason of his person, and his abode there,
and ought to be done twice a year, for defaut whereof, he shall be amerced and
not distrayned.

Suit service.
SUit service is to sue to the sherifes turn or leete, or to the lords court
from iij. wekes to iij. wekes by y^ whole year, and for default thereof, a ^^^
shall be distrayned and not amerced. And this suit service is by reason of the
tenure of a man's lands.

Tax and Tallage.
Tax and Tallage, are payments as tenthes, fiftenthes, subsydyes, or such like
granted to the Queen by Parlyament.

The tenaunts in auncien demean are quite of these texes and tallages granted
by parliament except y^ the Queen do tax au^cte^t demesne, as she may when
she thinks good for some great cause See ancient demesne.

Tenure in capite.
TEnure in capite is where any hold of y^ Queen as of her person being
Queen, and of her Crown as of a Lordshippe by it self in gross, and in
chief above al other lordshipes. And not where they hold of her as of any
manor, honor, or castle, except certain ancient honors, which appear in the
Eschequer.

Testament.
TEstament is thus defined or expounded in master Plowde^s comentaries, a
testament is the witness of the mind, and is compound of these 2. words
testatio and mentis, which so signifies, truth is, that atestament is a witness
of the mind, but that it is a compou^d word, Aulus Gellius in his vi. book
ca. 12. does deny y^ same to an excellent lawyer one Seruius, sulpitius, and
says that it is a simple word, as are these: Calciamentum, Paludamentum,
pauimentum, and diverse such like: And much less is aggreamentum a compounde
word of aggregatio, and mentium as is said before in that title, for there
is no such latin word simple or co^pound, but it may nevertheless serve well
for a law lattyn word.

And therefore thus it may be better defined: A testament is the true
declaration of our last will of that we would to be don after our death etc.
And of testame^ts there be ii. sorts, namely a testament in writing, and a
testament by words, which is called a nuncupatiue testament.

The first is always in writing as is said.

The other is when a man being sick, and for fear least death or want of
memory, or of speech, should come so soddenly and hastily upon him that he
should be prevented if he stayed the writing of his testament, desires his
neighbors and friends to bear witness of his last will, and then declares the
same presently by words before them, which after his decease in proved by
witnesses, and put in writing by the ordinary, and then stands in as good
force (except for lands) as if it had at y^ first in the life of the testatour
been put in writing.

Them.
THem, that is y^ you shall have all y^ generation of your vill^ynes with their
suits and cattle wheresoouer they shall be sound in England ^^cent that if any
(...) shall remain (...) year, and a day in any privileged town so y^ he
shall be received into their co^mmaltie or guild as one of them, by that means
he is delivered from villenage.

Thefbote.
THefebote is when a man takes any goods of a thief to favor and maintain
him: And not when a man takes his own goods that were stolen from him etc.
The punishment in ancient time of theefeboote was of life and member: But now
at this day Master Stamford says it is punished by rau^some, and impriso^me^t
but enquire farther for I think it be felony.

Title.
TItle, is where a lawful cause is c^e upon a man to have a thing which an
other has, and he has no action for y^ same, as title of mortmam, or to
e^ter for breach of a co^ditio^

Title of entry.
TItle of entry, is when one seysed of land in fee makes a feoffement
thereof upon condition, and the condrtyon is broken: Now after the condition
thus broken, the feoffour has title to enter into ye land and may so do at
his pleasure, and by his entry the freeholde shall be said to be in him
prepresently. And it is called title of entry, because that he cannot have a
writ of right against his feoffee upon condition: For his right was out of him
by the feoffeme^t, which cannot be reduced without entry, and the entry must
be for the breach of the condition.

Toll, or Tolne.
Toll or tolne, is most properly a payment used in Cities, Towns Markets, and
faires for goods and cattle brought thither to be bought and sold: And is
always to be paid by the buyer, and not by the seller, except there be some
custom otherwise.

There are diverse other tolles, as turn toll and that is where toll is paid
for bestes that are driven to be sold although that they be not sold in
deed.

Also toll trauers, that is where one claymeth to have an halpeny or such like
toll of every best that is driven over his ground.

Through tol, is where a Town prescribes to have toll for every best that
goes through their Town a certain: or for every score or hundred a certain,
which seems not to be so unreasonable a prescription or custo^e asso^e have
thought, although it be through the Queens high way (as they call it) where
every man may lawfully go, if that there be one thing for an other, as if
there be a bridge or such like commodity provided at the costs and charges of
the Town, for the ease of trauailers y^ drive that way, whereby their Journey
is either shortened or bettered, why then may not toll be lawfully, and with
good reason demanded of them etc. But diverse Citizens and Towns men are free
from paying toll by grant of the Queen, or her au^cestours, or do claim the
same by prescription or custom. So also spiritual persons, and religious men
(as they call the^) were quit of paying toll for their goods and marchandises
bought and sold, but now the statute of king H. 8. will that they shall not
merchandise: But enquire whether ye intent of ye statute be observed among the^
at this day or not, some say it is not.

Also tena^ts in ancient demesne ought to be quit thorough the whole Realm of
payinge toll, as appears before in ye title Sokemans. And in all these cases
where toll is demanded where it ought not to be paid of them that should
go, buy, and sell toll free, there the party or parties grieved may have a
writ, De essendi quietum de tolonio, against him or them that so demand
toll contrary to the Queen or her progenitors grant, or contrary to
custom or prescription.

Sheriffs turn.
Sheriffs Turn is a court of Rceorde in all things that parteyne to the
turn. And it is the Queens leete through all the County, and the sheriff is
judge. And whosoever has a leete, has the same aucthority wtin y^ prcint, as
ye shrufe has wtin the turn.

Treasure found.
TReasure found is when any money, gold, or silver, plate, or bolleyne, is found
in any place, and noe manne knows to whom the propertye is, then the property
thereof belongs to the Queen, and that is called treasure troue, that is to
say, treasure found. But if any mine of metal be found in any ground,
that always pertayneth to the lord of the soil, except it be a mine of gold
or silver which shall be to ye Queen in whose ground soever it be found.

View.
View is when any action real is brought and the tenant knows not well what
land it is that the demaundant asks, then the tenantshal pray the view,
that is to say, yt he may see ye la^d which he claims. But if the tenant has
had the view in one writ, and after the writ is abated by mysnaminge of the
town, or by ioynture, and after the demaundaunte brings another writ
against the tenant, then the tenant shall not have the view in the second writ.

Viscount.
VIscount is a magistrate, and officer, of great authority, whom we commonly
call (Sheriff) or to speak more truly (Shire reave) and was at the first called
(Shiregereue) y^ is to say the keeper of the Shire, or the reave or ruler of the
shire, for (Gereue) being deryued of the Saxon word ( Gereccan to rule) was
first called (Gerecfa) and then (Gerefa) which betokens a ruler. And hereof
comes (Portreue) or rather (Portgereue) a na^^ that in old time was given to
the head officer of a town, and signifies the ruler of the town for that
(Port) coming of y^ Latin word portus) signifies a port town, And (Gereue)
being derived as is aforesaid, signifies a ruler, so that (Portgereue) or
(as we now shorter speak it) (Portreue) is the ruler of the town.

And thus was the head officer or governor of the City of London long since
(before they had y^ name of Maier or Bailife) called, as it does appear in
diverse old monuments: But chiefly in the Saxon Charter of William bastard y^
cenquerour, which thus begins. William cheking, greeteth William the
Bishop, and Godfrey the Portreue, and all the Citizens that in London be etc.

So also they of Germany (from whom we and our language together first came)
call among the^ one governor burgreeue, an other Margreue, and an other
landsgreue with such like etc.

Thus much is said only to show y^ right Etymon and antiquity of the word
(Shirife) to which officer, our common law has always accordingly given
great trust, and authority, as to be a special preserver of the peace: and
therefore all obligations that he takes to y^ same end, are as recognisances in
law. He also is a judge of record, when he holds the Leetes or tournes which are courts of record.

Also he has the return of writs, and impanelling of Juries, and such like
etc.

Voucher.
VOucher is when a Precipe qd' redd' of land is brought against a man, and an
other ought to warrant the land to y^ tenant, then the tenant shall vouch him
to warranty, and theruppon he shall have a writ called Summonias ad
warrantiza^dum, and if y^ shirife return, y^ he has nothing by the which he
may be summoned, then there shall go forth a writ called Sequater sub suo
periculo, and when he comes he shall plede with the demaundaunt, and if he
come not, or if he come and cannot bar the demaundant, then the demaundaunt
shall recover the land against the tenant, and the tenant shall recover as much
land in value against the vouche, and thereuppon he shall have a writ called
capias ad valenciam verse le vouch.

Uses.
Uses de terre ad son co^mencement ap^s que le custom de property comence
enter homes, Come ou un esteant seisie de terres en fee simple, fait un
feffem^t al un aut' sans ascun co^siderac', mes solem^t meaning q'le auter
serroit seisie al so^ use, et q' il m^ voile prender le commodity et profits de
les terres et q'le feffee doit au^ le possession et franketenement de ceo al
mesme le use etc. Ore apres ceo, sur bone considerations, et pur auoyder diverse
mischiefs and inconveniences, suit le statut of an. 27. H. 8. cap. 10.
provided, which unites the use and possession together, so that who has the
use of land, the same has the possess. thereof, by virtue of that estatute.

Usury.
Usury is a gain of any thing above the principal, or that which was lent,
exacted only in consideration of the loan, whether it be of corn, meat
apparel, wares, or such like, as of money. And here much might be said and
many cases might be put concerning usury, which of purpose I omit, only I
wyshe, that they who account them selves religious and good christians, would
not deceive them selves by couller of the statute of usury, because it says
that it shall not be lawful for any to take above x. li. in the 100. li. for a
year etc. whereby they gather (although falsely) that they may therefore take
x. li. for y^ lone of a 100. li. with a good conscience because the statut does
after a sort dispense withal (for that it does not punish such taking) which
thing it cannot do with the laws and ordinances of god, for god will have his
decrees to be kept inviolable, who says, le^d looking for nothing thereby
etc. By which words is excluded, either the taking of xl. li. v. pound, yea
or of one penny above the principal: But rather let such think that that
statute was made upon like cause that moved Moses to give a byll of dyuorce to
y^ Isralites, as namely to avoid a greater mischief, and for the hardness of
their hearts.

Vilawrie.
VTlawrie is when an exigent goes forth against any man, and proclamation
made at v. counties, then at the v. county if the def. appear not, ye coroner
shall give judgment that he shall be out of the protectyon of the Queen, and out
of the eyde of the law: and by such an vtlary in actions personals, the party
outlawed shall forfayt all his goods and cattels to the burden or trouble of
the goods: for his ease sake and more speedy trauaylinge, without hu^ and
cry, flies away, and leaves the goods or any part of them behynd him etc.
Then y^ Queens officer, or the Reeue, or Bailife to the Lord of the manor
(within whose Jurisdictyon or circuit they were left) that by prescriptyon, or
grant from the Queen has the fraunchyse of wayfe: may seyse the goods so
wayued to their Lords use, who may keep them as his own proprr goods:
except that the owner come with fresh suite after the felon, and sue an appell,
or give in evidence against hi^ at his arrainme^t upon y^ indictment, and be
attainted thereof etc. In which cases the first owner shall have restitution of
his goods so stolen and wayued.

But although as has bin said waife is properly of goods stolen: yet waife
may ^ee also of goods y^ are not stolen: as if a man be pursued with hue, and
cry, as a felon, and he flies, and leaves his own goods etc. these shall be
taken as goods wayued, and forfait as if they had been stolen.

VVaiue.
WAiue is a woman that is vtlawed, and she is called wayue, as left out or
forsaken of the law: and not an vtlawe as a man is: For women are not sworn in
leetes to the Queen, nor to y^ law, as men are, who therefore are within the
law, whereas women are not, and for yt cause they cannot besaid out of the
law in so much as they never were wtin it: But a man is called vtlawe, because
that he was once sworn to the law: and now for contempt he is put out of
the law, and is called vtlaw, as one should say without benefit of the law.

VVarwit.
WArwite (or wardwite as some copies have it) that is to be quite of giving of
money for keepinge of watches.

VVrecke.
WReke or varech as the Normans from who^ it ca^e call it, is where a ship is
perished on the sea, and no man escapes a live out of the same, and the
ship, or part of the ship so perished, or the goods of the ship come to
the land of any Lord, the lord shall have that as a wrecke of the sea, but
if a man, or a dog, or cat, escape a live, so yt the party to who^e y^ goods
belong come wtin a year and a day and prove the goods to be his, he shall
have them a gain, by provision of the statute of Westminster the first cap. 4.
made in king Ed. 1. days, who therein followed the decree of Henry the first,
before whose days, if a ship had been cast on shore, torn with tempest, and
were not repaired by such as escaped on live within a certain time, that then
this was taken for wrecke.

FINIS.
The old Tenures.
Service de chiualer.
TO hold by knights service, is to hold by homage, fealty, and escuage, and
it draws to it ward, marriage, and relief, and know thou that knights
service is service of lands or tenementes to bear arms in war in the
defense of the Kealme, and it o weth ward and marriage by reason that none is
able nor of power, nor may have knowledge to bear arms, before yt he be of ye
age of 21. years. And for so much that the Lord shall not leese that that of
right he ought to have, and yt the power of the realm, nothing be made weke.
The law will because of his tender age, yt ye Lord him shall have in his ward
till the full age of him, that is to say xxi. years.

Graund serieantie.
To hold by graund serieanty is as if a man hold certain lands or tenementes of
the king to go with him in his host, or to bear his banner with him in his
wars, or to lead his host, or such like, and thereto belongs ward
marriage and relief, as it appears in ye tretise of wards and reliefes in the
statute made the 28. of Edward the I.

Petit Serieantie.
To hold by petit serieantie is as if a man hold of the king lands or
tementes, yelding to him a knife, a buckler, an Arrowe, a Bow without string,
or other like service at the will of the first feoffour, and there belongs
not ward marriage ne relief. And mark well that a man may not hold by grau^d
nor petit serieantie, but of the king.

Escuage.
To hold by escuage is by knight service, and there belongs ward, marriage,
and relief. And mark well that a man may not hold by escuage, bnt that he hold
by homage, for that escuage of common right draws to him homage, as it was
indged Termino H. 21. E. 3. cap. 42. fol. 52. Auowrye 115. And note well, that
escuage is a certain sum of money, and it ought to be levied by the Lord of
his tenant after the quantity of his tenure, when escuage runs by all
England. And it is ordained by all the counsel of England how much every
tenant shall give to his lord, and that is properly for to maintein the warrrs
beetweene England, and them of Scotland or of Wales, and not between other
lands, for that, that those foresayed lands should be of right belonginge to
the Realm of England.

Homage auncestrel.
To hold by homage auncestrel is where I or my au^cestors have holde^ of you
and of your ancestors from time out of mind whereof no mind runs, by
homage, fealtye and certain rent. And it is not to hold by knights service,
and there belongs not ward marriage, nor relyefe. And note well that homage
may be said in two manners, that is to say, homage auncestrell, and homage
de fayt. Homage auncestrell is there, where you or your ancestors have holden
of me and mine ancestors duringe the time of man's remembrance by homage,
fealty, and rent. Homage de fayt is there, where I enfeoffe your self, to hold
of me by homage and rent, and in so much that this homage begins by my
deed, it is called homage de fait. And note well yt homage au^^^strel draws
to him voucher, yt is to say, warrantie of au^cestours, but not homage de fait.

Courtesy dengleterre.
To hold by the curtesy of England is, there where a man takes a wife
inheritrix, and they have issu a son or daughter, and the wife dies, whether
ye issue be dead or a live, ye husband shall hold this la^d for term of his
life by the courtesy of England, and by ye law. And in this case the fee, and
the right remains in the person of him of whom he holds. And for that this
tenant may not alien in fee, nor for term of another life, and if he do, it
is lawful to him in the reuersion to enter.

Fee simple.
To hold in fee simple is to hold to any man or woman, to him and to his
heirs, and to his assigns for evermore.

Frank tenure.
To hold in free hold is to hold for term of his own life, or for term of an
other man's life, And in this case the fee and the right remains in y^
person of him, of whom he holds. And for that this tenant may not alie^ i^
fee nor for term of life: And if he do, it is well lawful to him in whom the
fee and the right abides to enter.

Dower.
To hold in dower, is where a man inherit takes a wife and dies, ye heir
shall enter, and endowe the wife of ye third part of all that that was to her
husband in his life, in fee simple or fee tail, and she shall hold these
lands for term of her life as her free hold.

Term dans.
To hold for term of years is not but chattel i^ effect, for no action is
mayntenable against y^ termour, for the recovering of the freehold, for no
freehold is in him. A lease for term of years is a chattel real, and the other
chattel personal, and al goods which are remouable are chattelles personals.

Mortgage.
To hold in morgage is to hold for a certain term upon condition, y^ if the
lessour pay so much money at such a day, that he may enter, and if not, that
the other shall have a fee simple or fee tail, or free hold. And in every
case where lands or tenements be geeuen to a manfor a certain term upon
condition of the part of the lessor for to make y^ lessee to have more long
time or term, if the other do not as the condition is, the lands and
tenementes until the day that the condytion should be done, be holden in
morgage, as in a dead gage.

And note well that if land be let to a man in morgage in fee simple or in fee
tail upon condition, that if the first lessour, as is before said, pay so much
money at such a day that he may enter, and if not, that the lessee have the
sa^e estate in the lands, that the lessour did him grant at y^ ^eginnynge. And
if before the day assygned, the lessee be disseysed, he shall have assise of
nouel disseisin. And in case that if the lessee take a wife and die lessed
before the day assigned, the woman shall be endowed.

And note well, that if ye lessour after the death of the lessee pay not the
money at y^ day assigned, then y^ woman shall hold her dower, and the issue her
heritage. And in case the lessour at ye day assigned pay the money to the heir
of the lessee, then he may put out the woman and the heir also, of all the
land first let. And if a man geeue lands to an other in the tail, yelding to
him a certain rent by the year, and one enter for defaut of paime^t, y^ donee
takes a wife and dies seysed the woman shall be endowed. And in case that
after the rent be behind, the donour may enter and put out the woman and the
heir also. And note well, that if lands be let to a man in morgage in fee
upon condition, the lessee does alien, the lessour shall be charged to pay the
money to the alienee, and not to the seffee as it is said.

Burgage
To hold in burgage is to hold as if the burgeis hold of the king, or of
another Lord lands or tenementes, yeldinge to him a certain rent by y^ year, or
else there where another man then burgeis holds of any Lord lands or
tenementes in burgage yeldinge to him a certain rent by year.

Socage.
To hold in socage, is to hold of any lord lands or tenements yelding to him a
certain rent by ye year for all manner services. And note well that to hold by
socage is not to hold by knights service, nor there longs ward, marriage, nor
relief. But they shall double once their rent after the death of their
ancestors according to that, yt they be wont to pay to their Lord. And they
shall not be over measure grieved, as it appears in the treatise of wards and
reliefes. And note well yt socage may be said in three manners, that is to
say. Socage in free tenure, Socage in ancient tenure, and Socage in base
tenure. Socage in free tenure is to hold freely by certain rent for all manner
of services as is before said, and of that the next kms body shall have the
ward to whom the heritage may not descend, til the age of xiiii. years, that
is to say, if the heritage come by the part of the father they of the part of
ye mother shall have the ward, and contrary wise.

And note well that if the gardeine in socage do make wast he shall not be
peched of wast, but he shall yield account to the heir when he shall come to
his full age of xxi. years, and look the Statute of Marlebridge cap. xvij.
for this matter. Socage in ancient tenure is that where the people in ancient
demesne held, which use no other writ to have then the writ of right close
which shall be determined according to the custom of the manor and the
Monstrauerunt for to discharge the^ when their Lord distrayneth them for to do
other service that they ought not to do. And this writ of Monstrauerunt ought
to be brought against the lord, and those tenants hold al by one certain
service, and these be free tenantes of ancient demesne.

Socage in base tenure is where a man holds in ancient demesne, that may not
have the monstrauerunt, and for that it is called y^ base tenure.

To hold in fee ferme is to hold in fee simple yeldinge to the lord the
value, or at the least the fourth part by year, and he ought to do noe other
thing, but as it is contained in the feffeme^t, and he that holds in fee
ferme ought to do fealty and not relief.

Frank fee.
To hold in frank fee is to hold in fee simple lands pledable at the common
law.

Base fee.
To hold in fee base is to hold at the will of the Lord.

Villenage.
To hold in pure vyllenage, is to do all that ye Lord will him command.

The definition of villenage is villein of blood, and of tenure, And it is he
of whom the Lord takes redemptyon to mary his daughter, and to make him free,
and it is he whom the lord may put out of his lands and tenements at his will,
and also of al his goods and cattle. And note well yt a sokma^ is no pure
villeine, nor a villeine owes not ward marriage nor relief, nor to do any
other services real. And note well that the tenure in vyllenage shall make noe
free man villeine, if it be not continued since time out of mind, nor vyllayn
land shall make no free manne villeine, nor free land shall make noe villeine
free, except that the tenant have continued free since the time of noe mind,
but a villeine shall make free land villein by seysin or claim of ye lord. And
note well that if a villain purchase certain land, and take a wife, and alien
and dies before the claim or seysin of ye lord, ye wife shall be endowed. And
note well, yt in case that the lord bring a Precipe quod reddat against the
alien the which voncheth to warraunt the issue of the villain which is
villeine to the Lord, he shall have the voucher, and by protestation ye Lord
may say that (notwithstanding that he plede with his villeine) yet his
villeine shall not be enfraunchised. And note well that a bastard shall never
be judged bylleyne, but by knowledge in court of record. And note well that
if det be due by a Lord to a free man, and he makes two men his executours the
which be villeynes to the said Lord and dies, the villeines shall have an
actyon of debt against their Lord, notwythstandinge that he plede with them.
And if he make protestation they shall not be for so much enfraunchised, for
that that they be to recover the debt aforesaid to the use of an other person
that is to say to the use of their testatour and not to their own use. And if
the tenant in dower have a villeine which purchases certain land in fee, and
after the tenant in dower enters, she shall have the land to her and to her
heirs for ever more, and the same law is of tenant for term of years of a
villein.

And note well that the Lord may roble his villain, beat and chastise at his
will, save only that he may not maime him, for then he shall have appell of
mayme against him.

And note well, that a villain may have iij. actions against his lord, yt is
to say appel of death of his aunce stour, appel of rape don to his wife, and
appel of maime. And note well, if two parceners bring a writ of Nyefe, and one
of the^ be nonsute, the nonsuite of him shall be judged yt consuit of them both,
so that if the nonsuite be after appearance, they shall be put out from that
actio^ for ever, for the law is such in favor of liberty. And note well, if
two have a vylleine in comen, and one of them make to him a manumission, he
shall not be made free against both. And note well, that in a writ de Natiuo
habendo, it behooves that the lord show how he comes privy of the blood
of the villeine of whom he is Lord etc. And if he, nor none of his
ancestors were not seysed of none of his blood, he shall not win by his
action, if y^ villein have not knowledged in court of record him self to be
his villein. And note well, that in a writ of Niefe may not be put more niefes
then ij. and this was first brought in in y^ hatred of bondage. But in a writ
de Liberate probanda, may be put as many nyefes as the plaintiff will.

And note well that if the vylleyne of a Lord be in auncien demesne of ye
king, or other town priuileged, within a year and a day, the lord may seize
him, and if he dwell in the same town or other place fraunchised by a year and
a day without seisin of the Lord, he has noe power to seyse him after, if he
go not in estraie out of the foresaid fraunches.

Tail.
To hold in the tail is, where a man holds certain lands or tenements, to
him and to his heirs of his body beegotten. And note well, that if y^ land be
geeuen to a man and to his heirs males, and he has issue male, he has fee
simple, and that was adjudged in ye parliament of our Lord the king. But where
lands or tenementes be geeuen to a man and to his heirs males of his body
begotten, then he has fee tail, and the issue female shall not be
enheritable, as it appears the xiiii. year of Edward the third in assise.

Tail apres possibility.
To hold in the tail after possibility of issue extinct is, where la^d is
given to a man and to his wife and to the heirs of their ii. bodies engendered,
and one of them ouerlyueth the other without issue between them beegotten, he
shall hold the land for term of his own life, as tenant in the tail after
possibility of issue extinct. And not withstanding that he do wast, he shall
never be impeched of that wast. And note that if he alien, he in the
reuersion shall not have a writ of enter in consimili casu. But he may enter,
and his enter is lawful per Robertum Thorpe chief Justice.

Frankmariage.
To hold in frankemariage is to hold in the second tail lymit in the
statute of Westminster second cap. 1. And the feoffour shall acquit y^ feoffee
of al manner of services unto ye 5. degree be past, and ye feffour shall do all
the service and suites duringe ye said term. And after the heirs of the
feoffee shall do it, for that that the priuitie of blood is past. And if he
be distrained for service, he shall have a writ of Mesne against him supposing
that he held the lands of him, but he shall not have the foreiudgement if it be
not in advantage of his issues.

And note well, that after the fowerth degree be past, he shall be attendaunt
of as much service to the donour, as the donour is attendant to the Lord
paramount. And if he do felony for which he is attaint, the king shall have his
lands for term of his life natural. And after his death, his issue shall
inheryte, as by force of the tail. And in this case, none shall have his lands
by way of eschete, no more then in any other tail. And in case that the tenant
die without heir of his body begotten, the land shall reuert to the donour as
it should in the common tail. And if a man let his land to another in
frank marriage yeldynge to him a certain rent by year, he shall hold this
land in the common tail, and not in frankemariage for by the rent reserved,
these words ( in liberum maritagium) be al utterly void, so that y^ tenure
shall be intended after the tenure in the common tail.

And note well that the gift in frank marriage has a condition annexed to it,
notwithstanding that it be not openly declared in the deed of the gift as it
appears by the statut of westin^ second, ca. primo, de Donis co^dicionalibus.

And note well that a man shall not geeue lands nor tenementes in
frankemariage, but where the womanne is privy of blood to the donour, ^ else
the m^^^e nor the woman shall have no other estate by the feoffement but for
term of life.

Frank almoigne.
To hold in frank almoigne is to hold lands or tenements for to serve Godde
and holy Church to endow without doing any other manner of service. And note,
well that in this case the donor is mosne, and oughtto acquit him freely
against the chief Lord, and also they that hold in frankealmoigne shall do
no fealty, but they that hold in frank marriage, shall do fealty.

Elegit.
To hold by Elegit is where a man has recovered debt or damage by a writ
against another or by confession or in other manner, he shall have within the
year against him a writ Judicial called Elegit to have execution of the half
of al his lands and cattels, (except oxen and bestes of the plowe) till the
debt or damages he utterly levied or paid to him, and duringe the term he
is tenant by Elegit. And note well if he be put out within ye term he shall
have assyse of novel disseysin, and after a redisseisin if need be, and this
is geeuen by the statut of Westminster 2. ca. 18. and also by the equity of the
same statute, he that has his estate if he be put out shall have assise and
a redisseisin if need be, and also if he make his executours and dye, and his
executours enter and after be put out, they shall have by the equity of the
same statute such action as he him self before said, but if he be put out,
and after make his executours and dye, his executours may enter, and if they be
stopped of their enter, they shall have a writ of trespass upon their matter
and case.

And note well if he do wast in all the land or parcel, the other shall have
against him immediately a writ Judicyall out of the first record called a
venire facias ad computandu^, by which it shall be inquired if he have levied
all the money or parcel, and if he have not levied the^ money, then it shall be
in quired to how much the wast amounts, and if the wast amount but to parcel,
then as much of ye money, as ye wast amou^teth shall be abridged of y^ foresaid
money which was to be levied. But if he have done more wast then the foresaid
sum of money which was to be levied amounts, the other shall be discharged
by and by of all the said money, and shall recover the land, and for the
superfluity of y^ wast made above that that amounts to the said sum, he
shall recover his da^mages single, and the same law is of his executours, and
also of him that has his estate. And note that if he alien in fee or for
term of life, or in tail all or parcel of the la^d which he holds by
Elegit, if y^ alienation be made wtin the term or after, he which has right
shalhaue against hi one assise of nouel dis^cisine. And they both must be put
in the au^se the alienor and the alienee, and notwythstandinge that the
alienour die presently, yet he which has right shall have an assise against the
alienee alone as if the alienour had been a plain tenant for term of years,
and that is by the equity of the statut of W. 2. cap. 25. for that that he
has not but a chattel in effect, and the same law is of his executours and of
him which has his estate as is aforesaid.

And note well that in an Elegit, if the shirife return y^ he had nothing y^
day of there conusance made, but y^ he purchased lands after the time, then the
party plaintiff shall have a new writto have execution thereof, the same law
is of a statute merchaunt. And note well that after a fiery facias a man may
have the Elegit, but not contrary wise, for so much y^ the Elegit is of more
higher nature then thefieri facias. And note well that if a man recover by a
writ of debt and sueth a fieri facias, and the shirife return that the
party has nothig where of he may make gree with the party, then the
plaintiff shall have a capi as sicut alias, and a pluries, and if the shirife
return at the capias mitto vobis corpus, and he have nothing whereof he
may make gree to y^ party, he shall be sent to the prison of the Fleet, and
there shall abide till he have made agreement with the party, and if y^ shirife
return non est inuentus then there shall go forth an exigent against him.
And note well y^ in a writ of debt brought against a person of holy church,
which has nothing of lay fee, and y^ shirife retourneth, y^ he has naught by
which he may be summo ned, then shall the plaintiff sue a writ to the Bishop
that he make his clerk to come, and the bishop shall make him ^o come by
sequestration of y^ church. And note well, y^ if a man bring a writ of debt and
recover, and make his executors and dies, they shall have execution not
wtstanding y^ it be within y^ year by a fieri facias.

Statut merchant.
6 To hold by Statute merchaunt, is where a man knowlegeth to pay certain
money to another at a certain day before the mayor, bailife, or other warde^
of any town yt has power to make execution of the same statute, and if ye
obligee pay not y^ debt at ye day, and nothing of his goods, lands, or
tenementes may be found within the ward of the mayor or warden before said,
but in other places without, the^ ye reconisee shall sue the reconisaunce and
obligation with a certification to the chauncery under the kings seal, and he
shall have out of the chau^ cery a capias to ye shirife of ye cou^ty where he is
to take him and to put him in prison, if he be not a clarke, til he be not
a clarke, til he have made greement of ye debt. And one quarter of the year
after that, that he shall be taken, he shall have his la^d delivered to
himself to make gree to ye party of the debt, and he may selit while he is in
prison, and his sale shall be good and law full. And if he do not gree wtin a
quarter of a year, or if it be returned that he be not found, then y^
reconisee may have a writ of the chauncery which is called Extendi sacias,
direct to al shirifs, where he has lands, to extend his lands and goods,
and to deliver ye goods to him, and to seize him in his lands, to hold them
to him and to his heirs and his assigns, til that the debts be levied or
paid, and for that time he is tenant by statut merchaunt. And note wei, that
in a statute merchaunt the reconisee shall have executyon of all the lands
which the reconisour had the day of the reconisaunce made, and any time
after, by force of the same estatute. And note well, that when any waste or
destruction is made by the reconisee, his executors, or by him that has
estate, the reconisour or his executours shall have the same law as is before
said of the tenant by Elegit.

And note well, if the tenant by statut merchaunt hold over his term, he that
has right may sue against him a venire facias ad computandum, or else enter by
and by as upon tenant by Elegit.

There be three manner ofrents, that is to say, rent service, rent charge and
rent secke. Rent service is, where a man holds of an other by fealty, and
for to do suit to his court, and yelding to him a certain rent by the year
for all manner of services.

And note well, that if the Lord be seized of the service and rent before said
and they be behind, and he distraine, and the tenant rescue the dystresse, he
may have Assyse, or a writ of rescous, but it is more necessary for him to
have assyse then a writ of rescous, for that by assise he shall recover his rent
and his damages but by a writ of Rescous, he shall not recover but the
thing and the damages.

And note well that if the lord be not seysed of the rent and service and they
be behind, and he dystrayne for them, and the tenant take again the
distress, he shall not have assise but a writ of Rescous, and shall not
need to show bys right. And note well that if the Lord distreine his tenant
in socage for knights service which is not denied him, and auowe for y^ same
service in court of record, he shall be charged by the same service by Fynch
termino Hillarij Anno xlvj.

And note well y^ if the Lord may not find a distress by two year, he shall
have against the tenant a writ of Cessauit per biennium as* it appears by
the statute of Westminster. 2. cd. 21. And if the tenant dye in the mean time and
his issue enter, the Lord shall have against the issue a writ of enter upon y^
Cessauit, or if the tenant alien, y^ lord shall have against the alienee the
foresaid writ. But if the Lord have issue and dye, and the tenant be in
arrerages of the said rent and service in the time of the father of the issue,
and not in the time of the issue, he may not distrain for y^ arrerages in y^
time of his father, and he shall have none other recovery against the tenant
or any other, for that that such advantage is geeuen by the law to the
tenant. And note well that rent service is that to the which belongs
fealty, but to rent charge and rent seck belongs not fealty, but it
belongs to re^t service of common right.

Rent charge.
Rent charge is where a man grau^teth certain rent going out of his lands or
teneme^ts to another in fee simple, or in fee tail, or for term of life by
deed upon condition, yt at what time the rent be be^ehinde, it shall be well
and lawefull to the grauntee to his heirs or assygnes or distrayne in the same
lands or tenementes. And note well, that if the rent be behind, it is well lawful
to the grauntee at his election to have a writ of annui^y, or else he may
distraine, and if the distress be taken against his will from him, and he was
never seized before, he has noe recovery, but by writ of Rescous, for ye
distress first taken, gives not to him seysin, only if he ha^ the rent
before, for if he were seysed of the rent before, and after the rent be
behind and he dystraine, and rescous to him be made, he shall have assise,
or a writ of rescous.

And note well, that in every assise of re^t charge and annuell rent, or in a
writ of annuitie, it beehoueth to him that brings the writ to show forth
an especialty, or else he shall not maintain the assise, but in a
Mordauncestour or formedon in the discender or other writs (in the which title
is given or comprised) brought of rent charge, or annuell rent, it needs not
to show especialtie.

And note well that if a man grant a re^t charge to an other, and y^ grauntee
purchase the half of the land whereof the rent is going out, all the rent is
extinct, and if the grauntee release to the grauntour parcel of the rent, yet
all the rent is not extinct. But in re^t service the law is otherwise, for
notwithstanding y^ y^ Lord has purchased y^ half of y^ la^d whereof y^ rent
is going out, yet y^ rent is not extinct, but for the half, and the cause of
the diversity is that rent service may be severed to one portion, but not rent
charge.

And note well that if rent charge be granted to two jointly, and the one
release, yet the other shall have the half of the rent. And also if one
purchase the half of the land whereof the rent is going out, the other shall
have the half of the rent of his companion: And if the disseysour charge y^
land to a stranger, and the disseisie bring an assise and recover, the charge
is defeated. But if he that has right, charge the land, and a stranger
feign a false action against him and recover by defaut, the charge abides. And
note well, that in case that purparty be beetweene two parceners and more land
be allotted to one then to the other, and she that has more of the land,
charge her land to the other and she happeth the rent, she shall mainteyne
assyse without especialty. And if y^ grau^tee have in fee simple or in fee
tail, and has issue and dies, if the issue bring a formedon, or assise of
mordauncester, he shall never be charged to show an especialty.

Rent secke.
Rent secke is where a man holds of me by homage fealty and other service,
yeldyng to me a certain rent by ye year and I grant this rent to another,
reseruinge to me the service.

And note well that in rent seck if a man be seized of the rent, and the rent
be behind, he may not dystrayne, but he shall have assise of nouel disseisin.

And note well that if rent secke be granted to a man and to his heirs, and
the rent be beehind, and the grauntour dye, the heir may not distrayne, nor
shall recover the arrerages of the time of his father, as it is before said of
re^t service.

And in the same manner it is to say of rent charge, or annuel rent. But in all
these rentes before said the heir may have for the arrerages in his own time
such advantage as his father had in his life.

And note well that in rent secke if a man be not seysed of the rent, and it
be behind, he is without recovery, for that that it was his own folly at the
beginning when the rent was granted to him, or reserved, that he took not
seysin of the rent as a penny or two pence. And note well that a man may not
have a Cessauit per biennium or another writ of enter sur Cessauit for no
rent secke beehynd by ii. years, but only for rent service, as it appears
in the statute.

And note well that in re^t secke it behooves him that sueth for y^ rent seck
for to show a deed to ye tenant, or else the tenant shall not be charged with
the rent, but where the rent secke was rent service before, as in this case,
lord, mesne, and tenant, and every of the^ holds of other by homage and
fealty, and the tenant of the mesne x. s. of rent, the lord paramou^t
purchases y^ lands or tenementes of the tenant, all the seign^orye of the
mesne but the rent is extinict. And for this cause this rent is beecome rent
secke, and the rent service changed, for he may not dystrayne for this rent,
and in this case he that demanudethe the rent shall never be charged to show a
deed. Also in a writ of mordauncestour, ayel, or besayle, of rent secke it
needs not to show a specyaltie for that these writtes of possession do
comprehend a title within the^ selves, that is to say, that the auncestour was
seysed of the same rent and continued his possession, by cause of which seysine
the law supposes that it is also auerrable by the countreye, yet learn, for
some suppose that it beehoueth of necessity to show forth a deed, for that
that rent secke is a thing against common right as well as rent charge. But in
assise of nouel disseisin and in a writ of enter sur disseisin brought of
rent secke, it beehoueth of necessity to show forth a deed, for that that
rent secke is a thing against a common right, except in the case before said
where it was rent service before.

And assise of nouel dysseisin, and a writ of enter sur disseisine conteygne
within them no title, but suppose a disseisine to be done to y^ plaintiff, and
of y^ entendement of the law the disseisin geeueth noe cause of auerme^t
against commen right, but of neces^itye it behooves to show forth a deed.

Suit service.
Suit service is to come to the court from three weeks to three weeks by the
whole year, and for that a man shabe distrayned not amerced. Suit real is to
come to y^ court of leete and that is not but two times in the year, and for
that a man shall be amerced and not distrained.

Terms of the law.
Abatement de brief ou plaint.
ABateme^t de br'ou plaint, est qua^t un accion est port perbr' ou plaint, en
que faut suffic' et bone matter, ou auterme^t le matt* all', nest certeineme^t
allege, ou si le pl', ou defendant, ou lieu, so^t misnosme, ou sil appt
variance ^enter le br' et le specialtie, ou record, ou q^ le brief ou
declaration sou^t uncertain, ou pur mort del pl' ou def. et purdiu^s aut's
se^blable causes q^ux ieo omise de pur^, car de c^ solem^t, un poet fair un
grand discourse, et ieo det'm^ de satisfier vous, (bo^ frie^^^^ich.) ^^bn^
q'ieo poy, ou^cy moult breuit', et cy petit troubl* a moy mesme co^c ieo poy,
do^ques sur ceux defautes, le def. poet pry, q^le br' ou plaint abatera, ce^
adire, que le suite del pl' enuers luy cessera pur cest temps, et que il
co^me^cer a auter temps son fuit, et port' un nouel brief ou plaint, sil soit
issint dispose a fair.

Abatement en terres.
ABatement en terres ou ten^tes, est quant un ho^e morust seisie de terres ou
teneme^ts, and un estranger, cest adire, un que and droit, entra en m^s les
terres ou ten^ts, deuant que le heir fayt son entry, cest entry de le
estrau^ger, est appel un abateme^t, et il un abator: Mes si le heir enter
primes apres le mort de so^ au^cestour, et le estra^ger enter sur le possession
del heir, cest entry de le estranger, est un disseisin al heir.

Abbe.
ABbe fuit le soueraign^, head, ou principal de ceux measons de papish religion,
q^ux quant ils fuerent fuerent appel abbeis, et cest abbe enseble oue les
moignes d' mesme le meason, queux fueront appel le covent, fou^t un corporation.

Abbettours.
ABbettors sou^t en diverse cases diu^seme^t prise, un kind de Abbettours so^t
ceux, q^ maliciousme^t sauns dr'turel ca^e ou desert procur' aut's de suer faux
appeals d' murd' ou felony, enu^s ho^es, al intent de troubler, and greeuer
eux, and pur fair eux en infamy and slander. Abbettors en murder, sont ceux
q^ command, procure, council, ou comfort auters de murder. Et en ascu^ case
tiels Abbett' serro^t prises come principals, et en ascun case forsque come
accessories. Issint en auter felonies, et lour p^se^ce a le chose fait, ou lour
absence de la, fayt un difference en le case. Il y ad Abbettoures auxi en
treason, mes ils sou^t en case come principals, car e^ tres. il ny ad asc^
accessories.

Abeyance.
Abeyance est qua^tvn leas est fait pur term de vie, le remaind' al droit hr's
de I. S. le q^l I. S. est en vie al temps del grant: Ore ce^ grant de rem'
passa horse del grau^t' maintena^t, vnc' il ne vesta maintena^t, ne prist effect
en le grau^tee, ce^ adire le dr' heir de I. S. mes est dit deste en abeiance,
ou come les Logitiens appel ceo, in potencia, ou in Intellectu, et come nous
diomus in nubibus, ce^ a scauoier en le consideration d' le ley: Que fi I. S.
morust relinquens un dr' heir en vie, et viuans le lessee pur vie, don'que ceo
est un bon rem', et a ore vest, et vient en le dit droit heir, e^ tiel sort,
que il poit grant, forfait, ou auterment dyspose ceo, et cessa deste ore en
abeiance, pur ceo que il est un a ore d' Abilit'pur pre^d' ceo, pur ceo q' I.
S. est mort et ad relinq' un droit heir'e^ vie le quel ne puit estre viuant I.
S. car durant son vye, null poit properment ee^ dit son heir. Ite^ si un ho^e
soit patron du^ esglise, et p^sent aut' a c': Ore est le feein le person, mes
si l' person morust, et le esglise e^ deuenus void, do^que est le fee en
abeya^ce, ta^que il soit un nouel person p^sent. Car le patron and le fee, mes
ta^t' le dr' de p^se^t, et le fee e^ en lencu^be^t que est p^sent, et puis son
mort, il ne^ en asc', mes en abeiance tanque il soit un nouel incu^bent come
est aua^dit.

Abishersinge.
ABishersinge (et en asc^ copies missher sing) hoc est quietum esse de
amerciamentis cora^ quibuscu^que de intransu^ptione probata.

Abiuration.
ABiuration est un serement que ho^e ou femme preignont quaunt ils ont commise
felonye, et fue al esglise ou Cemitorie pur tuitio^ de lour vies eslisa^t
pluistost perpetual banishm^t horse del Realm, que a estoier a le ley, et
destre try del felony. Et cest ley suyt institute per Saint Edward le
confessor un Roy d' cest Realm deuaunt le conquest, et fuit ground sur le ley
d' m^cy, et pur le amor and reu^ence, sauns doubt, q' il et aut's ses succes.
porteront al meason ddieu, ou lieu de prayers, et administrac' de son parol et
sacram^ts, le quel nous appellomus le esglise. Mes come unseemly chose il fuit
ou est, et come distant de le nature de le mea son de dieu, de fair el un
succouror et defe^dour d'horrible murderers et larons, vous poies co^siderer
(friar Nicholas) et l' meliour qn^t vous pensist quid nostre savior Christ
did reprehendans les Jews, et perauenture auxi prophesea^t de cest: Domus mea
domus orationis vocabitur, at vos fecistis eam spelunca^ latronum.

Abridgement deplaint ou demand.
ABridgem^t d' plaint ou dd', est lou un port un assise, brief de dower, br' de
guard, ou tiels semblables, ou le br' est, de libero tenemento, come en br' de
dovver, le br' est, rationabilem dot' q' eam co^tingit de libero tenemento W.
so^ bar'. Et en un br' de guard, le br' est, custod' terr' and her' etc. et le
pl' ou dd' ant, dd' diverse acres ou percels de terre, et le to plead non
tenure, ou iointenancy, ou ascu^ aut' tiel semblable plea al percel del terre
dd', en abatement del br', donques le pl' ou demau^d't poet abridger so^ playnt
ou dd' al cest parcel, cest adire, il poet omit horse cest part, et pry q'let'
rn^dera al rest a que il and vnc' plede ascun chose. Le cause est pur ceo q^
entiels br'esle certeintie nest mise, le dd' est generalment, de libero ten^to,
et nient obsta^t le dd' dant ad abridge son plaint ou dd' en part, vnc'le
brief demurt bone, de libero tenemento pur le residue.

Acceptance.
ACceptance est un prendrans en bon gree, et come un agreement al asc' chose
fait deuant, le quel puet este avoid et vnfayt (si tiel accepta^ce and estre)
per luy ou ceux que issynt accepta, Sicom^ pur example un Abbot less t're de
so^ meason pur ans reserua^t rent et morust, et puis un aut' e^ fait abbot, le
q^l accepta, cest adire, prist ou receive le rent qn^t il est due, et doet este
pay, ore per cest acceptance le leas est fait perfect and bone, le quel
auterm^t l' Abbot puet assets bien, avoid et fair' frustrate. Semblable ley
est, si un ho^e et sa sem^ seisie de terre en droit del fe^e, ioin^, et fou^t
lease, ou feoffem^t reseruant rent, et baron morust, el accept ou receyua le
rent, per q^l le feoffement ou leas est fait perfect et bo^, et serra bar a
luy de porter so^ brief appel un Cui in vita.

Accessories.
ACcessories sont en deux sorts, lu^ ante factu^, laut' post factum.

Accessory ante factum, est celuy que co^maunda ou procura auter de fair un
felony, et nest la present quant lauter le fayt, mes sil soit p^sent, do^ques
il est auxi principal.

Accessory post factum, est celuy que receiua, fauora, ou ayda un felon
conusant del fait que il ad fait.

Auxi un puet estre accessorie del accessorie, sico^e un felonisement receiua
auter q^ est accessorie del felony, la le receyuer est un accessorie.

Accion.
ACcion est un suite done per le ley de recou^ chose, come acc^ de debt, et
tiels semblables.

Accions personals.
ACcions personals sont tiels accio^s per q^ux ho^e claim^ det ou auter bn^s
and chateux, ou dam^ pur eux, ou dam^ pur tort fayt a so^ person.

Accion populer.
ACcion populer est un accio^ q^ est done sur le breach dasc' penal statute, le
q^l accio^ chesc' ho^e q^ voet poet suer, pur lui m^ et le royne, per
Informac', ou aut'm^t, come le stat allow, et le case requir'. Et de ceux
actions il y ad un infinite number, mes un pur example est qua^t ascu^ deliury
que sont impanel et iure, de passer enter party, et party indifferentme^t,
prist ascu^ chose de lu^ part, ou auter, ou de ambid' perties pur lour verdict
dire al c'part, donques asc' ho^e que voet deins le an prochein ensua^t le
offense fait, puit suervn brief, appel Decies tantum, enuers luy, ou ceux q^
issint p^st pur lour verdict dire. Et pur ceo q^ cest action nest done al un
home specialme^t, mes gen^alme^t al ascun les people del Royne qui voet suer il
est appel un action populer.

Accions reals.
ACcions reals, so^^ tiels actions per q^ux le dd't claim title a ascu^ terres
ou tenem^ts, re^ts ou common, en fee simple, fee tail, ou pur term de vie.

Accord.
Accord est un agreement perent' deux al meins, ou pur satisfy un offense,
que le un ad fait al auter: Ou il est un contract, oue diu^s articles, deu^
fait asc' sur le un part, et ascu^s sur le aut', lou il serr' Quid pro quo,
etc. Le primer est, qn^t un ho^e ad fait un trn^s ou tiel semblable al auter
pur le quel il ad agree oueluy, satisfy et content luy, oue asc' reco^pe^c' a
or' exec', et fait en fait. Et pur ceo q^ cest recompense e^ un plein
satisfaction pur le offense, il serr'vn bo^ bar en le ley si laut' voit suer
arrer'vn acc^ pur m^ le trn^s. Le aut'e^ quod I. S. lessa un chamber pur ans al
H. G. et il est oust'agre perent' eux, q^ le dit H. G. serr' al boorde oue le
dit I. S. et pur le dit chamber et boorde il paiera al dit I. S. un certain
some etc. cost un contract et accord oue articles en ambideux parts.

Acquital.
ACquital e^, qua^t il y ad sn^r, mesne, et to, et le to tie^t de le mesne
certain terres ou ten^ts en frankalmoygne, frankmariage, ou tiels se^blables. Et
mesne tient ouster auxi de le sn^r paramount (ou de haut luy.) Ore doit le
mesne acquit' ou discharge le to de tout et chesc' man^ de service, que ascun
auter voet au^ ou dde de luy concerna^tm^s les terres ou ten^ts, pur ceo que le
to doit fair service a le mesne tantsoleme^t, et nemy al diu^s sn^rs pur un
ten^t, ou parcel de terre. Mesme le ley e^, ou il est sn^r, mesne, et to, come
auantdit, et le mesne graunta al tenant (sur le tenure fait perenter eux) pur
acquit', et discharger luy de touts rents seruic' et tiels se^blables. Cest
discharge est appell acquital.

Acquitance.
ACquitance e^vn discharge en escript, du^ so^me d' money, ou aut' duity, quel
doit ee^ pay ou fait, Sico^e un soit oblige de paier money sur un obligac', ou
rent reserve sur un leas, ou tiel se^blable, et le party a q' le money, ou
duty doit ee^pay, ou fait, sur le resceit de c', ou sur aut' agreement perenter
eux ewe, fait escript, ou bill de son maine en discharge de c', testemoynant q^
il e^ pay, ou auterment content, et pur ceo acquit, et discharge luy de c', le
quel acquitance e^ tiel discharge et bar e^ le ley, q^ il ne poit d^e er
recover m^le some ou duity auterfoits, contra a c', sil poet mo^stro
lacquitance.

Additions.
ADdition est ceo, q^ est done al home, mes principalment al def. en actions,
ou process d' outlary gist, come en det, et tiels semblables, ouster son proper
nosme et sirnosme, cest adire pur monstrer de quel estate, ou degree, ou
mystery il est, et de que ville, ou hamlet, ou county.

Additions de estate sount ceux, yeoman, Gentlehome, Esquier, et tiels
semblables.

Additions de degree sount ceux que nous appellomus nosmes de diguitie, come
Chiualer, Count, Marquis, et Dux.

Addic'de misterye, sou^t ceux, Scriuener, Printer, Mason, Carpenter, Tailor,
Smith et issint touts aut's de semblable nature, car mystery est le craft ou
occupatio^, per que ho^e gain son living.

Addic' de villes, come Sale, Dale, ettiels aut's et issint de les auters.

Et lou un home ad household en deux lieux, il serr' dit dem^r' en ambid',
issint q^son addicio^ en un de eux suffist.

Et ce^ fuit ordeine per un estat' fait en le primer an de H. 5. ca. 5. al
intent, que un ho^e ne serroit grieve ne trouble per l' vtlary du^ aut', mes q^
per reason de le cert' addic', chescu^ ho^e puit ee^ certeinm^t conus, et
portera sa burden demesne.

Adiournement.
ADiournement est qua^t ascu^ court est dissolve, et determine et assign
destre guard arrere al aut' lieu, ou temps.

Administratour.
ADministrator est celuy a que lo^ dinary commit ^administrac' des bn^s la
mor^pur defaut de executors, and accio^ gist verse luy et pur luy co^epur
execut, et serr' charge iesques al value des biens le mort et nient ouster sil
n^ soit per son faux plee, ou pur ceo que il ad waste les bn^s le mort. Mes si
le administrat' deuie, ses executours ne sount Administrators, mes couiental
Ordinary de commit nouel administration, mes si un estra^ge q' nest
administratour ne executour prist les biens le mort, and ministr' de so^ tort
demesn^, il serra charge et sue come executour et nemye come administ' in ascun
accio^ q' est port verse lui per ascu^ creditours. Mes si lordinarie fayt un
brief ad colligendum bona defuncti, cestuy q' ad tiel letter nest
administratour, mes laction gist verse lordinary auxi bn^ come sil prist les
bn^s a son maine demesn^ ou p le maine dascu^ son servant per ascun auter
commandment.

Acts.
Acts de parliament sont leies positive, que consist de deux parts s. de les
parols del act, et del sense de ceo, et ils ambideux joint e^se^ble fo^t le ley.

Admiral.
ADmiral e^ un offic' south l Roigne, q' ad authority sur le mere ta^tu^,
pur voier le navy repair, et maint' pur suppress et chase dehors estumeurs
de mere, et de fair' en chooses perenter party et party, co^cernaunt chooses
fayt la; et pur cest purpose il ad son court appel le Admiraltie, uncore il
poet causer son Citation deste serve sur le terre, et prender le corpse del
party, ou biens en exec^c' sur le terre. Ite^ il ad cognis. del mort ou mayhem
du^ ho^e fait e^ asc' grand niefe fleetant en grand riu^s en l't'redebase les
ponts de eux prochein al mere. Auxi pur arrest' niefs en les grand streams
pur les viages del Roigne et realm, et ad iurisdicc' en l's dists streams
dura^t m^s les viages.

Aduowson.
ADuouson est lou un hoe et ses hr's, ont droit de present' lour clerkal
ordinary, al un psonage, ou auter espiritual benefice qn^t il deuient void. Et
celuy q' ad tiel dr't de present, est appell Patron.

Age prier.
AGe prier est quant action est port verse le^ fant de terre, q^ il ad per
descent, la il mr'a la matt'al court, et prier q^ lacc' demurra tanque a son
plein age de xxi. ans, et issint per agarde d'court le suit surcessera: mes en
brief de dower et en assise, and auxy en tiels actions ou lenfaunt vyent ey^s
de son tort demesne ilnau^a sa age.

Auxi nota que sont plusoures diuersityes de ages. Car le sn^r au^a aid de so^
to in socage pur sa fyle maryer qua^t le file le seignior est del age de vij.
ans. Et auxi aid pur fair son fites et heir chiualer quaunt il est dage de
septe ans.

Auxy feme que est espouse al age de ix. ans, si son baron murrust seisi au^a
dower et nemy deuant ix. ans.

Auxi xiiij. ans e^ lage de feme quel ne serra en guard si el fuyt de tyel age
al temps de mort son auncestour, mes si el fuyt deinsage de xiiij. ans and en
guard so^ seigniour, donques el serra en guard ta^que al age de xvj. ans, et
auxi xxj. a^s est lage de heir male desire en guard et ap^s horse de guard, et
auxi il e^ lage de male et female de suer ou deste sue des t'res q^ ils o^t ou
claim ^ descent, et de fair touts man^s contracts bargains, et nie^t deua^t:
mes si tiel en fa^t deins age de 21. a^s ^o^ ses bn^s, et le donee eux prist,
il poit au^ un acc' de tn^s, mes auterm^t il est sil deliu^ eux.

Agreement.
A Greem^t est en cest man^ define ou expound en mr' Plowdens Come^taries:
Aggreamentu^ est un perol co^pound de deux perolx, cest a scauoier, de
Aggregatio, et mentium, cest a dire agreement de mentes, issintq^ agreament' e^
aggregatio ment', in re aliqua facta, vel facienda: Et per le co^tracc' de les
deux parolx, Aggreg. et me^tiu^, et perle correpc^ et br' perlance de eux, ils
sont fait un perol ce^ a scauoier Aggreame^tu^, le q^l ne^ aut' chose q^'vn
vnio^, collec', copulac', et coniunc' de deux ou plus, me^ts en asc^ chose
fait, ou deste fait. Voies apres en Testament.

Et cest agreement est en trois man^s. Le prim^ est un agrem^t exec' ^n fait al
co^mencem^t. Le second e^ un agreement puis un act fayt per aut', et e^ un
agreement auxi. Le tierce e^ un agreement execut' ou deste fait en temps vnc'a
vener. Le prim^, que est un agreement execut' en fait al commencem^t, est tyel
de q^ me^c' e^ faiten le stat' de 25. E. 3. cap. 3. de pannis, en quart' stat'
que dit, que les bn^s et chooses achates per forestaller^ que de c'serro^t
attaints soient forfaits al Roigne, si le achat' ent vst fait gree al ve^dor,
en quel case, cest parol (gree) q'est aut'ment appel agreem^t, serra entende
agreement execute. s. paim^t pur les chooses. Le second manner de agreement, est
lou un fayt un chose ou act, et un auter agree ou assent a ceo apres, come si
un fait disseisin a mo^ use, et ap^s ieo agree a ceo, ore ieo serra disseisor
ab initio, et tiel agreement e^ un agreement puis un act* fait.

Le tierce agreement est quant ambid' pties a un temps sount accords q' tiel
chose serra fait en te^ps avener. et ceo agreem^t est executory entant que le
chose serra fayt apres, et vnc' la, lour ments accord a un temps, mes enta^t
que le perfourmance serra ap^s, et issint le chose sur q' lagreement fuit fayt
remain a fair, ceo agreement serra dit executory. Et c' le stat' de 26. H. 8.
ca. 3. prove, ou il dit q^ chesc^ vicar person and tiels etc. deuant lour
actual possess. ou meddling oue les profits de lour benefice, satisfiera,
co^ten^ etc. ou agreera a paier al use le Roigne, les prim^ fruits etc. et si
ascun tiel person, vicar, etc. ent' en actual possession etc. ceo agreement,
est deste intend executory come le common usage prove, car est use, q' il oue
un ou ij. oue luy faier' deuxvel trois obligations pur ceo, deste pay en cert'
iours apres. Et cest agreem^t executorie est divide en deux poi^ts, un est
agreem^t execu tory, q' est cert' al co^mencem^t, come est dit darrain^ deua^t
del prim^ fruits. Laut' est, lou le certeinty nap pert al pri mes, et les
parties sou^t accords q' le chose ser ra perform^, ou pay sur le certain tie
conus come si un vend'al aut'tout son wheat en tiel tasse en son barn nyent
threshe, et il est agree perenter eux, que il payera pur chesc' bushel xij. d'.
quant il est thresh clean et mea^.

Aid.
Aid est quaunt to ^ term de vie, to en dower, to per la curtesy, ou tenant
en tail, ap^^ possibility dissue extinct, est impled', do^ques pur ceo q^ ils
no^t q^ estate pur term de vie, ils prayont aid de cesty en le reuersio^ et
process serra fait per brief verse luy, de ve ^ and pleder oue le tenant en
defense del terre sil voile, mes il couient q^ ils accord en ple, car sils
vary le ple le ten^t serra prise, and donque leide prier est en vain: mes sil
ne vient al second brief le tenant respondera sole. Auxi tenant a term
dans, tenant a volunt, tenant per Elegit, and tenant per statnt merchant,
aueront aid de cesty en la reuersion, et le servant and baily de lour master
quant ils ount fait ascun chose loialment en le droit lour master, aueront aid.

Aid de Roy est en femble case come est dit deuant de comen person, and auxy
en plusours auters cases lou le roy puit aver perde coment que le tenant soyt
tenant en fee simple il auer' aid. Come si un rent soyt demand verse tenant le
roye: que tient en chief il auera aid, et issint nauera de auter person.

Auxi lou un city ou borovve ad un fee farm del roy, et ascu^ chose est
demand verse eux que apptaine al fee ferme, ils auero^t aid pur le perde l'
roy.

Auxy home auera aid de roye en lieu de voucher. Auxi le baillife de roy,
collectour, et purueyour aueront aid de roy auxybyen come les officers de
auters persons.

Alien.
ALien est celuy que pere et il m^ fuero^t a^bideux nee horse de legea^ce le
Roigne. Et si tiel alie^, nesteant un enemy del roign^, mes un alien amy, vient
et demurr'cy en Engleterre et ad issue, cest issu ne^ alien, mes Angloys.
Issint si un Angloys ala ouster le mere oue le license del roign^, et la ad
issu, cest issue nest Alien.

Alienation.
ALienation ide^ est quod alienum facere, d' alter, ou mitte le possession de
terre, ou auter chose de lun home al auter.

Ambidexter.
AMbidext'e^ cel^y q^ qn^t un matt' e^ en suit ^enter ho^es, prist money de lun
part, et del aut', ou pur labor le suit, ou tiels semblables, ou sil soit del
jury, pur dir' so^ verdict.

Amendment.
AMendem^t est qn^t error e^ en le process, les Justices poient c^ amend' ap^s
judge. Mes si error soit en iudgn^ t do^e, ils ne poie^t ame^d' ceo, mes le
perty est mis al br' de error. Et en plusours cases lou le de^. appiert en
l'clark que escriera le rec^, il serra amend. Mes tiels chooses que vient per
information del party, come le ville misteri, et huiusmodi, ne serr' amend,
car il doet enformer very a son peril.

Amercement.
AMercem^t plus properm^t est c^ en un court baron, leete, ou lawday, q^l en un
court de rec^ deuant lustices est appel un fin^, et est un penalty assesse per
le hom^ pur un offense fait encou^t'm^ l'court, come pur def. de suit de court,
ou pur no^ ame^ding de asc^ chose q'il fuit appoint d'redresser per cert' te^ps
al darr' court iour deuant, ou pur tiel semblabl' ca^e.

Amercement royal.
AMercem^t royal est qn^t un visc', coron^ ou aut' grau^d officer del roigne
est amercy per les Iusti^' pur so^ misdemening en l' office.

An, iour, et wast.
AN* iour, et wast, est un forf. qn^t un ho^e ad fayt petit treason, ou felony,
et ad terres q^ux il tient de asc' common person, q^ux serra seisi pur le
roigne, et remain en sa maines per le space de un an, et un iour procheine le
attainder, et donques les arbres serr'defosse, les measo^s serra rases, et l's
pastures and prees arres, et plowed. Un chose le plus de greeu^ le offenders,
et terrefy auters de fall est tiel, en demonstrans com^t l' lei detestat' lour
offense cy auant, issint que il execute judge. et punishm^t sur lour mute et
mort chooses.

Annuitie.
ANnuitie e^ un cert* su^me dargent gra^^ al auter en fee simple, see tail,
pur term de vie, ou pur term de ans, a receiu^ del grau^tour ou ses hr'es,
issint que null franktenem^t est charge de ceo.

Appell.
APpel est lou un ad fait murder, robbery, ou felony, donques la feme cesti
qui est tue auera un action de appell verse le murderer, mes sil and feme
do^ques son procheine heir male au^a le appel a ascu^ temps deyns lan and iour
ap^s le fact. Et auxy cesty que est issint rob auera son appel deyns mesme la
temps. Et si le def. soit acquit il recou^a dam^ verse lappellour et
labbettors, et ils au^ont lenpriso^met dun an, et ferrot fine al roy.

Un appel de mayhe^ nest en man^ forsque action de trn^s, car il ne recou^a
forsque dam^s.

Appellant.
APpellant e^ le plaintiff en le appell.

Appellour.
APpellour ou approuer est cesty q' ad fait ascun felonye, le quel il confess
et a ore appel, ou ap prove, cest adire, accuse auters q' fueront coadiutors ou
helpers oue luy en fasans de ceo, ou auters felonies, le q'l chose il voet ap
prouer, et pur ^ est appel en latin Probator.

Appendant and Appurtenant.
Appendant and Appurtenant, sount chooses q' per te^ps de p^scription ou^t
belong, pertain, et sou^t join al aut' principal chose ouesque q^l ils
passo^t, et va come accessory al m^ pri^cipal chose, per virtue de ceux parols:
Pertine^tijs: come terr', aduowso^s, co^mo^s, piscaries, chimins, courts et
diu^s tiels se^blables, al un manner, meason, office, ou tiels auters.

Apportionment.
APporcionm^t e^ un dividing en parts du^ rent (le q^l est deuidable) et nient
ent'ou whole, et entaunt q^ le chos' pur l'q^l, ou horse de q^, il fuit dee^
pay, est separate et divide, le rent auxi serr' divide ayent respect a les
perts. Sico^e un home ad un rent seruic'issua^t horse de terres, et il purchase
parcel de le terre, le rent serra apportion accordaunt all value del terre.

Issint si home tient son terre du^ auter per Homage, Fealty, Escuage, et
certain rent, si le sn^r de que le terre est tenus purchase parcel de le terre,
le rent serra apportion.

Item si home lessa, terres et biens pur ans reseruaunt rent, et apres un
estrau^ger recover le terr', do^ques le rent serra apportion, pur ceo que les
biens ne sont recover mes remain: Et issint est si forsque part de terre soyt
recover, le rent serra apporcion, cest adire, divide, et le lessee payera,
ayant respect a ceo que est recover, et a ceo que ore remain en ses maines,
accordaunt al value.

Mes un rent charge ne poet este apportion, ne chooses q' sount entyer, sicome
un tient terres per service de payer a son seignior annuelment a tiel feast un
Chiual un esperuer, un rose, un chery, ou tiels semblables: La si le seigniour
purchase parcel de la terre, ce^ service est tout ale, pur ceo q' un chiual,
esperuer, un rose, un chery, et tiels auters, ne poyent e^e divide, severe, ne
apportion sauns damage al entierty.

Appropriations.
Appropriations fueront quant ceux measo^s d' le Roomish religion, et ceux
religious persons, ^o^e Abbes, Priours, et tiels se^bles, ount laduovvso^ de
ascun Parsonage al eux et a lour successors, et obtain license de lour saint
peer le pape que ils m^s et lour succ' de ^' en auant, doyent este persons la,
et seruer le cure. Et issint al commencement appropriatyons suerount fait
soleme^t a ceux persons spiritual, que puissoyent minister les^acramentes et
fayer divine service, ^^e Abbes, Priors, Deanes, et tiels semblables: a pres
per petit et petit, ils fu eront enlarge, et fait as auters, cestassauoir, al
dean^, et chapt', q^l e^ corpse corporate co^sistant de plusors, quel corpse
insemble ne puissoit dire divine service. Et q' pluis fuit al Nonnes, que
fuero^t Prioresses, de asc' nu^ry, q^l fuit chose horrible, entaunt que ils ne
puissoient minister sacram^ts, ne preacher, ne dire al parochiens divine
service. Et tout ceo fuit sur pretense de hospitality, et maintenance de c'.
Et de supplyer les dits defectes, un vicar fuit deuyse quel serroyt deputye all
Priores, ou Deane et Chapter, et auxy al darreyne al dites Abbes et auters,
adire divine service, et il au^oit forsque petit porc^ et ils a q^ le
appropriation fueront fait, reteinont le graund revenue, et fefoient riens pur
ceo, per quel means, hospitalitye fuit decay en le lieu, ou il doit estre
chefement guard, nosment en le parish ou le benefice fuit, et ou les profits
cressoient.

Et issint il continue tanque a cest iour al graund hinderance de lerning le
empou^ishm^t d' le ministry, et l' infamy del gospel et professor de ceo.

Approouement.
APproueme^t e^ lou un ho^e ad common en le vvast terre del sn^r, et le sn^r
enclose part del wast pur luy m^ relinqua^t nient obstant sufficient common oue
egresse, etregresse pur les comoners. Ce^ enclosure e^ appel approuement.

Arbiterment.
ARbiterment est un award, determinac' ou judgment quel plusors font al request
d' deux parties al meins, pur et sur asc' det, ^n^s ou auter controversy evve
perent' les dits parties. Et est appell en latin, Arbitratus, et arbitriu^, et
ils q^ fo^t le avvarde, ou arbiterment, sount appel Arbitri, en Engloies,
Arbitrators.

Arest.
Arrest est quant un est prise et restrain de son liberty, null serra arrest
pur debte, trespass, detinue, ou auter cause de action, mes per virtue dun
p^cept, ou co^maundm^t horse de ascun court. Mes pur treason, felony, ou
debruser de peace, chesc' home ad auctority de arrester sa^s garr' ou p^cept.
Et ou un serra arrest pur felony, il couie^t q^ asc^ felony soit fait, etque il
soit suspect de m^ le felony, ou auterm^t il poit aver enuersluy q^ issint luy
arrest un br* de faux imprisonment.

Arrerages.
ARrerages, sount duityes arrere nye^t pay apres les iours, et temps, en quel
ils fuerount dues, et doient aver este paies soient il rent de man^ ou ascun
auter chose reserve.

Assets.
ASsets est en deux sorts, lun appel assets per descent, laut' assets ent'
mains. Assets per descent est lou un ho^e e^ oblige e^ un obligae' et morust
seisi de t'res en fee simple q^ux descend a son heir, mes il ne fist
executors, ou sil fait executours ne relinquis^ sufficient bn^s pur
dischargence^ obligation, donques cest terre serra appell assettes, cest adire
sufficient de paier ce^ det, et per cest means le heir serra charge cy auant
que le terre is^int a luy disc^d voile stretch. Mes sil ad alien deua^t q' le
obligation soit mise en suit, il est discharge. Auxi qua^t un ho^e seisie de
terre en tail, ou en dr't de sa feme, alien e^ oue garra^tie, et ad en value
tant t're en fee simple q' descend a so^ heir, q' est auxi heir en tail' ou
heir' al fe^e, ore si le heir apres le mort son auncestour pert un br'de
Formed', ou sur Cui in vita, pur le t're issint alien, do^ques il serra bar
per reason del garrantie et le t're issint disce^d, q^ est ta^t en value come
ceo que fuit vende, et issint per ceo il and receive ascu^ p^iudice* et pur ceo
cest terre est appell assets per descent.

Assets ent' mains, est qn^t un ho^e endet come deua^t est dit, fait executors,
'et relinquist a eux suffic'de paier, ou asc' commodity, ou prosit estvenus al
eux en dr't lour testat', ce^ appel assets e^ lour mai^s.

Assignee.
ASsignee est celuy a q^ un chose est appoint, ou assign^ deste occupy, pay, ou
fait, et est touts foits tiel person, q^ occupy ou ad le chose issint assign^
e^ so^ droit dem^, et pur luy m^. Et d' assignees il y so^t ij. sorts, nosm^s
Assignee en fait, et assignee en ley. Assignee e^ fait est qn^t un leas est
grant al un et a ses ass. ou sa^s ceux ^ols, assignees, et l' grau^tee don
grant, ou vend' le dit leas al auter, il est son assignee en fait.

Assign^ en ley e^ chescu^ execut' nosme per le testa' en son testament. Sico^e
un leas soit fait al un ho^e et a ses assignees (sico^e est aua^tdit) et il
fait ses execut's et morust sans assignem^t del leas al ascu^ auter: Ore les
execut's au^a m^ le leas pur ceo q' ils sount ses assignees en ley. Et issint
e^ en diu^s aut's semblables cases.

Attainder.
ATtaind' est un co^uicc' dasc' person du^ crime, ou faut, dou^t il ne fuit
co^uict deua^t: Sico^e un ho^e fait felony, treason, ou tiels se^blables, et d'
c'e^ e^dict, arr', et troue gilty, er ad judge. do^q's il e^ dit dee^ attaint.
Et c' poet este deux voies, ^u^ sur appar', laut' sur def.

Le attainder sur appearance est per confession, battle ou verdict. Le
attainder sur def. est per process.

Auerment.
AVerme^t est lou un ho^e pled' un ple en abatem^t de brief ou bar dactio^,
q^l il did, il e^ prist de prouer come l' court voit agard, ce^ offer de
prouer so^ plee, est appel un auerm^t.

Auerpeny.
Auerpeny hoc e^ quiet' esse de diuersis denarijs pro aueragijs domini regis.

Auncien demesne.
AVnc' demesne, so^t cert' tenures tenus de ceux manours q^ux fuer' en les
maines de seint Ed. la confessor et les q^ux il fist escrier en un liver appel
Domes day, sub titul' regis, et touts les terres tenus del dit man^s so^t aunc
demesn^, et les tena^ts ^e serro^t implede horse del dit man^, et sils sont ils
poyent mr' le matt' et abater le br', mes sils rn^d' al brief et plede et
iudg' done, do^que les terres so^t deuenus fra^ke fee a touts iours. Auxi
toutes tena^ts en aunc' demesn^ so^t frank de toll pur touts chooses co^cerna^t
lour viand' and husba^dry in aunc' demesne, et pur les terres ils ne serront
mis ne impanel sur ascun enquest. Mes toutes les terres en auncien demesne
queux sou^t en maines le roy sou^t frank fee, et pledable al comen ley. Voyes
plus apres en le title Sokmans.

Auowry.
AVowry est lou un prist distres pur rent ou auter chose, and laut' sua
Repleuin, do^q's celuy qui auoit prise, iustifiera en son plee pur quel cause
il le prist, et issint auowa le prise, et ceo est appel son auovvrie.

Bail.
Bail est quant un ho^e est prise, ou arrest pur felony, suspicion de felony,
endict de felony, ou en ascu^ tiel case, issint q' il est restrain de son
liberty, Et esteant per la ley baylable offer suerty ^l eux q' ou^t aucthority
a lui bail', les q^ux suerties sou^t obl' pur luy al use le Roign^ en un c^t'
so^m^ d' money, ou corpse pur corpse, que il apperera deua^t les Justice de gaol'
delivery al prochein sessio^ etc. Donques sur les bo^ds de ceux suerties, come
est aua^t dit, il est bail, ce^ adire, mise al liberty ta^que le iour appoint
pur so^ appara^c'.

Bailement.
BAleme^t e^ un deliu^y de chooses (soie^t il^ de escripts, bie^s, ou stuff) al
aut', asc': foits dee^ redeliu^arer' al bailor, ce^ adire, al celuy q^ issint
deliu^ ceo, ascun foits al use del bailey, ce^ adir', de luy a q' il e^ deliver,
et ascun foits auxi deste deliver ouster a un tierce person. Ce^ deliuere est
appel un bailement.

Bailife.
BAilife est un officer q' appertient al un manor, pur order le husbandry, et
ad aucthoritye de payer quitrents issua^ts horse del man^, succide arbres,
repaiter les measons, fair pales, haies, distrein^ au^s sur le t're et diverse
tiels semblables. Cest officer e^ celuy, q^ les au^c' Saxons ou^t appel un
Reeue: car le nosme (Bailife) ne fuit do^q^sconus ent' eux: mes vie^t eins oue
les Norma^s, et est appel en latin, villicus.

Bakberinde thief.
BAkberind' Thief est un lar' q' e^ prise oue le manner cest adire, aya^t ce^
troue sur luy (ee^ant pursue oue hue et cry*) le quel il ad emblee, soit il
money, linen, woolle^, ou auter stufe, mes il est plus properment dit, quant il
est prise, portans tiels chooses q^ il ad emblee en un bundel, ou fardel sur so^
dorse.

Bargain and sale.
Bargain et sale, est quant un reco^pe^ce est do^e per ambideux les parties al
bargain Co^ si un bargain et ve^d' so^ t're al aut'pur arge^t. Icy le terre
e^ un recompense a luy pur largent, et le argent e^ un reo^pe^ce al auter pur
l' t're, et ce^ un bo^ contract et bargain, et fee simple passa nyent obstant
il ne dit, a aver et tener le terre a luy and a ses heirs. Et per tiel
bargain et sale, terres poyent pass sauns livery de seysin, si le bargain et
sale soyt per fayt endent, seal, et enrolle, ou en le county lou le terre
gist, ou en un des courts del Roygne de record al Westminster deins v. moyes
procheyne apres le date de mesme le escript endent accordaunt all statut en
cest case fayt en le 27. An. de H. 8. cap. 16.

Bar.
Bar est quaunt le defendant en ascun action plede un plee que est sufficient
respons, and ceo adnul laction del pleintife a touts iours.

Bastard.
Bastard est celuy que est nee dasc' fe^e nient espouse issint q' son pere
nest conus per order del ley, and pur ceo il est dit filius populi, mes per la
ley spiritual si un engender un infant sur ascun fe^e que infaunt est nee horse
del espousels, and puis il mary m^ la fe^e: donques tiel infaunt serra dit
mulier et nemy bastard, mes per le ley Dengleterre il est bastard, et pur ceo
quaunt tyel especial bastardye est allege, il serra try per pais, and nemy
per leuesque, mes general bastardy serra try per certificatio^ del Euesque.

Et si un femme soyt gross de infaunt, per son baron, que morust et el prist
auter baron, et apres lenfa^t est nee, cest serr'dit le^fant le primer baron.
Mes fi el fuit priuem^t inseint al temps del mort son primier baron, donques il
serra dit lenfant le second baron, sed quaere, et voyes loppinion de Thorpe
21. E. 3. 39.

Auxi si un ho^e prent feme que soyt grosement inseint per ascu^ auter que ne
fuit son baron, et puis lenfant e^ nee deins les espousels, donques il serra
dit lenfaunt le baron mesque il fuit nee forsque un iour apres les espousels
solempnes.

Battle.
Battle est un ancient trial en nr'e ley quel le def. en un appele de felony
poit eslier, cestassauoir, a co^bater oue lappellant pur proof sil soit
culpable del felony ou non: quel combat sil succeda si bie^ del part le
defendaunt que il vanquish lappellant, il alera quite, et luy barrera de son
appel a touts iours. Mes si un soit endite de felony et un appel est port sur
m^ lendictement, la le def. ne gagera battle. Battle auxi poit estre en un
br' de droit.

Bigamy.
BIgamy fuit un cou^terplea (devise al Counsel de Lions sur mislike de second
marriage) deste object quant le prisoner demand le benefit del Clergy,
cestassauoir, son liver come nosment a dire, que il que demand le privilege
del clergy, fuit mary a tiel feme en tiel lieu deins tiel dioces, et que el est
mort, et que il ad apres marie un aut' feme deins m^ le dioces, ou deins ascun
aut'dioces, et issint Bigamus: Ou sil and este forsque un temps mary, donques
adire que el, que il ad espouse est, ou fuit un vief, cest adire le relict dun
tiel etc. Le quel chose serra try per Leuesq' de le dioces, ou le espousals
sount allege. Et esteaunt issint certify per Leuesque, le prisoner perdera le
benefit delclergie: Mes all cest iour, per force de le act fait en Anno 1. E.
6. cap. 12. cest null plea, mes que il poet aver son clergy ceo nyent obstaunt.

Issint est Br. ti. Clergy Pla. 20. al mesme purpose. Et sur ceo, si vous
estis desirous (Friar Nicholas) de voyer queux reasons ils ount que persuade
enuers second Espousels, lege, enter diverse auters, Fraunces Petrarch de
Remedijs vtriusque fortunae le primer liu^ et lxxvi. dialogue entite led de
secund'nuptijs, quel liver ore tarde nr' friar mr' Thomas Twyne ad bien et oue
bon grace (come ils que poient judge er diont) translate horse d'latine en
Englois, et moult aptment appell ceo Physic encounter fortune.

Blodewit.
BLodewit, hoc est quietu^ esse d' Amerciamentis d' sanguine fuso, et que
teneantur placita in curia vestra et habeatis amerciamenta inde prouenientia
quia (wit) angl' misericordia latin.

Boot.
Boot e^ un viel pol* et il signify, help succor, aid, ou advantage, et est
communement joint oue un auter parol, qui sig nification il augment come ceux
Brigboote, Burghboot, fireboot, hedgeboote, ploweboote, et diverse tiels
se^blables, pur queux significations, voies en lour proper titles.

Brodehalpeny.
Broad halpeny (en ase's copies Bordehalpeny) hoc est quietum esse de quadam
consuetudine exacta pro tabulis leuatis.

Brugbote.
BRugbote (et e^ ascu^s copies Bridgbote) hoc est quietum esse de auxilio dando
ad reficiendu^ pontes.

Burghbote.
Burghbote, hoc e^ qui etu^ esse de auxilio da^do ad facie^d'burgu^ Castrum,
Ciuitatem vel muros prostrata.

Burghbrech.
BVrghbrech, hoc est quietum esse de transgressionibus factis in ciuitate vel
burgo contra pacem.

Burgh English.
BVrgh English ou Borow english est un custom en un ancient burgh, que si un
home ad issue diverse fits et morust, uncore le puisne^ fits solement enheritera
et auera touts les terres et tenements, que fuerent al son pier de que il
morust seysie deyns mesme le burghe per descent, come heir a son pier per
force de custom de mesme le burgh.

Burglarie.
BVrglarie est quant un debruse et enter en le meason dun auter en le nuit, oue
felonyous intent de robber, ou occider, ou de fair auter felony, en queux
cases nyent obstant il nemport riens, vncor' il est felony, pur que il serra
pendue, Auterment est sil soit en le iour, ou que il debruse le meason en le
nuit, et nentra pas en ceo a cest temps. Mes si un servant voile conspire oue
auters de robber son master, et a cel intent il ouert les doors et fenesters
de son master en le nuit pur eux, et ils vyent en le meason per cest voye, cest
burglarie en les estrau^gers, et le servant est un laron, mes nemy burglar'. Et
c' fuit loppinion de le right woorshipful Sir Roger Manwood chiualer, plus
digne seigniour chief Baron de le Eschequer, a le quarter Session tenus en
Canterbury en January darrayne. 1579. 21. Elizab.

Caruage.
CAruage, hoc est qui etu^ esse si dn^s rex talliauerit tota^ terra^ suam per
carueas, Nota q^ un carue d' terre est un plovve land.

Cession.
CEssion, est qua^t un Ecclesiastical person est cree en Euesque, ou quant un
person dun personage p^st un auter bn^fic' sans dispens. ou auterment nient
qualify etc. En a^bideux cases lour prim^ bn^fices sont deuenus void, et al
ceux q' il ad que fuit cree Euesque, le roigne p^sentera pro illa vice,
quicunque soit patron de eux: Et en lauter case le patron poet presenter.

Challenge.
CHallenge est lou jurors apperont pur trier un issue, do^ques si ascun des
perties supposont q' ils ne so^t pas indifferent, la ils poient eux challenge
et refuse. Il y ad diu^s challe^ges, un est challenge al array, lauter a le
polles. Challenge al array est quant la panel est fauourablement fait par le
vico^t ou aut' officer. Challenge par le polis sou^t ascu^s principal, et ascu^
per cause come ils appel ceo. Principal e^ qua^t un des iurrours est le fits,
friar, ou cousin al pleintife ou defendant ou tenant a luy, ou q^ il auoyt
espouse la file le playntife, et pur ceux causes il serra retrait.

Auxy in plee de mort de home et en chescun action real et in actyons personel
si se debt ou damages amount a xl. mark il est bon challenge que il ne puyt
dispender xl, s. per an de fra^kt'.

Challenge per cause, est ou le party all' un matter que nest principal
challenge, come que le fits du^ desiurad espouse la fil' le pl', and donq^s
conclude and pur ceo il est favorable, quel serra try per auter del enq^st si
il soit favorable ou indifferent, et si ils diont q^ il est favorable et nemy
indifferent, do^ q^s il serra treit, aut'm^t il serra iure. Auxi un felon q^
est arraygne, puit challenge xx. iurrours pare^ptory sau^s ascun cause, et ceo
est in fauorem vitae, et taunt que il voil' oue cause, mes donques il serra
try si pur tyel cause il soit indifferent ou nemy.

Champertours.
CHampertours sou^t ceux que mooua pleas et suites, ou cause deste move per
lour, ou auters procurem^t, et sue a lour costages et charges demesne, pur aver
part del terre, ou gains en variance.

Charge.
CHarge est lou un home graunta un rent issant horse del so^ terre, et q'si le
rent soit arere, que list a luy ses heirs, et assigns a distrayne tanque le
rent soit pay, cest appell un rent charge: mes si un grant un rent charge horse
del terre un auter, and puis purchase le terre, le grant est void.

Charters de terres.
CHarters de terres, sont escripts, faits, euide^ces, et instrum^ts, fait de un
ho^e al aut', sur asc' estat' co^ueied

ou pass perent' eux, d' terres ou ten^ts, mr'a^s l' nosm^, lieu, et quantity
del terr', le estate, te^ps, et manner del fesance de ceo, les parties al le
estat' deliu^ et prise, les testemoignes present al ceo oue auters
circumstaunces.

Chattels.
CHattels sont en ij. sorts, ce^ adire, Chattels Reales, et Chattals personals.
Chattels reals, sount leases purans, Gardes, et a tener a volunt.

Chattels personals sont touts moueables bn^s, come argent, plate* bn^s del
measo^, chiuals vaches, blees, et tiels se^blables.

Childewite.
CHildvvite, hoc est quod capiatis gersummam de natiua vestra corrupta et
preignata sine licentia vestra.

Chimin.
CHimen est le haut voy ou chesc'ho^e passa, q^ est appel via Regia, et uncore
le Roy and auter chose la, forsque le passage pur luy and pur son people, car
le franktenement est en le seigniour del sole et touts les profits cressaunt
la, come arbres and auters chooses.

Chose en action.
CHose en action est quant un home ad cause, ou poit port' un action pur ascu^
duity due a luy, come un acc' d' det sur un obligac', annuitie, rent, covenant,
guard, biens, trn^s, ou tiels semblables, et pur ceo que ils sount chooses de
q^ux un ho^e ne^ possess, mes pur re couery de eux, e^ mise a son acc', ils
sont appel chooses en accion. Et tiels chooses en acc', qui sount certain, le
Roigne poit grant, et le grauntee poet vser un action pur eux en son nosme
demesne ta^tsolen^^t: Mes un common person ne poet gra^ter so^ chose en acc',
ne le Roygne m^ ne poet grant sa chose en acc' le q^l est un c^t', come trn^s
and tiels semblables.

Circuit de action.
CIrcuit de action, est quant un actio^ e^ droituralment port pur un duity, mes
un c^ circu^ le bush come se^ble: pur ceo que il puit cybien ee^ auterm^t
respondu, et det'mine et le suit save, et pur ceo que m^ le acc' fuit pluis que
besoigne, il est appel circuit de action, Come si home grant un rent charge
de x. li. horse de son manor de dale, et puis le grauntee disseisist le graunt'
de m^le manner de dale, et il port un assise, et recou^ le terre et xx. li.
dam', le q^l xx. li. esteant pay, le grau^tee del rent sue son acc' pur x. li.
de so^ re^t due durant le te^ps de le disseisin, le q^l si null disseisin ad
ee^, il doit au^ evve. Cest appell circuit de action, pur ceo que il puit aver
este pluis briefement respondu, car ou le grau^t' doit receive xx. li. dam', et
pay x. li. re^t, il puit au^ resceiue fors que le x. li. tantsolement pur les
damm^, et le grauntee puit aver recoupe et tenus arrere le aut'x. li. en ses
mains per voy de detain^ pur son rent, et issint per ceo puitauer save son
action.

Claim.
Claim est un challenge per asc' ho^e del property ou ownership dun chose que
il and en possession, mes que est detain de luy per tort.

Clergy.
Clergy est un ancient liberty del esglise papisicke, le quel ad auxy este
confirm oue nous en diverse parlyamentes, Et est quant un prester, ou un deins
holy orders (come ils appel ceo) ou ascun auter quicunque, en que est null
impediment ou impossibility destevn prester, est arraine de felony ou tiels
se^blables deua^t un temporal Judge etc. et le prisoner pria son clergy, cest
adire pur aver son liver, quel est a taunt sicome il vst pree deste dismiss
del temporal Judge, et deste deliver al ordinarye de purger luy mesme del mesme
offense. Cest privilege al prim^ ne fuit cy gen^al, en respect del parties que
pendra benefit per ceo, come il apres deuient, Car al comencement esteant un
papish invention les patrons deceo fuerent molt partial, et voylent que asc'
pre^droit commodity per ceo, mes lour papistical presters soleme^t et tiels
queux fuerent deins orders, come est aua^tdit: et c' come^ce ent' eux, pur part
per lour graund superbitie disdeynance de^e southe le obedience de lour natural
Roies et temporal correction, et pur part de policy, pur hont ne le male
manners de lour spiritualty doient vener al ouert vyewe et examynation del
layitie (come ils distinguish eux) et null merueile, car deins un petit de les
prim^ ans del reign le roy H. le 2. le clergy del Realm ad commit plus que
un cent several murders sur ces subjects, come le roy fuit certeinm^t enfourme,
ouster moult robberies et aut's outrages: pur remedy de q^l order fuit ewe per
le roy, so^ nobility, et oue grand fair le clergy consent a ceo, que si
ascun clerk de ceo en aunt commit felony ou treason, il doet primer este
degrade, et apres deliver al lay power de receiu^ la come a son offense appient
etc. al darr'en fauord' vie (un chose deste extend endifferentment al chescun
ho^es) et pur le amor de erudic', il fuit grant al chesc' home queux puissent
lieser, no obsta^t ils ne fuere^t presters, ne deins orders. Et puis en
parliament fait sur bon considerations, il ad este restraigne et repeal en
diverse cases, come en willful murder, burglary, et tiels auters.

Clerk attaint. Clerk convict.
Clerks sou^t en 2. sorts, ce^ adire clerks attaint, et clerks convict. Clerk
attaint est cestuy q^ pria son clergy apres judge. sur luy done de le felony,
et ad son clergy allow, tiel clerk ne poet fair' son purgation.

Clerk convict est cestuy que prya son clergy deuaunt judgment done sur luy de
le felonye, et ad le clergy a luy grant, tiel clerk poet fair so^ purgation.

Color.
Color, e^ un feigned matter le q^l le def. ou tenant use en son bar, qua^t
un acc' de trn^s, ou un assise est port enuers luy, en le quel il do^e le
demau^dant, ou pl' un show, prima facie que il ad bone cause de action, ou en
verity il ne^ just cause, mes tauntsolement un color, ou visour dun cause. Et
il e^ use al intent que le determination del action doet este per les Judges,
et nemy per un ignorant jury de xij. homes. Et pur c' un color doet este un
matter en ley, ou difficult al lay gentes, come pur example. A. port un assise
de terre enuers B. and B. dit que il mesme lessa mesme le terre al un C. pur
term de vie, et apres grant le reuersion al A. le demaundant, et puis C. le
tenant pur term de vie morust, apres que decease, A. le demaundaunt claymant
le reuersion per force del grant (ou C. le tenant pur vie ne vnques atturne)
entra, sur que B. entra, enu^s que A. pur mesme enter port cest assise etc.
cest un bon color, pur ceo q' le ley gents pensant, q^ le terre voile pass
per le grant sans atturnem^t, ou en fait il ne voyle pass etc.

Auxi en un actio^ de trespass, color doet este done, et de eux sou^t un
infinite number, un pur example: En un action de trn^s pur prisel de auers del
pl', le defendaunt dit, que deuant le pl' riens auoit en eux, il mesme fuit
possess de eux come de ses proper biens, et eux deliver al A. B. pur eux
rebayler a luy quando etc. et A. B. eux done al plaintiff, et l' plaintiff
suppose le property destre en A. B. al te^ps del done, prist eux, et le
defendaunt eux reprist del pl', sur q^le pl' port le action, cest un bone
color et un bone plea.

Color de office.
Color officij, est toutes dits prise* in malem partem, et signify un act
malement fait per le countenance de un office, et il port un dissimulant visage
del droit office, ou le office nest que vegle del fauxitie et l' chose est
ground sur vice, et loffice est come un shadovve al ceo.

Mes Ratione officij, et virtute officij, sount pryses toutes foytes in bonam
partem, et lou l' office est l' just cause del chose, et le chose est pursuant
suant al office.

Collusion.
COllusio^ est lou un action est port verse un auter per son agreement demesne,
si le pleyntife recover, tiel recovery est dit per collusio^: et en ascuns
cases le collusion serra enquire, come en un Quar' impedit, assise, et tiels
semblables: Mes en auowry, ne en brief dentre, ou ascun action personal, le
collusio^ ne serra enquire.

Common ley.
Common ley, est pur le pluis part prise 3. voyes. Primerment pur les leyes de
cest realm simply sa^s ascu^ aut' ley, come customarie ley, Civil ley,
Spiritual ley, ou quecunque auter ley join al ceo. Come quant il e^ dispute en
nr'e leyes denglet're, quid doet de droit ee^ determine per le common ley, et
quid per le spiritual ley, ou le court del Admiral, ou tiels sem blables.

Secondariment il e^ prise pur les courts le roy, come le bank l'roy ou common
place, tantsolem^t pur mr' un difference perent' eux et les base courts, come
customary courts, courts barons, cou^ty courts, pipowders, et tiels
se^blables, come qn^t un ple d' terr'est remove horse de au^c' dem^ pur ceo que
le terre est frank fee, et pledable al common ley, cest adir' e^ le court le
roy* et nemy en aunc' demesne, ou en ascu^ aut' base court.

Tierceme^t, et pluis vsualme^t, per le common ley est entendue, tiels leys que
fuer' generalme^t prise, et tenus pur ley, deuant q' ascu^ estatute fuit fait
pur alter ceo, come pur example. Tenant pur vie, ne pur ans, ne fuerent deste
punish pur fesance vvast al commonley, tanque le statute de Gloucester. ca. 5.
fuit fait le quel done un action d' vvast enuers eux: mes tenant per le
courtesy, et ten^t en dovver, fuerount punishable de vvast al common ley cest
adire, per le usual, et common received leyes del realm, deuau^t le dit
statute de Gloucester fuit fait.

Common.
Common est le droit que ho^e ad de mitter ses beasts a pasture, ou de vser et
occupier le terre q^ nest son proper sole.

Et nota q^ sont diu^s commons. s. common in gross, common appendaunt, common
appurtenaunt, et common per cause de vi^inage.

Common in gross est lou ieo per mon fayt grant a un auter que il au^a common in
ma t're

Common appendant est lou home est seysie de certain terre, a que il ad common
in aut' soil, ettouts ceux que serront seisie del dyt terre auerount le dit
common solement pur ceux bestes que compest sa terre a que il est appendant
except oysons, chyuers, et porceaux.

Et touts iours cest common est per prescription, et de common droit, et il est
appendaunt al terre erable solement, et nemy al auter terre ou measo^.

Common appurtena^t est in m^ le manner come common append', mese^ oues'que tants
man^s des auers cibie^ porceaux, chiuers, et tiels se^blabl' come chiuals,
vaches boefes, brebes, et tiels q^ compester le terre. Et tiel common poit ee^
fait a cestiour, et poet ee^ seu^e delt're a q^ il est appurtena^t, mes issint
ne poit common appe^d'. Common per cause de visinage, est lou les tenants de deux
seign^s q' sont seisies de deux villes don't lu^ gist pris lauter, et chesc' de
eux ont use de te^ps don't memory ne court de aver common en auter vylle
ouesque toutes beasts cominable.

Mes lu^ ne poit mit ses auers en le terre lauter car la ceux de lauter ville
poient eux distr' damage fesant, ou aver action de tn^s, mes ils eux mittera
en lour camps dem^, et sils estraye en les camps del auter ville, ils la doient
eux sufferer. Et les in habitaunts de lun ville ne misterount evns taunts come
ils voile, mes aient regard al frankten^t del inhabitants de lauter ville car
auterm^t il ne soyt bon vicinitie, sur que tout cest matter depend.

Condition.
Condition est un restraint ou bridle annexe et join al chose, issint que per
le non performance et fesans d' ceo le party al condie^ recou^a p^iudice et
perde et per le parformance et faired' c', comodity et auantage.

Et touts condic' so^t ou co^dic' actual et express, queux sont appel condic'
en fait, ou ils so^t condic' implicit ou tacit, et nient express, les q^ux
sont appels conditions en ley.

Auxi touts conditions sount ou condic' precedent et vaount deuau^t lestate et
sou^t execute, ou subseque^t et venie^s apres lestate et executorie.

Le condition precedent, fait gain et obtain^ le chose, ou estat' fait sur
condic' per le perfourmance de m^.

Le condition subsequent fait guard et co^tenue le chose, ou estate fait sur
condition per le performance de c^.

Actual et express condition q' est appel un condic' en fait, est un co^die'
knit and annexe per express perols, al feoffeme^t, leas, ou grant ou en
escript, ou sau^s escript, Sico^e ieo enfeffe un ho^e en terres reseruant re^t
deste pay a tiel feast 'sur co^dic. q'si le feoffee fail de payment al iour,
q^ donques il serra loyal pur moy de reenter.

Conditions implicit ou tacit, et nient exp^sse q^ux sont appel condic' en
ley, so^t qn^t un ho^e grant al aut' le office deste gard' dun pke, Seneschal,
Bedle, baylife, ou tiels se^blables, pur term^ de vie, et nient obsta^t que la
ne soit asc' condic' express en l'grau^t, vnc' le ley per le couertment du^
condic', le q'l est q^ si le grauntee ne execute pas touts points appartain^tal
so^ offic'per luy m^ ou so^ suffic' depute, do^que il serr' loyal purle gra^tor
dent' et disch. luy de son office. Condition precedent et vaant deuant

e^ qn^t un leas e^ fait al un pur vie sur co^dic' que si le lessee pur vie
voile pay al lessour xx. li. a tiel iour q^ do^ques il au^a fee simple: Icy le
condic' preceda et va deuaunt le estate en fee simple, et sur le pso^mance de
l'e condic', gayn^ et get le fee simple. Condic' subseque^t et venie^s ap^s est
qn^t un graunta al I. S. son man^ de dale en fee simple sur condition, q'le
grauntee paiera a luya tiel iour xx. li. ou auterment q^ son estate cessera,
icy le condition est subsequent et sequerens le estate en fee simple, et sur le
performance de c', fait guard et continue lestate.

Confiscate biens.
COnfiscate bn^s, sont bn^s al queux le ley entitle le Roine, qua^t ils ne sont
pas claim per asc' auter. Come si home soit endite que il felonisem^t emblea
les biens de I. S. lou en verity ils sont ses bn^s dem', et ils sount mises en
court verse luy come maineur, et donque il est dd' q'il dit al m^s les bn^s, et
il eux deny, ore per ce^ denier de eux, il perdra ceux biens, coment q^ apres
il soit acquit del felony, et issint en aut's semblable cases.

Contract.
COntract e^ un bargen ou covenant per enter ij. parties, ou un chose est don
pur auter q^ est appel quid pro quo, co^esi leo ve^d mon chiual pur arge^t ou
si ieo covenant de fair lease a vous de mo^ man^ de dale e^ co^siderac' de xx.
li. q^ vous dones a moy, ceux so^t bon co^tracts, pur ceo q' il ad un chose pur
auter, mes si un home fait promise a moy que ieo auera xx. s. et que il voyle
este dettour a moy de c^, et puis ieo demand le xx. s. et il ne voile a moy
deliver, uncore ieo nauera iammes action pur recover cest xx. s. pur ceo que
cest promys ne fuit contract, mes nudus pactus, Et ex nudo pacto non oritur
actio, mes si ascun chose fuit done pur le xx. s. mesque il ne fuit forsque al
value de un denier, do^ques il fuit bone contract.

Conusance.
COnusaunce de plee est un privilege que un city ou ville ad del grant le
roy, de tener plee de touts contractes, et des terres deyns le precinct del
fraunches: et qua^t ascu^ home est impled' pur ascun tiel chose en le court de
roy, les maires ou bailifs d' tiel fra^ches, ou lour att' poie^t dd'er
conusa^ce del plee. s. que le plee et le matt' serra pled' et determine deuaunt
eux:

Mes si le Court al Westminster soit loialment seisie del plea deuaunt que
conusaunce soit demand, donques ils nauerou^t conusaunce pur cest suit, pur c'
que ils ou^t negligentme^t surcesse lour temps d' dema^d, mes ceo ne serr'
bar al eux dau^ conusance en aut' action, car ils poyent demand conusance en
un actio^, et omit ceo en auter action a lour pleasur'. Et nota que conusance
ne gist en prescription, mes ils couient monstre letters le roy.

Corody.
COrody, fuit un reasonable allowa^ce d' meat, pan^, boier, arge^t vestam^ts,
loggis, et tiel sustenance, q^ de common dr't chesc' fou^d' de Abbeis,
Priories, Nu^ries, et aut's meas. de religion papistick, ou^t en m^s les
measo^s quant ils fuerent, purson pier, friar, cousin, ou auter home que il
voyet, prendroit ceo, sil fuit un meason de moygnes, et sil soyt founder dun
meason de Nu^nes ou muliers, donq^s c'pur sa mere, soer, cousin, ou aut' mulier
q'il voile direct al ceo, et touts iours cest prouiso fuit ewe, q' il que ad
corodie en un measo^ de moignes, ne doit mittre un fe^e de prender ceo, Ne ou
corodie fuit due e^ un Nu^ry, la il ne fuit loial de appoynter un home
d'receiuer ceo, car en ambideux cases, tiel presentation fuit deste reject. Et
ce^ corody fuit due cybn^ al un common person qui fuit founder sico^e ou le roy
m^ fuit founder. Mes ou le meason fuit tenus en frankealmoygne, la le tenure m^
fuit un discharge de corodie encounter touts homes, Sinon il fuit ap^s charge
voluntarime^t, come ou le roy voet mister son br'e al Abbey pur un corodie pur
un tiel, le quel ils admit, la le meason doet ee^ charge a touts iours si l'
roy soit fou^dor, ou nemy.

Coroner.
COroner est un ancient officer de trust et de graund authority, ordeine
deste un principal conseruat* ou gard' de la peace, a porter record des plees
del corone, et de son view demesne, et de diu^s auters chooses, mult en number,
etc. Mes al cestiour, ou le aucthority d'l Coroner ne^ cy grand, sico^e en
ancient temps il fuit, per que loffice ne^ ewe en semblabl' estimac'. Ou
auterme^t le viscount et ils q' ou^t authority de elect le coroner ne sount
cy careful sicome ils doient ee^ en lour election, et pur ceo il est a ore
tantoft deuenus arer' al mesme l' point, que il fuit en temps le roy Edward
le primer, quaunt cest statut seque^s fuit fait. Pur ceo q^ petits ge^ts and
meins sages soient eslius ore de nouel co^munelm^t al offic' del coron^, et
mestier serroit q^ prodes homes, loyals, et sages, se entermellent de cel
offic': Puruiew est, que per touts les counties soient eslues suffisantes homes
coroners, des plus loyals et plus sages chyualers etc. Et nyent obstant le
letter de ce^ estatute ne soyt precisement observe, uncore al meynes le intent
doyt este sequor cy pres come poet que pur le defaut de chiualers, Gentle homes
furnish oue tiels qualities sico^e le estatut mise (d' que il y ad diu^s)
poie^t este eslieu, oue cest addic', que ils soient virtuous, et bo^ conus
christians.

Corporation.
COrporation est un chos' permane^t q^ poet aver succession: Et en un assembly
et ioining ensemble de diverse en un fellowship fraternity, et meant, d' que un
est l' Test et principal, l's auters so^t le corpse, et ce^ Test et corpse joint
ensemble, fount le corporac'.

Et de corporations ascuns sount appels spiritual, et ascuns temporal, et de
ceux que sont spiritual, ascuns sont corporations de mort persons en ley, et
ascuns auterm^t, et ascuns sont per authority del Roy solem^t, et ascu^s ount
este dun mixed aucthority. Et d' ceux q^ux so^t te^porall ascuns sount per
authority d'l roign^ auxi et ascu^s per le common ley del realm.

Corporation spiritual, et de mort persons en ley, est lou le corporation
consist dun Abbey et Covent, et ceux ount lour commencem^t del roy, et le home
de Rome, qua^t il ad a fair cy.

Corporation spiritual et de able persons en ley, est lou le corporation
consist dun deane et chapter, Et cest corporation ad commencement del roy
solement.

Corporation Temporal per le roy est, lou est un mair' et co^minaltie.

Corporation temporal, per authority del common ley, est le asse^blie en
perliame^t, le q^l consist del roin^, le test del corporation et del sn^rs
spiritual et temporal, et de les co^mo^s del realm^, l'corps del corporac'.

Corpse politic.
Corpse politic sont Euesques, Abbes, Priours, Deans, Person dun esglise, et
tiels se^blables q^ux ont succession.

Corruption de sangue.
COrrupc' de sa^gue est qn^t le peer est attaint de felony ou treason, donque
son sa^gue est dit deste corrupt, per reason de q^l ses enfants ne poyent este
hr's a luyne a asc^ auter auncester. Et sil fuit noble, ou gentle ho^e deuant,
il et touts ses enfants per ceo sont faits ignoble et vngentel eyant regard al
nobility ou gent^ie q'ils claim per lour pier, quel ne poit este sane arrere
sans aucthority del parliam^t.

Covenant.
Covenant est un agreement fait perenter ij. persons, lou chescun deux est
tenus al auter, de perfourmer certain couenauntes pur son part.

Couerture.
COuerture, est qua^t un ho^e et un fe^e so^t espouse: Ore le temps de le
continuance de cest marriage perenter eux, est appel couerture, et le femme est
appel un feme covert.

Couin.
COuin est un secret assent, det' mine en les ceurs de deux ou plusors, al
prejudice dun auter: Come si t'pur t'me d'vie, voile secretment conspire oue un
auter, que lauter recover a verse le to pur vie, le terre que il tient etc. en
prejudice de celuy en le reuersion.

Counterplea.
COunterplee, e^ lou un port un actio^, et le tenant en son respons, et plee
vouche ou appell pur ascun home, pur garraunt son title, ou prayer aid de
auter que ad meliour estate, come de cesty en la reuersion, ou un estraunge al
actyon vyent and prayera deste resceu de sauer son estate: si le demaund'
replye a ceo et mo^ster cause que il ne doyt tyel home voucher, ou que il ne
doit de tiel home aid aver, ou que tiel home ne doit este resceu, cest plee
est appel un counterplee.

Cinque ports.
CInque ports, sone certain haven villes, cinque in number, as queux ad ee^
grant long te^ps pass mults libertyes (que auters port villes nount) et ceo
primerment en le temps del Roy Edward appel le confessor (q' fuit deua^t le
conquest) et fuer' increase ap^s, et c' especialm^t en les iours de les deux
Ed. l' prim^, et 2. (ap^s l' co^q^st) come ap pt en l'liu^d Doomesday et aut's
viels monum^ts q^ux en ce^ lieur ee^ants haut tedious d' cit', ieo entende
friar N. d' omit, et mise vous cy le copy de un au^c' rec' en fra^cois, le q'l
l' worshipful, nr' loving et bo^ pier, mou^sier I. Twine, de Cau^t' do^e a moy
horse de son liu^ appel W. Biholt, asc' te^ps un moigne de le Abbey d' S.
Augustin^ en que vous scauois que fuer' auncientm^t account le Cinks ports et
lour members, q^ux services ils deuoient, ou lour court doit ee^ tenus, deua^t
q^, et d' q^ux chooses ils poient tener plea, oue tiels semble digne de^e conus,
et per c' vous entendes auxi q^ le viel rude verse fait faux nosme d' les v.
ports e^ nosm^t eux solo^'que ce^ man^, Dover Sa^dwicus, Rye, Rumney,
Frigmareuentus, Dover, Sandvvich, Rye, Ru^ney, Winchel sey, q^ est entend
Frigmareuentus etc. q^l recordieo voile englois cibn^ come mon petite science
en ce^ viel french voile do^e a moy co^ge. Et issint il est.

Ceux sont les chief villes des Cinkes po^ts.

1 Hasting. 2 Romeney. 3 Heth 4. Dover. et 5 Sandwich.
Les members del port de Hasting sont ceux.

1 Peuenese. 2 Bolewareheth. 3 Petite James, 4 Bekesbourne 5 Grenethe. 6 Rye.
et 7 VVinchelse.
A scuns add a ceux le mere bank e^ Sefford, Hideney, et Nor thie.

Le chief port de Hastinge one les me^bres auant dits deuient trouer au Roy de
an en an, si mestre soit per mere vint et vne nefes. Ceo est a sauoir, la
ville de Hastinge iij. nefes, la Peuenese vne nefe, wole worchetie et Petite
Iham^e vne nefe, Bekesbourne vne nefe, Greneshe ij. homes, oue deux armours oue
ceux de Hastinge La ville de Rye v. nefes, la ville de winchelsee x. nefes.

La members del pert de Romenal so^t. 2. 1. Vieu Romenal, et 2. Iyde.

Ascuns add al ceux Prormhel, Oswardsto^e et denge marreis Romenal oue les
aua^t dits members deuient a roy come auant est dit 5. niefes, dount Lyde doit
un nief.

Le port d'Hethe oue son member vvestheth deuient trou^ 5. niefes au roy, come
aua^t e^dit.

Les members d'l port de Dover sou^t ceux.

1. Folkestone, and 2. Feuersham.
Ascu^s add Meregate etc.

Mesme cel port de Dover, oue les aua^tdits members doit trou^ au roy 21.
niefs, ceo e^ a seauoir Dover xix. niefes, Folkestone un nefe, et Fauersha^ un
niefe.

Les members del port de Sandvvyz sount ceux.

1. Stoner. 2. Forwich, 3 Dale. 4 Seire.
Ascuns add Reaculure.

Mesme cel port de Sandwich oue les members auauntdits doyt trou^ en service le
roy come auaunt est dit v. niefes.

Sum lvij. niefs.

Quant le roy vodra aver son service des auauntdits niefs, ils aueront xl.
iours de su^mons, et ils troueront au roy en chescu^ nief xx. homes, et le
mastr' byen arm, et byen atire pur fair le service le roy.

Et irrount les niefes en proper costages des cynke ports la ou eux serrount
su^mons. Et quant les niefs serrount la venus, eux demurront xv. iours en
service le roy al proper costages des Cynkes ports. Et apres les xv. iours
passes ils demurrount au costages le roy, sil en ad a fair.

Le mastr' de la niefe prendra le iour vi. deniers. Le Constable vj. deniers,
Et chescu^ des auters mariners iij. deniers.

Et est a sauer que la Court de Shipvveye que est chief Court des cynke
ports, ou chescu^ Maire de chescun port, ou dusse, diz, syz, ou quater, et le
Maire d' chescun port sicome eux par letters del gardeyne des Cynke ports ount
estre su^monus, et sicome le port est greinder ou meinder sauns essoine doit
vener, doyt estre summonus per letters del dit gardeine a toutes les ports que
illeoques suit deuient enuoies.

Et doit la summons a la suite fere et a su^mounder ascun comunant a responder
a ascun, de ascun plee conteiner quaraunte iours del iour d' la receyt des
letters le dit gardeine. Et auauntdit court doyt estre summons pryncipalment,
pur treason fait encounter le roy ou royes, pur fausure de seal le roy, ou de
sa money, pur treasure troue de south le terre, pur service le roy dedist, ou
detenue, pur faux judgment per ascun communant rendu.

Et null co^munant al ascu^ plee verse mesme la comuna^t mesa^ respond'ne doit,
forsque a la court aua^tdit.

Et plee illeoques mesne verse ascun baron des Cinkes ports challenge per le
baylife de cel port de que baylie mesme le baron est, doyt estre aiournee dekes
al port dount icel baron est, sil ne soit de trn^s fayt au roy, pur ceo q^ les
dits barons ou^t conisaunces de touts manners de plees horspris plees de corone.
Et quant y ceux barons auerount defailes endroyture fair. Le dit Gardeine a la
pleynt de celuy a qui ils auerount defayles de droyture entranticel port a
droyture fair sicome il est contenue en la chartre.

Oustre c' la auauntdit court ne doyt estre tenue de la feast del Nativity de
seint Marie iesques a la feast de saint Andrew pur les faires de German^.
Oustre ceo quant les Barons des Cynke ports sont en le service le roy sur
mere, ou a la su^mons le roy, ou al maundement le roy.

Oustre ceo ne doyt pas tenue forsque per un iour.

En un essoign^ tantsolement gist en le auauntdit Court en chescun plee.

De suit null essoign^ gist sicome il est auauntdit et pur ceo q' Maire qui de
langour ou enfermete sudeine illeoques venir ne purr, auter purra a cel iour
son lieu tenir, issint ne pur taunt que return soit sait par so^ baylife.

Ne auters princypalment deuient estre charges de ascu^ judgment rendu en mesm^
la Court forsque ceux nosmes queux par les Bayllyffes illeoques ounte^e
returns etc.

Ouster tout ceo, provision de niefs et ho^es come est auau^td^t, ieo ay view
en un auter record (briefement escript) q^ chesc' niefe doit aver un garsion,
que la est appell un Gromet. Issint que en sum les cinques ports sont charges
ouesque 57. niefes. 1197. ho^es, et 57. garsions ou Gromets.

Damage fesants.
DAmage fesants est quant les bests du^ estraunger, sount en auters terres,
sau^s authority del ley ou license del tenant de le terre, et la maunger
tread, ou auterment spoila les blees, grass, boys, ou tiels sembles, en q^l
case le tenant que ils issint damage, poet pur ceo la prender, distreine et
impounde eux, cibien sil soit e^ le nuit come en le iour. Mes e^ aut's cases,
come pur re^t et services et tiels semblables, null poit distrein^ en le nuit
temps.

Danegelde.
DAnegeld, hoc est quietu^ esse de quadam co^suetudine qui cucurrit aliquo
tempore, qua^ quide^ Danj leuauer' in Angl'.

Ceo co^mence prim^e^ te^ps le roy Etheldred q^ estea^t en grau^d distress per
le continual im uasio^ d'les Danes, pur purchaser paxe fuit co^pelled' charger
so^ paies et people oue importable paim^ts: car il p^merm^t don al eux al v.
seu^al paies 113000. li. et puis grant al eux 48000. li. annualm^t.

Deane et Chapter.
DEane et chapter e^ un corpse corporate spiritual, consista^t de plusors able
persons en ley, come nosm^t le deane (q'est le principal) et les Prebe^ds: et
ils iointfont le corporation. Et sico^e ce^ corporac' poie^t iointment purchase
t'res et ten^ts al use de lour esglise et successors: Issint auxi chesc'de eux
seu^alment poet purchase al use de luy et ses heir, come nous iournalm^tvoiom
'eux faier mult abu^da^tm^t.

Declaration.
DEclaration est un monstra^ce en escript de le grief et complaint de le
demaundant ou plaintiff, enuers le tenant ou defendant, en q' il suppose de
aver receive tort. Et cest declaration, doit este plain, et certain, pur ceo
que il impeach le defendant ou tenant, et auxi chase luy a respo^der.

Defendant
DEfendant est celuy que est sue en action personal, et il est appel tenant en
action real.

Demaines.
DEmaines, ou demesnes, e^ le principal manner place del sn^r, q'il et ses
ancestors, ount evve de temps horse de memory, en lour maines dem^, and ount
occupy ', ense^ble oue touts edefices et measo^s q^cunque, et auxi les prees
pastures, boys, terre errable, et tiels semblables appartainant a ceo.

Demaundant.
DEmaund' est celuy q' sue ou compain en un acc' real pur title de terre, et
il est appel pl' en un assise and envn action personel come en action de det,
trespass, disceit, detinue, and tyels semblables.

Demi sancke ou sangue.
Demi sancke, e^ qn^t un ho^e mary un fe^e, et ad issue per luy un fites, et el
morust, et donques il prist un auter femme et ad per luy auxi un fits, Ore ceux
deux fites sount solonque un manner freres, ou com^ ils sount appels, demi
freres, ou freres del demi sanke, cest adire friar, per le part del pier, pur
ceo que ils ount ambideux un pier, et sount ambideux de son sangue, et nemy
freres per le part le mere, ne de ascun sanck ou clime cest voye, et pur ceo
lun de eux ne poet este heir al auter, car il que voyle claim come heir al
un per descent, doit este dentier sanke a luyde que il claim.

Demurrer.
DEmurrer est quant ascun acc' est port, et le defend' plede un plee a que le
pl' dit q' il ne voile respond', pur ceo que il nest suf ficient plee in le
ley, and le def. dyt al contrary que il est sufficient plee, cest doub^e del
ley est appell un demurrer.

Denizen.
DEnizen est lou un alien deuie^t le subject del roigne, et obtain sa letters
pate^ts, pur enioier touts privileges come un ang loies. Mes uncore nient
obstant, il payera eusto^es, et diverse auters chooses come aliens sont.

Deodande.
DEodande, est qua^t ascun ho^e per misfortune est tue per vne chiual* ou per
charet, ou per auter chose q' mouet, donques cel chose que est la cause de son
mort, que al temps de la mysfortune moua, serra forfayt al Roine, and ceo est
appel Deodande, and pertain al Almener le Royne pur disposer in alms et acts
de charity.

Departure de son plea ou matter.
DEparture d' so^ plea, ou matter, est lou un home plede un pleen bar, and le
pleintife reply a ceo, et il apres en son reioynd' pled' ou mo^stre auter
matter contrary a son prim^ plee en barr', ceo est appel un departer de son
bar etc.

Departer in dispite del court.
DEparter in dispite del court, est qua^t le tenant ou defenda^t appear' al
action port enuers luy, et ad iour ouster en m^ le term, ou est demand apres
fau^s iour en mesme le term, et ne appear, mes fait defaut, ce^ un departure
in despite del court, et pur ceo il serra condemn.

Deputy.
Deputy, est celuy q^ occupia en aut' droit, soit ceo office, ou ascun auter
chose, et son forfaiture, ou misdemen^ causer loffic', ou celui q^ deputy il
est de pard' so^ office ou chose. Mes un ne poet fair son deputy en toutes
cases, nisi le grant soit issint sico^e il soit oue ceux ou tiels semblables
parols, exercendo per se vel sufficiente^ deput' suu^, ou si les parols va
oustre, per se vel deputat', suu^, aut deputat' deputati, donq^s il poet fair
un deputy, et son deputy auxi poet fair un deputy, auterm^t nemy.

Deuastauerunt.
DEuastauer' bona testator', e^ qn^t les executors voyle deliu^ les legacies
q'lour testator ad done: ou fair restitution pur tortes faits per luy, ou pay
ses dettes due sur co^tracts, ou auter dettes sur specialtyes, que iours de
payment ne sount uncore venus etc. Et ne guard sufficient en lour mains, pur
dyscharger tyels dets sur specialtyes, que ils sount compellable p^sentme^t per
la ley de satisfier, donq^s ils serront constrayne de paier de lour biens
demesne ceux duties, l' quel al primer per le ley ils fuerount com. pels de
payer, accordant al value de ceo que ils deliueront ou pay sauns compulsion,
car tyels payme^ts de dets, ou delivery de legacies, come est auantdit, deuant
dets pays sur especialties, que iours de payment sount a ore venus, sount
account en le ley un vasta^t del bn^s del testator, cy taunt, come si ils ad
done eux sauns cause, ou vende eux, et convert eux a lour proper use.

Devise.
Devise est lou un home en so^ testam^t done ou grau^ta ses bn^s ou ses terres
a un auter ap^s son decease. Et lou tiel devise est fait des biens, si les
executours ne voil' deliver les bn^s a le deuisee, le deuisee and remedy per l'
come^ ley, mes il couyent de aver cytation verse les executours le testatour
dappearer deua^t lordynarie de monstrer pur quoy il ne performer le volunte le
testator, car le deuisee ne poet pre^d' le legacy et luy m^ seruer, mes il doet
este deliver a luv per les executors.

Et ore al fin^ de mr'e a vous (friar Nich.) quant les leys de cest realm, et
les sapient discreet Judges de c^, q^ux sont les interpreters de le ley, ount
favor volunts et testaments, et issint devises en yelding al eux tiel
reasonable co^strucc', come ils pe^sant poet bn^ agreer oue les mentes de les
mor^s, considera^ts q^ volunts et testam^ts so^t pur le plus pert, et per common
entendm^t, fait qn^t le testat' e^ ore en grau^d la^gour, feeble, et pass tout
spe rans de recou^y, car il est un opinion en l'e pays enter le greind'
nombers, q^ si un ho^e per chance soit cy sapie^t, come de fair so^ volunt en
son bone sane, qn^t il est strong, de bo^ memory, ad te^ps and opportunity, et
poet dd' counsel, si asc' dout soit de le learned, q' donques il ne doiet viuer
long apres ceo, et pur ceo, ils ceo defer, ta^que tiel temps, quant il soit
plus convenient d'applier eux mesm^s al' disposition de lour alms, q' de lour
terres et biens, sino^ que il soit, q' per fresh memory, et recital d' eux a
cest te^ps, il poet estr' un ca^e de mise eux en meant, de ascu^s d'lour bn^s,
ou terres fauxm^t purch. et issint move cux al restitution etc. Et ac' te^ps,
le escripture de tyels volu^ts, so^t co^munem^t commit al minister del peroch,
ou al asc' aut' plus ignorant q^ luy, sil poet estre, q^ ne scauoit q^ux parolx
sont necessary pur fair un estate en fee simpl', fee tail', pur term de vie,
ou tyels semblables, preter diverse auters mischiefs. Ieo voile pur c^ mise a
vous cy ascuns d' ceux cases q^ux so^t plus common en les bouches de les
ignorant homes, et portount, per le sapient interpretations de les Judges, come
est auantdit, un larger, et plus favorable sense en volu^ts q^ e^ faits: Et pur
c^ prim^m^t, si un devise al I. S. per so^ volu^t, toutes ses terres et ten^ts,
icy no^ solem^t touts ceux t'res q^ il ad en possess. passo^t, mes auxy ceux de
q^ il ad le reuersion, per virtue de ceux perolx tenements.

Et si t'res so^t devise a un ho^e, a au^ a luy im perpetuu^, ou a au^ a luy et
a ses assigns: en ceux deux cases l' deuisee auera fee simpl', mes si soit
done per feoffement, en tiel manner il and forsqueestat' pur term de vie.

Auxi si un home devise ses terres al auter, pur done, ve^d', ou fair de c^ a
son will et pleasure, cest fee simple.

Un devise fayt al un et a ses hr'es males fait un estate tail, mes si tiels
parolx sou^t mise en un fait d'feoffem^t, il serra pryse en fee simple, pur ceo
que que il nappiert de qui corpse les heirs males serra ingendre.

Si terres sount done per fait al I. S. et a les heirs males de son corpse etc.
q^ ad issu file que ad issu fits et morust, la le terre reuertera al donor, et
l' fits del file nauer' ceo, pur c' que il ne poet a luy mesme conueyer per
heirs males, car sa mere est un obstacle a ceo, mes auterment est d'tiel
devise, car la l' fits del file ceo auera rather que le volunt serra void.

Si un devise al infant en venture matris sue, cest bone devise, auterment est
per feoffem^t grant ou do^e, car en ceux cases, il doet estr' un de ability
pur prend' maintenant, ou auterme^t il est void.

Un devise fait (en see simple) sa^s exp^sse parolx de heirs, est bon en fee
simple.

Mes si un devise soit al I. N. il au^a les terres forsque pur t'me de vie, car
ceux perolx ne voil' porter greind' estate.

Si un voile q' son fits I. au^a son terre post morte^ son fe^e, icy le fe^e
del deuisor au^a le terre prim^ pur term de sa vie. Issint si hom^ devise ses
byens a sa feme, et que apres le mort sa femme, son fits et heir auera le
meason ou les byens sount, la le fits nauera le meason durant le vie de le
femme, car il appiert que son intent fuit, q' sa feme doit au^ le measo^ auxi
pur term de sa vie, ni ent obstant il ne fuyt devise a luy per express parolx.

Si un devise soit al I. N. et a les heirs females de son corpse ingendres:
apres l' deuisee ad issue fits et file et morust, icy le file auera le terre,
et nemy le fits, et uncore il est le pluis digne person, et heir al son peer,
mes pur ceo que le volu^t del mort est, que le file doyt ceo aver, ley et
conscience voit issint auxi Et en cest point les hethens fueront precise, come
appiert per ceux verses de Octauius Augustus q' Donatus

report, il fesoyt apres que Virgil a son mort, donoit commandment que ses
livers doient estre combure pur ceo que ils fuero^t imperfect, et uncore ascuns
perswadount que ils doyent estre save, come e^ a fit happiment ils fueront, a
q^ il respond issint. Sed legum serua^da fides: sup^ma volu^tas quod mandat,
fierique iubet, parere necesse est.

Descent.
Descent e^ un deux sorts ou linial, ou collateral.

Liniall descent, est quant le descent est convey en mesme le line dentier
sanke, come aile, pier, fits, fits del fits, et issint debassa.

Collateral descent, e^ dehors en un auter branch dehaut, dentier sanke, come
le friar del aile, friar del fits, et issint debassa.

Disclaimer.
DIsclaimer est lou le seigniour distraine son tenant, et il sua repleuin, and
le seignior auowa le prise, per reason que il tient de luy si le tenant dyt que
il disclaima de tener de luy, cest appel vne disclaimer, et si le seig niour
sur ceo port brief de droit sur disclaim^, et il soit troue encounter le
tenant, il perdera le terre.

Dismes.
DIsmes sont deuides en troies sorts, nosment, Prediall dismes, Parsonel
dismes, et Mixed dismes.

Prediall dismes, sont dismes, que sont pay de chooses q^ux vient de le trrre
solem^t, come, feine, fruits delarbors. et tiels se^blables. Personal dismes,
sont dismes q^ sont paies de tiels profits q' veigne per le labor, it industry
del person du^ ho^e, come per empc', et ve^dic', gain de marcha^tdize, and de
manuel craft ho^es, laborers et tiels q' labor pur fallery, come carpe^ters,
maso^s, et tiels se^blables.

Mixed dismes, sont les dismes de vitels, agnes, porcels, et tiels se^blables,
q^ increase pertm^t del t'r', sur q'ils so^t depastures, et partm^t ^

Disseisin sur disseisin.
DIsseisin sur disseysin est, quaunt le disseisour est disseisie p^^ un auter.

Disseisour et disseisee.
DIsseisor est celuy que mist ascun home horse de so^ terre sauns order de ley,
et disseisee est celuy que estissint mis de horse.

Distress.
DIstres est la chose que est pris et distrayne sur ascun terre pur rent arere,
ou pur aut' duty, ou pur tort fait, coment que le property del chose soit
^^eina^t al estra^ge, mes si sount beasts que pertein^t a un estra^ge, il
couient que sont leuant and couchant sur mesme le terre. s. q^ les beasts
auoie^t ee^ sur l' terre per certain space que ils ou^t eux bn^ repose sur la
terr' ou auterme^t ils ne sont distrainable. Et si un distraine pur rent ou
auter chose sauns cause loyal, donques le party grieve auera un Repleuin sur
suertie troue de pursuer son action, et auera la distress a luy redeliuer. Mes
sount diverse chooses que ne sont dystreinable, cestassauoir le robe dauter home
en le meason de un tailor, ou drape en le meason dun fuller, shereman, ou
vveyuer, pur ceo q^ ils sont common artificers, et q^ le comen presumption est
que tyels chooses ne perteynent al artificer, mes al auters persons que les
mettont la a ou^^er.

Auxi vitel nest pas distreinable, ne blees en garbes, sinon q^ ils sount en un
chareot, purc' que distres couient ee^ touts foits de tiel chose, dou^t le vic^
puit fair repleuin, et redeliu^ en auxi bo^ cas que il fuit al te^ps del
prise. Auxi home puit distraine pur homage de son tenant, pur fealty et
escuage, and aut's services, et pur fin^s et amercements q^ so^t assesse en un
let, mes nemy en court baron. Et auxi pur damage fesaunt. s. quaunt il troue
l's beasts ou b^^ du^ aut', fe^ant tort ou incu^brant so^ t're, mes home ne
puit distrain pur ase' rent ou chose due pur ase' terre, mes sur in la t're q^
e^ charg ouesque c^, mes en case lou ieo veign^ a distr', et lauter voyant mon
purp^, chase les beasts ou port le chose de horse, al intent q^ ieo ne prendra
pur distress sur le terre, donq^s ieo puisse bn^ pursue, et si ieo le prist
mayntena^t en la haute ch min ou en auter soil, la prisel est loial, auxi bn^
la come sur la terr* charge a q^cunque la property des bn^s so^t. Auxi pur
fin^s et amerciamentes que sount assesse en un let, un puit toutes foits
prendre les biens celuy qui est issint amercy in quecunque soil que ils so^t
deyns la lurysdictyon del Court vt dicitur. Et quant un ad prise un distres, il
couie^t a luy de amesn^ a le comen pound, ou auterment il puit garder in auter
foil, issint que il done notice al party que il (si le distress soyt un viue
beast) puit done a luy viand, et donq^s si le beast murrust pur defaut de
viand', celuy que fuit distrayne serra a le parde, and donques lauter puyt
distrayne auterfoytes pur mesme le rent ou duitie. Mes sil amesna la dystresse
a un forselet, ou horse del county, que la vic^ ne puit bn^ fair deliu^a^ce sur
repleuin, donques la party sur le return de viscount auera un brief d'
Withernam direct al viscount que il preigne taunt de ses beasts, ou taunt des
bie^s lauter en sa guard, tanque il ad fayt deliverance de la prymer dist^esse.
Auxy* sils sount in un forselet ou chateaw, le vicont puit prender ^ue^luy le
power del county and abater le chastell come appie^t per le statute
westmonaster' 1. C. 17. Ideo vide statutum.

Divorce.
DIuorc', issint appel d' diuortiu^, venie^s del verb diuort', que signify
purret' arrer', come quant un home est dyuorce de son feme, il luy retpur^e
arrere al^ sa pier, ou auter amies, ou al^ieu ou* il luy ad, et per tiel
divorce le marriage* est defeat et destraye*

Donor et donee.
DOnor est celuy que do^e terres ou tenements al* auter en ^aile, et celuy a q^
il est do^e* est appel donee.

Double plea.
DOuble plee, est lou le defendant ou tenant en ascun action plede un plee, in
que ij. matters sont co^prehendus* and chescun per luy m^ est un sufficient
bar ou respo^s al actyon ou matter de bar, donques tiel double plee ne
serra admit pur plee, si non que un depend sur lauter, et in tyel case, sil ne
puit auer' l' darreine plee, sans le primer plee, do^ques tyel double plee
serr' bien suffer.

Droit.
DRoyt e^ lou un ad chose q^ fuit toll de auter per tort, come per disseisin,
ou eiectme^t, ou tiels semblables, et ceo challe^ge ou claim^ que il ad que
auoyt le chose, est term^ droit.

Droit dentrie.
DRoyt dentrie, est quant un seisie de terre en fee, e^d' c' disseise: Ore le
disseisie ad droyt dentre en le terre, et poet quaunt il voyle, ou il poet aver
brief de droyt enuers le disseisour.

Dures.
DVres e^ lou un ho^e est guard in prison ou restreyne d' so^ liberty contrary
al order de ley, et si tiel person issint esteant, fayt in dures ascun
especialtie, ou obligation, per reason de tiel emprisonment, tyel fayt est
void en le ley, et in actyon port sur tyel especialtie, il puit dire que il
fuit fait per dures de son imprysonment: mes si home soyt arrest sur ascun
action al suite un auter, mesque le cause del action ne soit bon ne voier, sil
fait ascun obligatyon a un estrau^ge esteant in prison pur tiel arrest, uncore
il ne serra dit per dures, mes sil fait obligation a luy a que suit il suit
arrest deste discharge de tiel imprisonment, donques il serra dit dures.

Eire Justices.
EIre Justices, or Itinerant, come nous appel eux, fuero^t Justices que use de
equitare de lieu al lieu, per tout le realm^, pur administer justice.

Embrasour ou embraceour.
EMbrasour ou Embraceour, est celuy que quant un matter est en trial perenter
party et party, vyent al bar oue un del parties (ayant receive ascun
revvard pur issint fair) et parle en le case, ou priuem^t labor l' jury ou
stat la pur surueier ou suruieu eux, per ce^ means de mitter eux en pauour et
doubt del matter. Mes ho^es que sount erudite en le ley, poient parle en le
case pur lour fee mes ils ne poyent labor le Jury, et sils preigne money a
issint fair, ils auxi sont embrasors.

Encrochment.
ENcrochment est dit qn^t le sn^r ad happa seisin de plus rent ou services de
son tenant que de droit est due, ou doet este pay ou fayt a luy: Come si le
tenant tyent sa terre de son seigniour per fealty et ij. s. rent annuelment,
Et ore de tardife te^ps, le sn^r ad happa seisin d' iij. s. rent, ou de homage,
ou escuage, ou tielsse^blables, do^que ce^ appel un Encrochment de cest rent,
ou service.

Enheritance.
ENheritaunce est tiel estat'en t'res ou ten^ts, ou auters chooses, que poient
este enherite per le heir, soit ceo de estate en fee simple, ou tail per
descent de asc^ de ses auncesters, ou per son purchase demesne.

Et enheritaunce est divide en deux sorts, ce^ascauoir, enherita^ce corporate,
et enheritance encorporate.

Enherta^ce corporate sont mesuages, terres, prees, pastures rents, et tiels
se^blables, q^ ont substance en eux mesmes, et poient co^tinuer tout te^ps. Et
ceux sont appel chooses corporal.

Enheritance incorporate, sont aduowsons, villes, voies, commons, Courts,
piscaries, q^ sont ou poient ^e^appe^d', ou appurtenantes a enheritance
corporate.

Equity.
EQuite est en deux man^s, diu^s molt lu^ del aut', et sont de contrary
effects, car lun abridge, diminish, ou toll' de l' lett' del ley. Le aut'
e^large, amplify, et ad a ceo. Le primer est issit define. Aequitas est
correctio legis generatim latae qua part dificit, le quel correction del
gen^al parols e^ moult use en nr'e ley, sicome pur example, qn^t act de
parliament est fair, quecunque que fait tiel act serra felon, et serr mise al
mort, vnc' si home de non sanae memoriae, ou enfaunt de tend' age que and
discretion le fayt, ils ne serront felons, ne mise al mort.

Auxi si estatut fuit fait que toutes persons que recetteront ou doneront
manger ou boier ou aut' aid ace^y q' faiera tiel act, serront accessory a so^
offense, et serro^t mise al mort si conustero^t del fact, uncore lu^ fait tiel
act et veygne a sa proper feme que sciant ceo luy receive et do^e manger et
boier a luy el ne serra accessorie ne felon, car en le generalty de les dits
parols del ley ce^y de no^ sanae memoriae, ne le infaunt, ne le feme fuerount
include en intent. Et issint equity correct le generalty del ley en ceux
cases, et les parolx general sont per equity abridge.

Lauter equity est define en tiel manner, Aequitas est verborum legis directio
efficiens cum vna res solummodo legis cauetur verbis vt o^nis alia in aequali
genere eisdem caueatur verbis. Et issint quaunt les parolx enact un chose, ils
enact touts auters chooses que so^t en se^blables degrees. Sicome le statute que
ordeygne que en action de det verse executours cesty que vient per distress
respondera, extendera per equity al administratours, car cesty de eux que
vyent primes per distress respondera per equity del dit act, Quia sunt in
aequali genere.

Issint le statute de Gloucester done le action de vvast et le punishment de
ceo verse cesty que tie^t pur vie, ou ans, et per leequitie de ceo home auera
acc' d'wast verse cesty q' tie^t forsq' pur un an, ou demi an, et vnc' ceo est
horse del parolx del statut, car ce^y q' tie^t forsque pur demi an, ou un an, ne
tient pur ans, mes c' e^ le intent, et les parols q' enact lun per equity
enacteront lauter.

Escape.
EScape est en deux sorts. s. volu^tary, et necligent.

Voluntary escape e^ quant un arresta auter pur felony ou auter crime, et puis
luy lesser aler ou il veult, ce^ lesser de luy aller est un voluntary escape.
Et si larrest de cesty q^ escape fuit pur felony ceo serra dit felony e^ cestuy
que luy lessa descap, et si pur treason, il serra treason en luy, etsi pur
tn^s, donq^s trespass, etsic de singulis.

Neglygent escape est quant un est arrest et puis escape encounter le volunt
cestuy que luy arrest, et ne so it freshme^t pursue, et reprise deuant que le
pursuour perda le vieu de luy, ceo serra dit negligent escape no^ obstant que
ce^y horse de que poss. il escape luy reprist apres le view perdus.

Il y ad un escap^ auxi sauns arrest, come si un murder soyt fayt en le iour,
and le murderer ne soyt pris, do^ques il est escape per q^ le vill' ou le
murder fuit fait serra amercy.

Esplees.
ESplees est sicome le seisin, ou poss* dun chose, profit, ou commodity q' est
a prender: come du^ common les esplees est le pre^der del grass ou common per
les mouths de les beasts q' common la: dun aduowson le prend' de gross
dismes, du^bois, le vender de boys, du^ orchard, le vender de pomes, ou auter
fruit cressa^ts la, dun molin e^ prisel de toll est les esplees, et d' tiels
semblables.

Essoine.
ESsoine e^ lou un actio^ est port, et le pl' ou defendant ne poit bien
appearer al iour in court pur un de v. causes de south exp^sses, donques il
serra essoyne de sauer son defaut, vnd' nota que sont v. manners de essoyne,
cestaslauoir, essoin^ de oustre le mere et ceo e^ per xl. iours. Le ij. essoyne
de terra sancta, et ceo serra pur un an et un iour, et ceux deux serront gist
al co^mencem^t d'l ple. Le tierce essoin^ est de male vener, et ceo serra al
comen iours, come laction require et cest appell' comen essoin^. Le iiij.
essoyne est de malo lecti, et c^ est solement en brief de droit, et sur ceo
issera brief horse de chauncerie direct al vicou^t que il maund'iiij. Chiualers
al tenant de voier le tenant, et sil soyt malade, de doner a luy ioure apres un
an and un iour. Lev. essoine est de service le roy, et gist en touts actions
forsqueen assise de nouel disseisin, br' de dovver, darreine presentment, et in
appel de murder, mes in cest essoin^, il couyent al iour de mo^stre son
garraunt, ou auterment il tornera in un def. sil soyt in plee real, ou il
perdra xx. s. pur le iurney del pl' ou plus per discrec' des Justices, sil soit
e^ plee psonel, vt patet per statut de Gloc. cap. 8.

Estoppel.
EStoppel est quaunt un est conclude et deny en ley de parler encounter son
act ou fait demesne nie^t obstantil soit pur dire le verity. Et de estoppels
il y ad un grau^d number, un pur example est, quant Ioh. Sti. est oblige en un
obligac' per le nosme de Thomas Style, ou ascu^ auter nosme, et est ap^s sue
accordant al m^ le nosme mise en loblig* ce^ adire, Thomas Stil' ore il ne
serra receive adir' q'il est misnosm^, mes serra chase a responder accordant al
nosme mise en loblig. cest adir' Thom^ S. car peradventure lobligee ne scauoyt
pas so^ nosme, mes il report tantsolem^t deloblig. m^. Et entant q'il est m^ le
ho^e q^ fuit oblig', il serr' estopp^ et deny e^ ley, pur dir'l' contrary
encounter son fait demesne, car auterm^t il puit prend' advantage de son tort
demesne, l' q^l l ley ne voet suffrer un ho^e de fair.

Auxi si le file que est tantsolem^t lheire la so^ pier, voet suer liuerie oue
sa soer que est un bastard, el ne serra apres receive pur dire q^ sa soer e^ un
bastard, entant q^ si sa bastard soer prist le moitie del terre oue luy, il ny
ad remedy per le ley.

Item si un home seisie de terr' en fee simple, voet prender un le as pur ans
de mesme le terre dun estranger per fayt endent, cest un estoppel durant le
t'me des ans. Et le lessee est per ceo bar adire le verity. Car le verity
est, que il que lessa le terre and riens en ceo al te^ps del leas fait, et que
le fee simple fuit en luy que prist le leas, mes ceo il ne serra receive adire,
tanque apres les ans serra determine, pur ceo que il appiert que il ad un estat
pur ans. Et il fuit so^ folly de prender un leas de ses terres dem^, et pur ceo
serra issint puny pur sa folly.

Estraungers.
EStraungers sount ils que ne sou^t parties, ne priuies al fine levy, ou
fesauns dun fayt.

Estray.
EStray, est lou ascun beast ou cattle, e^ in ascu^ seignioury, et null conust
le owner de c^ do^que il serra seisi al oeps le royne, ou le sn^r ^ ad tiel
estraye per grant l'royne ou per prescripc', et si le owner vie^t et fait
claim a ceo deyns un an et un iour, donq^s il le reau^a paiant pur son viand',
ou auterme^t a^s an, la property de c^ serra al sn^r, issint que le sn^r face
proclamation de ceo accordant a le ley, en deux market villes.

Excommengement.
Excommengem^t, est quant un ho^e per judgment en le spyrituall court est
accurse, do^ques il e^ disabl'de suer ascun action en le court le royne, et sil
remain exco^menge xl. iours, and ne voyle este justify per son Ordinary,
donque leuesque mau^dera sa letter patent al Chauncellor, et sur ceo serra
mau^d al vic. de prender le corpse lexcommengee per un brief appell de
Exco^municato capiendo, iesque il ad fait gree al esglise pur le contempt and
tort, and quaunt il est justify, and ad fait gree, donques leuesque maunder'
sa letter al royne certifient ceo, et donques serra maunde al viscount de luy
deliu^ per un br' appel de Excommunicato deliberando.

Exchange.
Exchange, est lou vne home est seisi de certain terre, et un auter home est
seisie de auter terre, si ils per un fayt endent ou sauns fayt (si les terres
sount en vne countye) exchange lour terres, issint que chescun de eux auera
aut' terre a luy issynt exchange en fee, fee tail, ou term^ de vie, ceo est
appel un excha^ge, et est bon sans liuerye et seisine. Et in exchange il
couient que les estates a eux limitte per lexchange sount egalles, car si vne
ad estate in fee in sa terre, and lauter ad estate in auter terre forsque pur
term de vye, ou en tail, donquestiel eschange est void, mes si les estates
sont egalles, et ses terres ne sont de egal value, uncore lexcha^ge est bo^.
Auxi un exchange de rent pur terre est bo^e. Issint exchange inter rent and
comen est bon, et ceo couient este per fayt. Et il couient toutes foits que
ceux parolx (exchange) sont en le fait, ou auterment ryens passa per le fayt
sinon que il ayet liuere and seisin.

Execution.
Execution, est lou judgment est do^e en ascun actio^ que le plaintiff
recouera la terr', le det, ou damages, come le case est, et quant ascun brief
est agarde de luy mitter en possession, ceo est appel brief de execution, et
quaunt il ad le possession de le terre, ou est pay de debt ou damages, ou ad
le corpse le def, agarde al prison, do^ques il ad execution, and si le ple soit
en cou^ty ou court barron ou hundred, and ils alyenont le judgment en favor
del party, ou per auter encheason, donque le demaundant auera brief
d'Executione iudicij. Mes en brief de debt home nauera recovery de null'
terre, mes de cel que le defendaunt auoit ioure de judgment rendue. Et de
chateux home auera executyon solement des chateux, queux il auoitiour de
execution

Executour.
EXecutor est quant home fait son testament et darreine volunt, et in ceo nosma
le person ^ executera son testament, donque cesty que est issint nosm^, est son
executour, et tiel executour auera action verse chescu^ dettour de son
testatour, et si lexecutor ad assets, chescun a ^ le testatour fuit in debt
auera action verse lexecutours sil ad obligation ou especialty, mes en chescun
case lou le testatour puissoit gager son ley, null acc' gist verse executour.

Extinguishment.
EXtinguishment est lou un seigniour dun manor ou ascun auter ad un rent issant
dascun terre, et il purchase mesme la terre, issint que il ad tiel estate en la
terre, come il auoyt en le rent: donques le rent est extinct pur ceo que un ne
puyt aver rent issuant horse de son terre demesne. Et quant ascun rent serra
extient, il couyent que le terre et le rent sount en vne maine, and auxy q^
lestate que il ad ne soyt defesible, et que il ad auxi bon estate en le terre,
come en le rent, car sil ad estate en le terre forsque pur term de vie, ou
dans, et ad un fee simple en le rent, donques le rent nest extinct, mes est ere
suspense pur cel te^ps, and donques apres le term le rent est revive. Auxy si
soit seigniour, mesne, et tenant and le feigniour purchase la tenauncye,
do^ques le menalty est extinct, mes le mesne au^a la surplusage de rent, si
ascun soit come un re^t secke. Auxi si home ad chimin appendant, and puis
purchase le terre en q'le chimin e^, donque le chimin e^ extinct, et issint e^
de un co^en appenddant.

Extortion.
EXtorc^ e^ un tort fait per un officer, come un Maier, Bailiffe, Visc',
Escheator ou auter officer, color officij sui, en prendrans excessive
reward, ou fee, pur execution de so^ dit office ou auterment, et ne^ aut'
chose en fait q' plain^ robbery, mes plus odible q^ robbery, car robbery est
apparent, et toutes dits ad oue lui le countenance de vice, mes extortio^
ee^a^t cy haut vice come robbery est, port oue luy un countenance d' virtue,
per reason de que il est le plus dure dee^ try, ou discern, et pur ceo le
plus odible. Et vncor' ascu^s il y ad q' ne voile^t dem^re, mes stretch lour
office, credit, et conscience pur purchaser money, cybie^ per extortion, come
auterment, accorda^t al disans de le poet Virgil.

Quid non mortalia pectora cogit auri sacra fames?

Failer de record.
FAyler de record, e^ quant un actio^ de trn^s ou tiels se^blables, est port
enuers un, et le def. dit, q' le pl' deuant ceo, port un acc' pur m^ le trn^s,
en auter court, et recover dam^ etc. Et dd' judgment del court sil auera
arrere cest actyon etc. Et le playntife dit null tiel record, sur que le def.
ad iour done a luy, pur amesner eins le record, a q^ iour il fail: ou amesne
eins un tiel, q' ne^ barr' al cest action, do^ques il est dit de fayler de
record, et sur ceo le playntife auera judgment de recover etc.

Fayt.
FAyt est un prove, et testimony de le agreement del party que fayt il est,
al chose contain en le fayt: Come un fayt de feoffeme^t est un prove del
livery de seisin, car le terre passa per la liuerie de seysin, mes quant le
fayt et le lyuerie est joint ensemble, cest un prove del liuerie, et que le
feoffour est content que le feoffee auera le terre.

Et nota que toutes faits sount ou indent, de q^ il ad deux, troys, ou
plusours, come le case require, de que le feoffor, grauntor, ou lessour ad un,
le feoffee, grau^tee, ou lessee un aut', et peraduent' asc' auter person auxi
un aut', etc. ou auterme^t ils sont fayts pol, ou single, et forsque un, le q^l
le feoffee, grauntee, ou lessee ad etc.

Et chescun fait consist de troys principal chooses (et sils troys ne sount
join ensemble, il nest perfect fait de lier les parties) nosment, escripture,
sigillation, et delivery.

Le primer point est escripture, per q' est declar' les nosmes del perties al
fait, lour habytatio^, lour degrees, le chose grant, sur q^ux co^siderac',
lestate limit, le temps quant il fuit grant, et si simplem^t, ou sur
condition, oue auters tiels semblables circumstances, mes si les parties al
fayt, escript en le fine lour nosmes demesn^, ou mise a ceo lour marks (come
il est co^munement use) il ne fait ascu^ matt' (come ieo suppose) car ceo nest
entende ou il est dit que chescu^ fait couient de aver escripture.

Le second point est Sigillation, que est pl' testimony de lour consents al
ceo contain en le fait, come appiert per ceux perolx: In cuius rei testimonium
etc. touts foites mise en le fin^ d' fayts, s^uns queux parolx, le fayt est
insuffycient. Et pur ceo q' nous sumus e^ sigillat' et sining de faits, il ne
serra de horse (friar Nich.) icy a mr'e a vous, pur l' amor de antiquity, le
man^ de signing et subscribing de faits en nr' ancestors les Saxons temps, un
fashion different de ceo que nous use en ceux nr' iours, en c' q' ils a lour
fayts subscribe lour nosmes (co^munem^t adding l' sign del cross) et en le
fine mise un grau^d number des testimonies, nyent vsant a cel temps ascun manner
de sigil. Et nous a cest iour pur plus suertie, auxibien subscribe nostre
nosmes (nient obstant c^ nest mult necessar' come ieo ay deua^t dit) mise nr'
sigils, et use le aid de testimoignes auxy.

Cest primer fashion ount contynuaunce per tout tanque al temps del conq^st per
les Norma^s, que manners per petit et petit al darrayne prevail e^ter nous: Car
le primer Charter sigil en Engleterre est pense deste ceo del roy Ed. le
confessor al Abbey de West minster, que (esteaunt educate en Normandy) port en
cest realm ceo, et ascun auter d' lour guises oue luy. Et apres le venia^s de
Guillam le Co^queror, les Normans estemans de le custom de lour paies (come
naturalment toutes nations fount) reject le manner que l^s trouo^t cy, et
retein^ lour proper, come Ingulphus le Abbot de Croyland que vyent eins oue le
conquest testimoygne, disens: Norma^ni, cheirographoru^ confectionem, cum
crucib aureis, et alijs signaculis sacris, in Anglia firmari solita^, in cerae
impressione^ mutant, modu^que scribendi Anglicu^ reijciunt. Mes nie^t obst' ceo
ne fuit fait tout al un te^ps, mes il e^crease et vient eins per certain steps
et degrees, issint que primes et pur un season le roy soleme^t ou un peu auters
d' le nobility oustr' luy use de sigiller, donques le noble homes pur le plus
part et null auters, q^l chose un ho^e poet voier en le history de Battle Abbey
ou Richard Lucy chief Justice de Engleterre en l' temps del roy Henry le
second est report d' aver blame un mean^ subject pur ceo que il use un private
sigill quant ceo pertayne (come il did) al roy et nobility sol'ment. Al q^l
te^ps auxi (come John Rosse note ceo) ils use de ingraue en lour sigils, lour
pictures demesn^, et cou^terfaits cover oue un long tunicle super lour
Armours. Mes apres ceo les Gentlehomes del meliour sort prist le fashion, et
pur ceo q'ils ne fueront touts guerrours, ils fesoient sigilles engraue oue
lour several coats, ou shieldes de arms, pur difference come m^ le author
report. Al darraigne, al te^ps del roy Edward le tierce, sigils fuero^t mult
common, issint que non soleme^t tiels que portant arms, use de sigiller, mes
auters ho^es auxi fesoyent al eux m^s, signets de lour devise demesne, ascuns
prendrans les letters de lour nosmes dem^, ascu^s flores, ascuns et florishes,
ascuns aues, ou beasts, et ascu^s autets chooses, come nous ore vnc' iournalment
voier e^ use. Ascu^s aut' man^ d' sigillac' ouster ceux ad ee^ over enter nous,
come nosme^t ceo de roy Ed. le 3. p q^l il do^e, Al Norma^ l' hu^t', le hop, et
le hop ville oue touts le bo^ds vpside down, Et en Testmoyne q' il soyt
very, il morde l' cere oue son fong deuteronomy.

Le semblable de ce^ (srere Nicholas) nr' e reverend and bon pier, enter auters
antiquities pur ma purpose, monstre a moy, en un loose cart, mes non moult
auncientm^t escript, et pur c^ il voile, q' ieo esteema de ceo come ieo pense
bien, il fuit come ensue.

Ieo Guillam King done a vous powlen Royden, ma hope et ma hop terres, oue
touts les bounds up et down, de ceole al terre, de terre al infern^, pur voy
et vr'es a dem^rer, de moy et mes, al toy et vr's, pur un arc et un broad
arrowe, when I come to hunt upon yarrowe In witness that this is sooth, I
bite this wax with mye tooth, In the presence of Magg, Maude, and Margery, and
mye third son Henry.

Also that of Alberic de veer, conteyninge the donation of Hatfield to the
which he affixed a short black hafted kniefe, like unto an old halpenie
whitle, in steed of a seal, with diverse such like. But some peradventure will
think that these were received in common use and custom, and that they were
not rather the deuyses and pleasures of a few singular persons, tiels ne
so^t meines deceive, que ils q'penso^t chescun charter et escript q' and
sigille annexe, de^e ey ancient come le conquest, lou (en verity) sigillatio^
ne fuit co^munement use tanque al temps del roy Edward le iij. come ad este dit.

Le tierce point est delivery, quel nient obsta^t il soit mise darraine, nest
le meinst, car ap^s q' un fait soit escript, et sigil, sil ne soit deliver,
tout le re sidue e^ a null purpose, Et cest delivery doyt este fayt per le
party m^, ou so^ sufficient garrant, et issint il luy liera quecunque escript,
ou sigille ceo, et per cest darraigne act, le fait est fait perfect accordant
al intent et effect de c', et pur c' e^ faits le deliu^y est de^e prove etc.
Issint poies voier q' escript', et sigillac' sans deliu^ry est a null purpose,
Que sigillation et delivery, lou ne^ asc' escripture work null chose, Ne
escriptur' et deliu^y sa^s sigillatio^ auxi, fait null fait. Et pur c' ils tout
doient iointme^t concur pur fair' un perfect fait, come est auantdit.

Farm ou Ferme.
Farm, ou ferme, e^ le chief mesuage en un vyllage, ou town, et a ceo
appurtenaunt graunde demeasnes d'touts sorts, et ad e^e use deste less pur
term de vie, ans, ou a volunt.

Item le rent que e^ reserve sur tiel leas, ou semblables, est appel, farm, ou
ferme.

Et farmour, ou fermor, est celuy q'occupia le farm, ou ferme ou est lessee de
ceo.

Auxi en asc^ lieus, and counties, chescun lessee pur vie, ans, ou al volu^t,
nient obsta^t il soit du^ petite cottage, ou meas, est ap pel farmor, ou fermor.

Et nota, q' ils sount appels farms, ou fermes, del Saxon parol, Feormian, q'
signify pur feed, ou render victual. Car e^ ancient te^ps, lour reseruatio^s
fuer' cibn^ (ou pur le plus part) en victual come argent, tanque al darreine,
et c^ principalm^t e^ le te^ps del roy Henry l' prim^ (per agrem^t) le
reseruac' de victuals, fueront conu^t e^ ready argent, et issint vnc' ad
continue e^t' le plus homes.

Fee farm.
FEe ferme, est quant un tenant tie^t de so^ seignior en fee simple rendaunt a
luy le value del moitie, ou de tierce party ou quater party, ou de auter part
del terre, pan, and q^ tient en fee ferm^ ne doyt fair auter chose, mes sicome
est contein en le feffeme^t forsque fealty, car ceo appent a touts man^s
tenures.

Feoffement.
FEoffement est lou un done terre a un ter en fee simple, and il deliver seisin
et possession del terre, ceo est un feoffement.

Feffor and feffee.
FEoffor est celuy q' enfeoffe, ou fait fefment al aut' de terres outen^ts, en
fee sim. Et feffee e^ celuy, q'est en feoffe, ou a q'le feffement est issint
fait.

Fireboote.
FIreboote est necessary boys pur arder, quel per le common ley, lessee pur
ans, ou pur vie, poyt prender en son terre, nient obstaunt il ne soit express
en son leas, et nient obstaunt il soit un leas par parol tantu^ sauns fait. Mes
sil prist plus q^ besoigne, il serra puny en wast.

Fledwite.
FLedwite, hoce^ quietum esse de amerciame^tis cum quis vtlagatus fugitiuus
veniat ad pacem domini regis sponte, vel licentiatus.

Flemeswite.
FLemeswite, hoc est quod habeatis cattalla sieve amerciame^ta hominis vestri
fugitiui.

Fletwit.
FLetwit (ou flytwit) hoc est quietu^ esse de contentione et conuictis, et quod
habeatis placitum inde in curia vestra et amerciame^ta, quia (flit) anglice
Tensone gallice.

Forstall.
FOrstall, hoc e^ quietu^ esse de amerciamentis et cattallis arrestatis infra
terram vestram, et amerciame^ta inde prouenie^tia.

Forestalier.
FOrstaller est celuy q^ achate blees, au^s, ou aut' merchandise q^cu^que est
vendibl', ple chimen qn^t il vient al m^kets, faires, ou tyels fe^blables lieus
dee^ ve^d al intent que il poet vender c^ auterfoits al un plus haut et chare
price, en prejudice et damage de le common weal et people etc.

Le penalty pur ceux q^ux so^t co^uict de ceo, etc, en le pri^^ temps
amerceme^t, et le pard del chose issint achat'.

Le second temps judgment d'l pillory. Le tierc' temps imprisonment et
rau^some. Le quater temps abiuration del ville etc.

Fraunches royal.
FRaunches Royal, est lou le Roygne grant al un et a ses heirs q^ ils serro^t
quite de tolnet', vel h^^odi.

Frankmariage.
FRankmariage, est qn^t un home seisie de terres en fee simpl' do^e c^ al auter
ho^e et a sa fe^e (q^ est sil' soer ou aut' meant de kynne al donor,) en
fra^kmariage, per virtue d' q^ux parolx, ils ^unt un estate ^n special tail,
et tiendra le terie del donor quite de touts manners d' services ta^que le 4.
degree soyt pass, acco^ptants eux m^s en l' prim^ degree, sinon fealty, q^ux
ils fieront pur ceo que il est incide^t a touts tenures forsque frank almoigne.
Et tiel done poet ee^ fait cy bn^ ap^s marriage solempnize come deuant. Et home
poet done terres al son fits en frankmariage cybien come a sa file per le
opinion de master Fitzh. en so^ brief de Champertie H. Mes il appert auterm^t
en mast' Litt', et en M. Broke Ti. Fra^kmar' P. 10. Et issint il fuit tenus
clear en Grayes Inn e^ lent An. 1576. 18. El. per le dr't woorshypful M.
Rhodes do^q^s lector la.

Franktenement.
FRankten^t e^ un estate q^ ho^e ad e^ terres, ou ten^tes, ou profit a pre^d',
en fee simple, tail, pur term de so^ vie dem^, ou pur term^ dauter vie. Et
south e^ il ne^ frankten^t, car il que ad estate pur ans, ou tient al volu^t,
and ascun frankten^t, mes ils sont appel chattels.

Et de fra^ktenem^ts, il y ad ij. sorts, ce^ assauoir, frankten^t e^ fait, et
frankten^t en ley.

Fra^kteneme^t e^ fait, est quant un home ad ent' e^ terres ou ten^ts, et est
seisie de ceo, reallm^t, actualment, et en fait, Sicome le pier seisie de
terres ou tenem^ts e^ fee simpl' deuie, et so^ fits ent' e^ eux come heir a
so^ pier, do^q^s il ad un frankten^t en fait per son entry.

Frankten^t en ley, est qn^t terres ou ten^ts so^t discend' al un ho^e, et il
poet enter en eux qn^t a luy plest, mes and vnc' fait son entry en fait, come
en le case auantdit, si le pier estea^t seisie de t're en fee simple deuie
seisie, et ils descend al son fits, mes le fits and uncore ent' e^ fait en eux,
ore deuant so^ entry, il ad un frankten^t en ley.

Freshsuite.
FReshsuit, est qua^t un ho^e e^ rob, et le party issint rob, pursua l'
felon immediatment, et luy pryst oue le manner, ou auterment, et donques port un
appeal enuers luy, et luy convince del felony per verdict, le quel chose
esteant enquire pur le roygne et troue, le party rob auera restituc'd' ses
bn^s arr'.

Ite^ il poet este dit q^ le party fait freshsuit, nient obsta^t il ne prist
le felon presentment, mes q^ il soit demi an, ou un an apres le robbery fait,
deuant que il soit prise, si soit is^int que le pertie rob fayt taunt que en
luy est, per diligent enquire, et search d' luy prend', nient obstant que il e^
prise per un aut' ho^e, uncore ceo serra dit bone freshsuit.

Et issint freshsuit est quant le sn^r vient pur distreigner pur re^t ou
service, et le owner des beasts fayt rescous, et enchase eux en auter terre
que ne^ tenus del fn^r, et le seigniour ensuer presentme^t, et reprist eux, ce^
appel freshsuite. Et issint en auters semblables cases.

Gager de deliverance.
GAger de delyuerance est, lou un sua repleuin des biens prise, mes il and
deliu^e des bn^s, et lauter auovva, et le pleintife mr'e q^ le defe^d' e^
uncore seisie etc. et pria que le defendant gagera deliverance, do^ques il
mittera eyns suertie ou pledge pur redeliuerance, et br'e issera al viscount
pur redeliuer etc. mes si home claim property il ne gagera delyueraunce. Auxi
sil dyt q^ les auers sont mort' en pound, il ne gagera etc. Auxi home ne gagera
ia^mais le deliverance auant que ils ils sont a issu ou demurrer en ley.

Guard.
Guard est quant un enfant que au^cestour tient per service de chivalry, est
en le guard et custody de le sn^r de que ils fuerou^t tenus, Et si le tenant
tient de diverse seigniours diverse terres, celuy seignyour de que il tyent per
prioritie^s, per le plus au^cyen tenure, auera la guard del enfant, mes si un
tenure soit auxy auncyen que lauter, donques celuy que primes happa le guard del
corpse, gardera ceo* mes en ceo case, chescun seignyour auera le guard del terr'
que est tenus de luy, mes si le tenant tient de roine in chief, donques le
roine per sa praerogatiue auera le guard de corpse et de tout le terr' que est
tenus de el, and de chescun auter seygniour.

Garden.
GArden plus properment est celuy q ad le guard ou custody dun hr', et de t're
tenus ^er service de chiualry, ou de un de eux a son use demesn^, dura^t le
nonage del hr': Et deins cest temps ad le bestowinge del corpse del heir, en
marige al son volunt sans disperagement.

Et de gardens il y ad ij. sorts nosme^t, garden en droit, et garden en fait.

Garden en droit, e^ celuy q'per reason de son s^ry est seisie del gardship ou
custodye del t're, et del heir durant le nonage del heir.

Garden en fait, est lou le sn^r ap^s son seysin, come auantdit grau^ ta per
fait^ ou sa^s fait, le gardship del terre ou del heir, ou da^bideu^ a un aut',
persorce (...) grant, le grau^tee est en poss^. donque e^ le grau^tee appel
garden en fait.

Et cost garden en sait poit grant le hr' al ^u^er auxi, mes cest (...)
^erment appel garden en fayt car ^^^ est le grauntee del garden en dr't sole^^,
Er icy poies voier (friar Nicholas) quel misery vient ap^s cest tenure per
service de chiualry si le t'morust relinquauns son heir deins age, com^t le
pouer inf^t poet e^e toss et tu^ble, chappe et change, et achate et ve^d'
se^ble un mal' chiual en Smithfeelde, et que plus est il serra mary a que plest
son Garden, de que ensue mult male.

Garnishment.
GArnishment est qn^t un action de detinue des charters est port verse un, and
le defendaunt dit que les charters fuerount deliu^ a lu y per le pleyntife, et
per un aut', sur certain conditions, and preye que lauter ^oyt garneye de
pled' oue le pleintife si les conditions sont perimples ou nemy, et sur ceo vne
brief de Scire facias isseravers luy Et ceo est appell un garnishm^t.

Gauelate.
GAuelate, e^ un special et ancient kind de Cessauit use en ke^t ou le custom
de Gauelkind continue, per q^l le to forfetera ses t'res et ten^ts al seignior
de que ils sont tenus, sil deteygne de son seignior ses due rents and seruyces
solonque cest manner que ensue.

Si asc^ tenant en Gauelkinde reteyne sa rent, et son services del tenement
quil tient de son sn^r, querge le sn^r per agard de sa court de trois semains
en trois semai^s, d'trou^ distress sur cel ten^t taunt que a la quart court, a
toutfet per tesmoignages, Et si dedens cell temps ne trusse distress en cel
ten^t, per queux il puisse so^ ten^t iustiser: Done a la quart court soit
agard, q^l preign^ cel tenement en sa main, en nosm^ d' distress, auxi come
boef ou vache et le tient un an, et un iour en sa main sauns main ouerer,
deyns quel term, si le tenant vient, et rend ses arrerages, et fait
resonables ame^ds de la detener, adone eit, et ioise son tenement sicome les
ancestors et luy auant tiendro^t. Et sil ne ve^t deuant lan, et le iour
pass, donc auage le seigniour al prochein Count suiant oue test moinages de
sa court, et face la pronuncier cel process pur testmoynage aver, et per agard
de sa court, apres ceo Count tenue, entra et meynouera en cells terres et
tenements, sico^e en son demesne, Et si la tenant vient apres, et voyle reauer
ses tenementes, and tener sicome il fist deuaunt, face gree al seygniour,
sicome il est auncyentment did.

Neghe sth selde, and ne ghe since geld, and v pound for the were: er he become
he alder.

Ily ad ascuns copies que ad le primer verse issint escript.

Nisith yield, and nisith gelde.

Et auters issint.

Nighesith yield, and nighesith gelde.

Mes ceux ne differ en signification, auter copies ont ceo solo^que cest sort.

Nigond since selde, and nigond since gelde.

Cest a scauoier, paiera il nouies foites, and nouies foits repaie.

Gauelkinde.
GAuelkinde est un custo^e a^nexe et cur rant oue t'res en kent appel Gauelkind
t'res tenus e^ ancient Socage tenure. Et est pense per les erudite en
antiquities, deste appel Gauelkinde de Give al kin, cest adire a touts les kyn
en un line, accordaunt come est use enter les Germa^s, de que nous Anglois, et
especialm^t de Kent venemus. Ou il e^ appel Gauelkinde, de give al kind, ce^
adir' al touts les males, car kind en dutch signify un male. Et diverse aut's
se^bl' conjectures so^t fait per eux d'l nosm^ Gauelkinde, le q^lieo omit de
purpose pur brevity, pur ceo q' cy vous expectes (friar Nich.) sico^e vous moy
requirast, q^ieo escriuera largem^t co^cern^t aut'plus needful matt* pur vr'
purp^, q^ux vous desirast de scauoir, co^cerna^t Gauelkind ter res, et pur c^
que vous lues nee en Kent, et auxi es plus demurra^t la, et pur ceo vous
pe^ses, patriae res nescire dedecus.

Pur satisfier vr'e dd' en cest: Ieo ay pur ceo mise pur vous cy les ancient
customs de Kent, sicome ils fuerou^t verame^t et carefully de puisne temps
publye ouesque ascuns cases sur eux collect horse del ceux livers, q^ fou^t
ascun mention de cest, q'l voet ieo pe^se satistier vr'e desire alarge. Et
prim^m^t vous ^cauoies, q' ceux Gauelkind custo^es, sou^t de bo^ antiquity
port eins cy per les Saxons, Intes, et Angles, Germans de q^ nous Angloys
descend (come est aua^tdit) et fuerount per eux use, et relic cy, et issint
continue e^ force, tanq' Guillam Duke de Normandy conquer' tout Engleterr'
(Kent ^auntsolement forsprise) le q'il auoit per compositio^ et nemy per
conquest. Et en cest composition, les valiant Kentois obtaineroit un grant de
le co^tinuatio^ de lour custo^es d'Gauelkind, le q^l touts te^ps puis ils ou^t
use en m^ l' pais, et ils so^t come ensuist.

Les customs de Kent.
CEs so^t les vsages, et les custo^es, les q^ux l' co^mur al^ie de Kent
claima^t au^ en ten^ts de Gauelkind, et en ge^ts Gauelke^deis, all^^ es en Eire
John de Bervvike, et ses companions, Justices en eire, en Kent, le 21. an le
Roy Ed. fits le roye Henry.

Cestassauoir, que touis les cors de Kenteys soyent Francz, auxi come les
auters frau^s cors Denglet'.

Cest chose ad este puis confess dee^ very, com^ il appiert en 30. E. I. en
Fitzherbert titulo Villenage placit' 46. Ou il est tenus sufficient pur un home
de auoider lobiection de bondage, adire, que son pier fuit nee en Kent, mes sil
voet seruer en ce^ case adire, q il m^ fuit ne^ en Kent, il e^ (pur bo^ cause)
deste doubt.

2 Et que ils ne duinent le Eschet' le roy eslire, ne vnques en null temps ne
fesoie^t* mes le roy prengne, ou face prender, tyel come luy plerra, de ceo qui
soit mistier a luy seruer.

3 Et quilz puse^t lour t'res and lour ten^ts done and vend', sans conge dd'er
a lour seignorages, Saues a seignorages les re^tset l's seruic' dues de m^s les
ten^ts.

4 Et q^ touz, et chesc' puseit per br' le roy, ou per pleit, pled' pur lour
dr't purchaser, aux^bn^ de lour seignorages, come des auters ge^ts.

5 Et claiment auxi, q^ la common de Gauilkind eis*, q^ ne tenent mes que
tenementes Gauileke^deis, ne deuient venera le commune summons del Eire, mes q'
per Borgesaldre, et iiij. homes de la Borgh, horspris les villes, que deuie^t
respond' per xij. ho^es en le Eire.

Le^emble du ce^ privilege e^ enjoy a cest iour en l' Lath d'l viscount, ou
diu^s entyer Borghes sou^t excuse ^l' appara^ce ^antsoleme^t du^ Borgesalder,
et ij. iiij. ou size auters de les enhabita^ts. Borshold', est issint nosme de
les Saxon parolx Borher caldor ce^ adire, le plus aunc' ou eigne de les pledges.

6 Et claiment auxi, q^ si null ten^t en Cauelke^d soit attaint de felony, per
que il suffer Iuise d'mort, eit l' roy ^ouz ses chateux, et so^ eire maintena^t
ap^s sa mort soit enherite de touts ses terres et tenements q^ il tient en
Gauelkinde en fee, et en heritage, et les tie^dra per mesmes les services et
customs, sicome ses au^cesters les tiendront don't est dit en Kentees.

Ye fader to ye bogh, Ye son to ye plogh.
Mes cest rule tyent en case de felony, et de murder solement, et nemy en case
de treason. Et il tient auxi en case ou le offe^dour est Justice per order del
ley, et nemy ou il se suthtrey apres le fact fayt, et ne voet permit son loyal
trial. Et pur ceo que cest custom ne serra construe per equity, mes per un
strict et literal enterpretation, il ad este doubt pur ceo, si le srere, ou
uncle auera le advantage de ceo, pur ceo que les parolx extend al sits
solement.

Vide 22. Edw. 3. abridg per M. Brook. tit' Custom. 54.

7 Et si il eit femme, meintena^t soit dovve per le heir', sil soit dage, de la
moity, de toutes les terres et teneme^tz q' son baron tient de Gauelkynde en
fee, A aver et a tener solon^ la form^ de suthdyte. Et de tiels terres le roy
ne auera an ne vvast, mes ta^tsolement les chateux, sicome il est auantdit.

Le femme ne perdra dovver pur le defaut de sa baron mes en tiel cas ou le hr'
^dera son enheritance pur le offense de son pere 8. H. 3.

8 Et si null Gauelkind eis purfelon^, ou pur ret de felony, se suthtrei de la
pees, et soit en count dd' come il appent, et puis vtlaghe, ou sil se met en
seint egli^e, et foriure la terre oue le Reaume, le Roy auera lan et le vvast
de ces terres, and de touts ses tenementes ense^blem^t oue toutes ces chateas,
Issint que apres lan, et le iour, le plus prochein seignyour, ou seignyoures
eynt lour eschetes de cells terres, and tenementes, chescun seigniour ceo que de
luy est tenus sauns men. Issint il est tenus en le liu^s 8. E. 2. abridged per
master Fitherb. ti. Prescription 50. Et 22. E. 3. abridged per M. Bro. ti.
Custom 54.

9 Et claimentauxi, q' si ascun tenant en Gauelkinde murt, and soit enherit'
de terres et de ten^ts en Gauelkind, q' touts ses fites partent cel heritage
per ouels porcions.

10 Et si null hr' male ne soit, soit la perty fait ent' les females, sico^e
entres les freres. Mes ^' stat' d' Prerog. regis ca. 16. dit, que faeminae non
participabunt cu^ masculis, q^ est dee^ entend, de tiels q^ sont e^ equal degree
d' kindred come freres, et soers, come come en cest ix. et x. deuisio^. Car si
un ho^e ad issue iij. fits, et le eigne ad issue un file, et morust en le vie
so^ peer, et le pere deuie: En ce^ case le file ioynera oue les deux aut's
freres sa uncles, pur ceo q' el nest en equal degree oue eux, come sa peer
fuit, q^ heir' nie^t meins el doet de necessitye este.

11 Et la mesuage soit antreci ent' eux depar ti, mesl' Astre demurra al pune
ou punee, et la value soit de ceo lieure a chesc' des par ceners de cell
heritage a xl. pees de cel Astre, si le tenement le peut suffrir.

Per cest perol (Astre) est meant (come est conjecture) ou le aule, ou principal
lieu del mea so^, ou auterm^t le well pur ewe, ou le suth pert del edefice car
(Astre) esteant sound sans (s.) poit ven^ del latin perol Atrium q^ signify un
aule, ou de Haustrum q^ betoke^l' bucket du^ well, ou de austrum le south side,
Chese' de q^ ou^t lour particular co^ modities deua^t les auters del meas. ou
ten^t. Ou auterment estea^t sound oue (s) il poit ee^ deduce de le french ^ol
(Asister) per contrace' (Astre) q^ e^ ta^t, come tonsite, ou situation, et oue
le article (le) deuant ^ (Lester) un cimitory, ou court enuiron un meason, Mes
al ce^ iour il and ^iel regard fait en le particion, mes solem^t consideratyon
ewe, q^ les parts m^s soie^t equal and indifferent

12 Et donq^z le eisne friar eit la primer election, et les auters ap^s per
degree.

13 Enseme^t de measons que serront trouets en tyens messuages, soyent departie
enter les heirs per ouel portioun, ceo est a sauoyer pe^ pei^s sil est
mistier, Save le Covert del Astre, que remeynt al pune, ou al punee, sicome il
est auantdist. Issi que nequedount q' le pune face reasonable gre a ces
parceners de le party que a eux appent, per agarde de bon gents.

14 Et les auauntdits tenementes don't un soul suit tant solem^t soleit estre
fait auant, ne soit per la resoun de la partic^ fors un soul suit fait sicome
soleit auant, mes que tous les parceners facent contributio^ a celuy que face
le suite pur eux.

15 Ensement seint les chateus de Gauelkin des parties en treis ap^s les
exequies et les dets rendues, si ily eit issue mulier en vie, issint q^ la mort
eit la un pertie, and les fites and les files muliers laut' party, et la fe^e
la iij. pertie.

Ou il e^ dit cy, que la mort eit vne party, il est entende pur parformance de
ses legacyes per ces executors sil fait testament, ou per le discrec' del
ordinarye sil deuye intestate.

16 Et si null issue mulier en vie ne so it, ey^ la mort la moite, et la seem en
vie laut' moity. Mesme le order de q' le custom cy parle en le 15. et 16.
division, est al ce^ iour observe en le city d' Lo^dres et m^ en effect fuit en
aunc' temps use per tout le realm. Car il est evident, et per le ley d'l roy
Canutus, per M. Glanuil, per les parolx de Magna Carta cap. 18. per M. Fitzh*
en son Natura breuiu^ en le br' de Rationabili perte bonor' fo. 122. L. q'
lafe^e et e^fa^ts ad lour reasonable parts del bn^s per le common ley del
realm, et q^ le common ley suit issit, il ap^^ auxi en 30. E. 3. 28. et 21.
30. H. 6. Et fuit dit per ley M. 31. H. 8. abridge per M. Brook tit'
Rationabili part bonorum pl'. 6. q^ ceo ad estre sepe mise en ure come un
common ley, et nunquam demurr', et ideo videtur que ceo est le common ley, per
q' means quicunque il vie^t al darrain q' il fuit admit pur ley mes en tiels
countries solement ou il fuit continue per continual usage, et que toutes les
briefes en le Register, de Rationabili part bonoru^, ount mention del special
custom^ del county, en q' le part est dd', et issint est le liver 28. H. 6. 4.
Mes come al cest iour perticion d' chattels ne^ use per toutle entier Realm,
nyent obsta^t en le mean temps il and parde le force du common ley come mults
pense, et come poet este collect per le oppinion auauntdit tenus pur ley Anno
31. H. 8. issint il est, (come ascu^s suppose) vanish outerment horse de ure
deyns cest country de Kent auxi.

17 Et si le heir', ou les heirs, soit ou soie^t de deins le age de xv. ans
soit la noriture d' eux bail per le sn^r al plus prochein del sa^k, a ^
heritag' n^ peut de^ce^d issint q' le sn^r pur l^ bail rien ne preigne.

18 Et que il ne so yt marie per le sn^r, mes per sa volunte demesn^, et per le
counsel de ces amies sil veult.

19 Et quant cel heir ou ceux heirs, so^t de pleine age de xv. ans, soient a
eux lour terres, et sour tenements lieures, ensembleme^t oue lour chateaux, et
oue les en prouem^ts de cells terres, oustre reasonable sustinance: de quel
enproueme^t, et chateux, soyt tenu a respondre celuy qui de luy auera la
noryture, ou le seigniour, ou ses heirs, que cel noritur' auera bail.

Le seigniour doyt bien consider, que il ne credit pas le custody al ascu^
person, que ne serra able a respo^der pur ceo. Car si le heir, al son pleyne
age de xv. ans, viendra al court del sn^r et demaundant so^ enherita^ce, nyent
obsta^t le sn^r poet distreygno le gardein pur fair' account (coe il appiert
18. E. 2. Auowry 220) uncore en defaut de son ability, le sn^r m^, et ses
hr'es, dem^t charge al le heir pur c': Mes ieo ne oyer, q^ les sn^rs prist sur
eux, a ce^iour de commit le custody de ceux enfants, mes q^ ils relinque c'
oustreme^t al order de proch. de amie, peraduentur' pur auoid' le danger e^ q^
ils so^t, sils ent'medle come est aua^tdit.

20 Et ceo fet a sauoir, que del heure que ceux heirs Gauelkind soie^t, ou ount
pass le age d' xv. a^s, list a eux lour terres ou ten^tes doner et vend', a
lour volu^te, Sauues les services au chese' sn^rages come il est deuant dit.

Nient obstant q^ cest cust^e enhable l' heir' pur fair alienatio^ de ses
terres et ten^ts mult soon, nosm^t al 15. an d' sa age, per means d'q' il puit
este pense ni^t reasonabl'pur done tiel scope et liberty al tiels june a^s,
vnc' sur le bo^ co^siderac' de c', il poet appear, q' l' custo^e m^ fait
reasonabl' et careful provision, en l' behalf del heir, entant que il luy
license a tiel ans, non pur doner ses terres, car ^ il poet fair pur null
chose, mes pur doner et ve^der ses terres, le quel il e^te^d il ne doet fair'
sau^s suffic' recompense. Semble interpretation le common ley auxi se^ble de
fair de ce^ custom, et per l^pinion de Vauasoure^ Keble. ^. H. 7. 31. et 41.
q^ux diont, q^ ^l fuit aiudge q' un releas fait per tiel enfant fuit void* per
le sentence del liu^ 21. E. 4. 24. o^ il est dit, que un enfa^t ne poet declare
son volu^t sur tiel feoffeme^t. Et per le judgment de Hank. 11. H. 4. 33. q'
auxi tient, que un garr', ou grant du^ reu^^* sayt a tiel age, fui^ anul
purpose, nient obstant un leas oue releas puit paduenture este bo^ per le
custom, pur ceo q^ il amou^ta a un feoffeme^t. Et il ne^ bo^ q^ cest custo^e
doet ^e^ construe per equity, enta^t que il nestoit oue asc' equity de^abler un
enf. d' petit discrec', et meins ex perie^ce, pur vend' so^ t'res, et no^
puruen^ oue c^, q^ il doit au^ Quid pro quo, et asc' reasonable recompense pur
ceo. Car c^ ne fuit pur defender le pupil et sans pier, mes pur giser luy ouert
a chesc' subtle deceit et circu^uention. En q^ respect, lour opinion e^ dee^
bn^ observe, q^ tient, q' si un ^nf. en Gauelkinde, a ce^ iour voet vend' al
xv. ans de so^ age, ceux ^. chooses doie^t de necessity co^curr', si il vo et
au^ l' sal' bo^ et effectual. Le prim^ q^ il soit un heir et nemy un purch.
del terres oue q^ux il dept. Le ij. q' il ad recompense pur c^, et le tierce,
q^ il ceo face oue livery de seisin per son maine dem^, et nemy per garra^t de
attorney, ne per ascu^ aut' man^ de assurance. Et ceux ho^es pur proof de le
prim^ et second part de lour assertion, edify sur les parols de ce^ custo^e,
ou il est dit, del heur' q^ ceux heirs Gauelkind seint, ou ou^t pass le age de
15. a^s, list a eux, lour t'res ou ten^ts done et ve^d*, en q' les parols,
(ceux heirs) restrain^ le infa^t q^ vie^t eins per purch. Et (done et vend')
en le copulative, de necessity implie un recompense, entaunt que vendere ne po
et este sine praecio. Et pur mayntenaunce del tierce matter, ils ount sur lour
part, preter le common usage del paies, le common ley del realm auxi, le q'l
expound le parol doner de signifier un feoffement, et le q^l non soleme^t
disallovve de ascu^ done fait per un enfant, mes auxy punish le prend' en
trn^s, sino^ q'il ad c^ per liuerie del maines del enfant come appert en 26. H.
8. 2. 9. H. 7. 24. 18. E. 4. 2. 22. H. 6. 3. et diverse auters livers.

21 Et si asc^ tiel tenant en Gauelkind meurt, et eit feme q^ survive, soyt cel
feme maintenaunt dovve de la moitie des tenements don't son baron morust vestu,
et ssi per les hr's, sils soyent de age, ou per les seigniours, si les heirs ne
soient pas de age, issint q' ele eyt la meit de celes terres et tenementes, a
tener taunt come ele se tyent veue, ou de enfanter soyt attaint, per le
ancient usage, ceo est asauoir, que qn^t ele enfant, et ^en^a^t soit oy crier,
et ^^ h^e et l'^ry soit leave, et le pais ense^ble, et ayent view de lenfa^t en
cy faunte, et de la mere, adonq^s perde son dovver enterement, et auterment
nyent, taunt come ele se tient veue, don't il est dyt en kenteyes.

Se thad sip wend, se sip lend.
Est custom ad este allow per le common ley long temps puis, come poet ce^
vieu, Praerog. regis ca. 16. et 2. H. 3. en Fitherbert ti. Prescriptio^ 59.
etc. Mes il est un doubt, si un feme serra endowe per ce^ custom, dun poss. en
leyo, u nemy, pur ceo q' les parols sont (des tenementes don't son baron morust
vestue, et seisie) quel parol (vestue) enforc' un poss. en fait, et non in
leysolem^t. Et pur c' si t'res en Gauelkind disce^d' al ho^e mary, q^ morust
deuant que il face son enter en ceo, Quer' si soitle man^ de^ dower sa feme de
ceo ou nemy? un feme ne serra endovve per ce^ custo^e, du^ bailiwike, ou fair,
ou tiel se^blable profet per loppinion de M. Parkins fo. 84. pur c' q' les
parols de ce^ customary dower sont terres et ten^ts, et touts customs trou^a
un litteral et strict interpretac'. Et ou el est deste endow per cest custo^e,
el poet bn^ este e^dow du^ moitie, dee^ tenus en common ouesque le heir, q^
enjoy laut' moitie etc. Il est un doubt, si un fe^e e^title al dower en
Gauelki^d poet vvaiu^ sa dovver del moity solo^que cest custo^e, et port sa
acc' dee^ endowe del iij. al common ley, et issint exe^pt luy m^ de tout danger
d'l customary co^dic'ou nemy? Ascuns fuer'de opinion q^ el est al liberty de
p^nd' lu^, et vvayue lauter al sa pleasure. Et pur ceo quaere de ceo etc.

22 Et claiment auxi, que home que prent femme, que eit heritage de Gauelkinde,
et la femme murge auant luy, eit le Baron le moite de celes terres et
tenements, tant come il se tyent veuers, dount il morust seisi sans
estrepement, ou vvast, ou exile fair, le quel kill y eyt heir ent' eux ou non
Et sil prent femme, trestout perde.

23 Et si null tenement de Gauelkinde eschete (et ceo eschete soit a null
seigniour q' tient per fee de Hawberke^, ou per seriauncie) per mort, ou per
Gauelate sicome il est suthdit, ou luy soit re^due de son tenant q' de luy
auaunt le tient per quyte clamans de ceo fete, o^ soit sa eschete per Gauelate
sicome il est de suthdit, remain cel terre as heirs impartable. Et c'est a
sauoir, la ou le t'ensi re^da^t null service retent deuers se, sauet nequedo^t
as aut's sn^rages, fees, ferm^s, et les rents don't les auauntdits tenementes de
Gauelkinde (ensi rendus) auau^t fuerent charges per ceux, ou per celuy, que le
charger poient ou poyet.

A ten^ per fee de Hawberk, ou per seriantie (sil soit grand serianty) et a
ten^ per ser^ie' d' chiual'. Heahbeony en Sax on, e^ un haut defense, Et les
customs de Normandy appel ceo fief ou fee d' Haubert que doit defender le
terre per pleine arms, ceo est per chiual, haubert, target, espee, ou helm.
Et il consist d' 300. acres de terre, q^ est c^ (come asc^ pe^se) q^ nous
appellomus un entier fee de chiual'.

24 Et claimant auxi, que si asc' tenant en Gauelkind retain sa rent, et son
service del tenement quil tient d' son seign^: querge le sn^r per agarde de sa
court de tois semains en trois semaines de trou^ distress sur cel ten^t tant
q^ ala quart court, a toutefit per tesmoinage. Et si dedeis cel te^ps ne trusse
distresseen cel tenement per queux il puisse so^ tenant iustiser, donque a la
quart court soyt agard, quil p^igne cel tenement en sa main, en noum de
distress, ausi come Boefe, ou vache, et le tie^t un an et un iour, en sa main
sa^s ou^er, maine deins quel term, si le tenant vient, and rende ses
arrerages, and feit ran^bles amends de la detenue, a donq'eit, et ioise son
tenement sicome ses ancestors et luy auaunt le tiendront. Et sil ne vient
deuant lan, et le iour pass, donq' ange le seignior al procheine Count suiant
oue tesmoinage de sa court, et face la pronuncier cel process pur tesmoinage
au^. Et per agard de sa court, apres ceo Count tenue, entra, et meynonera en
celes terres et tenementes, sicome en son demesne. Et si le tenant vient apres,
and voile ces tenementes reauer, et tener sico^e ^^ fist deua^t, face gree al
seigniour, sicome ilest auncientm^t did.

Neghe since selde? and neghe since geld? and fife pound for the were, er he
become ^ealder. Ascuns copies ad les primer verses issint.

Nigond since selde, and nigond since gelde.

Cest custo^e e^ touch per le voy, per master Frow. 21. H. 7. 15. et per luy
pense deste bone, mes sil soit a cest iour mise en ure, quere plus.

25 Auxi ils claime^t q^ null ho^e doit sereme^t sur liver fair', (per
distress, ne per poer de sn^r, ne de bayllife) encounter sa volunte sa^s
brief le roy (sinon pur fealty fere a son seigniour) mesque per deuaunt
Coroner, ou auter minister le roy, qui real power eyant de enquerer de trespass
fayt encounter la Corone nostre seigniour le roy.

26 Et claiment auxi, que chescun Kentoys puit auter essoiner en la Court le
Roy, en County, en hundredth, et en la court so^ seigniour, la ou essoigne
gist, auxibien de common suit, come de plee.

27 Oustr' ceo ils claiment per especial fet le roy Henry, pier le roy
Edward, que de tenements que so^t tenus en Gauelkind, ne soit prise battle;
ne graund assise per xij. chiualers, sicome ayllours est prise en le realm,
ceo est a sauoir, la on tenant et le demaundant tene^t per Gauelkinde: mes en
lieu de ces grau^des assizes soyent pryses Iures per xij. homes tena^ts en
Gauelkind, Issint que quater tenants de Gauelkind elisent xij. tenants de
Gauelkind Jurors.

Et al chartre le roy, de cest especyante est en la guard Sir John de Norwood,
le iour S. Elphegh en Canterbury, le an le roy Edward le fits le roy Henry 21.

Ces sont les vsages de Gauelkinde, et de Gauelke^deys en Ke^t, que fuerent
deuaunt le conquest, et en le eonquest, et toutes hours iesques a ore.

Le fine del customs.

Ayant issint fynish les customs come vous veyes (friar Nich.) il demurt a ore
dee^ mo^stre quel terres deyns cest paies de Kent so^t del nature de
Gauelkinde, et q^ux nemy.

Primerment pur c^, il est desse intend, que touts les terres deyns ce^ shire,
queux so^t de aunc' socage tenure (come fuit dit auant) so^t auxi del nature de
Gauelkind. Et l's terres tenus per ancient tenure de service de Chiualer, so^t
al common ley, et ne sount departible solonque le order de cest custom,
excepta certain, queux esteant tenus de ancient temps pur seruic' de chiualer
del Archieuesque de Canterbury, sont nie^t obstant departible, com^ il poet
appear per le liver 26. H. 8. 4. Et c^ vient per reason d' un grant, fait per
le roy John, al Hubert l' Archieuesque, le tenor de qui est come ensue.

Johannes dei gratia Rex Angliae, Dominus Hiberniae, Dux Normaniae, Aquitaniae
et Comes Andegaue^ Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbat', Comitibus, Baronibus,
Iusticiar', vicecom^, Praepositis, ministris, et onibus balliuis, et fidelibus
suis, salutem. Sciatis nos co^cessisse, et praese^ti charta nostra co^firmasse
ven^abil' patri nr'o ac Chro. Huberto, Ca^tuar' Archiepiscopo, et successor'
suis in perpetuu^, quod liceat cis terras, quas homines de feod ecclesiae
Ca^tuar' tenent in Gauelkind, co^uertere in feod' militum. Et qd' idem Episcop.
et successores sui, eande^in o^nibus potestate^, et libertatem habeant in
perpetuu^, in homines illos qui terras easde^ ita in seoda militum conuersas
tenebunt, et in haeredes eorum quam Archiepiscopus habet, et successores sui
post eum habebu^t in alios milites de feodo ecclesiae Cantuar', et in haeredes.
Et homines illi, et haeredes eorum, eande^ et omnem libertat' habeant in
perpetuu^, quam alij milites de feod' ecclesiae Cantuar', et haeredes eoru^
habent. Ita tamen, qd' nihilominus consuetus redditus denarior' reddatur
integre de terris suis, sicut prius, p^mia, aueragia et alia opera, q^ fieba^t
de terris ijsdem, conuertant' in reddit' denarioru^ aequiualente^. Et redditus
ille reddatur, sicut alius redditus denarior'. Quare volumus, et firmiter
praecipimus, qd' quicquid praedictus Archiepiscopus et successores sui post
eum, de terris illis in feodo militu^ secundum praescriptam forma^ co^uertendis
fecerint ra^u^ in perpetuu^ et stabile permaneat. Et prohibemus ne quis contra
factu^ ipsius Archiepiscopi, vel successor' suorum, in hac part venire
p^sumat. Test E. Elience, et S. Bathan, Episcopis. G. filio Pet', Comite
Essex, Wilhelmo Marestallo, Comite de Pe^brock, Rob. de Harecourt, Garino fil'
Geraldi, Petro de Stoke, Ric' de Reuerus, To. de Tateshal. Datu^ per man^ S.
Archid. Wilhelmi apud Rupem auriual iiij. die Maij* An. regni nr'i tertio.

Mes entant que il est disputable, si cest charter del roy John, soit de
sufficient virtue, pur chaunger le nature de Gauelkind terr', ou nemy, Et pur
ceo que le certeyntie des terres issint convert en fee de Chiualer, ne appiert
en ascu^ lieu (save solement q^ en le liver de aid levy en ce^ com^ An. 20.
E. 3. il est quater ou cinque temps note, que certain terres en Ke^t, sou^t
tenus en fee de Chiualer, Per nouam lice^tia^ Archiepiscopi) cest sufficera pur
ce^, et il serra prove, q' touts les terres de ancient tenure en service de
chiualer, sou^t subject al ordinary course de disce^t al common ley. Et ceo
poet este sufficientme^t fait et per les exp^sse perolx du^ note en 9. H. 3.
abridge per master Br. ti. Custo^es 57. et en master Fitz. ti. Prescription 63.
Et per le opinion del Justices 26. H. 8. 4. come auxi par pleine recital en le
act de parliament fait 31. H. 8. ca. 3. per que stat', les possessions de
certain gentelho^es la fuerount deliu^ de cest customary disce^t, et
incorporate a le common ley, car (enter auters) en cest act il est dit. Qui de
cest temps en auaunt, tiels lour terres serra change del le dit custom, et
dyscendera come terres all commen leye, et sicome aut's t'res estea^t en le dit
cou^ty d' kent, q^ux ne vnque ^ueronttenus per service de Socage, mes touts
temps ont este tenus per service de chiual', discende. Per q^ux parolx, il est
evident, q^ les feasors de cest estat' entendount touts terres tenus per
service de chiul', de^e de lour proper nature, discendable solonque le co^on
ley, et q' Socage tenure fuit solem^t le subject, in que cest nr' custo^e de
Gauelkind descent prevail, et tient lieu.

Mes qu^t mention e^ cy fait de Socage, et fee de chiual', il doet touts foits
este ente^d un tenure long puis, et d' ancient temps continue, et nei^ a ore
nouelm^t, oudarrainem^t creat, car issint il poit happen auterm^t, q'est deuant
report. Come pur example. Si terr' au^cientm^t tenus per service de chivalry,
vie^t al maines le roigne, q' ap^s done ceo arrere al un common person, de^e
tenus de sa manor de East Grenevvich en Socage, ce^t're (nient obstant le
alterac' del ten^r') demurt discen dable al eygnee fites solem^t, come il suit
de^^t come auxi, en m^ le man^ si t'res de au^cie^t Socage service vie^t al
corone (...) ^eliu^ar rere, de^^^^s ou del Roine en (...)te, ou per service de
^hiual' de asc' man^, i^ doit disce^d accord' al custo^e, nie^t obsta^t q^ le
tenure soit alt', et si ce^ soit very en le grant de le Roine m^: donque
mult meines poit le Archieueqsue per un nouel creatyon de tenure, fair al ses
tenants asc^ alteration de cest viele custom et man^. Car sicome le pleadinge
e^, qd't' rae praed' su^t de tenura et natura de Gauelkind, issint l' verity
est, q^ le p^sent ten^ soleme^t ne guide le disce^t mes que le tenure et le
nature ensemble, govern ceo. Et pur ceo, sico^e sur lun part le custom ne
poit attach, ou au^ lieu en c' que ne fuit pas deua^t en nature subject al
custo^e, ce^ a dir' accustomableme^t depart: Issint sur lauter part, le
practice de le custom, long temps continue, ne poet este interupt per un nude
alteration de le tenur' come il fuit tenus per les Justices, An. 4. and 5. P.
et M. come Judge Daliso^ ad relinque e^ report. Et auxi come il appiert per le
liu^ 26. H. 8. 4. ou il est dit, q'si un ho^e ssi^ de Gauelkind t're tenus en
socage, fait un do^e en tail et create un tenure en service de chiualer, que
vnc' cest terre doyt disce^d solonque le custom, sicome il fuit deuant le
change de le tenure.

Oustre ceo, sico^e le change de le tenure ne poet p^uaile encounter ce^
cufto^e: Issint le contin^ dun contrary usage, ne poet alter cest p^scripc'.
Car il e^ tenus 16. E. 3. en Fitzherb. ti Prescription 52. q' nient obsta^t le
eigne fits solem^t ad (et c'per diu^s discents ense^ble) ent' en Gauelkind
t're, et occupy c^s^s asc^ co^tradice' de les puignes freres, que vnc'le terre
remainera deste part perenter eux, qn^t ils voille^ fair lour claim. Encont'
quel assertion, ceo que est dit 10. H. 3. in Fitz. ti. Prescription 64. nosment
de le issue issint prise. Si terra illa fuit pertita necne, ne^ grau^d meant al
purpose. Car nient obstant il soit issint, q' le terre ne fuit vnque part en
fait, vnc^ sil demurt partible en nature, il poit este pt a quel temps occasion
serra minister. Et pur ceo, en le form de pleading use a cest iour (Quod terra
illa a toto t^pore etc, partibilis fuit, et partita) il est pleinment prise, q^
le parol (partibilis) solem^t est d' substance, et q' le parol (partita) nest
forsque parol de form, et nemy material, ou trau^sable, Verament issint
inseparable est cest custom de le terre en q' il obtain, que un contrary
descent (continue en le case d'l Corone m^) ne poet hinder, mesque q' (ap^s
tiel temps que le terre resortera arrere al un common parson) le former viel
custom gouernera ceo. Come si terres de. Gauelkinde nature vient al mains le
Roign^, per purchase, ou per Eschete come tenus de sa manner de Dale, ore ap^s
sa mort, touts ses fits enheritera, et deuidera eux. Mes sils veigne a luy per
forfaiture e^ treason, ou per done en parliament, issint que sa grace est
seisie del eux in iure Coronae, donques sa eigne fites solement (q' serr' roy
apres luy) auera eux, en quel case, nient obstant ceux terres q^ux le eigne
fites (esteant roy) ad possess, vie^t al son eigne fits apres luy (esteant roy
auxi) et issint de un al auter per sundrey dyscents, uncore loppinion de Sir
Anthony Brown fuit 7. Eli. que si a ascu^ temps apres, ceux terres sont
grant al un common person, ils reuertera a lour primer nature de Gauelkind, et
ee^ partible enter ses heirs males, nient obstant q^ ils ad curre un contrary
course, en diverse les disce^ts de les royes deuaunt. Mes mult meines poet le
unity de possession en le seignior, frustrate le custom de Gauelkinde descent
come il poet appear. 14. H. 4. en le long Recordare, abridge per M. Brook
tit' Auowry. 46. et ti. Customs. 19.

Ore sequitur deste parl' come long cest custom extend luy mesme deins cest
nostre paies de kent etc.

Il est communeme^t prise, q^ le custom de Gauelkind est general, et exte^d
luy mesm^ per tout l' entier cou^tie, en toutes terres subject per ancient
tenure al ceo, tiels lieus solement except, ou il est alter per act de
parliament. Et pur ceo en 5. E. 4. 18. et 14. H. 4. 8. il est dit que le
custom de Gauelkinde est (come) un common ley en Kent. Et le liver 22. Edwardi
quarti 19. affirm que en dema^dant Gauelkind t're, un home ne besoign^ de
prescribe en certain, et de monstre que le ville, borowe, ou City, ou les
terres sount, est un ancient ville, borowe, ou City, et que le custom ad
este la (temps horse de memory) que les terres deins mesme vill', borovve, ou
City doyt discende a touts les heirs males etc. Mes ceo est sufficient de
monstre le custo^e a large et dedire, que le terre gist en Kent, et que toutes
les terres la sount del nature de Gauelkinde. Car un brief de Partycion de
terres en Gauelkinde (Mounsier Littleton di^) serra cy general, sicome les
terres fuerount al common ley, nyent obstant le declaration doyt specyalme^t de
contain mention de le custom^ del pais. Cest universality consider, et auxi
le strict band (per que le custom^ est cy inse perably unite al le terre, que
en man^ null chose forsque un act de parliament poet clereme^t disseuer eux (il
sequitur, que nullieu, City, ville, ou borowe, deins cest shire, poet este
exempt d' ce^ custom nyent obstant c^ and a ascu^ temps este la mise en ure,
nyent plus q' le eigne fits (en le case deuaunt) poet pur semble reason
p^scribe encounter ses punees freres etc.

Cest taunt esteant parle touchaunt le nome, Tenure, Nature, generality, et
order de Gauelkind: il serra ore monstre de q^ quality les rents, remaynders,
actions, et tyels auters chooses (de q' ascu^s sou^t issua^t horse de ceux t'res,
ascuns so^t a^nex al eux, et ascu^s sou^t raise per reason de eux) serra. Et de
eux ascuns ensuera le nature del terre, et auters retaynera m^ le course q'
commo^ley ad appoint. Et pur c^ si un rent soyt grant en fee horse de Gauelkind
terre, il disce^dra a touts ses males sico^e le terre m^ ferra come appiert en
14. H. 8. 5. 26. H. 8. 4. et 4. E. 3,

Mes si 2. iointena^ts d't'res en Gauelkind grant un rent charge horse de ceo
terre al I. S. et a ses heirs, et I. S. morust ayant issue deux fites, cest
rent ne discendera al ambydeux les fits del I. S. mes al heir al common ley,
pur c^ q^ le custo^e est en suspense durant le iointur', per le opinion de le
droit woorshipful Christopher Yeluerton Armiger, al son lecture en Grayes Inn
en lent Anno. 1573.

Issint si un tenauncy soit d' Gauelkind nature, vnc' le rent service per que
il est tenus poet disce^d accorda^t al common ley. Come Ald' and Chart' en 7.
E. 3. fueront de opinion.

Si un rem^ de terr' en Gauelkind soit tail' al heirs males, ils touts
ensembl' inheritront, come Fitzherbert et Norwich pensou^t 26. H. 8. 4. Mes c^
est dee^ inte^d dun disce^t solement, car si terres de Gauelkynde nature soyt
lease pur vie, le remaynder al droyt heirs de I. Style que ad issue quater
fits et morust, et apres le lessee pur vy morust, or' le eignee fits soleme^t
de John Style auera cest terre, car il est droyt heir, et ceo est un bon nosm^
de purchase. 37. H. 8. en Mounsier Brook ti. Done et Remaynder 42. Mes si les
terres ount este done al John Style pur vie, le rem^ al son procheine heir
male, cest ad ee^ un estate tail en Ioh. Style mesme, et donque le terre doyt
aver descend al toutes ses fits, entant que en ce^ case les parolx (prochein
heir male) ne sont un nosme d' purch'. Mes il fuit grau^dm^t doubt 3. et 4. P.
and M. (come Justice Dalison ad report) srvn remainder soit devise per
testament (proximo haeredi masculo) si en cest case le eigne friar solement
auera ceo, en taunt q^ (en lentendement d'l ley, que est un Judge sur touts
customs) il est le proch' heir' male, et pur ceo quere d' c^.

Concernaunt vouchers, il appiert 11. E. 3. que touts les heirs en Gauelkinde
serra vouch pur le garrantie d'lour auncestour et nemy le eigne solement. Mes
le opinion de mounsyer Littleton libro. 3. cap. 13. et del Justices. 22. E. 4.
est clear que le eigne fites solem^t serra rebut, ou bar per le garranty de
le auncestor, briefement, le eigne fits solement ent' pur le breach dun
condition. Mes les auters de les freres serr'ioine oue luy en suiant un br'de
Attaint pur un faux verdit, ou Error, pur reuerser un erroneous Iudgem^t. Et
ils touts serront charge pur le debt de lour auncestor, si is^int soit que ils
touts ont assets en lour maines. Mes si le eigne tant solem^t ad assets
demurrant, et les auters au^t alyen lour parts, donque il solem^t serra charge,
solo^que loppinion del liver 11. E. 3. etc. Et cest tant pur cest part
sufficera.

Ore un vel deux parols de anters chooses confusedment, uncore appertainant al
cel nient obstant non tout cy necessary pur vr'e purpose de^e conus come ceux
deuant dit. Il appiert en vnescript report alarge d' 16. E. 2. que est auxy en
part abridge per M. Fitzherb. titulo Prescription, que il fuyt try per
verdict, q^ null ho^e doit au^ common en t'res d'Gauelkind, mes le contrary est
bn^ conus a cest iour en ceo en diverse lieus, m^ le liver dit, q' le usage de
Gauelkind est, q' un home poyt loyalment enchase, ou chase horse en la haut
chimen a lour adventure, les auers de ascun auter person que il trouera damage
feasauntes en ses terres, et que il nest compellable de impounde eux, q^l chose
e^ practice a cestiour.

Le parliament 15. Henrici 6. cap. 3. vo* lens de amplifier les privileges de
Gauelkynde graunta a les tenauntes de ceo terre exemption en Attaints, en tiel
sort come les inhabitauntes de ancient demesne and les cinqueports deua^t ad,
Mes deins iij. a^s apres sur complaint de ascuns del paies queux enfourme le
parlyament meason que il ne fuyt pass en lentier countye 30. ou 40 persons,
que tiental value de xx. li. terre horse de Gauelkind q'en defaut de auters, et
per reason de tiel exemption, fueront continualm^t mo lest per returns en
attaints, ce^ act fuit tout repeal.

Le statute 14. H. 8. cap. 6. done liberty a chesc' ho^e (aya^t haut chimin
per ses terres en le wealde que est worn profound, et inco^modious pur
passage (pur mise horse un aut'voy, en ascun tiel aut'lieu de sa terr', come
serr'pense convenient per le vieu de deux Justices de le peace, et xij. auters
homes de vvisdome and dyscretion.

Le general ley fait 35. H. 8. 17. pur le preservation de Copeises boys per
tout le Realm fait plain exceptyon de toutes boys deins ce^ wealde sinon il
soyt de tiels queux sount common. Et issint un fine de ce^ matter, sauant que
ieo voile fair master Lit. respons as tiels q^ voylent demand, quel reason
cest custo^e de Gauelkind descent ad issint pur divide terre ent'touts les
males co^tra al manner de tout le Realm aylours: Les punees fites (dit il)
sount auxi graund gentelhomes, come le eignee, et ils (esteants cy chare a lour
common auncestour, de que ils claim) ount taunt le plus beesoigne del aid
lour amies come (per reason de lour minorytie) ils sont meins able q^ le eigne
friar pur aider lour m^s etc.

Gelde.
GEld, hoc est quiet' esse de consuetudinibus seruilibus que quonda^ dare
consueueru^t et ad huc dant', sic hornegelde et hijs similibus.

Grithbrech.
GRithbrech, hoc est pax dn^i regis fracta, quia (Grith) angl'pax latin.

Hangewite.
HAngwite, hoc e^ quietum esse de latrone suspenso sine iudicio, velextra
custodia^ vestram euaso.

Hariot.
HAriot est en deux sorts, lun hariot custom, lauter hariot service.

Hariot service (ascuns diount) est touts foytes express en le grant dun
home, ou en son fait que il tient per tiel service pur paier hariot al temps de
son mort. Et ce^ hariot est payable apres le mort de le tenant en fee simple.

Hariot Custom, est lou hariots ount este paies te^ps horse de memory per
custom^. Et ceo poet este apres le mort de tenant pur vy etc. mes a parler de
ceo generalment.

Hariot est le meliour beast (soyt il Chiual, Boef, ou vach) q' l' tenant ad al
temps de so^ mort. Et poet este ou seisi, ou un distress prise pur ceo, soyt
il hariot seruic', ou hariot custom al use del sn^r de que le tenant tyent,
per son bailife, ou auter offycer de son manner.

Mes de droit le seigniour, ne so^ officer ne doet prender hariot, deuant que
il soit present al procheine court tenus que le tenant est mort, et que tiel
beast est due al sn^r pur son hariot.

Haybote, ou Hedgebote.
HAybote, ou Hedgbote, est necessary stuff pur fair'etame^d' hayes, q^ lessee
pur a^s, ou pur vy, de common droit poet prend' sur le terre a luy less, nyent
obstant il ne soyt express en so^ leas, et nient obsta^t que il soit un lease
per parols sau^s escript.

Haybote auxi poet este prise pur necessary stuff pur fair Rakes, forkes and
tiels semblables instrum^ts oue q^ux ho^es vsount en Su^mer d'tedder et fair
fein^. Et issint un lessee pur ans prist c', et fuit al luy allow per son
lessour, le rather come ieo supp^, pur c' q^ tiels instrum^ts so^t co^munem^t
fayt de slender subboys, q^ per le common ley lessee pur a^s poet succid' and
p^nder come est auantdit.

Hidage.
HIdage, hoc est quietu^ esse si dn^s Rex talliauerit totam terra^ per hidas.

Nota que un hide de t're, e^ un entier plowland. Et cest kind de taxing per
hides fuit mult use en viel te^ps, cybn^ pur provision de armor, come paiments
de argent, et c^principalm^t, en les iours del roye Etheldred (un roy en ce^
pais deuant le conquest (q^ en l' an de Crist 1006. qn^t les Danes prist la^d
as Sa^d which en Ke^t, tax tout so^ t're per hides en cest man^. Que chesc^
310. hides d' t'r' doie^t trou^ un nyefe furnish, et ches^' 8. hides, doient
trou^ un jack and un sal let, pur le defense del Realm.

Hotchpot.
HOtchpot, e^ un med ling, ou mixing ensembl', et un partie' de t'res do^e en
fra^kmar', ouesque aut's terres en fee simple discendus. Come pu^ example, un
ho^e ssi^ de 30. acres d' terre en fee simple, ad issu ij. files, et done
ouesque un de ses files al un ho^e que luy marie x. acres d' ceo terre en
frankmariage, et morust seisie de les auters xx. acres: Ore si el que est
issint marie voil' aver ascun part de les xx. acres de que son pier morust
seisie: El doyt mise sa t'res do^e en frankmariage, en hotchpot, cest adire, el
doit refuser ce^ done en frankmaryage, et suffer le terre deste commixt, et
mingle ensemble ouesque l' auter terre de q^ son pier morust seisie, issint q^
un equal deuisio^ poet este fait de lentiert pere^ter luy et sa soer. Et issint
pur sa x. acres, el auera xv. auterme^t sa soer voet aver les xx. acres, de q^
lour pier morust seisi.

Homesoken*
HOmesoke^ (ou have soken) hoc e^ quietum esse de amerciament', d' ingressu
hospicioru^ violent' et sine licentia, et contra pace^ dn^i regis. Et qd'
teneatis placita d' huiusmodi tra^sgressione facta in curia vestra, et in terra
vestra.

Homicide ou manslaughter.
HOmicide, ou manslaughter, est le occid' du^ ho^e feloniousment, sauns malice
prepence.

Il est auxi define issint, homicidium est hominis occisio, ab homine facta, si
au^e^ a cane, boue, vel alia re, non dicitur proprie homicidium, dicitur
homicidium ab homine, et caedo quasi hominis caedium.

Hornegelde.
HOrnegelde, hoc e^ quietum esse de quadam co^suetudine exacta per tallage per
tota^terr', sicut de qua cunque bestia cornuta.

Housebote.
HOusebote est necessary timber, q^ lessee pur ans, ou pur vie, de common dr't
poet prend' sur le terre, pur repair les measo^s sur m^ l' t're a luy lessa,
nie^t obsta^t il ne soit exp^sse en le lease, et nie^t obsta^t il soyt un leas
per parolx sau^s fait: Mes sil p^st pluis q^ besoign^, il poet este punish per
un action de wast.

Hundred.
HVndreds fuerount devise per Alfred le roy, apres que il ad divide lentier
Realm^ en certain parts ou Sections, le quel d'le Saxon parol Scynan,
signifiant de scinder, il term Shires, ou (sicome nous uncore perle) Shares,
et portio^s, Ceux Shires il auxi enfringe en petytes parts, de q^ux ascuns
fuer' apples Lathes de le parol Ielapian, que est, de asse^bler ense^ble,
auters Tithings, issint nosm^, pur c^ q^ la fuer' en chesc' de eux al number de
x. persons de que chescun fuit suertie, et pledge pur auters bone behauyour.
Auters hundreds pur ceo q^ ils contain jurisdiction sur un 100 ho^es, ou
pledges demurrant peradventure en 2. ou 3. ou plus paroches, borowes, ou
villes, esteant et adioinants nient meins prochein ensemble, en le quel il
appoint administrac' de Justice dee^ exercise seueralment enter eux de m^ le
hundred, et nemy que lun irra horse* disorderme^t en lauter hundred, lath, ou
tithing, en q^ il ne demurt. Ceux hu^ dreds continue al cest iour en force,
nyent obstant non en tout al m^ le purpose pur q^ al primerils fuerount ordeine
uncore a ore mult necessary, et en temps de peace pur bon ord' de government
diverse voyes, et auxi en guerre pur certeyntie de leuying de homes, come
auterment pur le plus spedye collections de payments grant en parliam^t al les
Royes, et roignes d'ce^ realm^.

Hundredum.
HVndredu^, hoc est quietum esse d' denarijs vel co^suetudinibus faciendis
prepositis et hu^dredarijs.

Idiot.
Idiot est celuy que est un sot natural de sa neysture, et ne scauoit de
accompter ou number xx. d'. ne poyt nosmer son pere ou mere, ne d'q^l age il
mesme est, ou tiel se^blable plain et common chooses, issint q' il appiert q'
il and ascu^ man^ d' inte^dm^t d'reaso^ ne gou^nement de luy ^, q'l est pur so^
prosct, ou disprofet etc. Mes sil adtant entelligence que il poit lier, ou
apprender de lier per instruction et information de auters, ou poet measure un
vlme d' drape, ou nos me les iours en le semaine, ou engend'vn enfaunt, fites
ou file, ou tiel se^blable per q' il poit appear, q il ad asc' lumen de reason:
donque tiel ne^ Idiot na turalment.

Illoyal assembly.
ILloyal assembly, est lou people eux assemble insimul pur fair illoyal chose
encounter le peace, nient obstaunt que ils ne execute lour purpose en fait.

Imparlance.
IMparlance, est qua^t un action de debt, trespass, ou tiels semblables, est
port e^uers un home, et apres q' le pleintife ad count ou declare, le defendant
pria le court que il poit aver temps de mise eins son respons al auter iour en
mesme le term, ou en le procheine term, cest stay de respons est appel
imparlance.

Imprisonment.
IMpriso^ment ne^ auter chose forsque le restraynt del liberty dun home, so it
ceo en le ouert champ ou en le Cippes* ou Cage en les estrets, ou en le proper
meason dun ho^e, cybyen come en le common jail. Et en touts ceux lieus, le
^tie issint restraint est dit deste un prison^ cy longement come il and son
liberty frankem^t de ire a touts te^ps lou il voit, sans bail, mainprise, ou
aut'aucthoritie.

Infangethefe.
INfa^gthefe, hoc e^ qd' latrones capti in dn^ico vel in feod' vr'o de latro
cinijs co^uicti,' in curia vestra iudicet'

Imformation.
INformation pur le Roine e^ c^ q^ pur un common person e^ appel un declarac',
et ne^ toutes foites fait directment per le Roigne, ou sa attorney mes per un
aut' ho^e, Qui tam pro dn^a regina qua^ pro se ipso sequitur, sur le breach de
ascun penal ley ou statute, en que un penalty est done al party q' voet suer
pur ceo, mes null acc' de det pur recou^ ceo, donque il doit este evve per
Informatyon.

Iointure.
IOynture est un estate et assurance fait al un feme en considerac'de marriage,
pur term de sa vie, ou auterment, soitil deuant ou apres le marriage. Et si
soit apres le marriage, donque el poit a son liberty apres le mort de so^ baron
refuser de prend' ou aver les terres issint assure pur sa iointure, et dd' sa
dower al le comen ley.

Mes sil soit fait deuaunt marriage donque el ne poit refuser tiel Iointure, ne
aver dower accord' al common ley, sinon que quant el port sa brief de dovver,
le defendant plead tiel pleque ne voile luy barrer de sa dovver, donques el
serra endovve: sicome il dyten bar, que sa baron ne fuit seisie de tiel
estate de quel el doit este endovve, ou asc'tiel ple, et ne mr' que el ad un
iointur'fait etc. et pur c^ dd'iudgem^t del acc' ou iudgem^t si el serra auxi
endowe, ou ascu^ tiel se^blabl ple etc. Et ceo fuit loppinion de le droit
worshipful master Brograue al so^ lecture en Graies Inn en So^mer An^ 1576.
18. Elizabeth, sur un branch del stat' fait Anno 27. H. 8. cap. 10. concernant
Ioyntures et dovvers.

Et per luy de ceux chooses de q' un feme poit este endovve, el poit au^ un
ioynture, come de meins, vestura^ t'rae, boys, villes, Isles, meadows, et
tiels se^blables. Item dun aduowson, dun reu^sion depe^da^t sur un estate pur
vie, du^ Windmil, un haut chamber, un rectorie et tiels aut's, et ils so^t
appels ten^ts, Item dun villen, ca^ il est hereditame^t. Et de touts ceux
profit poet vener al fem^. Mes de ceux chooses de q' null profit voet ven^, mes
plus toft un charge, un ioint' ne poet ce^ fait.

Larceny.
LArceny est un deceiptful prysel des biens dun auter hom^, mes nemy de so^
person, oue un meant de eux embleer encounter so^ volunt que biens ils fuerount.

Et larceny est en deux sorts, lun issint appel simplement, et lauter petite
larceny.

Le primer est lou le chose emblee exceda le value de xij. d. et ceo est felony.

Le auter (que est appel petit larceny) est lou le chose emblee, ne exceda le
value de xij. d. et c' nest felony.

Lastage.
LAstage, hoc est qui etum esse de quadam co^suetudine exacta in nundinis et
mercatis pro rebus cariandis vbi homo vult.

Lessor et lessee.
LEssor e^ celuy que less terres, ou tenements al auter pur term de vie, ans,
ou al volunt, et celuy a que le lease est fait, est appel lessee.

Leuant and couchant.
LEua^t and Coucha^t est dit, quant les beasts, o^ cattle du^ estrau^ger so^t
venu en le t're du^ auter ho^e, et la ou^t remain un certain bone space de
temps, cy long q^ ils ou^t bien manger, et auxi eux mesmes rest.

Ley gager.
LEy gager est qua^t un acc' e^ port verse un sa^s especialty mr'e, ou auter
matter d'recorde: come action de debt sur un contract, ou detinue, donques le
defendaunt puyt gage saley sil voile. s. iurer sur un liver, et certain
persons ouesque luy^, q^ il doyt riens al plaintiff en le manner and form
come il ad declare: mes en action d'det sur un leas pur term dans, ou sur
arrerages de account deuaunt auditors assign, home ne gagera sa ley. Mes
quaunt un gagera sa ley, il amesnera ouesque luy vj. viij. ou xij. de ces
vicines, come le court luy assignera de iurer ouesque luy, and si al iour
assign, il faut de sa ley, donque il serra condemn.

Liuerie de seisin.
Livery de seisin, e^ un ceremony use en co^ueyance de terres ou tenements lou
un estate en fee simple, fee tail, ou un franktenement passera. Et il est un
tesmoigne d'le voluntary departing de tout ceo que il que fait le liuerie ad
en le chose de que lyuerie est fayt: Et le resceyt del liuerie est un
voluntary acceptaunce par le auter party, de tout ceo de que lauter ad luy
dismiss. Et fuit invent come un ouert et notorious chose, per means de que le
common people poyent aver intellygence de passing ou alteration de estates de
ho^e al home, q^ per ceo ils poyent estre le meliour able pur trier en que le
droit et possession de terres et tenements fueront sils doyent este impanell et
iuries, ou auterment ount a fair co^cernant ceo.

Le common manner de livery de seisin, est en cest sort fayt: Si il soit en le
ouert cha^pe ou ne^ edifices ou mea son, donques un que poet liar prist le fayt
en so^ main, si lestate passera per fayt, et declare al eux que la sount, le
cause d' lour venir la ensemble, et donques ouertment lia le fayt en Englois,
et apres que il e^ seal, le party que est a departer oue le terre, pryst le
fayt en ses maynes ensemble ouesque un clodde del terre, et un twigge ou bow,
sil y ad ascun la, etitout ceo il deliver al auter party, en le nosme de
possessyon ou seisin accorda^t al form et effect d'l fayt, que deuant eux
fuit la lie. Mes sil soyt un habitation ou edifice sur le terre, donques ceo
est fayt la al le door del ceo null esteant relinquishe a cest temps deins le
meason, et le party deliver tout les aua^tdits ensemble ouesque le annuel del
door en le nosme de seysin ou possessyon, et il que receyua le lyuerie entra
prymes sole et shotta le door, et presentme^t ouert ceo, et lessa eux eyns
etc. Sil soyt dun meason a que est null terre, le liuerie e^ fayt et possession
prise per le delivery del annuel del door et fayt solement. Et ou il est sauns
fayt de terres ou teneme^ts, la le party declare per parol deuau^t tesmoign^,
lestate q' il entend de depart oue, et donques deliver seisin ou possession, en
manner come est auantdit, Et issint le terre ou tenement passera *cybyen lou il
and fayt, come per fait, et ceo per force del liuerie de seysin: Il fuit agree
en Graies Inn per l' droit worshipful M. Snagge, al so^ lecture la en So^mer
Anno 1574. que si un feoffour deliver le fayt en view del terre, en nosme de
seysin, que il est bon, pur ceo que il ad un possession en luy mesme. Mes
auterment est dun atturne, car il doyt aler al terre, et pryse possession luy
mesme, deuaunt que il poet doner possession al auter, accordant al parolx de
son letter etc. Et lou livery de seisin est per le view, sile feoffee ne entra
pas puis etc. null chose passa, caril doyt enter en fait.

Lotherwite.
LOtherwite, hoc est quod capiatis eme^das ab ipso qui corru^pit natiuam
vestram sine licentia vestra.

Mahim ou Maime.
MAhim est lou ascun member est damnifie ou toll, per que le party issint
da^nifie est fait imperfect a co^batier. Come si un osse soit prise horse del
test: ou un osse soyt debruse en ascun auter part del corpse, ou un pee, ou
maine, ou digit, ou joint du^ pee, ou ascu^ member soyt scyer: ou per ascun
plague, les nerves so^t fayt de shrinker, ou auter member, ou les digits fait
curue, ou si un oyl' soit mise horse, ou les auteriour de^tes debruse, ou ascun
auter chose en le corpse du^ ho^e, per reason de q^ il est fait le meines able
pur defender luy m^.

Mes l' scier du^ orail, ou nese, ou lenfreind' del dents moliers, ou tiels
se^blables, ne^ ascu^ maihem, pur c^ q^il est pluis un deformity d' l'corps, q^
un defect d'l strength. Et si les iustic' so^t en doubt si le dam^ soyt un
mayhem ou nemy, ils use, et voylent de lour graunde discrec' prend' le aid et
opinion de ascun erudite Surgeon pur consid' de c' deua^t q' ils determin^ sur
le cas.

Mainprise.
MAinprise est quant un ho^e est arrest per Capias, donque les Judges poie^t
deliver son corpse a certain ho^es pur garder, et de luy amesn^ deua^t eux a
c^taine iour, et ceux so^t appels mainpernors, and si le party ne appear al
iour assign, le mainpernors serront amercies.

Manor.
Manor, e^ un chose compound de diu^s chooses, come du^ measo^ terre arrable,
pasture, pree, boys, rent, auowson, court baron, et tiel se^blable fo^t un
man^, et ceo doit este per ancient co^tinua^ce de te^ps, cuius co^trariu^
memor' hominu^ non existit, car a cest iour un man^ ne poit ee^ fait pur ceo q^
un court ba ron ne poet ee^ fait a ore, et un man^ ne poit e^e sa^s un court
baron et suitors, ou fra^kt', deux almeins, car si touts les frankt' pret' un
escheate al le sn^r, ou sil purchase tout, p^t' un, la son man^ e^ ale, pur c'
que il ne poit este un man^ sans un court baron (come auantdit*) and un court
ne poit este tenus mes deuant suitors, et nemy deua^t un sut', et ideo lou
forsq^ un frankteneme^t, ou franktenant est, la ne poet este un manner.

Manumission.
MAnumission est en deux sorts, le un e^ un manumission explicita, lauter un
manumission implicita.

Manumission explicita, est quant le seignior fait un fait al son villein pur
luy enfra^cheser per cest parol manumittere, quod idem est quod extra manu^,
vel extra potestate^ alterius ponere.

Le manner de Manumitting ou enfra^chesing en te^ps pass plus vsualme^t fuit
isissint. Le seign your (en ^sence de ses vicines) pryst le villeine per l'
test disa^t, Ieo voile que cest home soyt frank, et oue c' il luy mise auant
horse de ses maines, et per c' il fuit frank sans asc' pluis fair. Manumissio^
implicita sans cest parol (Manumittere) e^ qn^t le sn^r fait un obligac' a so^
villen a paiera luy money al un c^ten iour, ou luy sue, ou il poytent' sans
suit, ou grant al son villen un annui tie, ou lessa terre a luy per fait pur
a^s, ou pur vie, et en diu^s tiels se^bles cases, le ville^ per ceo est fait
frank.

Maxims.
Maxims so^t les fou^dations del ley, and les conclusio^s de reason, et sont
efficie^t, et certain universal propositions, cy sure and perfect que ils ne
poient ee^ a asc' temps impeache, ou impugn, mes doyt touts foyts este observe
et tenus come fort principles et aucthorities d' luy m^, nyent obstant ils ne
poyent ee^ prove per force d' argument ou demonstrations logical, mes sount
conus per enduction per le voy de sense and memory. Come pur example il est un
maxim^ que si un ho^e ad issue ij. fits per diverse venters, et le un de eux
purchase terres en fee et morust sauns issue, lauter fits ne vnques serra son
heir etc.

Item il est un auter maxim que t'res discendra del pier al fits, mes nemy del
fits al peer car est un asce^tion etc. et diverse tyels semblables il y ad.

Maynour.
MAynour est quant un laron ad emble et est pursue oue hue et cry, et prise,
ayant ^eo troue ouesq' luy q^ il ad emble, ceo e^ appel le main^. Et issint
moisc o^munem^t use pur dire qn^t nous trouomus un faira^s de un vnloial act,
q^ nous luy prist ouesque le mainor, ou man^.

Misprision.
MIsprision est quant asc' sceit q'vn auter ad fait treason, ou felony, et il
ne voile luy discou^ al Roigne, ou sa Counsel ou a ascun magistrate, eins
concela son offense.

Un Chaplein ad fix un ancient seal dun patent, a un nouel patent d' non
residence, et c' fuit tenus de^e misprision de treason ta^tu^, et null cou^ter
feiter del seal del Roygne. Ite si un aut' sciet money deste faux, et port c^
horse de Irelande en Englet', et vtt' ceo en paym^t, c' est forsq^ misprision de
treason, and nemy treason, et issint e^ en diu^s tiels se^blables cases.

Et en touts cases de misprisio^ de treason, le party offend' forfetra ses bn^s
a toutes iours, et les profets de ses t'res pur term de son vie, et so^corps
al prison al pleasure del roine.

Et pur misprisio^ de felony ou trn^s le offe^dour serr' commit al prison,
tanque il ad troue suertyes ou pledges pur son fine, que serra assesse per le
discrec' de les Iustic' deuaunt q^ il fuit convict.

Et nota q^ en chescu^ treason, ou felony, est include misprision, et lou asc'
ad fait treason ou felony, le Roygne poit causer luy deste indit' et arraigne
forsque d'misprision solement sil voile.

Monstrans de faits, ou Records.
MOnstrans de faites, ou Records, est sico^e pur example, un acc' de debt
soit port enuers un sur un obligac', Ou per execut' etc. la apres que le pl' ad
declare, il doit mr' son obligac' ou le executour le testament al court, Et
issint est de Records.

Et le diversity perenter Monstrauns de faits ou records, et oier de faits et
records est issint. Il que plead le fait ou record, ou declare sur ceo, al
luy il appertain de mr'e ceo. Et laut' verse que tiel fait ou record est plead
ou declare, et est per ceo dee^ charge, poet demand oyer de ceo fait ou
record, q^ son adversary port, ou plead verse luy.

Mortgage ou Morgage.
MOrtgage ou Morgage, est quant un fait un feoffem^t a un auter sur tiel
condic' q^ si le feoffor paya al feoffee a certain iour xl. li. dargent, q^
adonques la feoffour puit reentre etc. en c^ case le feoffee est appel tenant
en morgage. Et sicome un home puit fair feoffem^t en fee en morgage, issint il
puit fair' done en le tail' ou less pur term^ de vie, ou pur term dans en
morgage. Et il semble que la cause pur que il est appell mortgage, est appell
mortgage, est pur c' q^ il estoyt e^ aweroust si le feoffor voile payer al iour
limit le argent ou no^, and sil ne pay p^, do^q^s la t're q^ il met en gage sur
condition de paym^t de le money, e^ al' d' lui a touts iours, et issint mort a
lui sur condic', et sil pay le money, donques est le gage mort quaunt a le
tenant. s. le feoffee, et pur cest cause il est appel en latin^ mortuum vadiu^,
come M. Littleto^ dit, ou mortuu^ vas, come ieo pe^se.

Mortmaine.
MOrtmaine fuit qn^t terres fuer' dones a un meason de relygion, ou a un
company q^ sou^t corporate per le grant le roy, donq^s ce^ terre est deuenus
en mortmaine, ce^ dir' en Anglois a dead hand, et le roy ou l' seignior de q^
le terre est tenus poet enter en eux.

Mulier.
MVlier e^ un parol use en nostr' ley, mes come aptment ieo ne poy dire ne scay
bn^ com^t il doit venir en tiel sense com^ nous la ceo prendromus* Car
accorda^t al proper signification, mulier e^ foemina corrupta, sicon^i il est
use per Vlpianus en un certain lieu en tiel manner, Quod si ego me virgine^
emere putare^ eu^ esset mulier, emptio non valebit. Per c^ poies voyer q^
mulier est un fe^e que ad ewe le company dun ho^e, mes a relinquisher le droit
signification: mulier est prise en nostre ley, pur un que est loialment
engender et ncc: et est toutes dit's use en comparison ouesque un bastard,
solement pur monstre un difference perenter eux come pur example: un ho^e ad un
fits per un fe^e deua^t marriage, ce^ issue est appel un bastard, et illoial:
Et apres ils entermary, et ount un auter fytes, cest second fits est appell
mulier, cest adire, loyal, et serra heir al son pier, mes le auter ne poet
este heir al ascun home, pur ceo que ^i ne^ conus, ne certain en le judgment
del ley, q^ fuit son pier, et pur cest cause est dit deste nullius filius, ou
filius populi, et issint sa^s pier accordaunt al ce^ viele verse.

Cui pater est populus, pater est fibi nullus et omnis.

Cui pater est populus, no^ habet ipse patrem.

Et touts foits vous troues ce^ addic'al eux (bastard eigne, et mulier puisne)
quant ils sont compare ense^bl'.

Murder.
MVrder est un volu^tarie occider dun home sur malice pretense, et semble de
ven^ d' le Saxon parol Mordren q^ issint signify. Et Mordridus est le murderer
tanque al cest iour enter eux en Saxony, de q^ nous auomus mult de nr' parols
come a dee^ sepe dit.

Negatiua preignans.
NEgatiua preignans est quant un action, ou information, ou tiel semblable est
port enuers un, et le defendant plead en bar del action, ou auterm^t un
negative plea, q' nest cy special answer al action mes que il enclude auxy un
affirmative. Com^ pur example, si cesty en reuersion enter sur tenant pur vie
supposant que il ad alien en fee, (que e^ un forfaiture de son estate) et le
tenant pur vie dit que il and alyen en fee, cest un negative en que est include
un affirmative. Car nient obstant il soyt very que il and alyen en fee, uncore
il poet este que il ad fayt un estate en tail (le quel est auxi un forfaitur')
et donques lentrie de celuy en le reuersion est loyal etc. Item en un Quare
impedit le Roygne fist title de present a un prebende ratione que les
Temporalties leuesque fuerount en sa mains per le mort de W. nuper Episcopi
etc. Le defendaunt dyt que ne voyda pas esteantes les Temporalties en les
maynes del Royne per le mort de W. cest un negative preignans, car il poet este
en les mains del royne auterment que per l' mort d' W. et il suffist al roigne
si soit en sa maines per ascun means etc. Issint est ou un informatio^ fuit
port in scaccario verse I. S. pur ceo que il achate laynes enter shering temps
et le Assumption tali anno de I. N. Le defendaunt dit quod non emit de I. N.
come il est allege etc. ceo est appell un negative preignans, car sil c^
achate d' aut, vnc'il est culpable pur le achate.

Niefe.
NIefe est un feme q' est bond ou un villen feme, mes si el mary un frank
ho^e, el est per c' fait fra^ke a toutsiours (com^t q' le baron deuie, et el
survive) pur c' q^ el et son baron sont forsque un person e^ ley, et el couient
este de m^ le nature et condic' en ley a touts intents come son baron est. Mes
so^ baron est fra^ke a toutes intentes sauns ascun condition en ley, ou
auterme^t, et issint per consequens le femme couie^t este, et e^ fra^ke accord'
al natur'de so^ fra^ke baron, et do^que si el so it un foits frank et clerem^t
disch. d'villenage a touts inte^ts, el ne poit estre niefe ap^s sans especial
act fait per luy* come diuors, ou conusa^s en court de record, et ceo est en
favor de liberty, et pur ceo un frank fe^e ne serra villen per prisel del
villen al son baron. Mes lour issue serr' vil lens come lour pere fuit que est
contrary al le ley civil, car la est dit partus sequit ve^trem. Bondage ou
villenage ad so^ co^mencem^t en to les Hebrews et so^ original proceeding
d'Chanaan le fits d'Cham, q^ pur c' q'il derisee son pere Noe giisant
dissolutem^t qn^t il fuit e* briee, fuit puni en son fits Chanaan ouesque
penalty de bondage.

Nihil dicit.
NIhil dicit, est quant un acc' est port enuers un ho^e, et le def. appear, le
pl' declare, et le def. ne voile respond', ou plede al le acc', et ne maintain
so^ ple, mes fait defaut ore sur cest defaut, il serra conde^pne, quia nihil
dicit.

Nomination.
NOmination, est ou un poit en dr' de so^ manor ou auterment nominate, et
appoint un abl' clarke, ou ho^e al un personage, vicarage, on tiel spiritual
promotion.

Nonabilitie.
NOnabilitie est lou un actio^ est port verse un, and le defendaunt dit que le
plaintiff est nonable de suer ascu^ action, et demand judgment sil serra
respo^de. Il y ad vj. causes de nonabilitye en le pl', come sil soyt vtlage, ou
un alien nee, mes cest disabilitie est en actions reales and mixed solement, et
non ^n actions parsonals, sinon que il soit un alien enemy, ou condemn en
p^munire, ou profess en religion, cest a scauoyer le Romish religion, ou
exco^menge, un villen et sue son sn^r, mes ce^ darraine nest ple pur auter que
nest sn^r al villen.

Nude Contract.
NVde Contract, ou

nude promise, est lou un home bargain, ou vend ses terres, ou biens, ou
promise pur done al auter money, ou un chiual, ou a edefier un meason, ou fair
tiel chose a tyel iour, et null reco^pe^c e appoint a luy pur le fair de c'.
Come si un dit al aut, Ieo vende ou done al vous touts mes terres ou bn^s Et la
e^ null chose appoint assign ou agree que le aut' don^a, ou paiera pur c',
issint ^ il and quid pro quo, cest un nude contract, et void en ley, et pur no^
performance de ceo null action gist, car ex nudo pacto non oritur actio.

Oredelfe.
O Redelfe, est lou un claim de au^ le ore que est troue en son soil ou terre.

Outfangthiefe.
OVtfa^gthiefe, hoc e^ qd' latrones de t'ra vestra vel feodo vestro extra
terra^ vestra^ vel feodu^ vestru^ capti cu^ latrocinio ad cu riam vestram
reuerta^tur, et ibidem iudic'.

Owelte.
OWelte, est qn^t il y ad sn^r mesne et tenant, et le to tient del mesn^ per
m^s les services que le mesne tient ouster de le sn^r paramount. Come si le to
tient del mesne per Homage, fealty, et xx. s. de rent annuelm^t, et le mesn^
tie^t ouster d' le seygn^ paramount per hom^ fealty et xx. s rent auxi, cest
appell Oweltie de services.

Oyer de records et faites etc.
OYer de Records et faits, est si pur example un acc' de det soit port enu^s un
ho^e sur un obligac', et le defend't appert al acc', et do^q^s pria q^ il poet
oier lobligac' ouesque q' le pl' charge luy.

Issint est qn^t executours port' un actyon de dette', et le defendaunt
demand oyer del testament: sur cest demand il serra lectu al defendant, Mes
sil soit en un auter term, ou apres q^ le defendaunt ad imparle, donq^s il
nauera le oyer. Et issint come est dit de faites ^st deste intend de records
que sount allege enuers luy.

Pape.
PApe, est un aunc' nosme fauxment arrogate, ou hautm^t usurp per le Euesque
de le sole City de Rome en Italy, et est co^muneme^t appel en Angloys le Pope,
un nosme veraym^t mult frequent en nr'e auncien annals liu^s, specialm^t en
les temps de ceux roys, q^ux grau^dme^t abandonans lour emperial authority,
et abasans eux mesm^s mult debase lour estate, ne fuer' hont de un alien et
outla^dish Euesque q^ e^habit oust' cinque diz cent miles d' eux, dee^ souer'
d'haut eux en lour dominions demesne, et de toller de eux non solem^t le
disposic' de cert' petit trifles d'nul account, mes auxi l' nominatio^ d'
Archeuesq^s, Euesq^s Abbeis, deanes, prouosts, appropriations de bn^fices
prese^tatio^s al personages, vicarages, et generalme^t de touts spirituel
persons a lour preferments, ascu^ temps per laps, ascun te^ps aut' m^t per q'
l' prerogative perish del Royes fuit moult abridge deyns lour realms demesne.

Partition.
PArtition est un division d' terres discendus per le common ley, ou per
custo^e perent' coheires, ou parceners, ou ils fount deux al meynes soie^t ils
fites, fil's, so ers auntes, ou auterme^t de kyn al auncestour de que le terre
disce^d al eux.

Et cest particion est fayt quatuour voyes pur le plus part, de q' troys lontal
pleasure et per agreement perent' eux, le quart est per compulsion.

Un particion per agreement est quant ils m^s divide le terre equalment en
tauntes parts, come la so^t d' eux co percen^s, et chescun de eslier share un
ou part, leignee primerment, et issint lun ap^s lauter, come ils sont de age,
sinon que le eignee per consent fayt le partic', donque le election appertyent
al prochein, et issint al le eignee darreigneme^t accord come il est dyt. Cuius
est particio, Alterius est electio.

Un aut' partitio^ ^ agreem^t e^ qn^t ils eslieu cert' de lour amies de fair
division pur eux.

Le tierce partition per agree^t est per ti abens de lots issint: primerme^t de
deuider le t're en tant des parts come la sou^t parcen^s, do^^s a scriuer
chescun part seu^ralme^t en un petit scrolle ou piece de paper ou parchment, et
de mitt' ceux scrols close en un hat, cappe ou auter tiel se^blable chose, et
do^ques chescun parcener un ap^s lauter come ils sount de age atraher horse de
ceo un piece, ou scrolle en que est escript un partt d'l terr' que per cest
trahens e^ a or' seueralm^t allot al eux en fee simple.

Le quater partitio^, q' est per co^pulsio^, est lou un, ou asc' de les
coparcen^s voylent au^ partic^ et aut's ne voilent agree al ceo, do^q^s ceux q^
issint voyle^t aver partic^ poie^t porter un br' de Partitione facienda enuers
les auters queux ne voylent fair partition, per virtue de que ils ferra
compelle de depart etc. Nous en Kent (^reere Nicholas) ou les terres sou^t de
Gauelkinde nature, appellomus a ce^ iour nostre particion, Shyfting, il mesme
parol quel's Scyftan Saxens use, nosment que signify pur fair partition
perenter coheires, et pur assigner a chesc' de eux lour portion. En latin il
est appell Herciscere.

Parties.
PArties al fine, ou fayt, sount ceux queux levy le fine, et auxi ils a que le
fin^ est levy. Et ils que fount un fait de feoffement, et ils a que il est
fait, sount appels perties al fait, et issint en auters se^blables cases.

Patron.
PAtron e^ celui q^ ad un personage, vicarage, fra^k chapel, o^ tielse^blabl'
spiritual promoc' appurten^t al so^ man^, et poet, ou doet doner ceo benefyce
qua^t et cy toft que il deuient void. Er ce^ esteant patron, ou patronage ad
co^me^c' m^t pur le pluis part per un de ceux troys voyes, nosm^t ou Ratione
fu^dationis, pu^ ^ que le patron ou ses ancestors, ou ceux de q'il claim
fueront foundours, ou edesiers de le esglise, ou Ratione dotationis, pur ^ que
ils endowe ou do^e ter ^es al ceo pur maintenance, ou auterment Ratione fundi,
pur ^ q' le esglise fuit mise, ou edify sur lour soil' ou terre, et diu^s
temps per reason de ils trois,

Perquisites.
PErquisites sou^t aduauntages et profittes queux vyent al un manner per
casualty, et non annulement, come escheates, hariots, reliefs, waiues estraies,
forfaitures, amerciam^es en courts, gards, marriages, bn^s et terres purchase
per villeines de ^ le manner, et diu^s se^blables chooses q^ux ne sou^t certain
mes happen per chance, ascun temps pluis often q^ a auter temps.

Plaintiff.
Plaintiff est celuy q^ sue ou co^playnt en un ass^se, ou en un action
personel, come en un action de det, trn^s, disceit, detinue, et tyels
semblables,

Pleading.
PLeadinge est ceo que vyent apres le count, nosment ceo que est contain en le
bar, replication, et reioinder, et no^ ceo contain en le count mesme, et pur
ceo defauts en l' matter del count, ne sou^t comprise deyns myspleading, ou
insufficie^t pleading, ne sou^t remedy per le statute d' leofailes, Mes
soleme^t ceo mispleading ou insufficient pleading, commit en le bar,
replication, et reioynder, sount la provide.

Pound.
Pounds sount en deux sorts, lun pounds ouert, les auters pounds close.

Pound ouert, est chescun lieu en q^ un distress est myse, soit ceo common
pound tiels que so^t en chesc' ville ou Seigniorie, ou soit ceo backeside,
court, yard, pasture, ou aut' meant quecunque, lou le own^ del distress poit
vener a doner eux viande sans offense pur lour esteant la, ou son ven^ la.

Pound close, est tiel lieu, lou le owner del distress ne poyt vener a done
eux vyande sans offense, come en un close, measo^, ou quecunque auter lieu.

Possession.
POssession est dit ii. voies, ou actual possession, ou poss. en ley.

Actual poss. est qn^t un ho^e enter en fayt en terres, ou teneme^ts a luy
descend, ou auterm e^t. Possession en ley est quant terres, ou tenementes sount
descend al un ho^e, and il and vnc' realment actualment, et en fait ent'en eux.
Et il est ap pel possession en ley, pur ceo q' en le oil, et consideration del
ley, il est pense de^e en possession, entant q^ il est tenant a chescun action
que voet suer concernaunt mesmes les terres, ou tenem^ts.

Preamble.
PReamble ad so^ nosme de le prepositio^ (pre) deua^t, et l' verb (Ambulo) pur
va, issint joint ensemble, ils font un compounde verb de le prymer conjugation
(Pream bulo) pur vadeua^t, et de c' l' i. part ou comme^ce^t du^ act est appel
le p^amble del act, le q^l p^a^ble, e^ un cliffe de ou^t'les me^ts del fesors
del act, et les mischifes q'ils intend de remedy per c^, come pur ex ampl'
lestat' fait al W. le prim^ le 37. c q'don attaint, le preamble d' q'est
issint. Pur c' q^ ascuns gents de la terre doutent meines faux serem^t fair,
q^ fair ne duissent, per q' multes des gents sont disherites and perdent lour
droit, puruieu est etc.

Prescription.
PRescriptio^ est qua^t un adewe ou use asc^ chose depuis le temps dount null
memory al contra.

Presentment.
PResentment, est quant un home q' ad droit a done un benefice spiritual nosme
le person a q^ il voit le doner, et fait un letter al euesque pur luy, ceo est
un presentation ou presentment.

Pretensed droit ou Title.
PRetensed droit ou title, est lou un est en possess^d' terres, ou ten^tes, et
un auter que est horse de possession, claim ceo, ou sue pur ceo, ore le
pretensed droit, ou title, est dit en luy que issint sue ou claim. Et sil puys
vient a le possession de m^ le t'res, ou tenements, so^ droit, ou title est
extinct, ou suspend en le terre.

Friuie ou Priuite, and Priuities.
Privy, ou priuite, e^ lou un lease e^ fait a tener a volunt, pur ans, pur
vie, ou un fef feme^t en fee, et en diverse auters cases, ore pur c'de ceo q^
adpasse perent' ceux parties ils sont appell priuies, en respect de estraungers
perent' q^ux null tiel conueiaunces ad estre.

Auxi si soit sn^r et tenant, et le tenant tient del sn^r per certain service,
il y ad un priuitie perent' eux per cause d'tenure, et si le tenant soyt
disseyse per un estraunger, il ad null priuitie perent' le disseisour et le
sn^r, mes le priuitie vnc* demurt perenter le sn^r et le tenant que est
disseisie, et le seigniour auowera sur luy pur ceo q' il est son tenant en
droit, et en le judgment del ley. Priuies sont en diu^s sorts come nosme^t,
priues en estate, priuies en fait, priuies en ley, priuies endroit, et priuies
en sange.

Priuies en estate, est lou un leas est fait del manner de Dale all A. pur vie,
le rem^ al B. en fee, la and A. and B. sount priuies en estate, car lour
estates fueront ambideux al un temps. Et issint est en le primer cas ou un leas
est fait al volunt, pur vie ou ans, ou un feoffement en fee, les lessees, ou
feoffees, so^t appel priuies en estat', et issint sou^t lour hr'es etc.

Priuies en fayt, est lou un leas e^ fait pur vie, et ap^s per un auter fayt,
le reuersion est grant al un estra^ger en fee, cest grauntee del reuersion est
appell privy en fayt, pur ceo que il ad l' reuersion per fait.

Privy en ley, est ou il ad seignyour et tenant, le tenant lessa le
tenauncye pur vie, et morust sauns heir, et le reuersyon escheate al
seigniour, il est dit privy en ley, pur ceo que il ad son estate solement per
le ley cest adir' per escheate.

Privy en droit, est lou un possess dun term pur ans grant son estate al un
auter sur condic', et fayt ses executors et morust, ore ceux execut' sont
priuies en droit, car si le condition soyt enfreint, et ils enter en le terre,
ils auera ceo en le droit de lour testatour, et a son use. Privy de sanke, en
le heir del feo^four, ou donour etc.

Item si un fine soit levy, les heirs de celuy q^ leuy le fine sou^t appell
priuies.

Privileges.
Privileges sou^t lyberties and fra^chises, grant al un office, lieu, ville,
ou manner per le graund charter del roign^, letters patents, ou act de
parliament come toll, sake, socke, Infangthiefe, vtfangthiefe, turn^ toll,
oredelfe, et diverse tyels semblables pur q^ux voies en lour proper titles et
lieus.

Procheine amy.
PRocheyn Amy et gardein en socage est tout un, et est lou un ho^e seisie de
terres tenus en socage morust son issue deyns age de 14. ans, donques le
procheine amy, ou procheine de sanke a que les terres ne poyent vener ou
descend, auera le guard del hr* e, et d'l terre, al use soleme^t del heir,
tanque il vient al age de xiiij. ans, et donque a tiel ans, il poet ent' et luy
ouste, et port luy d' accompter, mes en cest account, il auera allowaunce pur
touts reasonable costs et expenses bestow ou sur le heir, ou so^ terre.

Et le prochein amy, ou prochein de sanke a que le inheritance ne poet
discender est issint deste intend, si les terres discende al heir de son
pier, ou ascun del sanke del pert son pier, donques le mere, ou aut' d'l part
le mere, sount appel le procheine de sanke a que lenheritance ne poet
disce^der, car deuaunt que il issint discendera, il pluis tossed esch^ter' al
sn^r de que il est tenus: Et issint est deste intend ou les terres vie^t al
heir de sa mere, ou asc' auter de sanke de part sa mier: donques le pier ou
auter del part son pier sount appelle prochein de sanke a que le inheritance ne
poet discende, mes plus tossed eschetera al seigniour de que il est tenus.

Protestation.
Protestation est un salvation al party (que issint plead per protestatyon)
deste conclude per ascun matter alledg' ou object encounter luy, sur que il ne
poet ioyner issue: Et nest auter chose que exclusyon del conclusion, car il que
prist le protestation exclud' laut' party de conclude^ luy. Et cest
protestation doit estoier oue le sequel del plea, et nemy deste repugnant, ou
auterme^t contrary.

Purchase.
PVrchase est l' possession q^ un home ad en terres, ou ten^ts per son act
demesne, means, ou agreement, et nemy per title de descent, de ascu^ de ses
^uncestours.

Quarentine.
QVarentine est lou home deuy seisi du^ manner place et auter terres, dou^t sa
femme doit este endowe, do^ques la femme tyendra le manner place per
quarantiours, dey^^s quel temps son dower serra a luy assign^, mes si el marie
infra les xl. iours, el perdra son quarentine.

Quinzime.
QVinzime e^ un payment grant e^ parliament al roigne, per les lays,
cestassauoir le quinzime part de lour bie^s: Et fuit use en ancient te^ps
deste levy sur lour auers esteants en lour terres que fuit mult troublous, et
pur ceo a ore pur le plus part, cest voye est alter et ils use de leuy ceo per
les verges, ou acre, ou aut'measure d' t'r'. Per reason de que il est a ore
meins troublous, et plus certain, que deuau^t il fuit. Et chescun ville, et
pays scient, quel sum est deste pay perent' eux, et coment ceo serra raise.
Nous legimus que Moses fuit l'primer que number le people, car il number les
Israelites, et pur ceo le primer* Tax, Subsidy, tribute, ou Quinzime fuit
inue^t per luy enter les Hebrews, come Polidore Virgil suppose.

Regrator.
REgratour est celuy que ad blees, vittailes, ou auters chooses sufficyent pur
son necessary oeps, occupac', ou expe^c', and nie^t obstant engrosse et achate
en ses maynes plus blees, vittailes, ou auters tyels chooses, al intent de
vender ceo arrere al un plus haute et chare price, en faires, markets, ou tiels
semblables lieus.

Reioynder.
REioynder est qua^t le defendaunt fayt respons al replication del plaintiff.

Et chescun reioinder doyt aver ceux deux properties specialment ce^ a scauoir
ll doyt este un sufficient respons al Replication, et auxi de subsequer et
enforce le matter del bar.

Relief.
Relief est ascun foytes un certain so^me de money que le heir paiera al
seignior de q' ceux terres sont tenus, q^ux apres l' discease de son aunc' sont
a luy descend come prochein heir, asc^ foits il est le payment dun auter
chose, et nemy money. Et pur ceo relief nest certain et semble pur toutes
tenures, mes chesoun sundry tenure ad (pur le pluis part) son special relief
certain en luy mesme: Neque est ceo deste pay toutes foytes al un certain age,
mes il vary en c^ auxy accordaunt al tenure. Come si le tenant ad terres tenus
per service d' chiualer (foreprise grau^d sergeanty) et morust son hr' estea^t
de plein age, et tie^t ses terres per le service dun entier fee de chiualer, le
sn^r de que ceux terres so^t issint tenus, au^a del hr' 100. s. nomine releuij
Et si il tie^t per meines q^ un fee d' chiual', il paiera meines, et si plus,
donque plus, aient respect touts foites al le rate pur chescun fee de ehiualer
un cent souze. Et sil tient per graund serieanty (^* e^ touts foits del roign^
et est auxy service de chiualer) donque le relief serra le value del t're per
an, pret' toutes charges issuaunt horse de ceo.

Relief q^ le sn^r auera pur terres tenus en Socage, est tant plus come le
rent que le to tient son terre en Socage per, come sil tient per un denier
re^t, et morust, le sn^r au^a ce^ denier rent, et un denier ouster pur relief
de quecunque age le to soit, al mort de so^ au^cestor. Et nota que en ascuns
cases le sn^r au^a son relief maintenant apres le mort de son tenant, si il
soit issint que le temps del an voit suffer ceo de^e evve, come money, blees,
carne, pish, spices, ou ascun tiel semblable, et pur default de payement, le
seigniour poit pur ceo de common droit prese^ment distraigne.

Mes en asc^s cases le ^^r doit demurre pur so^ rel' un cert' temps, qn^t
necessity issint co^straint, come si le to tient per un rose, un cherue, un
strawbery, ou tiel semblable, et deuie on winter, il nau^a relief ta^que
Roses, cherues, et strawberies so^t naturalme^t fresh, et ripe, q^ e^ al te^ps
d' Mid somer, et donq^s il au^a un pur rent, et un aut' pur relief.

Il y ad un aut' kind de relief q^ est pay apres le mort, change, ou alienac'
de franktenants que tyent en au^c' dem^, et auterm^t, et est pay come un
cognusance del tenure perenter le seignior et le tenant, Ceo ne^ certain quant:
mes il vary accordaunt al custom del manner, ou tenure, et est deste present
per le homage, ou suitors, al prochein court iour de m^ le manor.

Et nota que touts foits qn^t le relief est due, il doit este pay al un e^tier
pam^it, et nem^ per parties, nient obstant q' le rent soit deste pay al
several feasts.

Remainder.
REmainder de terre est le terre que remainera apres le particular estat' det'
mine Come si un grant terre pur term de ans, ou pur vie, le remainder al I.
S. cest a dire, q' qn^t le lessee pur we est mort, que donque le terre
remainera, serra ou abide oue, al, ou en I. S.

Replication.
REplication est qn^t le def. en asc' action fait respons, and le pl' fait un
respons al ceo, ceo est appell le replication del plaintiff.

Reprises.
REprises sount deductions, paym^ts, and duities, que va annuelm^t et so^t pay
horse dun manor. Come rent charge, re^t secke, pencions, corodies, annui ties,
et tiels se^blables.

Resceit.
REsceit est quaunt un action est port verse tenant pur term de vye, ou tenant
a term dans, et cesty en la reuersyon vie^t eins et pria deste resceiue pur
defe^d' la terr'* et pur pled' ouesque l'demau^d'. Et qn^t il vient, il couient
q' il soit touts foits prist a pleder oue le demau^dant.

Reservation.
REseruac' est prise diverse voies, et ad diverse natures, come ascun foits per
voy de excepc' de reserve ceo q^ un ho^e ad deuant en luy, Come si un leas soit
fait pur ans de terr' reserua^t les graund arbors cressants sur ceo. Ore le
lessee ne poyt meddle ouesque eux, ne ouesque asc' chose q' vient per reason de
eux cy long come il demurt en, ou sur les arbors, come mast de oak, chestnut,
pomes, ou tiels se^blab les, Mes sils chient del arbors al t're, donq' ils so^t
en dr't le lessees, car le t'r' est less a luy, et tout sur c' nient reserve
etc.

Asc' foits un reseruae' obtainteh et port horse un aut' chose q^ ne fuit
deua^t, come si un ho^e less ses t'res reserua^t annuelm^t pur c^ xx. li. etc.
et diu^s aut' tyels reseruations y sount.

Et nota q en aunc' te^ps, lour reseruat o^s fueront cy bn^ (ou pur l' plus
part) en victuals, soit ceo, carne, pishe, blees, pane, boier, ou auterm^t,
come en money, ta^que al darraine, et especialment, en le temps del roy Henry le
prim^ per agreement le seruatio^de victuals fuit change en prist money, come il
ad tanque cy continue.

Retraxit.
REtraxit est le preterperfectence de^ Retraho, compound de Re, et Traho, q'
signify Retraho pur euulser arrere. Ete^ qn^t le party pl', ou dema^dant vient
en proper person en le court ou son suit est, et dit q^ il ne voet vlterius
prosequi in placito illo etc. Ore c^ serra un bar al actio^ a touts iours.

Reeue.
REeue est un officer, mes plus conus en ancient temps que a cest iour. Car
chescu^ manner ad do^ques un reeue, et vncor' en diverse coppyholde manours, (ou
le viel custom asc' chose p^uaiuaile) le nosm^ et of^^^ nest en tout obli^e.
Et est en effect ceo q^ a ore chescun baylife dun manner practice: nient obstant
le nosm^ de bailife ne fuit donques en ure enter nous esteant puis port eins
per les Norma^s. Mes le nosine de Reeue auncientment appell Gereue, (quel
particle (Ge) en continuance de temps fuit ousterment omise et pard) vie^t del
Saxon parol Gerefa, q^ signify un ruler. Erissint veras^t so^ rule or
aucthority fuit large dei^s le compass del manner son ^^r et enter ses homes et
tenaunts cy bien en chooses de government en peace et guerre, come en le
skilful use et trade de husbandrye. C^r sico^e il collect les rents del sn^r,
payer reprises, ou duities issua^ts horse del manner, appoint les servants de
woorker, succide et decoup^ arbres pur repayrer les edifices, et enclosures,
ouesque diverse tiels semblables pur le commodity del seygour: Issint auxy il ad
authority de gouerner, et seruer les tenaunts en peax, et sil besoigne, de
conducter eux en guerre.

Reuersion.
REuersion de terre, est un certain estat' remainant en le lesser ou donour,
apres le pertyculer estate et possession convey al un auter. Et est appel un
Reu^sio^ en respect del possession separate de c^, Issint que il que ad le un,
and laut' al mesme le temps, car esteant en un simul, la ne poet este dit un
reuersion, pur ceo que per le uniting, lun est merge en lauter, Et issint le
reuersion del terre, est le terre mesme quant il eschuest.

Riot.
RIot est lou troys (al meynes) ou plures font ascun illoyal act come de barer
un ho^e, Enter sur le possession dun auter, vel huiusmodi.

Robbery.
Robbery est qn^t un ho^e pre^t ase^ chose del parson dun auter felonysement,
come^t que la chose pryse ne soyt al value forsque dun denyer, uncore il est
felony pur quel le ^offendour suffera mort.

Rout.
ROut est quant people assemble eux mesmes, et puis procedunt, ou chiuauchant,
ou allant aua^t, ou mouent per instigacion dun ou plures que est conductor de
eux: Cest appel un rout, pur ceo que ils mouent, et proceed en routs et
numbers.

Item ou plures assemble eux sur lour quarelles et braules demesne, come si les
inhabytaunts dun ville voyle assembler eux pur debruser heis mures, fosses,
pales, ou tyels semblables, dauer comen la, ou de bater un auter que ad fayt al
eux un common displeasure, vel huiusmodi, cest un rout et encounter le ley,
coment que ils nount fayt, ou myse en execution lour male intent.

Sake.
SAke, hoc est placitu^ et emenda de transgr' hominum in cur' vestra, quia
(Sak) Anglicae est Acheson Galice, et dicitur for sick sack idem quod pur quel
ac^^son, et sak dicitur pro forfayt.

Scot.
SCot, hoc est quietu^ esse de quadam co^suetudine, sicut de co^muni tallagio
facto ad opus vic' vel balliuorum eius.

Showing.
Showing hoc est qui etu^ esse cu^ attachiame^t' in aliqua cur', et cora^
quibuscu^que in q^relis oste^sis et no^ aduocat'.

Sok.
SOk hoc est secta d' hominibus in curia vestra secundu^ consuetudinem regni.

Sokmans.
SOkmans so^t les tenants en aunc' demesne ^ux tient lour terres per socage,
cest adire, per service del carue, et pur ceo ils sount appel Sokma^s, q' est
taunt adire come tena^ts ou homes q^ux tient per service del carue, ou homes
del carue. Car sok signify un carue.

Et ceux Sokmans ou tenants en ancient demesn^, ount plusors et diverse
liberties do^e et grant a eux per le ley, Cybien ceux tenants queux tyent du^
common person en ancient demesne, come ceux queux tient del roign^ en ancient
demesne, come nosme^t deste quite de payer toll en chescun market, fair,
ville, et city per tout le realm, cy bn^ pur lour byens et chattels que ils
vende as auters, come pur ceux chooses que ils achat' pur lour provision, de
auters. Et sur ceo chescun de eux poet suer dauer letters patents de south le
seal le Roygne a ses officers, et al Mayres, Bayllyfes, et auters officers en
le realm d' suffer eux dee^ quite de toll. Item deste quit' d' Pontage,
murage, et passage, et auxi de taxes et tallage grant per Parliament sinon que
le Roygne tax ancient demesne, come el poet al sa pleasur' pur graund cause.
Auxy deste quite d' paime^ts as les expe^ses del chiualers del shire queux
vient al parlyament. Et si le vic' voile distreign^ eux ou asc' de eux destr'
co^tributor' pur lour terr' en auncien dem^, donq^s lun de eux ou touts come le
case require poyt suer un br'e direct al vic' luy command q^ il ne compel eux
deste contribut oris al expe^ ses del chiualers. Et celuy br' luy co^mau^d
auxy, que sil ad distrayne eux pur ceo, que il redeliuer mesm^ cest distress.

Item que ils ne deuer' estre enpannell, ne mis en Iuries and enquestes en
pays horse de lour manor ou seigniory de auncien demesne, pur les terres que
ils teygne la (sinon que ils ount auters terres al common ley, pur queux ils
deuer' estre charge) and si le vicont return eux enpanelles, donques ils
poient au^ un br'enu^s luy de non pone^dis in assisis et iuratis. Et sil face
al contrary, donque gist un attachme^t sur ceo enuers luy. Et issint est auxy
si les bailifes de fra^chises q^ux ont return de br'es voile return asc' del
to q^ux teigne en au^c' dem^, en ass. ou iuries.

Et auxy deste exe^ptes del letes, et d'turnes del vic', ouesque diverse aut's
semblables liberties.

Spoliation.
SPoliatio^ est un suit pur les fruits du^ esglise, ou pur lesgl' m^: et est
deste sue en le spiritual court, et nemy en nr'e courts. Et cest suit gist pur
un encumbe^t enuers un auter encu^bent, ou ils ambideux claim per un patron,
et lou le droit del patronag ne vient en question ou debate. Come si un person
soyt cree en Euesque et ad dispensation de tener son rectory, and puis le
patron present auter encumbent que est institut' et induct: Ore leuesque poyt
aver enuers cesty encumbent un Spoliatyon en le spiritual court, pur ceo que
ils ambideux claim per un patron, and le droyt del patronage ne vyent en
debate, and pur ceo que lauter encumbent vyent al possess* del benefice per le
course del ley spiritual, ce^ ascauoier per institution and induction, issint
que il ad color de au^ ceo, et destre person per le spiritual ley. Car
aut'ment sil ne soit institute and inducte etc. spoliation ne gist enuers luy,
mes un br' d' trespass, ou un assise de nouil disseisin etc.

Issint est auxy lou un parson accept aut' benifice per reason de que, le
patron present un aut'clarke, que est institute et induct, ore lun de eux poyt
aver spoliation enu^s le auter, et donque viendra en debate sil ad plurality ou
non. Et ifsint est de deprivation etc.

Mesme le ley, est

lon un dit al patron, que son clerk e^ mort sur que il present un auter. La
le primer en cumbe^t, que fuit surmise deste mort poyt aver un spoliation
enuers le auter. Et issint en diu^s aut's semblables cases.

Stallage.
STallage hoc est quietum esse de quada^ co^suetudine exact' pro platea capta
vel assignata in nundinis and mercatis.

Suit covenant.
SVit covenant est quaunt voster ancestors ount covenant oue mes ancestors
de suer a le court mes ancestors.

Suit custom.
SVit custom est qn^t ieo et mes ancestors ount estre seysies de vr' suit
demesn^ et vostre ancestors de te^ps etc.

Suit ryal.
SVuit rial est quant ho^esvient al turn de viscount ou leete, a q' courts
touts ho^es serra compel de vener a conuster l' leies, issint que ils ne serra
ignorant de les chooses q^ux serra mr's la com^t ils serra gouernes. Et est
appell rial suit per cause de lour allegeaunce, and ceo appiert per common
experience qua^t un est iure son oath est que il serra loyal and foial ho^e al
Roigne. Et ceo suit nest pur le terr' que il tient deins le county, mes per
reason de son person, et pur son rest la, et doyt estre fayt deux foites per
an, pur defaut de que, il serra amerce et no^ distreign^.

Suit service.
SVit service, est a suer al turn del viscount ou leete, ou al court del
seignior de troys semeynes en troys sameynes per lentier an: Et pur defaut de
ceo, un home serra distreigne et no^ amerce. Et cest suit service est per
reason del tenure del terres dun home.

Tax et Tallage.
Tax et Tallage so^t paim^ts, come dismes quinzimes, subsidyes, ou tiels
se^blables grant al roigne per parliam^t.

Les tenants en aunc' dem^ so^t quites d'ceux taxes, et tallages gra^ts per
parliament, sino^ que le roigne tax auncie^ dem^, come el poet qua^t a luy
pleast pur grau^d cause, Voies ancient demesne.

Tenure in Capite.
TEnure en capite est lou ascun tient del Roigne come de sa person esteant
roigne, et de sa Corone, come dun seygniourie per luy mesme en gross, et en
chyefe de suis touts auters seygniories. Et nemy lou ils tient de luy come de
ascun manner, honor, ou Castle, sinon certain ancient honors, vt patet in
Seaccatio.

Testament.
Testament est issint define ou expound en M. Plowde^s co^me^taries.
Testamentum est testatio mentis, et est compou^d de ceux deux parolx. Testatio
et mentis q^ issint signify very il est, q^ un testament est testatio mentis,
mes q^ il est un compou^d parol, Aulus Gellius en so^ vj. liver cap. 12. deny
ceo al un excellent Lawier un Seruius Sulpitius et dit q^ il est un simpl*
parol, come sou^t ceux, Calciame^tum, Paludamentum, Pauime^tu^, et diu^s tiels
se^blables. Et mult meynes est agreament' un co^pounde parol de aggregatio, et
mentium, come est dit e^ m^ title, car il ny ad null tiel latin parol simple ou
compound, mes il poet nie^t obsta^t serve bien pur un ley latin parol. Et pur
c^ il poet issint ee^ melior defin^. Testamentu^ est vltimae voluntatis iusta
sententia de eo quod quis post mortem sua^ fieri vult etc. Et de testame^ts il
y ad deux sorts, cestassauoir un testament en escript, et un testament per
parolx, q^ est appel un nu^ cupatiue testament. Le prim^ est touts foits en
escript come est dit.

Le auter e^ quant un ho^e esteant malade, et pur pauour ne mort, ou faut de
memory, ou de perler voet ven^ c^ suddeinm^t, et has^iuem^t sur lui q^ il serr'
prevent, sil demurt le scripture de son testament, req^st ses vicines et amies
de porter tesmoigne de so^ darrayn volunt, et donq^s declare ceo presentme^t
per parolx deua^t eux* q^ apres so^ decease est prove per testemoignes, et mise
en escript per le ordinary, Et donq^s il e^ en cy bone force, (sino^ pur
terres) sico^e il ad al primer en le vy del testatour este mise en^script.

Them.
THem, hoc est quod habeatis totam generatione^ villanorum vestro^u^ cu^ eor
sectis et cattallis vb^^^quein Anglia fuer' inuenta, excepto si qd' aliquis
no^iuus quiet per vn^ annu^ et die^ i^ aliqua villa priuilegia manserit, ita
quod in eor' co^munia^ vel gildam tanquam vnus illaru^ repertus fuerit, eo ipso
a villenagio liberatus est.

Thefbote.
THefboote est qn^t home prist byens dun laron de luy favorer et maintainer.
Et nemy quant ho^e prist ses byens demesne que fuerent e^blees de luy etc.

Le punishment en aunc' te^ps de Theefebote fuit de vie et de member: Mes a ore
M. Stamford dit q^ il e^ punish per ransom et imprisonment, sed quaere, car
ieo pense ceo este felony.

Title.
TItle est lou loial ca^e est veign^ a un ho^e de aver chose q^ auter ad, et il
and ascu^ acc' pur ceo, come title de mortm^, ou dentry sur condic' enfreynr.

Title Dentrie.
TItle Dentrie est quant un seisie de terr' en fee sait feoffem^t de c^ sur
condic^, et le condic' e^ enfreint: ore apres le condition issint enfreint, le
feoffour ad title dent' en le terre, et issint poet qn^t a luy pleist, et
person entry le franktenem^t serra dit en luy maintenant. Et e^ appell title
Dentrie pur ceo q^ il ne poet au^ br* de droit enu^s so^ feoffee sur condition,
car son droit fuit horse de luy per le feoffement, le q^l ne poit ee^ reduc*
sau^s entry, et le entry doit ce^pur l enfreind' del condition.

Toll, ou Tolne.
Toll ou Tolne est plus properme^t un payment use en cities, villes, markets
et fairs pur bie^s et cattle port la destr' achat' et ve^d, Et est touts dits
deste pay per le achator, et nemy per le vendour sinon que soyt ascun custom
al contrary.

Il y ad diverse auters tolles, come turn toll, et ceo est lou toll est pay
pur auers queux sou^t drives deste ve^dus, come^t que ils ne sount vendus.

Item toll trauers, ceo est ou un claim dauer un ob. ou tyel ^^blable toll',
d' chese^ beast que e^ drive su^ son terre.

Through toll, e^ lou un ville prescribe de aver toll pur chescu^ best que
ale through lour ville un certain, ou pur chesc' vint ou cent, un cert', q^ ne
appiert dee^ cy unreasonable p^scripc' ou custo^e come ascu^s ou^t supp^ nie^t
obstant il soit p le haut chimin del roine (come il c^ appel) ou cheso^ poet
loyalment pass:sil y ad quid pro quo, come si la soit un pont ou tyel
se^blable commodity puruieu al costs et charges del vill' pur le ease d'
trauailers que chase m^ voy, per q' lour journey est ou abrydge ou fait l'
meliour: pur que donques ne poet toll este dd' loialme^t et oue bon reason de
eux etc. Mes diu^s cyttizens et burgesses so^t quite de pay toll per le grant
del roigne, ou sa au^cestors, ou claim^ ceo per prescriptyon ou custo^e. Issint
auxy espirituall persons et religious homes (com^ ils fuerount appels) fueront
quite de toll pur lour bye^s et marchaundyses achate et vendus etc. Mes a ore
le statute de Roy H. 8. voet que ils ne marcha^diser, sed quaere si lentent de
ce^ statute soit observe ent' eux al ce^ iour ou nemy, ascuns diont que non.
Item tenau^ts en aunc' dem^ doie^t este quite per tout le realm de payer toll
come appiert deuant en le title Sokemans. Et en touts ceux cases ou tol est
dee^dd', ou il ne doit este pay de eux q^ doient aler, achate, et vend' quite
de toll, la le party, ou parties grieve poye^t aver un brief de essendi
quietum de Tolonio, enuers luy ou ceux que issint demand toll contra al
grant le Roygne ou sa progenitors, ou contra al custom ou prescription.

Turn del viscount.
Turn del viscou^t est un court de record en touts chooses q^ pertain al
turn. Et e^ l' leete l'Roigne per tout le county, et le vicont est judge. Et
quecunque ad un leete, ad m^ le aucthority deins le precinct, sico^e le vic'ad
deins le tourn^.

Treasure troue.
TReasure troue est quant ascun money ^re, argent, plate, ou bolio^, est troue
en ascu^ lieu, and null conust a que le property est, donques le property de
ceo appertyent al Royne, et ceo est dyt treasure troue. Mes si ascun mineral de
metal soyt troue en ascun terre, ceo toutes foites pertient al seigniour del
soil, forsque que il foyt mineral de ore, ou de argent, queux serrount toutes
foits al Roigne en quecunque soil q^ ils sont troues.

View.
View est quant ascun action real est port, et le tenant ne scauoit bie^ quel
terre il est que le demaundant demand, donque le tenant priera la vievve. s.
q^ il puit voier le terre que il claima. Mes si le tenant ad ewe le vievve en
vne brief, et puis le brief est abatus per mysnosmer de ville, ou per
iointenure, et puis le demaundaunt port vne tyel brief verse le tenant,
donques le tenant nauera le view en le second brief.

Viscount.
VIscou^t e^ un magistrate et offic^ d'grau^d aucthority q^ nous co^munem^t
appellomus (Shirife) ou d' perler plus veraym^t (Shire reave) et fuit al primes
appel (Shire gereue) cest a dire custos comitatus, ou l' reave ou ruler del
county, car (Gereue) estea^t derive del Saxon paroll (Gereccan pur ruler) fuit
al p^mes appel (Gerecfa) et do^ques (Gerefa) que betoken un ruler. Et de ceo
vient (Portreue) ou (Portgereue) un nosme q^ en viel te^ps fuit don al chief
officer dun ville, et signify le governor del ville pur c'que (Port) veniens
de le Latyne parol (Portus) signify un port ville. Et (Gereue) esteat derive
come est auantdit, signifi un ruler, issint que (Portgereue) ou (come nous a
ore briefem^t parle c^) (Portreeue) est le governor del ville.

Et issint fuit le chief officer ou governor del city de London long te^ps
past (deua^t que ils ad le nosme de Maire ou Bailife) appell, come il appiert
en diverse viel monum^ts, mes principalme^t en le Saxons charter de Guillam
Bastard le conqueror, que issint commence. William Cyng greit Will' Bisceop,
And Godfrey Ges port Gerefan, and dalle tha Burwaren the on Lou^de^ beon.

Issint ils de Germany (de q' nous et nostr' language ense^ble prim^m^t vie^t)
appel ent'eux un governor Burgreue, un auter Margreue, et un aut'La^dsgreue,
oue tiels se^blables etc. Cest tant est dit ta^tsolem^t pur mr'e le droyt
Etymon, et antiquity del paroll (Shirife) a quel officer nr' common ley ad
touts soits accordant done grand co^fide^ce, et authority, come de estre un
special p^seruer del peace: et pur c^ toutes obligatio^s q'il prist a m^ le
purpose, sou^t come Recognisaces en ley, Il auxi est un Judge d' record, qn^t
il tient les leetes ou tournes, les q^ux so^t courts d' rec'.

Item il ad le return des br'es, et impanelling de iuries et tyels semblables
etc.

Voucher.
VOucher est qn^t un Prec' qd' redd' de terre est por^e verse un home, and un
auter doit garraunty le terre el tenant, donques le tenaunte luy vouchera a
garrauntie, and sur ceo il auera un brief appel summonias ad vvarrantizandum,
and si vycount return que il and ryens que il puyt este some, donques issera
brief appel, sequatur sub suo periculo, and quaunt il vien^^l pleder' ouesque
le demaundaunt, and si il vient and ne puyt bar le demaundant, donques le
demaundant recouera la terre verse le tenant, and le to recouera tant de t're in
value verse le vouch, et sur c' il au^a un brief appel capias ad valentia^
against the vouch.

Uses.
Uses of land had beeginninge after that the custom of property beeganne
among men. As where one beeinge seysed of lands in fee simple, made a
feoffement to an other without any consideration, but only meaning that the
other should be seized to his use, and that he him self would take (...)*
commodity and profits of the lands, and that the feoffee should have the
possession and franketenement thereof to y^ same use etc. Now after this upon
good consideratyons, and to avoid diverse mischiefs and inconveniences, was y^
stat^ statut d' An. 27. H. 8. cap. 10. puruieu, quel unite le use et possession
ensembl', issint q^ il q^ ad le use de t're, il mesme ad le possession de ceo,
per virtue de cest estatute.

Usury.
Usury est un gain de ascu^ chose ouster le pryncipall, ou ceo que fuit lent,
exact solement en consideration de le loan, soyt il de corn, vyand', apparel,
wares, ou tyels semblables, come de money. Et icy mult puit estre dit et diverse
cases poyent estre mise concernant usury, le quel de purpose ieo omit, solem^t
ieo pria, q^ ceux q^ account eux m^s religious et bo^ christians, ne voilent
deceive eux m^s per color de le statut de usury, pur ceo q^ il dit, q^ il ne
serra loyal pur ascu^ de prend' ouster x. li. en le 100. li. pur un an etc. per
que ils collect (mes fauxme^t) que ils poient per ceo prender x. li. pur le
lone dun 100. li. oue un bo^ conscience, pur ceo q^ le statut solonque un man^
dispense oue ceo (pur ceo que il ne punish tiel pre^dors) quel chose il ne
poet fair' oue l's loies et ordinances de dieu, car dieu voile aver ses decrees
observe inviolable, que dit, lend expecte^s pur null chose per c' etc. per
queux parolx est exclude, le prisel dex. li. ou v. li. d' un denyer ouster le
pryncipall, Mes plus pensant tiels, que cest statute fuit fait sur tiel cause
que moua Moses de doner un bill de divorce al les Israelites, come nosment,
pur auoider un greinder mischief, et pur le durytie de lour ceurs.

Vtlagarie.
VTlagari est quaunt exigent issist verse ascun home et proclamac' fait al v.
cou^ties donques a l' v. cou^tie si le def. nappier, l'coroner donera iudgm^t
q^ il ferra horse de protection d' roign^, et horse del eide le ley, et per tiel
vtlagary in actions personels le party vtlage forfetera toutes ses byens et
chateux le burden ou trouble des biens, pur so^ ease et plus speedye travail
sauns hue et cry fua, et vvayua les biens ou ascun part de eux arrere luy etc.
Donques le officer del roign^, ou lereeue ou baylise al seignyor del manner
(deyns que jurisdiction ou circuit ils fuerount wayfe) que per prescription, ou
grant del roygne ad le fraunchyse de vvayfe, poyent seyser les biens issint
wayfe al use de lour seignyour, que poet retain eux come ses proper byens
sinon que le owner vient ouesque fresh suit apres le felon, et sue un appell,
ou done en; evidence enuers luy al son arraynment sur lendictment, et il
attaynt de ceo etc. En queux cases le primer owner auera restytution de ses
biens issint emblee et vvayfe.

Mes nyent obstant come ad este dit, vvaife est properment de biens emblees,
uncore vvaife poet este auxy de biens nie^t embles, Come, si un home soit
pursue ouesque hue et cry, come un felo^, et il fua et relinquish ses biens
demesn^ etc. ils serra prise come biens vvaife, et forfayt come sils ad este
emblees.

VVaiue.
WAiue est un feme q^ est vtl', etest appel waiue, quasi relicta ab lege, et
no^ vtlag' come ho^e est, car femes ne sount iures en leetes al roigne, ne al
ley come homes sount, queux pur ceo sount deyns le ley ou femmes ne sount, et
pur cest cause ils ne poyent este dyt horse del ley entaunt que ils ne vnques
fuerount deyns ceo. Mes un home est dyt vtlage, pur ceo que il fuit un foytes
iure al ley, et a ore pur contempt il est mis horse del ley, et dictus vtlagatus
quasi extra legem positus.

VVarwite.
WArwite (ou wardwite come ascuns copies ad ceo) hoc est quietum esse de
denarijs dandis pro wardis faciendis.

Wrecke.
VVReke ou varech come les Norma^s de que il vient appellant ceo, est quant un
niefe est perish sur la mere, et null home escap^ viue horse d' niefe and la
niefe ou part del niefe issint perish ou les bie^s en la niefe vient al terre
dascun seigniour, le sn^r les auera come vne vvreke d' mere, mes si un ho^e ou
un chien ouechate escape viue issint q' la party a que les biens sont veigne
deins lan et iour, et prove les bn^s dest'ses, ilau^a eux arr', per provision
del stat' de W. le prim^ ca. 4. fait en les iours del Roy Ed. le 1. q' en c'
followed le decre de H. 1. deuaunt queiours, si un niefe ad estre mise surl'
shore, torn oue tempest, et nemye repaier per eux q' escapont en vie deins un
certain temps, que do^ques ceo fuit prise come vvrecke.

The old Tenures.
Service de chiualer.
TEnir per service d'chiualer est a tener per homage fealty, et escuage, et
treit a luy guard marriage et relief. Et nota que service de chiual' est
service de terre ou de ten^ts pur arms port' en guerre en defe^c' d' roialme,
Et doit guard marriage per la reason q^ null e^ able ne de power et ne puit au^
conusaunce darmes porter auaunt que il soit dage of xxi. ans. Et pur taunt que
le seigniour ne perdera c'* q^ de droit doit aver, and que la power de la
royalme de ryen ne soit enfeeble: Laley voet per cause de son tender age que
son seignyour luy au^a en sa guard tanque al plein age de luy ce^ assauoir xxi.
ans.

Graund serieantie.
2 Tenir per graund serieantie, est sicome un home tyent certain terres ou
tenements de roy dal' oue luy en son host, ou de porter so^ banner oue luy en
ses guerres, ou amesn^ so^ host, ou tyel se^blable, et a c^ appent guard
marriage et relief, sico^e il appiert en la treatise de gards et relief enter
lestatutes. 28. E. I.

Petit Serieantie.
3 Tenir per petit serieantie est sicome un home tie^t de roy terres ou
tenements, re^daunt a luy un cottel un escue, un sete, un arc sauns cord, ou
auter service semblables, a la volunte le primer feoffour. Et la nappent guard
marriage ne relief. Et not' que home ne puit tener per graunde serieanty, ne per
petite seriea^ty, sino^ del roy.

Escuage.
4 Tenir per escuage est a tenir per service de chiualer. Et la appent guard,
marriage, et relief. Et nota que home ne puit tenir per escuage, sinon que il
teygne per homage, pur ceo que escuage de common droyte treit a luy ho^age come
il fuit aiuge in to H. 21. E. 3. c. 42. f 52. Auowrie 115. Et nota q^ escuage
est vne certain sum de argent, et doit estr leave perle sn^r de son tenant
solonque le quantity de son tenure qua^t le escuage courge per tout Eng^^. Et
ordeyne est per tout le counsel Denglet', qn^t ches^ tenant don^a a son
seignior, et ceo est properme^t pur susteiner la guerre perenter Englet r^ et
ceux de escoce ou de Galeys, et no^ pas perenter auters terres, pur ceo q^ les
auauntdits terres serrount de droyt appendant a la royalme Dengleterre.

Homage auncestrel.
5 Tenir per homage auncestrel est lou ieo and mon ancestors ont tenus de
vous et de vostr' ancestors de temps dount memory ne courge, per homage,
fealty, and certain rent. Et nest pas a tener per service de chiual', et la
nappent guard, marriage, ne relief. Et nota q'homage puit este dyt in deux
manners, cestascauoier, homage auncestrel, et homage de fait. Homage auncestrel
est la ou vous and voster au^cestors ont tenus de moy et mes au^cestors puis le
te^ps de non memory, per homage, fealtye, and certain rent. Homage de fait
e^la ou ieo enfeoffe vous m^s, a tenir de moye per homage and rent, et entaunt
que cest homage commence per mon fayt, il est homage de fait. Et nota que
homage auncestrel treyt a luy vouch. cestascauoir garr' del au^cest's, mes no^
pas homaged' fait.

Courtesy dengleterre.
6 Tenir per la courtesy Dengleterre est, la ou un ho^e pre^t fe^e enherite,
and ont issue fits ou file, and la feme deuy soit la issue mort ou en vie, le
baron tiendra cest terre a term de sa vie per la curtesy Dengleterre, et per
la ley. Et en ce^ case le fee and le droyt remaint in le person celuy de que
il tient. Et pur ceo cest tenant ne puit alyen en fee ne a term^ dauter vie, Et
sil face, by en list a ecluy en l' reu^c' dent'

Fee simple.
7 Tenir in fee simple est a tenir a ascun ho^e ou feme, a luy et a ses heirs
et a ses assign^s pur touts iours.

Frank tenure.
8 Tenir en frank tenure est a ten^ a term de sa vie demesne, ou a term de
auter vie, Et en cest case le fee and le droit remaynt in la person celuy de q^
il t^ent. Et pur ceo ^el tenant ne puyt pas alien en fee ne a term de auter
vie: Et sil face, bien list a celuy in q^l le fee and le droyt demourt, de^^rer.

Low^^.
9 Tenure in dovver est, lou home inherit prent feme et deuie, lheire entra et
endovvera la femme de la tierce party de tout ceo que fuit a son baron en sa
vie, en fee simple ou fee tail, et el tyendra cells terres pur term' d' sa vie
come son franktenement.

Term dans.
10 Tenir a term^ dans nest fors^^ chattel en effect, car null actyon est
mayntenable enu^s l' t^^^^^ qua^t a recouerer de franktenement, car null
fra^ktenement est a luy.

Lease a term' dans est chattel real, Et lauter chattel est personal, et toutes
bn^s mouables sont chattels personals.

Mortgage.
11 Tenir in morgage e^ a ten^ a cert' term^ sur condic', q' si le lessour paia
tants den^s a tyel iour, q^il puit enter, et sino^ q^ laut'eit fee simple ou
fee tail, ou frankteneme^t. Et en chescun case lou terres ou tenements sunt
dones a ho^e a certain term sur condie' de part le lessor pur fair le lessee
auoir plus long temps ou term, si lauter ne face sico^e la condic' e^, les
terres et tenements tanque le iour q' la condic' serroit fait, sont tenus in
morgage, quasi in mortgage.

Et nota q^ si ^err' soit less a un ho^e en morgage en fee simple, ou in fee
tail sur co^die^, q^ si le primier lessor come deua^t est dit, pay ta^^s des
den^s a tiel iour q^ il puit enter, et siuo^ q^ le lessee eyt m^ lestate en les
terres, que le lessour luy grant adeprimes. Et si deuant le iour assygne, ie
lessee soit disseisi, il auera assise de nouel (...). Et en case q^ si le
iessee prent feme S^ ^^uie seisie deuant le iour assign, sa feme serra endow.

Et nota que si le lessour apres le mort le lessee ne pay les de(...)s al' iour
assesse, adonques la feme tyendra sa dower, et liss^e son heritage. Et en cas
q^ le lessour al' iour assesse paia les denyers al heir de le lessee, donques
il puit ouster la femme, et le heir auxi de tout le terre primierm^t less. Et
si un home done terres a un auter en le tail, rendant a luy certain rent per
an, et un enter pur faut de paym^t, le donee prent feme and deuie seisie, la
feme serra endovve. Et en cas q^ ap^s le re^t soit aderere, le donor puit enter
et ousta le feme and ^heire auxy. Et nota q^ si terres soient lesses a un ho^e
en morgage en fee sur c^tein conditions, l' lessee alien, le lessour serra
charge d'paier les deniers al alienee et no^ pas a son feoffee come il est dit.
17. Ass. 2.

Burgage.
12 Tenir in burgage est a ten^ si come les burgeis teygnent de roy ou de auter
sn^r terres ou tenementes rendant a luy un certain rent per an, ou auterment la
ou un auter home que burgeis tient dascu^ seygniour terres ou tenementes en
burgage rendant a luy un cert' re^t per an.

Socage.
13 Tenir en socage e^ a tenir dascu^ seigniour terres on tenen^its re^dant a
luy un certain rent per an, pur touts manners des seruyces. Et nota que tenir
per socage nest pas tenir per service de chiual' ne la appent guard, marriage, ne
relife, mes ils doubleront un foites lour rent ap^s la mort lour auncester
solonque ceo q^ soleint paier a lour seignyour, et ils ne serrount oustre
mesure greeues, come il appiert en la treatise de gardes et d' reliefes. Et
nota que socage puit estre dit en trois manners, cestassauoir socage en
franktenure, Socage en ancient tenure, et socag' en base tenure. Socage en
frank tenure est a tenir fraunchement per certain rent pur toutes manners des
services come deuant est dit, and de ceo le procheine amye aueral' guard a que
lheritage ne purra my descender tanque al age lheire de xiiij. anss
cestassauoir si lherytage veign^ per le part le pier, ceux de part la mere
aueront le guard and econtra. Et nota q^ si gardeine en socage face waste il ne
serra my empech de vvast mes rendra account al heir quant il viendra a pleyne
age de xxj. ans. Et vide lestatute de Marlebridg capitulo xvij. pur cest
matter. Socage de ancient tenure e^ ceo ou gerts en ancient demesne tenoye^t,
que no soilent auter brief auoir que le brief de droit close q^ serr' termine
secu^dum cons. manerij, Sc le mo^strauerunt pur eux dyscharge quaunt lour
seignior eux distreine put fair auters services que fair ne duis sent. Et
ce^br' de mo^strauerunt doyt estre port enuers lour seigniour, et ceux tenants
teignent touts per un certain service. Et ils sont fra^ktena^ts dau^cien
demesne. Socage in base tenure est lou ho^e tient en ancient demesne que ne
puyt au^ l' mo^strauer' et pur ceo il est appel d' base tenure. 14 Tenir in fee
ferm^ est a tener en fee simple rend' a le sn^r le va lue ou la moity ou al
meins le iiij. part per an, et ne doit auter chose fair, mes sico^e est
co^teign^ en le seffem^t. Et q^ tient en fee ferme doit fair fealty et nient
relief.

Frank fee.
15 Tenir en fra^ke fee est a tenir en fee simple terres pleadable a la comen
ley.

Base fee.
16 Tenir en fee base e^ a ten^ a la volu^t le sn^r.

Villenage.
17 Tenir in pure villenage est a fair tout ^ que le seignior luy voit
commander.

La difinition de villenage est villeine de sa^ke, et d' tenure. Et il est de
que son sn^r pre^t redempc'd' sa file marier ou soym^ enfrau^chise, Et le
seign^ puyt luy ouster des terres ou ten^ts a sa volu^t, and auxi de toutes ses
bn^s et chateaux. Et nota q^ sokman nest pas pure villein, ne villein doit pas
guard marriage ne relief ne fair aut' ser uices reals. Et nota q^ tenur' en
villenage ne ferr' null fra^ke ho^e villein sil ne soit continue puis le temps
de non memory, ne villeyne terre ne ferra frank home villein, ne fra^ke terre
ne ferra villeine frank, sinon q^ le tenant soit continue fra^chement puis le
te^ps de non memory, mes villein ferra franket're villein per seisin ou per
claim de son seign^. Et nota que si villein purchase certain terre et prent
feme et alien and deuie deuaunt le claim ou seysin de so^ sn^r, la fe^e serr'
endow. Et nota q' en cest cas q' le sn^r port Precipe quod reddat enuers lalien
son villeyn le q^l vouche a garrauntie le issue la villeine que est villein a
la seign^, il auera la vouche. Et per protestation le seignior puit sauer (que
no^ obstant que il pled' oue son villeine) vncor' so^ villeine ne serra mye
enfraunchise. Et nota que bastard ne serra iammes aiudge villein sinon per
conusance en court de record. Et nota que si det soit due per un seignior a un
home et il face ii. home ses executours les queux sount villeins al dit
seignior et deuie, les villeins auerount action de debt enuers lour seignior,
nient obstaunt que il pled ouesque eux. Et sil face protestatyon ils ne serront
pur tant enfraunchise, pur ceo que ils sount a recou^ le debt auauntdit al use
dune auter person, cestassauoir al use lour testatour et nyent a lour use
demesne. Et si le tenant in dovver eit un villein le quel purchase certain
terre en fee and puis le tenant en dovver enter, el auera la terre a luy and a
ses heirs a touts iours, and mesme la ley e^ de tenant a term dans du^
villeine.

Et nota q^ le sn^r puit robber so^ villein, naufrer et chastiser a sa volu^t,
salve q^ il ne puit luy mayhime, car do^ques il auera appel de mayhime enuers
luy. Et nota q^ villein puit aver iii. actions enuers son seign^, cestascauoir,
appel de mort so^ au^c', appel de rape fait a sa femme, et appell de mahim. Et
nota si deux percen^s portent brief de N^iftie, et lun de eux soit non suy, le
nonsuit de luy serra aiudge la nonsuyte de am bydeux, issint que si le nonsuyte
soyt apres apparaunce, ils serrount oustes de cest actyon a toutes ioures, car
la ley est tiel in fauorem libertatis. Et nota si deux ount un villeine in
commen, and lun de eux face a luy un manumission, il ne serra my enfranchise
enuers a^bideux Et nota que en br' de Natiuo habendo, il couient que le seign^r
monstre coment il aueigna privy de sake a celuy villein de que il est seignior
etc. Et sil, ne null de ses auncesters ne soit seisi de null de son sanke, il ne
gaynera per son actio^ si le villeine and pas conu en court de rec' luy estre
son villeine. Et nota que en brief de Niefe ne purront este mys plusoures
niefes que deux tant solement, and hoc introductum fuit prius in odium
seruitutis, Mes en brief de Liberate probanda, purrount estre mis taunts
niefes come le pl' voudra.

Et nota que si le niefe de seign^ soit fue en ancient demesne de roy ou auter
vill' priuilegie, deins lan and iour le seignior puit luy seyser, and sil
demourt en la dit vil* ou lieu fraunchise per vne an and vne ioure sauns le
seysin de son seygniour, il and my power de luy seyser apres, sil ne va en
estray de horse le suisdit fraunchise.

Tail.
18 Tenir en le taile'e^ lou ho^e tient certain terres ou tenementes a luy et
a ses heirs de son corpse engendres. Et nota que si la terre soit do^e a un
ho^e et a ses heirs males, et il ad issu mal', il ad fee simple, et ceo fuit
aiudge en le parliament nost' seigniour le roy. Mes lou terres ou tenem^ts
sount dones a un ho^e and a ses heirs males de son corpse engendres, il ad fee
tail, et lissue female ne serr' my inherit, vt patet Anno xiiij. Edwardi
tertij en un Ass. 18. Edvvardi 3. 45.

Tail apres possibility.
19 Tenir en le tail' apres possibility dissue extinct est, lou terre est done
a home et sa femme et a les heirs de lour ij. corpse enge^dres, lu^ d' eux
survive laut' sa^s issu enter eux issa^t, il tie^dra sa terre a term de sa vie
dem^ come tenant en le tail apres possibility dissue extinct. Et no^^obsta^r
q^ il fac^ waste, il ne serra ia^mays empeche de cel vvast. Et nota sil alie^,
celuy en la reu^sio^ nau^a brief dentre in consimili casu. Mes il puit e^trer,
et so^ enter est congeabl' per To. Thorp chief Justice. 28. E. 3. 96. et 49.
E. 3. 25.

Frankmariage.
20 Tenir en fra^k marriage est a ten^ en l' second tail' limit en lestatut de
Westminster. 2. ca. 1. Et le feoffour quiteral' feoffee d' touts man^s des services
ta^que le quart degree soyt pass, et le feoffour ferra toutes les seruyces et
suites durant la dyt term. Et puis les heirs le feoffee le ferrount, pur ceo
que le priuitie de sanke est pass. Et sil soit distreine pur service, il auera
brief de mesn^ enuers luy supposaunt que il tyent les terres de luy, mes il
nauera pas le fore judgment sil ne soyten advantage de ^es issues.

Et nota que apres le quart degree soyt pas il serra attendant des tants des
services a le donour, come le donour est attendant al seignyour paramont. Et
sil face felony pur quoy il est attayn^, le roy auer' sa terre pur term de sa
vie natural. Et apres la mort, son issu serra inherit come per force de la
tail. Et en cest case, null auera sa terre per voye deschete, nyent pluis q^ en
auter tail. Et en case que le tenant deuie sans heir de son corpse engendres,
la terre reuertera a le donour, come serroit en le commen tail. Et si home
lessa sa terre a un auter en frank marriage, rendaunt a lay un c^tayn rent per
an, il tiendra cest terre en le commen tail, and nient en frank marriage, car
per le rent reserve, ceux paroix, (in liberum maritagium) so^t tout oustrement
voides, issynt que la tenure serra entendus solonque la tenur' en le comen
tail.

Et nota que le done en frank marriage ad condytion annexe a luy non obstant que
il nest pas expresseme^t declare en la charter del done, vt patet per statutu^
westin^ second, cap. I. de Donis conditionalibus.

Et nota q^ home ne donera pas terres ou tenements en frank marriage, forsque
lou la feme est pryuie de sanke a le donoure. Car auterment naueroit home ne
fe^e ascu^ estate per tiel feoffeme^t forsque a term de vie.

Frankalmoione.
21 Tenir en fra^k almoign^ est a tenir terres ou teneme^ts pur dieu seruir et
saint esglife dower sans fair null auter manner de service, Et nota que en cest
cas le donour est mesne and luy doit acquiter francheme^t enuers le chyefe
seigniour, and auxi ceux q^ teygnont en frankalmoigne ne ferroyent fealty, mes
ceux que teignont en fra^kmariage, ferront fealty.

Elegit.
22 Tenir per Elegit e^ lou home ad recover det ou damage per br'e deuers un
auter, ou per conusanc' ou in auter manner, il auera deyns le an deuers luy un
brief judicial nosme Elegit, dauer execution del moytye de toutes ses terres
and chat' (excepts boefes, et affers a sa carues) tanque le det ou le dam^
soient oustreme^t leaves ou pays a luy, and duraunt cest term il est tenant
per Elegit. Et nota sil soyt ouste dey ns le term il au^a assise d' nouel
disseisin and apres un redisseisin si besoign^ soit, and cest do^c per lestat'
d' W. 2. cap. 18. et auxy per lequitie de mesme lestatute celuy q^ ad son
estate sil soit ouste auer' assise et redisseisin si besoign^soit. Et auxi sil
face ses executours and deuye, et ses executoures entrount and puys soyent
oustes, ils auerount per lequitie de mesme lestatut actyon come luy mesme
suisdit, mes sil soyt ouste et puis face ses executours and deuye, ses
executoures purront entrer and sils soient estoppes de lour enter ils auerount
un brief de trespass sur lour matter and case.

Et nota sil face wast en tout la terre, ou en parcel, lauter auera enuers iuy
mayntenaunt un brief judicial horse de la prymer record nosme venire facias ad
computandum, per force de quel serra enquyse sil ad leave toutes les deniers ou
parcel, and sil and leave les denyers, donques serr' enquise a quaunt le waste
amount, Et si le waste amou^t sino^ a parcel, donques tauntes des denyers que
le vvast a mount serra abridge de les suisdits den^s q^ux fuer' estre leaves.
Mes sil ad fait pluys waste q^ le auauntdyt so^me dargent q' fuit a estre leave
amount, lauter serra discharge maintenaunt de toutes les deniers suisdits et
recouera sa terre. Et pur la superfluity de waste fait ouster ceo que amount a
le dyt sum il recouera ses damages singles, et mesme la ley est de ses
execurors, et auxy de cestuy que ad son estate, Et nota sil alie^ en fee, ou a
term de vie, ou en le tail, tout la terre ou parcel d' la terre que il tient
per Elegit, si le alienatio^ soit fait deins le term ou ap^s, cestuy que ad
droit auera verse luy un assise de nouel disseisin. Et couie^t q' ils soie^t
mise en lass. ambideux, auxibn^ le alienee come le alienour et no^ obsta^t que
lalien^ deuie maintenant uncore cestuy q'ad droit au^a verse ^alienee sole ass.
come sil vst estr' son simple to a term^ dans, Et ce^ est per lequity del
statute de Westminster 2. ca. 25. pur ceo que il and sinon chatel en effect, et
m^ la ley est de ses execut' and de cestuy q' ad son estate come est suisdit.

Et nota que en Elegit, si le vicont retorn^ que il auoit ryen iour de la
reconisance fait, mes que il purchase terre puis le temps, adonques la party
pl' auera nouel brief dau^ execution de ceo, mes me la ley est dun estatute
merchaunt. Et nota que apres le fieri facas un nome puit aver le Elegit, mes
non econtra, entaunt que le Elegyt est de pluis haut nature que le fieri
facias. Et nota que si home recou^ per brief d' det, et sue un fieri facias
and le vicontretourne que le party and riens don't il puit fair gree a la
party, donq^s le pleintife auera vne Elegyt ou un capias sicut alias and
pluries. Et si le vicount return a le capias mytto vobis corpus and il and
riens don't il puit fair gre a la perty, il serra maunde al gayle de Fleet,
and illonque demourra tanque il ad fait gree al gty, et si le vic' return non
est inuentus, ado^que issera lexigent enu^s luy. Et nota q' en br' de debt
port deuers person de saint esglise q' and rien de lay fee, and le vicount
return que il and riens perque il puit estr' some, adonques suera le plaintiff
brief al Euesque que il sace venir son clerk ^^ leuesque luy ferra venirpers^^
estratio^ del esgli^e. Et notu q^ ho^e si port br' de det and rec', and face
ses execut' and deuie, ils auerount execution non obstaunt que il soyt deins
lan per ^n scire facias.

Statut merchant.
23 Tenir per lestat' merchant est lou ho^e conust a paier certain denyers a un
auter a certain iour deuaunt le maire, bayllye, ou aut' gardein dasc'ville q^
ad poiar de fair execuc' de m^ lestat', and si l' obligeene paia l' det a le
iour asses and rien de ses bn^s, terr', ou tenem^ts ne purro^t estre troues
deins la guard le maire ou gardeyne auantdyt, mes en auters lieus dehors,
do^ques le reconisee suer' le reconisance and obligation oue un certification
al chauncery desouth le seal le Roy, and il auera horse de la chau^c' un capias
al vic' de q^l cou^ty il e^ de luy app^n^d' et metter en prison sil ne soit
clerk tanque il ad fait gree de la debt. Et un quart* de la^ ap^s c^ q^ il
serra pris, il auera sa terre liuere a luy mesme pur fair gree a le party de
debt. Et il puit vender tanque il est enprison, and sa vende serra bone and
loyal. Et sil ne face gree deins le quarter dun an, ou si soit return que il
ne^ troue, and sil ne soit clerk, adonques le reconisee puit aver brief de la
chauncery queest appelle Extendi facias, direct al touts vic'lou il ad t'res
dextender ses terres et bie^s, et ses bn^s a luy deliu^, et luy seiser en ses
terres, pur les tenir a luy et a ses heirs et a ses assigns tanque le debt
soyt leave ou pay, and per cel temps il est tenant per statute merchant. Et not
a queen lestatute merchaunt, le reconisee auera execution de toutes les terres
que le reconysour auoyt iour de la reconisaunce fayt, et vnques puis per force
de mesme lestatute.

Et nota que quaunt ascu^ wast ou destruction est fait per le reconisce, ses
execut's, ou per celuy qui ad son estate, le reconysour and ses executours
auero^t mesme la ley com^ est suisdit de le tenant per Elegit.

Et nota si tenant per lestatut merchant tient ouster so^ term, celui qui ad
droit puit suer enuers luy venire facias ad computandum, ou entrer ta^tost vt
sur tenant per Elegit.

Trois man^s de rents y sount, cestassauoire re^t seruic^, re^t charge, and
rent secke. Rent seruic^ est lou un ho^e tyent dun auter per fealty, and pur
fair suite a sa court, and rendant a luy un certain rent per an pur touts
manners des services. Et nota, que si le seignyour soyt seisie des services and
rent auauntdits, and ils soyent aderere, et il distrein^, et le ten^t rescue le
distres, il puit aver assise, ou brief de Rescous. Mes il est pluis necessary
pur luy aver assyse que brief de Rescous, pur ta^t que per Assise il recouera
son rent and ses damages, mes per cest brief de Rescous, il ne recouera mes
les reprises and les da^^. Et nota que si le seigniour ne soit my seysie del
rent and service, and ils sount aderere, and il distrey ne pur eux, et le
tenant reprent la distress, il ne puyt mye aver assise, mes brief de
rescous, et ne couie^t mi al seigniour de mr' son droit. Et nota que si le sn^r
distreine son tenant en socage pur service de chiual' ql il suppose estre
tenus d' luy, and auovve pur mes^^s les services en court de record, il serra
charge per tiels services, per Fynch. termino Hillarij Ann^ xlvi.

Et nota que si le seigniour ne puit my trouer dystresse per deux ans, il auera
verse le tenant brief de Cessauit per biennium, vt patet per lestatut de
westminster. 2. cap. 21. Et si le tenant deuie en le mean te^ps and son issue
enter, le seign your auera verse lissu brief dentre sur Cessauit, ou si le
tenant alien, le seigniour au^a verse lalyenee lauant dit brief. Mes si le
seigniour ad issue et deuie, et le tenant so yt en arrerage de dyt rent and
seruyces de le temps le pyer del issue and nemy en temps del issue, il ne puyt
mye dystreyne pur arrerages en te^ps son pyer, and il nauera ascun auter
recouere verse le tenant ou ascun auter, pur ceo q^ tiel advantage est done pur
le ley al tenant. Et nota q^ rent service est, a quel appent fealty, mes a
re^t charge and rent secke ne appent pas fealty mes il appent a rent service
de commen droit.

Rent charge.
25 Rent charge e^ lou home grant certain rent issant de ses terres ou
teneme^ts a un auter en fee simpl' ou in fee tail, ou a term de vie per fayt
sur condic', q^ a q^l heure q^ le rent soit aderere, bien lirra a le grauntee
ou a ses heirs ou assigns a distrein^ en m^ la terres ou tenements.

Et nota que si le re^t soit aderere, bn^ list a le grauntee per election dauer
brief danuitie, ou il puit distreyner, and si la distres soit rescue de luy,
and il ne fuit mye seysie adeuaunt, il and mye recouere forsque per brief de
Rescous, car la distress primierm^t fayt, ne done a luy seisin, forsque ^il
hap le rent adeuaunt, car sil fuit seysie del rent adeuaunt, and puis le rent
soit aderere, and il distreine, and rescous a luy so yt fayt, il auera assise
ou brief d' Rescous.

Et nota q^ en chescu^ assise de re^t charge and dannuel rent, and en brief de
Annuitye, couyent a celuy que port le brief de monstre auaunt especialtie, ou
auterment il ne maynteynera ass. mes en mortdauncestour ou Formedon en la
descender, et auters bryefes (en les queux title est do^e ou co^pris) port de
re^t charge, ou da^nuel rent, nest my besoygn^ de mo^stre especialtie. Et nota
q^ si ho^e grant rent charge a un auter, et le grau^tee purchase le moytie de
la terre dou^t le rent est issant, tout le rent est extinct. Et sile gra^tee
relesse a le grauntour peel de le rent, vncor' tout le re^t ne^ extinct. Mes en
rent service, le ley est auterm^t, car non obstant q^ le sn^r ad la moitie
purchase de la terre, dount le rent est issant', un c^ le rent nest pas extinct
forsque a le moitie, et la cause de diversity est pur ceo que rent service
puit estre severe a un portion, mes nemy rent charge.

Et nota q^ si re^t charg soyt grant a *deux ioi^tment, et lun release, uncore
lauter auera la moitie del rent. Et auxy si lun purchase le moytie de la terre
don't le rent est issant, lauter auera le moitie del rent de son compaignion. Et
si le disseysor charge la terre a un estraunge, and le disseisie port lassise
and recover, le charge est defeat. Mes si celuy qui ad droyt, charge la t're,
et un estrau^ge feign un faux actyon enuers luy que and droit et recouera per
der le charge demurra. Et nota que en cas que un purpartie soit parenter deux
parceners et pluis terre soit allot a lun, que a lauter, et celuy que ad pluis
de terre charge sa err a lauter, and el hap le rent, el mainteinera assise
sas especialtie. Et si le grau^tee lauoyt en fee simple, ou en see tail, and
ad issue and deuie, si lyssue port un formedo^, ou assise de mortdauncester, il
ne serra iammes charge de mo^stre especialtie.

Rent secke.
26 Rent secke est lou ho^e tient de moy per hom^, fealty, et auters seruic',
re^da^t a moi un certain rent per an, et ieo grant cest rent a un auter
reseruaunt a moy le service.

Et nota que en rent secke si ho^e soit seysie del rent, and le re^t soyt
aderere, il ne puit my distreine mes il auera Assyse de nouel dysseysin.

Et'nota que si rent seck soit grant a un home et a ses heirs, et le rent
soit aderere and le grau^tor deuie, lheir ne purra mye distreiner, ne recouera
les arrerages de temps son pyer, sicome est auantdit de^rent service.

Et en mesme l' man^ e^ adire en re^t charge ou annuel rent. Mes en toutes les
rentes auantdits lheire purr' aver pur arrerages en son temps demesn^ tiel
advantage come auoyt so^ pier en sa vie. Vide statut' 32. H. 8. 37.

Et nota que in rent seck si ho^e ne soit seysie del rent, and il soyt aderere,
il est sans recouere, pur ceo que il fuit sa folly demesne adeprymes quaunt le
rent fuist grant a luy ou reserve, que il ne prist my seisin del re^t sicome
un denyer ou deux. Et nota q^hom^ ne puit my aver Cessauit per bienniu^, ou
auter brief de^tre sur cessauit pur null rent seck aderere per ij. ans, mes ils
purrount tout solement pur re^t service vt patet in stat. W. 2. cap. 21. Et
nota q'en re^t secke il couient pur luy q' sue pur le rent secke pur mo^stre
fait al tenant, ou auterm^t le to ne serra mye charge del rent forsque lou le
rent secke fuyst rent service adeuaunt, come en cest case, seignior, mesne, and
tenant, and chescun deux tyent dauter per homage et fealty. et let' del mesne
x. s. de rent, le seigniour paramont purchase les terres ou tenementes de le
tenant, tout le seignorye del mesne, forspris le re^t est extinct. Et pur cest
cause cest rent e^ deuenus re^t seck et le re^t service change car il ne puyt
dystrein^ pur cest rent. Eten cest case celuy que demand le rent ne serra
ia^mes charge de monstre fait. Auxi en brief de mortdau^cester ayell ne
besayle de rent secke il ne besoigne monstre especialtie pur c^ que ceux
briefes de possession compreehndont vne title deins eux mesm^s, cestassauoir
que launc^ fuit seisie de mesme le rent and continua sa possession per cause d'
quel seisine le ley suppose que estauxi auerrable per pais, tamen quaere, car
ascuns supposont que il couient a fine force a mo^strer auaunt fait, pur ceo q'
rent seck e^ vne chose enconter come^ droit auxibyen come rent charge, mes en
Assise de nouel disseisine et en br' dentre sur disseysine port de rent seck,
il couient de fine force monstre auaunt fait pur ceo que rent secke est un
chose encont' comen droit sinon en le case suisdit ou il fuist rent service
adeuant.

Et assise de nouel disseisin, et br' dentre sur disieisin ne conteygnent deins
eux null title, mes supposent un disseisine estre fait a le pleintise. Et
dentendement del ley la disseisine ne done null cause dauerment encounter comen
droit, mes de fine force il monstre auant especialtie.

Suit service.
27 Suit suruice est a venir a la court de iij. semaignes en trois semaignes
per an entier, et purceo serra home distr' and nyent amercye. Suite real e^ a
venir a la courtdel leete, etc' nest forsque deux foits en an, et pur ceo home
serra amercy et non pas distraine.

Imprinted at London. in Fletestrete within Temple Bar at the sign of the
hand and Star by Rychard Tottel. 1579.


