THE VNBISHOPING OF TIMOTHY AND TITUS.

OR A brief elaborate Discourse, prooving Timothy to be no Bishop (much less
any sole, or Diocaesan Bishop) of Ephesus, nor Titus of Crete; and that the
power of ordination, or imposition of hands, belongs Iure Divino to Presbyters,
as well as to Bishops, and not to Bishops only.

Wherein all Objections and Pretenses to the contrary are fully answered; and
the pretended superiority of Bishops over other Ministers and Presbyters Iure
Divino, (now much contended for) utterly subverted in a most perspicuous manner.

By a Wellwisher to Gods truth and people.

Matthew. 15. 13. Every plant which my heavenly Father has not planted, shall
be rooted out. Chrysostom. Opus imperfectum in Matthew. Hom. 35. Quicunque
desideraverit Primatum in terra, inveniet in Coelo confusionem; ut jam in ter
servos Christi, non sit de Primatu certamen. In the Year M.DC.XXXVI

To the Reader.
CHristian Reader, what that Oracle of wisdom has registered; Proverb. 13.
10. Only by pride comes contention; was never more really verified in any one
particular, then in the Prelates: whose ambitious windy tumor, and overswelling
pride, as in all former ages, so in this, has See Theodoricus a Niem, Zabarel,
and Ioannis Marius De Schismate. Master Tyndals obedience of a Christian man;
and practice of Popish Prelates. Doctor John White his Defense of the way, c.
6. the fifth part of the Homily against Disobedience and wilful rebellion.
Fox Acts and Monuments throughout. Catalog. Testium Veritatis.
filled the whole Christian world with wars, with civil dissensions; and the
Church it self, with endless schisms, controversies, contentions, which else
would never had existence. The pretended primacy of the great Pontifical
Bishop of Rome, what tumults, battles, wars, treasons, rebellions, murders,
martyrdomes, has it engendered on the one hand; what disputes, books of
controversy, and paper-battles, on the other? What innumerable Schisms,
Treatises (which the endoubted parity of Ministers and Bishops Iure Divino had
prevented) have the Prelates pretended superiority by divine institution, over
Presbyters and their fellow-Ministers, produced in all ages, Churches,
especially in our own, (which from the first glimmerings of the Gospel in
John Wiclifes days till now, has been more or less disquieted with this
unhappy controversy?) which being raked up in the ashes for a space, by reason
of our Bishops waiving of their divine right, (which not only Archbishop Com.
in Phil 1. 1. in Tit. 1. 5. 7. in 1. Tim 3. and 4.
Anselme, De Quest. Armenorum. l. 11. c. 1. to 8.
Richardus Armachanus, and Balaeus Cent. 8. c. 19.
Bishop Peacocke of old, but likewise Fox Acts Monuments p. 9* 2. 973.
Bishop Tonstall, Bishop Stokesly, On the 8 Commandment.
Bishop Hooper, Defense of the Apology. part. 2. c. 3. Divis. 1. 5. p. 85. 99.
100. 101. etc. 9. Divis. 1 p. 196. 202.
Bishop Jewel, Poor man's Library, part. 1. f. 95. 96.
Bishop Alley, Exposit. on Aggius, verse. 1. and 2.
Bishop Pilkington, yea Against Cartwright. p. 389.
Archbishop Whitgift himself, and Of the Princes Supremacy. p. 359.
Bishop Bridges, to omit all others, have since them publicly disclaimed;
confessing Bishops and Presbyters, lure Divino to be allone, equal, and the
same; and the Statutes of 37. H. 8. c. 17. 1. Ed. 6. c. 2. 1. and 2. Mariaec.
8. and 1. Eliz ab. c. 1. for ever judicially in full Parliament resolved
against;) yet our present ambitious Prelates studying to surmount their
predecessors, not only in worldly pomp and power, derived from their
indulgent Sovereign, but likewise in spiritual Jurisdiction, claimed from God
himself, (though they have neither time nor care to preach, pray, or do him
any Episcopal service, being wholly taken up with secular offices and
affairs, and Maith. 6. 24. Lu. 16. 13. 1. John. 2. 15. 16.
unable to serve God for serving his incompacible enemies, Mamo^n, and the
world,) have lately blown abroad the coals, and resuscitated the violent
flames of this contention afresh, by a new ambitious claim of all their
Episcopal Soveraignity and Jurisdiction, Iure Divino, even in the High
Commission Court it self, in the late censure of Doctor Bastwicke, for a Book
written only against the Pope and Italian Bishops, without any reflection upon
them, as all men then conceived, and therefore wondered at, till their
magnifying of the Church of See Chownaeus Collect* Theolog. and Shelford his 5.
Treatises.
Rome as a true Church in that Censure of his, and some late licensed
Pamphlets, their Antichristian and Papal proceedings against Gods truth,
Ministers, Ordinances, and the late authorizing of Doctor Pocklingtons Page 2.
43. 44.
Sunday no Sabbath, by the Archbishop of Canterburies own Chaplain, Master
Bray; which expressly avers, that our Archbishops and Bishops can and do
lineally derive their Pedigree and Succession from Peter and the Popes of Rome;
has since in structed the ignorant people, that Popes Italian and English
Bishops, are in truth See Henry Stalbridge his Exhortatory Epistle. William
Wraghton his Hunting of the Romish Fox. Rodericke Mors his Complaint. c. 23.
Master Tyndals his obedience of a Christian man, and Practice of Popish
Prelates. Fox Acts and Monuments pa^ 414. 514. 516. 518. Master Whethenhall his
Discourse of the Corruptions now in Question with others.
all members of the same body, whelpesof the same litter, branches of the same
tree, and our present Prelates the Pope of Romes own lineally descended
sons, so as they could not but be sensible of, and highly offended, if not
actually lashed, wounded with their fathers scourge; Flagellum Pontificis and
Episcoporum Latialium, being a whip for them, as well as for the Italian
Prelates.

Now because in that late Censure of theirs, they all founded the divine right
of their Episcopal Superintendency and Dominion over their Fellow-Pres byters,
only on the examples of Timothy and Titus, (whom they then new consecrated
Diocaesan Bishops over Ephesus and Crete 1608. yearly after their decease,
though Christ and Paul himself had never done it in their life times:) and on
a supposed divine Monopoly of conferring Orders and imposing hands,
appropriated by God himself to Diocaesan Bishops, distinct in Jurisdiction,
power and degree from Ministers and Presbyters; I have therefore here for the
future quie^^^ing of this much agitated controversy, confined my discourse
within the lists of such questions, (not formerly fully debated by any in the
English tongue, that I have met with) by the discussion whereof I have (I
suppose) so shaken these rotten pillars, and undermined these Matthew. 7. 26. 27.
sandy foundations of their high-towring, over-swelling Hierarchy, as that I
have left them no divine prop or groundworke to support it longer; so as it
must now certainly (for any stay is left it in Scripture) come tumbling down
headlong to the very ground, (and me thinks I hear the fall of it already
sounding in my ears) unless with speed they wholly quit these false
foundations, and bottom their Prelacy and Jurisdiction only on his Majesty's
Princely favor, (not Gods or Christ's divine institution) which because they
have so lately judicially disclaimed in open Court, and even at this present
execute all Acts of Episcopal Jurisdiction by their own inherent power,
without any special Commission from his Majesty under his great Seal,
keeping their Courts, visitations, and making out all their citations, process,
excommunications, probate of wills, Letters of administration etc. in their own
names and under their own Seals, as if they were absolute Popes and
Monarchs, contrary to the Statutes of 25. H. 8. c. 19. 26. H. 8. c. 1. 37. H.
8. c. 17. 1. Ed. 6. c. 2. 1. Eliz. c. 1. 8. Eliz. c. 1. their Oath of
Supremacy, and their High Commission it self, which might teach them another
lesson (as that it confines them to do all things by his Majesty's special
Commission, in his name and under his Seal, when they are all there joined
together, much more therefore when they are divided in their several Dioces;)
and because they have See Sir John Dauis his Irish Reports. f. 97. 98* an
excellent passage to this purpose. q Math. 7. 27.
blotted out Caesar's Image and superscription, his Arms and royal Title out
of their Courts, process and all ecclesiastical proceedings, and inserted only
their own in leive thereof, that so they may appear to all the world to be no
longer his but theirs, and he (if he should chance to challenge and resume
them as his own) might not henceforth own or claim them to be his; they have
little reason now to attempt, and his Majesty far less to suffer, and so
having neither God nor the King, divine nor human Right to support them, they
must (as the proverb is, between two stools the arse goes to the ground) now
at last in the midst of their usurped greatness, fall flat upon the ground,
and this their fall, q prove very great, because they now of late, are grown
so, Doctor Barnes, Articles. Artic. 8. p. 211. Master Tyndals Practice of
Popish Prelates p. 342 343. etc. and Obedience of a Christian man.
not being content with the office of a Bishop, but they must be also Kings,
temporal Lords and chief state officers, against Christ's express command
and Gods own Law, to sway both Church and state at pleasure so they may
ingrosse 37. H. 8. c. 17.
into their sacred hands the sole rule and government of the world, having
great possessions; and being great Lords also as they are Prelates, and yet
doing nothing therefore at all in point of preaching, fecding, and instructing
the people committed to their spiritual charge, but only playing the part of
a Bishop, as a Christmas game-player does of a King and as a Poppet, which
springs up and down, and cries Peep, Peep, and goes his way, as What the
Keys of the Church be. p. 266. u Prove. 16. 18.
Doctor Barnes writes wittily of the Bishops of his age. Which swelling
greatness (...) ambition of theirs as it will make their downfall the
greater, so the speedier, being a sure prognosticke of their approaching ruin,
as the greatness of any unnatural swelling in the body is of its present
ensuing rupture. u Pride ever going before destruction, and a lofty spirit
before a fall, and they usually dogging them at the heels; because 1. Pet. 5.
5.
God himself resists the proud, but then most of all when they are at the
highest; according to that of the Psalmist, Psa. 119. 119.
Thou put away all the wicked of the earth like dross, which as soon as
ever it has gotten up to the top of the pot, and elevated it self above the
(...) mettle, is then scummed off and cast away.

Toward which their desired speedy downfall, if these my unworthy labors
shall through Gods blessing on, and thy prayers for them, contribute any
assistance, for the ease, releife or comfort of Gods poor people, See Thomas
Be^^ on his supplication, Vol. 3. of his Works in folio f. 21. to. 25. A most
excellent passage to this purpose suitable to our times.
who are every where most wrongfully, without, yea Magna Charta. c. 29. The
Petition of Right. 3. Caroli. and other Statutes in Ractall Accusation.
against all Law and reason oppressed, and cast out of their benefices,
freeholds, possessions, imprisoned, fined, excommunicated, silenced, suspended,
vilified, crushed, and trodden under feet by their intolerable tyranny, might
and unbounded extravagant power, I shall neither repent me of the penning, nor
thou thy self of the reading of it, wherefore here humbly prostrating it to
thy impartial Censure, and commending it to the blessing of that omnipotent
God, who to show the infinitenes of his wisdom and power, does often times 1.
Cor. 1. 27. 28. 29.
choose the foolish things of the world to confound the wise, the weak things
of the world to confound the things that are mighty, and base things of the
world, and things that are despised, yea and things that are not, to bring to
naught things that are, that no flesh should glory in his presence. I shall
take my leave of thee till some further occasion.

Farewell, and pray for me.
To the Right Reverend Fathers in God William Lord Archbishop of Canterbury:
And Richard Lord Archbishop of Yorkes, Primates and Metropolitanes of all
England.
MY Lords, I have sundry times heard both of you jointly and severally
protesting even in open Court, not only in the In Master Thomas Brewers,
Doctor Bastweekes, and sundry other cases.
High Commission, (but in Dr. Laytons and two other cases since) Starchamber
too, (whether seriously or vauntingly only let the event determine;) That if
you could not prove your Episcopal Jurisdiction and function which you now
claim and exercise over other Ministers, and your selves as you are Bishops to
be superior in power, dignity and degree to other Ministers Iure Divino (a
doctrine which An. Melvini Patricij Adamsoni Palinodia, printed An. 1630.
Patricke Adamson Archbishop of S. Andrews in Scotland, publicly recanted in
the Synod of Fiffe Anno 1591. as directly repugnant to, and having no
foundation at all in the word of God;) you would forthwith cast away your
Rochets of your backs, lay down your Bishoprics at his Majesty's feet, and
not continue Bishops on ehower longer. What your Lordships have so often averred
and publicly promised before many witnesses, (I hope bona fide, because
judicially in full Court upon goodadvise, not rashly on some sudden fit of
choler,) I shall make bold, to challenge you to make good without more delay;
either by giving a solid satisfactorie speedy answer to this short Treatise
(consisting only of 2. Questions, which you may devide between you, and so
speedily reply to, if your great See Master Tyndals Obedience of a Christian
man. The holy Practice of Popish Prelates.
secular occasions, not your praying and 1. Tim. 3. 2. 3. 2, Tim. 4. 1. to. 5
Tit 1. and 2. 1 Pet. (...). 2. 3.
frequent preaching, which are only truly Epicopall, though you deem them
overmeane employment for Archbishops interrupt you not:) which manifests all
that Jus Divinum which hitherto both or either your Lordships have pretended
for your Episcopalities to be but a mere absurd ridiculous faction, having not
the least shadow of Scripture to support it; or in case you either cannot or
fail to give such an Answer to it in convenient time; by pulling off your
Rochets and resingning up your Archbishoprikes (which without all question are
but a mere human, and no divine Institution, as I have evidenced:) into his
Majesty's hands, 31. H S. c 9 37. H. 8 c. 17. 1. E 6. c. (...). and all the
Bishops Patents for their consecration and Cong.
from whom you dare not deny you only and wholly received them, with all your
Episcopal Jurisdiction and Authority thereunto annexed, whereby you difference
your selves from, or advance your selves above your Fellow-Ministers as their
supreme Lords, unless you will split your selves against the hard rock of a
Praemunire, and the Statutes of: 26. H. 8. c. 1. 31. H. 8. c. 9. 10. 37. H. c.
17. 1. Ed. 6. c. 2. 1. Eliz. c. 1. 5. Eliz. c. 1. 8. Eliz. c. 1. which Acts as
they will inform your Lordships, notwithstanding all your former vaunts and
brags of divine right, That the Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons and other
Ecclesiastical persons of this Realm, HAVE NO MANNER OF IVRISDICTION
ECCLESIASTICAL, BUT BY, UNDER AND FROM THE KINGS ROYAL MAJESTY; to whom by
holy Scripture ALL AVTHORITY AND POWER IS WHOLLY GIVEN, to hear and determine
all manner causes Ecclesiastical, and to correct vice and sin whatsoever, and
to all such persons as his Not Archbishops or Bishops; who can make no
Chancellours, Vicar generals Commissaries or Officials unless the King by his
special Patent give them power so to do in express words, as these Statutes
evidence and the Bishops Patents in Edward the 6. Reign.
Majesty shall appoint thereunto: That all authority and Jurisdiction
spiritual and temporal is derived and deducted from the Kings Majesty, as
supreme head of the Church and Realm of England, and so justly acknowledged by
the Clergy thereof: That all Courts Ecclesiastical within the Realm were
then (and now ought to be though they are not) kept by no other power or
authority either foreign or within the Realm, but by the authority of his
most excellent Majesty only; and that by virtue of some special commission or
letters Patents under his Majesty's great Seal, and in his name and right
alone: That all power of Visitation of the Ecclesiastical State and Persons
(much more then of our Universities exempt from Archiepiscopall and Episcopal
Jurisdiction) is united and annexed as a royal prerogative to the Kings
Imperial Crown, and to be executed by none but by Patent under him: And that
all your Citations, process, Excommunications, Probates of Wills, Commissions
of Administration etc. ought to be made only in his Majesty's name, and sealed
with his seal (as they were in King Henry the 8. and King Edwards days,
witness the Bishops Registers, Process and Probates of wills in their two
reigns, and now are in your High Commission) that so both the Courts and
process migth be Matthew. 22. 20. 21. Sir John Davis his Irish Reports. p. 97.
98.
known to be his Majesty's by leaving his Image, style and superscription
engraven on them, and to be derived unto you, not by any divine right, but by
his Princely grace alone, who has as absolute an Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction,
as any of his royal progenitors enjoyed, both by the Laws of God and 26. H.
8. c. 1. 37. H. 8. c. 17. 1. E. 6. c. 2. 1. Eliz. c. 1. 5. Eliz. c. 1. 8. Eliz.
c. 1.
of the Realm: So they will enforce your Lordships to acknowledge, (unless
you will renounce your Alegiance to your most gracious Sovereign, whose mere
grace has advanced you to what you now are,) that all your Episcopal
Jurisdiction, whereby you are distinguished from, or elevated above any
ordinary Presbyters and Ministers, is not from any divine Charter or Commission
from Christ, but In case they have (...) Character or Commission under his
Majesty's Seal which all of them now want, and so are mere usurpers on his
Majesty's Crown and Ecclesiastical Prerogative in keeping Confistories,
Visitations, and Exercising Episcopal Jurisdiction in their own names, with
Patent or Commission from the King.
only in, by, from, and under his Majesty; and so not Jure Divino, as you have
thus frequently craked and boasted to the world; so as you must either now
forthwith renounce your Bishoprikes according to your Protestations, or else be
guilty of breach of promise; unless you can prove you enjoy them only by a
divine right, and yet only in, by, from, and under his Majesty, which is a
contradiction.

If your Lords to maintain your divine pretended Episcopal Jurisdiction shall
fly to Sunday no Sabath. p. (...) and 44.
Doctor John Pocklington for aid (who by W. Bray.
one of your Domesticke Chaplains approbation) has verily published in print,
That you by Gods mercy to our Church, are able lineally to set down your
Succession in your Episcopal dignity, from S. Peter's Chair at Rome, to S.
Gregory, and from him, from our first Archbishop S. Augustine (though we had
many See Antiquit. Eccles. Brit. Bodwines Conversion. of Brittanie with others,
who write of King ^ucius and Speedes History. Book. 6. c. 9. p. 73. to 82.
Archbishops before his coming) our English Apostle (so the Papists would have
him styled; though Defense of the Apolog. part. 5. c. 1. Divis. 1. Artic. 1.
Divis. 24.
Bishop Acts and monum. f. 2. p. 9^. to 120.
lewel, Fox, and Sped. Hist. l. 6. c. 9.
others, renounce him) downward to his Giver that now sits in his chair,
Primate and Metropolitan of all England. I shall then desire your Lordships
and this Doctor to prove.

First, that S. Peter was a Bishop by divine Institution.

Secondly, that he was Bishop of Rome? of which this Doctor is so impatient,
that he breaks out unto Page. 43.
these passionate words well worthy your Episcopal Censure: Whereby See Quest.
1. Object. 6. Answer 2. and most of our learned writers, who have affirmed,
that Peter was never at Rome much less Bishop there, upon such grounds as this
Doctor cannot answer
their vanity may appear, that upon idle ghesses against all antiquity, makes
fools believe, that S. Peter w as Epiphanius Contr. Haereses. l. 1. Haer. 27.
col. 88. 89. Eusebius Eccles. Hist. l. 3. c. 21. Irenaeus. l. 3. c. 3. 4. 5.
write that both of them were Bishops of Rome at once, and not Peter the sole
Bishop, and Eusebius writes Paul in the first place before Peter.
never at Rome; mking the Succession of Bishops and truth of the Latin
Churches, as questionable as the Centurists orders.

Thirdly, Wheter Peter was sole Bishop of Rome, or rather Paul also Bishop as
well as he at the same time, and that by divine institution? whence it will
follow, that there ought to be See Eusebius. s: 3. c. 10. 11. or So^r. Schol.
Eccl. Hist. l. 7. c. 3
how Bishops of Rome and so of Canterbury, at the same time, not one alone, as
two several persons at least to constitute one Bishop?

Fourthly, Whether it will follow from Peter's being Bishop of Rome Iure Divino,
that the Archbishops of Canterbury and York most necessarily be Archbishops
Iure divino?

Fifthly, Whether if this Doctrine be true, this Proposition can be denied;
that your Lordships being lineally descended from the Church and Popes of Rome,
are both the true and genuine sons and members of these two ghostly Parents?
If you deny this inference, then you must renounce this divine Title to your
Prelacies; if you subscribe unto it (as I presume you dare not, then all his
Majesty's loyal subjects (who have in their 28. H. 8. c. 10. 1. Eliz. c. 1.
oath of allegiance and supremacy, renounced all foreign Jurisdiction with
the Bishops and Church of Rome, abandoned by See Rastall Tit. Rome.
several Acts of Parliament,) must renounce both you, and this your Episcopal
Jurisdiction to, thus claimed: which since you can no ways substantially
prove to be Iure Divino, I hope you will now lay down your Bishopriches,
according to provise, or else be though^never worthy faith or credit more in
future time.

Neither may the seeming strangnes of the thing it self, deter you from it,
this being no new thing for Bishops to resign and give over their Bishoprikes.
For not to mention, that famous Oration ad (...) 50. Episcopus, in his life
before his works. Socrates Eccles Hist. l. 5. c 7. p Isidor. Pe'usiotae Epist
l. 3. Epist. 223.
Gregory Nazianzen, that great Patriarch of Constantinople, or p Hi^rax,
Nicephorus Eccles. Hist. l. 10. c 11.
John of Antioch, with sundry others in the primitive Church, who either out of
conscience or for quietness sake, voluntarily renounced or repudiated their
Bishoprikes betaking themselves to a more retired private life, wherein they
might serve God better. Nor yet to recite the History of Socr. Scholast l. 4.
c. 18. in the Greek 23. Niceph. Eccles. Hist. l. 11. c. 37. Petrus Blesensis
Epist. 23.
Ammonius, who when the Clergy and people elected him for their Bishop, and
urged him to take a Bishopric upon him, fled away secretly, and cut off his
right ear, that the deformity of his body might be a Canonical impediment, to
his election, and, being yet deemed meet* to be a Bishop by Timothius the
Patriarch, though his Nose and ears had been both cut off by reason of his
learning and virtues; and the people drawning him against his will to accept
that office, he replied that he would likewise cut off his tongue to, which
pleased them unless they would specdily let him go. Nor yet to remember
Socrates Eccl. Hist. l. 4. c. 18. Niceph. l. 11. c. 37.
Euagrius the Philosopher, who when he was constrained to accept a Bishopric
by Theophilus Alexandrinus, renounced his Ministry rather then he would
accept it, such a dangerous and ill office did he then repute it, and many
good men else, who as Nicephorus records, refused aunciently to accept thereof,
though nothing so dangerous and pernicious an office, then as now. Or
Nicephorus Nicephori Gregorae Hist. Romans l. 3. c. 1. 2. f. 9. Cent. Magd. 13.
Col. 982.
Blemmides, who being elected Patriarch of Constantinople absolutely refused to
accept it upon any terms* Or Cent. Magd. 10. Col. 599.
Werinbaldus unanimously elected Bishop of Spier who could by no means be
induced to embrace it: Or Cent. Magd. 6. Col. 644.
Theophil^us Archdeacon of Adaina, who being chosen Bishop of that See, refused
to receive it, and being forced both by the Ministers and people to take it
against his will, relinquished it shortly after though in an idle manner. I
find it recorded of Niceph. Greg. Hist. Romans l. 4. 2. 1. f. 11. 13* 14. l. 5.
fol. 16. l. 6. f. 20. 21. 22. 24. l. 7. f. 29. l. 8 f. 31. Cent. Magd. 8. Col.
669. 672. Cent. 11. Col. 516. 518. Cent. 12. Col. 1384. Cent. 13. Col. 932. 983.
Arsenius, Germanus, Paulus Cyprius, Josephus, Becus, Gregorius Cyprius,
Athanasius, John, Ioannes Glicis, Antonius Studites, Cosmas, and Theodosius,
all Patriarchs of Constantinople* as likewise of Vincentius Spec. Hist. l. 24.
c. 25. Cent. Magd. 7. Col. 502. 507. 508. Cent. 8. Col. 763. 786. Cent. 10.
Col. 586. Cent. 11. Col. 515. 576. Cent. 12. Col. 1387. 1458. 1468. 1484. 1486.
1491. 1519. 1530. 1544. Cent. 13. Col. 1042. 1052. 1057. 1062. 1078. 1092.
1093. 1094. 1102. 1146.
Gildenutus Bishop of Malden, Vlfranius Bishop of Shetne, Arnulphus, Bishop of
Mets, Addo-Bishop of Lions, Victerbus Bishop of Ratisbon, Herigerus Bishop of
Meniz, Michael Bishop of Ephesus, Adelberus Bishop of Wirtenburg. Michael
Opites, Patriarch of Athens, Desiderius, Bishop of Flaunders, Bruno the third,
Bishop of Colen; Vlrious the second Bishop of Constance, Walther Bishop of
Augusta, Gerhardus Bishof Herbipolis, Vlricus Bishop of Rhesia, Brincingus
Bishop of Hildeshem, Conrade the second Bishop of Lubecke. Adam Bishop of
Morini in Flaunders, Christianus the second Bishop of Marcte, Sebotho Bishop of
Augusta, Everhardus Bishop of Reformes, Vlricus Bishop of Saltsburg, Conradus
Bishop of Hildesheim, Conradus Bishop of Halberstat, Ludolphus Bishop of the
same See, Gunterus Bishop of Magdeburge? Iosia Odolpleus, Archbishop of
Vpsal(...) in S(...)hland, with sundry other Patriarchs, Archbishops and
Bishops, many of them by reason of age or sickness, others out of discontent,
others out of a desire of peace, quietness, and case from unnecessary cares,
and troubles, others of them merely out of conscience of the unlawfulness,
danger, hurt, and sins accompanying the very office of Bishops as then it is,
and yet is used*) have voluntarily renounced, revived, relinquished, their
Patriarkships, Archbishoprikes, and Bishoprikes, and betook themselves to a
more retired, religious, quiet, private, godly life, wherein they might serve
God better and show those manifold occasions of evil and temptations unto
which their Episcopal function would express them both a hazard of their
Souls.

If these many foreign examples, will no ways moove your Lordships as
seeming over strange, we have many pregnant Domestique presidents of like
nature, which may persuade you, to make good your promise and induce you to an
imitation of them. For I find that Godwine Catalogue of Bishops London. 1615.
p. 70. 113. 118. 120. 188. 192. 219. 305. 306. 313. 318. 323. 336. 353. 397.
413. 414. 437. 438 446. 447. 456. 477. 487. 504. 508. 532. 536. 543. 559. 565.
567. 581. 596. 629. 631. 632. 635. 636. 654. 655. 675. 676.
Robert Gemetiensis, S. Edmund, Boniface, and Robert Kalwarby Archbishops of
Canterbury; Richard Beaueyes, and William de sancta Maria Bishops of London,
John Bokingham, and Philip Ripingdon, Bishops of Lincoln, Richard Peche, and
Roger de Weseham Bishops of Coventre, and Lichfeild, Herman Bishop of
Sherborne, Shaxton Bishop of Sabisbury, William Warmest, John Voysy, and Miles
Coverdale (who being deprived in Queen Mary's time, cared not to return to
his Bishoprike in Queen Elizabeth's, settling himself in London and there
leading a private life as an ordinary Minister) Bishops of Exeter, John
Carpenter and Master Hugh Latimer, Bishops of Worcester (the later of whom Fox
Acts and Monuments p. 1578. His 2. 3. and 4. Sermons before King Edward.
skipped for joy when he had cast off his Rochet, for that he was eased of so
heavy a burden, and blessed God that he had given him grace to make himself a
Quondam Bishop;) Ralfe de Maydestan Bishop of Hereford. Putta, Quickhelmus, and
Haymo Bishops of Rochester, (the first of them becoming a Schoolmaster, spent
the residue of his days in that kind of life, and could never abide to hear
of returning to his Bishoprike;) Dubricius Bishop of Carleon, Sulghein Bishop
of S. David's, John Hunden, Bishop of Landaffe, Caducanus Bishop of Bangor,
Elguensis Bishop of S. Assaph, Colman, S. Cuthbert, Egelrit and Nicholas de
Farnham Bishops of Lindesfarne and Durham, (the later of whom first of all
twice refused and then at last resigned his Bishoprike out of conscience)
Paulinus de Leedes (who peremptorily refused out of conscience to accept the
Bishoprike of Carlisle though thereunto elected, and earnestly entreated by King
Henry the second to accept the place, who offer^ him 300. Marks yearly revenue
for the increase of his living there, as did Sylvester de Everdon for a time
to,) Walter Malclerke Bishop of Carlisle; Cedda, Coena alias Albert Athelwold,
Thurstan, William Wickwane Archbishops of York, who all voluntarily, (most out
of conscience, some out of choler, others for their ease, some for their age,
others for other causes, best known to themselves) resigned both these their
Archbishops and Bishoprikes, being so many domesticke presidents to your
Lordships (who have long since given over the maine part of your Episcopal
function preaching,) now to do the like, according to your joint and several
Promises, in case you cannot prove your Archiepiscopall and Episcopal
lurisdictions lure divino, and give a satisfactory Answer to these few papers,
which I presume you can never do; since not only Epist. 2. 83. 85. in Tit. 1.
Phil. 1. and 1. Tim. 3.
Hieron, In Ephesians. 4. and 1. Tim. 3.
Ambrose, Romans 1. in Phil. Hom. 11. in 1. Tim 3. Hom. 2. in Tit. 1.
Chrysostom, Ep. 19. 83. 85. Quaest. ex utroque impert. 100. 101.
Augustine, In Phil. 1. 1. Tit. 1. 5. 7. 1. Tim. c. 3. and 4. Acts. 15. and 20.
17. 28.
Sedulius, Remigius, Primasius, Theodoret, Haymo, Beda, Rabanus Maurus,
Theophilact, Ori. l. 7. c. 12. l. 8. c. 5. De Ecclesiast. Officiis. l. 2. c. 7.
Isidor Hispalensis, De divinis officiis l. 2. c 35. 36.
Alcuminus, In Acts. 15. and 20. 1. Tim 3. Phil. 1. 1. Tit. 1. 5. 7
Oecumenius, Distinct. 80. 93. Causa. 2. Qu. 7.
Gratian, the Counsels of Carthag^ 4. Con^. 22. to 26. of Aquisgran c. 8. 10.
11. Decretal. pars 5. c. 58. 59. 72. 107. 143. 144.
Iuo Camotensis, Sent. l. 4. Distinct. 24.
Peter Lombard, In Phil. 1. Tit. 1. and 1. Tim. 3.
Bruno and Amalarius Fortunatus de Eccles. officiis, l. 2. c. 13. Basilius
Magnus, in c. 3. Isayae. Nizianzen. Orat. 9. 13. 15. 21. 28.
other ancient, but even Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury, Richard Archbishop
of Ardmagh, all the Archbishops, Bishops and Clergy of England in 37. H. 8. in
their Institution of a Christen man chapter of Orders subscribed with all their
names, Stokesly Bishop of London, Tonstall Bishop of Durham, Reginald Peacocke
Bishop of Chichester, Bishop Hooper, Bishop Latimer, Bishop Jewel, Bishop
Alley, but even. Archbishop Whitgift himself and Bishop Bridges, to omit
Wickliffe, Swinderby, Walter Brute, S. John Oldcastle, Master John Lambert,
Master John Bradford, and other our Martyrs, Master Thomas Beacon, Master John
Fox, Master Alexander Novell, Doctor Whitaker, Doctor Humfry, Doctor Willet,
Doctor Agray, Doctor Tailor, Doctor Ames, Doctor Raynolds, Doctor Fulke, and
others in Quoted by Gersonius Bucerus, the Petition to Queen Elizabeth, Master
Parker, and Doctor Bastweeks Books.
their authorized writings printed here in England cum privilegio, and public
allowance, with the forecited statutes of our Realm, and all the Bishops
Patents in the Reign of King Edward the 6. in express terms, conclude your
Archiepiscopall, and Episcopal Jurisdiction to, over other Ministers, to be a
mere human invention long after the Apostles time, to prevent, (or rather as
the event has ever since prooved, to engender, foment, and occasion) all
schisms factions, errors and disorders in the Church; when as Matthew. 20, 20,
to 29, Marc. 10, 35, to 48, Lu. 22. 23, to 28.
Christ himself and 1. Pet. 5, 1, to 6, Acts. 14, 23, c. 20, 17, 28, Phil. l,
1, Tit. 1, 5, 7. 1. Tim. 3, etc. c. 5, 17, c. 4. 14, Iam. 5, 14*
his Apostles since, ordained a Parity, an equality both among his Apostles and
Ministers, and ever instituted many Bishops, elders over every particular
Church, but never any one Bishop or Minister over many, as the best means to
preserve unity and root out sins, occasioned only by the pride, ambitious
couvetousnesse, power, and Tyranny of domineering Prelates. Thus craving pardon
for my boldness in pressing your Lordships, like two honest plain dealing
men, to make good your words, that so we may once again become
fellow-brethren, and walk hand in hand together like equals m See Bp. Jewels
Defense of the Apology. part. 2, c. 3, Divis. 5, an excellent place for this
purpose.
without that infinite Lordly distance, which is now between us. I take my
leave and rest

Your Lordships faithful Monitor A. B. C.

A brief Exhortation to the Archbishops and Bishops of England in respect of
the present Pestilence.
MY LORDS, (for so you style Bishop Whites Title to his Treatise of the
Sabbathday.
your selves, and will be intiteled by all men, notwithstanding the Math. 23,
8, 9, 10, 11, c. 20, 25, 26, Iam. 3, 1, 1, Pet. 5, 3,
Lords own inhibition to the contrary,) the Prophet Isay. c. 26. 9. has
informed me; that when Gods Judgments are on the earth, the inhabitants of the
world will learn righteousness: and who knows, whither your Lordships, (as
properly inhabitants, if not servants and lovers to, of the world, as any of
what ever profession, though you 1, John. 2, 15, 16, 17, John. 17. 14, 15, 16,
Math. 6. 24. 2, Tim. 4, 10.
should not be so) may not now in this time of Pestilence, when Gods Judgments
are everywhere so rife among us, learn righteousness as well as others, (if
you think not your selves to wise to learn, to old to be instructed,) if any
man will but take the pains to teach you. Hearken therefore, I beseech you, as
you tender, either the preservation of your lives in this time of mortality, or
the salvation of your souls in the great day of Judgment; or the lives and
souls of his Majesty's Subjects, committed to your pastoral charge, to a
short lecture, (no ways overburthen some to your memories,) which I shall here
read unto you for your good, if you please either so to interpret it, or come
with a sincere conscience for to hear it. It may be that in regard of your
sacred Episcopal Order, you conceit your selves altogether plague-free, and as
wholly exempt from divine, as you now strive to be from temporal Jurisdiction;
(which makes you neither to dread the plague, which has seized upon Theodosius
the second an Emperor and sundry Kings, as Kinredus, Offa, (whom Platina in
the life of Pope Constantinus records, to have both died of the Plague at Rome)
with many other died of the Plague.
sundry Kings and laid them in the dust,) nor as yet any way to endeavor by
fasting and prayer, to prevent either it, or that famine likely to accompany
it. But to instruct you, how you are still but men, (and so exposed to all
those mortal sicknesses which continually assault the crazy fortresses of our
2 Cor. 5, 1,
earthly Tabernacles, Non obstante, your Rochets, Miters, Crosiers, and all
other your Episcopal harness,) give me leave in a word or two to acquaint
you; That Matthew Westminster. An. 591, p. 231.
Pelagius the second (though a Pope and Bishop of Rome) notwithstanding his
Pontifical Robes, Exorcismes, Pomp and Charms, was both seized upon and
devoured of this impartial disease, Anno Dom. 591. as Platina, Onuphrius,
Anastatius Stella, Fasciculus Temporum, Balaeus, Luitprandius, Vitelius, and
others testify in his life: which Plague (as Sermo 20. in ^etania Majori.
Petrus Blesensis Archideacon of Bath, records,) was sent by God as a just
Judgment upon the Romans and Italians, for giving themselves to drinking,
feasting, DAVNCING, sports and Pastimes, even on Easter day, and other
following Holy Days, after their participation of the blessed Sacrament of
Christ's body and blood, (many of them being cons^med and dying of the plague in
the very midst of their sports, mirth, ales ord pos^^mes,) and on this Pope
himself for not restraining them from this prophanes. A president which should
make your Lordships fear and tremble, this present Plague beginning here on
Easterweeke last, as that Plague then did; no doubt for the selfsame
profanation of Gods own day and Sacraments, with those abuses, sports,
sins, pastimes for which they then were plagued; which your Lordships, have
not only, not restrained, but countenanced, patronized, and propagated all you
could, this Pope going not so far, Cantinus Bishop of Avernium, Cato his
Successor in the same See, Rupertus Bishop of Triers, Hermannus Bishop of
Verd^num, Rainold Bishop of Colen, Conrade Bishop of Augusta, Walricus Bishop
of Spiers, Ruggerus Bishop of Herbipolis and Sigsridus of the same, Eberhardus
Bishop of Ratisbon, Gerion Bishop of Halberstat; all died of the plague. Cent.
Magd. 6. Col. 7, 31, Ibid. 137, Cent. 10. Col. 575. Cent. 12. Col. 1454. Ibid.
1466. Ibid. 1488. Ibid. 1489. Cent. 12, 1492. and 1493. Col. 1512. Col. 1533.
In the great Plague that happened in the Emperor Frederike Barbarossa his
army in Italy, many Germane Prelates and some German Princes which came with
him died of the Pestilence; neither their consecration, nor their function
being any antidote * Grimstons Imperial History p. 490.
against this disease. In the great Fox Acts and Monuments p. 632.
Council of Basil. Anno 1431. (to name no more foreign examples) Lodovicus
Patriarch of Aquilcia, the Bishops of Ebron, Lubecke, Constance, and others,
died of the Plague; Aencas Silvius himself (afterward Pope) being there
stricken with this disease, where of be lay three days together at the point
of death, all men despairing of his life, but yet by Gods help escaped. If any
of your Lordships should think these foreign Presidents prove not, that any
English Prelates are obnoxious to the selfsame disease; to rectify this
mistake, I shall present you with some domesticke examples, worthy your most
serious consideration. Godwins Catalogue of English Bishops p. 183.
Ann. Dom. 664* on the 26. day of October. Ceadda the second Bishop of London,
with all the Monks of his new erected Monastery at Lestinghen, were taken
away with the Plague. The very next year following Godwin. Ibid. p. 629.
Anno 665. Tuda the fourth Bishop of Durham died of the Pestilence. Godwin.
Ibid. p. 195.
Anno 1258. Fulco Basset the 45. Bishop of London, was smitten to death with
the same fatal disease. Godwin. Ibid. p. 198. 444.
Michael Northbrooke his Successor the 57. Bishop of London Anno 1361. perished
of the Plague; and the same year, Reginald Brian Bishop of S. David's, being
translated to Ely, deceased of the Plague before his translation could be
perfected. And to cite no See Grafton. p. 123*
more in so plain a case. Godwin. Ibid. p. 164. 244. 617. Antiquit. Eccles.
Brit. p. 345.
Anno 1500. Thomas Langhton Bishop of Winchester, then Archbishop of Canterbury
elect but not enstalled, and Thomas Rotheram Archbishop of York, were both in
the self same year swept away together with this pestilentiall disease. These
several Presidents, to omit all others, may be a good Memento and Monition to
your Lordships (being Bishops and Archbishops) to put you in mind, both of
your mortality in general (which most fear you seldom seriously consider
off, being so overmuch taken up with Nemo potest duobus Dominis servire, Deo
and Mammonae. Si te curiae, and maxim scaccarij labyrinthis immerseris* magna
spiritualis exercitij dispendia patieris. Quid tibi ad Fiscales redditus, ut,
vel horula brevi curam posthabeas animarum? Nunquid Christus te ad Telonium
elegit? Matthaeus semel inde sum^tus, denuo ad ipsum non rediit: Non sis ergo
in turba little qui secularia spritualibus anteponunt, glutientes Ca^^elum,
culicem liquantes. etc. Petrus Blesensis De Instit. Episc. Tractatus.
secular employments, not compatible with your spiritual functions,) and that
you though Bishops are subject to this disease, this stroke of God as well as
others, as these your Predecessors: and therefore should now at length, after so
many weeks delay, endeavor to appease Gods wrath and cease this plague begun
among us, (which every day spreads it self more and more) by public fasting;
prayer, preaching and humiliation the remedy, not only Number. 6. 25. 6. Joel. 1.
14. 15. 16. c. 2. 12. 13. 14. Isay 22. 12. 13. 14. Zeph. 2. 1. 2.
prescribed in Scripture by God himself, but likewise by the whole Church and
State of England in the two last great plagues both in 1. Iacobi, and in the
first year of our present Sovereigns reign, as the several Books of common
prayer and order of fasting, then published by these noble Princes special
command, yet testify on record: both of these books jointly confessing and
bewayling, that among other sins occasioning these two dreadful maneating
Pests, this was not the least; That the So the Book of 1. Iacobi. styles it.
SABBATH DAY, was not kept holy, but profaned; and therefore no wonder that
these plagues break in upon us. And may not your Lordships and the whole
Kingdom justly fear, that this very Sin of Sabbath-breaking, and profaning
Gods own sacred day by sports, WAKES, MAYGAMES, DAVNCING, drunkenness,
chambering, wantonness, idleness, traveling, unnecessary labor and the like,
which drew on these two former plagues upon us, has been one maine cause of
this present Pest, which begins thus freshly to destroy us? It being most
apparent to our shame, (and I fear to all our smart) that the Lordsday
Sabbath, (for so our own Of the time and place of prayer, and against
disobedience and wilful Rebellion part. 3.
Homilies ten times styled it before the Troubles of Frankfort, Anno 15^4. when
Sunday no Sabbath p. 6. 20. 21.
Doctor Pocklington, or Doctor Bounds Book Anno 1595. when Hist. of the
Sabbath part. 2. c. 8.
Doctor Heylynfables; that the Lords day was first anabaptized a Sabbath day
and Christened with this name by some Jewish Godfather, to overthrowe the
Liturgy and discipline of the Church of England, who yet gave it this Title
long before these ignorant Doctors dream, both in her Homilies and approoved
writers works,) has of late been more generally, publicly, audaciously
profaned in most places of the Realm by the fore named Pastimes, abuses and
disorders, then beforethose two sweeping plagues, not only in point of
practice, which is ill; but even in point of Doctrine, which is worse; many
late authorized Bishop White, Doctor Heylyn, Doctor Pocklington, Dostor
Primrose, Christopher Dow, Edmund Reeve and others.
Histories, Treatises and Discourses of the Sabbath; not fearing publicly to
maintain the Lawfullnesse of dancing, morrises, maygames, dedication Feasts,
pastimes, sports and ordinary labor even in Gods own day, as the Doctrine of
the Church of England; when as acute Master John Sprint, in his proposition for
the Christian Sabbath day, printed by license London, 1607. p. 4. (newly
reprinted) and learned Doctor John White in his Sest. 38. n. 1. p. 111. Digres.
46. Sect. 43. n. 6. p. 165. 166.
way to the true Church, 5. times printed by Authority (yea set forth and
defended by Doctor Francis White now Bishop of Ely,) expressly brand it, not
only as a Popish and Heathenish practice* but likewise as a point of Popish
religion, which directly tends to the maintenance of open sin and liberty of
life, and expressly allows most palpable wickedness, directly tending to the
desolation of public government and private honesty; being that which has
made the Papists the most notorious Sabbath Breakers that live, In quartum
Praeceptum.
Zanchius, and In Joan. c. 7.
Musculus also branding this very Doctrine of liberty they now teach and the
practice of (...), as Popish and all the Bishops, Clergy, King, Lords,
Commons, and Parliament of England in King Henry the S. his reign, condemning
it in Institution of a Christian man, and a Necessary Erudition etc. Exposition
on the fourth Commandment.
two several books, as merely Jewish; to check the dotage of those Novell
Doctors who defi(...) the strict sanctification of the Lords day by abstinence
from dancing, sports, and pastimes, Iudaizing; when as that they plead for, is
truly such. This gross profanation therefore of the Lords day both in
Doctrine and practice, 2. Chron. 36. 15. 16. 17. 1. These. 2. 14, 15, 16.
aggravated with the late suspending, silencing, exco^municating, pursevaning,
vexing, persecuting, depriving, croushing of many learned, painful, godly
conscionable Ministers, both against all the Rules of Canon Law, Common Law,
Statute Law, conscience, reason, piety, charity, justice, and the Presidents of
all former ages, merely for refusing out of conscience upon their Episcopal
Mandates, to have any hand or finger in acting, in proclaiming any thing which
might animate their people to this pestiferous sin, (punished within these
three years with many memorable See A Divine Tragedy lately acted.
particular judgments of God, immediately executed from heaven;) has no doubt
so far provoked our most gracious God, that now he can hold Ier. 20. 9.
off his hands no longer from smiting us, with his dreadful Judgments, which
some of us have already felt, and most of us now fear: who questionless will
never take off his Pests and Judgments from us, till your Lordships shall take
off your most unjust Suspensions and censures from those who have thus suffered
in his quarrel, and all of us repented of this our crying sin of profaning
Gods own sacred day, both in point of Doctrine and practice: An abomination
never more rife in any then this our present age, by reason of your Lordships
patronizing propagating and defending of it, in such a public, shameless,
violent manner, as no former age can ever parallel, to Gods dishonor, your own
eternal infamy, and the fitting of your selves, and this whole Kingdom for
those public judgments, (not only of a late extraordinary cold winter, and
two successive dry summers, which threaten a famine of bread to recompense
that Amos. 8. 11.
Famine of Gods word that you have lately caused, to omit all other miseries
which we suffer,) but likewise of that plague which is now dispersed: In the
pulling down whereof, as your Lordships have had, nodoubt, a deeper hand then
others, so you have great cause to fear, you shall feel the irresistible
mortiferous stroke thereof, as much, or more then others. The Plague, you well
know, is Gods own Arrow Psalm. 91. 5. who ordains his arrows against the
Persecutors. Psalm. 7. 13. And are not some at least of your Lordships such. It
is Gods own hand, 2. Sam. 24. 14. 15. Ier. 21. 6. Now Gods hand shall find
out all his Enemies, his right hand shall find out those that hate him, Psalm.
21. 8. And are not many of your Lordships in that number? It is, Gods own
brandished sword. Psalm. 8. 6. And whom does God wound and slay therewith but
the head Ps. 68. 21. Deuteronomy. 32. 41.
of his Enemies, and the hayry scalpe of those who go on still in their
trespasses? And are not to many of your Lordships such; who even now in the
very midst of Gods Judgments; proceed on still in your malicious, violent,
implacable hatred, enemities and persecutions against Gods faithful Ministers,
Saints, and the very power of holiness; in your Lordly Pomp, ambition,
avarice, pride, envy, arrogance, cruelty, oppression, injustice, luxury,
secularity, suppression of preaching, prayer, fasting, Communion of Saints, and
what ever savours of piety; and in profaning of Gods own sacred day, both in
your doctrine and practice; which is seldom worse solemnized, or more
profaned as In Ps. 92.
Master Bucer long since observed, Quam in ipsis Episcoporum aulis, then in
Bishops own Palaces, where neither Lord, nor Chaplain, nor servant, make any
great conscience of profaning it sundry ways, to give the better example of
piety and holiness unto others. How then (being heavy laden with these many
sins, and having the prayers, the cries, the clamours, the tears, the sighs
and groans of all Gods people against you, if not of the whole Kingdom to,
the daily imprecations of many distressed Ministers, people, whom you have most
injuriously and inhumanely handled without any lawful cause,) can you but
fear Gods vengeance and expect his plagues, to sweep such Clods of sin and
mischief, such Pests and Prodigies as you are, clean away? Ps 2. 9. 10. 11.
12.
Be wise now therefore O ye Kings, (for such are you now become by giving
absolute Laws, and prescribing what Ceremonies, Articles, Rites, Oaths and
Novelties you please, even in your own names and rights alone, unto his
Majesty's people, and executing all Lordly, Kingly Soveraignity and Dominion
over Animabus Prelatus es, non corporib. nihil Prelato commune est cum Pilato.
Petrus. Blesensis. Tract. de Institut. Episcopi, Ioanni Wigormensi Episc.
dicatus.
men's bodies, and estates as well as souls, contrary to your Saviors express
Inhibition. Math. 20. 25. 26.) be learned O ye Judges of the earth: (for such
are you now in many temporal Courts, and would be gladly such in more, in
steed of being preaching Bishops in our Pulpits and Pastors of men's souls:
Serve the Lord in fear (for that is in truth your duty, not to be Lords your
selves, or reverenced and served with fear as Lords are wont to be:) and
rejoice unto him (not with Organes, Choristers, Pipes, and Daunces, but) with
trembling kiss the son (whom you have hitherto buffeted Acts 9. 4. 5.
persecuted in his faithful Ministers and Servants) least he be angry, and ye
perish in the way, even now when his wrath is kinded but a little, and his
plagues but newly kinded; least if ye refuse to turn from all your former
sins and wickednesses, he begin at last to bruise you with this his rod of
Iron, and dash you in pieces like a Potters vessel, and there be Psalm. 7. 1.
none to deliver you from this his raging fury. Remember I beseech you that of
the Prophet Nahum Nahum. 1. 2.
God is jealous, and the Lord revengeth, the Lord revengeth, and is furious;
the Lord will take vengeance on his adversaries, and he reserveth wrath for his
enemies. And though he has a long time Romans 9. 22.
suffered you with much patience (as he does other vessels of wrath fitted to
destruction,) to spoil, oppress and deal treacherously with his people; yet
consider now, that the times are drawing near wherein Isay. 33. 1. Vae^^is qui
praesident, hominibus, nisi eis praesideat Deus. Petrus Blesensis. de Instit.
Episcopi Tractat.
you may be recompensed with the like usage; as the Prophet Isai threatens. Woe
to thee that spoylest and thou that wast not spoiled, and dealest
treacherouslly and they dealt not treacherously with thee: when thou shall
cease to spoil, thou shall be spoiled, and when thou shall make an end to
deal treacherously, they shall deal treacherously with thee. Wherefore my
Lords Dan. 4. 27.
break of your sins and sinnfull proceedings by sincere and timely
repentance, and of Lions, Bears, Acts 20. 29 Frequens est inter Episcopos
aliquem invenire, qui primum suae promotionis animam dedicet sanctitati; cumque
in sua novitatesit factus agnus, inveteratus aliquot dierum, fit rapacissimus
Lupus. Petrus Blesensis De Instit. Episcop. Tractatus.
Wolves, Thieves, and Robbers, (which many Bishops have degenerated into)
become Isay. 11. 6. 7.
Lambs and Shepherds to Gods people; and now at last, Col. 3. 12. 13. 14. 15.
as the Elect of God, holy and beloved, put on bowels of mercies, kindness,
humbleness of mind, meekness, long suffering, forbearing and forgiving all
those against whom you have any quarrel, even as Christ forgave you so also
do ye. And above all things, put on Charity, which is the bond of
perfectness, and let the peace of God rule in your hearts, to which you are
also called in one body; and let the word of God dwell richly in you, in all
wisdom etc. And if you will divert this Pest either from your selves or
others; then presently begin to turn to the Lord with all your hearts, with
fasting, weeping, and with mourning, sanctify a fast call a solemn assembly
gather the Elders, etc. (and not by proxy but in proper person, if ever you
will either be reputed the Priests or Ministers of the Lord,) weep between
Porch and the Altar, and say Spare thy people O Lord etc. give not thine
heritage to reproach. Alas for the Joel. 2. 12. 13. 14. 15. 14. 15. 16.
day of the Lord is at hand, and as a destruction from the Allmighty shall it
come, and who shall escape it? And that your fast may be acceptable, beware
that it be not Isay. 58. 4. (...) 14.
a fast for strife and debate, to smite with the fist of wickedness, or to
make your voice to be heard on high, bewareleast it be only a hanging down of
your heads, like a bulrish and aff licting of your souls only for a day. But
let it be that true fast, which God has chosen, to loose the bands of
wickedness, to let the oppressed go free, to undo the heavy burdens (which
you have lately laid on Ministers and people) and to break of every yoke,
(wherewith you like Lordly Barons have clogged the Consciences (yea and bodies)
of Gods servants, and brought them into Quidan Episcopi Regum munificcntias and
ele^mosinas antiquorum, abusive Baronias and Regalia^ocant Et in occasionem
turpissimae servitutis and seipsos Barons appella^t vereor ne de illis
queruletur Dominus, and dicet. Ipsi regnaverunt and non ex me. Principes
exstiterunt and ego non cognovi Scias te assumpsisse Pastoris officium non
Baronis. Certe Joseph in Aegypto Patrem suum and fratres instruxit, ut dicerent
Pharaoni, viri Pastores sumus: Maluit eos profiteri Pastoris officium, quam
Principis aut Baronis.
a miserable bondage and captivity under you, as if they were your vassals, not
Brethren:) to break your bread to the hungry, to bring the poor that are cast
out, (yea the poor Ministers and Christians you have most unchristianly cast
out of their livings, houses and Gods house it self, thrown into your nasty
prisons, where they must still be detained, when others are set free) to your
houses, (yea to their own houses, livings and Gods house again,) to cloth
the naked, to draw out your soul to the hungry, to satisfy the afflicted
soul; to turn away your feet from the Sabbath from doing your pleasure on
Gods holy day to call the Sabbath a delight, the holy of the Lord honorable,
to honor God alone therein, not doing your own ways, not finding your own
pleasure, nor speaking your own words. If thus you now fast and do,
peradventure you may be spared in this day of the Lords great wrath, and God
will make our health to spring forth speedily. But if you forbear to do it,
and proceed on as you have done, be sure Ier. 5. 9.
that God will visit you for these things, and that his soul shall be avenged
on such a Nation as you are. He will no doubt Ier. 11. 11. 23. Petrus Blesensis
Tractat. De Instit. Episeopi.
bring evil upon you, and you shall not be able to escape, in this year both
of yours and his visitation: in which as you have most strangly visited others,
thrusting many of Gods best and painefullest Ministers from their Ministry in
sundry places, upon mere new fancies and Articles of your own, against Law
and justice; so God the supreme Visitor, will in his justice visit you, in one
kind or other, with his most righteous judgments, and cut you off with his
plagues, as he has done your forecited predecessors. This you have cause to
fear, and seriously to expect, unless you forthwith become New-Creatures: Lo
I have in few words admonished you; If you amend, there may be hope of mercy,
if you continue, what ye are, contemn alla dmonitions, Isay. 41. 11. 12.
striving still as you have done, against God, his truth and people, you shall
be ashamed, confounded and perish, you shall become as nothing and as a thing
of naught, For God has spoken it and he Numb. 23. 19.
will make it good. Psalm. 37. 10. 38.
The transgressors shall be destroyed together, the end of the wicked shall be
cut off. For yet a little while, and the wicked shall not be, thou shall
diligently consider their place, and it shall not be found. 2. Tim. 2. 7.
Consider what I have written, and the Lord give you understanding in all
things.

Farewell.
Whether Timothy were ever a Diocaesan Bishop, or first, or sole Bishop of
Ephesus?
QVESTION. I.

IF the multitude, or common received opinion might take place, or our Prelates
be the Judges of this Controversy, they would presently conclude affirmatively
without dispute; that Timothy was a Diocaesan Bishop; yea, the first and sole
Bishop of the Ephesians. But if the Scripture, or verity may be umpire, it will
evidently appear, first, that Timothy was no Bishop (I mean no such Bishop as
Iure divino or humano, is different from an ordinary Presbyter in dignity and
degree) much less Bishop, or first or sole Bishop of Ephesus, as is generally
conceived; which I shall clearly evidence by these ensuing Scriptures and
reasons.

That Timothy was no Bishop in this sense, is apparent.

1. First, because S. Paul and Luke, who were best acquainted That Timothy was
no Bishop.
with him, and make frequent mention of him, never style him a Bishop, neither
is he termed a Bishop in any text of Scripture. S. Paul in his Epistles to
him, calls him, his own Son in the faith: 1. Tim. 1. 2. A good MINISTER (not
a Bishop) of Jesus* Christ* 1. Tim. 4. 6. His dearly beloved Son. 2. Tim. 1.
2. A good Soldier of Jesus Christ. 2. Tim. 2* 3. A (...) in that needed not to
be ashamed* rightly dividing the word of God, 2. Tim. 2. 11* In his other
Epistles, he terms him* ^ 1. These. 3. 2. ^ Romans 16. 21. His Brother and
beloved Son. 1. Cor. 4. 17. 2. Cor. 1. 19. Col. 1. 1. A workman of the Lord,
1. Cor. 16, 10. A servant of Jesus Christ, Phil. 1, 1. but never a Bishop. S.
Luke terms him Paul's Companion, Minister, attendant, and fellow-worker only,
Acts 16, 1, 2, 3, c. 17, 14, 15, c. 18, 5, c. 19, 22, c. 20, 4. never so much
as intimating him to be a Bishop. The Scripture therefore never phrasing him a
Bishop, nor giving him that Title, among all his other Epithites; is an
infallible argument, that he was in truth no Bishop, but rather an Evangelist,
as he is expressly styled, 2. Tim. 4, 5. Do the work of an Evangelist.

2. Secondly, Because he was S. Paul's Associate, Copartner, Brother and
fellow-helper in his Apostolical function, whence he often styles him, his
Brother, his fellow-worker; and conjoynes him with him in the Prologue* the
inscription of most of his Epistles, which are written in both their names,
witness* 2. Cor. 1, 1, c. 4, 17. 2. Cor. 1, 1, 19. Col. 1, 1, 1. These. 1, 1, c.
3, 2. 2. These. 1, 1. Phil. 1, 1, c. 2, 19. Romans 16, 21. Heb. 13, 23. Timothy
therefore being a Copartner with S. Paul in his Apostle-ship, or Apostolical
function, superior in degree to the Episcopal office, (as is apparent by
Ephesians. 4. 11. 1. Cor. 12. 18. and the general consent of all men,) it is not
probable that he would divest himself of his Apostolical Jurisdiction, to
become an inferior Bishop, or relinquish a Superior to take up an inferior
degree. Who ever saw of late any Archbishop or Bishop to deny himself of his
Archiepiscopall or Episcopal preeminency, to be made a poor Country Vicar or
Curate? And can we then conjecture, that Timothy would relinquish his
Apostleship for an Ephesian Bishop-pricke; or else, hold it by way of Commendam
with his Apostleship? (Commendams being not of such antiquity, and a mere late
Popish innovation) or descend from an See Gersonius Bucerus De Gubernatione
Ecclesiae: p. 512. 513. usque 518.
Evangelist-ship to a Bishop-ricke?

3. Thirdly, because Timothy was ever either accompanying S. Paul in his
Travels or bonds, as his fellow-helper, minister, and assistant; or else, sent
by him from one Church to another, as his Messenger, Delegate, or College, to
establish comfort, and instruct them; being never long resident in any one
fixed place, or Church, as all Bishops were. See Cent. Magd l. 2. c. 10. Col.
625. 626.
We read Acts 16, 1, usque 12. That Timothy came first of all to Paul when he
was at Derbe and Listra; Paul then taking him to go forth with him; and that
they went both together through the Churches of Phrygia, Galatia, Asia, Mysia,
and at last came to Philippy where he abode with Paul; and from thence wrote
the first Epistle of Paul to the Corinthians, as the If Postscripts be of
Credit as the Bishops make them.
Postscript manifests. In which Epistle he writes thus unto them: 1, Cor. 16,
10. Now if Timotheus come, see that he may be with you without fear; for he
works the work of the Lord as I also do. And c. 4, 17. For this cause have
I sent unto you Timotheus, who is my beloved Son and faithful in the Lord,
who shall bring you into remembrance of my ways which be in Christ, as I teach
everywhere in every Church. By which it is apparent, that Timothy was sent by
Paul from Philippi to Corinth (after this Epistle) to instruct them; Where he
continuing a while, repaired again to Paul to Philippi; and there joins with
Paul in the second Epistle to the Corinthians, written in both their names; 2.
Cor. 1. 1. informing them in the 19. verse: That the Son of God Jesus Christ,
who was preached among them by us, even by me, Sylvanus and Timotheus, was not
yea and nay, but in him was yea. By which it is evident, that Timothy had
before this second Epistle written, preached Jesus Christ among the Corinthians
by Paul's appointment. After which, Paul remooving from Philippy, Timothy
accompanied him to Thessalonica and B(...)a, where he abode, till Paul came to
Athens; from whence he sent a command to Timothy to Berea, to come to him
with all speed to Athens, where he stayed for him: Acts. 17, 13, 14, 15, 16.
Which he did accordingly: joining with Paul in the first and second Epistle to
the Thessalonians, written from Athens, in both their names. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 1. 2.
These. 1. 1. yea whiles Paul stayed at Athens, he sent Timothy from thence to
the Thessalonians, to establish and comfort them concerning their faith; that
they should not be moved by their afflictions, where he continuing for a
space, came from them again to Paul to Athens, bringing him good tidings of
their faith and charity: 1. These. 3, 1. to 7. After this, he remooveth with
Paul to Corinth, from thence being sent into Macedonia he came again to Paul
unto Corinth. Acts. 18, 5, from whence Paul writing his Epistle to the Romans,
remembers the salutation of Timotheus his Worke-fellow to the Romans, among
others: Romans 16, 11. After this Paul remooving to If Timotheus were then Bishop
of Ephesus, why did Paul thus send him from his Cure, and Bishops See?
Ephesus, sent Timotheus and Erastus (two of them who there ministered unto him)
into Macedonia; himself staying in Asia for a season* Acts. 19, 20. From
whence Paul afterward passed into Macedonia and Greece, and then returning into
Asia, Timotheus and others accompanied him; and going before tarried for him at
Troas, Acts 20, 4, 5. Whether Paul sent for the Elders and Bishops of the
Church of Ephesus, giving them a strict and severe charge, to take heed to
themselves, and to all the flock over which the holy Ghost had made them
Bishops, to feed the Church of God which he had purchased with his own blood:
v. 17. 28. etc. A task fitter for Timothy to enjoyne them, had he been their
Diocaesan, then Paul; and a charge more meet for Timothy to receive, then they;
had he then been Bishop of the Sea of Ephesus: who being so near Ephesus,
should have accompanied these Elders of his Church to Ephesus, when Paul
dismissed them, rather then have left his flock at random after so strict a
charge to feed them. But yet though the Elders went back to their Cures from
Miletus, Timothy did not so, for from thence he accompanied Paul to Jerusalem,
Acts. 21, 15, 16, 17. and from thence to Rome. For the Epistle to the
Colossians written from Rome, is penned in both their names, Col. 1, 1. and the
Epistle to the Hebrewees, as the Postscript testifies* was written to the
Hebrews from Italy, by Timothy; where Timothy was for a while imprisoned, and
then set at liberty, Heb. 13. 23. After which Paul writes his Epistle to the
Philipptans from Rome, where he was in bonds; at which time Timothy was
present with him joining in this Epistle: Philip. 1. 1. informing the
Philippians, that he trusted to send Timotheus shortly unto them, that he
also might be of good comfort, when he should know their estate, Philip* 2, 19.
whether Timothy being sent by him, as is most probable, Paul wrote his second
Epistle to him, at his second appearing before Nero, charging him to do his
diligence to come shortly to him before winter, 2. Tim. 4, 9, 21. he being then
not at Ephesus, but at Troas or Philippi; as is apparent by 2. Tim. 4, 12, 13.
and Philip. 2, 19. Timothy therefore thus ever accompanying Paul in his Travels
and Bonds, and traveling from one Church to another by his appointment and
mission, never keeping any fixed residence in any one place, much less at
Ephesus, could not be Bishop or Presbyter of any particular Church; the
Apostles instituting no non-resident Bishops or Elders, but such only as were
to reside with those flocks, over which the Holy Ghost had made them Bishops,
or Overseers, to watch over and feed them with the bread of life, and to go in
and out before them both in life and doctrine. 14. Acts. 23, c. 20, 28, 29, c.
21, 17, 18. 1. Pet. 5, 1, 2, 3. Col. 4, 17. Romans 12, 6, 7, 8. 1, Tim. 5, 17. 2,
Tim. 4. 3. Tit. 1, 5, 6, 7, 8. John. 10, 3, 4, 5, 14, 16, 27, 28. Ezeck. 34, 2.
to 25. Ier. 23, 3, 4. c. 3, 15. Isay. 56, 10, 11, c. 40, 11. Zech. 11, 17.

4. Fourthly, Because Paul, who best knew Timothies condition, expressly terms
him, A Minister of God (not a Bishop) 1. These. 3, 2. informing him, that if he
did put the Brethren in mind of these things he enjoynes him, he should show
himself a good Minister (not a Bishop) of Jesus Christ, 1, Tim. 4* 6.
Therefore certainly he was no Bishop, but a Minister, when this Epistle was
written to him, unless it be granted, that every Minister is a Bishop, as S.
Paul does phrase them. Acts. 20, 28. Tit. 1, 5, 7. Which the Opposites dare not
grant, though an undoubted truth: Phil. 1, 1. 1, Tim. 3, 1, 2, 3.

5. Because when Paul wrote his first Epistle to Timothy, he was then very
young in years, 1. Tim. 4, 12. and but See 1. Tim. 3. 14. 15.
newly entered into the Ministry: whence he charged him, to give attendance to
reading, to exhortation, to doctrine, to meditate upon these things, and to
give himself wholly to them, that his profiting might appear unto all men. 1.
Tim. 4, 13, 15. Instructing him in that Epistle, how and what to preach, and
how to demean himself in his Ministry, into which he was then but freshly
entered, as most Expositors on this Epistle accord; and the 1. Tim. 1, 3.
compared with Acts. 16, 1, 2, 3, 4, 9, 10. c. 18, 19, 20, 21. c. 20. 1. to 13.
clearly demonstrate. Timothy therefore being but young in years, and newly
entered into the Ministry, when this first Epistle was written to him, was
questionles not instituted sole Bishop of Ephefus, by Paul; who in his very
Epistle to him 1. Tim. 3, 6. among other qualifications of a Bishop enumerates
this, That he must not be a Novice (as Timothy then was) least being lifted up
with pride, he should fall into the condemnation of the Devil: and so should
have contradicted his own instructions to Timothy, that a Bishop must be no
Novice, in creating him a Bishop; (which questionles he would not do) being
but then a Novice.

6. Becaufe Paul in the 1. Tim. 5, 1. charge Timothy, Not to rebuke an Elder,
but to entreat him as a Father. If Timothy then were not to reproove them as a
Father over them, but to entreat Elders, as his Fathers, he was certainly no
Lord Bishop or Superintendent over Elders, but they rather Superiors unto him,
being to entreat them only as spiritual Fathers; whereas Lord Bishops and
their Chauncellours too, in our days, esteem the very best and gravest
Ministers under them, not as Fathers, but as underlings, vicars, and Curates to
them; not entreating them as Fathers, but rating, reviling, and domineering
over them as if they were their Curs and vasalls, and they their Lords and
Masters.

7. Because Timothy was to account those Elders that ruled well, especially
those who labored in the word and Doctrine, worthy of double honor. 1, Tim. 5,
17. He therefore being to render double honor to those Elders that ruled well
and labored in the word and doctrine; and not to receive double honor from
them; could be no Bishop, Father, or Lord paramount over them. Mal. 1, 6. Math.
15, 4. Romans 13, 7. 1, Tim. 6, 1. Honor ever coming for the most part, from the
inferior to the superior.

8. Because Paul exhorts Timothy, not to neglect the gift that was in him,
which was given him by prophecy with the laying on of the hands of the
Presbytery, 1, Tim. 4, 14. Now that gift which was given him by the laying on
of the hands of the Presbytery, was not his Episcopal function, (unless the
opposites grant, that he was consecrated Bishop of Ephesus by the Presbyters of
Ephesus:) but his Ministerial only: being therefore exhorted to exercise his
Ministerial function only, and to show himself a good Minister of Jesus
Christ, 1, Tim. 4, 6, 14, not to exercise any Episcopal authority; he was
questionless then no Bishop, but a Minister when this Epistle was compi^ed.

9. Because though Timothy, in the Postscript of the second Epistle to him, be
falsely styled, the first Bishop of the Ephesians, as I shall hereafter
manifest, yet in the body and Postscript of the first Epistle, he is named
Timothy only, without any mention of his Ephesian Bishopric; he was
therefore no Bishop either of Ephesus or any other place, when Paul sent his
first Epistle to him; for otherwise he would have been styled, the first
Bishop of Ephesus in the Postscript of the first Epistle, as well as of the
second, as is probable.

10. It would not stand with the Pomp and State of Bishop, (especially in our
days) to be commanded and posted up and down, from place to place, in such
manner as Timothy was by Paul, 1, Cor. 4, 7. Acts. 17, 14, 15. 1, These. 1, 3,
1, to 7. Acts. 19, 22, Phil. 3, 19. 2, Tim. 4, 9, 21, muchlesse, to Minister,
to Paul, as Timothy did, Acts. 19, 22, but least of all, to carry Paul's
Cloak, his Books, and Parchments after him, which Timothy is enjoined to
bring from Troas to Rome, 2, Tim. 4, 13. An office which our proud Prelates
would scorn to execute, though Paul himself should command them, as being
incompatible with their Episcopal dignity: Timothy therefore being so much at
Paul's beck, as to be his Messenger, his Minister, his cloak carrier, and
booke-bearer (even when some say he was the great Monarchical Prelate of all
Ephesus and Asia) was certainly no Bishop, at leastwise no such Lordly Bishop
as those of this age are.

2. Secondly. As all these several reasons evidence Timothy to That Timothy
was not Bishop of Ephesus.
be no Bishop, so in the next place, I shall manifest him to be no Bishop at
all of Ephesus, at leastwise not the first, or sole Diocaesan Bishop of that
City, and so by consequence, no Bishop at all, if not of Ephesus; since no
other Bishopric is assigned to him. The infallible verity whereof I shall
thus demonstrate.

1. First, there is not one syllable in Scripture (wherein the Titles and
actions of Timothy are frequently mentioned) which either directly, or by way
of necessary consequence, imply Timothy, to be either a Bishop, or Bishop of
Ephesus; which Paul in his Epistles to Ephesus, and Timothy, and S. Luke in the
Acts, would never have pretermitted, had Timothy been a Bishop of that famous
City.

2. The Scripture makes no mention of Timothies being at Ephesus; or of his
preaching there, save only that Paul besought (not commanded or ordered) him
to abide still to Ephesus, whiles he went into Macedonia, that he might charge
some that they teach no other Doctrine; neither give heed to fables, and
endless genealogies, which Minister questions rather then edefying, 1, Tim. 1,
3, 4, and to give attendance to reading, to exhortation, to doctrine, till he
came thither himself, which was but a short time after, 1, Tim. 4, 13, 14, 15.
Paul therefore not instituting Timothy any Diocaesan Bishop of Ephesus, but
only beseeching (which was voluntary not commanding) him, to abide there ( 1.
Tim. 3. 14. c. 4. 13. Gersonius, Bucerus, De Gubernatione Ecclesiae. p. 502.
usque 507.
till his own return from Macedonia,) both to instruct the people, and to
further himself in his own Studies; not to reside there during life; it is an
unanswerable argument, that he did not constitute him Bishop of Ephesus, (...)
some vainly hence infer: See 1, Tim. 3, 14, 15.

3. When Timothy was thus desired to abide at Ephesus by Paul, he was but
newly entered into the Ministry, as appears Vide Chytraeum On a mast. in
Timotheum, and Gersonium Bucerum: Dissertat. De Guber. Ecclesiae. p. 506. 507.
by the 1, Tim. 1, 3, c. 3, 15, compared with Acts. 16, 1, 3, 9, 10, 11, 12,
and by the 1, Tim. 4, 6, 10, 12, 13, 14. Now it is not probable, that Paul
would constitute Timothy a Diocaesan Bishop of all Ephesus, yea the very first
Bishop of that famous See, being but a youth, so soon as he had ordained him
to be a Minister: and before he knew how to behave himself, in the house and
Church of God, which then he did not, 1, Tim. 3, 15.

4. As Soon as Paul returned again from Macedonia to Ephesus, he sent Timothy
into Achaja, himself staying at Ephesus in Asia for a season, Acts. 19, 22, to
40, and from thence returned into Macedonia; and through it into Asia,
accompanied with Timotheus, and others: Acts. 20, 1, to 7, after which we
never read that Timothy writ, came or returned to Ephesus. Now if Timothy had
been Bishop of Ephesus, it is not probable that Paul upon his return from
Macedonia, would have sent him from Ephesus into Macedonia, to Corinth,
Philippi, and other Churches there, as he did Acts 19, 22, c. 20, 4, 5. 1 Cor.
14. 17, 2 Cor. 1, 19. Phil. 2, 19. 1, These. 3, 1, 2 6, or that Timothy would
have gone from his own Episcopal See, into another Bishops Dioces, and never
returned to his own Cure of Ephesus, (which for ought we read he never did
after his first departure thence) contrary to Paul's own direction to the
Bishops of Ephesus, Acts. 20, 28.

5. We read, that Paul sent Timothy into Macedonia, Acts. 19, 22. to preach
the Gospel to the Church of God there; that he sent him to the Church of
Corinth to bring them in remembrance of his ways which were in Christ, as he
t(...)ught everywhere, in every Church, and to work the work of the Lord, 1,
Cor. 4, 17, c. 16, 10, and that he accordingly preached Jesus Christ the Son
of God among them, 2, Cor. 1, 19. That he likewise sent him to the Church of
Thessalonica, to establish and comfort^ them, concerning their faith, 1, These.
3, 1, 2, 3, 4. and after that to Philippi from Rome, that he might know the
Sat of the Philippians, he having no man like minded, who would so naturally
care for their state as Timothy. Phil. 2, 19, 20. But we never read that Paul
sent him to Ephesus either to comfort, exhort, confirm, instruct them, or to
know their State after his first departure thence; which he would questionless
have done, had he been their Bishop, rather then thus have employed him to
other Churches. Timothy therefore was rather Bishop of these Cities and
Churches then of Ephesus.

6. As Timothy was sent by Paul to the Churches of corinth, Philippi, and
Thessalonica, so he joins with Paul in his Epistles written to those
Churches, directed to them in both their names: witness 2, Cor. 1, 1, Phil. 1,
1. 1, These. 1, 1, 2, These. 1, 1, in which Epistles Paul makes frequent of
Timothy: witness 1, Cor. 4, 17, c. 16, 10. Phil. 2, 19. 1, These. 3, 2, 6.
Moreover he joins with Paul in writings to the Colossians: Col. 1, 1, and
Paul in his Epistle to the Romans, c. 16, 21, remembers his salutation by name
to the Church and Saints of Rome, and in his Epistle to the Hebrews written by
Timothy as his Scribe, he makes mention of his delivery out of prison by name,
Hebr. 13, 23. Note well.
But in the Epistle to the Ephesians, written from Rome, long after Timothy was
supposed to be made Bishop of Ephesus; Timothy neither joins with Paul in the
indictment or salutation, neither does Paul so much as once name or mention him
throughout that Epistle, as he does in all the other Epistles to the Churches
whether he sent him, and in every of his Epistles else to any Church, except
in his Epistle to the Galathians. Timothy therefore doubtless was not Bishop
of Ephesus at this season; else he would have vouchsafed to have joined with
Paul in his Epistle to the Ephesians, as well as in his Epistles to other
Churches; or Paul being his special Friend and applauder, would have made some
honorable mention and commendation of him to the Church of Ephesus, (his own
peculiar Dioces as some affirm,) as he does in his Epistles to most other
Churches, where he was never Bishop. An unanswerable argument in my opinion,
that Timothy was never Bishop of Ephesus, since there is no news at all either
from, or of, or to, or concerning him in Paul's Epistle to the Ephesians, of
which he is surmised, to be the first, sole and genuine Bishop.

7. If Timothy were Bishop of Ephesus when Paul writ his first Epistle to him
why then did Paul himself excommunicate Hymenus and Philetus, and deliver them
unto Satan, and not write to Timothy to excommunicate these Heretics, and
play the Bishop in his own Dioces, (...), Tim. 1, 20. yea why did Paul
himself, no Timothy, lay hands upon the Disciples, there ordained after such
time as he was Bishop there, Acts. 19, 1, 6, 7? Was it because Timothy was a
negligent, or impotent Bishop, unwilling or unable to excommunicate Heretics,
or ordain Ministers? or in truth, because he was no Bishop then and there? Not
the first of these, since Timothy was neither negligent, nor impotent in his
function: therefore the latter, he being then, no Bishop, nor yet exercising
his Episcopal Jurisdiction there.

8. Had Timothy been Bishop of Ephesus, when Paul wrote his first Epistle to
him, no doubt Paul when he sent for the Elders of the Church of Ephesus, to
Miletus to take his final fare well of them, and made a solemn speech unto
them, charging them, To take heed unto themselves and to the flock over the,
which the Holy Ghost had made them Bishops, to feed the Church of God, which he
had purchased with his own blood, and Acts. 20, 17, to 38, would have made
some special mention of Timothy, and directed his speech more particularly to
him by name; as being the Prime Bishop of that Church, to whom this charge did
principally appertain. But Paul in that speech of his, makes no particular
mention at all of Timothy, neither directed he any part of his speech to him,
he being none of the Elders of Ephesus sent for to Miletus, or any of that
number whom the Holy Ghost had made Bishops of that flock and Church: he
coming along with Paul out of Macedonia into Asia to Troas and Miletus, Acts.
20, 3, 4, 5, etc. and so none of the number of Elders sent for and called from
Ephesus to Miletus, to whom this speech of Paul was applied. Therefore
questionles he was not then Bishop, muchlesse sole Bishop of Ephesus, as some
groundlesly affirm, against this unanswerable text.

9. Paul himself, as he sent Timothy to Philippi, Troas, and other Churches,
to instruct, confirm, comfort, and inquire of their estates; so he expressly
writes to Timothy, 2, Tim. 4, 12, that he had sent Tychicus unto Ephesus, for
the selfsame purpose. Which Tychicus as he did write the Epistle of Paul to
the Ephesians from Rome, so Paul in that very Epistle of his to the Ephesians,
c. 6, v. 21, 22, acquaintes them; That Tychicus a beloved brother and faithful
Minister in the Lord, should make known to them all things: whom (says he) I
have sent unto you for the same purpose, that ye might know our affairs, and
that he might comfort your hearts. So that if there were any particular
Diocesan Bishop of Ephesus instituted by Paul, this Tychicus (whom Dorotheus
makes one of the 70. Disciples and Bishop of Chalcedon in Bithinia) was more
like to be the man, then Timothy, as these two Scriptures evidence.

10. Paul himself makes mention of Elders in the Church of Ephesus RVLINGWELL,
and laboring in the word and doctrine, and so worthy of double Honor, 1, Tim.
5, 17. Which Elders he expressly styles, Bishops of Ephesus, Acts. 20, 27, 28.
These therefore being instituted Bishops of Ephesus even by the Holy Ghost
himself, and ruling, feeding, and taking the care, the oversight of that
Church by his appointment, questionless Timothy at the selfsame season would
not be Bishop there.

3. Thirdly, As Timothy was neither a Bishop, nor Bishop That Timothy was
neither the sole, nor the first-Bishop of Ephesus.
of Ephesus; so muchlesse was he the first, or sole Bishop there, as the
Postscript of the second Epistle to him in some late Coppies, terms him. Not
the first Bishop of Ephesus: For, as that Church was first planted by S. Paul,
who continued therefore a season: Acts. 18, 19, 20, c. 19, 1, to 41, c. 20, 17,
to 38. 1, Cor. 15, 32, c. 16, 8. 2, Tim. 1, 18, and after that for two years
and three months space together, disputing daily in the School of one
Tyrannus, so that all they who where in Asia heard the Gospel, Acts. 19, 8, 9,
10, during which time of Paul's residence there (in all 3. Years, Acts. 20,
31,) there needed no Bishop to govern and sway the Church, neither is it
probable that any Diocesan Bishop was there constituted: So the two first that
Paul left behind him at Ephesus at his first coming thither, to instruct that
Church were Priscilla and Aquila, Acts. 18, 18, 19, during whose abode there,
while Paul went from thence to Antioch, and over all the Country of Galatia
and Phrygia, in order strengthening all the Disciples; a certain Jew, named
Apollos, borne at Alexandria, an eloquent man and mighty in the Scriptures came
to Ephesus; Who being instructed in the way of the Lord, and servent in the
spirit, spoke and taught diligently the things of the Lord; and began to speak
boldly in the Lord: whom when Aquila and Priscilla had heard, they took him
unto them, and expounded to him the way of God more perfectly: Acts. 18, 22, to
27. So that Aquila whom Paul left first at Ephesus before Timothy, and Apollos
who thus preached there, may with greater reason be styled, the first Bishops
of Ephesus, then Timothy; whom Paul entreated to stay there only at his last
going into Macedonia: Acts. 20, 1 as Bucerus De Gubernat. ^ccles p. 506 usque
510. Cent. Magdeb. 1. l. 2. c. 10. Col. 626.
most accord. Besides, we read, that Paul at his second coming to Ephesus,
before Timothy was constituted Bishop thereof, finding certain Disciples
there, al out 12. in number, who were only baptized into the baptism of John,
and had not received the Holy Ghost since they believed, baptized them in the
name of the Lord Jesus, and when he had laid his hands upon them, the Holy
Ghost came on them, and they spoke with tongues, and prophesied: Acts. 19, 1.
to 18. Which 12. abiding at Ephesus, as is most probable, by Acts. 20, 17, 28,
29, to rule and instruct the Lords flock in that City; may more properly be
termed, the first Bishops of the Ephesians, then Timothy, who as he was not
the first, so muchlesse was he the sole Bishop of that See; as is infallibly
evident by Acts. 20. 4, 5, 15, 17, 18, 28, 29. Where we read, that Paul
returning through Macedonia in to Asia, to go to Jerusalem, to the Feast of
Pentecost, there accompanied him, Gajus of Derbe, and Timotheus; with others:
(where Timothy reckoned to be of Derbe, not Ephesus) All these going before to
Troas accompanied Paul to Miletus; who from thence sent to Ephesus, and called
to him the Elders of that Church to Miletus. And when they were come thither,
he said unto them. Ye know from the first day that I came into Asia, after
what manner I have been with you at all seasons etc. Take heed therefore unto
yourselves, and to all the flock over which the Holy Ghost has made YOU
BISHOPS (so the Greek, yea the Latin and ancient English Translations truly
render it) to feed the Church of Christ, which he has purchased with his own
blood. etc. from whence it is apparent.

First, That the Church of Ephesus at that time, had not one but many Bishops,
and that by the very institution of the Holy Ghost: Therefore Timothy could not
be sole Bishop there, by Paul's institution, in opposition to the holy Ghost.

Secondly, That these Bishops knew from the first day that Paul came into Asia,
after what manner he had been with them at all seasons: and therefore, in all
likelihood, were appointed Bishops of Ephesus at the very first planting of
that Church, before Timothy was settled Bishop: so that he was not the first
Bishop there; but these rather, before, or as soon as he.

Thirdly, That Timothy was then neither Elder, nor Bishop of that Church at
this time when Paul took his farewell of it; he coming with Paul out of
Macedonia to Miletus, and being none of the Elders and Bishops sent for, from
Ephesus, to whom alone Paul directed his speech: who had he then been sole or
prime Bishop of that See, Paul would not have styled the Elders which he sent
for, Bishops of that flock, at leastwise he would have made some special
mention of Timothy in this speech of his, and given him some special
instructions for the instructing and governing of that Church: Or at least have
honored Timothy so far, as to have made him give this Episcopal charge. and
instruction to the Elders and Bishops of his own proper Church and Dioces, or
to have enjoined them in special manner to reverence, honor and yield him all
Canonical obedience as their supreme Diocaesan. All which Paul utterly
neglects, or forgets to do; or particularly to charge Timothy to take heed to
or feed this flock, he being ofta Nonresident from it, as I have prooved.
Yea, making such have to be at Jerusalem by the feast of Pentecost, v. 16.
that he could not spare time to go to Ephesus, he needed not to have sent
for the Elders of Ephesus to Miletus to give them these instructions, since
Timothy their Bishop was then present with him, to whom he might and would no
doubt have imparted them, without further trouble, has he then in truth been
Bishop of that Church. But this sending for these Elders in his have, and
stiling them Bishops of that flock, etc. without any mention at all of
Timothy, who was none of the Elders sent for to Ephesus, is an infallible
evidence, that he was neither Bishop, nor first or sole Bishop of that City.
Add we to this, that when Paul exhorted Timothy to abide at Ephesus, there
were then in that City Elders, who did both rule well, and labor in the word
and doctrine, and so were worthy double honor, (...), Tim. 5, 1, 17, 19. Now
these very Elders, as Paul himself affirms, were made BISHOPS of the Church
of Ephesus by the Holy Ghost, Acts. 20, 17, 28. Therefore Timothy could not be
the first, the sole Bishop of the Ephesians as the false Postscript of the
second Epistle to him, styles him. Moreover; it was the Apostles manner in those
times to place See Gersonius Bucerus, De Guber. Eccles. p. 302, 303, 304.
many Bishops and Elders in every Church, not to constitute one Monarchical
Bishop over many: witness Acts. 11, 30* c. 14, 23, c. 15, 2, 4, 6, 22, 13, c.
16, 4, c. 20, 17, 28. c. 21, 18, c. 22, 5. Phil. 1, 1. 1, Tim. 5, 17. 1, Pet.
5, 1, 2, 3, Tit. 1, 5, 7, Iam. 5, 14. Hebr, 13, 17. Acts. 13, 1, 2. 1. Cor. 14,
29, 30, 31, 32. 1. These. 5, 12, 15, Romans 16, 3, 9, 12. Col. 1, 7, c. 4, 9, 12,
17. which testify, that there were many Bishops and Elders both at Jerusalem,
Corinth, Philippi, Rome, Thessalonica, Colosse, Ephesus, yea in all other
Churches, in Crete and elsewhere, at one time, by which the Church of God was
taught and jointly governed, as by a common Council of Bishops and Elders, as
Contra haeres. l. 4. c. 43 44. and l. 3. c. 2.
Iraeneus, Epist. 5. 6. 7. 8.
Ignatius, Com. in Phil. l. 1. 1. Tit. 1. 5. 7.
Ambrose, In Ephesians. 4.
Hierome, and Sedulius in Tit. 1. 5.
other ancients testify. Hence Contra Haereses l. 1. Haeres. 27. col. 88. 89.
Eccles. Hist. l. 3. c. 31.
Epiphanius and Eusebius testify, that Paul and Peter were joint Bishops of
Rome at the same time; and Apologia contra Gentes c. 39.
Tertullian writing of the Church-governors in his age, says; Praesident nobis
probati Seniores, etc. that approoved Elders (not one Diocaesan Bishop) were
Presidents over every several Christian Congregation; and in his book de
Corona Militis, he affirms the same* Since therefore the Apostles themselves
ordained many Elders and Bishops in every City and in Ephesus too, it is
neither possible, nor probable, that Timothy alone should be constituted sole
Bishop of Ephesus. Finally it is recorded by Advers. Haer. l. 3. c. 3
Iraeneus, Eccl. Hist. l. 3, c. 23,
Eusebius, Eccl. Hist. l. 2. 42. 44. 46.
Nicephorus In Lipom. De vitis Sanct. l. 1. de Iohanne.
Metraphrastes, Catal. Script. Eccl. Johannes.
Hierome, Onomast. in Joan.
Chytraeus, Annal. Tom. 1.
Baronius, August. Epist. 86.
and many others quoted to my hand by Gersonius Bucerus: Dissertatio De
Gubernatione Ecclesiae p. 520. to 526. That S. John the beloved Apostle after
the Council held at Jerusalem Acts. 15. resorted to Ephesus residing,
governing, and instructing that Church which Paul had planted, after Paul's
departure thence, with the Churches in Asia thereunto adjoining, even till
Trajanes days; and that though he were banished thence by Domitian for a
season, yet after his exile he returned thither again, writing an Epistle to
that Church during the time of his banishment, Revel. 2. 1. which he names
before all the other Churches of Asia. If S. John then kept his residence at
Ephesus, and ruled that Church by his Apostolical power, even till Trajanes
days; how could Timothy be sole Bishop and Superintendent there? there being
no need of a Bishop, where an Apostle was present and resident to govern, by
whose divine superior authority and presence all Episcopal Jurisdiction was
suspended. To close up this particular point; Chronol. Isag.
Bucolcerus, De Timatheo.
Fasciculus Temporum, the Cent. 1. l 2. c. 10. col. 626.
Centuary writers, and Niceph l. 3. c. 71. Vincentius Spec. Hist. l. 38. c. 10.
some others record that Timothy survived S. John, living till about the year
of Christ 108. and was then martyred in the third persecution under Trajan, or
under Nero, or Domitian. If this were true, and that Timothy continued Bishop
of Ephesus till his death, as the Patriotes of our Prelates affirm, then by
their own doctrine, it will necessarily follow, that Timothy was the Angel of
the Church of Ephesus (which they interpret to be the Bishop of that Sea) to
whom S. John writes. Rev. 2. 1. 5. charging him that he had left his first
love; and therefore admonished him, to remember whence he was fallen, to
repent, and do the first works etc. But it is not credible, nor probable,
that Timothy a man so pious, so laborious, so vigilant, and so much applauded
by Paulin most of his Epistles, should be this backsliding Angel of the Church
of Ephesus, (which the contents of our authorized Bibles, to omit all Beda in
Apoc. 1. and 2. Aretas in Apocal. 2. and 3. Ambros. Ausbert in Apoc. l. 2. and
Primasius in Apoc. 2. Brightman. Gersonius Bucerus De Guber. Eccl. p. 205. 393
408. 419. 422. 433. usque 466. 472. 484. 485,
other Commentators,) of the last translation, affirm, to be the Ministers
(not the Bishop) of that Church, as some Apostatizing Prelates gloss it,)
therefore from thence, and all other the premises, I may now safely conclude,
that Timothy was not a Bishop, nor yet the first, sole, Diocesan Bishop of
Ephesus, as our Prelates groundlesly affirm; whose allegations to the contrary
I shall next propose and refell, that so the truth may be more perspicuous.

Object. (...). The first allegation to prove Timothy a Bishop, when Paul writ
the first Epistle to him, is the Postscript of the second Epistle, which runns
thus; the second Epistle unto Timothius, ordained the first Bishop of the
Church of the Ephesians, was written from Rome, when Paul was brought before
Nero the second time. Hence Preface to the Treatise of the Sabbath. Bishop
Downham in his consecration sermon.
Bishop White and others, conclude Timothy to be a Bishop.

Answer. To which I answer; First, that this Postscript is no Scripture, (and
all others as in Comment. on Gal. 6. p. 497. 498. 499.
M. Perkins works is prooved at large) no part of the Epistle, no Appendix of
S. Paul's, but a private observation, annexed to it, by some Scribe or other
after the Epistle written without any divine inspiration; as the words
themselves demonstrate; The SECOND Epistle unto Timotheus ordained the first
Bishop of the Church of the Ephesians, was written from Rome, when Paul was
brought before Nero the second time. Where observe; First, that this Postscript
is written not in the name of Paul, but of some third person as the whole frame
of it Demonstrates.

Secondly, that this Postscript is no direction given by Paul to Timothy as the
words (the second Epistle unto Timotheus, ordained the first Bishop of the
Church of the Ephesians, was written etc.) evidence, but a direction of some
Notary or Perchance Theodoret. the first in whom I find any Postscripts. 430.
years after Christ.
Commentator to the Reader, who here speaks both of Paul and Timothy in the
third person.

Thirdly, The words WAS WRITTEN etc. in the preter imperfect tense, shows this
postscript to be a mere addition of some Scribe or Expositer, some good space
after the Epistle written; not of Paul himself, at the time when he writ it;
all the Postscripts of his other Epistles, appearing manifestly not to be his,
by the same reason.

Fourthly, It is here called, the second Epistle unto Timotheus, in relation to
the first; and the first Epistle to him, written many years before it, is
likewise styled, in the Postsript of it, The first to Timothy with reference to
the second. As therefore the Postscript of the first Epistle was certainly
added by some Notary after the second Epistle written, since it is called the
first in relation to it: so no doubt the Postscript of the second Epistle was
annexed to it after the first Epistle, and it was transcribed and bound up
together, by the same party that added the Postscript to the first; the
Postscript stiling them thus the 1. and 2. in regard of their mutual relation
one to the other; after they were both conjoined, and the New Testament and
Paul's Epistles, digested into that order and method, wherein now they are
placed, both in manuscripts and printed Coppies.

Fifthly, It is very unlikely, that Paul would make such a Postscript as this.
For as these words (was written from Rome, when Paul was brought before Nero
the 2. time) sound not of Paul's language but some others; so the second
Epistle unto Timotheus ordained the first Bishop of the Church of the
Ephesians, savor not of his inditing; who never in any of his Epistles to him
or others styles him a Bishop, much less ordained the first Bishop of the
Church of the Ephesians, neither would he have made such a description of
Timothy as this, to Timothy himself.

Sixthly, None of the other Apostles have any Postscripts added to any of their
Epistles; it is likely therefore that Paul guided by the same Spirit, added
none to all, or any of his, but that they See Master Perkins comment. on Gal.
6. p. 497. 498. 499. when this is largely prooved.
were added by some other, who either transscribed and collected his Epistles
together, or commented on them; as were the several Titles both before and
over his several Epistles, and the contents before each Chapter, both in
manuscripts, and printed Copyes.

Seaventhly, It is apparent, that the Postscripts of many, of Paul's Epistles
are forged and false, as Comment. on Gal. 6. p. 497. 498. 499.
M. Perkins works prooves them; and that the Postscript of the first Epistle
was written not only after the second penned, but likewise three hundred
years after Christ or more. For it runns thus. The first to Timothy was
written from Laodicea, which is the chiefest City of Phrygia Pacatiana. For
Phrygia was not surnamed Pacatiana (as See Tripart. Hist. l. 11. c. 3.
Theodoret. Eccl. Hist. l. 4. c. 7. the Title of the Chapter. Socrates. Eccles.
Hist. l. 7. c. 3. Nicephorus. Eccl. hist. l. 14. c. 11. (the first who style it
Pacatiana) and those who have lately comme^ted on, and written against this
Postscript. Surius Conc. Can. 1. p. 453. Tom. 2. 2. p. 11. 12. 221. 438. 461.
479. 480. 483. 488 413. 499. 503. 505. 520. 553. 580. 589. 599. 601. Carolin
Sigonius de occidentali Imperio. l. 3. p. 90.
diverse affirm by any Historians and Geographers,) till at least three hundred
years after Christ; from one Pacatius, a General, as is conceived, who
subdued it. Since therefore it was not so styled till (...) h^undred years
after Christ, this Postscript must needs be added after that time; and so in
all likelihood the Postscript of the second Epistle too, being both made by the
same author, at the same time; and the first, first both in time and order, as
is most probable, neither would Paul doubtless make such a Postscript to tell
Timothy that Laodicea, was the chiefest City of Phrygia Pacatiana, it being so
near to Ephesus, and as well known to Timothy as to Paul. Who as Master
Perkins Commentar. on Gal. 6. p. 497. 499. 499.
the Rhemists and Baronius confess was never at Laodicea, which they prove by
Gal. 2. 1. and so this Postscript is but a mere false.

Eighthly, This Postscript is directly contrary to the very preface and body of
the Epistle, written no doubt by Paul; which as it expressly styles Timothy an
Evangelist, not a Bishop; exhorting him to make full proof of his Ministry;
not of his Bishopric. c. 4. v, 5. So Paul therein, and in the first Epistle,
ever terms him, his dearly beloved Son. 2. Tim. 1. 2. c. 2. 1. 1. Tim. 1. 2.
18. A man of God: 1. Tim. 6. 11. 2. Tim. 3. 17. not a Bishop: and in the 2.
Tim. 4. 12. but a little above the Postscript, Paul writes expressly to him,
that he had sent Tychicus to Ephesus to know their affairs, comfort their
hearts, and make known to them all things. He being a beloved brother and
faithful Minister in the Lord Ephesians. 6. 21. 22. and neither Timothy his Curate
and underling, muchlesse his Successor at Ephesus, as is probable.

Ninthly, This Postscript is directly contradictory to many fore-alleadged
Scriptures, which prove Timothy to be no Bishop, muchlesse the first or sole
Bishop of the Church of the Ephesians; therefore not to be believed. See Acts.
20. 28.

Tenthly, The Postscript itself, but especially the clause of it, (ordained
the first Bishop of the Ephesians) whereon this objection is grounded, is but a
late addition, not extant in any of the Fathers works who have commented on
this Epistle, (except Occumenius, who lived 1050. years after Christ; the
first in whom this clause of the Postscript is found) nor in the most ancient
best, Greek, Latin, Arabic, English, or other Copyes and Translations,
whither manuscript, or printed; therefore to be rejected, as counterfeit coin.

Eleventhly, Eccles. Hist. l. 3. c. 4. as Meredith Hammer an English Bishop,
Englished it, in his English translation of Eusebius.
Eusebius, writes, that Timothy WAS REPORTED TO BE (not that he verily was) the
first Bishop of Ephesus, therefore this Postscript either was not in being in
his age, or else it had no more credit then a bare report, not sufficient to
resolve that Timothy was undoubtedly and of a truth Bishop of Ephesus: The
first who makes mention of any of these Postscripts is Theodoret 430. years
after Christ, who perchance then added them to Paul's Epistles; but in his
Postscripts this clause (ordained the the first Bishop of the Ephesians, With
that of Titus, ordained the first Bishop of the Church of the Cretians) cannot
be found.

Secondly, admit this Postscript true, and authentical, that Timothy was
Bishop of Ephesus when this second Epistle was written, being but a 2. Tim. 4.
6. 7. 8. 9. with all Expositors on this Epistle and the Postscript of it if of
any force or truth
little before Paul's death, yet this is no good proof. that he was Bishop of
Ephesus, when the first Epistle was penned, being some 10. or 12. years
before, as most conjecture; for if it be a good argument; that Timothy was
Bishop of Ephesus, when the second Epistle was written to him, because the
Postscript of it only styles him so: it is as good or a better argument for me
to say; that Timothy was no Bishop of Ephesus, when the first Epistle was
directd to him, because neither the body nor Postscript of that Epistle; nor
any other Scripture whatsoever, styles him, either a Bishop, or Bishop of
Ephesus, though he 1. Tim. 1. 3. 4.
was resident at Ephesus, when the first Epistle was written to him; 2. Tim. 4.
12. Ephesians. 6. 21. 22.
but not when the second was sent him; and so should much more have been
styled a Bishop, in the first Epistle and Postscript, then in the second. Now
all the Prelates and Papists arguments, by which they would prove Timothy a
Bishop, are drawn from his first Epistle, not his second, the Postscript
therefore of his second Epistle is no argument to prove, that he was a Bishop
when the first Epistle was written: for why then should not the Postscript of
the first Epistle style him a Bishop as well as the second? yea, rather then the
second? since the first has much matter in it, both concerning the offices and
qualities of a Bishop, the second very little, or nothing, save only of 2.
Tim. 4. 1. 2.
diligent and constant preaching in season and out of season; which belongs
indifferently to all Bishops and Ministers, and is so far from being proper
and peculiar to Bishops in these days, that it is hardly common to or with any
of them; Rare to most of them, and altogether improper to some of them, who Fox
Acts and Monuments page 1153. Nicolaus De Clemangijs de corrupto Eccl. Statu c.
14. 15. 16. 17. 18. 19. Bishop Latymers Sermon of the plough.
like the dunsticall Bishop of Dunkleden, think it no part of their Episcopal
office, and that they were never so much as ordained to preach, but rather to
sit mute and domineere like Lords, and that preaching belongs only to Curats,
and inferior Ministers, not to Lordly Prelates, who seldom climb now into a
Pulpit above once a year, whereas Chrysostom, Augustine, Ambrose, Cyrill,
Hooper and other Bishops anciently preached once at least every day.

Obj. 2. The second allegation is this; that Paul describes to See the Rhemists
in their Preface to this Episile.
Timothy the office, qualities, carriage, and duties of a Bishop, instructing
him how to demean himself in that office, 1. Tim. 3, 4. and 5. Therefore he
was a Bishop.

Answ. 1. To this I answer: first, that Paul by a Bishop in this Epistle means
no Diocaesan Bishop in dignity and degree above a Preshyter, but only such a
Bishop as was equal, the same, and no ways different from an Elder; as all
the Hierom, Ambrose, Chrysostom, Sedulius, Primasius, Theodoret, Theophylact,
Remigius, Rabanus, Maurus, Anselmus, Occumenius, Alenfis, Lombard, Bruno with
all late Expositors on 1. Tim. 3. Phil. 1. 1. Tit. 1. 5. 7. Acts. 20. 17. 28.
and Master Cartwright, in his Answer to the Rhemists Preface.
Fathers and most modern Expositors on this and other texts accord. Such a
Bishop I acknowledge Timothy to be, and so this instruction to him implies; but
that he was a Diocaesan Bishop, superior in dignity to a Presbyter, this text
and argument cannot evince.

Secondly, Admit it meant of a Diocaesan Bishop, yet it follows not thence,
that Timothy was such a one: this Epistle being written rather to instruct
others then Timothy, who was so well tutered before, both by his grand mother,
Lois and Paul, 1. Tim. 6. 12. 20. c. 4. 6. 14. 16. 2. Tim. 1. 5. 6. 13. 14. c.
2. 2. c. 3. 10. 14. 15. rather, for a pattern of the qualification and duty
of Ministers; to direct the Church in all future ages, then to inform Timothy
at that time: whence in both these Epistles there are some predictions of the
Apostasy and degeneracy of the last times; more necessary for Non solum
Timotheum sed and omnem per hoc admonet Episcopum: Oecumenius in 1. Tim. 5. 1.
others then Timothy to know, 1. Tim. 5. 24. 25. c. 6. 15. c. 4. 1. to 7. 2.
Tim. 3. 1. to 10.

Thirdly, there is in the same chapter instructions given, concerning Deacons,
Widows, and others; yet Timothy was neither Deacon nor Widow; which being
necessary for the Church of God, and for Timothy also to know, as he was an
Evangelist, a fellow-helper and assistant of Paul in his Ministerial and
Apostolical function, and as his delegate to order and regulate the Church
accordingly, argue him to be no more a Bishop, as is surmised; then that every
Minister and Christian for 2. Tim. 3. 16. 1. Tim. 6. 1. to 21.
whose instruction and direction this Epistle was written as well as for
Timothies are Bishops; or then any Archbishops, or Bishops instructions to
their Archdeacons, Vicars Generals, Chauncellers or Officials for
Ecclesiastical affairs, or Visitations, argue them to be Archbishops or
Bishops.

Fourthly, We read of diverse books, concerning the office and regiment of
Kings, of Magistrates, and Captains dedicated to young Princes, and others who
were neither Kings, Magistrates, nor Captains; of diverse tractates concerning
Bishops, inscribed to such who were no Bishops; yet the dedicating of such
Treatises to them, did neither constitute or necessarily imply them to be
Kings, Magistrates, Captains, Bishops. Why then should this Epistle to
Timothy, wherein are some things concerning the office, qualities, and duties
of a Bishop, prove him convincingly to be such a one.

Obj. 3. The third evidence to prove Timothy a Bishop, is taken from the 1.
Tim. 5. 22. Where he is enjoined, to lay hands suddenly on no man; that is, to
ordain no man suddenly, a Minister. Therefore certainly, he was a Bishop,
because none but Bishops have power to ordain Ministers.

Answ. 1. I answer first, that the laying on of hands has diverse
significations in Scripture. Sometimes, it is taken for an apprehension of
another, as a Mal factor to punish, or bring him to judgment for his offenses,
Exodus 24. 11. Esther 8. 7. Genesis 37. 22. Exodus 6. 13. Nehem. 13. 1. Luke. 21.
22. in which sense it may be well taken here, as the proceeding verses
evidence. Sometimes it is used for reconciliation of persons at variance, Job.
9. 33. Sometimes for benediction or blessing of another, Matthew. 9. 15.
Sometimes for curing and healing, Mark. 5. 23. Math. 19. 18. Mark. 6. 5. Luke.
4. 40. Sometimes for confirmation, as many affirm, Acts, 8. 17. 18. 19.
Sometimes for ordination, as Acts. 6, 6 cap. 8, 17. 11. cap. 13. 3. 1. Timoth.
4. 14. 2. Timoth. 1. 6. Acts. 19. 6. In which of these senses it is here meant
is Div(...) Basilius it a interpretatus est, quasi nihil hujus capitis ad
ordinationem pertineat. Occumenius, in 1. Tim. 5. 22.
not certainly resolved, and so no inference can be infallibly raised thence.

Secondly, Admit it is meant of ordination* as most conceive it; yet that
prooves not Timothy to be a Bishop, since not only Apostles, Evangelists, and
the Apostles fellow-helpers had power of ordination, as they were such, Act. 1,
22, 25, 26. c. 6, 6, c. 8, 17, 18, c. 13, 1, 2, 3. c. 14* 23, c. 19, 6. Tit. 1,
5. 2, Tim. 1. 6. but even Presbyters themselves: Acts. 9, 17. c. 13, 1, 2, 3.
c. 14, 23* 1. Tim. 4, 14. and Timothy might exercise this power in all or
either of these respects, not as a Bishop; which for ought appears he never
was; neither read we in Scripture that ordination belongs of right to Bishops,
as Bishops; muchlesse, that it is appropriated unto them.

Obj. 4. The fourth objection to prove Timothy a Bishop* is this; that he is
commanded to rebuke such as sinned openly before all men, that others might
fear, 1, Tim. 5, 20. Therefore he was a Bishop.

Answ. 1. I answer, that the argument is an inconsequent.

First, Because he might do this as an Evangelist, or as Paul's associate or
substitute, by virtue of his Apostolical authority, not of his own Episcopal
Jurisdiction, as Bishops Officials, Chauncellors and Vicars General, rebuke,
correct and visit others, not in their own names, or by their own
authorities, but their Lords.

Secondly, He might do this as a Minister, every Minister having power
sufficient in the public Ministry of the word, openly to rebuke all sins
and sinners, Isay. 5, 8. 1, 2. Tim. 4, 2, 3. Tit. 1, 13, c. 2, 15. Mark. 6,
18, 19, 20. 2, Sam. 12, 7.

Thirdly, He might do this as a private Christian; every Christian being
enjoined in any case to rebuke his neighbor, and not to suffer sin upon him:
Levit. 19. 17. Prove. 9, 8. Eccles. 9, 5. and so is every Magistrate to do,
Nehem. 13. 11. to 31. Psalm. 141. 5. This therefore is no argument of any
Episcopal Jurisdiction; the rather, because this rebuke was to be publicly in
the Church before all, not in a private Chamber or Consistory Court, (as all
Expositors accord) in which our Bishops pronounce their Censures.

Obj. 5. The fifth argument to prove Timothy a Bishop, is the 1 Timothy 5, 19.
Against an Elder receive not an accusation, but before two or three witnesses.
He had power to receive an accusation against Ministers, that so he might
correct them; therefore he was a Bishop.

Answ. 1. I answer first, that this is a mere Non sequitur.

For 1. He might have this power, to receive such accusations as an
Evangelist, and Paul's Coadjutor.

Secondly, As Paul's Delegate or Official; as our Bishops Officialls, Vicars
and Chauncellors now exercise Episcopal Jurisdiction under them; as their
substitutes only, not by any inherent Episcopal dignity or authority in
themselves.

Thirdly, He might do it by the appointement and mutual consent of the
people, who had power in all cases of difference, to constitute any man a
Judge, though no Bishop, 1. Cor. 6, 1, to 7.

Fourthly, He might do it only as an Elder; Elders having power to rule
well, 1. Tim. 5. 17. and so by consequence, to receive accusations, and to
correct delinquents by reproves or Ecclesiastical Censures, with the
consequent of the Congregation, 1, Cor. 5, 4, 5. 11, 12, c. 6, 1, to 7. Gal. 6,
1. 2. Thessal. 3. 14, 15.

Fifthly, I had almost added, that he might have done it as an Ecclesiastical
Commissioner, but that I considered* that he was, not so much as to receive an
accusation, against an Elder but under two or three witnesses at least, first
examined; and our Conference at Hampton Court. p. 89. 90. Me^ini Celsae
Commissionis Anatomia. Fullers argument. 1607 The Petition of Greivances 7.
Iacobi.
Ecclesiastical Commissioners and Bishops are so far from this divine
Apostolical precept, by which they would prove Timothy, and themselves to be
Bishops Iure divino, that they will pursevante, silence, suspend, imprison
Ministers and Elders and put them to self accusing one ex officio* oaths and
upon every jealosie, suspicion, and private accusation of any drunkard, rascal
or without two or three witnesses or accusers, first examined against them, and
brought face to face. A direct proof, that neither they nor their proceedings
are Iure divino.

Answ. 2. Secondly, I answer, that by Elder in this text, (as m Chrysostom.
Theodoret. Theophilact. Oecumenius, and other on this text. The Brethren of
London in King Henry the 8. his days in their Letter to Thomas Philips* Fox
Acts and Monumens. p. 951.
many conceive) is not meant a Presbyter, or Minister, but an ancient man, as
it is taken in the first verse of the chapter: so as it prooves not, that
Timothy had any Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction over the Elders that were
Ministers of Ephesus, who ruled that Church, v. 17. and ^w(...) Bishops of it,
Acts. 20* 28. Where Paul enjoynes them, to take heed to themselves; as having
no Superintendent paramount them; not giving Timothy any charge to take heed to
them.

Thirdly, Admit these Elders were Ministers, yet Timothy had no judiciary power
over them, to suspend or correct them: since v. (...). he is expressly
enjoined, not to rebuke an Elder, but entreat him as a Father: which is far
from giving him any such Episcopal Jurisdiction over them as our Bishops now
exercise and usurp; using godly Ministers and ra^ing them, rather like dogs
and scullions, then Elders.

Fourthly, The words are not; that he should not excommunicate, suspend,
convent or censure an Elder, but that he should not receive an accusation
against him, but before two or three witnesses. Now to condemn or censure, is
one thing, to receive an accusation, another. The first not but a Judge or
chief officer can do; the second, every register, clerk, informer, or under
officer; Yea, every private Christian is capable to receive an accusation, and
every ordinary Minister too, against another superior to him in age, estate, or
place, either privately to admonish him, that is accused, of his fault, or to
reproove him for it; or to counsel him how to repent and redress it; or to
comfort him if he be dejected with it, or to inform against him to the
Magistrate, or whole Congregation, or to pray to God for his amendment. Math.
18. 15. 16. 17. Levit. 19. 7. Gal. 6. 1. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 14. 15. 1. Tim. 5. 20.
24. Tit. 1. 10. to 14. 2. Johan. 10. 11. Iud. 22. 23. which well expound this
text.

Fifthly, The true meaning of this text is this, that Timothy and other
Christians of what quality soever, especially Ministers, should not lightly
receive or believe any ill report, chiefly of an Elder or Minister, without
sufficient testimony of the truth thereof by two of three able witnesses; as
will plainly appear by paralelling it with Psalm. 15. 3. Numb. 35. 30. Deuteronomy.
17. 6. c. 19. 15. Hebr. 10. 28. and with Math. 18. 15. 16. 17. where our
Savior says thus: Moreover, if thy brother shall trespass against thee, go
and tell him his fault between him and thee alone: if he shall hear thee,
thou have gained thy brother: But if he will not hear thee, then take with
thee two or three more, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses, every word
may be established; and if he shall neglect to hear them, tell it to the
Church, and if he neglect to hear the Church, let him be unto thee as an
beathen man and publican. A perfect Commentary on this text of Paul, and a
direct censure of our Bishops ex officio, oaths, and proceedings by the
parties own selfe-accusing oath, and answer without or before witnesses
produced.

6. This text (admit it gives power to Timothy to take accusations against an
Elder before two or three witnesses;) yet it excludes not the other Elders of
Ephesus from having like power with him; it gives him not any sole power to
hear and determine complaints without the other Elders assistance or consent,
but together with them, Math. 18, 19. 1, Tim. 5, 17. Acts. 20, 28. Hence the
fourth Council of Carthage, Can. 23. and after it Gratian. Cause. 15. Quaest.
7. Cap. Nullus, Decree, That a Bishop should hear no man's cause without the
presence of his Clerks; and that the sentence of the Bishop should be void,
unless it were confirmed with the presence of the Clergy: yea, Gratian in that
place prooves out of the Councels of Hispalis, Agatha the first, Carthage the
second and fourth. Gregory, (whose words and Canons he recites at large) that
a Minister, Presbyter, or Deacon cannot be punished, or deprived by the Bishop
alone, but by a Synod or Council, and that the Bishop cannot hear or
determine the causes of Cleargymen alone, without associating the Elders, of
the Church, or other adjoining Bishops, with him; for which cause Concilium
Antiochenu^, Can 20. Gratian. Distinct. 18. Conc. Aphricanum, Can. 18.
Chalcedonense. Can. 19. Nicaenu^. Can. 5. Toletanum, 3. Can. 18. Synodus
Francica, Anno. 742. Conc. Meldense, Can. 32. with many more.
many ancient Councels denied, that there should be two Councels kept, in each
Province every year, to hear and determine all Ecclesiastical causes and
controversies. This text therefore prooves nothing for Timothies
Ecclesiastical or Episcopal Jurisdiction, being written rather for the
Churches, and Ministers future, then Timothies present instruction, as
Dissertatio de Guber. Ecclesiae p. 506. 507. 508.
Gersonius Bucerus rightly observes. Finally learned Controv. 4. Quest. 1 c. 2.
Sect. 16.
Doctor Whitaker has long since assoyled this objection in these words: That
Timothy is commanded not rashly to admit an accusation against an Elder, this
prooves not that Timothy had power or dominion over Elders. For according to
the Apostles mind, to receive an accusation, is to bring a crime to the
Church, to bring the guilty person into Judgment, openly to reproove, which
not only Superiors may do, but also aequals and inferiors. In the Roman
Republike Knights did judge not only the people, but also the Senators, and
Patricij. And certainly it seems not that Timothy had such a Consistory or
Court, as was afterward appointed to Bishops in the Church. What this
authority was, may be understood by that which follows; Those that sin
rebuke before all, which aequals also may do. Thus Bishops heretofore, if any
Elder or Bishop had an ill report, referred it to the Ecclesiastical Senate or
Synod, and condemned him, if he seemed worthy by a public judgment, that is,
they did either suspend, excommunicate or remoove him. The Bishop condemned
nocent Elders and Deacons, not with his own authority alone, but with the
judgment of the Church and Clergy. Those who where thus condemned, might
lawfully appeal to the Metropolitan; but he could not presently alone
determine, what seemed good to him, but permitted the Synod to give sentence,
and what the Synod decreed was ratified. The same answer Martyn Bucer, De vi
and usu. S. Ministerij, Doctor Andrew Willet Synopsis Papismi. Cont. 5. Genesis
Quest. 3. part. 3. in the Appendix, and Gersonius Bucerus De Gubernat.
Ecclesiae Vide page 490. usque 524.
page 300. to 398. (where this objection is most fully cleared by Councels,
Fathers, and other authors testimonies) give unto this place: so that it makes
no proof at all, that Timothy was a Bishop. So as from all these premises I
may safely conclude, that Timothy was neither a Bishop, nor Bishop of Ephesus,
nor first, nor sole Bishop of that See, as many overconfidently, and
erroniously affirm.

Obj. 6. If any in the sixth place object, that See Gersonius Bucerus p. 518.
519. p Eccles. hist. l. 3. c. 4. as Meredith Hamner, a Bishop Englisheth it.
diverse of the ancient Fathers, as Dionysius Areopagita, Hierome, Ambrose,
Dorothew, Theodoret, Chrysostom, Epiphanius, Eusebius, Gregory the great,
Policrates, Occumenius, Primasius, Isidor Hispalensis, Beda, Anselme, Rabanus*
Maurus, with many modern writers affirm Timothy to be Bishop and first Bishop
of the Ephesians, therefore he was so.

Answ. 1. I answer first, that as some of these Fathers are spurious, and not
to be credited, so many of their testimonies are ambiguous, if not
contradictory. p Eusebius writes, that Timothy IS REPORTED to be the first
Bishop of Ephesus, and Titus of the Churches of Creta: which is rather a
denial then an affirmation that he was Bishop there in truth. In 1. Tim. 3.
Theodoret, and Beda affirm him, to be Bishop of all Asia, not of Ephesus
only, and so an Archbishop rather then a Bishop. Their Testimonies therefore
being so discrepant and dubious, are of no validity.

Secondly, See Doctor Raynolds conference, with Heart. p. 213.
Many of the Fathers affirm Peter to have been Bishop of Rome, and to have
continued Bishop there for diverse years, yet Defensor Pacis, pars. 2. c. 16.
Vlricus Velenus, Petrus non venisse Romam, neque illicpassus est.
Marsilius Patavinus, Senatus Consulius Franciae contra abusus Paparum. 162. to
172.
Carolus Molinaeus, with sundry Doctor Raynolds conference with Heart. c. 6.
Divis. 3. p. 210. to 218. Balaeus in Act. Romans Pontif. l. 1. Praefation.
Christopher Carlisle his S. Peter's life and Peregrination, prooving that Peter
was never at Rome. R. Bernard his fabulous foundation of the Popedom.
other late Protestant writers, both foreign and domestique, affirm, and
substantially prove by Scripture and reasons; that Peter was never at Rome,
nor yet Bishop thereof. As therefore their bare authorities are no sufficient
argument, to prove Peter Bishop of Rome, so neither are they sufficient to
evince Timothy Bishop of Ephesus.

Thirdly, These Fathers affirm not Timothy to be sole Bishop of Ephesus, or to
be Diocaesan Bishop, or such a Bishop as is superior to a Presbyter in
Jurisdiction or degree; the thing which ought to be prooved; and if they
affirmed any such thing, yet seeing the fore-alleadged Scriptures contradict it
in a most apparent manner, they are not to be credited against the Scriptures
testimony.

Fourthly, The Fathers term him Bishop of Ephesus; not because he was any
sole Diocaesan domineering Bishopthere, as the objections pretend; but because
he was left by Paul to teach and instruct them for a space, till he returned
from Macedonia, and to order that Church together with the other Bishops and
Elders thereof; and being one of the eminentest Pastors of that Church, next
after Paul, who planted it, the Fathers term him, the Bishop of Ephesus, in
that sense only as they styled Peter, Bishop of Rome and Antioch, James Bishop
of Jerusalem, Mark Bishop of Alexandria, and the like; ( Fox Acts and
Monuments p. 1465. Gersonius Bucerus De Gubernat. Eccl. p. 432. usque 500. 519.
520. to 540.
not that they were Bishops properly so called, or such as ours are now, but
only in a large and general appellation, because they first preached the
Gospel to such Churches) to no other purpose, but to prove a perpetual
succession of Presbyters, and doctrine in those particular Churches, from the
Apostles time till theirs, naming the eminentest Minister, for parts and gifts
in each Church, the Bishop of that Church; all which appears, by Advers.
Haereses. l. 3. c. 2. 3. l. 4. c. 43. 44. 45.
Irenaeus, De Praescriptionibus advers. Haereticos.
Tertullian, and Eusebius Eccles. Hist. l. 5. c. 12. 22 Fox Acts and Monuments
p. 1465.
others; who call them Bishops only for this purpose, to derive a Succession
of Ministers, and doctrine from the Apostles. He that would receive a larger
answer to this objection, let him read Gersonius Bucerus, de Gubernatione
Ecclesiae, p. 518. to 524. 436. to 441. 498. usque 500. 538. 539. which will
give him ample satisfaction.

Obj. 7. If any finally object, that Paul desired Timothy to abide still at
Ephesus when he went into Macedonia: 1, Tim. 1. 3. and that the Greek verb
(...) signifies a constant residence, or abiding in one place. Therefore
Timothy was Bishop of Ephesus: which if it be a solid Argument, prooves many of
our Court Nonresident Prelates and Ministers, to be no Bishops (because they
reside and abide, not muchlesse preach and keep hospitality on their
Bishoprics,) rather then Timothy to be Diocaesan Bishop of Ephesus.

Answ. 1. To this I answer, first, that the argument is a gross inconsequent.
For Timothy might abide thus at Ephesus as an Evangelist, as an Elder, as
Paul's assistant, or substitute only; as an ordinary Minister, not as a
Bishop; his abiding therefore at Ephesus is insufficient to constitute him a
Diocaesan Bishop of that Sec.

Secondly, Paul and Titus ordained Elders in every Church to abide and
continue, with their flocks: Acts. 14, 23. Tit. 1, 5, 7. yet the Opposites
deny these Elders to be Diocaesan Bishops.

Thirdly, Every ordinary Minister is to reside and abide upon his Cure, Romans
12, 7, 8. 1, Cor. 7, 20. Ier. 23, 1, 5. If this argument therefore where solid,
every Minister should be a Diocaesan Bishop.

Fourthly, Paul left Acts. 18. 18. 19.
Aquila and Priscilla at Ephesus to abide there; Will it therefore follow, that
they where Diocaesan Bishops of the Ephesians? If not, then the argument is
invalid.

Answ. 2. Secondly, I answer, That Timothy was to abide at Ephesus only for a
season, till Paul's return out of Macedonia and no longer, 1, Tim. 3. 14, 15,
c. 4, 13, 14. after which he went with Paul from Macedonia into Asia to Troas,
Acts. 20. 4, 5. and from thence to Italy, Philippi, and Rome, Heb. 13, 23.
Phil. 1, 1, c. 2. 19. Col. 1, 1. 2, Tim. 4. 9, 13. he being never resident at
Ephesus, (for ought appears in Scripture or authentic story,) after Paul's
return out of Macedonia. His abode therefore at Ephesus being but for so short
a time, and he so great a Nonresident from it afterward, cannot possibly argue
him to be a Diocaesan Bishop of that Church.

Answ. 3. Thirdly, Greek word (...), to abide, is often applied in Scripture to
a short abode, for a day or two, or some little space, as well as to a
perpetual fixed residence; as Math. 15, 32. Mark 8. 2. So it is in the
objected text; where it is put only in opposition to Paul's journey into
Macedonia; in respect whereof Timothy continuing at Ephesus till his return,
might be truly said, to abide there, though after his return he remooved
thence to other Churches; as Gersonius Bucerus, De Gubernatione Ecclesiae. p,
502. to 518, observes.

Answ. 4. Fourthly, Paul did not injoyne, but beseech Timothy to abide at
Ephesus: therefore his residence there was but arbitrary at his own pleasure,
not coactive, not enjoined by virtue of any Episcopal office; this Text
therefore cannot prove Timothy to be Bishop of Ephesus, no more then his stay
at Corinth, and other places whether Paul sent him, prove him to be Bishop of
those Churches.

Answ. 5. Finally, Admit Timothy to be both the first and Timothy no Diocaesan
Bishop of Ephesus.
sole Bishop of Ephesus, which is false; yet this makes nothing for, but
against our Hierarchicall and Diocaesan Bishops: for Ephesus was but one City,
one Parish, one Church, one flock and Congregation; as is evident by Acts. 20.
17, 28, 29, c. 18, 24, 25, 26, c. 19, 1. to 18, Ephesians. 1, 1, c. 4, 4, 16, c. 6,
21, 22, 23. 1, Tim. 1, 3, c. 5, 17 to 23. Rev. 1, 20, c. 2. 1. So that the
argument from this example is but this; Timothy was only Bishop of one City,
Parish, Church, Flock and Congregation, not of many: Therefore all Bishops
ought to be so too, as well as he.

Obj. If any object, that the City of Ephesus was a Dioces; for it had many
Elders, therefore many Parishes, and several Congregations? Acts. 20, 17, 28.
1, Tim. 5. 17.

Answ. 1. I answer, that the argument follows not; For first, in the Apostles
times, and in the primitive Church, every particular Church and Congregation
had See Gersonius Bucerus Dissertatio De Gubern. Eccl. p. 213. 246. 282. 302.
303. 304. 307. 308. 416. 417. 461. accordingly.
many Elders, Ministers, and Dea^ons in it, who did jointly teach, and instruct
it, and likewise govern and order it by their common Counsel and consent; as
is evident by Acts 1. 14. to 26. c. 2. 1. to 47. c. 3. 1. c. 4. 3. 8. 9. 20.
21. 23, 31. to 37. c. 5. 18. to 33. 42. c. 6. 1. to 9. c. 11. 29. 30. c. 14.
23. c. 15. 2. to 23. 25, 32. c. 20. 17. to 30. c. 21. 18. Phil. 1. 1. 1. Tim.
5. 4. to 14. c. 5. 17, Tit. 1. 5. 7. Jam. 5. 14. 1. Cor. 14. 23. to 33.
Ignatius Epist. 5. 6, 8. 9. 10. 11. 13. 14. Policarpus Epist. ad Philippenses,
Irenaeus contra Haeres. l. 3. c. 2. l. 4. c. 43, 44. Tertull. Adversus Gentes,
Apolog. c. 39. Hieronymus, Sedulius, Chrysostomus, Primasius, Remigius, Haymo,
Kabanus Maurus, Oecumenius, Theophylact, Anselmus, Petrus Lombardus, and sundry
others, in their Commentaries, and expositions upon Philip. 1. 1. 1. Tit. 5.
Acts. 15. and 20. 17. 28. The fourth Council of Carthage, Can. 22. 23. 24. 25.
The Council of A(...)en, under Ludovicus Pius, Can. 8. 10. 11. The 12.
Council of Toledo, Can. 4. and all writers generally accord.

Secondly, we at this day, have many Prebends, Canons, and Ministers in every
Cathedral and Collegiate Church, yea in every College in our Universities,
and elsewhere; yet but one Church and Congregation.

Thirdly, We have in many other Churches in the Country where the Parishes are
large, and there are diverse Chapels of ease, many Curates and Ministers; yet
but one Church, one Parish; not a Dioces; neither is the chief Minister either
a Bishop or Diocaesan, though he have diverse Curates and Ministers under him,
to assist him in his Ministry: yea in many places where there is but one
Church, no such Chapels of ease, and the Parish great, we have several
Ministers, Lecturers, and Curates, in some 4, or 5, in most 2, or 3, yet no
Dioces, no Bishopric. Neither is this a Novelty, but an ancient constitution,
not only instituded by the Apostles, and continued ever since, but likewise
enjoined by the Ioannes de At(...), Constit. provin. fol. 122. Lynd. provin
Constit. l: 3. Tit. De Parochiis. fol. 134.
Council of Oxford under Stephan Langhton Archbishop of Canterbury in the
year of our Lord, 12 22. which decreed; that in all Parish Churches, where the
Parish is great, there should be 2, or 3, Presbyters at the least, according to
the greatness of the Parish, and the value of the Benefice; least that one only
Minister being sick, or otherwise debilitated, Ecclesiastical Benefits (which
God forbid) should be either withdrawn, or denied to the Parishioners that
were sick, or willing to be present at divine offices. The multitude or
plurality therefore of the Elders in the Church of Ephesus, is no argument at
all to prove, that is was a Dioces; or that Timothy was a Diocaesan Bishop,
because he had Ministers and Curates under him; for then our Deacons,
Archdeacons, and Pluralists, who have many livings, Chapels, (and so many
Curates and Ministers) under them, should be Diocaesan Bishops too by this
reason.

Secondly, I answer, that admit there were diverse Churches and Congregations in
Ephesus, which is very improbable, the greatest part of the Citizens being
Idolaters, and the City itself a worshipper of the great Goddess Diana, and
of the Image which fell down from Jupiter, Acts. 19 21. to 41. yet it can not
be prooved, that Timothy was chief Bishop and Superintendent over all these
Churches, but only of one of them: as every Minister and Bishop of England is
a Minister and Bishop of the Church of England, but not a Minister and Bishop
in and over all the Curches of England, but in and over his own Parish Church,
and Dioces only. For Paul himself (who planted that Church, and Acts. 19. 10.
c. 20. 31
resided in it for three years space, during which time it is like there was
no Diocaesan Bishop of it but himself) expressly calls the Elders of the Church
of Ephesus, Bishops and Overseers of that Church, and that by the Holy Ghostes
own institution; and thereupon exhorts them, to take heed to all the flock;
and to feed and rule that Church of God, which he had purchased with his own
blood, Acts. 20. 28. 1. Tim. 5. 17. Since therefore every one of these Elders
by the Holy Ghostes institution, and Paul's resolution was no other, but a
Bishop over his own flock, (if several,) both to instruct and rule it; it is
certain, that Timothy (if he were a Bishop of Ephesus and there were many
Churches there,) was only Bishop of one of them, not of all; and so no
Diocaesan Bishop, as our Prelates and their flatterers vainly pretend. Timothy
therefore being neither a Bishop, nor first, sole, or any Bishop of Ephesus, or
of any other place, or if a Bishop, no Diocaesan Bishop, but of one Church and
congregation only, as these premises evidence, all our Prelates inferences
drawn from his example to prove their Episcopal Authority and Jurisdiction
Iure Divino, (which for the most part hang upon his Episcopal rochet only)
fall quite to ground, and their Episcopal Authority together with it. I now
proceed to the next Question (wherein I shall likewise discuss, whether the
power of ordination belongs only to Bishops, not to Presbyters? And whether
this Paradoxe of the Prelates be true, that ordainers are greater in
Jurisdiction and degree then those that are ordained?) to wit;

Whether Titus were ever Bishop, or Archbishop of Crete? Quaestion. 2.


What ever the common brute and Error of these or former times conceive, under
correction, I persuade my self, that Titus was no Bishop nor Archbishop of
Crete: and that for these ensuing reasons.

First, because the Scripture never styles him a Bishop; nor S. Paul, who often
styles him, his partner and fellow-helper concerning the Corinthians, (not
Cretians;) the Messenger of the Churches, (not Bishop) and the glory of Christ,
2, Cor. 8, 23, 6, 16. his Son, Titus 1, 6, his brother, 2. Cor. 7. 6, 13, 14.
never Bishop, as some would make him.

Secondly, Because his chiefest employment was to the Church of Corinth, after
that he had been left by Paul in Creet, as Paul's partner and fellow-helper in
that Church, 2. Cor. 2. 13. c. 7. 6. 13. c. 8. 6. 16. 23. c. 12, 18.

Thirdly, Because he was Paul's companion, attendant, partner, fellow-helper,
Messenger, fixed to no settled place of residence, as Bishops were, 2. Cor. 2.
13. c. 7. 6. 13. c. 8. 6. 16. 23. c. 12. 18. Gal. 2, 1. 3. 2. Tim. 4. 10. sent
by him from Rome, long after his being in Crete, into Dalmatia, 2. Tim. 4. 10.

Fourthly, Because Paul writes expressly to him, Tit. 1. 5. not that he
ordained him Archbishop or Bishop of Crete, but that he left him in Creet (for
a season) for this cause, that he should set in order, the things that were
wanting, and ordain Elders, in every City, as he had appointed him:
Therefore was he there only as Paul's Vicar general, Commissary or
substitute, to order those things, in such sort, as he had appointed him,
which Paul could not dispatch, whiles he was residing, not as the Archbishop
or Lord Bishop of Creet, to order all things there, by his own Episcopal
Jurisdiction and authority as he listed himself.

Fifthly, He expressly charged him, to come to him diligently, to Nicopolis
when he should sent Arthemas or Tychicus to him, for there he intended to
winter, Tit. 3. 12. By which it is evident, that his stay in Creet by Paul's
appointement, was very short, not above half a year, if so much; after which
we never read he returned thither, though we find, he was sent to Corinth,
and Dalmatia, that he went up to Jerusalem with Paul, and came to him during
his imprisonment at Rome, Gal. 2. 1. 3. 2. Cor. 2. 13. c. 7. 13. 14. c. 8. 6,
16. 23. c. 12. 8. 2. Tim. 4. 10. His short abode therefore in Creet, without
returning thither, prooves him to be no Bishop.

Sixthly, Paul charge him, to bring Zenas the Lawyer and and Apollos
diligently on their way, that nothing might be wanting to them, Tit. 3. 13. Now
it is very unlikely, that an Archbishop or Bishop of Creete, wherein were
Homer. Odys. 19.
90. walled Cities, would stoop so low, as to wait thus upon Lawyer, as
Zenas, or a Disciple, as Apollos was, unless he were far more Humble then any
Archbishops or Prelates in these our times; who are commonly so insolently
proud, as to disdain all familiar conversations with Lawyers, or Ministers.

Seaventhly, Paul left Titus Bishop of no one City in Creete, and he expressly
enjoynes him, to ordain (not one but many) Elders (in the plural number) in
every City of Creete, Tit. 1. 5. 7. where there were no less then 90. walled
Cities in Homerus time; which Elders were no other but Bishops, and so termed
by him v. 7. (For a BISHOP must be blameless, etc.) as Hierom. Chrysostom,
Ambrose, Theodoret, Sedulius, Primasius, Remigius, Beda, Raubanus Maurus,
Bruno, Theophilact, Oecumenius, Anselme, Lyra, Hugo Cardinalis, Aquinas, with
other modern Commentators on this text accord. If then Paul gives express
directions to Titus, to ordain many Elders and Bishops in every City of
Creete, constituting him a Bishop in none of them, that we read of, (an
apparent argument, that he was no Bishop there, because he had there no
Bishops See at all, and was no sole Bishop of any one City:) it is not
probable that he constituted him sole Archbishop or Bishop of all Creet,
(which had Mercators Atlas in English London. 1635. p. 812.
anciently no less then 4. Archbishops and 21. Bishops in it,) it being the
Apostles practice to place many Bishops and Elders in one Church, but never one
Bishop or Archbishop over many Churches, Phil. 1. 1. Acts. 20. 28. Hence Quoted
by Doctor Barnes in his Works. p. 210. See Gersonius Bucerus de Guberaat.
Ecclesiae. p. 520, 621
Athanasius, Chrysostom, Oecumenius and Theophilact on Titus 1. 5. 7. write
thus: Here he will have Bishops to be understood for Presbyters or Ministers,
as we have elsewhere often said, neither verily would he have the charge of
the whole Island to be permitted, or granted to one man, but that every one
should have his own proper cure and charge, allotted him: for he knew that
the labor and pains would be the lighter and that the people would be
governed with greater diligence, if that the Doctor or teacher should not be
distracted with the government of many Churches, but should only give himself
to the government of one, and study to compose and adorn it with his manners.
So also Peter Lombard, Adversus Haereses. Tit. Episcopus.
Alphonsus de Castro, p. 210.
Doctor Barnes, and others on, and from this text, determine.

Eighthly, All generally See Gersonius Bucerus, p. 233. 261. 398. usque 402.
556. Th. Cartwright 2. Reply to Whitgift, p. 404. to 616.
accord, that Archbishops, yea Metropolitanes BISHOPS themselves are not of
divine or Apo stolicall, but Papal and humane Constitution; witness Pope
Nicolas apud Gratianum Distinct. 22. c. 1. Omnes sive Patriarchae cujuslibet
apicem, sive Metropolis primatus, aut Episcopatuum Cathedras, vel Ecclesiarum
sive cujuscunque ordinis dignitatem See Anacleti Epist. 3. c. 3. Surius Council.
Tom. 1. p. 165.
INSTITVIT ROMANA ECCLESIA. Which Pope Anacletus in his 3. Epist. c. 3. does
likewise aver, and Pope Lucinus and Clement, in Gratian, Distinct. 80.
affirm as much; informing us, that Archbishops and Primates are the
Successors, of the Hathenish Arch-Flamens, and to be placed only in those
Cities where the Arch-Flamens had their Sees: with which Peter Lombard
accords, lib. 4. Distinct. 24. Hence our Galfridus Monumitensis. histor. l. 5.
c. 19. Ponticus Verunnius Brit. hist. l. 4. p. 106. Polichron. l. 4. c. 16. f.
163. Antiquit. Eccles. Brit. p. 7. with sundry others.
Historians record of King Lucius, the first Christian Prince of this our
Realm, that he instituted 3. Archbishoprickes, and 25. Bishop-rickes and
Bishops, in stead of the 3. Arch-Flamens, and 25. Flamens, changing their Sees
into Bishoprics, and Archbishop-rickes; by which it is evident, that
Archbishops, Patriarchs, and Metropolitans (instituted only at first by Surius
Council. Tom. 1. p. 140. 163. 165. 342. 505: 392. Tom. 2. p. 1046. Tom. 3. p.
547. Socrates Eccles. Hist. l. 5. 6. 8. Euagirus Eccl. Hist. l. 2. c. 18.
several Counsels and Princes) are no divine or Apostolical, but only a
humane institution; This all the Archbishops, Bishops and Clergy of England in
their institution of a Christian man, dedicated to King Henry the 8. fol. 59.
60. resolve in these terms. IT IS OVT OF ALL DOUBT, that there is no mention
made neither in Scripture, neither in the writings of any authentical Doctor
or Auctor of the Church being within the time of the Apostles, that Christ did
ever make or institute any distinction or difference to be in the preeminence
of power, order or Jurisdiction between the Apostles themselves, or between
the Bishops themselves, but that they WERE ALL EQVALL IN POWER, AVTHORITY AND
IVRISDICTION; And that there is now and since the time of the Apostles any such
diversity or difference among the Bishops, IT WAS DEVISED BY THE ANCIENT
FATHERS, of the primitive Church, for the conservation of good order, and unity
of the Catholic Church; and that, either by the consent and authority, or else
at least BY THE PERMISSION AND SVFFRANCE OF THE PRINCES AND CIVIL POWERS for
the time ruling. For the said Fathers, considering the great and infinite
multitude of Christian men so largely increased through the world, and taking
examples of the old Testament, thought it expedient to make an order of
Degrees, to be among Bishops, and spiritual governors of the Church, and so
ordained some to be Patriarchs, some to be Metropolitans, some to be
Archbishops, some to be Bishops; and to them did limit severally (not only)
their certain Diocese and Provinces, wherein they should exercise their power
and not exceed the same, but also certain bounds and limits of their
Jurisdiction and power; etc. The same is averred by learned Bishop Hooper, in
his Exposition upon the 23. Psalm fol. 40. who says, that Archbishops were
first ordained in Constantines time, yea, In his Re-ply to Tho. Cartwright. See
Cartwright his second Reply against Whitgift Tract. 8. fol. 414. to 616.
Archbishop Whitgift himself confesses as much, that Archbishops are neither
of divine, or Apostolical, but humane institution, since the Apostles times.
And An, Mesuini Petri Adamsoni Palinodia printed An. 1620.
Patricke Adamson Archbishop of S. Andrews in Scotland, in his public
recantation, in the Synod of Fiffe in Scotland Anno 1591. professed sincerely,
(ex animo) that Bishops and Ministers by Gods word were all equal and the very
same; That the Hierarchy and superiority of Bishops over other Ministers, NVLLO
NITITVR VERBI DEI FVNDAMENTO, had no foundation at all in the word of God; but
was a mere humane Institution long after the Apostles times, from whence the
Antichristian Papacis of the Bishop of Rome has both its rise and progress;
and that for 500. years last past, it has been the chiefest instrument of
persecuting and suppressing the truth and Saints of God in all Countries and
Kingdoms, as all Histories manifest. Thus this Archbishop in his Palinody,
disclaiming not only Archbishops but ever Diocaesan Bishops to be of divine,
but only of humane institution long after the Apostles, giving over his
Archbishopricke thereupon, and living a poor dejected life. This being then
granted on all hands, it is clear, that Titus could not be Bishop of all
Creete; for then he should be an Archbishop, having diverse Bishops under him,
those Elders which he placed in every City of Creete being no other but
Bishops, Tit. 1. 7. as all acknowledge, and Archbishops were not instituted
till after the Apostles and Titus days; For these reasons I conceive, that
Titus was not Bishop of Creete, having no Episcopal or Archiepiscopall See
there appointed to him; which learned De Gubernat. Eccl. p. 233. to 238. 299.
to 390. 394. 395. 396. 397. 490. to 423 580. 581.
Gersonius Bucerus has at large manifested, to such who will take pains to
peruse him.

Obj. 1. If any object 1. that the Postscript of the Epistle to Titus, styles
him, Titus ordained the first Bishop of the Church of the Cretians: Ergo he
was Bishop or Archbishop of Creete.

Answ. 1. I answer 1. that as this and all other Postscripts, are David Dickson
his short explanation on the Epistle to the Hebrews. p. 332. 333.
no part of the Scripture, or Epistles, as Master Perkins his Commentary on
Gal. 6. p. 496. 497 498. 499.
Mr. Perkins works prove at large, but an addition of some private person
since, as is evident by the words themselves in the preterimperfect tense and
third person. IT WAS WRITTEN TO TITUS, etc. therefore no convincing authority:
so this clause (ordained the first Bishop of the Church of the Cretians) is no
part of the Postscript, but a late appendix to it, not found in any of the
Coppies of this Epistle which the Fathers follow, in their Commentaries, in few
or no ancient Greek, Latin or English Coppies and Translations of this
Epistle, in few or no Testaments or late Commentators: And had Titus been
Bishop of Creete, it is like Paul would have given him this Title in the
Epistle, (where he styles him, Titus his own Son after the Common faith. c.
1. v. 4.) as well as in the Postscript; (which in truth is none of his, but
some others, Perchance Oecumenius his addition, the first that mentions it,
1050. years after Christi) since he speaks of Bishops by name in that
Epistle, Tit. 1. 7. But of this, see more in the answer to the Postscript of
Timothy.

Secondly, I answer, that this Postscript is directly false; for it says, that
this Epistle was written from Nicopolls of Macedonia. Now it is clear by the
12. verse of the third chapter of this very Epistle, that Paul was not at
Nicopolis when he writ it, but at some other place; for he writes thus to
Titus, when I shall send Artemas unto thee or Tychicus, be diligent ^ocome unto
me to Nicopolis, for THERE (not here) I have intended to winter. Now had Paul
then been at Nicopolis, he would have written thus, for here (not there) I
have intended to winter; there being ever spoken of a place from which we are
absent, here only of a place present. The Postscrip^ therefore being false as
Commentary on Gal. 6. Vol 2. p. 499.
Mr. Perkins works hence conclude, can be no part of Canonical scripture, nor
Epistle, none of Paul's penning, but a mere ignorant Appendix of some scribe
or comentator of after times, and so no solid proof to manifest Titus Bishop
or Archbishop of Creete, not at Nicopolis when this Epistle was written.

Obj. 2. If they secondly object; that Paul left Titus in Creete to set in
order the things that were wanting, Tit. 1. 5. Ergo he was a Bishop.

Answ. 2. I answer, that this is a mere inconsequent; and I may argue in the
like nature; Our Archbishops and Bishops (especially those who turn Courtiers,
Counselors of State, and Nonresidents,) leave Bishop Latimers fourth Sermon of
the plough, Fox Acts and Monuments, p. 119. 120.
their Archdeacons, Chauncellers, Commissaries, Vicars general, and
Officialls, to visit, order, correct their Dioces, and to set in order those
Ceremonies, Altars, Images, and Church ornaments, which were well wanting (now
too much abounding) in them; Ergo Archdeacons, Chauncellers, Vicars general,
and Officials, are Archbishops and Bishops of those Dioces: The King sends his
Indges, Commissioners and under Officers to some Counties or Cities, to set
Causes, Counties, people, Arms, Forts, Cities in good order, and to see
defects in these supplied. Ergo Judges, Commissioners and Officers are Kings:
Churchwardens ought by the Canons of 1571. and 1603. to set in order, and
provide such books, ornaments, and necessaries as are wanting in Parish
Churches, and see them well repaired: Ergo Churchwardens are Bishops: For Titus
was here left, to set in order the things that were wanting, AS PAVL HAD
APPOINTED HIM; and no other wise, Tit. 1. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. he did all by his
direction and authority, not his own. There is nothing therefore in this, of
ordering things that were wanting in the Church of Creete, which savours of
Episcopal Jurisdiction. And I may better argue hence, Titus did nothing at all
in Creet but by Paul's special appointment and Commission; Ergo he was no
Bishop; or if a Bishop: Ergo Bishops should order nothing in their Bishoprikes,
nor keep any visitations, but by special direction and Commission from the
Apostles, So the Statutes of 25. H. 8 c. 29. 37. H. 8. c. 17. 27. H. 8. c. 15.
1. E. 6. c. 2. 1 Eliz c. 1. 2. 8. Eliz. c. 1. 25. H. 8. c. 21. 31. H. 8. c. 9.
14. 32. H. 8. 15. 16. 2. H. 5. c. 1. 14. Eliz. c. 5. expressly resolve. That the
power of ordination of Ministers belongs not only to Bishops.
King, or State, authorizing them; Then the Objectors conclude; Ergo, he was a
Bishop; and Bishops, Archbishops, (yea Archdeacons too without any special
commission from the Apostles, King and State) may make and institute what
orders, constitutions, Articles, and Ceremonies they please, as now they do in
their illegal Courts and visitations, kept in their own names, without any
Patent from the King

Obj. 3. If any object in the third place, That Titus was lest to ordain
Elders in every City in Creete; Tit. 1. 5. Ergo, he was a Bishop: because
none have power to ordain Elders, but Bishops; since none ordained Elders in
Creete but Titus, who was a Bishop.

Answ. 3. I answer first, that this is as bad a consequence as the former, and
a mere circular argumentation: For first they will needs prove, Titus a
Bishop, because he ordained Elders; and none but Bishops can ordain Elders;
and then next they prove, that none but Bishops can ordain; because Titus
foresooth was a Bishop, and he only did ordain Elders in Creete. A mere
Circle, and Petitio Principij: yet this is the Logic of our great Rabbi
Prelates.

Secondly, I answer, that this proposition whereon they ground themselves and
their Prelacy, that none have any right Ture divino to ordain Elders or
Ministers, but Bishops; and that quatenus Bishops too, (which they must add,
or else their argument is unsound,) is a notorious falsehood, and mere sandy
foundation; For first, not to remember how Moses a Civil Magistrate,
consecrated Aaron and his sons by Gods own appointement, Levit. 8. 5. to 32.
Exodus 29. 9. 35.

First, The Apostles themselves were ordained Apostles and consecrated
Ministers by Christ himself, Matthew. 28. 19. 20. Mark 16. 15. 16. John. 20.
22. 23. 24. Acts. 1. 4. 5. Romans 1. 5. 2. Cor. 3. 6. To whom the power of
ordination principally appertains, Ephesians. 4. 11. 12. 1. Cor. 12. 28. Acts. 20.
28. 1. Pet. 1. 4.

Secondly, The Apostles and Evangelists ordained Elders in every Church, Acts.
14. 23. c. 19. 1. 6. 7. c. 7. 6. yet they were properly no Bishops as Fox Acts
and Monuments. p. 1465.
all learned men acknowledge.

Thirdly, The Disciples (inferior to the Apostles and Evangelists as the
objectors teach) ordained Ministers and Elders too, though they were no such
Bishops as the objectors mean. Acts. 14. 1. 2. 3. c. 9. 10. to 22.

Fourthly, Acts. 13. 1. 2. 3.
Presbyters and ordinary Ministers ordainea Elders and Ministers, yea Timothy
himself was made a Minister by the imposition of the hands of the Presbytery,
1. Tim. 4. 14. Thus did they in the primitive Church; this do they still in
our own Church, as the book of ordination it self confirmed by 3. Ed. 6. c.
32. 8. Elizab. c. 1.
two Acts of Parliament, the 35. Canon, and experience witness; this do they
in all the reformed Churches now, which should have no lawful Ministers, and
so no true Church, if the power of ordination were Jure divino appropriated
only to Bishops, and not common with them unto other Ministers.

Fifthly, Patriarchs, Metropolitanes, Archbishops and Chorall Bishops (neither
of which are properly Bishops in the objectors sense) ordain Ministers: If
then all these have ordained Elders and Ministers, though no Bishops, by
sufficient divine Authority, (as the objectors cannot deny of the 4. first, and
dare not contradict it in the last,) then it is most false; that the power of
ordination Jure divino belongs only to Bishops, as Bishops in the objectors
sense; for then none of those 5. being not properly such Bishops, could
lawfully have ordained Ministers or Presbyters, as they did and do.

Thirdly, There is no one syllable in the Scripture to prove, that the power
of ordination belongs only to Bishops quatenus Bishops; neither is there any
one example to warrant it. We read of Apostles, Evangelists, Disciples,
Presbyters, that laid hands on others to ordain them Ministers; but of
Bishops, (I mean distinct from Presbyters,) we read not a word to this purpose,
how then can this be true, that the power of ordination belongs only to
Bishops quatenus Bishops, Jure divino?

Fourthly, We read not a word to this purpose in Scripture of any Bishops
distinct from, or superior, in order, degree and dignity to Presbyters; if
therefore such Bishops themselves be not Jure divino, the power of ordination
cannot belong to them Jure divino, the rather because we read of no man whom
the Scripture calls a Bishop ordaining Ministers.

Admit there were such Bishops Jure divino; yet that the power of ordination
belongs to them Jure Divino quatenus such Bishops, is most false, but only
quatenus they are Ministers: For it appertained to the Apostles, to the
Evangelists, to Disciples and Presbyters Iure divino, though no such Bishops;
and the objectors will acknowledge, that it belongs to Popes, Patriarchs,
Metropolitans and Archbishops, though they neither were nor are properly such
Bishops, and are no divine, but mere humane institutions; therefore it must
appertain unto them only, as they are Ministers, (in which respect they all
accord, and are not differenced one from another;) not quatenus Bishops; for
then the Apostles, Evangelists, Disciples, Presbyters, Popes, Patriarchs,
Metropolitanes, and Archbishops, being not properly such Bishops, could not
lawfully ordain. The power therefore of ordination belonging to the Apostles,
Evangelists, Disciples, Presbyters and others as well as to Bishops, not to
Bishops only, or to them as Bishops, but as Ministers, (it being a Gersonius
Bucerus, p. 33. 158. to 162. 262. 499. 500. 517. 518. 540. 622. 623. 318. to
367.
mere Ministerial act, inferior to preaching, administering the Sacrament and
baptizing, as all acknowledge) it can be no good evidence to prove Titus a
Bishop. Now because this power of ordination which our Prelates would
Monopolize unto themselves, is the maine pillar whereon they now suspend their
Episcopal Jurisdiction over there Ministers, I shall produce some humane
authorities, to prove the right, the power of ordination and imposition of
hands to be by Gods Law common to Presbyters as well as to Bishops; I shall
begin with Counsels. The 4. Surius Tom. 1. p. 513.
Council of Carthage, Can. 3. about the year of our Lord 418. prescribes this
form of ordination of Ministers, When a Minister is ordained, the Bishop
blessing him, and holding his hand upon his head, all the Presbyters or
Ministers likewise that are present, shall lay their hands upon his head by the
Bishops hand. This Canon is incorporated by Gratian, into the body of the Canon
Law, and has been practiced and put in ure in all ages since, till now; The
very Gloss on Distinct. 23.
Gratian, yea and Notes on the 1. Tim. 4. 14.
the Rhemists too, assuring us, that when a Priest is ordained, all the Priests
standing by, do lay their hands upon him; neither is there any other form of
ordaining Ministers, prescribed in the Canon Law or Councels, but this alone,
which all Churches have observed, and yet retain. Since therefore no Bishop
may or ought of himself alone to ordain Ministers, without the assent and
concurrence of the Clergy, people and others there present, as Distinct. 23.
24. 25.
Gratian, Appendix ad Catal. Testium Veritatis.
Illyricus, and Dissertat. deGubernat. Eccles. p. 318. to 367. 464. 465. 493.
498. 499. 524. See Canon. 35.
Gersome Bucerus, prove at large; and since all Ministers present ought join
with the Bishop in the imposition of hands, in all ordinations of Ministers,
and have ever usually done it in all ages and Churches; how this Prerogative of
ordination should be peculiar to Bishops (who may not do it without Ministers
concurrrence, no more then Ministers without theirs,) I cannot yet conjecture.
True it is, that the Surius, Tom. 1. p. 296.
Council of Ancyra, about the year of our Lord 308. Can. 3. ordained; That
Chorall Bishops should not ordain Presbyters or Deacons; nor yet Presbyters of
the City in another Parish; but when the Bishop should permit them by his
Letters; And the Surius Ibid. p. 403. 404
Council of Antioch under Pope Julius, Canon. 10. decrees; that Chorall
Bishops should not ordain Ministers and Deacons without the Bishops privity.
From whence I observe.

First, That before these Counsels restrained the power of Chorall Bishops and
Presbyters, that they did and might lawfully ordain Ministers and Deacons
without the Bishops privity or assent.

Secondly, That by his assent and license both the one and the other, without
the Bishops presence, might lawfully ordain Ministers and Deacons. These
Councels therefore plainly resolve, that there is an inhaerent right and power
of ordination in Presbyters and Chorall Bishops, as they are Ministers, and
that with the Bishops consent, and license they may lawfully execute it, and
confer Orders, therefore the right and power of ordination is not invested
only in Bishops, as they are Bishops, for then none else could ordain but
they alone. The forged Constitutions of the Apostles, fathered on Pope Constit.
Apost. l. 3. c. 10. 11. 20.
Clement, prescribe; That Presbyters and Deacons, may not ordain other Priests
and Deacons, but Bishops only. And the Surius Tom. 2. p. 719. Tom. 1. p. 800.
Council of Hispalis or Spaw, about the year 6, 7. Canon. 5. 7. out of Pope
Leo, Epist. 86. decrees; that Presbyters and Chorall Bishops, which are all
one, should not presume to ordain Preistes or Deacons, or to consecrate Altars
or Churches; For in holy writ, by Gods Command, Exodus 40.
Moses only erected the Altar in the Tabernacle of the Lord, he only
anointed it, because he was the High Priest, of God, as it is written; Psalm.
98.
Moses and Aaron among his Priests. Therefore, that which was commanded only
to the chief Priests to do, of whom Moses and Aaron were a Type, Presbyters
who carry the figure of the sons of Aaron, may not presume to enchroach upon.
For although they have in most things a common dispensation of Mysteries with
Bishops, yet they must know that some things are notwithstanding prohibited
them by the authority of the old Law, some things BY NEW ECCLESIASTICAL RVLES
(or CANONS) as the CONSECRATION OF PRESBYTERS, DEACONS, and virgins; as also
the Constitution, benediction, or unction of the Altar. Verily it is not
lawful for them to consecrate Churches or Altars, not to give the Holy Ghost
the comforter by imposition of hands to the faithful who are to be baptized,
or to those, who are converted from heresy, nor to made Chrisme, nor to sign
the forehead of those that are baptized with Chrisme, See Council. Carthag. 2.
An. 428. c. 3. 4. Gratian. Causa. 20. quest. 6. Council. Carthag. 3. c. 36.
Gratian. Cause 16. quest. 6.
nor yet publicly to reconcile any penitent person in the Mass, nor to send
formed Epistles to any. All these things are unlawful to Presbyters or Chorall
Bishops, because they have not Pontificatus apicem, the highest degree of the
High Preist-hood, which by the AVTHORITY OF THE CANONS, is commanded to be due
only to Bishops, that by this the distinction of the Degrees, and the Hight of
the dignity of the High Priest, might be demonstrated. Neither shall it be
lawful for the Presbyters to enter into the Baptistery before the Bishops
presence, not to baptize or sign an infant, the Bishop being present, nor to
reconcile penitents without the Bishops command, nor to consecrate the
Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ he being present, nor in his
presence to teach, or bless, or salute the people, no nor yet to exhort them,
all which things are known to be prohibited by the Leo Epist. 86.
See Apostolic. These two last authorities are the chief that the Papists,
Jesuits, and our Prelates insist on, to Prove, that the power of ordination
belongs only to Bishops not to Presbyters.

But to remove these two obstacles: consider. First, that there is not a word
in either of these two Constitutions, that the power of ordination, belongs
only to Bishops by divine right and institution; or that Presbyters by Gods
Law have no power to ordain Ministers and Deacons, the thing only in question.

Secondly, That the Council expressly resolves, that the power and right of
ordination is prohibited Presbyters, and appropriated only to Bishops, not by
any Law of God, or ancient Constitutions of the Apostles, or those who
immediately succeeded them, but only by some Ecclesiastical Canons and
Constitutions then newly made, and by the authority only of the Sea of Rome;
which cannot deprive Ministers of that power of ordination, which the Scripture
and God himself has given them.

Thirdly, That before these late Canons, and Constitutions, Presbyters might
lawfully ordain Ministers, and Deacons.

Fourthly, That the chief reason why the power of ordination was taken from
Ministers, and thus monopolized to Bishops, (even by their own Constitutions,
wherein they have ever favored themselves,) was only to advance the power,
authority, dignity, ambition and pride of the Pope and Prelates, and to
distinguish them in degree and order from ordinary Ministers, which of right
are, and otherwise would be their equals, both in Jurisdiction, power and
degree.

Fifthly, That they bring not one syllable out of the new Testament to prove
that the power of ordination belongs only to Bishops, not to Ministers which
they would have certainly done, had there been any text to warrant it; but
that all they allege is out of the old Testament; to wit, that Moses only
consecrated the Tabernacle and the Altar; Ergo none but Bishops must consecrate
Ministers, Altars, Churches. A learned argument; ergo none but Kings, and
temporal Magistrates, no not Bishops themselves, may do it, had been a
better consequent. For Moses was no Priest, muchlesse a Bishop; the High
Priest, (which was Exodus 28. 1. to 43. c. 29. 5. to 45. c. 30. 7. 10. 30. Heb.
5. 4. 5. c. 7. 11.
Aarons office, not his, there being but Numb. 25. 35.
one High Priest, at once and he a Heb. 4. 14. 15. c. 5. 1. to 11. c. 6. 20.
c. 7. 20. to 28. c 8. 1. to 7. c. 9. 1. to 28. c. 10. 11 to 23.
type of our High Priest Christ) but a civil Magigistrate; yet God command
him Exodus 29. 1. to 39. c. 30. 25, to 31 c. 40. 1. to 34.
to consecrate Aaron with his Sons, the Tabernacle and Altar; and after him,
1. King 8. 2. Cron. c. 6. 8.
King Solomon (not the High Priest) consecrated the Temple, Altar, Court, and
all the furniture of the Temple and Altar: So that if these examples prove any
thing, it is, but this: That the power of ordination, of consecrating Bishops,
Ministers, Churches, Altars, etc. appertains not to Archbishops, Bishops,
Popes, Preistes, Ministers, but to the chief temporal Magistrates. But admit
that Moses were a Priest, and an High Priest, and that the power of
consecrating Preistes, Temples, Altars appertained to him in that regard; yet
this is no argument to prove, that the right and power of ordination should
belong to Bishops only; and that for these three reasons.

First, because the Aaronicall Preisthood was Heb. 7. and 8. and 9. and 10.
utterly extinct and abolished by Christ, as merely typical and ceremonial;
and so al ^he appurtenances thereunto belonging.

Secondly, Because the High Priest was no Emblem, type or resemblance of
Bishops, which are many, changeable, mortal, but Augustine. Sermon. 99. de
tempore. Whitekar. Contr. 4. qu. 1. c. 2. Willet. Symopsis Papismi. Cont. 5. q.
3.
only of Christ our true High Priest, who is but one, and remains an High
Priest forever without succession or change. So that this allusion prooves the
power of ordaining Ministers to belong originally to none but Heb. 9. 14. 15.
c. 5. 1. to 11. c. 6. 20. c. 7. and 8. and 9. and 10.
Christ, our Heb. 6. 20.
High Priest, chief Shepherd, and Heb. 13. 20. 1. Pet. 5. 4.
Bishop of our souls, as the 1. Pet. 2. 25.
Scripture expressly resolves; and ministerially, secondarily, to Math. 18. 1.
etc. c. 28. 19. Mark. 16. 15 John. 15. 16. 4. Ephesians. 8. 11. 12. 13. 1. Tim 4.
14. Acts. 13. 1. 2. 3.
every Minister of Christ, as his Ambassador, instrument, and Vicegerent.

Thirdly, Because the office and power of the High Priests and Bishops are
different, distinct, yea incompatible one with the other, and the manner of
ordination, of Ministers, and Deacons under the Law, different from that under
the Gospel, as the Exodus c. 29 and 30. and 40. compared with Acts 6. 1. to 8.
c. 14. 23. c. 13. 1. 2. 3. Tit. 1. 5. 1. Tim. 4. 14. c. 5. 12.
Scriptures, and Gersonius Bucerus de Gubernat. Eccles. p. 264. 265. 269. 291.
269. 308. 309. 446. 501. 502.
all Authors jointly witness: the one of them therefore can be no solid, or
convincing argument to make good the authority Jurisdiction or practice of
other. So that this Council and Constitution, makes nothing at all against the
divine right and Title of Presbyters to ordain, or for the Bishops sole
Monopoly of imposition of hands, by any divine charter from Christ or the Holy
Ghost.

Finally, Neither of these Counsels or Constitutions simply debar Ministers
from the imposition of hands on others together with the Bishop, which they
Acts. 13. 3. 1. Tim. 4. 14. The Rhemists with all late Commentators, Ibidem,
and some ancient too.
ever practiced, and were authorized to do, both by God himself, and the
fourth Council of Carthage, Can. 3. But from laying on hands and ordaining
Ministers of themselves alone without the Bishop, who cannot ordain, or lay
hands on any Ministers by virtue of these constitutions without them. Since
therefore the Bishop of himself alone cannot impose hands on any Minister
without their assistance or consent, nor they without the Bishops, it is
apparent, that the right of ordination is not wholly and originally vested in
the Bishop, by any divine or humane right; but in both. The Surius Tom. 3 p.
299.
Council of Aquisgran or Aken, under Ludovicus Pius An. 816. c. 8. out of
Isidor. Hispalensis De Ecclesiasticis Officiis l. 2. c. 7. determines thus: The
dispensation of the Mysteries of God are committed to Presbyters as they are to
Bishops, for they are over the Church of Christ, and are consorts with Bishops
in the confection of the body and blood of Christ, and likewise also in the
instruction of the people, and in the office of preaching; and only the
ordination and Consecration of Clerks is reserved to the High Priest or
Bishop, because of his authority, lest the discipline of the Church, challenged
or exercised by many, should dissolve, concord and engender scandals; For Paul
the Apostle calls Elders and Priests by the name of Bishops, Tit. 1. 5. 7. Acts.
20. 28. Phil. 1. 1. 1. Tim. 3. D. Rabanus Maurus De Instit. Clericorum, l. 1.
c. 6. writes thus; That Presbyters allthough they be Preistes, yet they have
not attained the top or Highest degree of Preisthood, because they cannot sign
the forehead with Chrisme, nor give the Holy Ghost; neither can they ordain
Clerks in sacred orders, which is reserved to Bishops for unity and concords
sake. The Epistle de 7. Gradibus Ecclesiae in the neinth Tome of Ieromes
works, avers in express terms; that the ordination of Clerks and
consecration of Virgins was reserved only to the High-Preist or Bishop for his
greater honor. And Tertullian de Baptismo c. 17. writes, that the High Priest,
who is the Bishop, has the right of giving Baptism, after him Presbyters and
Deacons, yet not without the Bishops authority, for the honor of the Church; By
all which it is evident, that Bishops have not the sole executive power of
ordination by any divine right or institution (of which there is not one
syllable, either in these or other Councels or Fathers) but only by Canons and
humane Constitutions, made by Bishops themselves, to advance their own honor,
power and dignity; yet notwithstanding the right of ordination remains still
in Ministers; and belongs to Bishops, only as they are Ministers by divine
right, not as they are Bishops; as is evident by the Surius Ib. p. 300.
9. Chapter of the same Council of Aken, taken out of Isidor. De Eccles.
Officiis l. 2. c. 6. where writing of Bishops ordination by imposition of
hands, and the original thereof, they use this expression, (which De Instit.
Clericorum. l. 1. c. 4.
H. Rabanus Maurus, likewise has:) But that Bishops are ordained by imposition
of hands, A PRAECESSORIBVS DEI SACERDOTIBVS, by the Preistes of God their
predecessors, is an ancient constitution. For the holy Genesis 27. and 28.
Patriarch Isaac laying his hands upon the head of Jacob, blessed him, and
Genesis 48.
Jacob in like manner gave a benediction to his sons: etc. Where the Council
and Fathers both affirm; that even Bishops themselves are ordained by Priests
or Presbyters (not Bishops) their predecessors, therefore the right and power
of ordaining Ministers (and Bishops too) belongs to Presbyters as well as
Bishops, and to Bishops, only as Presbyters, not Bishops; and so can no ways
advance them in Jurisdiction, order or degree above Ministers. The Popish
Surius Tom. 4. p. 965.
Council of Trent Sessio 23. De Sacramento ordinis c. 4. determines that
Bishops are superior to Presbyters, and that they can confer the Sacrament of
Confirmation, ordain Ministers of the Church, and do many other things, which
those inferior order have no power to do. And Can. 7. De Sacramento Ordinis:
If any shall say, that Bishops are not superior to Preistes, or that they have
not the power of ordination, or confirmation, or that this power, which they
have, is common to them with Presbyters; or that the orders conferred by them
without the consent or calling of the secular power are void, let him be
Anathema: Lo here this Council appropriates the power of ordination only to
Bishops, by denying it to be common to them with Ministers, and in this regard,
makes Bishops superior in degree to Ministers; yet not by any divine right or
institution, (of which there is not one word;) but only by humane and
Canonical; (as the Lib. 7.
History of the Council of Trent, and Examen Council. Tridentini, pars 2. De
Sacramento Ord.
Chemnitius well observe:) For in the same Ibid. p. 968.
Session de Reformatione, Can. 7. 8. it enjoynes; that according to the ancient
Canons, when Ministers or Deacons are to be ordained; that the Bishop calling
to him the Preistes and other prudent men skillful of the divine Law, and
exercised in Ecclesiastical constitutions, should diligently enquire and
examine before them the stock, person, age, institution, manners, doctrine, and
faith of those that were to be ordained; and that those orders, should be
publicly conferred and celebrated in the Cathedral Church; the Canons of the
Church being called to, and present at it; or if in any other place, or Church
of the Diocese, Praesenti Clero Loci, the Clergy of the place being present.
Epist. 2. c. 2. apud Surium. Tom. 1. p. 161. recited by Gratian. Distinct. 67.
Pope Anacletus, and the Gratian. Distinct. 61. 62. 63. 64. etc.
Canon Law, having long before that time ordained; That Priests and Deacons
should be ordained by their own Bishop; Ita ut Cives and Alij SACERDOTES
assensum praebent; So as the Citizens and other Preistes assented thereunto;
which they usually did, and ought to do, as Gratian with Illyr. Catalogus
Testium veritatis An. 1562. Appendix, p. 23. to 56. vera demonstratio, quod
Electio Praesulum and Episcoporum non ad Ecclesiasticos solum sed and ad
Laicos, vocant, pertineat, quodque hi hoc jure Electionisinde usque a Christi
temporibus annis: 1500. usisunt.
others prove at large. So that though this Council, and the other Canons and
Constitutions debar Presbyters and Ministers from the act and exercise of
ordination, (which yet they ever use, and practice as assistants to the
Bishops, who can ordain none but by their assent, since they ought to join
with them in the imposition of hands,) yet they deprive them not of their
inherent right, nor yet of the exercise of it as assistants to the Bishop,
which they have ever used. I pass now from these Councels and Constitutions to
the Fathers, who jumpe in judgment with them. It is true that Epist. ad
Evagrium. and in Tit. 1.
S. Hierome, Cont. haeres l. 3. haer. 75.
Epiphanius, * Isidor Hispalensis, In Ephesians. 4. and 1 Timothy 414
Ambrose, Quaestiones ex utroque Testamento mixtim. quaest 101.
Augustine, Epist. 86.
Leo, and others affirm, that Bishops only in their time did use to ordain
Ministers and Deacons; and that Presbyters might do all things that Bishops
did, except the conferring of Orders, and some other b De Ecclesiasticis
Officiis, l. 2. c. 7.
trifling toys, as consecrating of Altars, Churches, virgins, Chrisme, etc.
not warranted by Gods word; yet none of them determine, that the right and
power of ordination belongs only to Bishops, by divine institution and
appointment; that Presbyters have no right at all, by the word of God to
confer Orders; or that they might not do it in any case; but they expressly
aver the contrary: For as they did join with the Bishop in the imposition of
hands, as appears by the third Canon of the fourth Council of Carthage,
forecited; so in S. Ambrose his time, in Egypt, if the Bishop were absent, the
Presbyters use to consigne f Aquinas Supplementum Quaest. 38. Artic. 1.
and confer Orders; as this Ambros. in Ephesians. 4.
Father testifies: and Quaestiones ex utroque Testamento mixtim. quaest. 101.
S. Augustine records, That in Alexandria, and throughout all Egypt, if the
Bishop were wanting, the Presbyter did consecrate and give orders. Hence Aerius
(as C^nt. Haeres. l. 3. Tom. 1. Haer. 75.
Epiphanius reports his words) reasoned in this manner: What is a Bishop to a
Presbyter? one differs nothing from the other; it is one order (says he) one
honor, and one dignity. Imponit manus Episcopus; See Cent. Magd. 3. De Ritibus
circa vocationem and ordinatione^ Col. 135.
ITA ETIAM PRESBYTER: The Bishop imposes his hands, or ordaines Ministers; so
likewise does the Presbyter; The Bishop baptizeth, so also does the Presbyter;
The Bishop sitts in a throne; so also does the Presbyter. And he alleged,
that the Apostle says to a Bishop: 1. Tim. 4. 14.
Neglect not the gift that is in thee, which thou have received by the laying
on of the hands of the Presbytery: Epiphanius there denies not directly, that
Presbyters then did use to ordain; but demands, how it is possible for a
Presbyter to ordain, not having imposition of hands in the election of
Ministers, or to say that he is equal with a Bishop. A false and miserable
shift: since all Appendix Catalogo Testium veritatis p. 23. to 56. Gersonius
Bucerus De Gubernat. Eccl. p. 25. 130. 131. 318. usque 334. 346. usque 354.
360. 361. 362. 363. 364. 414. 609.
Histories, Fathers, Authors, Councels testify, that in that age, Presbyters
had always their voices in the Elelection, yea their hands in the ordination
of Ministers and Deacons. S. Hierome in his Commentary on Zeph. c. 2. Tom. 5.
p. 218. D. writes exprefly: SACERDOTES. and that Priests and Presbyters who
give baptism, and imprecate the Lords advent, to the Eucharist, make also the
oil of Chrisme, MANVS IMPONVNT, impose hands, instruct the catechumeny, LEVIT
AS ET ALIOS CONSTITVVNT SACERDOTES; ordain Levites, and other Priests:
Therefore Presbyters in S. Hieronymus time ordained Ministers, Deacons, and
laid on hands as well as Bishops. Yea De Vitis Pontificum p. 53.
Anastatius, in the life of Pope Pelagius the first, records; that this Pope
An. Christi 555. for want of three Bishops to ordain him; was ordained Pope,
by John Bishop of Perusia and Bonus Bishop of Florence, and Andreas Presbyter
de Hostia, and Andrew Elder or Minister of Hostia, which Luitprandius de Vitis
Pontificum p. 84. and Albo Floriacensis in his life, p. 140. likewise testify:
Lo here a Presbyter or ordinary Minister ordaining not only another Elder,
but a Bishop, yea a Pope; and supplying the place of a Bishop See Surius
Council. Can. 1. p. 188. 161. 163. 341. 369. 376. 406. 502. 506. 574. Tom. 2 p.
187. 656. Tom. 1. p. 699. 718 467. Tom. 2 p. 264. 267 268. 272. 638. 731.
the general Council of Nice. Can. 4. the first Council of Arelat. Can. 21.
the second Council of Carthage, Can. 12. the third Council of Carthage, Can.
^9. the Council of Aphricke, Can. 16. the Council of Rhegium, An. 472, the
Council of Arausica, Can. 21. the Council of Chalcedon, Act. 13. p. 187. with
sundry Popes Decrees, ordaining, that no man shall be consecrated a Bishop, but
by three Bishops at least and that a consecration made only by two Bishops
shall be void; and so this Pope no lawfully ordained Pope, rules this Presbyter
supplied the place of a Bishop, in his consecration and his Ordination good and
valid by the Law of God, though invalid and a mere nullity by the Canons
Antiquit. Eccl. Brit. p. 302.
An. 1390. about Wicklifs time there arose in England certain bold Clerks,
who affirmed; that it was lawful for them to make new Presbyters and Clerks,
and confer orders., like Bishops: teaching likewise, that they were endued
with the same power in Ecclesiastical affairs as Bishops were, whereupon they
laid hands on many, and ordained diverse Ministers: who affirmed likewise, that
they had equal and the selfsame Ecclesiastical power with Bishops: which was
the constant Doctrine of Wicklife and the Waldensis which Doctrine of theirs
was true, but their practice discommended, yet the Ministers thus ordained by
them, their ordination held lawful by Gods Law; yea and their ordination of
others in those times in darkness and persecution, when no Wickilvists,
Lollards or other orthodox professors of the Gospel could be admitted into
orders by the Bishops of that age, unless they would subscribe to their Popish
assertions, as some of our Prelates now will admit none to receive orders,
unless they will first, subscribe to such private positions and Ceremonies, as
are directly contrary to the established Doctrine, and discipline of the Church
of England; by means whereof many godly men are kept from the Ministry. And
though In 1. Tim. 4. 14.
Chrysostom, Primasius, Theodoret, Ambrose, Rabanus Maurus, Oecumenius,
Theophilact, Haymo, with some others, interpret that of the 1. Tim. 4. 14. By
the Laying on of the hands of che Presbytery; to be meant either of Paul
himself, or of the Senate of the Apostles, or of such who had Apostolical
authority, or of Bishops, and not of the bare Presbyters; because (say they)
Presbyters, (to wit according to the practice of their, though not of former
times) could not ordain a Bishop, but only Apostles, or Bishops; yet none of
them so much as once asffirme, that they cannot by the Law of God ordain
Deacons and ordinary Ministers; or that they ought by Gods Law and divine
institution to be ordained only by Bishops: yea In 1. Tim. 4. 14.
Theophilact on that text writes thus: Behold a wonderful thing, See how much
the imposition SACERDOTALIVM MANVVM, of Sacerdotall or Priests hands can do; A
clear demonstration, that Priests as well as Bishops, and Bishops only as
they are Priests not Bishops, have power of laying on hands. And In 1. Tim. 4.
14.
Theodoret, thus glosseth the text, here he calls those the Presbytery who had
attained Apostolical grace; For, says he, divine Scripture has called those
who were honored in Israel, Elders. The Fathers therefore confessing, that
Presbyters and Elders might and did in some cases and places ordain, and
consecrate Ministers without the Bishop, and likewise join with the Bishop,
(in all places) in the imposition of hands; grant that the right of ordination
and imposing hands, belongs to them by the word of God, as well as to
Bishops; the rather, because this is the constant doctrine of the Ambrose in
Ephesians. 4. and 1. Tim. 3. Hierome, Sedulius, Theodoret, Primasius, Rabanus
Maurus, Remigius, Oecumenius, Theophilactus, Alselmus, Beda, Bruno etc. in
Phil. 1. 1. 1. Tim. 3. Tit. 1. 5. 7. Acts. 20 17 28.
Fathers, that Bishops and Presbyters, by Gods Law and institution, are both
one and the same, and so continued till long after the Apostles times;
Therefore their power of ordination, the same with theirs. Neither do the
Papists dissent from this: In 1. Tim. 4. 14. Lect. 3.
Aquinas writes; That the imposition of hands belongs only to those who are
the Ministers of Christ: which was double, one which was made by Deacons, the
other by Ministers; and because he adds not the third by Bishops; he plainly
intimates, that the ordination made by Ministers and Bishops, is one and the
same, and that Bishops ordain only as Bishops, not as Ministers. In 1. Tim.
4. 14.
Ca^etan on that text says, That Paul relates, that the imposition of hands S
ACERDOTALIS OFFICII, is a part of the Sacerdotall or Priests office, (not the
Bishops) and Faber in 1. Tim. 4. 14. writes, that Presbyters did use to lay
their hands on the heads of those who were to be ordained, purged, or made
complete Ministers, pouring forth holy prayers. I know indeed that
Supplementum Quaest. 38. Arti. 1.
Aquinas and other Schoolmen hold, that it belongs only to Bishops to
confer holy orders; yet he and In 4. Sent. Did. 24. quaest, 5. 6.
Durandus grant, that this is not by virtue of any divine right, orinstitution,
but only by humane Constitutions and Canons, by reason of the more excellent
power and Jurisdiction that the Bishop has over and above Ministers, and for
order sake; yea they both affirm; that Presbyters do, and ought to join with
the Bishop in the imposition of hands in the ordination of Ministers. The
Rhemists in their annotations on the 1. Tim. 4. 14. confess; that when a
Priest is ordained, the rest of the Priests and Elders present, do together
with the Bishop, even at this day among them, (and have anciently used
heretofore) to lay hands on those that are to be ordained; citing the fourth
Council of Carthage: Can. 3. for proof thereof. And the Summa Angelica Ordo
Sect. 13. and Innocentius there cited.
Canonists, with some Filiuc. Icsuita De Casibus Consc. pars 1. Tract. 9. c. 5.
Schoolmen, grant, that Priests and Ministers by the Popes dispensation and
License, may without a Bishops concurrents, ordain Deacons and Ministers; but
a mere Layman, or one that is no Minister, cannot do it. A clear proof,
that the imposition of hands appertained to Presbyters as well as Bishops, and
that the power of ordination rests more in the Ministers person, then in the
Popes grant or License; else why might not a Lay man as well as a Minister,
grant Orders by virtue of the Popes License, or why should Ministers join with
Bishops in the imposition of hands? But to pass from these to the reformed
Churches beyond the Seas. We know that most of them have no Bishops; that all
their Ministers and Deacons are ordained by the Common election of the people
and Magistrates, and imposition of the Senate or College of Ministers hands;
yet none of our Prelates have been so impudently shameless, as to deny their
ordination and Ministers to be lawful, or their practice to be dissonant from
the Scriptures, or them to be true Churches. What their writers have determined
concerning the power of ordination, incident to Ministers as well as Bishops,
and to Bishops only as Ministers, and servants to the Church, not Lords, these
ensuing passages will declare: Lydij Waldensia p. 23.
Ioannes Lukawitz in his Confession of the ^aborites against Rokenzana, c. 13.
of the Sacrament of order, writes thus: They confess, that the conferring of
Orders only by Bishops, and that they have more effectual authority of his
nature then other Ministers, is not from any faith or authority of the
Scriptures, Sed ex consuetudine habetur Ecclesiae, but from the Custom of the
Church. This being the constant doctrine of the Fox Acts and Monuments p. 210.
Catal. Testium Veritatis tit. Waldenses p. 445.
Waldenses and Toborites, that the power of giving orders, and imposing hands,
belonged to Presbyters as well as Bishops; and that Bishops and Ministers by
Gods Law where both one; and no Bishop greater then any Presbyter in honor, or
Jurisdiction. Argument. and Respons. pars 7. De potestat. Episc. Arg. 2
Melanchton writes, That if Bishops and Ordinaries are enemies of the Church,
or will not give orders, yet the Churches retain their right; For wheresoever
there is a Church, there is a right of administering the Gospel; wherefore
there is a necessity that the Church should retain the right of calling,
electing and ordaining Ministers. And this right is a gift given to the
Church, which no humane authority can take from the Church; as Paul witnesses
in the fourth of the Ephesians, where he says, When he ascended upon High,
he gave gifts unto men; and he reckons Doctors and Pastors among the proper
gifts of the Church, and adds, that such are given for the Work of the
Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ, where therefore there is a
true Church, there must needs be a right of Electing and ordaining Ministers.
One thing has made a difference of Bishops and Pastors, to wit, ordination,
because it is instituted that one Bishop might ordain in many Churches; but
seeing that by Gods Law there are not diverse degrees of a Bishop and Pastor, it
is evident, that an ordination made by a Pastorin his Church, is ratified by
Gods Law. Marsilius Patavinus in his Defensoris Pacis, pars 2. (...). 15. 17.
affirms: that the power of ordaining Ministers belongs not to Priests and
Bishops, but to the Magistrates and people, where he is to be a Minister. That
every Priest by divine authority, may confer all Sacraments, and give orders,
as well as any Bishop: and that every Priests has power to ordain and promote
any believer that is willing to the Preisthood, he preparing him
Ministerially, but God simply and immediately impressing the Sacerdotall power
or character; the original property of ordaining Ministers being only in
Christ, the head of the Church. In 1. Tim. 4. 14.
Hyperius thus seconds him: The imposition of hands in the election of a
Bishop, or Deacon to approove the person to the multitude or people, was made
by THE ELDERS, in whom this authority rested, whence it is here added, with the
laying on of hands by the authority of the Preisthood, or as it is more
significantly and plainly expressed in the Greek, with the laying on of the
hands of the Presbytery, which signifies the whole Congregation of Elders. And
they agreed, that he who was elected by the Consent of many, should be
commended and approoved as a fit person, by this external sign. Which is
thus backed by In 1. Tim. 4. 14.
Hemingius. The imposition of the hands of the Presbytery, is the right of
ordination, which the SENATE (or Eldership) of the Church, or other Ministers
of the Gospel did administer. Argum. and Resp. part 7. De Ordin. Minist. in
Argum. 1.
Pezelius thus jumpes in Judgment with them: Heretofore the authority of
ordination was granted to Bishops at least by a humane institution, yet so that
the suffrages of the Church might not be excluded from the Election of
Ministers, and that the other Presbyters should be present at the examination,
and lay their hands together on him, that was to be ordained: For so Gratian
Can. Presbyter. Distinct. 23. when a Presbyter is ordained, the Bishop blessing
him, and holding his hand upon his head, all the Presbyters likewese that are
present, shall hold their hands upon his head close to the Bishops hands: which
tended to this purpose, that the Presbyters, likewise might retain the right,
of conscerating, or ordaining to themselves, and that so they might manifest,
that what ever the Bishop should do, that he did it not in his own name
alone, but in the name of all. Loci Com-De Ministr. Verbi Dei.
Musculu^ Harpes on the same string thus. It must plainly be confessed, that
the Ministers of Christ heretofore were elected, the people being present and
consenting, and they were ordained and confirmed OF THE ELDERS, by the laying
on of hands. This form of electing Ministers is Apostolical and lawful;
which he there prooves at large:

The Noble De Ecclesi^ Cap. 11.
Mornay, Lord of Tlessis, sings the same tune in these words: These things
being thus prooved, we add, that the right of laying on of hands, and
ordaining Ministers, is in the power of the Presbyters. And this verily
concerning the Apostles days is more apparent, then that it can be so much as
doubted of: For says Paul to Timothy, Neglect not the gift that is in thee by
the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery, that is, of the Presbyters or
Elders. Moreover Timothy himself ordained Elders, and since a Bishop and a
Presbyter are names of one and the same function; if the Bishops challenge this
right to themselves from the Scriptures, the Presbyters also may do the same:
but if they deny it to Presbyters, in this very thing they a^rogate this right
to themselves, And verily this was a good form of argument in the Church in
Ancient times. Magist. Sentent. l. 4 c. 25.
He can baptize, he can consecrate and administer the Sacrament of the Lords
body, (which are the greater an more honorable Actions, because Sacraments of
undoubted truth, of Highest note and use,) Therefore he may lay on hands.
(which is less;) Now in ordaining Elders, the Bishop laying his hands on the
head of those that were to be ordained, the rest of the Elders likewise did lay
on their hands, as appears out of many places of the Decrees. The Cent. 1. l.
2 c. 6. Ritus vocationis and Ordinationis Col. 502.
Centurie writers inform us, That in the Apostles time, the Apostles did not
assume to themselves the power of electing and ordaining Elders and Deacons,
but they had the suffrage and consent of the whole Church; and that they, and
the other Ministers of the Church with them, did ordain and lay hands on them;
which they prove by Acts. 6. and 13. and 14. and 19. and 1. Tim. 4. 14. And in
the 2. and third Century following, c. 6. they affirm, that Bishops and
Ministers were thus elected and ordained, the Elders as well as the Bishops
laying their hands on them. The Harmon. Confess. pars 2.
Confession of Saxony c. 12. resolves expressly; that it belongs to the
Ministers of the word to ordain Ministers lawfully elected and called. The Sea
Gersonius Bucerus DeGubern. Eccl. p. 618.
Synod of Petrocomia, Artic. 6. (in Poland) decreed: That no Patron should
receive or admit any Minister to teach in his Church, unless he were lawfully
ordained and sent by the Superintendents, and the Elders, and had a good and
certain testimonial from them; and the Synod of Wlodislania Artic. 8. and 12.
determines thus: The ordination and mission of Ministers into certain places
to work in the Lords vineyard, is committed to the Superintendents, and to the
Ministers and Elders their Colleagues; (not to Bishops:) Georgius Major in his
Enar, in Philip. 1. 1. writes thus: That there is no difference between a
Bishop and a Presbyter, Paul witnesses in the 1. Tim. 4. 14. where he says:
Neglect not the grace that is in thee etc. by the laying on the hands of the
Presbytery; that is, of the Order or Colleadge of the Presbyters, by which it
is showed, that Timothy was called and ordained to his Episcopal function by
the Presbyters. Therefore at that time PRESBYTERS HAD THE RIGHT OF ORDINATION,
as well as Bishops, neither was there any difference between them. To these I
might add, Master John Calvin, Piscator, Marlorat, and most other Protestant
Commentators on the 1. Tim. 4. 14. Zanchius Destatu peccati and Legal. in
quartum Praeceptum, Chemnitius Loc. Com. pars 3. De Eccles. c. 4. and Examen
Concilij Tridentini pars 2. De Sacram. Ordinis, page 224. 225. etc. (where he
prooves at large,) that the election and vocation of Ministers belongs to the
whole Church, to the people as well as the Clergy; that the imposition of hands
belongs to Presbyters as well as Bishops. Wherefore the Apostle s^ith, 1. Tim.
4. 14. that Timothy had a grace and a gift by the imposition of hands, neither
says he only of my hands, but he adds also of the Presbytery, that there
should be thought no difference, whether any one were ordained either by the
Apostles, or by the Elders.) A^tonius Sadeel, Respons. ad Repetita Turriani
Sophism. pars 2. Locus 12. Beza de diversis Ministrorum Gradibus. Iunius Contr.
5. l. c. 3. n. 3. Chamierus Paustratia Cathol. Tom. 2. de Oecum. Pontif. c. 6.
with sundry Presbytery and Episcopi sunt Iure divino pares, id est,
administrant idem officium, eodem modo, and eadem auctoritate, Vnde Presbyteri
impositionis manuum in pastoribus ordinandis jus habent. 1. Tim. 4. 14. Can.
Presbyter. Distinct. 23. Sir Amandus Polanus Syntagm. Theol. l. 7. c. 11.
other writers of the reformed Churches, who aver and prove against the
Papists, and Jesuits; that the power of election and ordination of Ministers
by the word of God, belonges to the whole Church and Congregation, and the
imposition of hands to Ministers, Elders, and Presbyters as well as to Bishops,
and to Bishops only, as they are Ministers. But he that has handeled and
prooved this most largely and fully of all others, is Gersonius Bucerus de
Gubernatione Ecclesiae (being an answer to Bishop Downhams Sermon of Bishops)
p. 261. 262. 283. 287. 292. 294. 299. 310. 318. to 367. 464. 465. 493. 498.
499. 524. 618. where this point is so learnedly and substantially prooved by
Scripture, reason, and Authors of all sorts, that none, which read these
passages of his, can ever hereafter call this into question more.

Having run thus long abroad, I now in the last place return to our own
Church and writers. The Book of ordination of Ministers, ratified by two
several Acts of Parliament, namely 3. Ed. 6. c. 12. and 8. Eliz. c. 1. and
subscribed to by all our Prelates and Ministers, Canons 1603. 36. 37.
by virtue of the 36. Canon as containing nothing in it contrary to the word of
God, expressly orders, that when Ministers are ordained; ALL THE MINISTERS
PRESENT AT THE ORDINATION SHALL LAY THEIR HANDS TOGETHER WITH THE BISHOP ON
THOSE THAT ARE TO BE ORDAINED: And the 35. Can. made in Convocation by the
Bishops and Clergy An. 1603. prescribes, that the Bishop before he admit any
person to holy Orders, shall diligently examine him in the presence of those
Ministers that shall ASSIST HIM AT THE IMPOSITION OF HANDS. And if the said
Bishop have any lawful impediment, he shall cause the said Ministers
carefully to examine every such person so to be ordered. Provided that they who
shall assist the Bishop in examining AND LAYING ON OF HANDS, shall be of his
Cathedral Church, if they may be conveniently had, or other sufficient
preachers of the same Diocese, to the number of three at the least. And
according to this Book of Ordination and Canon, when ever any Ministers are
ordained, all the Ministers there present join with and assist the Bishop in
layng on of hands, on every one that is ordained. So that both by the
established Doctrine and practice of the Church of England, the power of laying
on hands, and right of ordination, is common to every of our Ministers, as well
as to our Bishops; who as they cannot ordain or lay hands on any without the
Bishop, so the Bishop can ordain or lay hands on no Ministers without them; so
that the power and right of ordination rests equally in them both. With what
face or shadow then of truth our Prelates now can or dare to Monopolize this
privilege to themselves alone, against this Book of Ordination, their own
Canons, subscriptions, yea their own and their Predecessors common practice to
the contrary (which perchance their overgreat employments in temporal
businesses and secular state affairs, have caused them wholly to forgett, at
least not to consider:) let the indifferent judge. But to pass from them to
some of our learned writers: Alcuvinus De Divinis Officiis c. 37. writes; that
Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons were anciently, and in his time too, See
Bishop Iewols Re-ply to Harding. Artic. 4. Divis. 25. Eusebius Eccles. Hist. l.
3. c. 11. l. 6. c. 29. l. 3. l. 7. c. 3. Socr. Eccles. Hist. l. 2. c. 6. l. 5.
c. 7. 8. 9. 15. (...). 7. p 3. 12. 26. 28. 29. 34. 35. 36. 45. l. 4. c. 6.
Euagrius Eccles. Hist. l. 2. c. 8. 11. l. 3. c. 11. 12. l. 4. c. 6. 3^. Gratian
Distinct. 63. 79. Appendix ad Catalogum Test. Veritatis.
elected by the Clergy and people, and that they were present at their
Ordination and consenting to it. That the Bishops consecration in his days
used in the Church of Rome, wherein two Bishops held the Gospel or New
Testament over the head of the Bishop consecrated, and a third uttered the
blessing, after which the other Bishops present laid their hands on his head,
was but a Novelty, not found in the old or new Testament, nor in the Roman
tradition. And then he^ prooves out of Hieroms Epistle to Evagrius, and his
Commentary on the first to Titus, that the ancient consecration of Bishops, was
nothing else but their election and inthronization by the Elders, who chose out
one of their company for a Bishop, and placed him in a higher seat then the
rest, and called him a Bishop, without further Ceremony; just as an Army makes
a General, or as if the Deacons should choose one from among them and call him
an Archdeacon, having no other consecration but such as the other Deacons had,
being advaunced above others only by the Election of his fellow-brethren,
without other solemnity.

By which it is plain, that in the primitive Church, Presbyters did not only
ordain Presbyters and Deacons, before there were any Bishops elected and
instituted; but likewise, that after Bishops were instituted, they ordained and
consecrated Bishops (as well as Elders and Deacons,) and that the sole
ordination and consecration of Bishops in the Primitive and purest times, was
nothing but the Presbyters bare election and inthronization of them without
more solemnity; So that the other Rites and Ceremonies now used, are but
Novelties. Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury on the 1. Tim. 4. 14. expounds
these words, with the laying on of hands of the Presbytery in this manner, He
calls that the laying on of hands which was made in his ordination; which
imposition of hands was in the Presbytery, because that by this imposition of
hands, he received an Eldership, that is, a Bishopric. For a Bishop is
oftentimes called a Presbyter by the Apostle, and a Presbyter a Bishop. (which
in his Commentary on the third Chapter, on Phil. 1. 1. Tit. 1. 5. 7. he
prooves to be but one and the same in the Apostles time and in the Primitive
Church.) So that by his resolution the imposition of hands and power of
ordaining Elders and Bishops, belongs to Presbyters as well as to Bishops. Our
English Apostle Wicklif. De 4. Sectis Novellis. c. 6. De Papa. c. 11.
John Wickliffe, and his Coaetanean Richardus Armachanus. Ad Quaest. Armenorum.
l. 11. c. 1. to 8.
Richard Fitzralphe, otherwise called Richardus Armachanus Archbishop and
Primate of Ardmagh in Ireland; if we believe either their own writings, or
Waldnsis Cont. Wicl. Tome 3. c. 60 61 62. 63. and Tom. 1. l 2. Artic. 3. c. 57.
Thomas Walden, who recites their opinions, arguments, and takes a great deal
of pains (though in vain) to refute them: affirmed and taught:

First, that in the defect of Bishops, any one that was but a mere Priest, was
sufficient to administer any Sacrament or Sacramentals whatsoever either found
in Scripture, or added since.

Secondly, That one who was but a mere Priest might ordain another, and that
he, who was ordained only by a simple Priest, ought not to doubt of his
Presbytership, or to be ordained again, so as he rightly performed his
clericall office, because the ordination comes from God, who supplies all
defects.

Thirdly, That mere Priests may ordain Priests, Deacons and Bishops too; even
as the inferior Priests among the Jews did ordain and consecrate the High
Priest, as Bishops consecrate Archbishops, and the Cardinals the Pope.

Fourthly, That the power of order is equal, and the same in Bishops and
Priests, and that by their very ordination they have power given them by Christ
to administer all Sacraments alike; therefore to confer orders and confirm
children, which is the less, as well as to baptize, administer the Sacrament
of the Lords Supper and preach the Gospel, which is the greater.

Fifthly, That Christ sitting in heaven has given the power of consecrating and
ordaining Priests and Deacons, of Confirmation, and all other things, which
Bishops now challenge to themselves, to just Presbyters; and that these things
were but of late times, even above 300. years after Christ, reserved and
appropriated to Bishops only by their own Canons and Constitutions, to
increase their Caesarian Pomp and pride. And Tom. 3. c. 36. Sect. 1.
Waldensis himself (who undertakes to refute these propositions) says
expressly: That no man hitherto ^ath denied, that God in an urgent case of
necessity gave the power of ordination to any one that is but a mere Priest,
to wit, in the want or defect of Bishops. All the Archbishops, Bishops,
Archdeacons and Clergy of England in their Book, entitled The institution of
a Christian man, subscribed with all their hands, and dedicated to King Henry
the 8. An. 1537. Chapter of Orders, and King Henry the 8. himself in his Book
styled, A necessary ^rudition for any Christian man, set out by authority of
the Statute, of 32. H. 8. c. 26. approoved by the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and Netherhowse of Parliament, prefaced with the Kings own Royal
Epistle, and published by his special command in the year 1543. in the
chapter of Orders; expressly resolve, that ^reists and Bishops by Gods Law are
one and the same, and that the power of ordination and excommunication belongs
equally to them both. Learned Martin Bucer in his Book of recalling and
bringing into use again the lawful ordination of Ministers, and of the office
of Pastors, in his Scripta Anglicana, written here in England, p. 254. 255.
259. 291. 292. 293. and on Math. 16. lays down these Conclusions.

First, That the power of ordination rests principally and originally in Christ
himself Prince of Pastors.

Secondly, That this power is secondarily and derivately in the whole Church,
whose consent is requisite in the election and ordination of Ministers.

Thirdly, That the actual power of Ordination and imposition of hands belongs
as well to Presbyters as to Bishops, that they ought to join with the Bishop
in the laying on hands; and that Timothy was ordained by the Presbyters.

Fourthly, That Bishops and Ministers have the power of imposition of hands in
them only instrumentally not originally as servants to the whole Congregation.

Fif^ly; That the examination and ordination of Ministers ought to be made
publicly in the Church where they are elected to be Ministers, before all the
Congregation, All which he prooves by sundry Scriptures and Histories. Peter
Martyr his coaetaman, (Regius professor in the ^niversity of Oxford, in the
days of King Edward the 6.) in his Commentary upon the 2. Kings. 2. 23. and in
his Common places, printed at London, Cum Privilegio, An. 1576. Class. 4. Loc.
1. Sect. 23. p. 849. writes thus: The Papists cannot object grievous sins
against the Ministers of the Gospel, but they oppose only some slight, that I
say not ridiculous thing: they say that our Pastors have no imposition of
hands, and thence they endeavor to conclude, that they are not to be reputed
just Governors of the Church; and that the Congregations which are taught and
governed by them, are no true Churches, but Conven^^cles of rev^lters. And this
they say, as if the imposition of hands were so necessary, that without it
there can be no ministry in the Church; when notwithstanding Moses consecrated
Aaron his Brother and his Children, offering diverse kinds of Sacrifices, on
which no man formerly had laid on hands. Lik^w^se John the Baptist brought in a
new right of Baptism, and administered it to the Jews, when as yet no hands
had been laid upon him, and he himself had been baptized of no man. Paul
also called by Christ in his journey, did not presently go to the Apostles
that they might lay hands upon him, but he taught in Arabia for 3. years
space, and ministered to the Churches, before that he went up to the Apostles
his Antecessors, as himself witnesses in his Epistle to the Galathians. We
reject not the imposition of hands, but retain it in many Churches; which if
we receive not from their Bishops, we are not to be blamed for it, for they
would not conf^rre it on us, unless we would depart from sound Doctrine, and
likewise bind our selves by O^th to the Roman Antichrist. In which words he
resolves:

First, That the imposition of hands is no such essential part of a Ministers
ordination, but that it may be omitted; and that those who are elected and
lawfully called to the Ministry by the suffrage of the whole Church and
people, are Ministers lawfully called and ordained without this Ceremony.

Secondly, That the imposition of hands belongs to Ministers, as well as
Bishops; and that those who are ordained Ministers in the reformed Churches,
where they have no Bishops, only by the laying on of hands of other Ministers,
are lawfully ordained.

Thirdly, That this position, that the power of ordination belongs only to
Bishops, that those are no true Ministers who are ordained without a Bishop, is
but a vain ridiculous Popish Cavil. Our Prelates therefore should be ashamed
to ground both their own, and Titus his Episcopal Hierarchy upon it: Learned
Controv. 2. qu. est. 5. c. 5.
Doctor Whitaker, writing against Bellarmine, says; that this text of the 1.
Tim. 4. 14. makes very much against the adversaries; For from this place we
understand, that Tim^thy, receives imposition of hands from the Elders, who at
that time governed the Church by a common Council; and against Contra Duraeum
l. 9. Sect. 55.
Duraeus, he argues thus; Luther, Zwinglius, Oecolampadius, Bucer and others
were Presbyters; and Presbyters by Gods Law are the same with Bishops;
therefore they might lawfully ordain other Pres^yters; Doctor Fulke in his
Confutation of the Rhem^sh Testament: Annot. on Tit. 1. Sect. 2. and Doctor
Willet in his Synopsis Papismi, the 5. general Controversy quaest. 3. part.
2. write thus, Although in the Scripture a Bishop and an Elder is of one order
and authority in preaching the word, etc. yet in government by ancient use of
speech, he is only called a Bishop, which is in the Scripture called chief
in government, to whom the ordination or consecration by imposition of hands
was always principally committed. Not that imposition of hands belongs
only to him, for the rest of the Elders that were present at ordination did
lay on their hands, or else the Bishop did lay on his hands in the name of the
rest. We differ from the Papists in this; They affirm; that not principally
and chiefly, but solely and wholly the right of consecrating and giving Orders
appertains unto Bishops. But concerning the power of giving Orders we say;
that though it were chiefly in the Apostles, yet the Pastors and Elders
together with them laid on their hands, Acts. 13. 3. 4. and as S. Paul speaks
of his laying on of hands, 2. Tim. 1. 6. so he makes mention of imposition of
hands by the Eldership, 1. Tim. 4. 14. And the Rhemists on that place mislike
not the practice of their Church, that their Priests do lay on their hands
together with the Bishop upon his head that is to be ordained. What else does
this signify, but that they have some interest in ordaining together with the
Bishop? The 4. Council of Carthage Can. 3. Decrees thus: Let all the Priests
that are present, hold their hands next to the Bishops hand, upon the head of
him that is to be ordained. Again Can. 14. of the same Council: The Bishop
must not give orders, but in the presence and assembly of the Clergy. By this
then it is manifest, that imposition of hands does not wholly and soly belong
to the Bishops, seeing the rest of the Elders were wont to lay on their hands
likewise, or the Bishop in the name of the rest. So that the Elders were not
excluded. Doctor Field in his 5. Book of the Church, c. 27. is of the same
opinion; where he prooves out of Durandus and other Papists, that the power of
consecration and order is not greater in Bishops then in any other Ministers;
that the power of ordination was reserved to Bishops, not by any divine, but
humane Constitutions only, rather for to honor the Bishops preistly place,
then for that it might not be done by any other, and for the avoiding of
confusion and schism in the Church: Concluding, that in cases of necessity; as
when Bishops are extinguished by death; or fallen into haeresie, or obstinately
refuse to ordain men to preach the Word and Gospel of Christ sincerely, and
the like, then Ministers only may ordain other Ministers, without any Bishops
assistance. And Master Cartwright in his Confutation of the Rhem^sh Testament,
on the 1. Tim. 1. 14. Sect. 18. and on Tit. 1. Sect. 2. pr^oves, both by the
Rhemists own practice and Confession, by the 4. Council of Carthage, cited by
them, and the History of Eradius his ordination, who succeeded Augustine, to
which six Elders, as well as two Bishops were called, and by the text of
Timothy itself, that the imposition of hands belongs to Elders as well as
Bishops, which he manifests to be one and the same by divine institution.
Finally, acute and learned Doctor Ames in his Bellarminus Enervatus Tom. 2. l.
3. c. 2. of the vocation and ordination of Ministers, Sect. 4. etc. De
Ordinatione, Concludes thus against Bellarmine, who affirms, that the
ordination, vocation, and election of Bishops and other Ministers of the Church
belongs only to Bishops.

First, That it cannot belong Iure Divino to Popish Bishops, superior to
Presbyters in degree, because they themselves are only, vel juris, vel
injuriae humanae, of humane right, or rather injury, not of divine institution.

Secondly, That the very act of ordination belongs to divine Bishops, that is,
to Presbyters, in a Church well ordered.

Thirdly, That as to the right force and virtue which it has in constituting
the Minister of the Church, it always appertains to the whole Church; as the
celebration of Matrimony receives all its force and virtue from the consent of
the parties married.

Fourthly, That in corrupted and collapsed State of the Church, the Ministry
and Order failing; the very act of ordination, so far forth as it is
necessary to the constitution of a Minister, may in such a case be lawfully
executed by the people.

Fifthly, That the Act of ordination is attributed to Presbyters, 1. Tim. 4. 14.
And that the Apostles themselves did not ordain ordinary Ministers* but by the
concurrence and consent of the people, Acts. 14. 23.

Sixthly, That in the primitive Church, which was governed by the common
Counsel of the Presbyters, before there were any Bishops, the very first
Bishops were not ordained by Bishops, which then were not, but by Ministers.

Seaventhly, That all the Councels, Degrees and Testimonies of Fathers objected
to the contrary; prove nothing else, but that the Act and Right of Ordination
partly by Custom, and partly by humane Decrees, was given to the chief
Presbyter or Bishop after the Apostles time, not belonging to them by any
divine right.

Eighthly, That the imposition of hands is not absolutely necessary to the
essence of a Pastor, no more then a Coronation to the essence of a King, or the
celebration of a marriage, to the essence of a marriage.

Ninthly, That the power of Ordination, according to the Schoolmen and
Canonists, is not an Act of Jurisdiction, but of simple office, which
Presbyters may perform without any Command or Jurisdiction.

Tenthly, That the Papists themselves teach, that baptism conferred by any
Christian, though a lay man or woman; is good by reason of the necessity of it,
that a simple Presbyter by the common consent of the Popish Doctors, may
administer the Sacrament of Confirmation, or confer any of the greater
Orders, and that all the Pontificians teach with unanimous consent, that a
Bishop once consecrated, although he be a Simoniack, Heretic, excommunicate
person or the like, may yet firmly ordain others. Therefore a fortiori Godly
Presbyters, or the people and Church of Christ, may lawfully confer orders
without the help or concurrence of a Bishop. Which authority of his ought not
to be slighted as Schismatic or Erroneous, it being consonant to the
Doctrine both of our own and other Protestant writers, Churches; and this
book of his printed by Authority, in the university of Oxford, no longer
since, then Anno 1629. It is evident then by this whole cloud of witnesses (to
omit others) that the power and right of ordination and imposition of hands,
(which says Manus impositio quid est aliud quam oration super* hominem? Cause.
1. qu. 1. c. Manus. Ambr. in 1. Tim. 4.
Gratian, is nothing else but a prayer over a man; and as In 1. Tim. 4. Lect.
3. See Gersonius Bucerus De Gubern. Eccl. p. 337.
Aquinas writes, signifies only the conferring of grace, which is given by
Christ; and not that Ministers, (not Bishops, who are here but Ministers) give
this grace,; and so as proper for Ministers as Bishops both by divine and
humane right and practice) belongs to Presbyters and ordinary Ministers as well
as Bishops; therefore Bishops cannot be paramount Presbyters and ordinary
Ministers in order and Jurisdiction, in this regard; neither will this power of
ordination prove Timothy or Titus Bishops, as they now vainly surmise. Hence
therefore I retort the objection in this manner against the opposites. That
power or authority which is common by divine right and institution to Ministers
and Presbyters as well as Bishops, can neither prove Timothy or Titus to be
Bishops, or Bishops to be superior to Presbyters or Ministers in Jurisdiction,
order, dignity or degree, Iure divino or humano.

But the power of authority of ordaining Presbyters, Ministers, and Deacons, is
such; as the premises undeniably evidence.

Therefore it can neither prove Timothy or Titus to be Bishops, nor Bishops to
be superior to Presbyters, or Ministers in Jurisdiction, order, dignity or
degree, Iure divino or humano.



Sixthly, S. Paul, in the 1. Tim. 3. and Titus 1. 6. etc. makes a particular
enumeration and recital both of the qualifications, and offices of a Bishop;
But among all these, he speaks not a word concerning the power of act of
ordination; neither does he make it a part of a Bishops qualification or duty
to be apt and able discreetly to confer orders, as he does particularly
require, he 1. Tim. 3. 2.
should be apt to teach: How therefore this should be a chief property, or
principal quality of a Bishop, I cannot yet conjecture, since the Scripture
makes it none, but rather a property, an act of the Presbytery, 1. Tim. 4. 14.
Acts. 13. 3. 4. I shall desire Bishops therefore, to produce some divine
Charter or other for this pretended Monopoli^e of ordination, which they would
ingrosse unto themselves alone (perchance to make the more advantage by it, it
Lindewoods Constit. Provinc. l. 3. de Censibus. cap. Sena f. 160. 161.
being a sweet and pleasant gain as some handle it now,) before they lay any
further Title thereunto, even as they are Diocaesan Bishops.

Seaventhly, I must inform our Bishops for their learning, that An. 31. H. 8.
in the Patent Rolls part. 4. King Henry the 8. granted a Patent to all the
Archbishops, and Bishops of England, to endble them to consecrate Churches,
Chapples, and Churchyards, by virtue of his special Patents and Commissions
under his great Seal first obtained; without which they could not do it, and
that all the Bishops in King Edward the 6. time, had special clauses in their
Letters Patents, authorizing them to ordain and constitute Ministers and
Deacons, as Bishop Ponets, Bishop Scoryes, Bishop Coverdales, Patents 5. Edw.
6. pars 1. and 2. with others in his Reign, testify at large. Neither do or
can our Archbishops or Bps* at this day consecrate any Bishop or Archbishop,
unless they have the Kings own See Wests Presidents: Warranti Sect. 574.
Letters Patents, authorizing and commanding them to do it, as the Patents
directed to them uponevery Bishops consecration and experience witness. It
seems therefore that their power to consecrate Churches, Chapples,
Churchyards, Ministers, and Bishops, belongs not to them as they are Bishops,
and that it is merely humane not divine, since they claim and execute it only
by virtue of the Kings Letters Patents; therefore it cannot advance them above
Pres byters, by any divine right.

Eighthly, All accord, that in cases of necessity, when or where Bishops are
wanting, or when there are none but Simontacall or Heretical Bishops, who
refuse to ordain such as are Orthodoxe, or will not subscribe to their
heresies, there Presbyters and ordinary Ministers may lawfully confer orders,
confirm, and do other Acts, which Bishops usually ingrosse to themselves; so
Ambrose, Augustine, Richardus Armachanus, Wicliffe, Thomas Waldensis, Field,
Ames, with others in their forequoted places, and generally all divines resolve
without dispute. Yea that learned Morney Lord of Plessis, in his Book De
Ecclesia. c. 11. Bellarminus Ener. Tom. 2. l. 3. c. 2.
Amesius, with sundry others affirm, that the people alone in case of
necessity where there are no Bishops nor Ministers, may lawfully elect and
ordain Ministers, as well as baptize and preach (both which Summa Angelica,
Baptismus 5. Sect. 12. Council. Carthag 4. Can. 39. 99. Gratian. Distinct. 23.
cap. Mulier.
Papists, and Fox Acts and Monuments 1610. p. 465. 485. 501. 599. 1015. 1016.
1795. 1796.
Protestants affirm, that Laymen may lawfully do in cases of necessity) the
right of ordination and election of Ministers being originally in the whole
Church and people, Ministerially only in Bishops and Ministers as servants to
the Congregation, and the imposition of hands no essential, but a ceremonial
part of ordination, which may be sufficiently made without it, as Angelus de
Clavasio, Peter Martyr, and others, both Papists and Protestants, affirm. But
when Paul left Titus in Crete, Tit. 1. 5.
to set in order the things that were wanting, and to ordain Elders in every
City, there where present no other Bishops or Elders to ordain Ministers, (as
is likely) but Titus only; for we read of none else but Titus then in Cree^e,
(which was then but newly converted to the faith;) and he is enjoined, to
ordain Elders in every City; which prooves there were none there before, for
what need then of any, yea of many others to be newly ordained, and that in
every City? Titus his example of ordination therefore in this exigent and
necessity in a Church then newly planted, is no argument to prove him a
Diocaesan Bishop; since other ordinary Ministers might ordain in such a case,
as all acknowledge, yea and the people too, without either Minister or Bishop
to assist them.

Ninthly, I answer, that it is most evident, that Titus did not ordain Elders
in every City, by virtue of any Episcopal inherent Jurisdiction of his own,
but as Paul's Substitute, who appointed him to do it, and prescribed him what
manner of persons he should ordain: Tit. 1. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. This therefore
cannot prove Titus to be a Bishop; or that the sole right of ordination is
appropriated unto Bishops, as Bishops, but rather the contrary.

Lastly, Admit, that the power of ordaining Pres byters belonged only to
Bishops Iure Divino; yet is no good consequent; Ergo, they are superior to
Presbyters in order and degree Iure Divino; since the conferring of orders, (an
Amesuis, Bellarminus Enervatus Tom. 2. l. 3. c. 2. and others forequoted.
act of service, of Ministry only, not of Authority, and no more then an
external complement or Ceremony) is far See Gersonius Bucerus de Gubernat.
Eccles. p. 33. 158. to 162. 261. 262. 499. 500. 517.
inferior to the authority of preaching, baptising, consecrating, and
administering the Sacrament, which every Minister may do as well as a Bishop.
The Bishops and Ministers in the primitive Church had 1. Cor. 12. 9. 10. Acts
10. 46.
many of them the gift of tongues, of prophecy, of healing and working
miracles, which some Bishops, then and all now want; yet these extraordinary
endowments made them not superior in Jurisdiction, order, or degree to those
Bishops who then wanted those gifts, or to ours now, who take far more state
upon them, then those Bishops did. Marsilius Patavinus Defene. Pacis pars 2. c.
20. 24. Fox Acts and Monum. p. 1153. Bishop Latymers Sermon. of the plough.
Nicolaus de Clemangiis de corrupto Eccles. statu. c. 14. 15. 16. Avent. Annal.
Bojorum. l. 6. Proaemio.
Many Bishops there are and have been that could not, at least would not
preach, though Bellarmine himself, yea the De Cleric. c. 4.
Council of Trent, and Thomas Bec ons Catechism. f. 499. 500 The Institution
of a Christian man: Chapter of orders; Gersonius Bucerus De Gub. Eccles. p. 33.
158. usque 162. 261. 162. 499. 500. 517. 518. 540. 622. 623.
all men acknowledge, that it is the chiefest, and most honorable part of
their Episcopal function, as making them Christ's Ambassadors: Are they then
inferior in order, dignity, power, and degree to Bishops, yea to Ministers,
Vicars, and poor Curates who are both able and willing to preach? That which
makes any man superior in order Jurisdiction, or dignity to his equal, must be
an authority superior to that which his equal has, not the accession of any
inferior dignity or power. The making of an Earl, a Knight, or
Country-Iustice, adds nothing to his former honor in point of superiority or
precedence. If a Bishop be presented to an ordinary benefice, prebendary or
Deanery, (as See Godwins catalogue of Bishops. p. 70. 72. 1114. 123. 143. 164.
185. 214. 220. 247. 249. 275. 345. 382. 422. 436. 448. 484. 501. 502. 568. 569.
570. 571. 572. 620. 621. 622. 630.
some are and have been by way of Commendam.) it accumulates naught to his
Episcopal authority being inferior to the power of the Keys, preaching and
administering the Sacraments, which every enjoyes Iure divino, as absolutely as
any Archbishop or Bishop, can no ways advaunce Bishops in Jurisdiction or
degree above Pres byters and ordinary Ministers, no more then the Bishop of
Durham his being a Godwins Catalogue of Bishops. p. 644. 657 660 Brook County
Palatine 14. 15. 16. 18. 19. 24.
Count Palatine, with his large temporal jurisdiction, far exceeding that of
all our Archbishops and Bishops, advaunceth him in order or degree above them
all. So that this grand objection to prove Titus a Bishop; yea a Bishop
superior in Jurisdiction, order, and degree to Ministers; is both false and
idle.

Obj. 4. If any object, that it is a received maxim in the Schools,
Bellarmin. De Clericis l. 3. quest. 2.
that he which ordaines is greater then he who is ordained; and that the
Apostle says, that the lesser is blessed of the greater: Therefore Titus, and
so likewise Bishops, who ordain Ministers in point of Jurisdiction, order,
dignity and degree.

Answ. 1. I answer; First, that this objection takes that for granted which I
formerly refuted and evidenced to be a falsehood; to wit, that the power of
ordination belongs only to Bishops, not to Presbyters; and so is build on a
false sandy foundation.

Secondly, I answer; that this proposition, he that ordains or consecrateth
Ministers is greater in Jurisdiction, power, order, or degree, then the parties
consecrated and ordained; is a notorious dotage and untruth, broached at first
by Contra haereses l. 3. Tom. 1. Haer. 75. Col. 759. 760.
Epiphanius, to confute Aerius his orthodox opinion, of the parity of Bishops
and Presbyters; and since that taken up at second hand by De Clericis. l. 3.
Quaest. 2.
Bellarmine, and other Jesuits, the Sessio 23. De Sacramento Ordinis cap. 3.
and Canon. 7.
Council of Trent, His Sermon April 17. An. 1608. in this defense of the
honorable Function of Bishops; and his defense of that Sermon since.
Bishop Downham, with other Patriots of the Popes and Prelates Monarchy; and
last of all (like Coleworts twice sodde) usurped by all our Prelates in their
high Commission at Lambeth in their Censure of Doctor Bastwicke, who laid the
whole weight and burden of their Episcopal superiority and precedence over
other Ministers, upon this rotten counterfeit Pillar, unable any ways to
support it, as these ensuing demonstrations will evidence at large bejond all
contradiction.

For first of all we know, Gratian Distinct. 79. 63.
that Cardinals and Bishops at this day, (as the people and Clergy, yea the
Emperor heretofore) do elect and consecrate the Pope; yet they are not greater
in order, dignity, power or Jurisdiction then the Pope, but inferior, and he
far superior to them in all these. We Gratian Distinct. 79. 63.
read, that Metropolitanes, Patriarchs, Primates and Archbishops are created,
consecrated and installed by ordinary Bishops, as the Sea Antiquitates
Ecclesiae Brit. Godwins Catalogue of the Archbishops of Canterbury and York,
Malmesbury De Gestis Pontificum Angliae, with Mason his Consecration of
Bishops; and the book of consecration of Bps.
Archbishops of Canterburry and York, have oftentimes been by the Bishops of
London, Rochester, Winchester, Salisbury, and the like: yet are they not
greater in dignity, power, authority, place, or order then they, but
subordinate and subject to them whom they thus ordain, in every of these. We
know by daily experience that one Bishop consecrates and ordaines another, and
he a second, and that second a third; yet all of them are of equal power, and
Jurisdiction, not different or distinct in order or degree; and sometimes the
last of the three in respect of his Bishopric, takes precedence of the rest,
that ordained him, as the 31. H. 8. c. 10.
Bishops of London, Durham, and Winchester do here with us, and other Bishops
the like in foreign parts. So some The book of Ordination of Ministers: and
Can. 35.
Ministers join with the Bishop in the ordination and laying of hands on
others, yet one of them is not superior in Jurisdiction, order, or degree to
the other; Now were this our Prelates objected Paradoxe true; the Cardinals
should be greater in order, power, and degree, then the Popes, the Bishops,
then Patriarchs, Metropolitanes, Primates, and Archbishops; one Bishop, one
Minister then another; yea there should be so many different degrees, among
Bishops and Ministers, as there are successive subordinate ordinations; which
is both false and absurd. S. Hierom in his Epistle to Evagrius and on Titus, 1.
with Alcuvinus, De Divinis Officiis c. 37. affirm, that in the primitive
Church Bishops were both Elected and consecrated by Presbyters; and the
Scripture is express, that both Paul and Timothy were ordained by the
Presbytery: Acts 13. 3. 4. 1. Tim. 4. 14. If the Bishops reason then be
orthodoxe; it follows inevitably, that in the Apostles times, and the
primitive Church Pres byters were superior in Jurisdiction, order and Degree to
Bishops, yea to Paul and Timothy, the one an Apostle, the other an Evangelist;
and not Bishops, Lords paramount over them, as they now pretend; and then
farewell their Hierarchy which they so much contend for. The Archbishop of
Canterbury (who stood much upon this argument at Doctor Bastwicks Censure) both
crowned our Sovereign Lord King Charles, and baptized his son Prince
Charles; will he therefore conclude, that he is greater in power, authority,
place, and Jurisdiction then they? The Sea Antiquitates Eccles. Brit, and
Godwins ^atalogue of Bishops.
Archbishops of Canterbury, have usually crowned and baptized the Kings of
England, and the Archbishops of Rheemes the Kings of France; will they
therefore infer, Ergo they are greater in power, dignity, and authority then
they; as the Marsilius Patavinus Def^nsoris Pac(...): pars. 2. c. 25.
Popes argue, that they are greater then the Emperors, because the Bishops of
Rome have usually crowned the Emperors? Are the Princes Electors in Germany
greater then the Emperors; or of Poland, Bohemia, and Sweden greater then their
Kings; because they elect and create them Emperors and Kings? Are the Lord
Major of London and York, or the Major of other Cities inferior to the
Commons; or the Lord Chauncellors of our Universities of Oxford and Cambridge,
less honorable, potent, and inferior to the Doctors, Procters, and Masters of
Arts; or the heads or Masters of the Colleadges and Halls in them,
subordinate, or less worshipful or eminent then the fellows, because they
are elected, constituted and created by them, to be such? Are the Knights,
Citizens and Burgesses of the Parliament, not so good as those freeholders,
Citizens and Burgesses who elect them? or the Masters of Companies inferior to
those that choose them. If not, as all must grant, how is this maxim true;
that he who constitutes, ordaines, or consecrates another, is greater then the
parties constituted, ordained, or consecrated, and that in Jurisdiction, place,
order, and degree? Our Popish Priests are not afraid to proclaim Discip.
Sermo. 111. Bishop ^ewels Reply to Harding. Artic. 22. Div. 10. p. 452. 453
that in their consecration of the Sacrament, they create their very Creator,
and make no less then Christ himself: are they therefore greater and higher
in order and degree then Christ, the Hebr* 4. 14* 15. c. 8. 1. c. 9. 11. c. 10.
21.
great and only High Priest, the * Chief Shepherd, and Bishop of our Souls,
whose Hebr. 13. 20. 1. Pet. 2. 25 c. 5. 4. John. 10. 1. etc.
Vicar and Substitute the Pope himself does but claim to be? Certainly if
this their Popish proposition be true, they must needs be one order and degree
Higher, in point of Preisthood, then Christ himself; who must then lose his
titles of High Priest and chief Shepherd, because every Masse-Preist will be
paramount him; in that he not only consecrates, but creates him too. We read
in Council. Constantien. Sessio 24. Bellarm. De Pontifice R^mano.
Scripture, that Kings, Priests and Prophets were usually anointed and
consecrated to be such with oil; was therefore the oil that consecrated them,
greater or better then they? Are the font and water, better then the children
Exodus 29. and 35. L(...). 4. 3. 16. 1. Sam. 10. 1. c. 26 6. 11. Ps. 92. 10. 1.
Kings 1. 39. c. 19. 15. 16.
baptized in or with them? The Diadems better then Kings, because they crown
them? or the very hands of Bishops and Ministers, worthier then Ministers
ordained by them? If not, then are not Bishops greater then the Ministers which
they ordain or consecrate, since both are but instruments, Servants not prime
original agents, Lords, or Supreme absolute actors in these several
consecrations and actions. If we cast our eyes either upon nature or policy, we
find this proposition of our Prelates a mere ^alsehood. In nature we ^ee,
that a man begets a man; an horse an horse; an ass an ass; a dog a dog
etc. equal one to the other in nature, quality, species, and degree; the son
being as much a man as the Father, the colt as much an horse as the steed that
begott him. In Civil or Politic Constitutions, we see the like; In our
Universities, Doctors and Professors of Divinity, Physic, Law, Music,
create other Doctors of the same Professions, equal to themselves, and as much
Doctors in these arts as they; one Doctor in each of these, being as much and
no more a Doctor then another, save only in point of time or antiquity, but
not in respect of the profession or degree of Doctorship it self; yea Bishop
Jewel* Reply to Harding. Article 4. Divis. 5. 6. 18. Richa^dus Armachanu^ De
Quaest. Armenorum l. 11. c. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7.
every Minister made by any Bishop, is as much as truly and fully a Minister as
the Bishop, as all Protestants and Papists do acknowledge; therefore the same
in specie with, and equal to a Bishop: Our Bishops pretend themselves
Spiritual Fathers, and they call the Ministers ordained by them, Sons; So
Contr. haer. l. 3. haer. 75.
Epiphanius long since argues against Aerius: As therefore in natural
generations, a man begets a man, a beast a beast; and in Civil respects; a
Gentleman begets a Gentleman; a peasant a peasant etc. but not a man a beast; a
beast a man, a Gentleman a peasant, nor a peasant a Gentleman; So Bishops when
they engender natural children, beget them as men, not Bishops, and their
children are as much men as themselves; when they spiritually ordain or
engender Ministers, they do it only as they are Ministers not Bishops, and
those they thus beget and ordain, are as much Ministers as themselves; when
they beget and consecrate Bishops, they do it as they are Bishops, and those
thus begot and consecrated are as much Bishops as themselves. Since therefore
they ordain Ministers only as they are Ministers, not as Bishops; as is
clear (else it were an unnatural an incongruous, yea a monstrous generation,
to beget one of a different kind, order, quality and degree from themselves,
and as much as if a man should beget a beast, an horse, or an Ass,) and since
every Minister is as much as completely a Minister every way as the Bishop, and
Ministers who ordain him; how this proposition can be true; that the ordainer
is higher in Jurisdiction, or different Iure divino in order or degree from the
ordained, I cannot yet perceive, neither can our Prelates ever make it good. We
know there are now diverse Ministers living, who not only baptized, but likewise
ordained some of our Bishops to be Ministers, and laid hands upon them with the
Bishop at the time of their ordination; yea every of our Bishops, and
Archbishops were first ordained Ministers by Ministers before they were made
Bishops or Arcbishops. And the first Bishops that were ordained in the Church
paramount Ministers, were ordained Bishops by Ministers, as Hierom writes in
his Epistle to Evagrius, and all since acknowledge out of him. Are these
Ministers therefore in point of order, honor, jurisdiction, dignity and degree,
greater then our Archbishops or Bishops? If so, then the controversy is at
end; and the truth most apparent; that our Ministers are greater and higher in
degree then our Bishops and Archbishops, not our Bishops and Archbishops
higher greater then they, as they vainly contend. If not, then the Prelates
maxim, on which they ground their Hierarchy, is most false, in that sense in
which they urge it; and so will yield no supportation to their Hierarchy.

Thirdly, I answer, that this Proposition of theirs is warranted by no
Scripture, nor backed with any convincing reason drawn from Scripture;
therefore it prooves nothing either for Titus his Episcopal authority; or for
Bishops superiority above other Ministers, by any divine right, or institution:
As for that text of Hebr. 7. 7. (And without all contradiction the lesser is
blessed of the greater;) it is nothing to the putpose.

First, Because it it not spoken concerning ordination, or of one Ministers
ordaining or blessing another, but only of Melchizedechs blessing of Abraham,
and Ministers blessing of the people, as the words and Anselmu^, Haymo,
Rabanus, Primasius, Calvin, Deering, and David Dickson on this text.
all Commentators jointly testify.

Secondly, Because it is not meant of Ministers, who bless others only
Ministerially, instrumentally, by way of duty and service, as Bishops ordain
Ministers; not inherent original authority, for then Ministers should be
better and greater then God, whom they bless and praise, but of Christ
himself; who by Melchisedech, his type, blessed Abraham by his own inherent
authority and power; as the only Heb. 4. 14. 15. c 8. 1. c. 9. 11. c. 10. 21.
true High-Preist, and Heb. 13. 20. 1. Pet. 5. 4.
ch^ife Shepherd of our souls. If therefore our Prelates take their maxim in
this sense, he that ordaines Ministers, to wit, originally by his own
inherent primitive authority and power, is greater then those who are ordained
in Jurisdiction, power, and degree; then the proposition thus interpreted, is
true and warranted by this text; but yet they gain no advantage by it, because
no Bishops, do or can ordain Ministers thus, but Ephesians. 4. 10. 11. 1. Cor. 12.
28. Math. 9. 37. 38.
only God and Christ alone, whose Ministers and Servants both the ordainers
and ordained are. But if th^^meane, that they who ordain Ministers only
instrumentally and Ministerially as servants to Christ, his Church and the
whole Congregation, (in whom the original and primitive right of ordination is
only vested) are greater in Jurisdiction, order and degree, then those who are
ordained, as they do and must do; then the proposition is most false and not
justified by this Scripture, as the premised instances manifest.

Fourthly, Admit this proposition true; that those who are to ordain others
are greater in power and authority then the parties to be ordained, before
their ordination fully executed, because they have an office, a calling of
Ministry which the others want; in which sense the proposition may be true,
yet it is not true; that the ordainers are greater in power, office and
authority then the parties actually ordained after the ordination past and
finished; because the very end of ordination, is to confer the selfefame
office of Ministry on the parties ordained; which the ordainers themselves
have in as large and ample manner as they enjoye it; and the parties once
ordained, are thereby made as complete, (...) absolute Ministers every way, in
respect of their orders and office, as any of those who ordained them: though
they were not so when they came to be ordained. This appears by the examples
of Acts. 1. 25 26. Gal. 2. 8. 9, 11. 14 1. Cor. 12. 28. 29. 2. Cor. 11. 5
Mathias and Paul; before they were called and ordained to be Apostles, they
were inferior to the other Apostles; but being once called and ordained
Apostles, they became equal with the other Apostles in Apostolical power,
dignity, and degree. So that from all these premises I may conclude, that this
maxim of our Prelates, whereon they build their Episcopal Hierarchy, in that
sense they take it, is most false; and neither prooves Titus to be a Diocaesan
Bishop, nor yet Bishops to be superior to other Ministers in dignity, power,
order, or degree, by divine right and institution as they pretend they are.

Finally, Admit the proposition true, yet it prooves but this; that Bishops are
superior to those Ministers only which themselves ordain, (so that if they
ordain none they are superior to none; not to those ordained by others, which
may be their equals notwithstanding this allegation, seeing they were not
ordained by them; this proposition extending only to the act, not to the power
of ordination. If any extend it further, in this sort; that they who have power
to ordain Ministers are greater in order, Jurisdiction, degree and dignity,
then those who want this power; then it will follow, that Bishops suspended
from ordaining others (either for advauncing unworthy Ministers, without due
examination, or making Ministers without a title, as many now do, for which
the Canon. 33. 35. An. 1603.
Canons prescribe, they shall be suspended from giving Orders for two years
space) are inferior in order and degree to Bishops, who may execute this power
and ordain; and so one Bishop shall be superior in order and degree to another
Bishop; which none ever yet affirmed; yea all our Bishops being prohibited and
disabled by their own Canon. 31.
Canons to ordain Ministers or Deacons at any time, but only at the 4.
solemn times appointed, and that in the presence of the Deane, Archdea^on or
two Prebends at the least, or of 4. other grave Persons, being Masters of Art
at least, and allowed for public Preachers: it will hereupon follow, that
Bishops only at these 4. times of the year, are greater in dignity and degree
then Ministers, because they may then ordain, but not at other seasons, when
they have no power or authority to confer orders upon any being restrained by
the Canon. All which being laid together, discovers the weakennes, the
absurdity of this our Prelates Theory, on which they build both their own, and
Titus his hierarchy, which now fall quite to ruin with this their sandy
foundation, which I have here (...) ever dissipated and subverted, if I mistake
not.

Obj. 5. If any finally object; that the Fathers style Titus, the first Bishop
of Crete, and Timothy of Ephesus, therefore they were Diocaesan Bishops, and
superior in Jurisdiction and degree to other Ministers, and so by consequence
are other Diocaesan Bishops as well as they.

Answ. 1. I answer: First, that neither S. Paul nor S. Luke, who lived in their
times, and knew them far better then any Fathers or writers since, ever so
much as once term or style them Bishops; much less, the first or sole
Diocaesan Bishops of Crete, or Ephesus; which no doubt they would have done,
had they been in truth Diocaesan Bishops there; and the name, the office of a
Bishop so honorable and sublime, above that of Ministers, even Iure Divino, as
our Prelates and their flatterers now pretend. Their testimonies therefore (who
style them only 1. Tim. 4. 6. 2. Tim. 4. 5. 1. These. 3. 2.
Ministers or Evangelists, never Bishops) is to be preferred before all Fathers
and writers, (who style them Bishops) being neither acquainted with their
persons or functions, nor living in their age.

Secondly, No Father ever styles them, or either of them a Diocaesan or sole
Bishop of Crete or Ephesus, (the thing which ought to be prooved,) but Bishops
only, as they styled other Ministers, the name, the office of Bishops and
Presbyters being but one and the same, and promiscuously used in the Apostles
times; all Presbyters being then called Bishops, and all Bishops Presbyters; as
is evident by Acts. 14. 23. c. 20. 17. 28. Phil. 1. 1. 1. Pet. 5. 1. 2. 3. Tit.
1. 5. 7. 1. Tim. 3. 1. 2. 3. 2. John. 1. 3. John. 1. Philemon. 9. with all
ancient, all modern Commentators on these texts. Whence the Translators of our
last authorized English Bible, affixe these Contents to Titus, 1. 6. to 10.
(which treates of the quality of Bishops) How they that are to be chosen
MINISTERS ought to be qualified* And the Book of ordination of Ministers
(confirmed by two 3. Ed. 6. c. 12. 8. Eliz. c. 1.
several Acts of Parliament) prescribes the 1. Tim. c. 3. Acts 20. and Titus
(...). to be read both at the ordination of Ministers, and Consecration of
Bishops: and so intimates, yea interpretes, that Bishops and Ministers in the
Scriptures language, are both one, in name, and office, and were so reputed in
the Primitive Church.

Thirdly, The Fathers use the word, Elders and Bishops, promiscuously; calling
Elders Bishops, and Bishops Elders; Hence Papias the Auditor of S. John, and
companion of Polycarpus, writes thus in the Preface of his books; Eusebius
Eccles Hist. l. 3. c. 39. p. 55.
It shall not seem grievous untome, if that I compile in writing, and commit
to memory, the things which I learned of the Elders. If any came in place which
was a follower of the Apostles, forthwith demanded the words of the Elders:
what Andrew, what Peter, what Philip, what Thomas, or James, or John, or
Matthew, or any other of the Lords Disciples; what Ariston, and the Elder John,
Disciples of the Lord, had said. Here he styles, not only Bishops, but even
Apostles Elders. Polycarpus, his companion and Coaetanian, writes thus in his
Epistle to the Philippians, Bibliotheca. Patrum. Tom. 1. p. 96.
Be ye subject to Presbyters and Deacons as to God: let the Presbyters be
simple and merciful in all things. Now those whom he here styles Presby^ers,
S. Paul expressly terms Bishops, Philip. 1. 1. Justine Martyr in his second
Apology, used neither the name Bishop nor Elder, but terms the Minister only,
He who is set over the Brithren, He who holds the first place, in reference
to the Deacon, who held the second place, not to any Elders of an inferior
order to him. And least any one should dream that Iustine Martyr here speaks
of a Bishop, Tertullian, who lived near about that time, or within few years,
in his Apolog. c. 39. Tom. 1. p. 692. 693. 694.
Apology writes thus; Praesident nobis probati quique Seniores, etc. Approoved
Elders (not Bishops) are set over us, having obtained this honor, not with any
price, but by a good testimony. Whence it is evident, that in his age, every
Christian Congregation had diverse Elders, (not one Diocaesan Bishop) over it to
feed and rule it, according to the practice of the Apostles times, Acts. 14.
23. c. 20. 17. 28 c. 21. 18. Philip. 1. 1. 1. Tim. 5. 17. Tit. 1. 5. James, 5.
14. 1. Pet. 5. 1. 2. Hence learned Eusebius Eccles. Hist. l. 5. c. 16.
Apollinarius, calls the Bishops and Elders of the Church of Ancyra in Galatia,
Presbyters. And Eusebius Eccles Hist. l. 5. c. 23.
Clemens Alexandrinus, relating the Story of the young man delivered by S. John
to a Bishop, to train up in the fear of God, twice together calls him,
interchaingably, both a Bishop and an Elder; as Meridith Hamner (a Bishop)
Englisheth it. So Eusebius Eccles. Hist. l. 5. c. 20.
Ireneus, one of the ancientest of all the Fathers, styles Polycarpus Bishop of
Smyrna. That holy and Apostolic Elder, yea he terms the Bishops of Rome
themselves Elders, Ibid. e. 26.
They (says he) that were Elders before Soter, of the Church which now thou
governest, I mean Anacletus, Pius, Hyginus, Thelesphorus, and Xystus, neither
did so observe it themselves, neither left they any such commandment unto
posterity. And the same Father Adversus Haereses. l. 3. c. 2. and l. 4. c. 43.
44. oftentimes Eusebius Eccles Hist. l. 7. c. 8.
styles Bishops Elders; and Elders Bishops; making Presbyters equal to Bishops
in all respects, and Successors to the Apostles as well, as much as they. So
Dionysius Alexandrinus, in his Epistle to Xystus, Bishop of Rome, about the
year of Christ, 240. writes thus: There was a certain Brother, reputed to be
of our Church, and Faith, very aged, and priusquam ego etiam creatus Episcopus,
and created a BISHOP before, I was, and as I think, before blessed Heraclas
was made a Bishop. Where he expressly terms this party, who was but a Minister
or Presbyter only in that Church, A BISHOP, and says, he was created a
Bishop: when he was but ordained a Minister. And that famous Gregory Nazianzen
(three hundred and seventy years after Christ,) in his 9. 13. 15. 21. and 28.
Orations, p. 262. 357. 368. 479. as Elias Cretensis, in his Commentary on those
places testifies, uses the words Bishops and Presbyter, reciprocally; stiling
Bishops Presbyters, and Presbyters Bishops; making them all one by divine
institution, and different only by humane invention, which difference he
heartily wishes, were abolished; himself See his life before his works.
voluntarily resigning his Bishopric of Constantinople, to be take himself
to a more private and retired life. The Fathers therefore thus promiscuously
using the name Bishop and Presbyter, stiling Bishops Presbyters; and Presbyters
Bishops, and making both of them one and the same by divine institution, their
stiling of Timothy and Titus, Bishops of Ephesus and Crete, is no argument or
proof at all, that they were Diocaesan, or sole Bishops of those places; or
that they had, or any Bishops now have, by divine institution, any Episcopal
Jurisdiction and preeminence over other Presbyters or Ministers, or were
superior to them, in order, dignity or degree.

Fourthly, The Greek word (...), which we English, a Bishop, signifies
properly nothing else, but an Overseer, Survayor, Superintendent, or
Administrator, and is often times applied both by Greek Authors, and the
Septuagint Greek Translators to secular offices Aretius. Theolog Problemata.
Locus 62. De Officiis Eccl. Sex. 9. p. 184. 186 Chenmitius Examen Concilij
Tridentini pars, 2. De Sacramento Ordinis. c. 4. p. 223. 224.
Hence. Homer, styles Hector; the Bishop of the City: In the Verses of Solon in
Demostenes, Pallas is called the Bishop of Athens: Plutarch in the life of
Numa, styles Venus the Bishop over the dead, and he there makes mention of a
Bishop of the Vestall Virgins. Suidas records, that in the Athenian Republike;
those who are sent to the Cities under their Jurisdiction, to oversee the
affairs of their Companions; were called Bishops. Cicero in his seventh Book
to Atticus, writes thus, Pompey will have me to be the Bishop of all Compagnia
and the Maritine Coasts, to whom the choice and sum of the business may be
referred. And in the Pandects, the Clerks of the Markets are called Bishops.
The Septuagint Numb. 13. read the Bishops of the Army; Iliad. 1. 10
4. Kings 11. they read; the Bishops who are over the Army, and the Bishops
over the house of the Lord. Where Watchmen, Guardians, and Overseers, are
called Bishops, 2. Chron. 34. The Overlookers of the Workmen, are styled
Bishops; Judges 9. Zebul is called Abimeleches Bishop, in the Greek; which we
now English, his Officer: So Number. 4. 16. The office of Eliazar, in the
Tabernacle of the Lord, and the function of Judas, Psalm. 109. 8. is tormed
(...), a Bishopric, by the Septuagint; and so expressly styled by the Holy
Ghost himself, and Englished by us, Acts. 1. 20. His Bishopric let another
take, yea, Constantine the great (as Eusebius records in his life) inviting
some Bishops * De Vita Constantini. l. 4. c. 24.
to a Feast, called himself a Bishop in their presence, uttering these words,
You says he, are Bishops within the Church, but I am constituted of God a
Bishop without the Church. Our New Translators, Acts. 20. 28. render the Greek
word (...) (the title which he gives to the Elders of the Church of Ephesus)
Overseers: Luke. 19. 44. The time of Gods visitation and overthrow of
Jerusalem, is termed (...) etc. Luke. 1. 6. 7. 8. c. 7. 16. Heb. 2. 6. The
Greek word which we translate, has visited us, is (...). Whence the day of
Gods gracious visitation of his people to convert them to him in mercy, is
called by the Holy Ghost, 1. Pet. 2. 12. (...) The day of visitation; yea our
very visiting of sick persons, prisoners, Orphans and Widows, is termed by
Christ and the holy Ghost himself (though a mere act of charity, humility,
and Christian duty, So is the Word (...) used by Basil. Epist. 52. not to ride
in visitation like a Lordly Prelate, but to consider of the miserable state of
the Church and to be careful for it, as Bishop Jewel witnesses in his
Defense of the Apology of the Church of England, part. 2. c. 3. Divis 5. p. 107.
not of Jurisdiction and Lordly Prelacy,) (...). Math. 25. 36. 43. and (...):
Iam. 1. 27. to visit or to play the Bishops part and duty; which the meanest
Christian, yea women (though uncapeable, of sacred orders) may do and ought to
perform, as well as any others. So intermedling with other men's affairs or
couetting of any other men's offices of what condition soever, is termed by the
Apostle, 1. Pet. 4. 15. (...) the playing as it were the Bishop in another man's
Dioces. Yea every Ministers feeding and taking the oversight of his proper
flock, is styled, the doing of a Bishops office: and those Presbyters who do
thus, are not only said to be (...). 1. Pet. 5. 21. that is, men executing the
office and duty of a Bishop; but likewise styled, (...); that is, true and
proper Bishops: a name given only to Presbyters (and none but they in holy
Scripture: Acts. 20. 28. Phil. 1. 1. Titus. 1. 7. and to Christ himself, who
is styled, (...), the Bishop of our Souls, 1. Pet. 2. 25. but not to any
Apostle, Evangelist, Diocaesan, or other Prelate; none such being particularly
termed, a Bishop, ^hroughout the whole New Testament: The Fathers make Bishops
and Overseers all one, deriving the very name of a Bishop, from a Greek verb,
which signifies to overlooke, watch, ward, or take care off. Hence Enarratio:
in Psalm. 126. Tom. 8. pars. 2. p. 726. 727.
Augustine writes thus; He did keep, he was careful, he did watch, as much
as he could, over those, over whom he was set. And Bishops do thus. For
therefore an higher place is set for Bishops, that they may superintend, and as
it were keep the people. For that which in Greek is called a Bishop, that in
Latin is interpreted a Superintendent, because he overseeth, because he
sees from above. For like as an higher place is made for the vineyard keeper,
to keep the vineyard, so an higher place also is made for the Bishops. And a
perilous account is to be rendered of this high place, unless we stand therein
with such an heart, that we may be under your feet in humility, and pray for
you, that he who knows your minds, he may keep you; because we can see
you entering and going out, but yet we are so far from seeing what you think
in your hearts, that we cannot so much as see what you do in your howses. How
therefore do we keep you like men, as much as we can, as much as we have
received. We keep you out of the office of dispensation, but we will be kept
together with you: we are as Pastors to you, but under that Pastor (Christ,)
we are sheep together with you: we are as teachers to you out of this place,
but under that one Master we are Scholars with you in this School. If we
will be kept by him who was humbled for us, and is exalted to keep us, let us
be humble. Let our great Prelates mark this well.
Those set themselves before Christ, who will be high here, where he was
humble; Let them therefore be humble here, if they will be exalted there, where
he is exalted. In another place he writes thus; De Civitate Dei. l. 19. c.
19. Tom. pars 2. p. 516.
For this cause the Apostle says, He that desires a Bishopric, desires a
good work. He would expound what a Bishopric is: it is a name of labor not
of honor. For it is a Greek word, and derived from hence, that he who is made
an Overseer, overseeth those, over whom he is set, namely by taking care of
them. For (...) is over, but (...) is intention, overseeing or care: therefore
if we will render (...) in Latin, we may say it is to play the Superintendent;
that he may understand, that he is not a Bishop, who delights to be over
others, but not to profit them. On which words Ludovicus Vives thus Comments;
The name of a Bishop is derived either from (...), which signifies to
consider, or from (...), which signifies the same and to visit. Whence S^idas
says, there were some sent from the Athenians to the Cities under them, who
should look into their affairs: and these were called Bishops, that is, as it
were Overseers, or Visitors, and Observers. In Holy Scriptures, a Bishop is
commonly called, a Watchman, as in Ezekiel. 3. 17. c. 33. 2. 6. 7. and in
Hosea. 5. 1. The Lord complains that the Bishops were made a snare on Mizpah
(or in the watch tower,) and a net spread upon Tabor; as if he had spoken of
the Note this.
Bishops of this age, who lay snares in their Bishoprics and large nets to
catch many, but not with thin holes or threades, least the gift should swim
thorough: yea now it is so provided by the diligence and wits of certain men,
that without evasion of this Law, a Bishopric may not only be lawfully
desired, but likewise bought and sold. S. Chrysostom in his 10. Hom. upon the
1. Tim. S. Hierom in his Epistle to Evagrius, Beda on the 1. Pet. 2. 25.
Anselme on Phil. 1. 1. Aquinas secunda secundae: Qu. 184. Art. 6. Petrus de
Palude. de Potest. Coll. Apostol. Art. 1. (all cited by Bishop Jewel in the
Defense of the Apology of the Church of England, part. 6. c. 2. Divis. 1. p.
523.) and S. Bernard also, de Consideratione ad Eugenium, l. 2. and 3. jointly
resolve; that a Bishop is nothing else, but a Superintendent, Watchman, or
Overseer, and that he is called a Bishop from hence, that he overseeth,
survaieth, or watches over others, with which all other ancient and modern
writers, whether foreign or domestique, Papists or Protestants accord. Hear
only Doctor John Ponet Bishop of Winchester, in his Apology against Doctor
Martin, in defense of Priests marriage, c. 4. 5. p. 44. 52. 53. 54. who as he
there expressly reckons up Popes, Cardinals, BISHOPS, Priests, Monks, Canons,
Friars, etc. to be the Orders of Antichrist; fol. 116.
taxing them likewise severely and comparing them with the Eustathian
heretics for refusing to wear usual garments, and putting upon them
garments of strange fashions, to vary from the common sort of people in
apparel: So he thus determines of the name Bishop and Superintendent: And
further whereas it pleases Martin not only in this place, but also hereafter
to est at the name of Superintendent, he shows himself bent to condemn all
things that be good, though in so doing ^ee cannot avoid his open shame. Who
knows not that the name Bishop has so been abused, that when it was spoken,
the people understood nothing else, but a great Lord, that went in a white
Rochet, with a wide shaven Crown, and that carries an oil box with him,
where he used once in 7. year riding about to confirm children, etc. Now to
bring the people f^^m this abuse, what better means can be d^v^s^d then to
teach the people their error by another word out of the Scriptures of the same
signification: which thing by the term superintendent would in time have been
well brought to posse. For the ordinary pains of such as were called
superintendents, should have taught the people to understand the duty of their
Bishop, which you Papists would feign have hidden from them. And the word
Superintendent being a very Latin word made English by use, should in time
have taught the people by the very Etymology and proper signification, what
things was meant, when they heard that name which by this term Bishop, could
not so well be done, by reason that Bishops in the time of Popery were
Overseers in name, but not indeed. So that their doings could not teach the
people their names, neither what they should look for at their Bishops hands.
For the name Bishop, spoken amongst the unlearned, signified to them nothing
less then a preacher of Gods word, because there was not, nor is any thing
more rare in any order of Ecclesiastical persons, then to see a Bishop preach,
whereof the doings of the Popish Bishops of England can this day witness; but
the name superintendent should make him ashamed of his negligence, and afraid
of his idleness, knowing Act. 20.
that S. Paul does call upon him to attend to himself and to his whole flock,
of the which sentence our Bishops mark the first pecce right well, (that is,
to take heed to themselves, but they be so deaf, they cannot hearken to the
second) that is, to look to their flock. I deny not, but that the name Bishop
may be well taken, but because the evilnes of the abuse has marrid the
goodness of the word, it cannot be denied, but that it was not amiss to join
for a time another word with it in his place, whereby to restore that abused
word to his right signification, And the name superintendent is such a name,
that the Papists themselves (saving such as lack both learning and wit,) cannot
find fault withal. For Peresius the Spaniard and an Archpapist, (out of whom
Martin has stolen a great part of his Book) speaking of a Bishop, says:
Primum Episcopi munus nomen ipsum prae se fert, quod est spperintendere,
Episcopus enim Superintendens interpreta(...) visitans aut supervidens, etc.
That is to say: The chief office of a Bishop by interpretation, signifies a
Superintendent, a Visitor, or an Overseer. Why did not Martin as well steal
this piece out of Peresius, as he did steal all the common places that he
has for the proof of the Canons, of the Apostles, and of Traditions in his
second and third Chapters? Martin in the 88. leaf is not ashamed in his Book
to divide the significations of the terms, (Bishop and Superintendent,) as
though the one were not signified by the other. But it may be that Martin as
the rest of the Popish Sect would not have the name of (Superintendent) or
Minister used, least that name which did put the people in remembrance of
sacrificing and bludsapping, should be forgotten. Since therefore this Title
Bishop, is thus promiscuously used, both in profane and Christian writers, and
in the Scripture it self, for any Officer, Overseer, Survayer, Superintendent,
Watchman, Guardian, Pastor, or Keeper, as well temporal and civil, as
Ecclesiastical, and all these their offices styled in Greek, a Bishopric:
since every Pastor, Watchman, Presbyter, Minister, Rector, and Curate, who
takes care of, watches, feeds, overlooketh, instructs, or keeps the
flock and people committed to his charge, is even in the Scriptures Language
called a Bishop, and said, to act, to do the office of a Bishop: since those
who out of charity, love, or freindship go to visit others, who are either
sick, poor, Fatherless, or otherwise distressed, and God himself when he
comes, to punish or show mercy unto others, are in the Greek and Scripture
phrase, said, to visit and play the Bishops; as appears by the forecited
Scriptures, and by Acts. 15. 36. Where Paul said to Barnabas (...), which we
translate, Let us go again and visit our Brethren, in every City, where we
have preached the word of the Lord, and see how they do. From which text the Sea Fulke and Cartwright. Ibid. m.
Rhemists would make Bishops, ordinary visitation, to be Jure Divino; but this
was no Lordly Episcopal visitation such as our Bishops now keep, for we read
of no visitation Articles, oaths, fees or presentmens in it; neither were Paul
and Barnabas Bishops, but it was a mere visitation of love, as one friend
visits another, not of Jurisdiction, as the last words: And see how they do,
together with the Council of Laodicea, Can. 57. expound it, and verse 14.
Simon has declared how God (...) at the first (...) did visit the Gentiles, to
take out of them a people for his name. And Acts. 7. 23. When Moses was full
40. years old, it came into his heart (...), to visit his brethren, the
children of Israel; and since these words (...) and (...), (that is) to visit,
oversee, or play the Bishop, Bishop Jewel. Defense of the Apology. part 2. c.
3. Divis. 5. p. 107.
imply no Lordship; Soveraingty, Dominion, Jurisdiction, or Lordly Episcopal
authority in them, (at least no such as our Bishops now claim and exercise:)
but rather an Act of humility, charity, Service, and inferiority to the persons
visited, as is evident by Matthew 25. 3. 6. 43. Acts. 7. 23. c. 15. 36. Iam. 1.
27. Heb. 2. 6. 1. Pet. 5. 2. 3. 5. It hence unanswerably follows, that Bishops
Episcopal Lordly visitations, are not Iure Divino, and that other Ministers
are as much Visitors, and may visit as well as they, that every Presbyter,
Minister, Curate who does faithfully discharge his duty, Marsilius Patavinus
Defens. Pacis pars. 2. c. 15. 16. Richardus Armachanus. Resp. ad Quaest.
Armenorum l. 11. c. 1. to 8. Fox Acts and Monum. p. 1009. 1116. 1465.
is as much, as truly, as properly a Bishop, both in the Scriptures language
and in Gods account, as any Diocaesan Bishop or Prelate whatsoever; That those
Bishops who merge themselves in pleasures, idleness, or secular affairs, and
do not diligently, faithfully, entirely give themselves to preach Gods word,
instruct and teach the people, visit the Fatherless, imprisoned, sick, poor,
widows, and flocks committed to them; (which few of our Prelates now deine
to do) are Bishop Jewel. Defense of the Apol. part. 2. c. 3. Divis. 7. part.
111. Thomas Beacon his Catechism. Vol. 1. f. 499. 500. Chrysostom. Opus Imperf.
in Matthew. Hom. 3. and 43. Ambros. de Dign. Sacerd. c. 4.
in truth, in Gods, in Christ's account, and in the Scriptures language, no
Bishops at all, what ever they pretend; that the word Bishop, is August. De
Civ. Dei l. 19. c. 19. Hier. Ambr. Sedul. Primas. Haymo, Rab. Maur. Chrysostom.
Theodoret. Theophylact. Oecumenius, Anselmus, Beda, in 1. Tim. 3. 1. 2.
Bernard. De Consid. ad Eugen. 2. and 3.
not a title of Dominion, Soveraingty, Jurisdiction, Glory, Power,
Preheminency, Pomp, State, Authority, and Command, (as our Bishops, who now
presume to monopolize it to themselves alone, though common(...) Gods word and
ancient writers to every Minister, pretend,) but of humility, office, service,
labor, care, circumspection, watchfulness, meekness, tender-heartednesse,
charity, familiarity, and brotherly kindness, (which most Prelates have now
quite shaken off.) The Fathers stiling therefore of Timothy, Bishop of Ephesus,
or Titus Bishop of Crete, or Bishops, will neither prove them to be Diocaesan;
or sole Bishops of those Churches, or that they had a superiority or
Jurisdiction as they were Bishops over all other Ministers or Presbyters in
those Churches; or that Archbishops or Bishops are Iure Divino superior to, or
different in order or degree from Presbyters, who have the selfsame Commission
or authority, given them by Christ, as they; and so have equal authority with
them, and are as much Bishops every way by Gods Law, as they; even as every
High Commissioner of the Quorum, is as much an High Commissioner as the
Archbishop of Canterbury or York, and has as much authority as an High
Commissioner, as they; since they have all the selfsame Commission, which
gives no greater power to one of them then the other, but the same to both.
Indeed had Christ given a different Commission to his Apostles and the seaventy
Disciples, or to Timothy and Titus, then to other Elders and Bishops of the
Churches of Ephesus and Crete, or to Bishops, then he has given to Presbyters
and Ministers, there might have been some ground to have prooved the 12.
Apostles, Timothy, Tytus, and Bishops, greater in Jurisdiction, power,
authority, and degree then the 70. Disciples, Presbyters, and other Ministers,
by divine institution. But since it is apparent by Math. 10. 1. to 16. Mark.
6. 7. to 12. Luke. 9. 1. to 6. compared with Luke. 10. 1. to 21.
the Scriptures, that the 12. Apostles and 70. Disciples (what ever Clemens.
Epist. apud Surium. Tom. 1. p. 141. and others, who have since followed this
forgery of his.
some men have rashly determined to the contrary) had but one and the selfsame
commission given unto them by Christ; that Timothy, Titus, Archbishops,
Bishops, and other Prelates have no other, no larger Patent, Commission or
authority granted unto them by Christ, then Presbyters and ordinary Ministers,
(as the book of Ordination manifests: where the same words are used, the same
commission given from God, to Ministers at the ordination of every Minister, as
there is to Bishops at the consecration of any Archbishop or Bishop) since they
are all joined together in one and the selfsame divine Charter, and all claim
by one and the selfsame grant, (as is evident: by Math. 28. 19. 20. Mark. 6.
15, 16. John. 20. 22. 23. Acts. 1. 8. c. 10. 47. c. 20. 17. 28. Col. 4. 17. 1.
Tim. 3. 1. to 7. c. 4. 12. 13. c. 5. 17. 18. 20. 21. 22. c. 6. 11. 12. 17. 18.
19. 20. 2. Tim. 2. 14. 15. 16. c. 4. 1. to 16. Tit. 1. 5. to 14. c. 2. 1. to.
15. c. 3. 1. 2. 8. 9. 10. 1. Pet. 5. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 2. Pet. 1. 12. 13. 1. Cor.
1. 12. 13. 17. c. 3. 4. 5. to 11. 21. 22. c. 4. 1. 6. 7. 17. c. 9. 16. 17. c.
13. 29. 30. 31. 32. Ephesians. 4. 11. 12. with other Scriptures) it is most
apparent, and undeniable, that by Gods word and institution, they are all
equal, both in point of office, power, Jurisdiction, and authority, not one of
them greater, higher or superior then the other, having the selfsame divine
ordination, commission, office, and charge.

Finally, L. 3. c. 4. Eccl. Hist.
Eusebius records only, that Timothy IS REPORTED to be the First Bishop of
Ephesus, and Titus of the Churches in Crete: So that all the Fathers
Authorities, (who follow Eusebius,) are grounded only upon this bare report,
not upon any certainty; therefore not to be granted or relied on. The rather,
See Mercator Atlas Minor. p. 812.
because there have been anciently in Crete no less then 4. Archbishops, and
21. Bishops, Suff^^aganes: now it is very improbable that Paul would institute
Titus Archbishop or Superintendent general of all Crete, it being so large a
circuit, having so many Archbishops and Bishops Sees within it, and he so
little resident in, so often absent from it, as I have manifested in the
premises. From all which I presume, I may safely conclude this second question
against the common received Error, that Titus was never Bishop or Archbishop
of Crete, what ever our Prelates and their favorites have written to the
contrary: And so Timothy being neither a Diocaesan Bishop of Ephesus, nor Titus
of Creet, the pretended Hierarchy of our Prelates Iure divino, built only upon
the Math. 7. 26. 27.
sandy foundation of these two supposed Bishops Bishoprics, must needs now
fall to ruin; and they being now lifted up so High above their fellow
Brethren, their fall must certainly prove very great. They have long since,
(many of them) forsaken God, the teaching of his word, the chief part The
Instit. of a Christian man. Chapter os Orders, and Thomas Beacons Catech. f. 499.
500
of their spiritual functions, banded themselves against his truth, Ministers,
people, and the preaching of his Gospel, which they suppress and put down in
all places; yea such is their desperate impiety, that whereas in all former
times of Plages and Pestilence, (yea in See the Fastbookes then printed.
1. Iacobi and Caroli) there has been by public authority a special day of
fasting, prayer, preaching, and humiliation appointed every week (especially
in infected places) to divert Gods heavy judgments, as the chief antidote
against all Plages and judgments, prescribed by God himself, Joel. 2. 14 to
20. 4. 2. 1. to 28. Isay. 22. 12. 13. 14. 2 Chronicles. 6. to 24. to 40. c. 7. 13.
14. 15 Zeph. 2. 1. 2. 3. Jonah. 3. 5: to 10. Ezech. 9. 4. Mal. 3. 16. 17. Ezra.
9. and 10.
yet now they are grown such open fighters against God, Religion, the
spiritual, the temporal good and safety of the people, that to prevent the
plague, (as they pretend, but in truth to increase it more, and to suppress
preaching, piety and religion) they begin to put down all weekeday Lectures,
and Lords day sermons in the afternoon, (as if Gods public ordinances and
service, the best remedy against, were a means to increase and spread, not
stay the plague) yea they debar See Bishop Wrens Injunctions for Norwich, and
his Visition Artiles, and yet this Can. binds them not strictly to any form
as the Words, Or to this Effect; declare,
Ministers from using any prayers at all after their sermons, or any other
prayer before them, then what the 55. Canon prescribes, in which there is not a
word of prayer against the plague, drought, famine, sword or pestilence. By
means whereof, inhibiting Ministers thus to reproove the people for their
sins, which provoke Gods wrath and judgments at this present, and so to
bring them to repentance for them Ier. 7. 16. c. 11. 14. c. 14. 11. c. 29. 7.
c. 37 3. 4. c. 42. 2. 4. 20. Joel. 2. 17.
by their preaching; or to pray against the plague and other judgments of God,
which now lie hard upon the Kingdom, which these sins have occasioned; and
hindering that public weekly fasting, preaching and prayer, which God by his
judgments Isay. 22. 12. 13.
now calls for at our hands; they have made not only the Kingdom, but
themselves especially, ripe for ruin. And being now for these their
atheistical godles practices, their enmity to God, his truth, his faithful
Ministers and people, their Lordlines, tyranny, pride, oppression, wordlines,
prophanes, and irreligion fallen under the very Ps. 119. 21. Judge. 5. 23. Mal.
2. 2. c. 3. 9. 1. Cor. 16. 22.
execration of God himself, and Luke. 18. to 3. Rev. 6. 9. 10. Psalm. 28. 4. 5.
the curses of his people, who day and night cry for vengeance against them,
as Gods sworn and most professed open enemies; and having no divine
foundation, prop, or pillar now left, where with to support their tottering
thrones and Miters, needs mu^^ they shortly, like that 1. Sam. 4. 18.
High Priest Ely, fall from their high-towring seats backward, and so break
their necks, to the joy of all Gods people, whom they now by their
persecutions and innovations so much oppress; Even so let all thine enemies
perish, O Lord; but let them that love thee, be as the sun, when it goes
forth in his might.

A POSTSCRIPT.
OUR famous Fox Acts and Monuments London. 1610. p. 502.
Martyr John Purvey, in King Henry the fourth his reign, delivered this
Position, touching the preaching of the Gospel; That whosoever receives or
takes upon him the office of a Priest, or of a Bishop, and discharges not the
same by the example of his godly conversation and faithful preaching of the
Gospel, is a theife, excommunicated of God and of holy Church. And further,
that if the Curates preach not the word of God, they shall be damned, and if they
know not how to preach, they ought to resign their livings, (as Platina,
Onuphrius, Bale Stella, Volateranus Celestin. 5 and Bonifac. 8.
Pope Celestine the fifth, Georgius. Pontan. Bohemiae. piae. l. 3. p. 36.
Godwin. Catalog. of Bps. p. 212. 216 460. 564. 585. Matthew. Westminst. An. 932.
p. 361. Newbrigens. l. 1. c. 14.
Adelbartus the second, Bishop of Prague, Daniel the 6. and Firthstane the 23.
Bishop of Winchester, John the 5. and Thurstan the 28. Archbishop of York,
Thomas Spofford the 56. Bishop of Hareford, besides sundry others before-cited,
resigned their Bishoprics.) So that those Prelates, which preach not the
Gospel of Christ (although they could excuse themselves from the doing of any
other evil) are dead in themselves, are Antichrists and Satan's, transfigured
into Angels of light, night theives, manquellers by daylight, and betrayers of
Christ his people. What then shall we think or judge of many of our present
Lordly swaying English Prelates, some of which never preached since they were
made Bishops; others, not once in a dozen years; others, but once in a year
or two, and that not in their Diocese to their people (where many of them
never yet preached,) but at Court; few of them above once a quarter, or once a
month at most? Where as De Sacram. l. 3. c. 1. l. 5. c. 1.
S. Ambrose, Tract. 9. 16. 20. 21. 25. 27. 29. 35. 37. in Joan.
S. Augustine, Hom. 5. 6. 8. 9. 10. 13. 28. in Genes.
S. Chrysostom, Catech. Orat. 7. and 14. and Catech. Mystag. 14.
Cyrill of Jerusalem, with Socr. Eccl. Hist. l. 7. c. 2.
other Bishops heretofore, and Fox Acts. and Monum. p. 1366.
Bishop Hooper, and Fox Acts and Monuments. p. 15. 59. See p. 1115. 1153. 1457.
1579. 1696.
Bishop Ridley in King Edward the 6. days, preached once or twice every day of
the week without fail or intermission. Yea what shall we say of those
Bishops, who now everywhere put down Lectures and preaching, both on
weekedayes and Lordsdayes, to suspending, silencing, excommunicating,
imprisoning, depriving the most powerful, painful, faithful Godly Ministers
in all their Diocese; for no offense either in life or doctrine, for no
violation of any Ceremonies by Law established, but merely for not subscribing
to their late Popish innovations, illegal injunctions and commands, warranted
by no Law of God or man, the sole pretended cause, yet in truth out of their
desperate hatred to the sincere, frequent, powerful preaching and Preachers of
Gods word (which seems to condemn their idle, secular, Lordly, vicious lives
and practices,) to the progress, power, and growth of our Religion, and
salvation of the peoples souls? Nay, what shall we judge of that proud
insolent Regulus and imperious Prelate Matthew Wren, Bishop of Norwich, who has
not only put down many famous worthy preachers, and all Lectures throughout
his Diocese, both on the weekedayes, Lordsday Evenings See his Visitation
Articles and injunctions for Norwich.
, yea and in the morning too in many places, and silenced diverse Ministers of
chiefest note, for not conforming to his strang^novell Magisteriall innovations
and late visitation Articles, printed and published Before the 39. Articles,
and of the Dissolution of the last Parliament. p. 20. 21. 22. 42. 43.
(like an absolute Monarch, King and Pope) in his own name, and by his own
authority alone, in affront of his Majesty's Magna Charta. c. 29 25. Hen. 8. c.
19. 21. 27 H. 8. c. 15. 37. H. 8. c. 17. 1. Ed. 6. c. 2. 1. Eliz c. 12 5. Eliz.
c. 1. 12. Eliz. c. 13. 8. Eliz. c. 1.
Laws and Declarations, for which he has incurred a Praemunire; but likewise
very freshly since his late coming to Ipswitch (where he has silenced 7
Preachers, and has no Sermon at all often times on the Lordsday in his own
Parish Church,) commanded the Sexton of one Mr. Scots Church in Ipswitch (a
reverend ancient conformable Inconformity therefore it not^ the thing the
Bishops aim at, but the suppression of the Gosple.
Minister, whom he has suspended upon no lawful occasion) to blott out this
sacred Sentence of Scripture (most proper for that Church and place it stonds
in) painted on this Church-wall over against the Pulpit, (which Scripture I
wonder any Bishop or Minister can think off, and yet forbear to preach or put
down preaching.) 1. Cor. 9. 16.
For necessity is laid upon me, yea, Woe is me if I preach not the Gospel? An
insolency, an impiety, that no age can parallel. Certainly he that would
command this Scripture thus to be rased out of the Church-wall, would as gladly
obliterate and rend it out of the Church-Bible too, and have neither preaching,
preachers (and I fear neither reading nor readers) of the Gospel, nor yet the
Gospel it self in being, were it in his power utterly to suppress them; as
this Prelate has made a large beginning and progress for this purpose. This
notable late fact of his, makes me the less to wonder, at the most insolent
exploict of Henry Dade (the Archbishop of Canterburies Surrogate for Ipswitch)
who about September last past solemnly excommunicated the Churchwardens of S.
Mary's of the Tower in that Town, in the Archbishops name (I hope without his
privity) for not blotting out upon his command this Sentence of Scripture
written on that Churches-wall over the place where he keeps his spiteful (I
should say spiritual) Court, (which Scripture is recorded by two Prophets and
three Evangelists, and most proper for the Church by our Saviors own
resolution.) Isay. 56. 7. Ier. 7. 11. Math. 21. 13. Mark. 11. 17. Luke. 19.
46. See Dr. Boys Postill. on the first Sunday after the Epiphany p. 132 and on
the 10. Sunday after Trinity. p. 446. 447.
It is written, my house shall be called an house of prayer to all people, but
ye have made it a den of theives. Which excommunication he is so far fro
disavowing or being ashamed off, that he not only refuses to absolve the
Churchwardens, but also has most audaciously pleaded it in bar of an
information brought against him by Ferdinando Adams, one of the Churchwardens
in the Court of Star Chamber; for which presumption alone were he guilty of,
and there charged with no other crimes (as he is with other foul ones,
against his To wit, for affirming, That his Majesty and the Lords of the
Council would be heartily glad, if all those that went over to New England.
were drowned in the bottom of the Sea. A most trayterly, and seditious, speech,
as of his Majesty and the State delighted in the destruction of his faithful
subjects whom he is bound by Oath and duty to protect and preserve.
Majesty and the whole State, and several extortions on the subjects) that
Court most justly may, and I presume will deeply fine and censure him, for
daring to grant out and plead such an impious execrable excommunication in any
Court of Justice, to the very shame and obloquie of our Religion, Church,
State, and insufferable scandal of that great Arch-Prelate, in whose name and
color of authority it is granted; who should do well (for his own
justification to the world) to hang up such a Surrogate for a president to all
others, and such a Suffragan Bishop too, who bear such spleen to these holy
parcells of Scripture, as to raze them out of the Church it self, though set
up by the express command of the Homilies, of repairing and keeping clean
Churches, and of the Right* use of the Church (which recite and prescribe these
latter text, as most proper for it) the Canons 1571. p. 19. and 1603. Canon 82.
And here I cannot but stand amazed at these proceedings. For the Surrogate will
not endure the Church, neither to be or called an house of prayer: but his
Courthouse causing this Scripture to be actually dashed out of the Church; and
the other will not suffer it to be or reputed an house of preaching; neither of
them will admit these two textes of Scripture, to appear therein, (no not on
the bare wall where they are no hinderance) which intimate and declare it to be
both an house of prayer and preaching too. And if the Church must now be
neither an Oratory, nor an Auditory, neither an house of prayer, nor preaching,
though our Of the right use of the Church of the time and place of prayer
Homilies and Dr. Boys Postill on the 10. Sunday after Trinity. p. 448.
Postillers define it to be both, I know not what they will make of it, but
(what they begin to make their Churchhouses in many places) a direct den of
theives, as our Savior terms it, or else an house of Hom. of the repairing
and keeping clean of Churches p. 80 of the time and place of prayer. p. 131.
piping, minstressie, dancing and revelling: they having made the Lordsday
sacred Sabbath, such a day already; justifying both in their visitation
Articles and printed Books; That dancing, piping, Morrisses, Wakes, Ales,
Sports and Bacchanals, are meet exercises for this holy day, and so no place
fitter for them then the Church; appointed principally for the Hom. of the
right use of the Church of repairing Churches, and of the time and place of
prayer
duties and public exercises of the Sabbath day; to the strict entire
sanctification whereof by religious duties our Prelates are such enemies, that
they not only silence, suspend and excommunicate such godly Ministers, who out
of conscience dare not join with them in encouraging their people to profane
it, and punish those for Conventiclers, who after divine prayer and Sermons
ended, meet together to repeat their Ministers Sermon, read chapters, sing
Psalms, confer or pray together, as they are taught by Hom. 1. 2. 3. 5. and
10. 29. in Genesis Hom. 5. in Math.
S. Chrysostomes and Defense of the Apology part. 5. c. 3. Divis. 4. p. 449. 450
Bishop Jewels doctrine; but one of them (D. Pierce the now Bishop of Bath and
Wels by name,) enjoined the Churchwardens of Batcombe (in Mr. Barnards Parish
in Somersetshire) under pain of excommunication, to expunge this Scripture
(anciently painted on their Church-wall) quite out of the Church (Isa. 58. 13.
If thou turn away thy foot from the Sabbath from doing thy pleasure on my
holy way, and call the Sabbath a delight the holy of the Lord, honorable and
shall honor him, not doing thine own ways, not finding thine own pleasure,
not speaking thine own words. Then shall thou delight thy self in the Lord,
etc. stiling it, a O Blasphemy*
Jewish place of Scripture, not fit to stand or be suffered in the Church: (and
by the same reason not sufferable in the Bible, for the correcting whereof our
Prelates may do well to join with the Sea Doctor James his Treatise of the
corruption of the Scriptures etc. by the Prelates of Rome. part. 2. 3. 4.
Papists in making an Index ex purgatorius, as they intend and give out
publicly they intend to do on all ancient English Writers) which Scripture
the Churchwardens refusing to blot out, the Bishop like an Heroical Prelate,
r^de thither (...) with a plaisterer to see it wiped out himself; such hideous
Monsters of impiety, blasphemy and irreligion, (that I say not Atheism) are
this last generation of our holy domineering Prelates grown; who must now for
ever cease to affirm or boast their Episcopal Supremacy, Authority and
Jurisdiction to be Jure divino, since by virtue thereof they thus
presumptuously take upon them (a strain beyond the Papists) to blot Jus
divinum, the very Law of God and Gospel too, out of the house of God it self.
And can we then wonder at those immoderate droughts, those watery seasons,
those devouring spredding Pests and See the Homilies of the Right use of the
Church of the time and place of prayer, of keeping clean of Churches.
Plagues, with other public and personal judgments of God, which we have
lately felt and suffered, and are like to taste of in a sharper manner, when such
monstrous impieties as these, thus plublikely break forth, without either
shame or reprehension in those who style themselves the Pillars (being in truth
the Caterpillars) and holy Fathers (in verity the unholy step fathers) of our
Church, from whom Ier. 23. 13 14. 15.
profaneness is gone out and spread over all the Land? Certainly if we
consider only the lives and practices of our Bishops (that I speak not of any
others) how they now openly fight against God, his Word, his Ministers,
Ordinances, worship, people, grace, holiness, yea moral virtue, honesty,
civility, and that with both hands, both swords at once; we may rather wonder
that the Lord himself does not visiblie descend Genesis 18. and 19. See 2. Chron.
36. 15. 16. 17.
from heaven, and rain down fire and brimstone on us, as he once did on
Sodom and Gomorrah, and then tumble us all headlong into hell, yea our
Archbishops, Bishops and Prelates specially, may justly fear he will strike
them all quite dead with Plague, as he did Pope Lucius the second (who died of
the pestilence,) Fasciculus Temporum. 1144. Cent. Magd. 12. Col 1407. stella.
Pope Caelestine the second (swept away with the same disease, both within the
compass of two years,) Antiq. Eccl. Brit. p. 13. Godw. p. 53.
Wichardus Archbishop of Canterbury elect, (who going with great presents from
King Oswy unto the Pope to Rome, to fetch thence his pall and conse(...)ion,
he and most of his company there perished with the Pest,) Fox Acts and
Monuments p. 364.
Thomas Bradwardin, Archbishop of Canterbury An. 1348. The Bishop of Marselles
and all his Chapter An. 1348. Alberti Argentinensis Chron. An. 1348. p. 147.
Daniel the 13 Bishop of Prague Anno 1116. The Bishope of Par(...), Rhegium and
Millain, Anno 1085. with many other Archbishops and Bishops forecited,
heretofore; that they might no longer be an insufferable Plague and burden to
the earth, or provocation and greivance even to heaven it self; or else deal
with them in that exemplary way of Justice, as he did with Georgius Pont.
Bohemiae piae. l. 3. p. 34.
Thomas Arundle (Archbishop successively both of York and Canterbury) one of
their predecessors, a grievous persecutor of Gods people, and great silencer
and suspender of his Ministers; who occupying both his tongue, his brains and
Episcop^ll power (as * Behold Constantiensis ad Herman. Appendix An. 1085. p.
357.
too many of his successors have done since) to stop the mouths and tie up the
tongues of Gods Ministers, and hinder the preaching and course of Gods word,
was by Gods just judgment, so stricken in his tongue (with which he had often
staundered the poor Ministers, and Saints of God, as seditious factions
people, * Thomas Gascoine in Dictionario Theologico. Fox Acts and Monuments p.
541. Antiquitates Eccl. Brit. Bale and Godwin in his life, with our Chroniclers.
rebels and Conventiclers to K. Henry the fourth, (as some of his Rochet do
now to his Majesty) that it swelled so big he could, neither swallow nor
speak for some days before his death, much like after the example of the rich
glutton, and so he was starved, choked and killed by this strange tumor of his
tongue. This (say all the marginall writers) was thought of many to come upon
him by the just hand of God, for that he so bound and much stopped the word of
the Lord, that it might not be peached in his days. Our Prelates now have
far greater cause then he had then, to fear Gods Judgments in this, or a
more grievous nature, and that in these regards.

First, Because they have his Example, with Fox Acts and Monum. p 1902. to
1906. and Dr. Beards Theater of Gods Judgments. l. 1. passim.
many other like Presidents of divine revenge upon persecuting,
truth-suppressing Prelates, to want and terrify them, which this Prelate
never heard of: and so are more inexcusable then he.

Secondly, Because his silencing of the Preachers and hindering the preaching of
the Gospel, proceeded rather from error, ignorance of the truth, and misguided
zeal; then malice or hatred against the Gospel, Ministers, and professors of
it; But our Bishops proceedings in this kind, proceeds from direct and
wilful malice and emnity against the truth, Gospel, Ministers, and Saints of
God, against inward conviction and the testimony of their own consciences
staring them in the face; the very Hebr. 6. 4. 5. 6. 7. c. 10. 26. 27. 28. 29.
2. Tim. 3. 2. 3. 4. 5. 2. Pet. 3. 3. 4. 5.
sin against the holy Ghost himself, or next degree thereto, into which they
are dangerously fallen.

Thirdly, Because he persecuted, silenced, or suspended none that professed
the same truth, faith and doctrine; which he and the Church of England then
embraced; but only those whom he and the Church of England then deemed both
heretics and Schismatickes. But our Prelates now silence, suspend,
excommunicate, deprive, imprison, persecute those, who profess and maintain
the established doctrine and discipline of the Church of England, which
themselves pretend to defend and strive for; those who are members, yea pillars
of our own Orthodoxe Church and neither separate from it in point of doctrine
nor discipline, being likewise altogether spotles, innocent, undefiled in their
lives, even because they preach, and defend Gods truth, and the Doctrines, the
Articles of the Church of England against Papists, Arminians, and superstitious
Romanizing Novellers: (A thing so strange, that the like was never heard or
read off in any age, Church, State, but ours only; yea a thing so detestable,
as not found among the Savage At jam serpentum major concordia: quando Leoni
Fortior ^ripuit pr^dam (...)? quo nemore unqnam expiravit Aper, majo^^s
den^ibus Apri? Iudica Tygris agit rabida cum Trigride pacem; saevis inter
s(...) convenit ursis. Iuvenal. p. 141.
b(...)ite beasts, as Tigers, Lions, Wolves, Bears, who ever hold together and
prey not one upon the other. Par^it cognatis maculis similis fera, being as old
as true, and therefore most monstrous, most detestable in our Christian Church,
and Prelates, who must needs expect the extremity of Gods Judgments to light
upon them for it.

Fourthly, Because he put down preaching, and silenced Gods Ministers in
times of health and prosperity only; but our Prelates even now in this time of
sickness and mortality, when God in special manner calls upon them, Isay. 58. 1.
To cry aloude and spare not, to lift up their voices like a trumpet, and show
the people their transgression, and the house of Jacob their sins: yea which
is the hight and upshot of all impiety, they take advantage of this present
pestilence and mortality, to put down all Lectures and preaching, when as all
former ages have set them up, together with prayer and fasting to, as a Ezech.
9. 4 (...). Chron. 6. 28. 29. c. 7. 13. 14. Joel. 2. and 2. Zeph. 2. 1. 2 3.
See the Books sor the Fast, in 1. Iacobi and Caroli.
special anti(...) and preservative * against the Plague, which they now
pretend to be a means to spread it. An impiety that heaven and earth may well
stand am^azed at, and future ages will hardly credit; yea the very capital
sin of which the Jews were guilty, f who both killed the Lord Jesus, and
their own Prophets, and persecuted and chased out, (as the margin renders it)
the Lords Ministers, forbidding them to preach to the Gentiles that they might
be saved, to fill up their sins always; for the wrath is come upon them to the
uttermost: A text which should smite through the loins and hearts of all
persecuting Prelates and silencers of Gods Ministers, who prohibit and put
down preaching, the chief and most principal office, whereunto Priests or
Bishops be called by the auehority of the Gospel, as all the Bishops and whole
Clergy of England have resolved in the 1 Thessalonians. 2. 15. 16.
Institution of a Christian man, dedicated by them to King Henry the 8. and
subscribed with all their names, as the very Council of Trent it self has
deemed in these words: The Sacrament of Orders f53. 54
Praedicationis munus Episcoporum praecipuum est; as the Church of England
herself in the Homily of the right use of the Church, p. 3. 4. 5. and before
them all our Sess(...) 24. Decretum de Reformatione c. 4.
Savior Christ himself his Prophets and Apostles have past all dispute
concluded. I shall therefore desire these dumb silencing and silent Prelates,
(who would have all other Ministers as lasie mute and silent as themselves,
favoring all dumb dogs that neither will not, nor cannot preach, and
persecuting none but the most painful Preachers, a thing well worthy noting,
discovering their emnity to be directly against preaching and the Gospel; (to
remember that of Master Math. 28. 19. 20. Mark 16. 15. 16. 1. Cor. 1. 17 Isay.
61. 1. Math. 24. 14. Luke. 4. 18. Acts. 10. 42 c. 5. 42. c. 610. 1. Cor. 9. 15.
16. 2. Tim. 4. 2.
Tyndall our godly Martyr, That Bishops who persecute their own office of
preaching (for and by which they hold their (...) Bishoprics) are not worthy
of it, nor sufferable in it: and that Bishops or Priests that preach not, or
that preach ought save Gods word, are none of Christ's nor of his anointing
(therefore not Jure divino) but Servants of the Beast, whose mark they bear;
whose word they preach, whose Law they maintain, clean against Gods Law: and
therefore both Ministers and people must and will henceforth call and deem
them such. As for Obedience of a Christian man p. 114. 134.
those Ministers most unjustly silenced, suspended and excommunicated by them,
who now basely sit down silent under their Suspensions, when as they should
go (...) courageously in their Ministry in despite of them, I shall desire
them only to consider.

First, the Acts. c. 4. and 5. throughout.
example and answer of the Apostles themselves, who when they were commanded
by the High Priests, Elders and whole Council of the Jews (who had as much or
more power over them then any Bishops have over Ministers at this day) not to
speak at all or teach in the name of Jesus, gave this answer; We ought to
obey God rather then men; whether it be right in the sight of God to hearken
unto God more then unto you, judge ye? for we cannot but speak the things
which we have seen and heard: and though they were thrice expressly inhibited
from preaching, yea imprisoned and beaten for violating these prohibitions, yet
they daily in the Temple IN EVERI HOUSE* (which now forsooth must be a
Conventicle, I am sure an Apostolical one) they ceased not to preach and teach
Jesus Christ, filling Jerusalem and every place with their doctrine, the very
Angel of God himself commanding them to do it. If then the whole Senate of
the High Priests and Elders, their terrible Prohibitions and Suspen^ions, yea
their imprisonments and stripes could neither keep nor de^erre the Apostles
from preaching; why should our Bishops threats, suspentions, (...) most unjust
illegal Censures (warranted by no Statute, Law ot Commission from his Majesty)
hinder our Ministers from their duty?

Secondly, The example of our own godly 5. R. 2. c. 5. 2. H. 4. c. 15. 2. H.
5. c. 7. Fox Acts and Monuments London. 1610. p. 415. 416 417. 418. 428. 434.
435. 438. 552. 563. 567. 588. 598. 800. 911. 1280. 1281. 1336. 1457. 1690.
Martyrs, who both their Doctrine and example taught and professed, That
Ministers ought not to give over preaching for any unjust suspension,
excommunication, inhibition, Censure or persecution whatsoever, either of the
Pope himself or of any other Prelate, going on boldly to preach the Gospel,
maugre all inhibitions, menaces, imprisonments and penalties to the contrary,
though fire and death it self. Whereupon they never would give over their
preaching upon any Prelates inhibition, no not in their prisons, where Master
Bradford and others preached twice every day. And shall our eminentest
Ministers now in the Sun shine of the Gospel under a most gracious Prince,
be more pusillanimous, base and cowardly then these godly Martyrs were even in
times of darkness under Popish Princes, Prelates and Tyrants, when it was
death to profess and preach the truth, which now (God be thanked) it neither
is, nor can be? God forbid.

Thirdly, That position of our Godly Martyr, Master John Wicklife (excellently
defended and notably proved by John Hus at large in the School of Prague, as
all may read at leisure in Acts and Monuments p. 415. 416 417. 418.
Master Fox:) That they which lea(...) off preaching and hearing of the word of
God for fear of any excommunication, threatening, persecution, or imprisonment,
threatened, or inflicted by the Pope, or any other whatsoever, are already
excommunicate by God himself, and in the day of Judgment shall be accounted
the betrayers of Christ; which is so well proved and defended by Hus, that all
Godly Ministers and people must subscribe thereto. And who of all our late
suspended Ministers, would be either accounted here, or adjudged hereafter, a
man excommunicated of God, and a betrayer of Christ, yea of the very Word of
God, of Religion it self, and of the souls committed to his Cure, who are
slain for lack of spiritual food, whiles they out of a slavish fear, of I
know not what or whom, sit mute and silent, and become so many laughing
stocks to our Prelates, who would be terrified, daunted and repulsed by their
Godly courage. See the Prayer on the 5. of November lately altered, in the last
impression 1635. and Doctor John White his defense of the Way, p. 6.


Fourthly, That Popish Priests and Jesuits dare say Mass, and preach in a
manner publicly, though a thing unlawful and expressly prohibited both by the
Laws of God and the Realm, and no less then See Rastall Tit. Rome. Recusant
(...), Jesuits, Priests.
high treason, for which capital punishments are prescribed. If these
Miscreants and generation of vipers then have so much courage, for their false
and trayterly religion, that they will not be silenced, nor scared from
preaching, neither by Laws, nor capital punishments; how much less then
should zealous faithful Ministers of the Gospel, contrary to Gods Laws and
the Realms, give over their Ministry and preaching, upon the bare illegal
suspension or excommunication of a Lordly Bishop, warranted by no Law nor
Statute of the Realm, nor any Patent or Commission from the King, and so no
color for any to obey or submit thereto?

Fifthly, What a great blow and wound they have given to religion, what great
discouragement and ill example to their people and fellow Ministers; what loss
and prejudice to their flocks, what encouragement to Jesuits, Seminaries,
Papists and domineering Prelates, who get heart and head by their
faintheartednes yielding, silence and submission, encroaching every day further
on their liberties, consciences and Religion, so that they have brought
themselves and others into a mere vassalage to the Bishops unruly lusts and
pleasures; all which their opposition and contemning of these their suspen^ions
and excommunications, being 25. H. 8. c. 19. 37. H. 8. c. 17. 1. Edw. 6. c. 2.
1. Eliz. c. 1. Canons. 1603. Can. 1. 13.
mere nullities in Law (for want of a Commission from his Majesty a lawful
ground, a due manner of proceeding, and his Majesty's style and seal) had
prevented, and may yet chance to remedy.

Sixthly, That a 1. Cor. 9. 16. 2. Tim. 4. 2. 3. 4.
necessity is laid upon them, even by God and Christ himself, to preach the
Gospel, and to be instant in season and out of season, and a temporal and
eternal woe denounced against them, if they forbear or give over to do it
upon any unjust inhibition whatsoever, which can neither nullify, control nor
dispense with the commands of God. How then can they avoid or shun this woe,
if the frown or unjust suspension of a profane unpreaching domineering
Prelate, may restrain them from this duty, or dispense with this most serious
task imposed on them Mark 16. 15. 1. Cor. 9. 15. 16. 2. Tim. 4. 1. 2. 3. 4.
from heaven it self.

Seaventhly, That solemn charge that was given them in the name and behalf of
Christ himself, yea of the whole Realm and Church of England, and that
solemn promise they made before God and the Congregation, when they were first
made Ministers; to wit, See the Book of Ordination of Ministers.
that as they would answer it before Christ's tribunal at the great day of
judgment, they should and would teach, premonish, feed and provide for the
Lords flock, for whom he shed his blood, AND NEVER THEIR LABOUR CARE AND
DILIGENCE HEREIN, until they had done all that lies in them, according to
their bounden duty, to bring all such as were or should be committed to their
charge, unto that agreement of faith and knowledge of God, and to that ripenes
and perfectnes of age in Christ (which none of them has yet done) that there
should be no place left among them, neither of error in Religion, or for
viciousnes of life; and that for the same cause they should and would forsake,
and set aside (as much as in them lies) all worldly cares and studies, and
give themselves WHOLLY to this thing, and draw all their cares and studies this
way and to this end, and that they should and would preach, and be faithful
dispensers of Gods Word in their Congregations; which charge being laid upon
them by the Bishop at their ordination in the name of Christ, by the whole 3.
and 4 Ed* 6 c 12. 5. and 6. Ed 6. c. 1. 8. Eliz. c. 1.
Church and State of England, and the Book of Ordination (confirmed by three
several Acts of Parliament, the 8 Canon, and their own subscriptions to it;)
and they particularly promising in a most solemn manner, to perform it to the
^ttermost of their power. How any Bishop can by Law suspend them from preaching
as long as they continue Ministers, and are not actually degraded or deprived
of their livings, for some just or lawful cause, warranted by an express Act
of Parliament; or how any godly Minister in point of Law or Conscience, can
give over his preaching or Ministry upon any unjust suspen^ion, inhibition,
excommunication or command of any Bishop, Visitor, or Ordinary (who cannot
countermaund this charge or Book of Ordination, ratified by 3 Acts of
Parliaments) I cannot conjecture.

Finally; That if Ministers will thus suffer, every Bishop at his pleasure,
without any special Commission from his Majesty, under the great Seal of
England, or any just cause in point of Law, upon every humor, fancy, or new
minted Article of his own (which by the Statute of 25. H. 8. c. 19. and the
13. Canons resolution, yea and his Majesty's too, in his Declaration before the
39. Articles, he has no power to make) to suspend, excommunicate, and put
them down from preaching, then it will be in the Bishops power to suppress
and alter Religion at their pleasure, without his Majesty's or a Parliaments
assent, and so all shall hang upon their wills, who have no power at all,
either by the Laws of God or the Sea. 25. H. 8 c. 19. 1. Eliz. c. 1. 2. 13.
Eliz. c. 12. Can. 1603. Can. 1. 13.
Realm, to institute any new rites, Ceremonies, Articles, Canons or
Injunctions, or to alter or innovate any thing in Religion, much less to
suspend or silence Ministers? Wherefore in case our Prelates presently revoke
not these their antichristian, illegal suspen^ions, inhibitions, injunctions,
or other Censures, to hinder Ministers from preaching, I hope every Godly
Minister, who has any care; either of his own soul, liberty, people, any
love at all to God or Religion, any zeal or courage for the truth, or desire
of the good, either of Church or State, taking these considerations into his
thoughts, and finding the Bishops Jurisdiction and proceedings to have no
lawful warrant, either from the Laws of God or man, will readily protest both
against their usurped authority and proceedings, as mere nullities and
vanities, and proceed to preach, pray, and do his duty, as the Apostles and
Who had never been Martyrs had ^hey been such (...) cowards as most Ministers
are now.
Martyrs did of old, without any fear or discouragement; that so Gods
judgments, Plagues and punishments, which the Prelates late practices, with
the Ministers silence and cowardice, and all our sins have drawn down upon
us, may be assuaged and remooved, and we may ever retain the Ordinances and
Word of God among us, in purity, power, sincerity and plenty, both to our
present and future happiness. I shall close all with this Syllogism. That
calling, authority and jurisdiction, which obliterates, persecutes,
suppresseth, oppugneth the very Law, Gospel and word of God, with the frequent
powerful preaching, preachers and professors thereof is doubtless, not of
divine right or institution, but Antichristian and Diabolical, 1 Thessalonians. 2.
14. 15. 16. Romans 2. 13. 10. John 8. 39. to 48. 1. Tim. 3. 1. to 7. Tit. 1. 5.
to 10. But this does the calling, authority and jurisdiction of Lord
Archbishops and Bishops, as the premises, and all stories witness, especially
our Book of Martyrs. Therefore it is doubtless not of divine right or
institution, but Antichristian and Diabolical.


If the Minor be not sufficiently evidenced by the Premises, by the silencing
of many Ministers, suppressing of so many Lectures throughout the Realm, give
me leave to instance but in two fresh examples more.

The first, in Doctor Pierce, Bishop of Bath and Wels; who in his Visitation in
the midst of August last expressly prohibited all Ministers in his Diocese to
preach on the Lords day afternoon; threatening some Ministers to suspend them
both from their office and Benefice, if they durst presume to preach any more
on the Lords day afternoon; without alleging any Law or Canon, (which there
is none) or any danger of bringing or spreading the plague, (which there is not
feared,) but only out of his malice to preaching; and to deprive poor people
of the sprituall food of their souls: to affront the Sta^utes of 5. and 6. E.
6. c. 1. 3. and 1. Eli. c. 2. which require OFTEN PREACHING AND HEARING of the
Gospel, upon every Sunday and Holy day, and prescribe preaching twice a day,
as well, as much, as Commonprayer, coupling them together in the same words to
oppugn the Homily of the right use of the Church, p. 3. 4. 5. which prescribes
and enforces, the daily and continual preaching of Gods word, and specially
on the Sabbath-dayes, from our Saviors and his Apostles own Precepts and
Examples; to make all Ministers perjured, who at the time of their Ordination
make a solemn promise and covenant before God, diligently and painefully to
instruct their people, and never to give over preaching, etc. (as the Book of
Ordination, and the Church and State of England, both in and by it injoyne
them,) and to spite S. Paul^ himselse: who as by the space of three years
together, he ceased not to warn every one Night and Day (therefore he
preached Evenings as well as mornings) publicly and from house to house. Acts.
20. 20. 31. So he charge Timothy, and in him all Ministers, To preach the
word instantly in season, out of season (that is, on Lords days, and
weekedayes; Morning, and Evening, yea and at Midnight to if need be; in times
of prosperity and adversity; of health and pestilence, when preaching is most
seasonable to raise men from their sins;) 2. Tim. 4. 2. which Apostle were
he in this Bishops and some other of his Brethrens Diocese, they would
school him roundly for such good doctrine, and stop his mouth, to prevent the
great mischeife of often preaching, yea, (...) our Savior Christ himself, and
his Apostles, were now among our Prelates and should Luke. 19. 47. Acts. 2. 46.
c. 3. 4. and 5. The Homily of the right use of the Church p. 3. 4.
preach DAILY in our temples, as they did in the Temple of Jerusalem and Jewish
Synagogues, I fear me they should be all silenced, suspended, and laid by the
heels for their pains, by our Rare-preaching Lordly Prelates, since they thus
use our painefullest Ministers even for frequent preaching; If I should demand
of them by what Law of God, or the Realm? by what Canon of the Church, or by
what special commission from his Majesty, under his great Seal? (without
which their Lordships 25. H. 8. c. 19. 37. H. 8 c. 17. 31. H. 8. c. 10. 1. E.
6. c. 2. 1. Eliz. c. 2. 5. Eliz. c. 1. 8. Eliz. c 1. and the Patents to
Coverdale and story. 5. E. 6. pars. 1.
cannot by Law suspend or silence any Minister, nor keep any Visitation
without the danger of a Praemunire which they have all incurred;) I fear me
they would be as mu^^, as any Minister they have put to silence: And till they
can show such Law, Canon, and special Commission (which not one of them can
do) he is not worthy the name of a faithful Minister, that will sit down
silent altogether, as too many do, to their eternal infamy or slack down
their former frequency and diligence in preaching, upon the proudest Prelates
bare Mandate, especially in these days of Pestilence and Mortality.

The second instance is, the suppressing of Master John Rogers Lecture of
Dedham in Essex about the same time, continued so many years together with so
good success that he has converted more souls to God, and brought more to
heaven, then all the Lord Archbishops and Bishops Sermons from Queen Mary's
days till now; many of which though they have lived long, cannot I presume
name so much as one Soul they have truly converted, either by their life or
doctrine, though they have murdered and starved thousands. The Pretense of
suspending this our Lecturer is, the great good will the Bishops bear to the
Townsmen and Puritans (so they term them) of Dedham, over whom they are 2.
Cor. 11. 2.
jealous with a godly jealosie, to wit, least the continuance of this Lecture
should draw the Plague to the Town. But is this think you the true cause? If
so, why then let me propound but 6. or 7. questions to our Prelates who are so
careful of men's bodies, that they are altogether careless of their Souls.

First, Has not the Lecture been the greatest blessing that ever this Town
enjoyed? the chief means that has enriched it, and ever since its erection
wa^ded of the Pestilence from it, yea in the last great Visitation when there
was more danger? If so, as all the Town and Country will aver, why should it
be pestiferous or infectious now?

Secondly, Where did ever their Lordships read, that powerful preaching was a
means to attract or draw the pestilence to any Town or Parish? or the
suppressing of preaching and Lectures an Antidote or Preservative against it?
What Divine, Physician, Philosopher, or Historian, yea what Epicure or Atheist
Levit. 26. 25. Deutr. 28. 20. 21. 60. 61. 1. King. 7. 3 37. 38. 2. Chron. 7.
13. 15. 78. 50. Ps. 126. 21. 29. Ier: 14. 12. 11. 12. c. 21. 6. 9. c. 29. 17.
18 c. 32. 24 36 c. 38. 2. c. 42. 17. 22 c. 44. 13. c. 34. 17. Ezech. 5. 12 c.
6. 12. c. 7. 15 c. 12. 16 c. 33. 27. c. 38. 24. Amos 4. 100
ever taught such Doctrine till our present new Doctors and Lord Prelates?

Thirdly, Whether the reading of Common prayer and Homilies be not as apt to
bring and increase the Plague, as preaching and Lectures, and the one as
pestiferous as the other? If not: then why do they put down and prohibit
public fasting and prayer, as infectious in this pestilence, used as a
preservative, medicine and chief cure in all others as well as preaching? yea
how can they prove, that one of these is more apt to attract and diffuse the
Plague then the other? If so then; why do they not put down Common prayer and
Homilies in all places infected, or in danger of infection, as well as
preaching, (the one being as pestiferous, as pestilentiall as the other,) and
so make us all true Atheists or Infidels, giving God no public worship at all?

Fourthly, Whether the putting down of Lectures and preaching has been a
means to stay, keep off, or spread the Plague, or rather to increase and
attract it? Religion teaches us that were there is * most sin and
wickedness abounding, least knowledge and service of God, there is most danger
of the plague, and (...) experience prooves it true for the most part, it ever
raging more in the disorderly suburbs of London, where they have usually least
and worst preaching, more then in the City, where is better government, life
and preaching. Powerful preaching therefore being the chief Acts. 26. 18. c.
37. 38.
means to turn men from their sins and evil lives, and win them unto
God, and the suppression of it a means to continue and harden men in their
evil ways; it must necessary follow, that frequent powerful preaching, is an
antidote and cure against it; and the suppression of it, the high way and
means to bring it. If reason be not sufficient, let late experience instruct
us thus much. The Lectures of Christ Church, S. Martins and others in London,
were put down by the Bishops this Pestilence, to prevent the bringing of it
into these Parishes: the very selfsame week God sends it unto them, and now
it spreads among them much: But in S. Antholines Parish and some others, where
the Lectures yet continue, (in the first every morning) no Pestilence (blessed
be God) has hitherto been heard off: The Lecture of Black friars on
Wednesdayes, at S. Cathrines in the same day, with some other have been
suppressed to prevent the Plagues increase, after its invasion of these
Parishes, to the intolerable grief both of Minister and people: yet the
plague in those parishes has since every week increased and spread further.
At Westminster upon the first coming of the Plague, they gave over all
preaching even forenoone and afternoon on the Lords day, thinking by this
remedy to cease it; (a president hardly paralleld in any age;) but what
followed thereupon, the Bills since have been doubled and trebled, and more
have there died every day since, then did in a whole week before. This
therefore is but a Preposterous remedy, and a vain pretense to beguile little
children, and fools with all.

Fifthly, What place is there near to Dedham from which that lecture should
draw the infection? were it in all or some of the neighboring Parishes, there
might be some color for such a pretext, and yet not sufficient to put down
the Lecture, since men of those Parishes might be prohibited only from it, and
all else have access unto it: But since it is not so near that Town (God be
blessed for it) as that there is any such fear of infection, this pretext can
be but a mere cloak of wickedness to countenance a worse design.

Sixthly; Whether they hold not great Banqueting, Maskes, Dancing, Plays and
Enterludes, as pestiferous and infectious, as Preaching and Lectures: and the
famous University of Oxfords health and immunity from the Pestilence, as much
to be respected as the poor Town of Dedhams? If any scruple be made of the
former part of this Question, his Majesty's and their own Book of Common
prayer for the Fast the last great pestilence 1. Caroli, (which The
Exhortation, and Orders at the end.
prohibits all Plays, Maskes, revellings, Dancing, Pastimes and Banqueting,
as causes of the plagues, both beginning, spredding and continuance, and the
proper* sins of our Nation, which have made us a Proverb and Byword to all
other neighbour-Countries,) compared with Isay. 5, 12. 13. c. 22. 12. 13. 14.
etc. 32. 13. 14 Amos 6. 1. to 12. Exodus 32. 19. to 35. 1. Cor. 10. 5. 6. 7.
^am. 5. 1. 5. 6. Revel. 18. 7. 8. and many presidents cited in a late Tract
against Stageplayes and enterludes, will put it out of doubt. Of the latter
part of this Quaere there can be no question, unless the Bishops be very
unnatural, to love a stranger better then their own Foster-mother, and
weavers, Clothiers, more then Scholars. If then excessive Feasting, Masking,
Enterludes, Dancing and Epicureanpomp, the Gal. 5. 21.
very works of the ^lesh, (and therefore most unseemely of all others for
those who term themselves spiritual men, yea works that shut men out of
heaven, and therefore not fit for those who profess they have the keys to let
men into heaven) be more pestiferous and apt to bring the Pestilence, then
Preaching; and Oxford to be preferred before Dedham; what is the reason that
our great Lordly Prelates in these dangerous times of mortality (when as they
should be all in sable, fasting, praying, weeping and mourning with the people
of their Diocese, and refreshing their starved bodies with that prodigal
expense they have there cast away) have (to the great ill example of all other
people, and grieving of the souls of all who are sensible of the Plagues we
now groan under) been so lately setting up and practicing the one, at Oxford,
to draw the Pestilence thither; and putting down the other at Dedham, to keep
the Pest from thence? When as sundry Councels in all ages, have strictly
inhibited Bishops and Ministers, neither to be Exhibiters, setters out, or
spectators, but diligent suppressors, yea censurers of the one (especially in
mournful times of Plague and Mortality which summon all men, but Conc Laodice
number Can. 54. Carthag. 3. Can. 11. Agathense. Can. 39. Constantinop. 6. Can. 24.
5. (...). 62. Nicenum. 2. Can. 22. Turonense. 3. Can. 7. with sundry others
Bochellus. l. 6. Decr. Eccles. Gal. Tit. 18. 19. l. 4. Tit. 1. 7. l. 8. Tit. 10.
Gods Ministers above others, to weeping, sackecloath and baldnes, to turn
their laughter into heavines, and their joy into mourning,) and instant both by
preaching and Ecclesiastical Censures, to draw all men from them; but
furtherers and setters up of preaching, yea of preaching twice a day, (and that
principally in times of humiliation) which they now suppress. Alast is the
piety and zeal of those Lordly Pontificians, who will needs claim all their
Episcopalities by a divine right, degenerated to this Epicurian resolution;
Isay. 22. 12. 13. Joel. 2. 16. 17. Jam. 4. 9.
let us eat and drink, let us Mask and Play, let us feast and keep
Revell-route, for to morrow we shall die? Are these the sermons, the good
instructions they preach to King, Queen, Nobles, Ministers, Scholars, People
in these pestilentiall times? Must they be feasting, banqueting, laughing,
masking, playing, piping, dancing, when all others are weeping, Iay 22. 13.
fasting, mourning, at leastwise gladly would be so, and that in public (as
they have reason) were it not for them? certainly if S. Bernard were now alive,
and saw such Prelates, he would be so far from thinking them Gods Bishops,
that he would undoubtedly define them to be the Devils, yea and style them Sic
facit Jesus hodie, multos sibi eligens Diabolos Episcopos, Sermo in Council.
Rhemensi and ad Clerum.
Devils too, and murderers of men's souls. Who having now taken the highest
degree at the University, that ever the Schools of Bacchus, Venus, or Epicurus
can afford them, may be rather deemed their professed Chaplains, then Christian
Bishops. Yet mistake me not, as if I thought it unlawful for a Prelate or
University, to entertain their Prince; far be it from me or any other to
harbor such a thought: But to do it now at such a time, in such a
Pontifical, Epicurian manner, with most profane and impious Enterludes in
contempt and derision of all purity, piety and religion, is the only thing,
which not I alone, but the whole Kingdom generally cry shame on; banqueting,
masking, feasting, Revelling, being altogether unsuitable, if not unlawful to
a Christian, a Prelate, a University, in a time of such general weeping and
mourning, when Joel. 1. and 2.
most hearts (but stony ones) are sad, and many poor men's faces gather
blacknes, even for very hunger, with which too many perish; whose lives this
prodigality would have preserved.

Seaventhly, If the Bishops have so much fatherly care to keep off the plague
from our Precissians, and Puritans of Dedham (so they term us) as to put
down our Lecture, (yea Sermons on the very-solemne Fast Day, where there is
any infection, as if the sick needed least spiritual physic and instruction)
to keep us from the Plague, what is the reason they have so little care of
those of our Religion and profession, whom they have mewed up in several
prisons in London? Why have the Priests and Jesuits in the Gatehouse and
elsewhere (though 27. Eliz. c. 1. 2.
Traitors to his Majesty and the Realm, and some of them condemned men,) with
all other prisoners there, liberty granted them to go abroad this time of
Pestilence, and yet D. Bastwicke, convicted and censured only for showing
himself a true subject to his Sovereign, in defending his Majesty's
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, against the Popes and your encrochements, (with
other of your High Commission Prisoners,) no leave at all to retire himself
into the fresh air for his safety; It being now, as it seems, a great deal
better to be an open Traitor to his Majesty, or the State, then a mere
opposite only to these our Lordly Prelates, even in their intolerable
usurpations both upon his Majesty's Royal Prerogatives, and his subjects
liberties? Why have you given special command, that Mr. Brewer, committed
Though their Commission give them no power to close imprison any man, yet now
their common practice is to do (...).
close prisoner by you to the Kings bench, for the same cause, should there be
detained still, and not remoove with the other prisoners, when as he had
obtained license to go into Oxfordshire with his fellow prisoners, that so the
plague, which environs both those prisons, might sweep away both these
Prisoners and ease you of them? Why do you still detain others of your
commitment in these and other prisons, of purpose to murder them as much as in
you lies with the pest, when all else that are willing, are set free and walk
abroad into the Country for their health? Why detain you D. Layton in the
Fleet, and Mr. Prinne in the Tower, notwithstanding some Nobles mediation for
the enlargment of the one, and the Queens most gracious intercessions for the
other, whose Princely clemency and pity, to those of a different religion, is
an everlasting foil to your unchristian mercies and barbarous inhumanity, to
those of your own faith and profession. Is this your Episcopal pity, mercy,
grace, and goodness; that when all men else can find favor and relief, yet
those whom you unjustly persecute, restrain or malice without cause, must
find none at all, no not though King or Queen desire it? What, is your
Pontifical malice now swollen greater then their Royal grace and goodness?
Never therefore dissemble more with the world and us, that you have put down
our Dedham, or other Lectures, out of any love to us, or care of our, or their
safety, as you pretend, to keep the pestilence from us, or them; but confess
you have done it out of the malice of your hearts, against preaching, if not to
bring the plague and pestilence (as much as in you lies) even upon our souls
and bodies, as you endeavor to do upon these Isay 59. 6, 7.
poor prisoners thus detained by you, which these times of plague and fasting
call upon you to set free. But take heed least whiles you se^ke to put down
preaching and fasting, by such ungodly means and pretenses, to keep off the
plague from us and others, you draw it not down, both on us and your selves. I
have already informed you of many Bishops, who have perished of this disease, I
could acquaint you yet with more, as H. Mutius Germaniae Chron. l. 18. p. 152,
153.
The Bishops of Colen, Spire, Ratisbon, Prague, Verden and Leodium all swept
away in An. 1169: (...) Hildewardus Bishop of Hildesheim, An. 996. with many
others; let their examples be your warnings; and if you will prove your
calling to be of God, then henceforth learn to preach, not to suppress his
word; to be Saxoniae Chron. Cent. Magd. 10. Col. 622. Lu. 6. 36.
merciful as he is merciful; else all will henceforth conclude, that you are
of your Joh. 8. 44.
father the devil, for his works you do: He was a murderer from the
beginning of men's souls and bodies, and so are you.

Now if your Holinesses or any other deem this censure of mine over-ha^sh, one
that was once of your own Rochet, and after that a Martyr, Sermon 4. before
King Edward.
(Bishop Latimer) will assure you; that it was the very devil himself, not
God, that set up the State of unpreaching Prelacy, and that it is he alone who
stirs these Prelates up to persecute and suppress the preaching of the Gospel
under the Title of Heresy, and schism, and ill Magistrates to do the like
under the Title of sedition; and our learned His Catechism, vol. 1. fol. 500.
Thomas Becon, as he affirms and proves at large, that the first and
Principal point of a Bishop and spiritual Ministers office, is to teach and
preach the word of God; so he resolves, that such a Bishop as either does not,
or cannot preach, is a Nicholas Bishop and an Idol, and indeed no better then
a painted Bishop on a wall: yea, he is as the Isay 56. 10.
Prophet says, a dumb dog, and as our Savior Christ says Math. 5. 13.
unsavourie salt, ^worth nothing but to be cast out, and to be trodden under
foot of men. Woe be to those Rulers that set such Idols and white-daubed walls
over the Flock of Christ, whom he has purchased with his precious blood.
Horrible and great is their damnation. Our Savior Christ says to his
Disciples Io^. 20. 21
As my Father sent me, so send I you. Now who knows not, that Christ was sent
of his Father to preach the Gospel, as we may see in Isay 61. 1. Mar. 1. 38.
Luke 4. 18. 19 31. 43, 44.
diverse places of the holy Scripture. It therefore follows, that such as are
sent of Christ are sent to preach the Gospel. If they preach not (the case of
many of our Lord Prelates) it is an evident token, that Christ sent them not,
BUT ANTICHIST and THE DEVIL. Thus and much more Becon, who tells these
unpreaching Prelates in plain terms; that nothing abides them but
everlasting damnation. What then will become of our great Lord Pre^ates, who
will neither preach to the people themselves, nor suffer others who are
willing, to do it; stoping up our preachers mouths with their illegal,
unchristian, antichristian suspenions and excommunications, yea, expressly
prohibiting all preaching in these doleful mortiferous times of Plague and
pestilence, and that on the very Fasting-dayes, for fear it should infect men's
souls and bodies? when as the whole Surius. Tom. 3. p. 464.
Council of Paris under Jews and Lotharius, Anno 829. l. 1, 2, 5. decreed the
quite contrary, in these very remarkable terms. Statuimus pari voto, parique
consensu, ut unusquisque nostrum dictis and exemplis, plebes parochiae suae
attentius ad meli^ra incitare studeat, easque ut se a malis cohibeant, and ad
Dominum ex totocorde convertant, solicit admoneant, Deumque quem peccando sibi
iratum fecerunt, digna paenitentiae satisfactione and eleemosinarum largitione,
sibi placabilem facere satagant etc. Cum itaque Praedicatores SINE CESSATIONE
POPVLODEI PRAEDICARE NECESSE SIT, juxta illud Esaiae Isay 58.
Clam* NEECSSES, quasi tuba exalt a vocem tuam, and annuncia popul^ ^eo,
scelera ^orum, and domui Jacob peccata little: TVM MAXIM ID FACERE NECESSE EST,
QVANDO IRAM DOMINI CONTRA POPVLVM DEI, meritis exigentibus, GRASSARI
PERSEPXERINT, juxta illud quod Dominus per Ezechielem Prophetamloquitur. Ezech.
3. 17. 18. 19. etc. 33. 7, 8. 9. 10, etc. At which our silent and silencing
Prelates and old doting Shelford Priest, may well blush for shame, especially
if they peruse the 23, 24, 25. 28, 29. and 31. Chapters of the same Council
following. And good reason, for the very Romish Prelates in the Sessio. 24.
Decretum de Reformatione. c. 4.
Concell of Trent, as lewd as they were, had so much ingenuity as to decree.
That the preaching of Gods word was the principal part of a Bishops Office,
belonging especially unto them, and that it ought to be exercised as frequently
as might be, for the salvation of the people; and thereupon enjoined all
Bishops in proper person, or in case of inevitable occasions, by their
sufficient substitutes, and all Ministers in every Parish, to preach every
Lord's Day and Holy Day at the least; and in the time of Fasts, (as of Lent,
Advent, and the like) QVOTIDIE, VEL SALTEM TRI^VS IN HEBDOMADE DIEBVS, to
preach every day, or at least three days every week, and at other times also
as often as opportunity would permit, and to Catechize the people besides. If
this Popish Council then prescribes all Bishops and Ministers whatsoever, thus
constantly and daily to preach Gods word, (especially on Lords-dayes,
Holy Days and Fasting-dayes) without intermission; our Lordly, lasie,
Loytering Prelates, who will neither thus preach themselves, and prohibit
others to preach thus frequently and daily on these seasons, or in any infected
Cities on our Solemn Fasting-dayes; are certainly not only far worse then
these Trent Prelates, but even as bad or worse then the very Devil himself
(as Bishop Latimer proves at large in his Sermon of the Plough, which I would
wish them seriously to peruse:) yea, they are mere Rebels, Traitors and
enemies to God, his Church, Religion and the peoples souls. And can they then
be ever true, loyal or faithful to their Prince? No verily. Not to mention
all the Sea Balaeus de Ritis Pontificum. Fox Acts and Monuments, Mr. Tyndals
Practice of Popish ^rclates, Dr. Barnes his supplication to King Henry the 8.
Godwins Catalogue of Bishops.
conspiracies, Rebellions and Treasons of our own or foreign Prelates
against their Sovereigns in all ages, enough to fill a volume as large as
Baronius his Annals; I shall instance only in three late examples. Anno 1536.
Christian the 3. King of Denmark, (our King Charles his great grandfather by
the mothers side) imprisoned all the seven Bishops of Denmark, for their
several Treasons, Rebellions conspiracies, and insurrections against him, the
Kingdom and Christian Religion, and for usurping regal authority, with
Chytraeus Chron. Saxoniae l. 14 p 407. 421 l. 15 p. 433. 434.
the rule of the Kingdom to themselves alone, and publishing Edicts in their
own names as the Senate of that Realm (as our Prelates do now in their
visitations and Consistories) against the Ministers and Professors of the
Reformed Religion. All which this King caused to be drawn up into a
Remonstrance, which lasted three hours reading, and on the 10. of August Anno
1537. (two days before his Coronation,) he caused a scaffold and Throne to be
erected in the most public place of Hafnia the Metropolis of Denmark; where
he sitting with all his Nobles and Senators in State; caused this remonstrance
of these Prelates detestable Treasons, Conspiracies, Rebellions, and disloyal
usurpations on the Crown, to be read publicly before them and all the people,
declaring, that for them he had imprisoned the Bishops, and demanding the
Nobles and people, whether they desired that these trayterly Prelates should
any more sway the Common weal of the Kingdom, or be restored to their former
dignity and power? Whereupon they all cried out, No, and that they would be no
longer molested with this. Antichristian trayterly generation of Vipers. Which
ended, a public Decree or Act of State was made by their unanimous consents,
that these Bishops should be removed, and that the political office and power
of Bishops should be thenceforth wholly abolished out of the Realm, which was
forthwith put in execution; the Bishops removed, their temporalities and
revenues confiscated to the King and seven Superintendents, being but ordinary
Ministers, ordained in their steed. And thus was Denmark freed from trayterly
Prelates by our Kings great grandfather, after it had been long oppressed by
them Chytreus Chron. Saxoniae l. 2^. p 64^. Bucanon Rerum Scotararum. l. 18.
and 18. Paltricij Adamsoni ^a linodia and Melvini Celsae Commissioni^ Anatomia.
Anno Domini 1571. John Hamilton Archbishop of Saint Andrews in Scotland, was
apprehended, arraigned, condemned and hanged at Sterling, by Matthew Steward
then Viceroy during King James his minority, for two notorious suocessive
Treasons: the first, for conspiring and having a chief hand in the Murder of
Henry Steward King of Scots, father to our late King James of famous memory,
and grandfather to our present Sovereign King Charles. Anno 1565. and for
causing James Earl of Murra, Viceroy of Scotland during King James his
infancy, to be traitorously murdered likewise Anno 1567. For which Treasons,
not long after all, Lord Bishops were thrust out of Scotland, by King James and
the whole Parlements consent, (though since restored) as Traitors to their
Princes, contrary to Christ's institution, as the chief suppressors of the
preaching of the Gospel in all Countries. Chytr^us Chron. Saxoniae l. 6. p.
49. l. 7. p. 219. 220. l. 9. p. 259. 261. 262. 263. 270. 275. l. 10 p. 297 309.
311. 340. 341. 342. l. 12 p. 358. 359 l. 13. p. 388.
Gustavus Ericus that famous King of Sweden, banished, deprived, hanged up and
beheaded some of his Archbishops and Bishops for their many execrable Treasons
against himself, and the whole Realm, and refused to be crowned, before he
and the whole State of Sweden had by public Act of Parleament, (though with
much opposition of the Prelates) stripped the Prelates of Sweden of their
excessive temporalities, revenues, wealth, and all temporal Qui sacris Of
ficijs ob meritorum praerogativam sunt applicati, dedecus et valde periculosum
est, terrenis actionibus, t^^p(...) (...) lacris (...)cari Council* Paris. Anno
829 l. 1. c. 28. S(...) Tom. 3. p. 376.
Offices and Jurisdiction, which made them often times to rebel against their
Princes, Kings and Magistrates, to stir up many seditions and to molest that
Realm with almost continual and daily wars and schisms, for about an
hundred years then last past, and had and did make them slow bellies, and
unpreaching Prelates, serviceable neither to God nor man either in words or
deeds, serving rather to entice them to riot, pride, idleness, and seditions,
then to true piety, and having no Title in the word of God to warrant them.
Since which the Prelates in Sweden, ever rebellious and seditious to their
Princes before, have been more dutiful to their Sovereigns, and entermedled
only with their spiritual functions* which they altogether neglected while
they were Lords. These three late examples of his Majesty's royal Progenitors,
(to omit See Mr. (...)yndals Practice of Popish Prelates, Dr. Barnes his
Supplication to Henry the 8. Henry Stalbridge his exhortatorie Epistle* Antiqui
Ecclesiae Brit. et Godwins Catalogue.
others) as they may instruct all Princes how false that idle Paradox of the
Prelates is, No Bishop, no King, the contrary being an experimental truth, and
how little trust and fidelity there is in Lordly Prelates (who have ever been
treacherous to their Sovereigns when and where they have born greatest sway.)
So they may move his Majesty to follow Sermon on of the Plough and 2. 4. 5. 6.
before King Edward.
Father Latymers council to King Edward the 6, to unlord all our Lordly
Bishops, and remove them from all their temporal offices and employments, that
so they may follow their spiritual Plough-tayle, (which they will scorn to
do, as long as they are Lords, it being an unseemely and dishonorable thing
for Lords to go to plough;) and no longer silence their fellow Brethren,
oppress, molest and vex his faithful Subjects, and root out all powerful
frequent Preaching and Preachers of Gods word, as now they do: From which kind
of Lordly Prelates with their Antichristian Romish practices and Innovations
now on foot, Good Lord deliver us; since they have neither Gods nor the Kings
Law to authorize them, or support that usurped Papal tyrannical Jurisdiction
which now they exercise, under which the whole Kingdom groans and
languisheth, desiring to be unburthened of it, as an intolerable yoke of
bondage, which it can no longer bear, as now it is aggrevated I shall
therefore close up all, with the Canon of the Council of Paris under Jews and
Lotharius, An. 829. Surius Tom. 3. p. 374.
l. 1. c. 23. worthy our domineering proud Prelates most serious rumination.
Quia sunt plerique qui non paternu^ affectu^ circa gregem sibi comissum sed
quendam exercere videntur Dominatum eumque non ut Dominicum, sed flatibus
vertosae arrogantiae inflati, ut suum proprium tractare non verentur. Quantum a
paternitatis officijs aberrent* subter collecta Johan. 21.
documenta declarant. Dominus in Evangelio. Si diligis me, pasce oves meas: ME
AS inquit, non TV AS. Item, qui major Math. 20.
est vestrum, erit minister vester: Et non post multa. Non ita erit, inquit,
inter vos. Sed qui voluerit inter vos major fieri 1. Pet. 5.
erit vester servus. Petrus, Neque dominantes in clero sed forma facti gregis
ex animo. Solomon, Principem te constituerunt? nolli extolli, sed esto in eis,
quasi unus ex ipsis. Fulgentius Eccles. 32.
in libro de veritate praedestinationis et gratiae; Non ideo, inquit, se solum
quilibet episcopus vas misericordiae putet in gloria praeparatum, quia
pontificali Mitra.
militia fungitur, sed si progrege sibi redito solicitus SEMPER invigilet, et
PRAEDICET VERBO, instet opportune, impertune, arguat, obsecret, Tim. 4.
increpet in omni patientia et doctrina. Nec sibi dominatum superbus usurpare
contendat, sed Apostolicis informatus eloquijs et exemplis, servum se cunctis
exhibeat, neque sedis illius altitudine, collatum sibi gaudeat temporale
fastigium, sed humili cord fidelibus Praebeat bonae conversations exemplum.
Quicunque igitur sacris officijs servituri, sub quolibet ordine applicantur,
dignum est, ut illius dicantur, cujus servitio mancipantur, Quia ergo
temeritate, immo PRAESVMPTVOSAVANITATE quilibet praelatorum dicere praesumit;
Illa congregatio mea est, aut Ille praesbyter vel Clericus meus est, cum
NONSITILLIVS SED ILLIVS CVI DICATVS EST? Proinde quia is inolitus sesus
ecclesiasticae non concordat regulae, corrigatur NECESSE EST.

Christian Reader, this passage should have been inserted p. 123. l. 27. after
mistake not.

I shall close up this, concerning the power and right of Ordination, with
these ensuing Authorities and memorable examples. Anno Dom. 1389. the Lollards,
Wiclifs-disciples (as Hist. Angliae An. 1389. p. 374.
Walsingham records) winning very many to their Sect, grow so audacious; that
their Presbiters like Bishops, created and ordained new Presbiters; affirming,
that every Priest had received as much power to bind and loose, and to
minister other Ecclesiastical things, as the Pope himself gives or could
give. This power of Ordination they exercised in the Diocese of Salisbury: And
those who were ordained by them, thinking all things to be lawful to them,
presumed to celebrate Masses, and feared not to handle Divine things, and
administer the Sacraments. This wickedness (writes he) was discovered by a
certain man Ordained a Minister by them, to the Bishop of Salisbury at his
Manor of Sunnyng: By which it is apparent, that the Lollards and Wiclenists,
(the Prctestants of that age) believed, that the power of Ordination belonged
as much to Presbiters by Gods Law, as to Bishops; that one of them might as
well, as lawfully ordain Ministers as the other; and This was the Doctrine and
practice of all our Mayrtyrs Fox Acts and Mounments. 1610. p 483. 485. 500.
502. 521. 541. 552. 553. 556. 568. 588. 590. 592 598. 599. 602. 604. 639. 806.
874. 883. 884. 911. 931. 950. 956. 1001. 1006. 1006 1015. 1016. 1099. 1156.
1868. 1889.
that as they might lawfully preach the Gospel without the Bishops license
(first prescribed by the forged Statute, of 2. H 5. c. 15. made only by the
Bishops without the commons consent; to suppress the preaching of the
Gospel,) so likewise ordain Ministers without it; and that Ministers ordained
only by Presbyters without a Bishops privity or assistance, were lawful
Ministers, and might lawfully with a good conscience discharge all Ministerial
Offices; This being not only their received Doctrine, but their practice too.
I find moreover that b Janruay 20. 1542. Nicholas Amsdorffius, a noble and
learned unmaried man, was ordained Bishop of Newbury, by Martin Luther, Doctor
Nicholas Medler pastor of Newbury, George Spalatine of Aldenburge and
Wolffgaugus Steinius of Lucopeira, joining with him in the imposition of hands;
Which Ordination Lu^her afterward publicly g Chytraeus Saxonia. l. 15. p 456.
maintained to be lawful in a printed Treatise. Lo here we have Presbiters
not only ordayning a Presbiter, but a Bishop. If therefore the Prelates
Paradox be true; That he that ordayens, is greater in Jursdiction and degree,
then he that is ordained. It will hence inevitably follow, that these
Presbiters (and those who ordained the first Bishops,) were greater in
Jurisdiction, degree and order then Bishops; And then farewell their pretended
Hierarchy: Chytraeus ibid p. 434.
Anno Dom. 1537. Christian the 3, King of Denmark, removed and suppressed by a
public Edict, all the Bishops of his Kingdom for their intolerable Treasons
and rebellions; abolishing their Lordly Bishoprics, as contrary to our
Saviors institution, the means that made them idle, proud, ambicious
unpreaching Prelates, and sedicious treacherous Rebels to their Princes; and
instead of the 7. Bishops of Denmark, he instituted 7. Superintendents, to
exercise the Office of Bishops, give Orders to others, and execute all
ecclesiastical affairs; which 7. Superintendents August 26. 1537. received
their Ordination from John Bugenbagius a Protestant Minister, in the Cathedral
of Hafnia, in the presence of the King, and Senate of Denmark. Lo here all
Bishops casheired, as false rebellious Ttaytors to their Sovereign, (as they
have See Centur. Mage. 4, 5, 6, 7. 8, 9, 10, 11. 12. 13. c. 7. 8. 10. Antiquit
Ecclesiae Brit. and Godwins Catalogue of Bishops.
ever been in all States and ages, there having been more notorious Traitors,
Rebels, and Conspirators of Bishops, then of all other ranks of men in the
world, as I am able to make good,) as contrary to Divine institution, (and so
not Jure Divins, as they now boast;) and Superintendents ordained by a mere
Presbiter in their steed, to confer Orders unto others in all the Danish
Churches. In Chytroeus Chro. Saxonia, l. 14. 15. 16. 17.
the beginning of reformation in Germany and other places, Luther and other
Ministers, usually ordained Deacons and Ministers, and set out Books of the
manner of Ordination, without any Bishops assistance; Which power of Ordination
and imposition of hands, has ever since been practiced by Ministers in all
reformed Churches, which have abandoned Bishops, (Such as ours are, and make
themselves) as contrary to GODS Word. Patrick Adamson Archbishop of Saint
Andrews in Scotland, in Patricij Adamsoni Palin^dia. p. 49. 55.
his Recantation publicly made in the Synod of Fiffe, April 8. 1591.
confesses, That the office of a Diocesan Bishop, Omni authoritate verbi Dei
destituitur, et solopolitico hominum commento fundatur; is destitute of all
authority from Gods Word, and only founded in the politic figment of men; out
of which the Primacy of the Pope or Antichrist has sprung, and that it is
worthily to be condemned, because the assembly of the Presbitery, penes quem
est Iurisdictio et Inspectio, tum in Visitationibus, tum in Ordinationibus,
which has the Jurisdiction and inspection, both in Visitations and in
Ordinations, will perform all these things with greater authority, piety and
zeal, then any Bishop whatsoever; Whosecare is for the most partintent, not
upon God, or his function, but the World, which he especially serves. A fatal
blow to our Prelates Hierarchy; For if Lord Bishops be not Jure Divino, and
have no foundation in the Word of GOD, then the power of Ordination belo^gs not
to them Iure Divino, as they are Lord Bishops, neither can, do, or ought they
to confer Orders as they are Bishops, but only as they are Ministers. And if
so (as is most certain) then this power of Ordination belongs not at all to
Bishops as they are Bishops, but only as they are Ministers; and every
Minister as he is a Minister, has as much divine right and authority to give
Orders as any Bishop whatsoever; (the true reason Why anciently among the
Papists, as Rationalis divinorum. l. 2. de Sacerdote Rubrica.
Durandus confesses, and now too; as the Rhemists witness; and See the book
of Ordination. and Canon. 35.
even in our own English Church among us at this day, Ministers ought to join
with the Bishop in the imposition of hands; Neither can our Bishops ordain any
one a Minister, unless Three or Four Ministers at least join with him in the
Ordination and laying on of hands. This being an apparent truth, I shall hence,
from the Bishops own principles, prove Presbiters Superior and greater then
Bishops in jurisdiction, dignity, and degree. Those (say they) to whom the
power of Ordination belongs by divine right, are greater in jurisdiction
dignity and degree, then those who have not this power; and the Ordayner, is
higher, superior in all these, then the Ordained. But the power of Ordination
belongs Iure Divine only to Presbyters, as Presbyters, not to Lord Bishops,
and to Lord Bishops themselves, not as Bishops but Presbyters; and Bishops when
they ordain in a lawful manner, do it only as Presbiters, not as Bishops;
Therefore Presbiters are superior to Bishops in jurisdiction, order and
degree; and Bishops themselves, far greater in all these as they are
Presbiters (an office of Divine invention,) then as they are Lordly Prelates,
or Diocesan Bishops, (a mere humane institution.) Thus are our great Lord
Bishops (who See Bishop White his Epistle Dedicatory to the Archbishop of
Canterbury, before his Treatise of the Sabath.
vaunt of the weakness of Puritan principles, Whereas their Episcopal are
far more feeble and absurd,) wounded to death with their own weapons, and
all their domineering swelling authority, overthrown by that very principle
foundation, on which they have presumed to erect it; the ancient proverb being
here truly verified, Vis consilij expers moleruit sua. I shall cloze up this
with the words of acute Respons. ad Turriani Sophismata pars 2. loc. 18.
Antonius Sadeel, Who after a large proof of Bishops and Presbiters to be both
one and the same by Divine institution, Winds up all in this manner: We
conclude therefore, seeing that superior Episcopal dignity is to be avowched
only by humane institution, tantum esse humani Iuris, that it is only of
humane right: On the contrary, Since it is evident by the express testimonies
of Scripture, that in the Apostles times, Bishops were the same with
Presbiters. Iure Divino potestatem ordinandi non minus Presbiteris quam
Episcopis convenire; that by Gods law, and Divine right, the power of
Ordination belongs as much to Presbiters as to Bishops.

Page 51. l. 17. between same, and since; this should have been inscribed.

So Eusebius Echist. l. 6. c. 8. 10. in the Greek. 7. and 9. in the English.
Alexander and Narcissus were both Bishops of Jerusalem at the same time;
Paulinus and Miletus both Bishops of Antioch together: Theodosius and Agapetus
were both Bishops of Synada at the Socrates Eccles. hist. l 5. c. 5. 1 Socrates
l. 7. c. 3.
same season. Possidonius in vita Augustini c. 8. Cent. Magd. 4. Col. 679. 680.
Valerius and Augustine were both joint Bishops of Hippotogether, by the
unanimous consent of the Clergy and people; and when as Augustine, was loath
to be joined a Bishop with Valerius, alleging it to be contrary to the Custom
of the Church, to have two Bishops in one City; they repyled, Non hoc esse
inusitatum, that this was no unusuallthing, confirming this both by example of
the African, and other foreign Churches; Whereupon he was satisfied. In the
Platina B^l^ us Luithpraudius, Albo de vitis Pontificum Theodorius a Niem.
Zabarel and Marius de Scisamte.
Church of Rome, we know, there have been sometimes two, sometimes three, and
once four Popes and Bishops at one time, Some adhering to the one, some to the
other; but all of them conferring Orders, making Cardinals, and exercising
Papal jurisdiction. In the Eusebius, Socrates, Nice^ borns; Tirpartita
historia, passim, Cent. Mag. 4, 5, 6, 7. c. 10. Augustinus contra Donatum.
Churches of Constantinople, Alexandria, Jerusalem, Antioch, and Affricke,
during the Arrian Macedonian, Novatian heresies and Schism of the Donatists,
there were successively two or three Bishops together in them, and other
Cities; the one orthodox, the other heretical and schismatic; Yea, the
first Council of Nice Canon, 7. admitts the Novation Bishops which conformed
themselves to the Church and renounced their Errors, to enjoy the title and
dignity of a Bishop, and to be associated with the Orthodox Bishops, if they
thought fit; And De Gestis cum Emerito Donatist. Tom. 7. pars: 1. p. 781. 782:
See Mr Carwrights answer to the Rhemish Testament on Phil. 1. page 499.
St. Augustine would have the Donatists Bishops (where there was a Donatist
Bishop and a Catholic,) if the Donatists returned unto the unity of the
Church, that they should be received into the fellowship of the Bishops office,
with the Catholic Bishops; if the people would suffer it; Poterit quippe
unusquisque nostrum honoris sibi socio copulato vicissim sedere eminentius,
etc. utroque alterum cum honor mutuo praeveniente. Nec novum aliquid est, etc.
As he there defines: Therefore this was then reputed no novaltie. Platina In
vita Joannis 4 and Martini 7.
records of Rhotaris, King of the Lombards, who declined to the Arians, that in
all the Cities of his Kingdom, he permitted there should be two Bishops of
equal power, the one a Catholic, the other an Arian; and that he placed two
such Bishops in every City. In Augustinum de haeresibus. har. 53.
Danaeus proves out of Epiphanius, that anciently in most Cities there were two
or three Bishops. Nicephorus writes; That the Scythians near Ister, have many
and great Cities, Ecclesiast hist. l. 11 c. 34. p. 758.
all of them subject to one Bishop; But among other people, we know, there are
Bishops not only in every City, but also in every Village; especially among
the Arabians in Phrygia, and in Cyprus among the Novatians and Montanists; Yea,
no longer since then the Council. lat. cap. 9. Surius Tom. 3. p. 740.
Council of Later an under Innocent the 3d. there were diverse Bishops in one
City and Diocese, where there were diverse Nations of diverse languages and
customs: Which though his Council disallowes where there is no necessity; Yet
it approves and Permit where there is a necessity. Nay, Surius Tom. 1 (...).
220. 222. 226, 343. 459. 165 414. 467. 799. Tom. 3. 740. 537.
those Canons, Constitutions, and Decretalls, which prohibit, that there should
be many Bishops in one City, or that there should be Bishops in Castles,
Villages, or small Towns and Parishes, least the dignity of Bishops should
become common and contemptible; Manifest, that before these Canons and
Constitutions, there were many Bishops in one City and Diocese; and a Bishop
in every little Castle, Town and Country Village: And to come nearer home,
the Statute of 26. H. 8. c. 14. ordayneth, that there shall be many suffragan
Bishops exercising Episcopal jurisdiction in one and the same Diocese of
England; with the Statutes of 31. H. 8. c 9. 33. H. 8. c. 31. 34. H. 8. c. 1.
which erected diverse new Bishoprics in England, and divided one Diocese into
many, both intimate and prove as much. Why then there may not now be diverse
Bishops in one City, one Church, as well as there was in the Apostles time, in
the primitive Church, and forms ages, or as well as there are now diverse
Archbishops and Bishops in one Kingdom; diverse Ministers in one Cathedral and
Parish Church, I cannot yet conceive; unless Bishops will now make themselves
such absolute Lordly Monarks and Kings, as cannot admit of any Nec quenquam jam
serre potest Caesurica priorem, Pompriusve parem. Lucan l. 1.
equals or corrivalls with them, and be more ambicious, proud, vayneglorious,
covetous, unsociable, then the Bishops in the Apostles and Primitive times,
whose successors they pretend themselves to be in words, though they disclay
me them utterly in their manners, lordlines, pomp, and supercilious deportment,
which they will not lay down for the peace and unity of the Church of Christ.
I shall conclude this with that notable speech of Saint De Gestis cum Emerita
Donatist: Episc. lib. Tom. 7. pars 1. p. 782. 783.
Augustine, and those other almost 300. Bishops who were content to lay down
their Bishopriks for the peace and unity of the Church; Et non perdere, sed Deo
tutius comendare. An vero Redemptor noster de caelis inhumana membra descendit,
ut membra eius esse^^us, et nos ne ipsa eius membra crudeli divisione
lanientur, de Cathedris descendere formidamus? Episcopi propter Christianos
populos ordinamur. Quod ergo Christianis populis ad Christianam pacem prodest,
hoc de nostro Episcopatu faciamus. Quod sum, propter te, sum, si tibi prodest;
non sum, si tibi obest. Si Servi utiles sumus, cur Domnini aeternis lucris pro
nostris temporalibus sublimitatibus invidemus? Episcopalis dignitas fructuosior
nobis erit, si gregem Christi deposita magis collegerit, quam retenta
disperserit. Fratres mei, si Dominum cogitamus, locus ille altior specula
vinitoris est, non fastigium superbientis. Sicum nolo retinere Episcopatum meum
dispergo gregem Christi, quomodo est damnum gregis honor Pastoris? Nam qua
front in futuro seculo promissum a Christo sperabimus honorem, si Christianam
in hoc seculo noster honor impedit unitatem? To which I shall add, as a
Corollary, a like Speech of that holy devout man, S. Bernard, See his life
before his Works, and Es^ ncaeus. Digres. in 1. Tim. l. 3. c. 6. p. 330.
Who as he constantly refused (out of conscience) the Bishoprics both of Genoa
and Millaine, though earnestly urged to accept of them; so he brake forth into
these admirable speeches upon that occasion, (Homil. 1. De Laudibus Mariae
Virginis: p. 18.) Worthy all Lordly Prelates most serious contemplation.
Erubesce superbe cinis, Deus se humiliat, tu te exaltas? Deusse hominibus
subdit, tu dominari gestiens, tuo te praeponis authori Vtinam tale me quid
cogitantem Deus, uti suum olim Apostolum, increpare dignetur: Vade post me
Satana; Non sapis quae Dei sunt: Quotiens hominibus praeesse desidero, totiens
Deum meum praeire contendo, et tunc quae vere Dei sunt non sapio. Enough to
cause all our Lordly Prelates, (have they any grace in their hearts) to cast
off their Rochets, and lay down their Bishoprics, their Lordly jurisdiction,
which have bred so many schisms, controversies, wars, and tumults in the
Christian World, and rent the unity of Christ's Church in sunder; in all acts.
Which thing if they now refuse to do, I shall conclude of them, as Hermagandus
did of the Greek Bishop, who was like to starve him Aventinus Annal. Boirum.
l. 4. p. 202.
Sanctissimus est vester Pontifex quatenus ADVERSO DEO fieri licet. Literis
sacris enim pingitur Deus est charitas, cujus istum Episcopum omnino expertem
esse, nostro periculo sensimus.

FINIS.
And: Melvini Musae, p. 22. 23. 30. 31.
PAstores fidos omnes nos Dounamus aequat
Praesulibus, laudi dum labor urget opus.
Idem mox septem stellarum arcana revelans,
Angelico hos unos tollit in astra gradu.
Nos animas viles quibus una est perdia, pernox
Cura gregis, vulgi in faece relinquit humi.
Christ ducum Lecti pecoris cordate Magister,
Coge gregem, numerum non habet ille suum.
Si stella est sacri gregis Angelus, Angelus, Anglus
Presul, et hic gemino splendet in imperio;
Quaerere nunc restat quae stella sit Angelus, Anglus
Praesul, ut is gemino splendet in imperio?
An quae stella haerens caelo scintillat ab alto?
Subtus an orb alio qui vagus erro meat?
Portentum an terris metuendus crine cometes?
Stella an ab axe in humum tracta Draconis open?
Et quam in ter ternotenet Angelus, ordine sedem,
Aetheris? aut Terrae? aut Aequoris? haud Erebi.
Nam regnandi illi haud veniat tam dira cupido,
Vt Papa Cerbereum tollas in astra caput.
Praesul Regalis.
Praesule Papano quod nos damnamus in omni,
Quodque in Romano Pontifice est vitium,
Praesule Regali, quid non damnamus in omni?
Quae virtus nostri est maxima Pontificis?
Curia pro Cura gregis, aut Iucuria: Cura
Cui non ulla gregis, Curio an egregius?
Aureus antiquo florebat Episcopus aevo,
Tum cum sacrae essent lignea vasa domus;
Ligneus hoc nostro frondescit Episcopus aevo,
Cum sacram exornant aurea vasa domum
Porticibus Regem Antistes cur excipit amplis
Fruge mensa fuit, dum casa parva fuit.
Substruit insanas cur celsa ad Sydera moles,
Moribus it praeceps Tartara ad ima rudens,
A plebe et Clero fiebat Aepiscopus olim.
Illum nunc Mammon, Regia et Aula facit.
Hospitio in parvo olim haerebat Episcopus aedi:
Arcem excelsam habitat nunc procul aede sacra.
In commune olim cum Clero cuncta gerebat.
Nunc sine Praesbyteris omnia solus agit.
Canonicae quondam Scripturae interpres agebat.
Nunc pro jure sacro regia jussa docet.
Fratrum jure patri contentus Episcopus olim.
Nunc Regnum in fratros imperiosus obit.
Tum tenui stipem vitam ultro tolerabat egenam:
Nunc beat illum amplis copia divitijs:
Nunc opibus dives, pictai vestis et auri.
Olim divitiae in moribus atque animo.
In grege pascendo totus sudaverat olim;
Nunc mundi incumbet rebus et imperio.
Olim Acalutho ibat, seu Tros comitatus Achatem;
Nunc septus magno Papa satellitio.
Tunc capite obstipo, et spectanti lumine terram:
Nunc stupet elatis astra supercilijs.
Tunc vulgaris ei corpus velabat amictus:
Nunc picturatae syrmata laxa togae.
Et tunicae manicas, et habent ridimicula mitrae,
Carbaseosque levis ventilat aura sinus.
Pileus in quadrum tereti de vertice surgit,
Et bis cocta humilem purpura verrit humum.
Ni caudam suspensam ulnis gerat unus et alter
Vulpinam. O gerulis sarcina quanta tribus!
I siodor Pel^siota Epist. l. 3. Epist. 223.
Illud fortasse ignorare videmini, lenitatis ac mansuetudinis dignitatem, in
tyrannidem transijsse. Olim enim salutis ovium causa mortem oppetiebant; nunc
autem Pastores mortem ovibus inferunt, non corpora jugulantes, (levius enim hoc
inalum esset) verum animis offensionem afferentes. Tum jejunijs corpus
castigabant, nunc autem ut luxu et delicijs ex^ltent, efficient. Tum bona sua
egentibus destribuebant, nunc autem pauperum bona in rem suam vertunt. Tum
virtutem colebant, nunc virtutis cultores proscribunt et eliminant.

Ne Savi Magna Sacerdos.
Courteous Reader, before thou peruse this Treatise, shall desire thee to
correct these Errors and Omissions of the Printer, because many of them corrupt
and pervert the sense* and so require thy Correction before thy Perusal; both
to free the Author from causeles Censure, and thy self from needless Error.
Other literal obvious scapes of less moment, thou may amend as thou meetest
with them.

In the matter, p. 6. l. 5. for 1608 yearly, read* almost 1600 years. l. 12.
quickening, quieting. p. 7. l. 8. as, in. l* 27. also l. 29. of, that: p. 8. l
9. of, and, l. 21. poor, pure* p. 10. l. 11. in Starchamber. p. 11. l. 16.
faction, fiction* p. 19. l. 12. Egelrie. l. 13. offered: l. 22. Maleclerke. p.
20. l. 8. Alcunivus. Carthage: Council, Can. l. 10. Aquisgran: Carnotensis. p
21. l. 9. sins. scismes. p. 24. l. 13. Cautinus. l. 15. Verdunum. p. 25. l.
9. Durham: p. 26. l. 31. An. 1554. p. 28. l. 1. of it: l. 5. defile, define. p.
36* l. 32. deny* denude. p. 43. l. 12. and, as: p. 44 l. 10. thought, taught:
l. 15. comfort. p. 45. l. 18. not: p. 46. l. 20. would, could: l. 26.
therefore, there for* p. 49. l 7. Timothy is. p. 55. l. 3. two, three. l. 13.
falsenes, false forgerie* p. 61. l. 25. consequent, consent. p. 62. l. 6.
purseivant p. 7. blot out one: and, and that. l. 8. jealosie: l. 26. rating. p.
64. l. 21. denied. decreed. p. 70. l. 12. ca, in l. 14. Aken: p. 74. l. 5 a
Lawyer p. 75. l. 5 and Bishops: p. 78. l. 31. Postscript. p. 79 l. 1. no, nor:
l. 4. not. r. since Paul was not. l. 13. these, those. p. 85. l. 16. 5 ly: p.
83. l. 6. other. p. 87. l. 11. or the* p. 93. l. 32 r. who supplied the place
of a Bishop, in his consecration to be a Bishop Iure divine, and etc. p 95. l.
1. were; to be. l. 13* and their* p. 95 l. 26. r. as Ministers not as Bishops.
p 96. l. 12. concurrence l. 32. Taborites p. 100. l. 23. ^etricw p. 111. l. 5
Decrees. p. 112. l 23. and 113. l. 3. of, or. l. 11. Monopoly p. 117. l. 27.
in, do: p. 122. l. 11. they p. 123 l. 36. for ever. p. 133. l. 6. interpretatur
p. 134. l. 18. blot out has. p. 135. l. 11. commonly, common by. p. 137. l.
11. banded* p. 144. l. 20. predecessors. p. 145 l. 1. starved: l. 5. preached.
l. 12. want, warn. p. 147. l. 14. fast, fat. l. 23. un, on. p. 148. l. 1. and
in l. 8. defer, deter. l. 13. both by. l. 21. what, where. l. 22. here*
twtch: p. 150. l. 21. never cease. p. 151. l. 23: 13. 12: p. 154, l. 5. of, if.
l. 17. much, mute. p. 155. l. 9. warded. p. 156. l* 2 the, our.

In the Margin: p. 5. l. 34* page: p. 8. l. 12. Bccon: p. 11. l 27 deslire. p.
32. l. 7. animam, annum. p. 58. l. 6, when, where: p. 62. l. 4. Meluini. p. 64*
l. 17. Meldense: p* 70. l. 2. Aton* p. 93. l. 2. Catalogo. p. 103. l. 14. lib.
7. p. 113. l. 8. Seva. p. 130. l. 4. Tim. 5. p. 149. l. 17. p. c. l. 25. 13.
12: p. 152. l. 5. favorers, fainthearted.

Kind Reader, ere thou peruse this Treatise, be pleased to correct those Errors
in the last page; with these therein omitted. p. 14. l. 4. forverily: read,
freshly. l. 12* Giver, Grace: p. 15. l. 6. how, two: l. 8. as, or l. 12: most,
must: l. 17. gemmie, genuine. l. 29. provise; promise. p. 16. l. 5. Hidrax,
Hicrax: l. 30. elected p. 17. Studies, l. 11. Shetne, Sennes. l. 20. Maucte.
Mentz: l. 21. Augusta: Reformes. Rheemes: l. 22. Salisbury Saltzburg. l. 25.
Visalis in Southland* Vpsal in Suethland. p. 18. l. 5. revived, resigned: l. 9.
shows, shun. l. 11. express, expose, both (...), to the hazard. l. 18.
Kylwarby, l. 25. Warwest. p. 115. l. 9. it is: p. 116. l 4. So the power of
Ordination being inferior: l. 5. every. Minister. l. 19 are superior to them
in point. p. 143. l. 13. rode thither; made his chaplain ride thither p. 162.
l. 11. c. 5: l. 20. necessis. p. 166. l. 29. Quia, Qua. l. 33. sesus, usus. p.
167. l. 17. Wiclevists. l. 32. 33: Newbury, Naoburge. p. 173. l. 6. nolo, volo:
l. 27. acts, ages: l. 31. pingitur, proditur. p 175. l. 7. pari: l. 8. fratres.
In the Margin. p. 13. l. 18 19. by Characters any Charter: l. 34: any, out p.
14. l. 7. Godwins: l. 25. 26. people to standing: Reply to Harding. p. 15. l.
2. Eccles: hist: l. 5. Socr. l. 12 Rome. p. 163. l. 2. Vitis p. 164. l. 5.
Scoticarum. p. 171. l. 5. Theodoricus: l. 8. Schismate: p. 172. l. 9. r.
Caesarue, Pompeinsue. Page 1. 6. l. 10. This should have been inserted.

Nor yet to recite the examples of Clement, the 1 of Rome, Pope Cornelius,
Ambrose, Augustine, Athanasius, Gregory Nazianzen his father, Pope Gregory the
first, Alexander Patriarch of Jerusalem, Anatolius Bishop of Laodicea,
Eustathius Bishop of Antioch, Antiochus, Theophilus Alexandrinus, Dioscorus,
Chrysanthus, S. Martin Bishop of Towers, S. Nicholas, Paulinus of Nola,
Eusebius Pamphilus, Flaiuanus of Antioch, or Marchus, who in ancient times were
all enforced to accept of their Bishoprics full sore against their wills and
judgments, by the overpressing importunity of other Bishops, Princes,
Ministers and people. (With others quoted to my hands by Digres. lib 3. in 1 Timothy c. 4. 5. 6. 7.
Claudius Espencaeus:) Or, Cent. Magd. 3. Col. 1335. Cent. 10. Col. 1542: see
Cent. 13. Col. 1098.
Eucherius Bishop of Lions, or Otto Bishop of Bamburge, enforced in the same
manner to be Bishops, full sore against their liking; as was Fox Acts and
Monuments, p 1703.
Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury. Nor yet to mention Espenceus Digress in 1.
Tim. l. 3. c. 4. 5 6. 7.
Ephaaem Syrus, Nilammon, or S. Bernard, who all constantly refused diverse
great and wealthy Bishoprics, not only offered, but urged on them, with much
importunity; or Godwins Caralo. p. 51.
Adrian, who refused the Archbishopric of Canterbury, though called to it, and
urged to accept it: or Bassianus elected Bishop of the Vangensi, Centur. Magd.
3. Col. 1043.
whom furious Memnon whipped before the Altar for 3. hours space, till he
bedewed the Altar and new Testament with his blood, because he refused to
accept that Episcopal charge and office. Or Cent. 10. c. 10. in his life.
Brune Seguinas, who rejected a Bishoprik offered to him, saying, A Bishopric*
must be altogether forsaken of that man that would not be set at Christ's left
hand; (answerable whereunto is that Onuphrius and others in his life.
of Pope Marcellus the 2: who smiting his hand upon the Table, used these
words: I do not see how those that possess this high place can besaved. Or
Chytraeus Chron Saxo niae. l. 1. p. 10.
John Bugenhagius* who of late times repudiated the Bishopric of Camine in
Pomerland, to which he was freely chosen. Platina, Onuphrius, B(...) lc,
Opmerus, S^ella, Volaterranus, Aventinus and others in his life.
Pope Celestine the 5: C^ntur. Magd. 5. col. 998 1035. 1056. Cent. 7 col. 496.
Cent 8. col. 807. cent. 10 col. 598. cent. 11. col. 515. 546. 547. cent. 12.
col. 1447. 1458. cent. 13 col. 1039. 1067 1072.
Athanasius Bishop of the Pareni, Eustathius Bishop of Pamphilia, Rusticus
Bishop of Narbon, Remaclus Bishop of Virech, Otgerus Bishop of Spire, Lambert
Bishop of Florence, Lutulphus Bishop of Callens, Hugh Bishop of Towers,
Burchardus Bishop of Wertzburge, Michael Ephesinus Bishop of Antioch,
Desiderius Bishop of the Morini, Geoffry Bishop of Sylvanecta* Conrade Bishop
of Batavia, Albertus Magnus Bishop of Ratisbon, of ancient times abroad,
Godwins Catalogue, p. 143. 211. 216. 314. 460. 473. 545 564.
Simon Langham Archbishop of Canterbu y, Winifred Bishop of Coventry, Robert
Sherborne Bishop of Chichester, Geoffry Bishop of S. Asaph, with sundry others
at home; Chytraeus. Chron. Saxoniae. Lip. 1593. p. 10. 19. 44 62. 63. 65. 176.
278. 320 352. 391 456 461. 467. 471 492. 497. 519 520. 532. 545 554. 557. 635
689. 704. 813 819. 927. 928. 930 935.
Jews ab Eperstem, Bartholmew Suavenius and John Frederick Bishops of Camene
in Pomerland, Isaurus Archbishop of Riga, Baldaser Bishop of Suerin, Ericus,
John Duke of Saxony, and Otto Bishops of Heldesheim, Hugh the 47. Bishop of
Constans* Fridericke a Weda and Salentine Archbishops of Colen, Augustus Bishop
of Mersburge, Jodocus, a Reke Bishop of Derbat, Francis, Henry and Julius
Bishops of Minda, Theodosius a Rheden Bishop of Lubecke, Christopher Bishop of
Raceburge, Christopher Bishop of Breme, of later times beyond the Seas, with
diverse others Page 17. 18. 19. 139.
here and else where cited, have all successively resigned, and voluntarily
relinquished their Bishoprics and Episcopal dignities out of conscience, age,
discontent; or otherpious considerations of the great danger and unlawfulness
of this antichristian Lordly function, which Espencaeus Digress. in Tim. l. 3.
c. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8
all or most holy men have ever declined* or unwillingly accepted of, though
our Lord Prelates now post and hunt after Bishoprics, and would rather die then
part with them, or the least title of that Lordly Jurisdiction, which they now
most antichristianly usurp, contrary to the Laws of God and the Realm.
Giving over preaching, their chiefest spiritual employment, contrary to their
sole mne vow and covenant made unto God and the people at their See the Book
of Ordination.
Ordination, to become great secular Lords, and manage temporal affairs not
compatible with their calling.


