TRINITAS EMBLEMES

By ^ra^ Quar^es.

LONDON. Printed by I.D. for Francis. Eglerfeild, and (...) at the (...) of the
Marigold in St. Paul's Churchyard 1^7^.



Haec Laus, hic Apex Sapientiae est, ea viventem appetere, quae morienti forent
appetenda.

TO MY MVCH HONORED, AND NO less truly beloved Friend EDW. BENLOVVES
Esquire.
My dear Friend,
YOu have put the Theorboe into my hand; and I have played: You gave the
Musician the first encouragement; the Music returns to you for Patronage.
Had it been a light Air, no doubt but it had taken the most; and, among them,
the worst: But being a grave Strain, my hopes are, that it will please the
best; and among them, You. Toyish Airs please trivial ears; They kiss the
fancy, and betray it: They cry, Hail, first; and, after, Crucify: Let Dorrs
delight to immerd themselves in dung, whilst Eagles scorn so poor a Game as
Flies. Sir, you have Art, and Candor: Let the one judge, let the other excuse

Your most affectionate Friend, FRA. QUARLES.

TO THE READER.
AN Emblem is but a silent Parable. Let not the tender Eye check, to see the
allusion to our blessed SAVIOR figured, in these Types. In holy Scripture, He
is sometimes called a Sower; sometimes, a Fisher; sometimes, a Physician: And
why not presented so, as well to the eye, as to the ear? Before the knowledge
of letters, GOD was known by Hierogliphicks; And, indeed, what are the
Heavens, the Earth, nay every Creature, but Hieroglyphics and Emblemes of His
Glory? I have no more to say. I wish thee as much pleasure in the reading, as I
had in the writeing. Farewell Reader.

BY Fathers backed; by Holy Writ, led on,
Thou shewst away to Heaven by Helicon*
The Muses Font is consecrate by Thee,
And Poefie, baptized Divinity:
Blessed soul, that here embark'st: Thou sayl'st a pace,
It Is hard to say, moved more by Wit, or Grace;
Each Muse so plyes her Oar: but O, the Sail
Is filled from heaven with a Diviner Cale:
When Poets prove Divines, why should not I
Approve, in Verse, this Divine Poetry?
Let this suffice to license thee the Press;
I must no more; nor could the Truth say less.
Sic approbavit RICH. LOV^ Procan. Cantabrigie^si^.

Tot Flores, QUARLES, quot Paradisus, habet. Lectori been- male-volo.
Qui legit ex Horto hoc Flores, Qui carpit, Vterque
Jure potest VIOLAS dicere, jure ROSAS.
Non e Parnasso VIOLAM, Paestive ROSETO
Carpit Apollo, magis quae sit amoena, ROSAM.
Quot Versus, VIOLAS legis; and Quem verba locutum
Credis, verba dedit: Nam dedit Ille ROSAS.
Utque Ego non dicam haec VIOLAS suavissima; Tu^e
Ipse facis VIOLAS, Livide, si violas.
Nam velu^te VIOLIS sibi sugit A^anea virus:
Vertis ita in succos Hasque, ROSASque tuos.
Quas violas Musas, VIOLAS puto quasque reculas
Dente tuo rosas, has, r^or, esse ROSAS.
Sic rosas, facis esse ROSAS, dum, Zoile, rodis:
Sic facis, has, VIOLAS, Livide, dum violas.
Brent-Hall. 1634. EDW. BENLOVVES.

emblem Dum Caesum aspicio, Solum despicio (...) marshall (...):


THE FIRST BOOK.
The Invocation.
ROwze thee, my soul; and dreine thee from the dregs
Of vulgar thoughts Skrue up the heightened pegs
Of thy Sublime Theorboe four notes higher,
And higher yet; that so the shrill-mouth'd Quire
Of swift winged Seraphims may come and join,
And make thy Consort more than half divine.
Invoke no Muse; Let heaven be thy Apollo;
And let his sacred Influences hallow
Thy high-bred Strains; Let his full beams inspire
Thy ravished brains with more heroic fire;
Snatch thee a Quill from the spread Eagles wing,
And, like the morning Lark, mount up and sing:
Cast off these dangling Plummets, that so clog
Thy laboring heart, which gropes in this dark fog
Of dungeon-earth; Let flesh and blood forbear
To stop thy flight, till this base world appear
A thin blew Lanskip: Let thy pineons sore
So high a pitch, that men may seem no more
Than Pismires, crawling on this Molehill earth,
Thy ear untroubled with their frantic mirth;
Let not the frailty of thy flesh disturb
Thy new-concluded peace; Let reason curb
Thy ^ot-mouth'd Passion; and let heavens fire season
The flash Conceits of thy corrected Reason;
Disdain to warm thee at Lusts smoakie fires,
Scorn, scorn to feed on thy old bloat desires*
Come; come, my soul, hoyse up thy higher sails,
The wind blows fair? Shall we still creep like Snayles,
That gild their ways with their own native slimes?
No, we must fly like Eagles, and our Rhimes
Must mount to heaven, and reach th'Olympick ear;
Our heav'n-blowne fire must seek no other Sphere:
Thou great Theanthropos, that giv'st and crown'st
Thy gifts in dust; and, from our dunghill crown'st
Reflected Honor, taking by Retayle,
(What thou have given in gross) from lapsed frail,
And sinful man, that drink'st full draughts, wherei^
Thy Childrens leprous fingers, scurf'd with Sin,
Have padled, cleanse, O cleanse my crafty Soul
From secret crimes, and let my thoughts control
My thoughts* O, teach me stoutly to deny
My self, that I may be no longer I;
Enrich my Fancy, clarify my thoughts,
Refine my dross; O, wink at humane faults;
And, through this slender conduit of my Quill,
Convey thy Current, whose clear streams may fill
The hearts of men with love, their tongues with praise;
Crown me with Glory: Take, who list, the Bays.
I.
emblem ^^us mu^^uus in masign^ mali ligno ^^tus est. (...) Marshall sculp:


I. JAM. I.XIV. Every man is tempted, when he is drawn away by his own lust,
and enticed.
Serpent. Eve. Serp. NOt eat? Nor taste? Not touch? Nor cast an eye
Upon the fruit of this fair Tree? And why?
Why eat'st thou not what Heaven ordained for food?
Or can thou think that bad, which heaven called Good?
Why was it made, if not to be enjoyed?
Neglect of favors makes a favor void:
Blessings unused, pervert into a Wast,
As well as Surfeits; Woman, Do but taste:
See how the laden boughs make silent Suit
To be enjoyed; Look how their bending Fruit
Meet thee half way; Observe but how they crouch
To kiss thy hand; Coy woman, Do but touch*
Mark what a pure Vermilian blush has died
Their swelling Cheeks, and how, for shame, they hide
Their palsy heads, to see themselves stand by
Neglected: Woman, Do but cast an eye;
What bounteous heaven ordained for use, refuse not;
Come, pull and eat! y'abuse the things ye use not.

Eve. Wisest of Beasts, our great Creator did
Reserve this Tree, and this alone forbid,
The rest are freely ours, which, doubtless, are
As pleasing to the Taste; to the eye, as fair;
But touching this, his strict commands are such,
It Is death to taste, no less than death to touch.

Serp. P'sh; death's a fable: Did not heaven inspire,
Your equal Elements with living Fire,
Blown from the spring of life? Is not that breath
Immortal? Come; ye are as free from death
As He that made ye: Can the flames expire
Which he has kindled? Can ye quench His fire?
Did not the great Creators voice proclaim
What ere he made (from the blue spangled frame
To the poor leaf that trembles) very Good?
Blessed He not both the Feeder, and the Food?
Tell, tell me, then, what danger can accrue
From such blessed Food, to such Halfe-gods as you?
Curb needless fears, and let no fond conceit
Abuse your freedom; woman, Take, and eat.

Eve. It Is true; we are immortal; death is yet
Unborne; and, till Rebellion make it debt,
Undue; I know the Fruit is good, until
Presumptuous disobedience make it ill:
The lips that open to this Fruit's a portall
To let in death, and make immortal, mortal.

Serp. You cannot die; Come, woman, Taste and fear not*

Eve. Shall Eve transgress? I dare not, O I dare not,

Serp. Afraid? why draw'st thou back thy timorous Arm?
Harm only falls on such as fear a Harm:
Heaven knows and fears the virtue of this Tree
'Twill make ye perfect Gods as well as He.
Stretch forth thy hand, and let thy fondness never
Fear death; Do, pull, and eat, and live for ever.

Eve. It Is but an Apple; and it is as good
To do as to desire* Fruit's made for food:
I Will pull, and taste, and tempt my Adam too
To know the secrets of this dainty,

Serp. Do.

S. CHRY^. sup. Matthew.
He forced him not: He touched him not: Only said, Cast thy self down; that
we may know, whosoever obeyes the Devil, casts himself down; For the Devil
may suggest; compel he cannot.

S. BERN. in ser.
It is the Devils part to suggest; Ours, not to consent: As often as we resist
him, so often we overcome him, as often as we overcome him, so often we bring
joy to the Angels, and glory to God; Who proposes us, that we may contend, and
assists us, that we may conquer.

EPIG. 1.
Unluckie Parliament! wherein, at last,
Both houses are agreed, and firmly past
An Act of death, confirmed by higher Powers*
O had it had but such success ^ Ours.
II.
emblem Sic m^lum (...) in euint ma^um.

(...) Marshall sculp^^t



II. JAM. I.XV. Then when lust has conceived, it brings forth sin; and sin
when it is finished, brings forth death.
1
LAment, lament; Look, look what thou have done
Lament the worlds, lament thy own Estate;
Look, look, by doing, how thou art undone;
Lament thy fall; lament thy change of State:
Thy faith is broken, and thy Freedom gone,
See, see too soon, what thou lament'st too late:
O thou that were so many men; nay, all
Abrig'd in one, how has thy desperate fall
Destroid thy unborne seed, destroid thy self withal.
2
Uxorious Adam, whom thy maker made
Equal to Angels, that excel in power,
What have thou done? O why have thou obayd
Thy own destruction? Like a new-cropt flower
How does the glory, of thy beauty fade!
How are thy fortunes blasted in an hour!
How art thou cowed, that had the power to quell
The spite of new-faln Angels; baffle Hell,
And vye with those that stood, and vanquish those that fell
3
See how the world (whose chaste and pregnant womb,
Of late, conceived, and brought forth nothing ill)
Is now degenerated, and become
A base Adultresse, whose false Births do fill
The Earth with Monsters, Monsters that do ^ome
And rage about, and make a Trade, to kill.
Now glutt'ny paunches; Lust begins to spawne;
Wrath takes revenge; and Avarice, a pawn;
Pale Envy pines; Pride swells; and Sloth begins to yawne*
4
The Air, that whispered, now begins to roar,
And blustering Bore as blows the boiling Tide;
The white mouthed water now usurpes the Shore,
And scorns the power of her tried entall Guide;
The fire now burns, that did but warm before,
And rules her Ruler with resistlesse Pride;
Fire, Water, Earth and Air, that first were made
To be subdued, see how they how invade;
They rule who^ once they served; command, where once obaid.
5
Behold; that nakedness, that late bewraid
Thy Glory, now is become thy shame, thy wonder;
Behold; those Trees whose various Fruits were made
For food, now turned a Shade to shroud thee under:
Behold; That voice (which thou have disobayd)
That late was Music, now affrights like Thunder:
Poor man! Are not thy Joints grown sore with shaking,
To view the effect of thy bold undertaking,
That in one hour did mar, what heaven six days was making?
S. AUGUST. lib. 1. de lib. arbit.
It is a most just punishment, that man should lose that Freedom which man
could not use, yet had power to keep if he would; And that he who had knowledge
to do what was right, and did not, should be deprived of the knowledge of what
was right; And that he who would not do righteously when he had the power,
should lose the power to do it, when he had the will.

HUGO de anima.
They are justly punished that abuse lawful things, but they are most justly
punished, that use unlawful things; Thus Lucifer fell from heaven; thus Adam
lost his Paradise.

EPIG. 2.
See how these fruitful kernels, being cast
Upon the earth, how thick they spring! how fast!
A full eared Crop, and thriving; rank and proud;
Prepost'rous man first sowed, and then he plough'd.
III.
emblem Vt potia^, putio^. Paticeis, non poticeis.

Wills Marshall. sculpsit.



III. PRO. XIV.XIII. Even in laughter the heart is sorrowful, and the end of
that mirth is heaviness.
1
ALas fond Child,
How are thy thoughts beguiled,
To hope for Honey from a nest of Wasps?
Thou may as well
Go seek for ease in Hell,
Or sprightly Nectar from the mouths of Asps.
2
The world's a Hive,
From whence thou can derive
No good, but what thy souls vexation brings:
Put case thou meet
Some peti-peti sweet,
Each drop is guarded with a thousand stings.
3
Why do thou make
These murmuring Troops forsake,
The safe Protection of their waxen Homes?
This Hive contains
No sweet that is worth thy pains;
There Is nothing here, alas, but empty Combs.
4
For trash and Toys,
And grief ingendring Joys
What torment seems too sharp for flesh and blood!
What bitter Pills,
Composed of real Ills,
Man swallows down, to purchase one false Good!
5
The dainties here,
Are least what they appear;
Though sweet in hopes, yet in fruition, sour:
The fruit that is yellow,
Is found not always mellow,
The fairest Tulip's not the sweetest flower.
6
Fond youth, give ore,
And vex thy soul no more,
In seeking, what were better far unfound;
Alas thy gains
Are only present pains
To gather Scorpions for a future wound.
7
What Is earth? or in it.
That longer than a minit
Can lend a free delight, that can endure?
O who would droyle,
Or delve in such a soil,
Where gaine's uncertain, and the pain is sure?
S. AUGUST.
Sweetness in temporal matters is deceitful; It is a labor and a perpetual
fear; it is a dangerous pleasure, whose beginning is without providence, and
whose end is not without repentance.

HUGO.
Luxury is an enticing pleasure, a bastard mirth, which has honey in her
mouth, gall in her heart, and a sting in her tail.

EPIG. 3.
What, Cupid, Are hy shafts already made?
And seeking Hone, to set up thy Trade?
True Emblem of hy sweets! Thy Bees do bring
Honey, in their mout^es, but in their tails, a sting.
IV.
emblem Quis leuior? cui phis ponderis adds amor.

Will: Marshall sculpsit.



IV. PSALM. LXII.IX. To be laid in the balance, it is altogether lighter than
vanity.
1
PUt in another weight: It Is yet, too light:
And yet: Fond Cupid, put another in;
And yet, another: Still there is under weight;
Put in another Hundred: Put agin:
Add world to world; then heap a thousand more
To that; then, to renew thy wasted store,
Take up more worlds on trust, to draw thy Balance lower.
2
Put in the flesh, with all her loades of pleasure;
Put in great Mammons endless Inventory;
Put in the pondrous Acts of mighty Caesar;
Put in the greater weight of Swedens Glory;
Add Scipio's gauntlet; put in Plato's Gown;
Put Circes Charms, put in the Triple Crown.
Thy Balance will not draw; thy Balance will not down.
3
LORD, what a world is this; which, day and night,
Men seek with so much toil, with so much trouble!
Which, weighed in equal Scales, is found so light,
So poorly over-balanc'd with a Bubble;
Good GOD? that frantic mortals should destroy
Their higher Hopes, and place their idle Joy
Upon such ayry Trash, upon so light a Toy!
4
Thou bold Imposture, how have thou befooled
The Tribe of Man, with counterfeit desire!
How has the breath of thy false bellows cooled
He w^ns freeborn flames* and kindled bastard fire!
How have thou vented Dross instead of treasure.
And cheated man with thy false weights and measure,
Proclaiming Bad for good; and gilding death with pleasure!
5
The wo^ld's a crafty Strumpet, most affecting,
And closely following those that most reject her;
But seeming careless, nicely disrespecting
And coyly flying those that most affect her:
If thou be free, she is strange; if strange, she is free;
Fled, and she follows; Follow, and she will flee;
Than she there is none more coy; there is none more fond than she.
6
O, what a Crocodilian world is this,
Composed, of trech'ries, and ensnaring wiles!
She clothes destruction in a form all kiss,
And lodges death in her deceitful smiles;
She huggs the soul she hates; and, there, does prove
The veryest Tyrant, where she vows to love:
And is a Serpent most, when most she seems a Dove.
7
Thrice happy he, whose nobler thoughts despise
To make an Object of so easy Gains;
Thrice happy he, who scorns so poor a Prize
Should be the C own of his heroic pains:
Thrice happy he, that never was borne to try
Her frowns or smiles; or, being borne, did lie
In his sad Nurses Arms an hour or two, and die.
S. AUGUST. lib. Confess.
O you that dote upon this world, for what victory do you fight? Your hopes can
be crowned with no greater reward than the world can give; and what is the
world but a brittle thing full of dangers, wherein we travel from lesser to
greater periis? O let all her vain, light, and momentary glory perish with her
self, and let us be conversant with more eternal things. Alas, this world is
miserable; life is short, and death is sure.

EPIG. 4.
My soul; What Is lighter than a feather? Wind*
Than wind? The fire* And what then fire? The mind:
What Is lighter than the mind? A thought: Than Thought?
This bubble-world. What, than this Bubble? Naught.
V.
emblem His ve^titue orbis.

Will. Marshall. sculpfit.



V. I COR. VII.XXXI. The fashion of this world passes away.
1
GOne are those golden days, wherein
Pale conscience started not at ugly sin;
When good old Saturnes peaceful Throne
Was usurped by his beardlesse Son:
When jealous Ops never feared the abuse
Of her chaste bed, or breach o^ nuptial Truce:
When just Astraea poys'd her Scales
In mortal hearts, whose absence earth bewailes:
When froth-borne Venus, and her brat,
With all that spurious brood young Jove begat,
In horrid shapes, were yet unknown;
Those Halcyon days, that golden age is gone:
There was no Clyent then, to wait
The leisure of his long tayl'd Advocate;
The Talion Law was in request,
And Chaunc'ry courts were kept in every breast;
Abused Statutes had no Tenters,
And men could deal secure, without indentures;
There was no p^eping hole, to clear
The Wittols eye from his incarnate fear;
There were no lustful Cinders, then,
To broyle the Carbonado'd hearts of men;
The rosy Cheek did, then, proclaim
A shame of Guilt, but not a guilt of shame;
There was no whining soul to start
At Cupids twang, or curse, his flaming dart;
The Boy had, then, but callow wings,
And fell Erynnis Scorpions had no stings,
The better acted world did move
Upon the fixed Poles of Truth and Love;
Love essenc'd in the hearts of men;
Then, Reason ruled; There was no Passion, then;
Till Lust and rage began to enter,
Love the Circumf'rence was, and love the Center;
Until the wanton days of Jove,
The simple world was all composed of Love;
But Jove grew fleshly, false, unjust;
Inferior beauty filled his veins with Lust;
And Cucqueane Iunos Fury hurld
Fierce Balls of Rage into th'incestuous World:
Astraea fled; and love returned
From earth: Earth boiled with Lust^; with Rage, it burned:
And ever since the world has been
Kept going with the scourge of Lust, and Spleen.
S. AMBROS.
Lust is a sharp spur to vice, which always puts the affections into a
false Gallop.

HUGO.
Lust is an immoderate wantonness of the stesh a sweet poison; a cruel
pestilence; a pernicious potion, which weakens the body of man, and effeminates
the strength of an heroic mind.

S. AUGUST,
Envy is the hatred of another felicity: in respect of Superiors, because
they are not equal (...) them in respect of Inferiors, lest they should be
equal to them; in respect of equals; because they are equal to them: Through
Envy proceeded the fall of the world, and the death of Christ.

EPIG. 5.
What? Cupid, must the world be ^^iht so soon?
But made at morning, and be whipped at noone?
It Is like the Wagg that pla^es with Venus Doves,
The more it is lasht, the more perverse it proves.
VI.
emblem In ceuce tuta quies

Will Marshall Sculpsit



VI. ECCLES. II.XVII. All is vanity and vexation of spirit.
1
HOw is the anxious soul of man befooled
In his desire,
That thinks a Hectic Fever may be cooled
In flames of fire,
Or hopes to rake full heaps of burnisht gold
From nasty mire!
A whining Lover may as well request
A scorn full breast
To melt in gentle tears, as woo the world for rest.
2
Let wit and all her studied plots effect
The best they can;
Let smiling Fortune prosper, and perfect
What wit began;
Let earth advise with both, and so project
A happy man;
Let wit, or fawning Fortune vie their best;
He may be blessed
With all that earth can give: but earth can give no Rest*
3
Whose Gold is double with a careful hand,
His cares are double;
The pleasure, Honor, Wealth of Sea and Land
Bring but a trouble;
Tbe world it self, and all the worlds Command
Is but a Bubble.
The strong desires of man's insatiate breast
May stand possessed
Of all that earth can give; but earth can give no Rest.
4
The world's a seeming Par'dise, but her own
And Man's Tormenter;
Appearing fixed, yet but a rolling Stone,
Without a Tenter;
It is a vast Circumference, where none
Can find a Center:
Of more than earth, can earth make none possessed;
and he that least
Regards this restless world, shall in this world find Rest:
5
True Rest consists not in the often revying
Of worldly dross;
Earths myry Purchase is not worth the buying;
Her gain is loss;
Her rest, but giddy toil, if not relying
Upon her Cross;
How worldlings droyle for trouble! That fond breast
That is possessed
Of earth without a Cross, has earth without a Rest.
CASS. in Ps.
The Cross is the invincible Sanctuary of the humble: The dejection of the
proud; the victory of Christ; the destruction of the devil: the confirmation
of the faithful: the death of the unbeleever: the life of the just.

DAMASCEN.
The Cross of Christ is the key of Paradise: the weak man's staff: the
Converts Convoy: the upright man's perfection: the soul and bodies health: the
prevention of all evil, and the procurer of all Good,

EPIG. 9.
Worldling, whose whimp^ing folly holds the losses
Of honor, Pleasure, health and wealth such Crosses,
Look here, and tell me what your Arms engrosse,
When the best end of what ye hugg's a cross.
VII.
emblem Latet hostis, et otia ducis?

W. Marshall sculp:



VII. I PET. V.VIII. Be sober; Be vigilant, because your adversary the devil
as a roaring Lion walks about seeking whom he may devour.
1
WHy do thou suffer lustful sloth to creep
(Dull Cyp^ian lad) into thy wanton brows?
Is this a time to pay thine idle vows
At Morpheus Shrine? Is this a time to steep
Thy brains in wastfull slumbers? up and rouse
Thy leaden spirits; Is this a time to sleep?
Adjourne thy sanguine dreams; Awake, arise;
Call in thy Thoughts, and let them all advise,
Had thou as many Heads, as thou have wounded Eyes.
2
Look, look, what horrid Furies do await
Thy flattring slumbers; If thy drowzie head
But chance to nod, thou fal'st into a Bed
Of sulfurous flames, whose Torments want a date:
Fond Boy, be wise; let not thy thoughts be fed
With Phrygian wisdom; Fools are wise too late:
Beware betimes, and let thy Reason sever
Those Gates which passion closed; wake now, or never:
For if thou nod'st, thou fal'st: and falling, fal'st for ever.
3
Mark, how the ready hands of death prepare;
His Bow is bent, and he has noch'd his dart;
He aims, he levels at thy slumbring heart;
The wound is posting; O be wise; Beware,
What? has the voice of danger lost the art
To raise the spirit of neglected Care?
Well; sleep thy fill; and take thy soft reposes;
But know withal, sweet tastes have sower closes;
And he repents in Thorns, that sleeps in Beds of roses.
4
Yet sluggard, wake, and gull thy soul no more,
With earths false pleasure, and the worlds delight,
Whose fruit is fair, and pleasing to the sight,
But sour in taste; false at the putrid Core:
Thy flaring Glass is Gemms at her half light;
She makes thee seming rich, but truly poor:
She boasts a kernel, and bestows a Shell;
Performs an Inch of her fair promised Ell;
Her words protest a Heaven; Her works produce a Hell.
5
O thou, the fountain of whose better part
Is eathed, and gravail'd up with vain desire:
That daily wallow'st in the fleshly mire
And base pollution of a lustful heart,
That feel'st no passion but in wanton fire,
And own'st no torment but from Cupids dart;
Behold thy Type; Thou sitst upon this Ba^l
Of earth, secure, while death, that flings at all,
Stands ar'md to strike thee down, where flames attend thy fall.
S. BERN.
Security is no where; It is neither in heaven; nor in Paradise, much less in
the world: In heaven the Angels fell from the divine presence; in Paradise.
Adam fell from his place of pleasure; in the world, Judas fell from the School
of our Savior.

HUGO.
J eat secure; I drink secure: I sleep secure, even as though I had past the
day of death, avoided the day of judgment, and escaped the torments of hell
fire: I play and laugh, as though I were already triumphing in the Kingdom of
heaven.

EPIG. 7.
Get up, my soul; Redeem thy slavish eyes,
From drowzy bondage: O beware; Be wise:
Thy Foe's before thee; thou must fight, or flie^
Life lies most open in a closed Eye.
VIII.
emblem Et risu necat.

W. Marshall. sc*



VIII. LVKE. VI.XXV. Woe be to you that laugh now, for ye shall mourn and
weep.
THe world's a popular disease, that reigns
Within the froward heart, and frantic brains
Of poor distempered mortals, often arising
From ill digestion, through th'unequall poysing
Of ill-weigh'd Elements, whose light directs
Malignant humors to malign Effects:
One raves, and labors with a boiling Liver;
Rends hair by handfuls, cursing Cupids Quiver:
Another with a Bloody-fluxe of oaths,
Vows deep Revenge; one dotes: the other loathes:
One frisks and sings, and vyes a Flagon more
To drench dry cares; and makes the Welkin roar;
Another droopes; the sunshine makes him sad;
Heaven cannot please; One's moap'd; the tother's mad;
One huggs his Gold; Another let sit fly,
He knowing not, for whom; nor, the other why:
One spends his day in Plots; his night, in Play;
Another sleeps and slugs both night and day:
One laughs at this thing; the other cries for that:
But neither one, nor the other knows for what:
Wonder of wonders! What we ought t'evite
As our disease, we hugg as our delight:
It Is held a Symptom of approaching danger,
When disacquainted Sense becomes a stranger,
And takes no knowledge of an old disease;
But when a noisome Grief begins to please
The unresisting sense, it is a fear
That death has parlyed, and compounded there:
As when the dreadful Thund'rers awefull hand
Powers forth a Vial on the infected land,
At first the affrighted Mortals, quake, and faeare:
And every noise is thought the Thunderer;
But when the frequent Soule-departing Bell
Has paved their ears with her familiar knell,
It is reputed but a nine days wonder,
They neither fear the Thundre'r, nor his Thunder;
So when the world (a worse disease) began
To smart for sin, poor new-created Man
Could seek for shelter, and his generous Son
Knew by his wages, what his hands had done;
But bold-fac'd Mortals in our blushlesse times,
Can sin and smile, and make a sport of Crimes,
Transgress of Custom, and rebel in ease;
We false-joy'd fools can triumph in disease,
And (as the careless Pilgrim, being bit
By the Tarantula, begins a Fit
Of life-concluding laughter) wast our breath
In lavish pleasure, till we laugh to death.
HUGO de anima.
What profit is there in vain Glory^, momentary mirth, the worlds power, the
fleshes pleasure, full riches, noble descent, and great desires? Where is their
laughter? Where is their mirth? Where their Insolence? their Arrogance? From
how much joy to how much sadness! After how much mirth, how much misery! From
how great glory are they fallen, to how great torments! What has fallen to
them, may befall thee, because thou art a man: Thou art of earth; thou live of
earth; thou shall return to earth. Death expects thee every where; be wise
therefore, and expect death every where.

EPIG. 8.
What ails the fool to laugh? Does something please
His vain conceit? Or is 't a mere disease?
Fool, giggle on, And wast thy wanton breath;
Thy morning laughter breeds an evening death.
IX.
emblem F^yt^ quis st^^i^em figat in orb ^^adien?

Will Marshall (...)



IX. I JOHN. II.XVII. The world passes away, and all the lusts thereof.
1
DRraw near, brave sparks, whose spirits scorn to light
Your hallowed Tapours, but at honors flame;
You, whose heroic Actions take delight
To varnish over a new painted name;
Whose high-bred thoughts disdain to take their flight,
But on th'Icarian wings of babbling Fame,
Behold, how tottring are your high-built stories
Of earth, whereon you trust the groundwork of your Glories
2
And you, more brainsick Lovers, that can prize
A wanton smile before eternal Joys;
That know no heaven but in your Mistress eyes:
That feel no pleasure but what sense enjoyes:
That can, like crowne-distemper'd fools despise
True riches, and like Babies, whine for Toys:
Think ye, the Pageants of your hopes are able
To stand secure on earth, when earth it selfe's unstable?
3
Come dunghill worldlings: you, that root like swine,
And cast up golden Trenches, where ye come:
Whose only pleasure is to undermine,
And view the secrets of your mothers womb:
Come bring your Saint, pouch'd in his leather Shrine,
And summon all your griping Angels home.
Behold your world, the Bank of all your store:
The world ye so admire: the world ye so adore.
4
A feeble world; whose hot-mouth'd pleasures tire
Before the Race; before the start, retrait;
A faithless world, whose false delights expire
Before the term of half their promised Date;
A fickle world, not worth the least desire,
Where every Chance proclajmes a Change of State:
A feeble, faithless, fickle world, wherein
Each motion proves a vice; and every act, a Sin.
5
The beauty, that of late, was in her flower,
Is now a ruin, not to raise a Lust;
He that was lately drenched in Danaes shower,
Is Master, now, of neither Gold nor Trust;
Whose Honor, late, was manned with princely power,
His glory now lies buried in the dust;
O who would trust this world, or prize what is in it,
That gives and takes, and chops, and changes every minit!
6
Not length of days nor solid strength of Brain
Can find a place wherein to rest secure:
The world is various, and the Earth is vain:
There Is nothing certain here: there is nothing sure:
We trudge, we travel but from pain to pain,
And what is our only grief's our only Cure:
The World's a Torment; he that would endeaver
To find the way to Rest, must seek the way to leave her,
S. GREG. in ho.
Behold, the world is withered in it self, yet flourishes in our hearts,
every where death, every where grief, every where, desolation: On every side
we are smitten; on every side filled with bitterness, and yet with the blind
mind of carnal desire we love her bitterness; It flies, and we follow it; it
falls, yet we stick to it: And because we cannot enjoy it fallen, we fall
with it: and enjoy it, fallen.

EPIG. 9.
If Fortune hale, or envious Time but spurn,
The world turns round; and, with the world, we turn;
When Fortune sees, and Lynx-ey'd Time is blind,
I Will trust thy joys, O world; Till then, the Wind.
X.
emblem Vtriusque crepundia Merces Will. Marshall Sculptit


X IOH. VIII.XLIV. Ye are of your father the devil, and the lusts of your
Father ye will do.
Here Is your right ground: Wagge gently ore this Black;
It Is a short cast; you are quickly at the Jack:
Rub, rub an Inch or two; Two Crowns to one
On this Boules side; blow wind; T's fairly thrown;
The next Boul's worse that comes; Come boule away;
Mammon, you know the ground untutored, Play;
Your last was gone; a yard of strength, well spared,
Had touched the Block; your hand is still too hard.
Brave pastime, Readers, to consume that day,
Which, without pastime, flies too swift away!
See how they labor; as if day and night
Were both too short, to serve their loose delight*
See how their curved bodies wreath, and skrue
Such antic shapes as Proteus never knew:
One raps an oath: another deals a curse;
He never better bold; this, never worse:
One rubbes his itchlesse Elbow, shrugges, and laughs;
The the other bends his beetle-browes, and chafes,
Sometime they whoope; sometimes their Stigian cries
Send their Black- Santos to the blushing Skies:
Thus, mingling Humors in a mad confusion,
They make bad Premises, and worse conclusion:
But where is the Palm that Fortunes hand allows
To bless the victors honorable Brows?
Come, Reader come; I Will light thine eye the way
To view the Prize, the While the Gamesters play;
Close by the Jack, Behold Gill fortune stands
To wave the game, see, in her partial hands
The glorious Garland's held in open show,
To cheer the Ladds, and crown the Conq'rers brow:
The world's the Jack; The Gamsters that contend,
Are Cupid, Mammon: That juditious Friend,
That gives the ground, is Satan; and the Boules
Are sinful Thoughts: The Prize, a Crown for Fools.
Who breathes that boules not? what bold tongue can say
Without a blush, he has not bold to day?
It is the trade of man; and every Sinner
Has played his Rubbers; Every Soul's a winner.
The vulgar Proverb's crossed: He hardly can
Be a good Bouler and an honest man
Good God, turn thou my Brazil thoughts a new;
New soale my Boules, and make their Bras true:
I Will cease to game, till fairer Ground be given,
Nor wish to win until the Mark be heaven.
S. BERNARD lib. de Consid.
O you Sons of Adam, you covetous Generation, what have ye to do with
earthly Riches, which are neither true, nor yours. Gold and silver are real
earth, red and white, which the only error of man makes, or rather reputes
precious: Jn short, if they be yours carry them with you.

S. HIEROME. in Ep.
O Lust, thou infernal fire, whose Fuel is Gluttony; whose Flame is Pride;
wose sparkles are wanton words; whose smoke is Infamy; whose Ashes are
uncleanesse; whose end is Hell.

EPIG. 10.
Mammon, well followed: Cupid bravely ledde^
oath Touchers; Equal Fortunes makes a dead^
No Reed can measure where the Conquest lies;
Take my advise; Compound, and share the Prize;
XI.
emblem Mun^^ in (...)

Will Marshal sculps^.



XI. EPHESIANS. II.II. Ye walked according to the course of this world, according to
the Prince of the Air.
1
O Whether will this mad-braine world, at last,
Be driven? where will her restless wheels arive?
Why hurries on her ill matched pair so fast?
O whether means her furious Groom to drive?
What? will her rambling Fits be never past?
For ever ranging? never once retrive?
Will earths perpetual Progress nere expire?
Her Teame continuing in their fresh Careire,
And yet they never rest, And yet they never tire.
2
Sols hot-mouth'd Steeds, whose nostrils vomit flame,
And brazen lungs belch forth quotidian fire,
Their twelve hours task performed, grow stiff and lame,
And their immortal Spirits faint and tire;
At th'Azure mountains foot, their labors claim
The privilege of Rest, where they retire
To quench their burning Fetlocks, and to steep
Their flaming nostrils in the Western deep,
And fresh there tired souls with strength-restoring sleep.
3
But these prodigious Hackneyes, basely got
T'wixt men and Devils, made for Race, not flight,
Ca^n dragge the idle world, expecting not
The bed of Rest but travel with delight;
Who neither weighing way, nor weather, trott
Through dust and dirt, and droyle both night and day;
Thus droyle these f^ends incarnate, whose free pains
Are fed with dropsies, and veneriall Blaines.
No need to use the whip; but strength, to rule the raynes.
4
Poor Captive world! How has thy lightness given
A just occasion to thy foes illusion?
O, how art thou betrayed, thus fairly driven
In seeming Triumph to thy own confusion?
How is thy empty universe bereiven
Of all true joys, by one false Joys delusion?
So have I seen an unblowne virgin fed
With suga'rd words so full, that she is fed
A fair attended Bride, to a false Bankrupts Bed.
5
Pull, gracious LORD; Let not thine Arm forsake
The world, impounded in her own devises;
Think of that pleasure that thou once did take
Amongst the Lillies, and sweet Beds of spices*
Have strongly thou whose hand has power to slake
The swift foot Fury of ten thousand Vices:
Let not that dust-devouring Dragon boast.
His craft has won, what Judahs Lion lost;
Remember what it craved; Recount the price it cost.
ISIDOR. lib. 1. De summo bono.
By how much the nearer Satan perceives the world to an end, by so much the
more fiercely he troubles it with persecution; that knowing himself is to be
damned, he may get company in his damnation.

CIPRIAN in ep.
Broad and spacious is the road to infernal life: there are enticements and
death, bringing pleasures. There the Devil flatters, that he may deceive;
Smiles, that he may endamage; allures, that he may destroy.

EPIG. II.
Nay soft and fair, good world; post not too fast;
Thy journeyes end requires not half this have?
Unless that Arm thou so disdainst, reprives thee,
Alas thou needs must go: the devil drives thee.
XII.
emblem Gno^em m^ (...)

Will. Marshall Sculpsit.



XII. ISAY LXVI.XI. Ye may suck, but not be satisfied with the breast of her
Consolation.
1
WHat never filled? Be thy lips skre'wd so fast
To the earths full breast? For shame, for shame unseise thee:
Thou take a surfeit, where thou should but taste,
And make too much not half enough, to please thee
Ah fool, forbear; Thou swallow'st at one breath
Both food and poison down; Thou draw'st both milk and death.
2
The ub'rous breasts, when fairly drawn, repast
The thriving Infant with their milkie flood,
But being overstraind, return, at last,
Unholsome Gulps composed of wind and blood;
A moderate use does both repast and please;
Who strains beyond a mean, draws in and gulps disease.
3
But, O that mean whose good the least abuse
Make^ bad, is too too hard to be directed;
Can Thorns bring grapes, or Crabs a pleasing juce?
There Is nothing wholesome, where the whole's infected:
Unseise thy lips; Earths milk's a ripned Core
That drops from her disease, that matters from her Sore.
4
Think thou, that Paunch that burlyes out thy Coat,
Is thriving Fat; or flesh, that seems so brawny?
Thy Paunch is dropfied and thy Chee^ s are bloat;
Thy lips are white and thy complexion tawny;
Thy skin's a Bladder blown with watery tumors;
Thy flesh a trembling Bogge, a Quagmire full of humors?
5
And thou whose thrivelesse hands are ever straining
Earths fluent Breasts, into an empty Sive,
That always have, yet always art complaining;
And whin'st for more then earth has power to give,
Whose treasure flows and flees away as fast,
That ever have, and have, yet have not what thou have;
6
Go choose a Substance, fool, that will remain
within the limits of thy leaking Measure;
Or else go seek an Urne that will retain
The liquid Body of thy slippery Treasure:
Alas, how poorly are thy labors crowned?
Thy liquor's neither sweet, nor yet thy vessel sound.
7
What less then fool is Man, to progge, and plot,
And lavish out the Cream of all his care,
To gain poor seeming goods, which, being got,
Make firm possession, but a Thorow-fare:
Or if they stay, they furrow thoughts the deeper,
And being kept with care, they loose their careful keeper.
S. GREG. Hom 3. secund. part Ezech.
If we give more to the flesh then we ought, we nourish an Enemy; If we give
not to her necessity what we ought, we destroy a Citizen: The flesh is to be
satisfied so far as suffices to our good; whosoever allows so much to her as
to make her proud, knows not how to be satisfied: To be satisfied, is a great
Art; least by the society of the flesh we break forth into the Iniquity of her
folly.

HUGO de Anima.
The heart is a small thing, but desires great matters: It is not sufficient
for a Kites dinner, yet the whole world is not sufficient for it.

EPIG. 12.
What makes thee, fool, so fat? Fool, thee so Bare?
Ye suck the selfsame milk; the selfsame air:
No mean betwixt all Paunch, and skin and bone?
The meane's a virtue, and the world has none.
XIII.
emblem Da mihi froena ti^or; Da mihi calcar amor. Ro^ Vaugahn f^cit.


XIII. IOH. III.XIX. Men love darkness rather then light, because their deeds
are evil.
LORD, when we leave the World and come to Thee,
How dull; how slugge are we?
How backward! how praeposterous is the motion
Of our ungaine devotion!
Our thoughts are Milstones, and our souls are lead,
And our desires are dead:
Our vows are fairly promised, faintly paid;
Or broken, or not made:
Our better work (if any good) attends
Upon our private ends:
In whose performance one poo^e worldly scoff
Foyles us, or beats us off:
If thy sharp scourge find out some secret fault,
We grumble, or revolt.
And if thy gentle hand forbear, we stray,
Or idly lose the way:
Is the Road fair? we loyter: cloggd with mire*
We stick, or else retire:
A Lamb appears a Lion; and we fear,
Each bush we see's a Bear.
When our dull souls direct their thoughts to Thee,
The soft-pac'd Snayle is not so slow as we:
But when at earth we dart our winged desire,
We burn, we burn like fire:
Like as the amorous needle joys to bend,
To her Magneticke Friend:
Or as the greedy Lovers eye balls fly
At his fair Mistres eye,
So, we cling to earth; we fly, and puff,
Yet fly not fast enough;
If pleasure becken with her balmey hand
Her becke's a strong command*
If Honor call us with her courtly breath,
An hours delay is death:
If profits golden fingered Charms enveigle's,
We clip more swift then Eagles:
Let Auster weep, or blustering Boreas rore
Till eyes or lungs be sore:
Let Neptune swell until his dropsie-sides
Burst into broken Tides;
Nor threatening Rocks, nor winds, nor waves, nor Fire
Can curb our fierce desire;
Nor Fire nor Rocks can stop our furious minds,
Nor waves, nor winds;
How fast and fearelesse do our footsteps flee!
The lightfoot Roe-buck's not so swift as we.
S. AUGUST. sup. psalm. 64.
Two several Lovers built two several Cities; The love of God builds a
Jerusalem; The love of the world builds a Babylon: Let every one enquire of
himself what he loves, and he shall resolve himself of whence he is a Citizen.

S. AUGUST. lib 3. Confess.
All things are driven by their own weight, and tend to their own Center: My
weight is my love; By that I am driven whithersoever I am driven.

Ibidem.
LORD, he loves thee the less, that loves any thing with thee, which he loves
not for thee.

EPIG. 13.
Lord scourge my Ass if she should make no have,
And curb my Stagge if he should flee too fast:
If he be overswift, or she should prove idle,
Let Love lend him a spur: Fear, her, a Bridle.
XVI.
emblem P^o^^ce read diem.

Will Marshall (...)



XIV. PSALM. XIII.III. Lighten mine eyes, O Lord, lest I sleep the sleep of
death.
Will It nere be morning? Will that promised light
Nere break, and clear these Clouds of night^
Sweet Phospher bring the day,
Whose conquering Ray
May chase these fogges; Sweet Phospher bring the day,
How long! how long shall these be nighted eyes
Languish in shades, like feeble Flies
Expecting Spring! How long shall darkness soil
The face of earth and thus beguise
Our so^ules of rightful action? when will day
Begin to dawne, whose newborn Ray
May gild the Wether-cocks of our devotion,
And give out unsoul'd souls new motion?
Sweet Phospher bring the day,
Thy light will fray
These horrid Mists; Sweet Phospher bring the day:
Let those have night, that slily love t'immure
Their cloistered Crimes, and sin secure;
Let those have night, that blush to let men know
The baseness they nere blush to do;
Let those have night, that love to take a Nappe
And loll in Ignorances lap;
Let those whose eyes, like Oules abhor the light,
Let those have Night that love the Night?
Sweet Phospher bring the day;
How sad delay
Afflicts dull hopes! Sweet Phospher bring the day.
Alas! my light-invaine-expecting eyes
Can find no Objects but what rise
From this poor moral blaze, a dying spark
Of Vulcans forge, whose flames are dark
And dangerous, a dull blue burning light,
As melancholy as the night:
Here Is all the Suns that glister in the Sphere
Of earth: Ah me! what comfort's here:
Sweet Phospher bring the day;
Haste, haste away,
Heavens loytring lamp; Sweet Phospher bring the day,
Blow ignorance, O thou, whose idle knee
Rocks earth into a Lethargy,
And with thy footy fingers have bedight
The worlds fair cheeks, blow, blow thy spite;
Since thou have pufft our greater Tapour, do
Puff on, and out the lesser too:
If ere that breath-exiled flame return,
Thou have not blown, as it will burn:
Sweet Phospher bring the day
Light will repay
The wrongs of night: Sweet Phospher bring the day.
S. AUGUST. in Ioh. ser. 19.
God is all to thee; If thou be hungry, he is bread; If thirsty, he is water;
If in darkness he is light; If naked, he is a Robe of Immortality.

ALANVS de conq: not.
God is a light that is never darkened; An unwearied life, that cannot die; a
Fountain always flowing; a garden of life; a Seminary of wisdom, a radical
beginning of all goodness.

EPIG. 14.
My Soul, if Ignorance puff out this light
She Will do a favor that intends a spite:
'T seems dark abroad; But take this light away,
Thy windows will discover break a day.
XV.
emblem Debilitata fides: Terras Astraea reliquit.

W: M: scul:



XV. REVEL. XII.XII. The Devil is come unto you, having great wrath, because
he knows that he has but a short time.
1
LORD? can thou see and suffer? is thy hand
Still bound to th'peace? Shall earths black Monarch take
A full possession of thy wasted land?
O, will slumbring vengeance never wake,
Till full-ag'd law-resisting Custom shake
The pillours of thy right, by false command?
Unlocke thy Clouds, great Thund'rer, and come down;
Behold whose Temples wear thy sacred Crown;
Redress, redress our wrongs; revenge, revenge thy own.
2
See how the bold Usurper mounts the seat
Of royal Majesty; How overstrawing
Perils with pleasure, pointing every threat
With bugbeare death; by torments over-awing
Thy frighted subjects; or, by favors drawing
Their tempted hearts to his unjust retreat;
Lord, can thou be so mild? and be so bold?
Or can thy flocks be thriving, when the fold
Js governed by a Fox? Lord, can thou see and hold?
3
That swift-wing'd Advocate, that did commence
Our welcome Suits before the King of Kings,
That sweet Ambassador, that hurries hence
What Airs th'harmonious soul or sighs or sings,
See how she flutters with her idle wings;
Her wings are clipped, and eyes put out by Sense:
Sense conquering Faith is now grown blind, and cold,
And basely cravend, that, in times of old,
Did conquer heaven it self, do what The Almighty could.
4
Behold, how double fraud does scourge and tear
Astraeas wounded sides, plough'd up, and rent
With knotted cords, whose fury has no ear;
See how she stands a Prisoner, to be sent
A Slave, into eternal banishment,
I know not whither, O, I know not where:
Her Patent must be canceled in disgrace;
And sweet-lipt Fraud, with her divided face,
Must act Astraeas part, must take Astraeas place.
5
Faiths pineons clipped? And fair Astraea gone?
Quick seeing Faith now blind? And Justice see?
Has Justice now found wings? And has Faith none?
What do we here? who would not wish to be
Dissolved from earth; and, with Astraea, flee
From this blind dungeon, to that Sunne-bright Throne?
Lord, is thy Scepter lost, or laid aside?
Is hell broke loose, and all her Fiends untyed?
Lord rise, and rowze, and rule; and crush their furious Pride.
PETR. RAV. in Math.
The Devil is the author of evil; the fountain of wickedness; the Adversary
of the Truth; the corrupter of the world; man's perpetual Enemy; He plants
snares; digs ditches; spurs bodies; he goads souls; He suggests thoughts,
belches Anger; exposes virtue to hatred; makes vices beloved; sowes Errors,
nourishes contention; disturbes peace, and scatters Affections.

MACAR.
Let us suffer with those that suffer, and be crucified with those that are
crucified, that we may be glorified, with those that are glorified.

SAVANAR.
If there he no enemy, no fight; if no fight, no victory; if no victory, no
crown.

EPIG. 15.
My Soul, sit thou a patient looker on;
Judge not the Play before the Play is done:
Her Plot has many Changes: Every Day
Speaks a new Scene; The last act crowns the Play.
THE SECOND BOOK.
I.
emblem Sic sumine lumen ademptum.

Will marshall scu:



I ESAIAS. L.XI. You that walk in the light of your own fire, and in the
sparks that ye have kindled ye shall ^e down in sorrow.
1
DO silly Cupid snuff, and trim
Thy false, thy feeble light,
And make herselfe-consuming flames more bright;
Me thinks, she burns too dim*
Is this that sprightly fire,
Whose more then sacred Beams inspire
The ravished hearts of men, and so inflame desire?
2
See, Boy, how thy unthrifty blaze
Consumes; how fast she waines;
She spends her self, and her, whose wealth maintains
Her weak, her idle Rays;
Cannot thy lustful blast,
Which gave it luster, make it last?
What heart can long be pleased, where pleasure spends so fast?
3
Go, Wanton, place thy pale-faced light
Where never breaking day
Intends to visit mortals, or display
The sullen shades of night:
Thy Torch will burn more clear
In nights un-Titand Hemispheare;
Heavens scornful flames and thine can never co-appeare.
4
In vain thy busy hands address
Their labor, to display
Thy easy blaze, within the veirge of day;
The greater drownes the less:
If heavens bright glory shine,
Thy glimring sparks must needs resign;
Puff out heave's glory then, or heaven will work out thine:
5
Go Cupids rammish Pander, go,
Whose dull, whose low desire
Can find sufficient warmth from Natures fire,
Spend borrowed breath, and blow,
Blow wind, made strong with spite;
When thou have pufft the greater light,
Thy lesser spark may shine, and warm the new made night;
6
Deluded mortals, tell me, when
Your daring breath has blown
Heavens Tapour out, and you have spent your own,
What fire shall warm ye then?
Ah Fools, perpetual night
Shall haunt your souls with Stigian fright,
Where they shall boil in flames, but flames shall bring no light.
S. AUGUST.
The sufficiency of my merit is to know that my merit is not sufficient.

S. GREG. Mor. 25.
By how much the less, man sees himself, by so much the less he displeases
himself; And by how much the more he sees the light of Grace, by so much the
more he disdaines the light of nature.

S. GREG. Mor.
The light of the understanding humility kindles and pride covers.

EPIG. 1.
Thou blows heavens fire, the whilst thou go about,
Rebellious fool, in vain, to blow it out:
Thy Folly adds confusion to thy death;
Heavens fire confounds, when fanned with Follies breath,
II.
emblem Donce totum expleat orbem.

Will. Marshall. sculpsit.



II. ECCLES. IV.VIII. There is no end of all his labor, neither is his eye
satisfied with riches.
O How our wid'ned Arms can over-stretch
Their own dimensions! How our hands can retch
Beyond their distance! How our yielding breast
Can shrink, to be more full, and full possessed
Of this inferior Orb! how earth refinde
Can cling to sordid earth! How kind to kind!
We gape, we graspe, we gript; add store to store;
Enough requires too much; too much craves more;
We charge our souls so sore beyond their stint,
That we recoyle or burst; The busy Mint
Of our laborious thoughts is ever going,
And coining new desires; desires, not knowing
Where next to pitch, but like the boundless Ocean
Gain, and gain ground, and grow more strong by motion;
The pale-fac d Lady of the black-eyed night
First tips her horned brows with easy light,
Whose curious train of spangled Nymphs attire
Her next nights Glory with increasing Fire;
Each evening adds more luster, and adornes
The growing beauty of her grasping horns,
She suckes and draws her brothers golden store
Until her glutted Orb can suck no more,
Even so the Vultur of insatiate minds,
Still wants, and wanting seeks; and seeking, finds
New fuel to increase her ravenous fire,
The grave is sooner cloyd then men's desire:
We cross the Seas, and midst her waves we burn,
Transporting life's, perchance that nere return.
We sack, we ransacke to the utmost sands
Of native Kingdoms, and of foreign lands;
We travel Sea, and Soil; we pry; we proule,
We progress, and we progge from pole to pole;
We spend our midday sweat, our midnight oil;
We tire the night in thought; the day, in toil;
We make Artservill, and the Trade gentile,
(Yet both corrupted with ingenious guile)
To compass earth; and with her empty store,
To fill our Arms, and graspe one handful more;
Thus seeking Rest, our labors never cease,
But as our years, our hot desires increase;
Thus we poor little worlds (with blood and sweat)
In vain attempt to comprehend the great;
Thus, in our gain, become we gainefull losers,
And what is enclosed, encloses the enclosers.
Now, reader, close thy Book, and then advise:
Be wisely worldly, be not worldly wise;
Let not thy nobler thoughts be always raking
The worlds base dunghill; Vermins took, by taking*
Take heed thou trust not the deceitful Lap
Of wanton Delilah; The world's a Trappe.
HUGO de anima.
Tell me where be those now that so lately loved, and hugged the world? Nothing
remains of them but dust and worms; Observe what those men were; what those
men are: They were like thee; They did eat, drink, laugh, and led merry
days, and in a moment slipped into Hell: Here their flesh is food for worms:
There, their souls are fuel of fire, till they shall be rejoyned in an
unhappy fellowship, and cast into eternal torments; where they that were once
companions in sin shall be hereafter partners in punishment.

EPIG. ^.
Gripe, Cupid, and gripe still until that wind,
That Is pent before, find secret vent behind:
And when thou have done, bark here, I tell thee what,
Before I Will trust thy Armefull, I Will trust that.
III.
emblem Non amat iste; sed hamat amor.

Will Marshall sculpsit.



III. JOB XVIII.VIII. He is cast into a net by his own feet, and walks upon
a snare.
1
WHat? Nets and Quiver too? what need there all
These sly devices to betray poor men?
Die they not fast enough, when thousands fall
Before thy Dart? what need these Engines then?
Attend they not, and answer to thy Call,
Like nightly Coveyes, where thou list? and when?
What needs a Stratagem where strength can sway?
Or what need strength compel, where none gainesay?
Or what need stratagem or strength, where hearts obey?
2
Husband thy sleights: It is but vain to wast
Honey on those that will be caught with Gall;
Thou can not, ah, thou can not bid so fast
As men obey; Thou art more slow to call:
Than they to come; thou can not make such have
To strike, as they, being struck, make have to fall
Go save thy Nets for that rebellious heart
That scorns thy power, and has obtained the Art
To Avoid thy flying shaft, to quench thy fir'y Dart.
3
Lost mortal, how is thy destruction sure,
Between two Bawds! and both without remorse;
The one's a Line, the the other is a Lure;
This, to entice thy soul; that, to enforce;
Way-layd by both, how can thou stand secure?
That draws, this wooes thee to the eternal curse;
O charming Tyrant, how have thou befooled
And slav'd poor man, that would not, if he could
Avoid thy Line, thy Lure; nay, could not, if he would!
4
Alas thy sweet perfidious voice betrays
His wanton ears with thy Syrenian baits;
Thou wrapft his eyes in mists, then boldly lays
Thy Lethall Ginns before their Crystal Ga^s;
Thou lock'st up every Sense with thy false kayes,
All willing Prisoners to thy close deceits;
His ear most nimble whereit deaf should be,
His eye most blind where most it ought to see,
And when his heart's most bound, then thinks it self most free.
5
Thou grand Imposter, how have thou obtained
The wardship of the world; Are all men turned
Idiots, and Lunaticks? Are all retained
Beneath thy servile bands? Is none returned
To his forgotten self? Has none regained
His senses? Are their senses all adjourned,
What none dismissed thy Court? will no plumpe Fee
Bribe thy false fists, to make a glad Decree,
T'unfoole whom thou have fooled, and set thy prisoners free?
S. BERN. in Ser.
In this world is much treachery, little truth; here, all things are traps;
here, every thing is be set with snares; here souls are endangered, bodies are
afflicted; Here all things are vanity, and vexation of spirit.

EPIG. 3.
Nay, Cupid, pitch thy Trammill where thou please,
Thou can not fail to take such fish as these;
Thy thriving sport will never be spent; no need
To fear, when every Corck's a world; Thou Wilt speed.
IV.
emblem Cuam grave seruitium est, quod scuis esca parit.


IV. HOS. XIII.III. They shall be as the chafe that is driven with a whirlewind
out of the floor, and as the smoke out of the chimney.
FLint-hearted Stoics, you, whose marble eyes
Contemn a wrinckle, and whose souls despise
To follow Natures too affected Fashion,
Or travel in the Regent-walk of Passion;
Whose rigid hearts disdain to shrink at Fears,
Or play at fast and loose with Smiles and Tears;
Come burst your spleenes with laughter; to behold
A new found vanity; which 'dayes of old
Never knew; A vanity, that has beset
The world, and made more slaves then Mahomet:
That has condemned us to the servile yoke
Of slavery, and made us slaves to smoke:
But stay! why tax I thus our modern times,
For new-blowne Follies, and for newborn Crimes?
Are we sole guilty, and the first Age free?
No, they were smoked, and slav'd as well as we:
What Is sweet-lipt Honors blast, but smoke? What Is treasure
But very smoke? And what more smoke than pleasure?
Alas: they are all but shadows, Fumes, and blasts;
That vanishes; this fades; the other wastes.
The restless Merchant; he, that loves to steep
His brains in wealth, and lays his soul to sleep
In bags of Bullion, sees the immortal Crown,
And feign would mount, but Ingots keep him down:
He brags today, perchance, and begs to morrow;
He lent but now; wants Credit, now to borrow:
Blow winds the Treasur's gone; the Merchant's brok;
A slave to silver's but a slave to smoke:
Behold the Glory-vying Child of Fame,
That from deep wounds sucks forth an honored name,
Tha^ thinks no purchase worth the style of good;
But what is sold for sweat, and sealed with blood,
That for a Point, a blast of empty breath,
Undaunted, gazes in the face of death;
Whose dear bought Bubble, filled with vain renown,
Breaks with a Phillip, or a Gen'ralls frown;
His stroke got Honor staggers with a stroke;
A Slave to Honor is a Slave to Smoke:
And that fond soul which wastes his idle days
In loose delights, and sports about the Blaze
Of Cupids Candle; he that daily spies
Twin Babies in his Mistress Gemenies,
Whereto his sad devotion does impart
The sweet burnt offering of a bleeding heart;
See, how his wings are singed in Cyprian fire,
Whose flames consume with youth; in Age, expire:
The world's a Bubble; all the pleasures in it,
Like morning vapors vanish in a minit.
The vapors vanish, and the Bubble's broke;
A slave to pleasure is a slave to smoke.
Now, Stoic, cease thy laughter, and repast
Thy pickled cheeks with Tears, and weep as fast.
S. HIEROM.
That rich man is great, who thinks not himself great because he is rich^ the
proud man (who is the poor man) brags outwardly, but begs inwardly: He is
blown up, but not full.

PETR. RAV.
Vexation and anguish accompany riches and honor: The pomp of the world and
the favor of the people are but smoke, and a blast suddenly vanishing which,
if they commonly please, commonly bring repentance, and for a minut of joy they
bring an age of sorrow.

EPIG. 4.
Cupid; thy diet's strange; It dulls; It rowzes;
It cooles; It heats; it binds, and then it looses:
Dull-sprightly-cold-hot Fool, if ever it winds thee
Into a looseness once, take heed: It binds thee.
V.
emblem Non omne, quod hic micat, aurum est

Will: Marshall. sculpsit.



V PRO. XXIII.V. Will thou set thine eyes upon that which is not? for riches
make themselves wings, they fly away as an Eagle.
1
FAlse world, thou lie: Thou can not lend
The least delight.
Thy favors cannot gain a Friend,
They are so slight:
Thy morning pleasures make an end
To please at night:
Poor are the wants that thou supply'st
And yet thou vaun'st, and yet thou vy'st
With heaven; Fond earth thou boasts; False world thou lie.
2
Thy babbling Tongue tells golden Tales
Of endless Treasure;
Thy bounty offers easy sales
Of lasting pleasure;
Thou asks the Conscience what she ailes,
And swear'st to ease her;
There Is none can want where thou supply'st:
There Is none can give where thou deny'st*
Alas, fond world thou boasts; false world thou lie.
3
What well advised ear regards
What earth can say?
Thy words are Gold, but thy rewards
Are painted Clay;
Thy cunning can but pack the Cards;
Thou can not play:
Thy game at weakest, still thou vy'st;
If seen, and then revy'd, deny'st;
Thou art not what thou seem: False world thou lie.
4
Thy tinsill boosome seems a Mint
Of new-coynd treasure;
A Paradise, that has no stint,
No change, no measure;
A painted Cask, but nothing in it,
Nor wealth, nor pleasure:
Vain earth! that falsely thus comply'st
With man; Vain man! that thus rely'st
On earth: Vain man thou dot'st: Vain earth thou lie.
5
What mean dull souls, in this high measure
To haberdash
In earths base wares, whose greatest treasure
Is dross and trash?
The height of whose inchaunting pleasure
Is but a Flash?
Are these the goods that thou supply'st
Us mortals with? Are these the highest?
Can these bring cordial peace? False world thou lie.
PET. BLES.
This world is deceitful; Her end is doubtful; Her conclusion is horrible;
Her judge is terrible; And her punishment is intolerable.

S. AUGUST. lib. Confess.
The vain glory of this world is a deceitful sweetness, a fruitless labor,
a perpetual fear, a dangerous honor; Her beginning is without providence,
end her and not without repentance.

EPIG. 5.
World; thou art a Traitor; Thou have stamped thy base
And Chymick metal with great Caesar's face;
And with thy bastard Bullion thou have barterd
For wares of price; How justly drawn and quarterd!
VI.
emblem Sic decipit orbis

Will* Marshall. sculpsit.



VI. JOB XV.XXXI. Let not him that is deceived trust in vanity, for vanity
shall be his recompense.
1
BElieve her not: Her Glass diffuses
False Portraitures: Thou can epsy
No true reflection: She abuses
Her mis-inform'd beholders eye;
Her Chrystal's falsely steeled. It scatters
Deceitful beams; Believe her not: She flatters,
2
This flaring Mirror representes
No right Proportion, heiw, nor Feature:
Her very looks are Complements;
They make thee fairer, goodlier, greater;
The skillful Gloss of her reflection
But paints the Context of thy course Complexion.
3
Were thy dimension but a stride,
Nay, were thou statur'd but a span,
Such as the long-bill'd Troops defied,
A very Fragment of a Man;
She Will make thee Mimas, which ye will,
The love-slaine Tyrant, or the Ionick Hill.
4
Had surfeits, or th'ungratious Star
Conspired to make one Common place
Of all deformities, that are
Within the Volume of thy face,
She Would lend thee favor, should out-move
The Troy-bane Hellen, or the Queen of Love,
5
Were thy consumed estate as poor
As Lazars, or afflicted Jobs,
She Is change thy wants to seeming store,
And turn thy Rags to purple Robes;
She Will make thy hide-bound flanck appear
As plump as theirs that feast it all the year.
6
Look off; let not thy Optics be
Abused; thou see not what thou should;
Thy selfe's the Object thou should see,
But it is thy shadow thou behold'st:
And shadows thrive the more in stature,
The nearer we approach the light of nature.
7
Where heavens bright beams look more direct,
The shadow shrinks as they grow stronger;
But when they glaunce their fair aspect,
The bold-fac'd shade grows larger, longer;
And when their lamp begins to fall,
Th'increasing shadows lengthen most of all.
8
The soul that seeks the noone of Grace,
Shrinks in; but swells, if Grace retreat;
As heaven lifts up, or veiles his Face,
Our selfe-esteemes grow less, or great,
The least is greatest; And who shall
Appear the greatest, are the least of all.
HVGO lib. 3. de anima.
In vain he lifts up the eye of his heart to behold his God, who is not first
rightly advised to behold himself: First thou must see the vi^^ble things of
thy self, before thou can be prepared to know the invisible things of God,
for if thou can not apprehend the things within thee, thou can not
comprehend the things above thee: The best looking-glass wherein to see thy
God, is perfectly to see thy self.

EPIG. 6.
Be not deceived, great Fool; There is no loss
In being small: Great bulks but swell with dross:
Man is heavens Masterpiece; If it appear
More great, the valu's less; If less, more dear.
VII.
emblem She pes^ima, die o^tima seviat.

Will: Marshall sculpsit.



VII. DEVT. XXX.XIX. I have set before thee life and death, blessin and
cursing, therefore choose life, that thou and thy seed may live.
1
THe world's a Floor, whose swelling heaps retain
The mingled wages of the Ploughmans toil;
The world's a Heap, whose yet unwinnowed grain
Is lodged with chafe and buried in her soil;
All things are mixed; the useful with the vain;
The good with bad, the noble with the vile;
The world's an Ark, wherein things pure and gross
Present their lossefull gain, and gainefull loss,
Where every dram of Gold contains a pound of dross,
2
This furnished Ark presents the greedy view
With all that earth can give, or heaven can add;
Here, lasting joys; here, pleasures hourly new,
And hourly fading, may be wished and had:
All points of Honor; counterfeit and true
Salute thy soul, and wealth both good and bad:
Here may thou open wide the two-leav'd door
Of all thy wishes, to receive that store
Which being empty most; does overflow the more.
3
Come then, my soul, approach this royal Burse,
And see what wares our great Exchange retains;
Come, come; here is that shall make a firm divorse
Betwixt thy Wants and thee, if want complains;
No need to sit in council with thy purse,
Here Is nothing good, shall cost more price than pains:
But O my soul, take heed; If thou rely
Upon thy faithless Optics, thou will buy
Too blind a bargain: know; Fools only trade by The Eye.
4
The worldly wisdom of the foolish man
Is like a Sive, that does, alone, retain
The grosser substance of the worthless Bran;
But thou, my soul, let thy brave thoughts disdain
So course a purchase; O, be thou a Fan
To purge the Chafe, and keep the winnow'd Grain;
Make clean thy thoughts, and dress thy mixed desires;
Thou art heavens Tasker; and thy GOD requires
The purest of thy Floor, as well as of thy fires.
5
Let grace conduct thee to the paths of peace,
And wisdom bless thy souls umblemisht ways,
No matter, then, how short or long's the Lease,
Whose date determins thy selfe-numbred days;
No need to care for wealths or Fames increase,
Nor Mars his Palm, nor high Apollo's Bays:
LORD, if thy gracious bounty please to fill
The floor of my desires, and teach me skill
To dress and choose the Corn, take those the Chafe that will*
S. AUGUST. lib 1. de doct. Christi.
Temporal things more ravish in the expectation, than in fruition: but things
eternal more in the fruition than expectation.

Ibidem.
The life of a man is the middle between Angels and beasts: If man takes
pleasure in carnal things, he is compared to beasts; But if he delights in
spiritual things, he is suited with Angels.

EPIG. 7.
Art thou a Child? Thou will not then be fed,
But like a Child, and with the Childrens bread:
But thou art fed with chafe, or corn undrest:
My soul thou savour'st too much of the Breast.
VIII.
emblem Haec animan^ ^^ue^os cym^ala; at illa (...)

Will Marshall. sculpsit.



VIII. PHIL. III. XIX. They mind earthly things, but our conversation is in
heaven.
Venus. Div. Cupid. Ve. WHat means this peevish Brat? Whish, Lullaby;
What ails my Babe? What ails my Babe to cry?
Will nothing still it? will it neither be
Pleased with the Nurses breast nor Mothers knee?
What ails my Bird? What moves my froward Boy
To make such whimpring faces? Peace, my Joy:
Will nothing do? Come, come, this pettish Brat,
Thus cry and bawle, and cannot tell for what?
Come busse and friends, my lamb; whish, lullaby,
What ails my Babe? What ails my Babe to cry?
Peace, peace my dear; alas, thy early years
Had never faults to merit half these tears;
Come smile upon me: Let thy mother spy
Thy Fathers Image in her Babies eye:
Husband these guiltless drops against the rage
Of harder fortunes, and the gripes of Age;
Thine eye's not ripe for tears: whish, lullaby;
What ails my Babe, mine sweet-fac'd Babe to cry?
Look, look, what is here! A dainty Golden thing:
See how the dancing Bells turn round and ring
To please my Bantling! Here Is a knack will breed
A hundred kisses: Here Is a knack indeed,
So, now my bird is white, and looks as fair
As Pelops shoulder, or my milke-white pair:
Here Is right the Fathers smile; when Mars beguiled
Sick Venus of her heart, just thus he smiled.

DIVIN. CUPID.
Well may they smile alike: Thy base-bred Boy
And his base Sire had both one Cause; A Toy:
How well their subjects and their smiles agree?
Thy Cupid finds a Toy, and Mars found thee:
False Queen of Beauty, Queen of false delights,
Thy knee presents an Emblem, that invites
Man to himself, whose selfe-transported heart
(Ov'rwhelm'd with native sorrows, and the smart
Of purchased griefs) lies whining night and day,
Not knowing why, till heavy-heeld delay
The dull-brow'd Pander of despair, lays by
His leaden Buskins, and presents his eye
With antic Trifles, which the indulgent earth
Makes proper Objects of man's childish mirth:
These be the coin that pass; the sweets that please;
There Is nothing good, there is nothing great but these:
These be the Pipes that base-borne minds dance after,
And turn immod'rate tears to lavish laughter;
Whilst heavenly Raptures pass without regard;
Their strings are harsh and their high strains unheard:
The plough man's Whistle, or the trivial Flute
Find more respect than great Apollo's Lute:
We Will look to heaven and trust to higher Joys;
Let Swine love Husks, and children whine for Toys:
S. BERN.
That is the true and chief joy, which is not conceived from the creature, but
received from the Creator; which (being once possessed thereof) none can take
from thee, whereto all pleasure being compared, is torment; all joy is grief;
sweet things are bitter, all glory is baseness, and all delectable things are
despicable.

S. BERN.
Joy in a changeable subject must necessarily change as the subject changes.

EPIG. 8.
Peace, childish Cupid, peace: Thy fingered eye
But cries for what, in time, will make thee cry:
But are thy peevish wranglings thus appeased?
Well may thou cry, that art so poorly pleased.
IX.
emblem Venturum exhorresco diem.

Will: Marshal sculpsit.



IX. ESAIAS X.III. What will ye do in the day of your visitation? to whom will ye
fly for help? and where will ye leave your glory?
1
IS this that jolly God, whose Cyprian Bow
Has shot so many flaming darts,
And made so many wounded Beauties go
Sadly perplexed with whimpering hearts?
Is this that Sov'raigne Deity that brings
The slavish world in awe, and stings
The blundring souls of swains, and stoops the hearts of Kings
2
What Circean Charm? what Hecatean spite
Has thus abused the God of love?
Great Jove was vanquished by his greater might;
(And who is stronger-arm'd than Jove?)
Or has our lustful God performed a Rape,
And (fearing Argus eyes) would escape
The view of jealous earth, in this prodigious shape?
3
Where be those Rosy Cheeks, that lately scorned
The malice of injurious Fates?
Ah, where is that pearl Percullis, that adorned
Those dainty two-leav'd Ruby gates?
Where be those killing eyes, that so controld
The world? And locks, that did infold
Like knots of flaming wyre, like Curles of burnisht Gold?
4
No, no, 'Twas neither Hecatean spite
Nor Charm below, nor power above;
'Twas neither Circes spell; nor Stigian sprite,
That thus transformed our God of Love;
'Twas owle-ey'd Lust (more potent far than they)
Whose eyes and actions hate the day;
Whom all the world observe; whom all the world obey.
5
See how the latter Trumpets dreadful blast
Affrights stout Mars his trembling Son!
See, how he startles! how he stands aghast,
And scrambles from his melting Throne!
Hark, how the direful hand of vengeance tears,
The sweltring Clouds, whilst heaven appears
A Circle filled with flame, and centerd with his fears.
6
This is that day, whose often report has worn
Neglected Tongues of Prophets bare;
The faithless subject of the worldlings scorn,
The sum of men and Angels prayer:
This, this the day whose All-descerning light
Ransacks the secret dens of night,
And severs Good from Bad; true Joys from false Delight.
7
You groveling Worldlings, you whose wisdom trades,
Where light never shot his Golden Ray;
That hide your Actions in Cymerian shades,
How will your eyes endure this day?
Hills will be deaf, and mountains will not hear;
There be no Caves, no Corners there,
To shade your souls from fire, to shield your hearts from fear.
HUGO.
O the extreme loathsomeness of fleshly lust, which not only effeminates the
mind, but enerves the body; which not only distaines the soul, but disguises
the person! It is ushered with fury and wantonness, It is accompanied with
filthiness and uncleanness, and it is followed with grief and repentance.

EPIG. 9.
What? sweet-fac'd Cupid, has thy bastard-treasure,
Thy boasted Honors, and thy bold-fac'd pleasure
Perplexed thee now? I told thee long ago,
To what they would bring thee, fool, To wit, to woe,
X.
emblem Tinnit ^inan^ est.


X NAH. II.X. She is empty, and void, and waste
1
She Is empty: Hark, she sounds: There Is nothing there
But noise to fill thy ear,
Thy vain enquiry can, at length, but find
A blast of murmuring wind:
It is a Cask, that seems as full, as fair;
But merely tunn'd with Airs
Fond youth, go build thy hopes on better grounds:
Thy soul that vainly founds
Her joys upon this world, but feeds on empty sounds:
2
She Is empty: Hark; she sounds: There Is nothing in it
The spark-ingendring Flint
Shall sooner melt, and hardest Raunce, shall first,
Dissolve and quench thy thirst,
Ere this false world shall still thy stormy breast
With smooth faced Calmes of Rest:
Thou may, as well, expect Meridian light
From shades of black-mouthed night,
As in this empty world to find a full delight.
3
She Is empty: Hark; she sounds; It Is void and vast;
What if some flattring blast
Of flatuous Honor should perchance, be there;
And whisper in thine ear,
It is but wind; and blows but where it list,
And vanishes like a Mist:
Poor Honor earth can give! What generous mind
Would be so base, to bind
Her heav'n-bred soul a slave, to serve a Blast of wind?
4
She Is empty: Hark; She sounds: It Is but a Ball
For Fools to play with all;
The painted filme but of a stronger Bubble,
That Is lined with silken trouble;
It is a world, whose Work, and Recreation
Is vanity, and vexation;
A Hagg, repaired with vice-complexion, paint:
A Questhouse of complaint;
It is a Saint; a Fiend: worse Fiend, when most a Saint.
5
She Is empty: Hark; she sounds: It Is vain and void;
What Is here to be enjoyed,
But Grief, and sickness, and large bills of sorrow,
Drawn now, and crossed to morrow?
Or what are Men, but puffs of dying breath,
Revived with living death?
Fond lad; O build thy hopes on surer grounds
Than what dull flesh propounds;
Trust not this hollow world, she is empty: Hark; she sounds,
S. CHRYSOSTOM. in Ep. ad Heb.
Contemn riches, and thou shall be rich; Contemn glory, and thou shall be
glorious; contemn injuries, and thou shall be a conqueror; Contemn rest, and
thou shall gain rest; Contemn earth, and thou shall find Heaven.

HUGO. lib. de Vanit. mundi.
The world is a vanity which affords neither beauty to the amorous, nor reward
to the laborious, nor encouragement to the industrious.

EPIG. 10.
This house is to be let; for life or years;
Her rent is sorrow, and her In-come, Tears:
Cupid, 't' as long stood void: Her bills make known,
She must be dearly Let; or let alone.
XI.
emblem Erras hac itur ad illam.

Will Marshall sculpsit



XI. MAT. VII.XIV. Narrow is the way that leads unto life and few there be
that find it.
PRepost'rous fool, thou troul'st amiss:
Thou err'st; That Is not the way, It Is this:
Thy hopes, instructed by thine Eye,
Make thee appear more near than I;
My floor is not so flat, so fine,
And has more obvious Rubs than thine;
It Is true; my way is hard, and strait,
And leads me through a thorny Gate;
Whose ranckling pricks are sharp and fell;
The common way to Heaven's by Hell:
It Is true; Thy path is short and fair,
And free of Rubbs: Ah, fool, beware,
The safest Road's not always even;
The way to Hell's a seeming Heaven;
Think thou, the Crown of Glory's had
With idle ease, fond Cyprian Lad?
Think thou, that mirth, and vain delights;
High feed, and shadow-shortning nights,
Soft knees, full bones, and Beds of Down
Are proper Prologues to a Crown?
Or can thou hope to come, and view,
Like prosperous Caesar, and subdue?
The bond-slave Usurer will trudge
In spite of Gouts, will turn a drudge,
And serve his soule-condemning purse,
To Increase it with the widows Curse;
And shall the Crown of glory stand
Not worth the waving of a hand?
The fleshly wanton, to obtain
His minit-lust, will count it gain
To lose his freedom, his Estate
Upon so dear, so sweet a rate;
Shall pleasures thus be prized, and must
Heavens Palm be cheaper than a lust?
The true-bred Spark, to hoyse his name
Upon the waxen wings of Fame,
Will fight undaunted, in a Flood
That Is raised with brackish drops, and blood:
And shall the promised Crown of life
Be thought a Toy, not worth a Strife?
An easy Good, brings easy Gains,
But things of price are bought with pains:
The pleasing way is not the right:
He that would conquer heaven, must fight.
S. HIEROM. in Ep.
No labor is hard, no time is long, wherein the glory of Eternity is the mark
we level at.

S. GREG. lib. 8. Mor.
The val^ur of a just man is to conquer the flesh, to contradict his own will,
to quench the delights of this present life, to endure and love the miseries of
this world for the reward of a better, to contemn the flatteries of
prosperity, and inwardly to overcome the fears of adversity.

EPIG. 11.
O Cupid, if thy smoother way were right,
I should mistrust this Crown were counterfeit*
The way's not easy where the Prize is great:
I hope no virtues, where I smell no sweat.
XII.
emblem In cruce (...) securus amor.

(...)



XII. GAL. VI.XIV. God forbid that I should glory, save in the Cross.
1
CAn nothing settle my uncertain breast,
And fix my rambling Love?
Can my affections find out nothing best?
But still, and still remove?
Has earth no mercy? Will no Ark of Rest
Receive my restless Dove?
Is there no Good, than which there is nothing higher,
To bless my full desire
With Joys that never change; with Joys that never expire;
2
I wanted wealth; and, at my dear request,
Earth lent a quick supply;
I wanted Mirth, to charm my sullen breast;
And who more brisk than I?
I wanted Fame, to glorify the rest;
My fame flew Eagle-high:
My Joy not fully ripe, but all decaid;
Wealth vanished like a shade;
My mirth began to flag, my Fame began to fade.
3
The world's an Ocean, hurried to and fro,
With evry blast of passion:
Her lustful streams, when either ebb or flow,
Are tides of man's vexation:
They alter daily, and they daily grow
The worse by alteration:
The Earth's a Cask full tuned, yet wanting measure;
Her precious wine, is pleasure;
Her Yest is Honors puff; Her Lees are wordly treasure.
4
My trust is in the Cross: Let Beauty flag
Her loose, her wanton sail;
Let count'nance-gilding Honor cease to brag
In courtly terms, and vale;
Let ditch-bred wealth, henceforth, forget to wag
Her base though golden tail;
False beauties conquest is but real loss,
And wealth but golden dross;
Best Honon's but a blast: my trust is in the Cross.
5
My trust is in the Cross: There lies my rest;
My fast, my sole delight;
Let cold-mouth'd Boreas, or the hot-mouth'd East
Blow till they burst with spite;
Let earth and hell conspire their worst, their best,
And join their twisted might:
Let showers of Thunderbolts dart down, and wound me,
And troops of Fiends surround me,
All this may well confront; all this shall never confound me.
S. AUGUST.
Christ's Cross is the Chriscrosse of all our happiness; It delivers us from
all blindness of error, and enriches our darkness with light; It restores
the troubled soul to rest; It brings strangers to Gods Acquaintance; It makes
remote forreiners near neighbors; It cuts off discord; concludes a league of
everlasting peace, and is the bounteous Author of all Good.

S. BERNARD in Ser. de resur*
We find glory in the Cross; To us that are saved it is the power of God, and
the fullness of all virtues.

EPIG. 12.
I followed Rest, Rest sled, and soon forsook me;
I ran from Grief, Grief ran, and over-tooke me.
What shall I do? Lest I be too much tossed
On worldly Crosses, LORD, let me be crossed.
XIII.
emblem (...) ^^^era ^^m^n

(...) Marshall sculpsit.



XIII. PRO. XXVI.XI. As a Dog returns to his vomit, so a fool returns to
his folly.
O I am wounded! And my wounds do smart
Beyond my patience, or great Chirons Art;
I yield, I yield; The day, the Palm is thine;
Thy Bow's more true; thy shafts more fierce than mine.
Hold, hold, O hold thy conquering hand* What need
To send more darts; The first has done the deed:
Often have we struggled, when our equal Arms
Shot equal shafts; inflicted equal harms;
But this exceeds, and with her flaming head,
Twyfork'd with death, has struck my Conscience dead:
But must I die? Ah me! If that were all,
Then, then I Would stroke my bleeding wounds, and call
This dart a Cordial, and with joy, endure
These harsh Ingredients, where my Griefe's my Cure.
But something whispers in my dying ear,
There is an After-day; which day I fea^e:
The slender debt to Nature's quickly paid,
Discharged, perchance, with greater ease than made;
But if that pale-faced Sergeant make Attest,
Ten thousand Actions would (whereof the least
Is more than all this lower world can bail)
Be entered, and condemn me to the Iayle
Of Stygian darkness, bound in red-hot Chains,
And gripped with Tortures worse than Tytian pains;
Farewell my vain, farewell my loose delights;
Farewell my rambling days; my rev'ling nights;
'Twas you betrayed me first, and when ye found
My soul at vantage: gave my soul the wound:
Farewell my Bullion Gods, whose sov'raigne looks
So often caught me with their golden hooks;
Go, seek another slave; ye must all go;
I cannot serve my God, and Bullion too:
Farewell false Honor; you, whose ayry wings
Did mount my soul above the Thrones of kings;
Then flattered me; took pet; and, in disdain,
Nipt my green buds; then kicked me down again:
Farewell my Bow: Farewell my Cyprian Quiver;
Farewell, dear world; farewell, dear world, for ever,
O, but this most delicious world, how sweet
Her pleasures relish! Ah! How jump they meet
The grasping soul! And, with their sprightly fire,
Revive, and raise, and rowze the rapt desire!
For ever? O, to part so long? What never
Meet more? Another year; and then, for ever:
Too quick resolves do resolution wrong;
What, part so soon, to be divorced so long?
Things to be done are long to be debated;
Heaven is not day'd. Repentance is not dated.
S. AUGUST. lib. de util. again. paen.
Go up my soul into the Tribunal of thy Conscience; There set thy guilty
self before thy self: Hide not thy self behind thy self, least God bring
thee forth before thy self.

S. AUGUST. in Soliloq.
In vain is that washing, where the next sin defiles: He has ill repented
whose sins are repeated: that stomach is the worse for vomiting, that licks
up his vomit.

ANSELM.
God has promised pardon to him that repents, but he has not promised
repentance to him that sins.

EPIG. 13.
Brain wounded Cupid, had this hasty dart
As it has pricked thy Fancy, pierced thy heart,
'T had been thy Friend: O how has it deceiy'd thee?
For had this dart but killed, this dart had said thee.
XIV.
emblem Post lapsum fortius acto.

(...) Marshall sculpsit.



XIV. PRO. XXIV.XVI. A just man falls seven times and rises up again, but
the wicked shall fall into mischief.
1
It Is but a Foil at best, And that is the most
Your skill can boast:
My slippry footing failed me; and you tript,
Just as I slipped:
My wanton weakness did her self betray
With too much play:
I was too bold: He never yet stood sure,
That stands secure:
Who ever trusted to his native strength,
But fell at length?
The Title's crazed the Tenor is not good,
That claims by th'Evidence of flesh and Blood.
2
Boast not thy skill; The Righteous man falls often,
Yet falls but soft:
There may be dirt to mire him; but, no stones,
To crush his bones:
What, if he staggers? Nay, put case he be
Foiled on his knee;
That very knee will bend to heaven, and woo
For mercy too.
The true-bred Gamester ups a fresh; and then,
Falls to it again;
Whereas the leaden-hearted Coward lies,
And yields his conquered life; or cravend, dies:
3
Boast not thy Conquest; thou, that every hour,
Falst ten times lower;
Nay, have not power to rise, if not, in case,
To fall more base:
Thou wallow'st where I slip; and thou do tumble,
Where I but stumble:
Thou glory'st in thy slav'ries dirty Badges,
And fal'st for wages:
Sour grief, and sad repentance scowres and cleares
My stains with tears;
Thy falling keeps thy falling still in ure;
But when I slip, I stand the more secure.
4
LORD what a nothing is this little Span,
We call a Man!
What fenny trash maintains the smooth'ring fires
Of his desires!
How slight and short are his Resolves at longest!
How weak, at strongest.
O if a Sinner, held by thy fast hand
Can hardly stand,
Good GOD! in what a desperate case are they
That have no stay!
Man's state implies a necessary Curse;
When not himself, he is mad; when most himself, he is worse.
S. AMBROS. in Sermon. ad vincula.
Peter stood more firmly after he had lamented his fall, than before he fell.
Insomuch that he found more grace than he lost grace.

S. CHRYSOSTOM. in Ep. ad Heliod. monach.
It is no such heinous matter to fall afflicted; as being down, to lie
dejected: It is no danger for a soldier to receive a wound in battle, but
after the wound received, through despair of recovery, to refuse a Remedy; For
we often see wounded Champions wear the Palm at last, and after flight,
crowned with victory.

EPIG. 14.
Triumph not, Cupid, His mischance does show
Thy Trade; does once, what thou do always do:
Brag not too soon: Has thy prevailing hand
Foiled him? Ah Fool, Thou Have taught him how to stand:
VI.
emblem Patet ^ethe^; clauditue orbi.

(...)



XV. IER. XXXII.XL. I will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not
depart from me.
SO; now the soul's sublimed: Her sour desires
Are re-calcin'd in heavens well tempred Fires:
The heart restored and purged from drossie Nature,
Now finds the freedeme of a newborn Creature:
It lives another life, it breaths new Breath;
It neither feels nor fears the sting of death:
Like as the idle vagrant (having none)
That boldly dopts each house he viewes, his own;
Makes every purse his Chequer; and at's pleasure,
Walks forth, and taxes all the world, like Caesar,
At length, by virtue of a just command,
His sides are lent to a severer hand;
Whereon, his Pass, not fully understood,
Is taxed in a Manuscript of Blood;
Thus past from town to town, until he come
A sore Repentant to his native home:
Even so the rambling heart, that idly roves
From Crime to Sin; and uncontrol'd, removes
From lust to lust, when wanton flesh invites
From old-worne pleasures to new choice delights,
At length corrected by the filial Rod
Of his offended (but his gracious GOD)
And lasht from Sins to sighs; and, by degrees.
From sighs to vows; From vows, to bended knees,
From bended knees, to a true pensive breast;
From thence, to torments, not by tongues expressed,
Returns; and (from his sinful self exiled)
Finds a glad Father; He, a welcome Child:
O, then, it lives; O then, it lives involved:
In secret Raptures; pants to be dissolved:
The royal Offspring of a second Birth
Sets open to heaven, and shuts the doors to earth:
If love-sicke love-commanded Clouds should hap
To rain such showers as quickened Danaes lap:
Or dogs (far kinder than their purple Master)
Should lick his sores, he laughs nor weeps the faster.
If Earth (Heavens Rival) dart her idle Ray;
To heaven, it is Wax, and to the world, it is Clay;
If earth present delights, it scorns to draw,
But, like the Iet unrub'd, disdaines that straw:
No hope deceives it, and no doubt divides it;
No Grief disturbes it; and no Error guides it;
No Fear distracts it; and no Rage inflames it;
No Guilt condemns it; and no Folly shames it;
No sloth besots it; and no lust inthrals it;
No Scorn afflicts it; and no Passion gawles it:
It is a Carknet of immortal life;
An Arc of peace; The Lists of sacred Strife;
A purer piece of endless Transitory;
A Shrine of Grace; A little Throne of Glory;
A Heaven borne Offspring of a newborn birth;
An earthly Heaven; An ounce of heavenly Earth.
S. AUGUST. de spir. and anima.
O happy heart, where piety affects; where, humility subjects, where,
repentance corrects; where, obedience directs; where, perseverance perfects;
where, power protects; where, devotion projects; where, charity connects.

S. GREG.
Which way soever the heart turns it self (if carefully) it shall commonly
observe, that in those very things we lose God, in those very things we shall
find God; It shall find the heat of his power in consideration of those things,
in the love of which things he was most cold; and by what things it fell,
perverted, by those things it is raised, converted.

EPIG. 15.
My heart, but wherefore do I call thee so?
I have renounced my Intrest long ago:
When thou were false, and fleshly, I was thine;
Mine were thou never, till thou were not mine.
THE THIRD BOOK.
emblem Lord all my Desire is before Thee, and my groaning is not aid from
Thee^s 38


The Entertainment.
ALL you whose better thoughts are newly born,
And (rebaptiz'd with holy fire) can scorn
The worlds base trash, whose necks disdain to bear
The Imperious yoke of Satan; whose chaste ear
No wanton Songs of Sirens can surprise
With false delight; whose more than Eagle-eyes
Can view the glorious flames of Gold, and gaze
On glittring beams of Honor, and not daze;
Whose souls can spurn at pleasure, and deny
The loose Suggestions of the flesh; draw nigh:
And you, whose amorous, whose select desires
Would feel the warmth of those transcendent fires,
Which (like the rising Sun) put out the light
Of Venus star, and turn her day to night;
You that would love, and have your passions crowned
With greater happiness than can be found
In your own wishes; you, that would affect
Where neither, scorn, nor guile, nor disrespect
Shall wound your tortured Souls; that would enjoy,
Where neither want can pinch, nor fullness cloy;
Nor double doubt afflicts, nor baser Fear
Vnflames your courage in pursuit; draw near:
Shake hands with earth, and let your soul respect
Her Joys no further than her Joys reflect
Upon her Makers Glory, if thou swim
In wealth, See him in all; See all in Him:
Sink'st thou in want, and is thy small Cruise spent?
See Him in want; Enjoy ^im in Content:
Conceiv'st Him lodged in C^oste* or lost in pain?
In Prayer and Patience find Him out again*
Make Heaven thy Mistress, Let no Change remove
Thy loyal heart: Be fond; be sick of Love:
What if he stop his (...) knit his Brow?
At length he will be as fond, as sick as thou:
Dart up thy Soul in Groans: Thy secret Groan
Shall pierce his Ear, shall pierce his Ear, alone:
Dart up thp Soul in vows; Thy sacred Vow
Shall find him out, where heaven alone shall know:
Dart up thy Soul in sighs: Thy whispring sigh
Shall rouse his ears, and fear no listner nigh:
Send up thy Groans, thy Sighs, thy closet Vow;
There Is none, there is none shall know but Heaven and thou:
Groans fresht with vows, and vows made salt with tears,
Vnscale his eyes, and scale his conquered ears:
Shoot up the bosom Shafts of thy desire,
Feathered with Faith, and double forkt with Fire,
And they will hit; Fear not, where heaven bids Come:
Heavens never deaf, but when man's heart is dumb.
I.
emblem My Soul has desir^d Thee in ye Night W. Simpson ^c: Esa^. 26


I. ESAIAS XXIX.VI. My soul has desired thee in the Night.
GOod God! what horrid darkness does surround
My groping soul! How are my Senses bound
In utter shades; and, muffled from the light,
Lusk in the bosom of eternal night!
The bold-fac'd Lamp of heaven can set and rise;
And, with his morning glory, fill the eyes
Of gazing Mortals, his victorious Ray
Can chase the shadows, and restore the day:
Nights bashful Empress, though she often wayne,
As often repents her darkness; primes again;
And with her circling Horns does re-embrace
Her brothers wealth, and orbs her silver face.
But, ah, my Sun, deep swallowed in his Fall,
Is set, and cannot shine; nor rise at all:
My bankcrupt Waine can beg nor borrow light;
Alas, my darkness is perpetual night.
Falls have their Risings; Wainings have their Primes,
And desperate sorrows wait their better times,
Ebbs, have their Floods, and Autumnes have their Springs;
All States have Changes hurried with the swings
Of Chance, and Time, still tiding to and fro:
Terrestrial Bodies and Celestial too*
How often have I vainly grop'd about,
With lengthned Arms, to find a passage out,
That I might catch those Beams mine eye desires,
And bathe my soul in those Celestial fires:
Like as the Hagard, cloistered in her M^e,
To scowre her downy Robes, and to renew
Her broken Flags, preparing t'overlooke
The timorous Malard at the sliding Brook,
Iets often from Perch to Perch; from Stock to ground;
From ground to Wandow, thus surveying round
Her dove-befeatherd Prison, till at length,
(Calling her noble Birth to mind, and strength
Whereto her wing was borne) her ragged Beak
Nips off her dangling Iesses, strives to break
Her gingling Fetters, and begins to bate
At every glimspe, and darts at every grate:
Even so my weary soul, that long has bin
An Inmate in this Tenement of Sin,
Locked up by Cloud-brow'd Error, which invites
My cloystred Thoughts to feed on black delights,
Now scorns her shadows, and begins to dart
Her winged desires at Thee, that only art
The Sun she seeks, whose rising beams can fright
These duskie Clouds that make so dark a night:
Shine forth, great Glory, shine; that I may see
Both how to loath my self, and honor Thee:
But if my weakensse force Thee to deny
Thy Flames, yet lend the Twilight of thine Eye:
If I must want those Beams I wish, yet grant,
That I, at least, may wish those Beams I want.
S. AUGUST. Soliloq. cap. 33.
There was a great and dark cloud of vanity before mine eyes, so that I could
not see the Sun of Justice, and the light of Truth: I being the Son of
darkness, was involved in darkness: I loved my darkness, because I knew not
thy Light: I was blind, and loved my blindness, and did walk from darkness
to darkness: But Lord, thou art my God, who have led me from darkness, and
the shadow of death; have called me into this glorious light, and behold, I see.

EPIG. 1.
My soul, cheer up: What if the night belong?
Heaven finds an ear, when sinners find a tongue:
Thy tears are Morning showers: Heaven bids me say,
When Peter's Cock begins to crow, it is Day.
II.
emblem O Lord Thou know m^ Foolishness and my Sin^s ari' not hid from Thee
Ps: (...) ^o 5.


II. PSALM. LXIX.III. O Lord, thou know my foolishness, and my sinnnes are
not hid from thee.
See thou this fulsome Idiot? In what measure
He seems transported with the anticke pleasure
Of childish Baubles? Can thou but admire
The empty fullness of his vain desire?
Can thou conceive such poor delights as these
Can fill th'satiate soul of Man, or please
The fond Aspect of his deluded eye?
Reader, such very fools are thou and I:
False puffes of Honor; the deceitful streams
Of wealth; the idle, vain; and empty dreams
Of pleasure, are our Traffic, and ensnare
Our souls; the threefold subject of our Care:
We toil for Trash, we barter solid Joys
For ayry Triffes; sell our Heaven for Toys:
We snatch at Barley grains, whilst Pearls stand by
Despised; Such very Fools are Thou and I;
Aym'st thou at Honor? Does not th'Ideot shake it:
In his left hand? Fond man, step forth and take it:
Or would thou Wealth? See how the fool presents thee
With a full Basket; if such Wealth contents thee:
Would thou take pleasure? If the Fool unstride
His prauncing Stallion, thou may up, and ride:
Fond man: Such is the Pleasure, Wealth, and Honor
The earth affords such Fools as dote upon her;
Such is the Game whereat earths Idiots fly;
Such Idiots, ah, such Fools are thou and I
Had rebell-mans Foole-hardinesse extended
No further than himself, and there, had ended,
It had been Just; but, thus, enraged to fly
Vnon the eternal eyes of Majesty,
And drag the Son of Glory, from the breast
Of his indulgent Father; to arrest
His great and sacred Person; in disgrace,
To spit and spaule upon his Sun-bright face;
To taunt him with base terms; and, being bound,
To scourge his soft, his trembling sides; to wound
His head with Thorns; his heart, with humane fears;
His hands, with nails; and his pale Flanck with spears;
And, then, to paddle in the purer stream
Of his spilt Blood, is more than most extreme:
Great Builder of mankind, can thou propound
All this to thy bright eyes, and not confound
Thy handy-worke? O, can Thou choose but see,
That made the Eye? Can ought be hid from Thee?
Thou see our persons, LORD, and not our Guilt;
Thou see not what thou may, but what thou will:
The Hand, that formed us, is enforced to be
A Screene set up betwixt thy Work and Thee:
Look, look upon that Hand, and thou shall spy
An open wound, a Through-fare for thine Eye;
Or if that wound be closed, that passage be
Denied between Thy gracious eyes, and me,
Yet view the Scarre; That Star will countermand
Thy Wrath: O read my Fortune in thy Hand.
S. CHRYSOSTOM. Hom. 4. Joan.
Fools seem to abound in wealth, when they want all things; they seem to
enjoy happiness, when indeed they are only most miserable; neither do they
understand that they are deluded by their fancy, till they be delivered from
their folly.

S. GREG. in Mor.
By so much the more are we inwardly foolish, by how much we strive to seem
outwardly wise.

EPIG. 2.
Rebellious fool, what has thy Folly done:
Controld thy GOD, and crucified His Son:
How sweetly has the LORD of life deceived thee?
Thou shedst His Blood, and that shed Blood has saved thee.
III.
emblem Have mercy on me o Ld for I am weak o Ld heal me for my bones are
vexed Ps: ^2.


III. PSALM. VI.II. Have mercy, Lord, upon me, for I am weak, O Lord heal me,
for my bones are vexed.
Soul. Jesus Soul. AH, Son of David, help:

Ies. What sinful cry
Implores the Son of David?

Soul. It is I:

Ies. Who art thou?

Soul. Oh, a deeply wounded breast
That Is heavy laden, and would feign have rest.

Ies. I have no scraps, and dogs must not be fed
Like household Children, with the childrens bread:

Soul. True Lord; yet tolerate a hungry whelp
To lick their crumbs: O, Son of David, help.

Ies. Poor Soul, what ail'st thou?

Soul. O I burn, I fry*
I cannot rest; I know not where to fly
To find some case; I turn my blubbered face
From man to man; I roll from place to place,
To Avoid my tortures, to obtain relief,
But still am dogged and haunted with my grief:
My midnight torments call the sluggish light,
And when the morning's come, they woo the night.

Ies. Surcease thy tears, and speak thy free desires;

Soul. Quench, quench my flames, and swage these scorching fires

Ies. Can thou believe my hand can cure thy grief?

Soul. Lord, I believe; Lord, help my unbelief:

Ies. Hold forth thy Arm, and let my fingers try
Thy Pulse; where (chiefly) does thy torment lie?

Soul. From head to foot; it reigns in every part,
But plays the selfe-law'd Tyrant in my heart.

Ies. Can thou digest? can relish wholesome food?
How stands thy taste?

Soul. To nothing that is good:
All sinful trash, and earths unsav'ry stuff
I can digest, and relish well enough:

Ies. Is not thy blood as cold as hot, by turns?

Soul. Cold to what is good; to what is bad, it burns:

Ies. How old's thy grief?

Soul. I took it at the Fall
With eating Fruit.

Ies. It Is Epidemicall;
Thy blood's infected, and The Infection sprung
From a bad Liver: It Is a fever strong.
And full of death, unless, with present speed,
A vein be opened; Thou must die, or bleed.

Soul. O I am faint, and spent: That Lance that shall
Let forth my blood, lets forth my life withal;
My soul wants Cordials, and has greater need
Of blood, than (being spent so far) to bleed:
I faint already: If I bleed, I die.

Ies. It Is either thou must bleed, sick soul, or I:
My blood's a Cordial. He that sucks my veins,
Shall cleanse his own, and conquer greater pains
Than these: Cheer up: this precious Blood of mine
Shall cure thy Grief; my heart shall bleed for thine:
Believe, and view me with a faithful eye;
Thy soul shall neither languish, bleed, nor die.

S. AUGUST. lib. 10. Confess.
Lord, Be merciful unto me: Ah me: Behold, I hide not my wounds. Thou art a
Physician, and I am sick; Thou art merciful, and I am miserable.

S. GREG. in Pastoral.
O Wisdom, with how sweet an art does thy wine and oil restore health to my
healthlesse soul! How powerfully merciful, how mercifully powerful art thou!
Powerful, for me, Merciful, to me!

EPIG. 3.
Can thou be sick, and such a Doctor by?
Thou can not live, unless thy Doctor die!
Strange kind of grief, that finds no medicine good
To swage her pains, but the Physicians Blood!
IV.
emblem Look upon my Affliction and mi^^^y and forgive me all my Sin (...)



IV. PSALM. XXV.XVIII. Look upon my affliction and my pain, and forgive all my
sins.
BOth work, and strokes? Both lash, and labor too?
What more could Edom, or proud Ashur do?
Stripes after stripes? and blows succeeding blows?
Lord, has thy scourge no mercy, and my woes
No end? My pains no ease? No intermission?
Is this the state? Is this the sad condition
Of those that trust thee? Will thy goodness please
T'allow no other favors? None but these?
Will not the Rethrick of my torments move?
Are these the symptoms? these the signs of love?
Is It not enough, enough that I fulfill
The toylsome task of thy laborious Mill?
May not this labor expiate, and purge
My sin, without th'addition of thy scourge?
Look on my cloudy brow, how fast it raines
Sad showers of sweat, the fruits of fruitless pains:
Behold these ridges; see what purple furrows
Thy plow has made; O think upon those sorrows,
That once were thine; wilt, will thou not be wooed
To mercy, by the charms of sweat and blood?
Can thou forget that drowsy Mount, wherein
Thy dull Disciples slept? Was not my sin
There, punished in thy soul? Did not this brow
Then sweat in thine? Were not those drops enough?
Remember Golgotha where that springtide
Over flowed thy sov'raigne Sacramental side;
There was no sin; there was no guilt in Thee,
That caused those pains; Thou sweatst; thou bledst for me:
Was there not blood enough, when one small drop
Had power to ransom thousands worlds, and stop
The m^uth of Justice? Lord, I bled before,
In thy deep wounds; Can Justice challenge more?
O do thou vainly labor to hedge in
Thy losses from my sides? My blood is thin;
And thy free bounty scorns such easy thrift;
No no* thy blood came not as lone, but gift:
But must I ever grind? And must I earne
Nothing bu^ stripes? O, wi t thou disalterne
The rest thou gav'st? Have thou perused the curse
Thou laydst on Adams fall, and made it worse?
Can thou repent of mercy? Heaven thought good
Lost man should feed in sweat; not work in blood:
Why do thou wound th'already wounded breast?
Ah me; my life is but a pain at best?
I am but dying dust: my days, a span;
What pleasure take thou in the blood of man?
Spare, spare thy scourge, and be not so austere;
Send fewer strokes, or lend more strength to bear.
S. BERN. Hom. 81. in Cant.
Miserable man! Who shall deliver me from the reproach of this shameful
bondage? I am a miserable man; but a free man; free, because a man; Miserable,
because a servant: In regard of my bondage, miserable; In regard of my will,
inexcusable: For my will, that was free, be slaved it self to sin, by
assenting to sin; for he that commits sin, is the servant to sin.

EPIG. 4.
Tax not thy God: Thine own defaults did urge
This twofold punishment; the Mill, the Scourge:
Thy sin's the Author of thy self tormenting:
Thou grind'st for sinning; scourged for not repenting:
V.
emblem Remember I beseech thee, that thou have made me as the clay, and will thou bri^^ me into dust again Job. (...) will s^^p^


V. JOB. X.IX. Remember, I beseech thee, that thou have made me as the clay,
and will thou bring me to dust again?
THus from the bosom of the new-made earth,
Poor man was delv'd, and had his unborne birth:
The same the stuff; the selfsame hand does trim
The Plant that fades, the Beast that dies; and Him:
One was their Sire; one was their common mother;
Plants are his sisters; and the Beast; his brother,
The elder too, Beasts draw the selfsame breath,
Wax old alike, and die the selfsame death:
Plants grow as he, with fairer robes arraid;
Alike they flourish, and alike they fade:
The beast, in sense, exceeds him; and, in growth,
The three-ag'd Oak does thrice exceed them both:
Why look thou then so big, thou little span
Of earth? What art thou more, in being man?
I; but my great Creator did inspire
My chosen earth with that diviner fire
Of Reason; gave me Judgment, and a Will;
That, to know good; this, to choose good from ill:
He put the raines of power in my free hand,
And jurisdiction oversea and land:
He gave me art, to lengthen out my span
Of life, and made me all, in being man*
I; but thy Passion has committed treason
Against the sacred person of thy Reason;
Thy Judgment is corrupt; perverse thy Will;
That knows no good; and this makes choice of ill:
The greater height sends down the deeper fall,
And good, declined, turns bad; turns worst of all:
Say then proud inch of living earth, what can
Thy greatness claim the more in being man?
O but my soul transcends the pitch of nature,
Borne up by The Image of her high Creator;
Out-braves the life of reason, and beats down
Her waxen wings kicks off her brazen Crown;
My earth's a living Temple t'entertaine
The King of Glory, and his glorious train:
How can I mend my Title then? where can
Ambition find a higher style than man?
Ah, but that Image is defaced and soiled;
Her Temple's razed, her altars all defiled;
Her vessels are polluted, and distained
With loathed lust; her ornaments profaned;
Her oil forsaken lamps, and hallowed Tapoure
Put out; her incense breaths unsav'ry vapors:
Why swel'st thou then so big, thou little span
Of earth? What art thou more in being man?
Eternal Porter, whose blessed hands did lay
My course foundation from a sod of clay,
Thou know my slender vessell's apt to leake;
Thou know my brittle Temper's prone to break;
Are my Bones Brazzill, or my Flesh of Oak?
O, mend what thou have made, what I have broke:
Look, look with gentle eyes, and in thy day
Of vengeance, Lord remember I am clay.
S. AUGUST Soliloq. 32.
Shall I ask, who made me? It was thou that made me, without whom nothing was
made: Thou art my maker, and I thy work: I thank thee my Lord God, by whom I
live, and by whom all things subsist, because thou made me: I thank thee O
my Potter, because thy hands have made me, because thy hands have formed me.

EPIG. 5.
Why swell'st thou, Man, puffed up with Fame, and Purse?
Thou Art better earth, but borne to dig the worse:
Thou came from earth, to earth thou must return;
And art but earth, cast from the womb, to th'^ne.
VI.
emblem What shall I do unto thee, O thou ^ preserver of men; why have thou set
me as a mark against thee. Job. 7.2.


VI. JOB. VII.XX. I have sinned: What shall I do unto thee, O thou preserver
of men, why have thou set me as a mark against thee?
LOrd I have done: and Lord, I have misdone;
It Is folly to contest, to strive with one,
That is too strong; it is folly to assail
Or prove an Arm, that will, that must prevail?
Iv'e done, I Have done; these trembling hands have thrown
Their daring weapons down: The day's thine own:
Forbear to strike, where thou have won the field;
The palm, the palm is thine: I yield, I yield.
These treacherous hands, that were so vainly bold
To try a thrivelesse combat, and to hold
Selfe-wounding weapons up, are now extended
For mercy from thy hand; that knee that bended
Upon her guardlesse guard, does now repent
Upon this naked floor; See, both are bent,
And sue for pity; O, my ragged wound
Is deep and desperate; it is drenched and drowned
In blood, and briny tears: It does begin
To stink without, and putrify within:
Let that victorious hand, that now appears
Just in my blood, prove gracious to my tears:
Thou great Preserver of presumptuous man,
What shall I do? What satisfaction can
Poor dust and ashes make? O, if that blood
That yet remains unshed, were half as good
As blood of Oxen; if my death might be
An offering to atone my God and me,
I would disdain injurious life, and stand
A suitor, to be wounded from thy hand.
But may thy wrongs be measured by the span
Of life? or balanced with the blood of man?
No, no, eternal sin expects for guerdon,
Eternal penance, or eternal pardon:
Lay down thy weapons; turn thy wrath away;
And pardon him that has no price to pay;
Enlarge that soul, which base presumption binds;
Thy justice cannot loose what mercy finds:
O thou that wilt not bruise the broken reed,
Rub not my sores, nor prick the wounds that bleed:
Lord, if the peevish Infant fights, and flies,
With unpar'd weapons, at his mothers eyes,
Her frowns (half mixed with smiles) may chance to show
An angry love-trick on his arm, or so;
Where, if the babe but make a lip, and cry,
Her heart begins to melt; and by and by,
She coakes his deawy cheeks; her babe she blisses,
And choaks her language with a thousand kisses.
I am that child; lo, here I prostrate lie,
Pleading for mercy; I repent, and cry
For gracious pardon: let thy gentle ears
Hear that in words, what mothers judge in tears:
See not my frailties, Lord, but through my fear,
And look on every trespass through a tear:
Then calm thy anger, and appear more mild:
Remember, thou art a Father; I, a child.
S. BERN. Ser. 21. in Cant.
Miserable man! Who shall deliver me from the reproach of this shameful
bondage? I am a miserable man, but a free man: Free because like to God;
miserable, because against God: O keeper of mankind, why have thou set me as a
mark against thee? Thou have set me, because thou have not hindered me. It is
just that thy enemy should be my enemy, and that he who repugnes thee, should
repugne me: I who am against thee, am against my self.

EPIG. 6.
But formed, and fight? But borne, and then rebel?
How small a blast will make a bubble swell?
But dare the floor affront the hand that laid it?
So apt is dust to fly in's face that made it.
VII.
emblem Wherefore hidest thou thy face and hold me for thine Enemy Job:
^3.24 W. S. sc.


VII. JOB XIII.XXIV. Wherefore hidest thou thy face, and hold me for thine
enemy?
WHy do thou shade thy lovely face? O why
Does that ecclipsing hand so long, deny
The Sun-shining of thy soule-enliv'ning eye?
Without that Light, what light remains in me
Thou art my Life, my Way, my Light; in Thee
I live, I move, and by thy beams I see:
Thou art my Life; If thou but turn away,
My life's a thousand deaths: thou art my Way;
Without thee, Lord, I travel not but stray.
My Light thou art; without thy glorious sight,
Mine eyes are darkened with perpetual night.
My God, thou art my Way, my Life, my Light.
Thou art my Way; I wander, if thou fly:
Thou art my Light; It hid, how blind am I?
Thou art my Life; If thou withdraw, I die:
Mine eyes are blind and dark, I cannot see;
To whom, or whether should my da^kenesse flee,
But to the Light? And who is that Light but Thee?
My path is lost; my wandering steps do stray;
I cannot safely go, nor safely stay;
Whom should I seek but Thee, my Path, my Way?
O, I am dead: To whom shall I, poor I
Repair? To whom shall my sad Ashes fly
But Life? And where is Life but in thine eye?
And yet thou turn'st away thy face, and fly'st me;
And yet I sue for Grace, and thou deny'st me;
Speak, art thou angry, Lord, or only try'st me?
Vnskreene those heavenly lamps, or tell me why
Thou shad'st thy face; Perhaps, thou think, no eye
Can view those flames, and not drop down and die:
If that be all; shine forth, and draw thee nigher;
Let me behold and die; for my desire
Is Phoenix-like to perish in that Fire.
Death conquered Laz'rus was redeemed by Thee;
If I am dead, Lord set deaths prisoner free;
Am I more spent, or stink I worse than he?
If my pufft light be out, give leave to tine
My flamelesse snuff at that bright Lamp of thine;
O what is thy Light the less for lighting mine?
If I have lost my Path, great Shepherd, say,
Shall I still wander in a doubtful way?
Lord, shall a Lamb of Isr'els sheepfold stray?
Thou art the Pilgrims Path; the blind man's Eye?
The dead man's Life; on thee my hopes rely;
If thou remove, I err; I grope; I die:
Disclose thy Sunbeams; close thy wings, and stay;
See see, how I am blind and dead, and stray,
O thou, that art my Light, my Life, my Way.
S. AUGUST. Soliloq. cap. 1.
Why do thou hide thy face? Happily thou will say, none can see thy face and
live: Ah Lord, let me die, that I may see thee; let me see thee, that I may
die: I would not live, but die; That I may see Christ, I desire death; that I
may live with Christ, I despise life.

ANSELM. Med. cap. 5.
O excellent hiding, which is become my perfection! My God, thou hidest thy
treasure, to kindle my desire; Thou hidest thy pearl, to inflame the seeker;
thou delay'st to give, that thou may teach me to importune, seem not to
hear, to make me persever,

EPIG. 7.
If heavens all-quickning Eyes vouchsafe to shine
Upon our souls, we slight; If not, we whine:
Our Equinoctial hearts can never lie
Secure, beneath the Tropicks of that eye.
VIII.
emblem O that my Head were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of tears! Ier:
9.^. Will. Marshall sculpsit.


VIII. IER. IX.I. O that my head were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of
tears, that I might weep day and night.
O That mine eyes were springs, and could transform
Their drops to seas! My sighs, into a storm
Of Zeal, and sacred Violence, wherein
This laboring vessel, laden with her sin,
Might suffer sudaine shipwreck, and be split
Upon that Rock, where my drenched soul may sit
Orewhelm'd with plenteous passion; O, and there
Drop, drop into an everlasting tear!
Ah me! that every sliding vein that wanders
Through this vast Isle, did work her wild Meanders
In brackish tears, in stead of blood, and swell
This flesh with holy Dropsies, from whose Well,
Made warm with sighs, may fume my wasting breath
Whilst I dissolve in streams, and reeke to death!
These narrow sluices of my dribling eyes
Are much too straight for those quick springs that rise,
And hourly fill my Temples to the top;
I cannot shed for every sin a drop:
Great builder of mankind, why have thou sent,
Such swelling floods, an^ ^ade so small a vent?
O that this flesh had been composed of snow,
Instead of earth; and bones of Ice, that so,
Feeling the Fervor of my sin; and loathing
The fire I feel, I might be thawed to nothing!
O thou, that did, with hopeful joy, entombe,
Me thrice three Moons in thy laborious womb,
And then, with joyful pain, broughtst forth a Son,
What worth thy labor, has thy labor done?
What was there? Ah! what was there in my birth
That could deserve the easiest smile of mirth?
A man was borne: Alas, and what is a man?
A scuttle full of dust, a measured span
Of flitting Time; a furnished Pack, whose wares
Are sullen Griefs, and soule-tormenting Cares:
A vale of tears; a vessel tunn'd with breath,
By sickness broacht, to be drawn out by death:
A hapless, helpless thing; that, borne, does cry
To feed; that feeds to live; that lives to die.
Great God and Man, whose eyes spent drops so often
For me, that cannot weep enough; O soften
These marble brains, and strike this flinty rock;
Or if the music of thy Peter's Cock
Will more prevail, fill, fill my harkening ears
With that sweet sound, that I may melt in tears:
I cannot weep, until thou broach ruin eye;
Or give me vent, or else I burst, and die.
S. AMBROS: in Psalm. 118.
He that commits sins to be wept for, cannot weep for sins committed: And
being himself most lamentable, has no tears to lament his offenses.

NAZIANZ. Orat. 3.
Tears are the deluge of sin, and the worlds sacrifice:

S. HIEROM. in Esaiam.
Prayer appeases God, but a tear compels him: That moves him, but this
constraines him.

EPIG. 8.
Earth is an Island ported round with Fears;
The way to Heaven is through the Sea of tears.
It is a stormy passage, where is found
The wrack of many a ship, but no man drowned.
IX.
emblem The sorroues of hell have encompassed me the snares of death have
overtaken me. psalm. 17: Will simpson


IX. PSALM. XVIII.V. The sorrows of hell compassed me about, and the snares
of death prevented me.
IS not this Type well cut? In every part
Full of rich cunning? filled with Zeuxian Art?
Are not the Hunters, and their Stygian Hounds
Limm'd full to th'life? Did ever hear the sounds,
The music, and the lip-divided breaths
Of the strong-winded Horn Recheats, and deaths
Done more exact? The Infernal Nimrods hollow?
The lawless Purliews? and the Game they follow?
The hidden Engines? and the snares that lie
So undiscovered, so obscure to the eye?
The new-drawne net? and her entangled Prey?
And him that closes it? Beholder, say,
Is It not well done? seems not an em'lous strife
Betwixt the rare cut picture, and the life?
These Purlieu-men are Devils; And the Hounds,
(Those quick nosed Canibals that scour the grounds)
Temptations and the Game these Friends pursue,
Are humane souls, which still they have in view;
Whose fury if they chance to escape, by flying,
The skillful Hunter plants his net, close lying
On th'unsuspected earth, bayted with treasure,
Ambitious honor, and selfe-wasting pleasure;
Where if the soul but stoop, death stands prepared
To draw the net, and drawn, the soul's ensnared.
Poor soul! how art thou hurried to and fro?
Where can thou safely stay? where safely go?
If stay: these hot-mouth'd Hounds are apt to tear thee,
If go; the snares enclose, the nets ensnare thee:
What good in this bad world has power t'invite thee
A willing Guest? wherein can earth delight thee?
Her pleasures are but Itch; Her wealth, but Cares;
A world of dangers, and a world of snares:
The close Pursuers busy hands do plant
Snares in thy substance; Snares attend thy want;
Snares in thy credit; Snares in thy disgrace;
Snares in thy high estate; Snares in thy base;
Snares tuck thy bed; and Snares arround thy board;
Snares watch thy thoughts; and Snares attache thy word;
Snares in thy quiet; Snares in thy commotion;
Snares in thy diet; Snares in thy devotion;
Snares lurk in thy resolves; Snares, in thy doubt;
Snares lie within thy heart, and Snares, without;
Snares are above thy head, and Snares, beneath;
Snares in thy sickness; Snares are in thy death:
O, if these Purlieus be so full of danger,
Great God of Hearts, the worlds sole sov'raigne Ranger,
Preserve thy Dear, and let my soul be blessed
In thy safe Forest, where I seek for rest:
Then let the Hell Hounds roar; I fear no ill;
Rouse me they may, but have no power to kill.
S. AMBROS. lib. 4. in cap. 4. Lucae.
The reward of honors, the height of power, the delicacie of diet, and the
beauty of a harlot are the snares of the Devil.

S. AMBROS. de bono mortis.
Whilst thou seek pleasures, thou runnest into snares, for the eye of the
harlot is the snare of the Adulterer.

SAVANAR.
In eating, he sets before us Gluttony; In generation, luxury; In labor
sluggishnesse; In conversing, envy; in governing, covetousness; In correcting,
arger; In honor, pride; In the heart, he sets evil thoughts; in the mouth,
evil words; in actions evil works; when awake, he moves us to evil actions;
when asleep, to filthy dreams.

EPIG. 9.
Be sad, my Heart, Deep dangers wait thy mirth;
Thy soul's way laid by sea; by Hell; by earth;
Hell has her hounds; Earth, snares; the Sea, a shelfe;
But most of all, my heart, beware thy self.
X.
emblem Enter not into judgment with thy servant for no man living shall be
justified in thy sight Will simpson


X. PSALM. CXLIII.II. Enter not into judgment with thy servant, for in thy
sight shall no man living be justified.
Jesus. Justice. Sinner. Ies. BRing forth the prisner, Justice.

Just. Thy commands
Are done, just Judge; See here the prisner stands.

Ies. What has the prisner done? Say; what is the cause
Of his committment?

Just. He has broke the laws
Of his too gracious God; conspired the death
Of that great Majesty that gave him breath,
And heaps transgression, Lord, upon transgression:

Ies. How know thou this?

Iu. Even by his own confession:
His sins are crying; and they cried aloud;
They cried to heaven; they cried to heaven for blood:

Ies. What say thou sinner? have thou ought to plead,
That sentence should not pass? Hold up thy head,
And show thy brazen, thy rebellious face.

Sin. Ah me! I dare not: I Am too vile and base,
To tread upon the earth, much more, to lift
Mine eyes to heaven; I need no other shrift
Than mine own conscience; Lord, I must confess,
I am no more than dust, and no whit less
Than my Indictment styles me; Ah, if thou
Search too severe, with too severe a Brow,
What Flesh can stand? I have transgrest thy laws;
My merits plead thy vengeance; not my cause.

Just. Lord shall I strike the blow?

Ies. Hold, Justice, stay,
Sinner, speak on; what have thou more to say?

Sin. Vile as I am, and of my self abhorred,
I am thy handy-worke, thy creature, Lord,
Stamped with thy glorious Image, and at first,
Most like to thee, though now a poor accursed
Convicted Caitiffe, and degen'rous creature,
Here trembling at thy Bar.

Just. Thy fault's the greater;
Lord shall I strike the blow?

Ies Hold, Justice, stay,
Speak, sinner; have thou nothing more to say?

Sin. Nothing but Mercy, Mercy; Lord, my state
Is miserably poor and desperate;
I quite renounce my self, the world, and flee
From Lord to Jesus; from thy self, to Thee.

Just. Cease thy vain hopes; my angry God has vowed:
Abused mercy must have blood for blood:
Shall I yet strike the blow?

Ies. Stay, Justice, hold;
My bowels yearne, my fainting blood grows cold,
To view the trembling wretch; Me thinks, I spy
My fathers Image in the prisoners eye:

Just. I cannot hold.

Jes. Then turn thy thirsty blade
Into my sides: let there the wound be made:
Cheer up, dear soul; Redeem thy life with mine:
My soul shall smart; My heart shall bleed for thine.

Sin. O ground-lesse deepes! O love beyond degree!
The Offended dies, to set the offender free.

S. AUGUST.
Lord, if I have done that, for which thou may damn me; thou have not lost
that, whereby thou may save me: Remember not sweet Jesus, thy justice
against the sinner, but thy benignity toward thy Creature: Remember not to
proceed against a guilty soul, but remember thy mercy toward a miserable
wretch: Forget the insolence of the provoker, and behold the misery of the
invoker; for what is Jesus but a Savior.

ANSELM.
Have respect to what thy Son has done for me, and forget what my sins
have done against thee: My flesh has provoked thee to vengeance; let the flesh
of Christ move thee to mercy: It is much that my rebellions have deserved; but
it is more that my Redeemer has merited.

EPIG. 10.
Mercy of mercies! He that was my drudge
Is now my Advocate, is now my Judge:
He suffers, pleads, and sentences, alone:
Three I adore, and yet adore but One.
XI.
emblem Let not the water-flood overflow me* neither let the deep swallow me
up* Ps: 69.15. Will: Simpson sculpsit


XI. PSALM. LXIX.XV. Let not the water-flood overflow me, neither let the
deepes swallow me up.
THe world's a Sea; my flesh, a ship, that is manned
With laboring Thoughts; and steered by Reasons hand:
My heart's the Sea-mans Card, whereby she sails;
My loose Affections are the greater Sails:
The Top-saile is my Fancy; and the Gusts
That fill these wanton Sheets, are worldly Lusts.
Prayer is the Cable, at whose end appears
The Anchor Hope, never slipped but in our fears:
My Will's th'unconstant Pilot, that commands
The staggring Keele; my Sins are like the Sands:
Repentance is the Bucket; and mine Eye
The Pumpe, unused (but in extremes) and dry:
My conscience is the Plummet, that does press
The deepes, but seldom cries, A fathom less:
Smooth Calm's security; The Gulf, despair;
My Freight's Corruption, and this life's my Fan
My soul's the Passenger, confusedly driven
From fear to fright; her landing Port, is Heaven.
My seas are stormy, and my Ship does leake;
My Sailors rude* My Steersman faint and weak:
My Canvace torn, it flaps from side to side;
My Cable's crakt; my Anchor's slightly tied;
My Pilot's crazed; my shipwreck sands are cloak'd;
My Bucket's broken, and my Pump is choked;
My Calm's deceitful; and my Gulf too near;
My Wares are flubber'd; and my Fare's too dear:
My Plummet's light, it cannot sink nor sound;
O shall my Rock-be threatened Soul be drowned?
Lord still the seas, and shield my ship from harm;
Instruct my Saylours; guide my Steersmans Arm;
Touch thou my Compass, and renew my Sails;
Send stiffer courage, or send milder gales;
Make strong my Cable; bind my Anchor faster;
Direct my Pilot, and be thou his Master;
Object the Sands to my more serious view,
Make sound my Bucket; bore my Pump anew;
New cast my Plummet, make it apt to try
Where the Rocks lurk, and where the Quicksands lie;
Guard thou the Gulf, with love; my Calmes, with Care*
Cleanse thou my Freight; accept my slender Fare;
Refresh the Sea-sick passenger; cut short
His Voyage; land him in his wished Port:
Thou, thou, whom winds and stormy seas obey,
That, through the deepes, gav'st grumbling Isr'ell way.
Say to my soul, be safe; and then mine eye
Shall scorn grim death, although grim death stand by;
O thou whose strength-reviving Arm did cherish
Thy sinking Peter, at the point to perish,
Reach forth thy hand, or bid me tread the Wave,
I Will come, I Will come, The voice that calls will save.
S. AMBROS. Apol. post. pro David. Cap. 3.
The confluence of lusts make a great Tempest, which in this sea disturbes the
seafaring soul, that reason cannot govern it.

S. AUGUST. Soliloq. Cap. 35.
We labor in a boisterous sea: Thou stand upon the shore and see our
dangers: Give us grace to hold a middle course betwixt Scylla and Charybdis,
that both dangers escaped, we may arrive at our Port, secure.

EPIG. 11.
My soul; the seas are rough; and thou a stranger
In these false coasts; O keep aloof; there is danger:
Cast forth thy Plummet; see a rock appears;
Thy ship wants sea-roome; Make it with thy tears.
XII.
emblem O that thou would protect me in the grave and hide me ontill thy
fury be past* Job 14 Will: simpson sculp:


XII. JOB XIV.XIII. O that thou would hide me in the grave, that thou
would keep me secret until thy wrath be past!
O Whether shall I fly? what path untrod
Shall I seek out, to escape the flaming rod
Of my offended, of my angry God?
Where shall I sojourne? What kind sea will hide
My head from Thunder? where shall I abide,
Until his flames be quenched, or laid aside?
What if my feet should take their hasty flight,
And seek protection in the shades of night?
Alas, no shades can blind the God of Light:
What, if my soul should take the wings of day,
And find some desert; if she spring away,
The wings of vengeance clip as fast as they:
What if some solid Rock should entertain
My frighted soul? Can solid Rocks restrain
The stroke of Justice, and not cleave in twain?
Nor Sea, nor Shade, nor Shield, nor Rock, nor Cave,
Nor silent deserts, nor the sullen grave,
Where flame eyed fury means to smite, can save.
The Seas will part; graves open; Rocks will spl^t;
The shield will cleave; the frighted shadows flit;
Where Justice arms, her fiery darts must hit.
No, no, if sterne-brow'd vengeance means to thunder,
There is no place above; beneath, nor under,
So close, but will unlocke, or rive in sunder.
It Is vain to flee; It Is neither here nor there
Can escape that hand until that hand forbear;
Ah me! where is he not, that is every where?
It Is vain to flee; till gentle mercy show
Her better eye, the farther off we go,
The swing of Justice deals the mightier blow*
Th'ingenious child, corrected, does not fly
His angry mothers hand, but clings more nigh.
And quenches, with his tears, her flaming eye.
Shadows are faithless, and the rocks are false;
No trust in brass; no trust in marble walls;
Poor Cotts are e'ven as safe as Princes Halls:
Great God, there is no safety here below;
Thou art my Fortress, though thou seem my foe,
It Is thou, that strik'st the stroke, must guard the blow.
Thou art my God; by thee I fall or stand;
Thy Grace has given me courage to withstand
All tortures, but my Conscience, and thy Hand.
I know thy Justice is thy self; I know,
Just God, thy very self is mercy too;
If not to thee, where? whether should I go?
Then work thy will; If passion bid me flee,
My Reason shall obey; my wings shall be
Stretched out no further than from Thee to Thee.
S. AUGUST. in Psalm. 30.
Whether fly I? To what place can I safely fly? To what mountain? To what
den? To what strong house? What Castle shall I hold? What walls shall hold me?
Whethersoever I go, my self follows me: For whatsoever thou flyest, O man,
thou may, but thy own Conscience: wheresoever O Lord I go, I find thee, if
angry, a Revenger; if appeased, a Redeemer: What way have I, but to flee from
thee, to thee: That thou may avoid thy God, address thee to thy Lord.

EPIG. 12.
Has vengeance found thee? Can thy fears command
No Rocks to shield thee from her thundering hand?
Know thou not where to escape? I Will tell thee where;
My soul make clean thy Conscience; Hide thee there;
XIII.
emblem Are not my days few? Cease then, and let me alone that I may bewail
me a little

Job. 10.20. Will. simpson. sculpsit



XIII. JOB. X.XX. Are not my days few? Cease then, and let me alone, that I
may bewail my self a little.
MY Glass is half unspent: Forbear t'rrest
My thriftlesse day too soon: My poor request
Is that my glass may run but out the rest.
My time-devoured minutes will be done
Without thy help; See, see how swift they run;
Cut not thy thread before my thread be spun:
The gaine's not great I purchase by this stay;
What loss sustain'st thou by so small delay,
To whom ten thousand years are but a day?
My following eye can hardly make a shift
To count my winged hours; they fly so swift,
They scarce deserve the bounteous name of gift.
The secret wheels of hurrying Time do give
So short a warning, and so fast they drive,
That I am dead before I seem to live:
And what is a life? A weary Pilgrimage,
Whose glory, in one day, does fill the stage
With Childhood, Manhood, and decrepit Age.
And what is a Life; the flourishing Array
Of the proud Summer meadow, which to day
Wears her green plush; and is, to morrow, Hay;
And what is a Life? A blast sustained with clothing,
Maintained with food; retained with vile selfe-loathing,
Then weary of it self, again'd to nothing.
Read on this dial, how the shades devour
My short-lived winters day; How'rs eats up hour;
Alas, the total's but from eight to four.
Behold these Lillies (which thy hands have made
Fair copies of my life, and open laid
To view) how soon they droop, how soon they fade!
Shade not that dial, night will blind too soon;
My nonag'd day already points to noone;
How simple is my suit? How small my Boon!
Not do I beg this slender inch, to while
The time away, or falsely to beguile
My thoughts with joy; Here Is nothing worth a smile.
No, no: It Is not to please my wanton ears:
With frantic mirth; I beg but hours; not years:
And what thou giv'st me, I will give to tears.
Draw not that soul which would be rather led;
That Seed has yet not broke my Serpents head;
O shall I die before my sins are dead?
Behold these Rags; Am I a fitting Guest
To taste the dainties of thy royal Feast,
With hands and face unwash'd, ungirt, unblest?
First, let the Jordan streams (that find supplies
From the deep fountain of my heart) arise,
And cleanse my spots, and clear my leprous eyes:
I have a world of sins to be lamented;
I have a sea of tears that must be vented;
O spare till then; and then I die, contented.
S. AUGUST. lib. 7. de Civit. Dei cap. 10.
The time wherein we live is taken from the space of our life; and what
remains is daily made less and less, in so much that the time of our life is
nothing but a passage to death.

S. GREG. lib. 9. mor. Cap. 44. in Cap. 10. Job.
As moderate afflictions bring tears; so immoderate take away tears; Insomuch
that sorrow becomes no sorrow which swallowing up the mind of the afflicted,
takes away the sense of the affliction.

EPIG. 13.
Fear thou to go, when such an Arm invites thee?
Dread'st thou thy loads of sin? or what affrights thee?
If thou begin to fear, thy fear begins;
Fool, can he bear thee hence, and not thy sins?
XIV.
emblem Oh that they were wise, then they would understand this; they would
consider their latter end. Deeteron: 32. I Pain scult


XIV. DEVT. XXXII.XXIX. O that men were wise, and that they understood this,
that they would consider their latter end.
Flesh. Spirit. Fl. WHat means my sister^ eye so often to pass
Through the long entry of that Optic glass?
Tell me; what secret virtue does invite
Thy wrinckled eye to such unknown delight?

Sp. It helps the sight; makes things remote appear
In perfect view; It draws the object near.

Fl. What sence-delighting objects do thou spy?
What does that Glass present before thine eye?

Sp. I see thy foe, my reconciled friend,
Grim death, even standing at the Glasses end;
His left hand holds a branch of Palm; his right
Holds forth a two-edged sword.

Fl. A proper sight!
And is this all? does thy Prospective please
The Abused fancy with no shapes but these?

Sp. Yes, I behold the dark'ned Sun bereav'n
Of all his light, the battlements of heaven
Sweltring in Flames; the Angell-guarded Son
Of glory on his high Tribunal Throne;
I see a Brimstone Sea of boiling Fire,
And Fiends, with knotted whips of flaming Wyre,
Torturing poor souls, that gnash their teeth, in vain,
And gnaw their flame-tormented tongues, for pain;
Look sister, how the queazie-stomack'd Graves
Vomit their dead, and how the purple waves
Scaled their consume less bodies, strongly cursing
All wombes for bearing, and all paps for nursing*

Fl. Can thy distempered fancy take delight
In view of Tortures? These are shows t'affright:
Look in this glasse-Triangular; look here,
Here Is that will ravish eyes.

Sp. What see thou there?

Fl. The world in colors; colors that distaine
The cheeks of Proteus, or the silken Train
Of Floras Nymphs; such various sorts of hiew,
As Sun-confronting Iris never knew:
Here, if thou please to beautify a Town,
Thou may; or, with a hand, turn't upside down;
Here, may thou scant or widen by the measure
Of thine own will; make short or long, at pleasure*
Here may thou tire thy fancy, and advize
With shows more apt to please more curious eyes;

Sp. Ah fool! that dot'st on vain, on present toys,
And disrespects those true, those future joys!
How strongly are thy thoughts befooled, Alas,
To dote on goods that perish with thy Glass!
Nay, vanish with the turning of a hand!
Were they but painted colors, it might stand
With painted reason, that they might devote thee;
But things that have no being, to besot thee?
Foresight of future torments is the way
To baulk those ills which present joys bewray;
As thou have fooled thy self, so now come hither,
Break that fond glass, and let us be wise together.

BONAVENT. de contemptu seculi.
O that men would be wise, understand, and foresee: Be wise, to know three
things: The multitude of those that are to be damn^^: the few number of those
that are to be saved; and the vanity of transitory things: Understand three
things; the multitude of sins, the omission of good things, and the loss of
time: Foresee three things, the danger of death, the last judgment, and
eternal punishment.

EPIG. 14.
What soul, no farther yet? what never commence
Master in Faith? Still Bachelour of Sense?
Is It insufficiency? Or what has made thee
Ore slip thy lost degree; Thy lusts have staid thee.
XV.
emblem My life is spent with grief and my years with Sighing. Ps: 30:10. W:
M. sculp:


XV. PSALM. XXX.X. My life is spent with grief, and my years with sighing.
WHat sullen Star ruled my untimely birth,
That would not lend my days one hour of mirth!
How often have these bare knees been bent, to gain
The slender Alms of one poor smile in vain!
How often, tired with the fastidious light,
Have my faint lips implored the shades of night?
How often have my nightly Torments praid
For lingering twilight, glutted with the shade!
Day, worse than night, night, worse than day, appears,
In fears I spend my nights; my days, in tears:
I moan, unpitti'd; groan without relief,
There is nor end, nor measure of my grief;
The smiling flower salutes the day; it grows
Untouched with care; It neither spins, nor sowes;
O that my tedious life, were like this flower,
Or freed from grief; or furlish'd with an hour:
Why was I borne? Why was I borne a man?
And why proportioned by so large a Span?
Or why suspended from the common lot,
And being borne to die, why die I not?
Ah me! why is my sorrow-wasted breath
Denied the easy privilege of death?
The branded Slave, that tugs the weary Oar,
Obtaines the Sabbath of a welcome Shore;
His ransomed stripes are healed; His native soil
^weetens the memory of his foreign toil*
But ah! my sorrows are not half so blessed;
My labor finds no point; my pains, no rest:
I barter sighs for tears; and tears for Groans*
Still vainly rolling Sysiphaean stones:
Thou just Observer of our flying hours,
That, with thy Adarmantine fangs, devours
The brazen Monuments of renowned Kings,
Does thy glass stand? Or be thy moulting wings
Unapt to fly* If not why do thou spare
A willing breast; a breast, that stands so fair?
A dying breast, that has but only breath
To beg a wound; and strength, to crave a death:
O, that the pleased Heavens would once dissolve
These fleshly fetters, that so fast involve
My hampred soul; then should my soul be blessed
From all these ills* and wrapher thoughts in rest:
Till then, my days are months, my months are years*
My years are ages, to be spent in tears:
My Grief's entayl'd upon my wastfull breath,
Which no Recov'ry can cut off, but death;
Breath drawn in Cottages, pufft out in Thrones,
Begins continues, and concludes in Groans.
INNOCENT. de vilitate condit humanae.
O who will give mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I may bewail the
miserable ingresse of man's condition; the sinful progress of man's
conversation, the damnable egresse in man's dissolution? I will consider with
tears, whereof man was made, what man does, and what man is to do: Alas, he
is formed of earth, conceived in sin, borne to punishment: He does evil
things, which are not lawful; He does filthy things, which are not decent; He
does vain things, which are not expedient.

EPIG. 15.
My heart, Thy life's a debt by Bond, which bears
A secret date; The use, is Groans and Tears.
Plead not; Usurious Nature will have all,
As well the Interest, as the Princ^pall.
THE FOVRTH BOOK,
I.
emblem My soul has Coueted to desire thy judgment* psalm. 119 Will simpson


I. ROMANS VII.XXIII. I see another Law in my members warring against the Law of
my mind, and bringing me into captivity to the Law of sin.
1
O How my will is hurried to and fro,
And how my unresolved resolves do vary!
I know not where to fix; sometimes I go
This way; then that; and then the quite contrary:
I like, dislike; I lament for what I could not;
I do; undo; yet still do what I should not;
And at the self same instant; will the Thing I would not.
2
Thus are my weather-beaten thoughts oppressed
With th'earth-bred winds of my prodigious will;
Thus am I hourly tossed from East to West
Upon the rouling streams of Good and Ill:
Thus am I driven upon these slippry Sudds,
From real Ills to false apparent Goods;
My life's a troubled sea, composed of Ebbs and Floods.
3
The curious Penman, having trimmed his Page
With the dead language of his dabled Quill,
Lets fall a heedlesse drop, then, in a Rage,
Cashieres the fruit of his unlucky skill;
Even so my pregnant soul in the infant bud
Of her best thoughts, showers down a Cole-black flood
Of unadvised Ills, and cancels all her Good.
4
Sometimes a sudden flash of sacred heat
Warmes my chill soul, and sets my thoughts in frame:
But soon that fire is shouldred from her seat
By lustful Cupids much inferior flame;
I feel two flames, and yet no flame, entire:
Thus are the Mungrill thoughts of mixed desire
Consumed between that heavenly and this earthly fire.
5
Sometimes my trash-disdaining thoughts out-passe
The common Period of terrene conceit;
O then, me thinks I scorn the Thing I was,
Whilst I stand ravished at my new Estate:
But when th'Icarian Wings of my desire
Feel but the warmth of their own native fire,
O then they melt and plunge within their wonted mire.
6
I know the nature of my wavering mind;
I know the frailty of my fleshly will:
My Passion's Eagle-ey'd; my Judgment, blind;
I know what is good, but yet make choice of ill;
When th'Ostrich wings of my desires shall be
So dull, they cannot mount the least degree,
Yet grant my soul desire but of desiring Thee.
S. BERN. Med. 9.
My heart is a vain heart, a vagabond, and instable heart* while it is led by
its own judgment, and wanting divine counsel, cannot subsist in it self,
and whilst it diverse ways seeks rest, finds none, but remains miserable
through labor, and void of peace: It agrees not with it self; it dissents
from it self; it alters resolutions, changes the judgment, frames new
thoughts, pulls down the old, and builds them up again: It wills and wills not;
and never remains in the same state.

EPIG. 1.
My soul how are thy thoughts disturbed! confined,
Enlarged betwixt thy Members, and thy Mind!
Fix here, or there; Thy doubt-depending cause
Can never expect one verdict, twixt two Laws.
II.
emblem Oh that my ways were Directed to keep thy Statutes. Ps. 119.5. W.
Simpson Sculy:


II. PSALM. CXIX.V. O that my ways were directed to keep thy statutes.
1
THus I, the object of the worlds disdain,
With Pilgrim-pace, surround the weary earth;
I only relish what the world counts vain:
Her mirth's my grief; her sullen Grief, my mirth;
Her light, my darkness; and her Truth, my Error;
Her freedom is my Iayle; and her delight my Terror:
2
Fond earth! Proportion not my seeming love
To my long stay; let not thy thoughts deceive thee;
Thou art my Prison, and my Home's above;
My life's a Preparation but to leave thee:
Like one that seeks a door, I walk about thee.
With thee I cannot live; I cannot live without thee.
3
The world's a Lab'rinth, whose anfractious ways
Are all composed of Rub's, and crook'd Meanders;
No resting here; He Is hurried back that stays
A thought; And he that goes unguided, wanders;
Her way is dark; her path untrod, unev'n;
So hard's the way from earth; so hard's the way to Heaven.
4
This gyring Lab'rinth is betrench'd about
On either hand, with streams of sulphrous fire,
Streams closely sliding, erring in and out,
But seeming pleasant to the fond descrier;
Where if his footsteps trust their own Invention,
He falls without redress, and sinks beyond Demension,
5
Where shall I seek a Guide? Where shall I meet
Some lucky hand to lead my trembling paces?
What trusty Lantern will direct my feet
To escape the danger of these dangerous places?
What hopes have I to pass without a Guide?
Where one gets safely through, a thousand fall beside.
6
An unrequested Star did gently slide
Before the Wisemen, to a greater Light;
Backsliding Israel found a double Guide;
A Pillar, and a Cloud; by day, by night:
Yet, in my desperate dangers, which be far
More great than theirs, I have nor Pillar, Cloud, nor Star.
7
O that the pineons of a clipping Dove
Would cut my passage, through the empty Air;
Mine eyes being seeld, how would I mount above
The reach of danger, and forgotten Care!
My backward eyes should never commit that fault,
Whose lasting Guilt should build a Monument of Salt.
8
Great God, that art the flowing Spring of Light,
Enrich mine eyes with thy refulgent Ray:
Thou art my Path; direct my steps aright;
I have no other Light, no other Way:
He trust my God, and him alone pursue;
His Law shall be my Path; his heavenly Light my Clue.
S. AUGUST. Soliloq. cap. 4.
O Lord, who art the Light, the Way, the Truth, the Life; in whom there is no
darkness, error, vanity, nor death: The light, without which there is
darkness; The way, without which there is wandering; The Truth, without which
there is error; Life, without which there is death: Say, Lord, let there be
light, and I shall see light, and eschew darkness; I shall see the way, and
avoid wandering; I shall see the truth, and shun error; I shall see life, and
escape death; Illuminate, O illuminate my blind soul, which sits in darkness
and the shadow of death, and direct my feet in the way of peace.

EPIG. 2.
Pilgrim trudge on: What makes thy soul complain,
Crowns thy complaint. The way to rest is pain:
The Road to Resolution lies by doubt:
The next way Home's the farthest way about.
III.
emblem Stay my stepps in thy Paths that my feet do not slide. Ps. ^7.^. W. M.
sc:


III. PSALM XVII.V. Stay my steps in thy paths, that my feet do not slide.
1
WHen ere the Old Exchange of Profittings
Her silver Saints-bell of uncertain gains,
My merchant soul can stretch both legs and wings;
How I can run, and take unwearied pains!
The Charms of Profit are so strong, that I
Who wanted legs to go, find wings to fly.
2
If time-beguiling Pleasure but advance
Her lustful Trump, and blow her bold Alarms,
O, how my sportfull soul can frisk and dance,
And hug that Siren in her twined Arms?
The sprightly voice of sinew-strengthning Pleasure
Can lend my bedrid soul both legs and leisure.
3
If blazing Honor chance to fill my veins
With flattring warmth, and flash of Courtly fire,
My soul can take a pleasure in her pains;
My lofty strutting steps disdain her pains;
My antic knees can turn upon the hinges
Of Complement, and skrue a thousand Cringes.
4
But when I come to Thee, my God, that art
The royal Mine of everlasting Treasure,
The real Honor of my better part,
And living Fountain of eternal pleasure,
How nervelesse are my limbs! how faint and slow:
I have nor wings to fly, nor legs to go.
5
So when the streams of swift-foot Rhene convay
Her upland Riches to the Belgic shore;
The idle vessel slides the watery lay,
Without the blast, or tug, of wind, or Oar;
Her slippry keele divides the silver foame
With ease; So facile is the way from home.
6
But when the home-bound vessel turns her saile^
Against the breast of the resisting stream,
O then she slugs; nor Sail, nor Oar prevails;
The Stream is sturdy, and her Tides extreme:
Each stroke is loss, and every Tug is vain:
A Boat-lengths purchase is a League of pain.
7
Great All in All, that art my Rest, my Home,
My way is tedious, and my steps are slow:
Reach forth thy helpful hand, or bid me come;
I am thy child, O teach thy child to go:
Conjoyne thy sweet commands to my desire,
And I will venture, though I fall or tire.
S. AUGUST. Ser. 15. de Verb. Apost.
Be always displeased at what thou art, if thou desire to attain to what
thou art not: For where thou have pleased thy self, there thou abidest: But if
thou say, I have enough, thou perishest: Always add, always walk, always
proceed; neither stand still, nor go back, nor dev^^e: He that stands still*
proceeds not; He goes back, that co^^inues not; He deviates, that revolts: He
goes better that creepes, in his way, than he that runs, out of his way.

EPIG. 3.
Fear not, my soul, to lose for want of cunning;
Weep not; heaven is not always got by running:
Thy thoughts are swift, although thy legs be slow;
True love will creep, not having strength to go,
IV.
emblem My flesh trembles for fear of thee: and I am afraid of thy
Judgments. Ps: 119.120. W.M. sculp:


IV. PSALM. CXIX. CXX. My flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of
thy judgments.
LEt others boaste of Luck: and go their ways
With their fair Game; Know, vengeance seldom plays,
To be too forward; but does wisely frame
Her backward Tables, for an After-Game:
She gives thee leave to venture many a blot;
And, for her own advantage, hits thee not;
But when her pointed Tables are made fair,
That she be ready for thee, then beware;
Then, if a necessary blot be set.
She hits thee; wins the Game; perchance the Set;
If prosperous Chances make thy Casting high,
Be wisely temperate; cast a serious eye
On after-dangers, and keep back thy Game;
Too forward seed-times make thy Harvest lame:
If left hand Fortune give thee left hand chances,
Be wisely patient; let no envious glances
Repine to view thy Gamesters heap so fair;
The hind most Hound takes often the doubling Hare.
The worlds great Dice are false; sometimes they go
Extremely high; sometimes, extremely low:
Of all her Gamesters, he that plays the least,
Lives most at ease; plays most secure, and best:
The way to win, is to play fair, and swear
Thy self a servant to the Crown of Fear:
Fear is the Primmer of a Gamsters skill;
Who fears not Bad, stands most unarmed to Ill:
The Ill that is wisely feared, is half withstood;
And fears of Bad is the best foil to Good:
True Feare'sth' Elixar, which in days of old,
Turned leaden Crosses into Crowns of Gold:
The World's the Tables; Stakes, Eternal life;
The Gamesters, Heaven and I; Unequal strife!
My Fortunes are my Dice, whereby I frame
My indisposed Life: This Life's the Game;
My sins are several Blo^; the Lookers on
Are Angels; and in death, the Game is done:
Lord, I Am a Bungler, and my Game does grow
Still more and more unshap'd; my Dice run low:
The Stakes are great; my careless Blots are many;
And yet, thou passest by, and hitst not any:
Thou art too strong; And I have none to guide me
With the least Iogge; The lookers on deride me;
It is a Conquest, undeserving Thee,
To win a Stake from such a Worm as me:
I have no more to lose; If we persever,
It Is lost; and that, once lost, I Am lost for ever.
Lord, wink at faults, and be not too severe,
And I will play my Game with greater fear;
O give me Fear, ere Fear has past her date:
Whose blot being hit, then fears; fear's then, too late.
S. BERN. Ser. 54. in Cant.
There is nothing so effectual to obtain Grace, to retain Grace, and to
regaine Grace, as always to be found before God not over-wise, but to fear:
Happy art thou if thy heart be replenished with three fears, a fear for
received grace, a greater fear for lost Grace, a greatest fear to recover
Grace.

S. AUGUST. super Psalm.
Present fear begets eternal security: Fear God, which is above all, and no
need to fear man at all.

EPIG. 4.
Lord shall we grumble, when thy flames do scourge us?
Our sins breath fire; that fire returns to purge us.
Lord, what an Alchymist art thou, whose skill
Transmutes to perfect good, from persect ill!
V.
emblem Turn a way mine eyes least they behold wanite psalm* 118 ^


V. PSALM. CXIX.XXXVII. Turn away mine eyes from regarding vanity.
1
HOw like to threads of Flax
That touch the flame, are my inflamed desires!
How like to yielding Wax,
My soul dissolves before these wanton fires!
The fire, but touched; the flame, but felt,
Like Flax, I burn; like Wax, I melt.
2
O how this flesh does draw
My fettered soul to that deceitful fire!
And how the eternal Law
Is baffled by the law of my desire!
How truly bad, how seeming good
Are all the Laws of Flesh and Blood!
3
O wretched state of Men,
The height of whose Ambition is to borrow
What must be paid again,
With griping Interest of the next days sorrow!
How wild his Thoughts! How apt to range!
How apt to vary! Apt to change!
4
How intricate, and nice
Is man's perplexed way to man's desire!
Sometimes upon the Ice
He slips, and sometimes falls into the fire;
His progress is extreme and bold,
Or very hot, or very cold.
5
The common food, he does
Sustain his soule-tormenting thoughts withal*
Is honey, in his mouth,
To night; and in his heart, to morrow, Gall;
It Is oftentimes, within an hour,
Both very sweet, and very sour.
6
If sweet Corinna smile,
A heaven of Joy breaks down into his heart:
Corinna frowns a while?
Hels Torments are but Copies of his smart:
Within a lustful heart does dwell
A seeming Heaven; a very Hell.
7
Thus worthless, vain and void
Of comfort, are the fruits of earths employment;
Which, ere they be enjoyd,
Distract us; and destroy us in th'enjoyment;
These be the pleasures that are prized
When heavens cheap pen'worth stands despised.
8
Lord quench these hasty flashes,
Which dart as lightning from the thundering skies;
And every minut, dashes
Against the wanton windows of mine eyes:
Lord, close the Casement, whilst I stand
Behind the curtain of thy Hand.
S. AUGUST* Soliloq. cap. 4.
O thou Son that illuminates both Heaven and Earth; Woe be unto those eyes
which do not behold thee: Woe be unto those blind eyes which cannot behold
thee: Woe be unto those which turn away their eyes that they will not behold
thee: Woe be unto those that turn not away their eyes that they may behold
vanity.

S. CHRYSOSTOM. sup. Matthew. 19.
What is an evil women but the enemy of friendship, an unavoidable pain, a
necessary mischief, a natural tentation, a desiderable calamity, a domestic
danger, a delectable inconvenience, and the nature of evil painted over with
the color of good!

EPIG. 5.
It Is vain, great God, to close mine eyes from ill,
When I resolve to keep the old man still:
My rambling heart must covenant first with Thee,
Or none can pass betwixt mine eyes and me.
VI.
emblem If I have found favor in thy sight, let: my life be given me at my
petition. Ester. 7.3. Will: Simpson sculpsit


VI. ESTER. VII.III. If I have found favor in thy sight, and if it please the
King, let my life be given me at my petition.
THou art the great Assuerus, whose command
Does stretch from Pole to Pole; The World's thy Land;
Rebellious Vasht's the corrupted Will*
Which being called, refuses to fulfill
Thy just command: Hester, whose tears condole
The razed City's the Regen'rate Soul;
A captive maid, whom thou will please to grace
With nuptial Honor in stout Vashti's place:
Her kinsman, whose unbended knee did thwart
Proud Hamans glory, is the Fleshly part:
The sober Eunuch, that recal'd to mind
The new-built Gibbet ( Haman had divined
For his own ruin) fifty Cubits high,
Is lustful thought-controlling Chastity;
Insulting H^man is that fleshly lust
Whose red-hot fury, for a season, must
Triumph in Pride, and study how to tread
On Mordecay, till royal Hester plead:
Great King, my sent-for Vashti will not come;
O let the oil o'th blessed Virgins womb
Cleanse my poor Hester; look, O look upon her
With gracious eyes; and let thy Beams of honor
So scour her captive stains, that she may prove
A holy Object of thy heavenly love:
Anoint her with the Spiknard of thy graces,
Then try the sweetness of her chaste embraces:
Make her the partner of thy nuptial Bed,
And set thy royal Crown upon her head:
If then, ambitious Haman chance to spend
His spleen on Mordecay, that scorns to bend
The wilful stiffenesse of his stubborn knee,
Or basely crouch to any Lord but Thee;
If weeping Hester should prefer a Groan
Before the high Tribunal of thy Throne,
Hold forth thy Golden Scepter, and afford
The gentle Audience of a gracious Lord:
And let thy royal Hester be possessed
Of half thy Kingdom, at her dear request:
Curb lustful Haman; him, that would disgrace,
Nay, ravish thy fair Queen before thy face:
And as proud Haman was himself ensnared
On that self Gibbet, that himself prepared,
So nail my lust, both Punishment and Guilt
On that dear Cross that mine own Lusts have built.
S. AUGUST. in Ep.
O holy Spirit, always inspire we with holy works; constrain me, that I may
do: Counsel me that I may love thee; Confirm me, that I may hold thee;
Conserve me that I may not lose thee.

S. AUGUST. sup. Joan.
The Spirit rusts where the flesh rests: For as the flesh is nourished with
sweet things, the Spirit is refreshed with sour.

Ibidem.
Would thou that thy flesh obey thy Spirit? Then let thy Spirit obey God:
Thou must be governed, that thou may govern.

EPIG. 6.
Of Merc' and Justice is thy Kingdom built;
This plagues my Sin; and that removes my guilt;
When ere I sue, Assuerus like decline
Thy Scepter; Lord, say, Half my kingdome's thine.
VII.
emblem Come my beloved, let us go forth into ye fields, let us remain in ye
Villages. Cant: 7. ij. W. Simpson. sculp:


VII. CANT. VII.XI. Come my beloved, let us go forth into the fields, and let
us remain in the villages.
1
Christ. Soul. Chr. COme, come, my dear, and let us both retire
And whiffe the dainties of the fragrant fields:
Where warbling Phil'mel and the shrill-mouth'd Quire
Chaunt forth their raptures; where the Turtle builds
Her lovely nest; and where the newborn Bryer
Breaths forth the sweetness that her April yields:
Come, come, my lovely fair, and let us try
These rural delicates; where thou and I
May melt in private flames, and fear no stander by.
2
Soul. My hearts eternal Joy, in lieu of whom
The earth's a blast, and all the world, a Buble;
Our Citie-mansion is the fairer Home,
But Country-sweets are tang'd with lesser Trouble;
Let Us try them both, and choose the better; Come;
A change in pleasure makes the pleasure double:
On thy Commands depends my Go, or Tarie^;
I Will stir with Martha; or I Will stay with Marie:
Our hearts are firmly fixed, although our pleasures vary.
3
Chr. Our Country-Mansion (situate on high)
With various Objects, still renewes delight;
Her arched Roofe's of unstained Ivory;
Her walls of fiery sparkling Chrysolite;
Her pavement is of hardest Porphery;
Her spacious windows are all glazed with bright
And flaming Carbuncles; no need require
Titans faint rays, or Vulcans feebler fire;
And every Gate's a Pearl; and every Pearl, entire.
4
Soul. Fool, that I was! how were my thoughts deceived!
How falsely was my fond conceit possessed!
I took it for an Hermitage, but paved
And daubed with neighbring dirt, and thatched at best;
Alas, I never expected more, nor craved;
A Turtle hoped but for a Turtles nest:
Come, come, my dear, and let no idle stay
Neglect the advantage of the headstrong day;
How pleasure grates, that feels the curb of dull delay!
5
Chr. Come, then my Joy; let our divided paces
Conduct us to our fairest Territory;
O there we will twine our souls in sweet embraces;
Sou. And in thine Arms I Will tell my passion story:
Chr. O there I Will crown thy head with all my Graces;
Sou. And all those Graces shall reflect thy Glory;
Chr. O there, I Will feed thee with celestial Manna;
I Will be thy Elkanah.
Soul. And I, thy Hanna.
Chr. I Will sound my Trump of Joy.
So. And I Will resound Hosanna
S. BERN.
O blessed Contemplation! The death of vices, and the life of virtues! Thee the
Law and Prophets admire: Who ever attained perfection, if not by thee! O
blessed Solitude, the Magazen of celestial Treasure! by thee things earthly,
and transitory, are changed into heavenly, and eternal.

S. BERN. in Ep.
Happy is that house, and blessed is that Congregation, where Martha still
complains of Mary.

EPIG. 7.
Mechanic soul; thou must not only do
With Martha; but, with Mary, ponder too:
Happy's that house, where these fair sisters vary;
But most, when Martha's reconciled to Mary.
VIII.
emblem Draw me: we will run after thee because of the savor of thy good
ointments. Cant: ^4 Will: simpson. sculp*


VIII. CANT. I.III. Draw me, we will follow after thee by the savor of thy
Ointments.
THus like a lump of the corrupted Mass,
I lie secure; long lost, before I was:
And like a Block, beneath whose burden lies
That undiscovered Worm that never dies,
I have no will to rouse; I have no power to rise.
Can stinking Lazarus compound, or strive
With deaths entangling Fetters, and revive?
Or can the water-buried Axe implore
A hand to raise it; or, it self, restore
And, from her sandy deepes, approach the dry-foot shore?
So hard's the task for sinful flesh and Blood
To lend the smallest step to what is Good;
My God, I cannot move, the least degree;
Ah! If but only those that active be
None should thy glory see, none should thy Glory see.
But if the Potter please t'informe the Clay;
Or some strong hand remove the Block away;
Their lowly fortunes soon are mounted higher,
That proves a vessel, which, before, was mire;
And this being hewne, may serve for better use than fire.
And if that life-restoring voice command
Dead Laz'rus forth; or that great Prophets hand
Should charm the sullen waters, and begin
To beckon, or to dart a Stick but in,
Dead Laz'rus must revive, and the Axe must float again.
Lord, as I am, I have no powe'r at all
To hear thy voice, to Echo to thy call;
The gloomy Clouds of mine own Guilt be night me;
Thy glorious beams, or dainty sweets invite me;
They neither can direct; nor these at all delight me.
See how my Sin-bemangled body lies,
Nor having power, to will; nor will, to rise!
Shine home upon thy Creature, and inspire
My livelesse will with thy regen'rate fire;
The first degree to do, is only to desire.
Give me the power to will; the will, to do;
O raise me up, and I will strive to go:
Draw me, O draw me with thy treble twist,
That have no power but merely to resist;
O lend me strength to do; and then command thy List.
My Soul's a Clock, whose wheels (for want of use
And winding up, being subject to the abuse
Of eating Rust) wants vigor to fulfill
Her twelve hours task, and show her makers skill;
But idly sleeps unmoov'd, and stands vainly still.
Great God, it is thy work: and therefore, Good;
If thou be pleased to cleanse it with thy Blood;
And wind it up with thy soule-moving kayes,
Her busy wheels shall serve thee all her days;
Her hand shall point thy power; her Hammer strike thy praise
S. BERN. Sermon. 21. in Cant.
Let us run: let us run, but in the savor of thy Ointments, not in the
confidence of our merits, nor in the greatness of our strength: we trust to
run, but in the multitude of thy mercies, for though we run and are willing, it
is not in him that wills, nor in him that runs, but in God that shows mercy:
O let thy mercy return, and we will run: Thou, like a Giant, run'st by thy
own power; We, unless thy ointment breath upon us, cannot run.

EPIG. 8.
Look not, my Watch, being once repaired, to stand
Expecting motion from thy makers hand.
H'as wound thee up, and cleans'd thy Coggs with blood:
If now thy wheels stand still; thou art not good.
IX.
emblem O that thou were as my Brother, that Sucked the Breasts of my Mother.
Cant: ^ W. marshall sc.


IX. CANT. VIII.I. O that thou were as my brother, that sucked the breasts of
thy mother, I would find thee without, and I will kiss thee.
1
COme, come my blessed Infant, and immure thee
Within the Temple of my sacred Arms;
Secure mine Arms; mine Arms shall, then, secure thee
From Herod's fury, or the Highpriests Harms;
Or if thy danger'd life sustain a loss,
My folded Arms shall turn thy dying Cross.
2
But, ah, what savage Tyrant can behold
The beauty of so sweet a face as this is,
And not himself, be, by himself, controld,
And change his fury to a thousand kisses?
One smile of thine is worth more mines of treasure
Than there be Myriads in the days of Caesar.
3
O, had the Tetrarch, as he knew thy birth,
So known thy Stock; he had not sought to paddle
In thy dear Blood; but, prostrate on the earth,
Had vayld his Crown before thy royal Cradle,
And laid the Scepter of his Glory down,
And begged a heavenly for an earthly Crown.
4
Illustrious Babe! How is thy handmaid graced
With a rich Armefull! How do thou decline
Thy Majesty, that were, so late, embraced
In thy great Fathers Arms, and now, in mine!
How humbly gracious art thou, to refresh
Me with thy Spirit, and assume my flesh.
5
But must the Treason of a Traitors Hail
Abuse the sweetness of these rubie lips?
Shall marble* hearted Cruelty assail
These Alablaster sides with knotted whips?
And must these smiling Roses entertain
The blows of scorn, and Flurts of base disdain?
6
Ah! must these dainty little sprigs that twine
So fast about my neck, be pierced and torn
With ragged nails? And must these Brows resign
Their Crown of Glory for a Crown of thorn?
Ah, must this blessed Infant taste the pain
Of deaths injurious pangs? nay worse; be slain?
7
Sweet Babe! At what dear rates do wretched I
Commit a sin! Lord, every sin's a dart;
And every trespass lets a javelin fly;
And every javelin wounds thy bleeding heart:
Pardon, sweet Babe, what I have done amiss,
And seal that granted pardon with a kiss.
BONAVENT. Soliloq. Cap 1.
O sweet Jesus, I knew not that thy kisses were so sweet, nor thy society so
delectable, nor thy attraction so virtuous: For when I love thee, I am clean;
when I touch thee, I am chaste; when I receive thee, I am a virgin: O most sweet
Jesus, thy embraces defile not, but cleanse; thy attraction pollutes not, but
sanctifies: O Jesus, the fountain of universal sweetness, pardon me, that I
believed so late, that so much sweetness is in thy embraces.

EPIG. 9.
My burthen's greatest: Let not Atlas bost:
Impartial Reader, judge, which bears the most:
He bears but Heaven; My folded Arms sustain
Heavens maker, whom heavens heaven cannot contain.
X.
emblem By night on my bed I sought him whom my soul loves; I sought him, but
I found him not Cant: ^^ Will* simpson sculpsit.


X. CANT. III.I. In my bed, by night, I sought him, that my soul loved; I
sought him, but I found him out.
THe learned Cynick, having lost the way
To honest men, did in the height of day,
By Taper-light, divide his steps about
The peopled Streets, to find this dainty out;
But failed. The Cynick searched not where he ought;
The thing he sought for was not where he sought:
The Wisemens task seemed harder to be done,
The Wisemen did, by Starre-light seek the Son,
And found; the Wisemen searched it where they ought;
The thing they hoped to find, was where they sought:
One seeks his wishes where he should; but then
Perchance he seeks not as he should, nor when:
Another searches when he should, but there
He fails; not seeking as he should, nor where
Whose soul desires the good it wants, and would
Obtain; must seek Where, As, and when he should:
How often have my wild Affections led
My wasted soul to this my widdow'd Bed,
To seek my Lover, whom my soul desires!
(I speak not, Cupid of thy wanton fires;
3
Where have my busy eyes not pried? O where,
Of whom has not my threadbare tongue demanded?
I searched this glorious City; He Is not here;
I sought the Country; She stands empty-handed:
I searched the Court; He is a stranger there:
I asked the land; He Is shipped: the sea; he is landed:
I climbed the air, my thoughts began t'aspire;
But, ah! the wings of my too bold desire,
Soaring too near the Sun, were singed with sacred fire.
4
I moov'd the Merchants ear; alas, but he
Knew neither what I said, nor what to say:
I asked the Lawyer; He demands a Fee,
And then demurres me with a vain delay*
I asked the Schoole-man; His advise was free,
But scor'd me out too intricate a way;
I asked the Watchman (best of all the four)
Whose gentle answer could resolve no more;
But that he lately left him at the Temple door.
5
Thus having sought, and made my great Inquest
In every place, and searched in every ear;
I threw me on my Bed; but ah! my rest
Was poisoned with th'extreames of grief and fear,
Where, looking down into my troubled breast,
The Magazen of wounds, I found him there;
Let others hunt, and show their sportfull Art;
I wish to catch the Hare before she start,
As Potchers use to do; Heavens Form's a troubled heart.
S. AMBROS. Lib. 3. de Virg.
Christ is not in the market; nor in the streets: For Christ is peace; in the
market are strifes: Christ is Justice; in the market is iniquity: Christ is a
Labourer; in the market is idleness: Christ is Charity; in the Market is
slander: Christ is Faith; in the market is fraud: Let us not therefore seek
Christ, where we cannot find Christ.

S. HIEROM Ep. 22. Eustoch.
Jesus is jealous: He will not have thy face seen: Let foolish virgins ramble
abroad; seek thou thy Love at home.

EPIG. 11.
What lost thy Love? Will neither Bed nor Board
Receive him? Not by tears to be implored?
It is the Ship that moves, and not the Coast;
I fear, I fear, my soul, it is thou art lost.
XI.
emblem I will rise now and go about the city in the Streets and in the
broad ways I will seek him whom my Soul loves I sought him but I found him
not. Cant. 3.2. Will simpson


XI. CANT. III.II. I will rise, and go about in the City, and will seek him
that my soul loves: I sought him, but I found him not.
1
O How my disappointed soul's perplexed!
How restless thoughts swarm in my troubled breast!
How vainly pleased with hopes; then, crossely vexed
With fears! And how, betwixt them both, distressed!
What place is left unransack'd? Oh I Where, next,
Shall I go seek the Author of my Rest?
Of what blessed Angel shall my lips enquire
The undiscovered way to that entire
And everlasting solace of my hearts desire!
2
Look how the stricken Heart, that wounded, flies
Over hills and dales, and seeks the lower grounds
For running streams; the whilst his weeping eyes
Beg silent mercy from the following Hounds,
At length, embost, he droopes, drops down, and lies
Beneath the burden of his bleeding wounds:
Even so my gasping soul, dissolved in tears,
Does search for thee, my God, Whose deafned ears
Leave me th'unransom'd Prisner to my panick fears.
Where Thy fires are all but dying sparks to mine;
My flames are full of heaven, and all divine)
How often have I sought this Bed, by night,
To find that greater, by this lesser light!
How often has my unwitnest groans lamented
Thy dearest absence! Ah, how often vented
The bitter Tempests of despairing breath,
And tossed my soul upon the waves of death!
How often has my melting heart made choice
Of silent tears, (tears louder than a voice)
To plead my grief, and woo thy absent ear!
And yet thou will not come; thou will not hear:
O is thy wonted love become so cold?
Or do mine eyes not seek thee where they should*
Why do I seek thee, if thou art not here?
Or find thee not, if thou art every where?
I see my error; It Is not strange I could not
Find out my love; I sought him where I should not
Thou art not found in downy Beds of ease;
^as, thy music strikes on harder keys:
Nor art thou found by that false, feeble light
Of Natures Candle; Our Egyptian night
Is more than common darkness; nor can we
Expect a morning, but what breaks from Thee.
Well may my empty Bed lament thy loss,
When thou art lodged upon thy shameful Cross:
If thou refuse to share a Bed with me;
We Will never part, I Will share a Cross with Thee.
ANSELM. in Protolog. Cap. 1.
Lord, if thou are not present, where shall I seek thee absent? If every
where, why do I not see thee present? Thou dwell in light inaccessible; and
where is that inaccessible light? Or how shall I have access to light
inaccessible? I beseech thee, Lord, teach me to seek thee, and show thy self
to the seeker, because I can neither seek thee, unless thou teach me, nor
find thee, unless thou show thy self to me: Let me seek thee, in desiring
thee, and desire thee in seeking thee; Let me find thee in loving thee, and
love thee in finding thee.

EPIG. 10.
Where should thou seek for rest, but in thy Bed?
But now thy Rest is gone; thy Rest is fled:
It Is vain to seek him there; My soul, be wise;
Go ask thy sins; They Will tell thee where he lies,
XII.
emblem Saw ye him whom my Soul loves? It was but a little that I passed
from them but I found Him whom my soul loves, I held Him and would not let
him go. Cant: 3.4. Will: sim: sculp


XII. CAN. III.III. Have you seen him whom my soul loves? When I had past a
little from them, then I found him, I took hold on him, and left him not.
1
WHat secret corner? What unwonted way
Has escaped the ransack of my rambling thoughts?
The Fox by night, nor the dull Owl, by day,
Have never searched those places I have sought,
Whilst thy lamented absence taught my breast
The ready Road to Grief, without request;
My day had neither comfort, nor my night had rest:
2
How has my unregarded language vented
The sad Tautologies of lavish passion?
How often have I languish'd, unlamented!
How often have I complained without compassion!
I ask the Citie-Watch; but some denied me
The common streit, whilst others would misguide me;
Some would debar me; some, divert me; some, deride me.
3
Mark, how the widowed Turtle, having lost
The faithful partner of her loyal Heart,
Stretches her feeble wings from Coast to Coast,
Haunts every path; thinks every shade does part
Her absent Love, and her; At length, unsped,
She re-betakes her to her lovely Bed,
And there bewailes her everlasting widow-head;
4
So when my soul had progrest every place,
That love and dear affection could contrive;
I threw me on my Couch, resolved to embrace
A death for him, in whom I ceased to live:
But there injurious Hymen did present
His Lanskip joys; my pickled eyes did vent
Full streams of briny tears, tears never to be spent.
5
Whilst thus my sorrow-wasting soul was feeding
Upon the rad'call Humor of her thought,
Even whilst mine eyes were blind, and heart was bleeding,
He that was sought, unfound, was found, unsought;
As if the Sun should dart his Orb of light
Into the secrets of the black-brow'd night.
Even so appeared my Love, my sole, my souls delight.
6
O how mine eyes, now ravished at the sight
Of my bright Sun, shot flames of equal fire!
Ah! how my soul, dissolved with ov'r-delight,
To re-enjoy the Crown of chaste desire!
How sov'raigne joy deposed and dispossessed
Rebellious grief! And how my ravished breast
But who can press those heights, that cannot be expressed?
7
O how these Arms, these greedy Arms did twine,
And strongly twist about his yielding wast!
The sappy branches of the Thespian vine
Never cling'd their less beloved Elm so fast;
Boast not thy flames, blind boy, nor feathered shot;
Let Himens easy snarles be quite forgot:
Time cannot quench our fires, nor death dissolve our knot.
ORIG. Hom. 10. in diverse.
O most holy Lord, and sweetest Master, how good art thou to those that are of
upright heart, and humble spirit! O how blessed are they that seek thee with a
simple heart! How happy that trust in thee! It is a most certain truth, that
thou love all that love thee, and never forsakest those that trust in thee:
For behold thy Love simply sought thee, and undoubtedly found thee: She trusted
in thee, and is not forsaken of thee, but has obtained more by thee, than she
expected from thee.

BID cap. 3. Cant.
The longer I was in finding whom I sought, the more earnestly I held him being
found.

EPIG. 12.
What? found him out? Let strong embraces bind him;
He Will fly perchance, where tears can never find him.
New Sins will lose what old Repentance gains:
Wisdom not only gets, but got, retains.
XIII.
emblem It is good for me to draw near to ye Lord (...) I have put my trust in
ye Lord God Ps: 73.20* Will Simpson* ^^^lpsit


XIII. PSALM. LXXII.XXVIII. It is good for me to draw near to God, I have put
my trust in the Lord God.
WHere is that Good, which wisemen please to call
The Chiefest? Does there any such befall
Within man's reach? Or is there such a Good at all?
If such there be: it neither must expire,
Nor change; than which, there can be nothing higher;
Such Good must be the utter point of man's desire:
It is the Mark, to which all hearts must tend,
Can be desired for no other end,
The^ for it self; on which, all other Goods depend:
What may this Exc'lence be? does it subsist
A real Essence, clouded in the midst
Of curious Art, or clear to every eye that list?
Or is it a tart Idea, to procure
An Edge, and keep the practick soul in ure,
Like that dear Chymick dust, or puzzling Quadrature?
Where shall I seek this Good? Where shall I find
This Cath'licke pleasure, whose extremes may bind
My thoughts, and fill the gulf of my insatiate mind?
Lies it in Treasure? In full heaps untold?
Does gowty Mammons griping hand infold
This secret Saint in sacred Shrines of sov'raigne Gold?
No, no; she lies not there; Wealth often sowrs
In keeping; makes us hers, in seeming ours;
She slides from heaven indeed, but not in Danaes showrs.
Lives she in Honor? No. The royal Crown
Builds up a Creature, and then batters down:
Kings raise thee with a smile, and raze thee with a frown.
In pleasure? No, Pleasure begins in rage;
Acts the fools part on earths uncertain Stage,
Begins the Play in Youth; and Epilogues in Age.
These, these are bastard-goods; the best of these
Torment the soul with pleasing it, and please,
Like water gulp'd in Fevers, with deceitful ease.
Earths flattring dainties are but sweet distresses:
Mole-hils perform the mountains she professes;
Alas, can earth confer more good than earth possesses?
Mount, mount my soul; and let thy thoughts cashiere
Earths vain delights, and make their full careire
At heavens eternal joys; stop, stop thy Courier there.
There shall thy soul possess uncarefull Treasure;
There shall thou swim in never-fading pleasure;
And blaze in Honor far above the frowns of Caesar.
Lord, if my hope dare let her Anchor fall
On thee, the chiefest Good, no need to call
For earths inferior trash; Thou, thou art All in All.
S. AUGUST. Soliloq. cap. 13.
I follow this thing, I pursue that; but am filled with nothing. But when I
found thee, who art that immutable, individed, and only good, in my self,
what I obtained, I wanted not; for what I obtained not, I grieved not; with
what I was possessed, my whole desire was satisfied.

S. BERN. Ser. 9. sup. beati qui habent, etc.
Let others pretend merit: let him brag of the burden of the day; let him
boast of his Sabbath fasts, and let him glory that he is not as other men: but
for me, it is good to cleave unto the Lord, and to put my trust in my Lord God.

EPIG. 13.
Let Boreas blasts, and Neptunes waves be joined,
Thy Eolus commands the waves, the wind:
Fears not the Rocks or worlds imperious waves:
Thou climbst a Rock (my soul) a Rock that saves.
XIV.
emblem I sat under the shadoue of him whom I have desired. Can^: 2 Will sim
son sculp


XIV. CANT. II.III. ^ sat under his shadow with great delight, and his fruit
was sweet to my taste.
1
LOok how the sheep* whose rambling steps do stray
From the safe blessing of her Shepherds eyes
Eftsoone, becomes the unprotected Prey
To the winged Squadron of beleagring flies,
Where, sweltred with the scorching beams of day,
She frisks from Bush to Brak; and wildly flies
From her own self, even of herself afraid;
She shrouds her troubled brows in every Glade,
And craves the mercy of the soft removing shade.
2
Even so my wandering Soul, that has digrest
From her great Shepherd, is the hourly prey
Of all all my Sins. These vultures in my Breast
Gripe my Promethian heart both night and day;
I hunt from place to place, but find no rest;
I know not where to go nor where to stay:
The eye of vengeance burns; her flames invade
My sweltring Soul. My soul has often assaid
But she can find no shroud, but she can feel no Shade.
3
I sought the Shades of Mirth, to wear away
My slow paced hours of soule-consuming grief;
I searched the Shades of Sleep, to ease my day
Of griping sorrows with a nights repriefe;
I sought the Shades of Death; thought, there, t'allay
My final torments with a full relief;
But Mirth, nor Sleep, nor Death can hide my hours
In the false Shades of their deceitful Bowres;
The first distracts, the next disturbes, the last devours.
4
Where shall I turn? To whom shall I apply me?
Are there no Streams where a faint soul may wade?
Thy Godhead, JESUS, are the flames that fry me;
Has thy All-glorious Deity never a Shade,
Where I may sit, and vengeance never eye me,
Where I might sit refresht, or unaffraid;
Is there no Comfort? Is there no Refection?
Is there no Covert that will give Protection
T'a fainting soul, the subject of thy wraths reflection?
5
Look up, my soul; advance thy lowly stature
Of thy sad Thoughts; advance thy humble eye:
See, here is a Shadow found; The humane nature
Is made th'Vmbrella to the Deity,
To catch the Sunbeams of thy just Creator;
Beneath this Covert thou may safely lie:
Permit thine eyes to climb this fruitful Tree,
As quick Zacheus did, and thou shall see
A Cloud of dying flesh betwixt those Beams and thee.
GUILL. in cap. 2. Cant.
Who can in dure the fierce rays of the Sun of Justice? Who shall not be
consumed by his beams? Therefore the Sun of Justice took flesh, that through
the conjunction of that Sun and this humane body, a shadow may be made,

S. AUGUST Med. cap. 37.
Lord, let my soul flee from the scorching thoughts of the world under the
Covert of thy wings, that being refreshed by the moderation of thy shadow, she
may sing merrily, In peace will I lay me down and rest.

EPIG. 14.
Ah, treacherous soul, would not thy Pleasures give
That Lord which made thee living, leave to live?
See, what thy sins have done: Thy sins have made
The Sun of Glory now become thy Shade.
XV.
emblem How shall we sing the song of the Lord in a strange Land w s. scul


XV. PSALM. CXXXVII.IV. How shall we sing a song of the Lord in a strange land?
Urge me no more: This Ayry mirth belongs
To better times: These times are not for songs:
The sprightly Twang of the melodious Lute
Agrees not with my voice: and both unsuit
My untuned fortunes: The affected measure
Of strains that are constrained, afford no pleasure;
Musick's the Child of mirth: where griefs assail
The troubled soul, both voice and fingers fail;
Let such as ravill out their lavish days
In honorable Riot; that can raise
Dejected hearts, and conjure up a Sprite
Of madness by the Magic of delight;
Let those of Cupids Hospital that lie
Impatient Patients to a smiling eye,
That cannot rest, until vain hope beguile
Their flattered Torments with a wanton smile;
Let such redeem their peace, and salve the wrongs
Of froward Fortune with their frolic Songs:
My grief, my griefe's too great for smiling eyes
To cure, or Counter-charmes to exorzise;
The Ravens dismal Croakes; the midnight howles
Of empty Wolves, mixed with the screech of Owls;
The nine sad knowls of a dull Passing Bell,
With the loud language of a nighty knell,
And horrid out cries of revenged Crimes,
Joined in a Medley's Music for these Times;
These are no Times to touch the merry string
Of Orpheus; No, these are no times to sing:
Can hide bound Prisners, that have spent their souls
And famished Bodies in the noisome holes
Of hell-black dungeons, apt their rougher throats,
Grown hoarse with begging Alms, to warble notes?
Can the sad Pilgrim, that has lost his way
In the vast desert; there, condemned a Prey
To the wild subject, or his Salvage Kings
Ronze up his palsy smitten spir'ts, and sing?
Can I a Pilgrim, and a Prisner too,
(Alas) where I am neither known, nor know
Ought but my Torments, an unransom'd stranger
In this strange Climat in a land of danger,
O, can my voice be pleasant, or my hand,
Thus made a Prisner to a foreign land?
How can my music relish in your ears,
That cannot speak for sobs, nor sing for tears?
Ah, if my voice could, Orpheus-like, unspell
My poor Euridice, my soul, from hell
Of earths misconstru'd Heaven, O then my breast
Should warble Airs, whose Rapsodies should feast
The ears of Serathims, and entertain
Heavens highest Deity with their lofty strain,
A strain well drencht in the true Thespian Well,
Till then; earths Semiquaver, mirth, farewell.
S. AUGUST. Med. cap. 33.
O infinitely happy are those heavenly virtues which are able to praise thee in
holiness and purity, with excessive sweetness and inutterable exultation!
From thence they praise thee from whence they rejoice, because they continually
see for what they rejoice, for what they praise thee: But we pressed down with
this burden of flesh far removed from thy countenance in this pilgrimage,
and blown up with wordly vanities, cannot worthily praise thee: We praise thee
by faith; not face to face: but those Argelicall Spirits praise thee face to
face, and not by faith.

EPIG. 15.
Did I refuse to sing? Said I these times
Were not for Songs? nor music for these Climes?
It was my Error: Are not Groans and tears
Harmonious Raptures in The Almighty's cares?
THE FIFTH BOOK,
I.
emblem I charge you, o ye Daughters of Jerusalem if ye find my beloved that
you tell him that I am sick of love. Can^t ^ w. simpsen scupsit


I. CANT. V. VIII. I charge you, O daughters of Jerusalem, if you find my
beloved, that you tell him that I am sick of love.
1
YOu holy Virgins, that so often surround
The Cities Saphyre Walls, whose snowy fe^^
Measure the pearly Paths of sacred ground,
And trace the new Jerus'lems Jasper street;
Ah you whose care-forsaken hearts are crowned
With your best wishes; that enjoy the sweet
Of all your Hopes; If ere you chance to spy
My absent Love, O tell him that I lie
Deep wounded with the flames, that furnac'd from his eye.
2
I charge you, Virgins, as you hope to hear
The heavenly Music of your Lovers voice;
I charge you by the solemn faith ye bear
To plighted vows, and to the loyal choice
Of your affections; or, if ought more dear
You hold; by Hymen; by your marriage joys,
I charge you tell him, that a flaming dart,
Shot from his Eye, has pierced my bleeding heart;
And I am sick of love, and languish in my smart.
3
Tell him. O tell him, how my panting breast
Is scorched with flames, and how my soul is pined;
Tell him, O tell him, how I lie oppressed
With the full torments of a troubled mind;
O tell him, tell him, that he loves in jest,
But I, in earnest; Tell him, he is unkind:
But if a discontented frown appears
Upon his angry Brow, accoast his ears
With soft and fewer words, and act the rest in tears.
4
O tell him, that his cruelties deprive
My soul, of peace, while peace, in vain, she seeks;
Tell him, those Damask roses, that did strive,
With white, both fade, upon my sallow cheeks;
Tell him, no token does proclaim I live,
But tears, and sighs, and sobs, and sudden shreeks;
Thus if your piercing words should chance to bore
His harkning ear, and move a sigh, give ore
To speak; and tell him -- Tell him, that I could no more.
5
If your elegious breath should hap to rouse
A happy tear, close harb'ring in his eye,
Then urge his plighted faith, the sacred vows,
Which neither I can break, nor He deny;
Bewail the Torments of his loyal Spouse,
That for his sake, would make a sport to die:
O blessed Virgins, how my passion tires
Beneath the burden of her vain desires!
Heaven never shot such flames, Earth never felt such fires.
S. AUGUST. Med. cap. 40.
What shall I say? What shall I do? Whether shall I go? Where shall I seek
him? Or when shall I find him? Whom shall I ask? Who will tell my beloved that
I am sick of love?

GVLIEL. in Cap. 5. Cant.
I live; But not I: It is my beloved that lives in me: I love my self, not
with my own love, but with the love of my beloved, that loves me: I love not
my self in my self, but my self in him, and him in me.

EPIG. 1.
Grieve not (my soul) nor let thy love wax faint,
Weepst thou to lose the cause of thy Complaint?
He Will come; Love never was bound to Times nor Laws:
Till then, thy tears complain without a Cause.
II.
emblem Stay me with Flowers; Comfort me with Apples, for I am sick of love.
Cant: 2.5. Will: Marshall. sculpsit*


II. CANT. II.V. Stay me with Flowers, and comfort me with Apples, for I am
sick with love.
1
O Tyrant love! how does thy sov'raigne power
Subject poor souls to thy imperious thrall!
They say, thy Cup's composed of sweet and sour;
They say, thy diet's Honey, mixed with Gall;
How comes it then to pass, these lips of our
Still trade in bitter; taste no sweet at all?
O tyrant love! Shall our perpetual toil
Never find a Sabbath, to refresh, a while,
Our drooping souls? Art thou all frowns, and never a smile?
2
You blessed Maids of Honor, that frequent
The royal Courts of our renowned JEHOVE,
With Flowers restore my spirits faint, and spent;
O fetch me Apples from Loves fruitful Grove,
To cool my palate, and renew my sent,
For I am sick, for I am sick of Love:
These will revive my dry, my wasted powers,
And they, will sweeten my unsav'ry hours;
Refresh me then with Fruit, and comfort me with Flowers.
3
O bring me Apples to assuage that fire,
Which, Aetna-like, inflames my flaming breast;
Nor is it every Apple I desire,
Nor that which pleases every Palate best:
It Is not the lasting Deuzan I require,
Nor yet the red-cheek'd Queening I request;
Nor that which, first, beshrewd the name of wife,
Nor that whose beauty caused the golden strife;
No, no, bring me an Apple from the Tree of life.
4
Virgins, tuck up your silken laps, and fill ye
With the fair wealth of Floras Magazine;
The purple Vy'let, and the pale-faced Lilly;
The Pauncy and the Organ Colombine;
The flowring Thyme, the guilt-boule Daffadilly;
The lowly Pinck, the lofty Eglentine:
The blushing Rose, the Queen of flowers, and be
Of Floras beauty; but, above the rest,
Let Iesses sov'raigne Flower perfume my qualming breast.
5
Haste, Virgins, haste; for I lie weak and faint,
Beneath the pangs of love; why stand ye mute;
As if your silence neither cared to grant,
Nor yet your language to deny my suit?
No key can lock the door of my complaint,
Until I smell this Flower, or taste that Fruit;
Go, Virgins, seek this Tree, and search that Bower,
O, how my soul shall bless that happy hour,
That brings to me such fruit, that brings me such a Flower?
GISTEEN. in cap. 2. Cant. Expos. 3.
O happy sickness! where the infirmity is not to death, but to life, that God
may be glorified by it: O happy fever, that proceeds not from a consuming, but
a calcining fire! O happy distemper, wherein the soul relishes no earthly
things, but only savours divine nourishment!

S. BERN. Scrm. 51. in Cant.
By flowers understand faith; by fruit, good works: As the flower or blossom
is before the fruit, so faith is before goodworks: So neither is the fruit
without the flower, nor good works without faith.

EPIG. 2.
Why Apples, O my soul? Can they remove
The Pangs of Grief, or ease the flames of love;
It was that Fruit which gave the first offense;
That sent him hither; that removed him hence.
III.
emblem My Beloved is mine and I am his, He feeds among the Lillies. Cant:
2.16.

Will simpson sculp:



III. CANT. II.XVI. My beloved is mine, and I am his; He feeds among the
Lillies.
1
Even like two little bank-dividing brooks,
That wash the pebles with their wanton streams,
And having ranged and searched a thousand nookes,
Meet both at length, in silver-brested Thames;
Where, in a greater Current they conjoyne:
So I my Best Beloveds am; so He is mine.
2
Even so we met; and after long pursuit,
Even so we joined; we both became entire;
No need for either to renew a Suit,
For I wa^ Flax and he was Flames of fire:
Our firm united souls did more than twine;
So I my Best-Beloveds am; so He is mine.
3
If all those glittring Monarchs that command
The servile Quarters of this earthly Ball,
Should tender, in Exchange, their shares of land,
I would not change my Fortunes for them all:
Their wealth is but a Counter to my Coin;
The world's but theirs; but my Beloved's mine.
4
Nay, more; If the fair Thespian Ladies, all
Should heap together their diviner treasure:
That Treasure should be deemed a price too small
To buy a minutes Lease of half my Pleasure;
It Is not the sacred wealth of all the Nine
Can buy my heart from Him; or His, from being mine:
5
Nor Time, nor place, nor Chance, nor Death can bow
My least desires unto the least remove;
He Is firmly mine by Oath; I, His, by Vow;
He Is mine by Faith; and I am His, by Love;
He Is mine by Water; I am His, by Wine;
Thus I my Best-beloveds am; Thus He is mine.
6
He is my Altar; I, his Holy Place;
I am his Guest; and He, my living Food;
I Am his, by Poenitence; He, mine by Grace;
I Am his, by Purchase; He is mine, by Blood;
He Is my supporting Elm; and I, his Vine:
Thus I my Best-Beloveds am. Thus He is mine.
7
He gives me wealth: I give him all my Vows:
I give Him songs; He gives me length of days:
With wrethes of Grace he crowns my conquering brows:
And I his Temples, with a Crown of Praise,
Which be accepts as an everlasting sign,
That I my best-beloveds am; that He is mine.
S. AUGUST. Manu. cap. 24.
O my soul stamped with the Image of thy God; love him, of whom thou art so
much beloved: Bend to him that bows to thee, seek him that seeks thee: Love
thy lover, by whose love thou art prevented, being the cause of thy love: Be
careful with those that are careful, want with those that want; Be clean
with the clean, and holy with the holy: Choose this friend above all friends,
who, when all are taken away, remains only faithful to thee: In the day of
thy burial, when all leave thee, he will not deceive thee, but defend thee
from the roaring Lions, prepared for their prey.

EPIG. 3.
Sing Hymen to my soul: What? lost and found,
Welcomed Espoused, enjoyed so soon, and crowned!
He did but climb the Cross; and then came down
To th'Gates of Hell; triumphed, and fetched a Crown.
IV.
emblem I am my beloveds, and his Desire is toward me. Cant: 7.10. W. Simpson
Sc^


IV. CANT. VII.X. I am my Beloveds, and his desire is toward me.
1
LIke to the Artick needle, that does guide
The wandering shade by his Magneticke power,
And leaves his silken Gnomon to decide
The question of the controverted hour,
First franticks up and down, from side to side,
And restless beats his christall'd Ivory case
With vain impatience; jets from place to place,
And seeks the bosom of his frozen Bride,
At length he slacks his motion, and does rest
His trembling point at his bright Poles beloved Breast.
2
Even so my soul, being hurried here and there,
By every object that presents delight,
Feign would be settled, but she knows not where;
She likes at morning what she loathes at night?
She bows to Honor; then, she lends an ear
To that sweet Swan-like voice of dying Pleasure,
Then tumbles in the scattered heaps of Treasure;
Now flattered with false hope; now, foiled with fear:
Thus finding all the world delights to be
But empty toys, good GOD, she point's alone to Thee,
But has the virtu'd Steel a power to move?
Or can the untouched Needle point aright?
Or can my wandering Thoughts forbear to rove,
Unguided by the virtue of thy Spirit?
O has my leaden Soul the Art t'improve
Her wasted Talent; and unrais'd, aspire
In this sad moulting time of her desire?
Not first beloved have I the power to love?
I cannot stir, but as thou please to move me,
Nor can my heart return thee love, until thou love me.
4
The still Commandresse of the silent night
Borrowes her beams from her bright brothers Eye;
His fair aspect fills her sharp horns with light,
If he withdraw, her flames are quenched and die;
Even so the beams of thy enlightening Sp'rite
Infused and shot into my dark desire,
Inflame my thoughts, and fill my soul with fire,
That I am ravished with a new delight;
But if thou shroud thy face, my glory fades,
And I remain a Nothing, all composed of shades.
5
Eternal God, O thou that only art
The sacred Fountain of eternal light,
And blessed Loadstone of my better part,
O thou my hearts desire, my souls delight,
Reflect upon my soul; and touch my heart,
And then my heart shall prize no good above thee;
And then my soul shall know thee; knowing, love thee;
And then my trembling thoughts shall never start
From thy commands, or swerve the least degree,
Or once presume to move, but as they move in thee.
S. AUGUST. Med. Cap. 25.
If man can love man with so entire affection, that the one can scarce brook
the others absence? If a Bride can be joined to her Bridegroom with so great
an ardency of mind, that for the extremity of love she can enjoy no rest, not
suffering his absence without great anxiety, with what affection, with what
fervency ought the soul whom thou have espoused by faith and compassion, to
love thee her true God and glorious Bridegroom?

EPIG. 4.
My soul; thy love is dear; It Was thought a good
And easy pen'worth of thy Saviors Blood:
But be not proud; All matters rightly scanned,
'Twas over brought: 'Twas sold at second hand.
I.
emblem My Soul melted, when my beloved spoke. Cant: 5.6. Will: Simpson scul:


V. CANT. V.VI. My Soul melted whilst my Beloved spoke.
LOrd, has the feeble voice of flesh and blood
The power to work thine ears into a flood
Of melted Mercy? or the strenth, t'unlocke
The gates of Heaven, and to dissolve a Rock
Of marbel Clouds into a morning shower?
Or has the breath of whining dust the power
To stop, or snatch a falling Thunderbolt
From thy fierce hand, and make thy hand revolt
From resolute Confusion, and in stead
Of Vyals, pour full Blessings on our head?
Or shall the wants of famisht Ravens cry,
And move thy mercy to a quick supply?
Or shall the silent suits of drooping flowr's
Woo thee for drops, and be refreshed with Showr's?
Alas, what marvel then, great GOD, what wonder
If thy Hell-rouzing voice, that splits in sunder
The brazen Portals of eternal death;
What wonder if that life-restoring breath
Which dragged me from the infernal shades of night,
Should melt my ravished soul with ore-delight?
O can my frozen gutters choose but run,
That feel the warmth of such a glorious Sun?
Me thinks his language, like a flaming Arrow,
Does pierce my bones, and melts their wounded marrow;
Thy flames O Cupid (though the joyful heart
Feels neither tang of grief, nor fears the smart
Of jealous doubts, but drunk with full desires)
Are torments weighed with these celestial fires;
Pleasures that ravish in so high a measure,
That O I languish in excess of pleasure:
What ravished heart, that feels these melting Joys,
Would not despise and loathe the trech'rous Toys
Of dunghill earth! what soul would not be proud
Of wry-mouthed scorns, the worst that flesh and blood
Had rancor to divise? Who would not bear
The worlds derision with a thankful ear?
What palate would refuse full bowls of spite,
To gain a minutes taste of such delight?
Great spring of light, in whom there is no shade
But what my interposed sins have made,
Whose marrow-melting Fires admit no screene
But what my own rebellions put between
Their precious flames, and my obdurate care;
Disperse these plague-distilling Clouds, and clear
My mungy Soul into a glorious day;
Transplant this screene, remoove this Bar away;
Then, then my fluent soul shall feel the fires
Of thy sweet voice, and my dissolved desires
Shall turn a sov'raigne Balsome, to make whole
Those wounds my sins inflicted on thy soul.
S. AUGUST. Soliloqu. Chap. 34.
What fire is this that so warmes my heart? What light is this that so
enlightens my soul! O fire, that always burnest, and never go out, kindle
me: O light, which ever shinest, and art never darkened, illuminate me: O that I
had my heat from thee, most holy fire! How sweetly do thou burn! How
secretly do thou shine! How desiderably do thou inflame me!

BONAVENT. Stim. amoris Chap. 8.
It makes God man; and man, God; things temporal, eternal; mortal,
immortal; it makes an enemy a friend; a servant a Son: vile things,
glorious; cold hearts fiery, and hard things liquid.

EPIG. 5.
My soul; Thy gold is true; but full of dross;
Thy SAVIORS breath refines thee with some loss,
His gentle Furnace makes thee pure as true;
Thou must be melted, ere thou art cast anew.
VI.
emblem Whom have I in heaven but thee and what desire I on earth in respect of
thee. Ps: 73.^ W. S. sc:


VI. PSALM. LXXIII.XXV. Whom have I in heaven but Thee? and what desire I on
earth in respect of Thee?
1
I Love (and have some cause to love) the earth;
She is my Makers Creature; therefore Good:
She is my Mother; for she gave me birth;
She is my tender Nurse; she gives me food:
But what is a Creature, Lord, compared with Thee?
Or what is my mother, or my nurse to me?
2
I love the Air; her dainty sweets refresh
My drooping soul, and to new sweets invite me;
Her shrill-mouth'd Quire sustain me with their flesh,
And with their Polyphonian notes delight me:
But what is the Air, or all the sweets that she
Can bless my soul withal, compared to Thee?
3
I love the Sea; She is my Fellow Creature;
My careful Purveyor; She provides me store;
She walls me round; She makes my diet greater;
She wafts my treasure from a foreign shore;
But Lord of Oceans, when compared with thee,
What is the Ocean, or her wealth, to me?
4
To heavens high City I direct my Journey,
Whose spangled Suburbs entertain mine eye;
Mine Eye, by Contemplations great Attorney,
Transcends the Crystal pavement of the sky;
But what is heaven, great GOD, compared to Thee?
Without Thy presence Heaven's no Heaven to me.
5
Without Thy presence Earth gives no Refection;
Without Thy presence, Sea affords no treasure;
Without Thy presence Ayre's a rank Infection;
Without Thy presence Heaven it selfe's no pleasure;
If not possessed if not enjoyed in Thee,
What Is Earth, or Sea, or Air, or Heaven to me?
6
The highest Honors that the world can boast
Are subjects far too low for my desire;
The brightest beams of glory are (at most)
But dying sparkles of thy living fire:
The proudest flames that earth can kindle, be
But nigh^ly Glow-wormes, if compared to Thee.
7
Without Thy presence, wealth are Bags of Cares;
Wisdom, but Folly; Joy, disquiet sadness,
Friendship is Treason, and Delights are snares;
Pleasures but pain, and mirth, but pleasing Madness
Without Thee, Lord, things be not what they be,
Nor have they being, when compared with Thee.
8
In having all things, and not Thee what have I?
Not having Thee, what have my labors got?
Ler me enjoy but Thee, what farther crave I?
And having Thee alone, what have I not?
I wish nor Sea, nor Land; nor would I be
Possessed of Heaven, Heaven unpossest of Thee.
BONAVENT. Cap. 1. Soliloq.
Alas my God, now I Understand (but blush to confess) that the beauty of thy
Creatures have deceived mine eyes; and I have not observed that thou art more
amiable than all thy creatures; to which thou have communicated but one drop of
thy inestimable beauty; For who has adorned the heavens with Stars? Who has
stored the air with foul? the waters, with fish? the earth, with plants and
flowers? But what are all these but a small spark of divine beauty.

S. CHR. Hom. 5. in Ep ad Romans
In having nothing I have all things, because I have Christ; Having therefore
all things in Him, I seek no other reward, for he is the universal Reward.

EPIG. 6.
Who would not throw his better thoughts about him,
And scorn this dross within him; that, without him?
Cast up (my soul) thy clearer eye; Behold.
If thou be fully melted: There Is the Mold.
VII.
emblem Woe is me that I am constrained to dwell with Meseth: and to have my
habitation among the tent: of Cedar: Psalm. 120.4. Will. simpson sculpsit.


VII. PSALM. CXX.V. Woe is to me! that I remain in Meshech, and dwell in the
Tents of Kedar.
IS Natures course dissolved? Does Times glass stand?
Or has some frolic heart set back the hand
Of Fates perpetual Clock? Will It never strike?
Is crazy Time grown lazy, faint, or sick
With very Age? Or has that great Purroyall
Of Adamantine sisters late made trial
Of some new Trade? Shall mortal hearts grow old.
In sorrow? Shall my weary Arms infold
And underprop my panting sides for ever?
Is there no charitable hand will sever
My well-spun Thread, that my imprisoned soul
May be delivered from this dull dark hole
Of dungeon flesh? O shall I, shall I never
Be ransomed, but remain a slave for ever?
It is the Lot of man but once to dye,
But ere that death, how many deaths have I?
What humane madness makes the world afraid
To entertain heavens joy? because conveig'd
By the hand of death? Will nakedness refuse
Rich change of robes, because the man's not spruse
That brought them? Or will Poverty send back
Full bags of gold, because the bringer's black?
Life is a Bubble, blown with whining breaths,
Filled with the torments of a thousand deaths;
Which, being pricked by death (while death deprives
One life) presents the soul a thousand lives:
Of frantic mortal, how has earth bewich'd
Thy Beldam soul, which has so fondly pitched
Upon her false delights! Delights, that cease
Before enjoyment finds a time to please;
Her fickle joys breed doubtful fears; her fears
Bring hopfull Grifes; her griefs weep fearful tears,
Tears coin deceitful hopes; hopes, careful doubt,
And surly passion justles passion out:
To day, we pamper with a full repast
Of lavish mirth; at night, we weep as fast:
To night we swim in wealth, and lend; To morrow,
We sink in want, and find no friend to borrow;
In what a Climat does my soul reside!
Where pale-faced murder, the first borne of pride,
Sets up her kingdom in the very smiles,
And plighted faiths of men-like Crocadiles
A land, where each embroydred Satin word
Is lined with Fraud; where Mars his lawless sword
Exiles Astraeas Balance; where that hand
Now flayes his brother, that new-sow'd his land:
O that my days of bondage would expire
In this lewd Soil! Lord, how my Soul's on fire
To be dissolved! that I might once obtain
These longed for joys, longed for so often, in vain!
If Moses-like I may not live possessed
Of this fair Land; Lord, let me see it, at least.
S. AUGUST. Soliloq. Cap. 2.
My life is a frail life; a corruptible life; A life, which the more
increases, the more decreases: The farther it goes, the nearer it comes to
death: A deceitful life, and like a shadow; full of the snares of death: Now I
rejoice; now I languish; now I flourish; now infirm; now I live, and straight
I dye; now I seem happy, always miserable; now I laugh, now I weep: Thus all
things are subject to mutability, that nothing continues an hour in one state:
O Joy above Joy, exceeding all Joy, without which there is no Joy, when shall I
enter into thee; that I may see my God that dwells in thee?

EPIG. 7.
Art thou so weak? O can thou not digest
An hour of travel for a night of Rest?
Cheer up, my soul; call home thy spir'ts, and bear
One bad Good Friday; Full-mouthed Easter's near.
VIII.
emblem O wretched Man that I am: who shall deliver me from the body of this
Death*

Rom: 7.24. Will: simpson sculp:



VIII. ROMANS VII.XXIV. O wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me from this
body of death?
BEhold thy darling, which thy lustful care
Pampers; for which thy restless thoughts prepare
Such early Cates; For whom thy bubbling brow
So often sweats, and bankrupt eyes do owe
Such midnight scores to Nature, for whose sake
Base earth is Sainted, the Infernal Lake
Vnfeard; the Crown of glory poorly rated;
Thy GOD neglected, and thy brother hated:
Behold thy darling, whom thy soul affects
So dearly; whom thy fond Indulgence decks
And puppets up in soft, in silken weeds:
With farre-fetch'd delicates, the deare-bought gainer
Of ill-spent Time, the price of half thy pains:
Behold thy darling, who, when clad by Thee,
Derides thy nakedness; and, when most free,
Proclaims her lover, slave; and, being fed
Most full, then strikes the indulgent Feeder dead:
What meanst thou thus, my poor deluded soul,
To love so fondly? Can the burning Cole
Of thy Affection last without the fuel
Of counter-love? Is my Compere so cruel,
And thou so kind, to love unlov'd again?
Can thou sow favors, and thus reap disdain?
Remember, O remember thou art borne
Of royal Blood; remember thou art sworn
A Maid of Honor in the Court of Heaven;
Remember what a costly price was given
To ransom thee from slavery thou were in;
And will thou now, my soul, turn slave agin?
The Son and Heir to Heavens Triune JEHOVA
Would feign become a Suitor for thy Love,
And offers for thy dower, his Fathers Throne,
To sit, for Seraphims to gaze upon;
He Will give thee Honor, Pleasure, Wealth, and Things
Transcending far the Majesty of Kings:
And will thou prostrate to the odious charms
Of this base Scullion? Shall his hollow Arms
Hugg thy soft sides? Shall these course hands untie
The sacred Zone of thy Virginity?
For shame, degen'rous soul, let thy desire
Be quickened up with more heroic fire;
Be wisely proud; let thy ambitious eye
Read nobler objects; let thy thoughts defy
Such amorous baseness; Let thy soul disdain
The Ignoble profers of so base a Swain;
Or if thy vows be past, and Himens bands
Have ceremonyed your unequal hands,
Annull, at least avoid thy lawless Act
With insufficience, or a Prae contract:
Or if the Act be good, yet may thou plead
A second Freedom; for the flesh is dead.
NAZIANZ. Orat. 16.
How I am joined to this body, I know not; which when it is healthful,
provokes me to war, and being damaged by war, affects me with grief; which
I both love as a fellow servant, and hate as an utter enemy; It is a pleasant
Foe, and a perfidious friend: O strange conjunction and Alienation: What I
fear I embrace, and what I love I am afraid of; Before I make war, I am
reconciled; Before I enjoy peace, I am at variance.

EPIG. 8.
What need that House be daubed with flesh and blood?
Hanged round with silks and gold; repaired with food?
Cost idly spent! That cost does but prolong.
Thy thraldom; Fool, thou make thy I ayle too strong.
IX.
emblem I am in a straight betwixt two haueing a Desire to Depart and to be with
Christ Phil: 5.23. Will: Simpson. Sculpsit


IX. PHIL. I.XXIII. I am in a straight between two, having a desire to be
dissolved, and to be with Christ.
1
WHat meant our careful parents so to wear,
And lavish out their ill expended hours,
To purchase for us large possessions, here,
Which (though unpurchas'd) are too truly ours?
What meant they, ah what meant they to endure
Such loads of needless labor, to procure,
And make that thing our own, which was our own too sure.
2
What mean these liv'ries and possessive kayes?
What mean these bargains, and these needless sales?
What need these jealous, these suspicious ways
Of law-divis'd, and law-dissolv'd entailes?
No need to sweat for gold; wherewith, to buy
Estates of high-priz'd land; no need to tie
Earth to their heirs, were they but clogged with earth as I.
3
O were their souls but clogged with earth, as I,
They would not purchase with so salt an Itch;
They would not take, of Alms, what now they buy;
Nor call him happy, whom the world counts rich:
They would not take such pains, project and prog,
To charge their shoulders with so great a log;
Who has the greater lands, has but the greater clog.
4
I cannot do an act which earth disdaines not;
I cannot think a thought which earth corrupts not;
I cannot speak a word which earth prophanes not;
I cannot make a vow earth interrupts not;
If I but offer up an early groan,
Or spread my wings to heavens long longed for Throne,
She darkens my complaints, and drags my Offering down.
5
Even like the Hawlk, (whose keepers wary hands
Have made a prisner to her wethring stock)
Forgetting quite the power of her fast bands,
Makes a rank Bate from her forsaken Block,
But her too faithful Leash does soon restrain
Her broken flight, attempted often in vain;
It gives her loins a twitch, and tugs her back again.
6
So, when my soul directs her better eye
To heavens bright Palace (where my treasure lies).
I spread my willing wings, but cannot fly,
Earth hales me down, I cannot, cannot rise;
When I but strive to mount the least degree,
Earth gives a jerk, and foiles me on my knee;
LORD, how my soul is rackt, betwixt the world and Thee.
7
Great GOD, I spend my feeble wings, in vain;
In vain I offer my extended hands;
I cannot mount till thou unlink my chain;
I cannot come till thou release my Bands:
Which if thou please to break, and then supply
My wings with spirit, The Eagle shall not fly
A pitch that is half so fair, nor half so swift as I.
BONAVENT. cap. 1. Soliloq.
Ah sweet Jesus, pierce the marrow of my soul with the healthful shafts of
thy love, that if may truly burn, and melt, and languish with the only desire
of thee; that it may desire to be dissolved, and to be with thee: Let it hunger
alone for the bread of life; let it thirst after thee, the spring and fountain
of eternal light, the stream of true pleasure: let it always desire thee,
seek thee, and find thee, and sweetly rest in thee.

EPIG. 9.
What? will thy shackles neither loose, nor break?
Are they too strong? or is thy Arm too weak?
Art will prevail where knotty strength denies;
My soul; there is Aquafortis in thine eyes.
X.
emblem Bring my soul out of Prison that I may praise thy Name: Ps: 142.7.
Will simpson. sculpsit


X. PSALM. CXLII.VII. Bring my soul out of prison, that I may praise thy Name.
MY Soul is like a Bird; my Flesh the Cage;
Wherein she wears her weary Pilgrimage
Of hours as few as evil, daily fed
With sacred Wine, and Sacramental Bread;
The keys that locks her in, and lets her out,
Are Birth and Death; 'twixt both she hops about
From perch to perch; from Sense to reason; then
From higher Reason, down to Sense again:
From Sense she climbs to Faith; where, for a season,
She sits and sings; then down again to Reason;
From Reason back to Faith; and straight from thence
She rudely flutters to the Perch of Sense;
From Sense, to Hope; then hops from Hope to Doubt;
From Doubt, to dull Despair; there, seeks about
For desperate Freedom; and at every Grate,
She wildly thrusts, and begs th'untimely date
Of unexpired thraldom, to release
The afflicted Captive, that can find no peace:
Thus am I cooped within this fleshly Gage,
I wear my youth, and wast my weary Age,
Spending that breath which was ordained to chaunt
Heavens praises forth, in sighs and sad complaint:
Whilst happier birds can spread their nimble wing
From Shrubs to Cedars, and there chirp and sing,
In choice of raptures, the harmonious story
Of man's Redemption, and his Makers Glory:
You glorious Martyrs; you illustrious Troops,
That once were cloistered in your fleshly Coopes,
As fast as I, what Reth'rick had your tongues?
What dextrous Art had your Elegiak Songs?
What Paul-like power had your admired devotion?
What shackle breaking Faith infused such motion
To your strong Prayers, that could obtain the boon
To be enlarged, to be uncag'd so soon?
When I (poor I) can sing my daily tears,
Grown old in Bondage, and can find no ears:
You great partakers of eternal Glory,
That with your heav'n-prevailing Oratory,
Released your souls from your terrestrial Cage,
Permit the passion of my holy Rage
To recommend my sorrows (dearly known
To you, in days of old; and, once, your own)
To your best thoughts, (but oh't does not befit ye
To moove your prayers; you love and joy; not pity:)
Great LORD of souls to whom should prisners fly,
But Thee? Thou had thy Cage, as well as I:
And, for my sake, thy pleasure was to know
The sorrows that it brought, and feltst them too;
O set me free, and I will spend those days,
Which now I wast in begging, in Thy praise.
ANSELM. in Protolog. cap. 1.
O miserable condition of mankind, that has lost that for which he was created!
Alas What has he left? And what has he found? He has lost happiness for which
he was made, and found misery for which he was not made: What is gone? and what
is left? That thing is gone, without which he is unhappy; that thing is left,
by which he is miserable: O wretched men! From whence are we expelled? To what
are we impelled? Whence are we thrown? And whether are we burried? From our
home into banishment; from the slight of God into our own blindness; from the
pleasure of immortality to the bitterness of death: Miserable change! From how
great a good, to how great an evil? Ah me; What have I enterprized? What have
I done? Whither did I go? Whither am I come?

EPIG. 10.
Paul's Midnight voice prevailed; his musicks thunder
Vnhing'd the prison doors; split bolts in sunder:
And sitst thou here? and hang'st the feeble wing?
And whinst to be enlarged? Soul, learn to sing.
XI.
emblem As the Heart pants after the waterbrooks so pants my soul after
thee o Lord. Will: Simpson. Sculpsit


XI. PSALM. XLII.I. As the Heart pants after the waterbrooks, so pants my
soul after thee O God.
1
HOw shall my tongue express that hollowed fire
Which heaven has kindled in my ravished heart?
What Muse shall I invoke, that will inspire
My lowly Quill to act a lofty part!
What Art shall I divise to express desire,
Too intricate to be expressed by Art!
Let all the nine be silent; I refuse
Their old in this high task, for they abuse
The flames of Love too much: Assist me David's Muse.
2
Not as the thirsty soil desires soft showers,
To quicken and refresh her Embrion grain;
Nor as the drooping Crests of fading flowers
Request the bounty of a morning Rain,
Do I desire my GOD: These, in few hours,
Re-wish, what late their wishes did obtain,
But as the swift-foot Heart does, wounded, fly
To the much desired streams, even so do I
Pant after Thee, my GOD, whom I must find, or die.
3
Before a Pack of deep-mouthed Lusts I flee;
O, they have singled out my panting heart,
And wanton Cupid, sitting in a Tree,
Has pierced my bosom with a flaming dart;
My soul being spent, for refuge, seeks to Thee,
But cannot find where Thou my refuge art:
Like as the swift-foot Heart does, wounded, fly
To the desired streams, even so do I
Pant after Thee, my GOD, whom I must find, or die.
4
At length, by flight, I over-went the Pack;
Thou drew'st the wanton dart from out my wound;
The blood, that followed, left a purple track,
Which brought a Serpent, but in shape, a Hound;
We strove; He bit me; but Thou brak'st his back,
I left him groveling on th'envenom'd ground;
But as the Serpent-bitten Heart does fly
To the long-long'd for streams, even so did I
Pant after Thee, my GOD, whom I must find, or die.
5
If lust should chase my soul, made swift by fright,
Thou art the streams whereto my soul is bound:
Or if a lav'lin wound my sides in flight,
Thou art the Balsome that must cure my wound:
If poison chance t'infest my soul, in fight,
Thou art the Treacle that must make me sound;
Even as the wounded Heart, embost, does fly
To th'streames extremely long for, so do I
Pant after Thee, my GOD, whom I must find, or die.
CYRIL. lib. 5. in Ioh. cap. 10.
O precious water, which quenches the noisome thirst of this world, that
scoures all the stains of sins; that waters the earth of our souls with
heavenly showers, and brings back the thirsty heart of man to his only God!

S. AUGUST. Soliloq. 35.
O fountain of life, and vein of living waters, when shall I leave this
forsaken, impassible, and dry earth, and taste the waters of thy sweetness,
that I may behold thy virtue, and thy glory, and slake my thirst with the
streams of thy mercy; Lord, I thirst: Thou art the spring of life, satisfy
me; I thirst, Lord, I thirst after thee the living God!

EPIG. 11.
The Arrow-smitten Heart, deep wounded, flies
To the Springs with water in his weeping eyes:
Heaven is thy Spring: If Satan's fiery dart
Pierce thy faint sides; do so, my wounded Heart.
XII.
emblem When shall I come and appear before the Lord Ps: 42.2. W. M. Sculp:


XII. PSALM. XLII.II. When shall I come and appear before God?
WHat is my soul the better to be tinde
With holy fire? What boots it to be coynd
With Heavens own stamp? What vantage can there be
To souls of heav'n-descended Pedigree,
More than to Beasts, that grovell? Are not they
Fed by The Almighty's hand? and, every day,
Filled with His Blessing too? Do they not see
GOD in His Creatures as direct as we?
Do they not taste Thee? hear Thee? nay, what Sense
Is not partaker of Thine Excellence?
What more do we? Alas, what serves our reason,
But, like dark lanthornes, to accomplish Treason
With greater closeness? It affords no light,
Brings Thee no nearer to our pur blind sight;
No pleasure rises up the least degree,
Great GOD, but in the clearer view of Thee:
What priv'ledge more than Sense, has Reason than?
What vantage is it to be borne a Man?
How often has my patience built, (dear LORD)
Vain Towers of Hope upon Thy gracious Word?
How often has Thy Hope-reviving Grace
Wooed my suspicious eyes to seek Thy face!
How often have I sought Thee? Oh how long
Has expectation taught my perfect tongue
Repeated prayers, yet prayers could never obtain;
In vain I seek Thee, and I beg in vain:
If it be high presumption to behold
Thy face, why did Thou make mine eyes so bo^^
To seek it? If that object be too bright
For man's Aspect, why did thy lips invite
Mine eye t'expect it? If it might be seen,
Why is this envious curtain drawn between
My darkened eye and it? O tell me, why
Thou do command the thing Thou do deny?
Why do thou give me so unpriz'd a treasure,
And then deny'st my greedy soul the pleasure
To view thy gift? Alas, that gift is void,
And is no gift, that may not be enjoyed:
If those refulgent Beams of heavens great light
Guide not the day, what is the day, but night?
The drouzie Shepherd sleeps; flowers droop and fade;
The Birds are sullen, and the Beast is sad;
But if bright Titan dart his golden Ray,
And, with his riches, glorify the day,
The jolly Shepherd pipes; Flowers freshly spring
The beast grows gamesome, and the birds they sing.
Thou art my Sun, great GOD, O when shall I
View the full beams of thy Meridian eye?
Draw, draw this fleshly curtain, that denies
The gracious presence of thy glorious eyes;
Or give me Faith; and, by the eye of Grace,
I shall behold Thee, though not face to face.
S. AUGUST. in Psalm. 39.
Who created all things is better than all things; who beautified all things is
more beautiful than all things: who made strength is stronger than all things:
who made great things is greater than all things: Whatsoever thou love he is
that to thee: Learn to love the workman in his work; the Creator in his
creature: Let not that which was made by Him possess thee, lest thou lose Him
by whom thy self was made.

S. AUGUST. Med. cap. 37.
O thou most sweet, most gracious, most amiable, most fair, when shall I see
Thee? when shall I be satisfied with thy beauty? When will thou lead me from
this dark dungeon, that I may confess thy name?

EPIG. 12.
How art thou shaded in this vale of night,
Behind thy Curtain flesh? Thou see no light,
But what thy Pride does challenge as her own;
Thy flesh is high: Soul take this Curtain down:
XIII.
emblem Oh yt I had the wings of a Dove for then I would fly away and be at
rest. P^: 5^.6 W. Simpson* sc.


XIII. PSALM. LVI.VI. O that I had the wings of a Dove, for then I would flee
away and be at rest.
1
ANd am I sworn a dunghill slave for ever
To earths base drudg'ry? Shall I never find
A night of Rest? Shall my Indentures never
Be canceled? Did injurious nature bind
My soul earths Prentice, with no Clause, to leave her?
No day of freedom? Must I ever grind?
O that I had the pineons of a Dove;
That I might quit my Bands, and sore above,
And power my just Complaints before the great JEHOVA!
2
How happy are the Doves, that have the power,
When ere they please, to spread their ayry wings!
Or cloud-dividing Eagles, that can tower
Above the Sent of these inferior things!
How happy is the Lark, that every hour,
Leaves earth, and then for joy, mounts up and sings!
Had my dull soul but wings as well as they,
How I would spring from earth, and clip away,
As wise Astraea did, and scorn this ball of Clay!
3
O how my soul would spurn this Ball of Clay,
And loath the dainties of earths painful pleasure!
O how I Would laugh to see men night and day,
Turmoyle, to gain that Trash they call their treasure!
O how I Would smile to see what plots they lay
To catch a blast, or own a smile from Caesar!
Had I the pineons of a mounting Dove,
How would I sore and sing, and hate the Love
Of transitory Toys; and feed on Joys above!
4
There should I find that everlasting Pleasure,
Which Change removes not, and which Chance prevents not
There should I find that everlasting Treasure;
Which force deprives not, fortune dis-augments not;
There should I find that everlasting Caesar,
Whose hand recals not, and whose heart repents not:
Had I the pineons of a clipping Dove,
How I would climb the skies, and hate the Love
Of transitory Toys, and joy in Things above!
5
No rank-mouth'd flander, there, shall give offense,
Or blast our blooming names, as here they do;
No liver scalding Lust shall, there, incense
Our boiling veins: There is no Cupids Bow:
LORD, give my soul the milke-white Innocence
Of Doves, and I shall have their pineons too:
Had I the pineons of a sprightly Dove,
How I would quit this earth, and sore above,
And heavens blessed kingdom find, with heavens blessed King IEHOVE.
S. AUGUST. in Psalm. 38.
What wings should I desire but the two precepts of love, on which the Law and
the Prophets depend! O if I could obtain these wings, I could fly from thy
face to thy face, from the face of thy Justice to the face of thy Mercy: Let us
find those wings by love which we have lost by lust.

S. AUGUST. in Psalm. 76.
Let us cast off whatsoever hinders, entangles or burdens our flight until we
attain that which satisfies; beyond which nothing is; beneath which, all
things are; of which, all things are.

EPIG. 13.
Tell me, my wishing soul, did ever try
How fast the wings of, Red-crost Faith can fly?
Why beg'st thou then the pineons of a Dove?
Faiths wings are swifter, but the swiftest, Love
XIV.
emblem How amiable are thy Tabernacles O Lord of Hosts my Soul longs, y^^
even faints for the courts of the Lord: P^ ^4 Will: Marshall. Scul^


XIV. PSALM. LXXXIV.I. How amiable are thy Tabernacles O God of Hosts.
ANcient of days, to whom all times are Now,
Before whose Glory, Seraphims do bow
Their blushing Cheeks, and vale their blemished faces;
That uncontain'd, at once, do fill all places,
How glorious, O how far beyond the height
Of puzzled Quils, or the obtuse conceit
Of flesh and Blood, or the too flat reports
Of mortal tongues, are thy experssesse Courts!
Whose glory to paint forth with greater Art,
Ravish my Fancy, and inspire my heart,
Excuse my bold attempt, and pardon me
For showing Sense, what Faith alone should see.
Ten thousand Millions, and ten thousand more
Of Angell-measur'd leagues from th'Easterne shore
Of dungeon earth this glorious Palace stands,
Before whose pearly gates, ten thousand Bands
Of armed Angels wait, to entertain
Those purged souls, for whom the Lamb was slain,
Whose guiltless death, and voluntary yielding
Of whose given life, gave this brave Court her building;
The lukewarm Blood of this dear Lamb being spilt,
To Rubies turned, whereof her posts were built;
And what dropped down in cold and gelid gore,
Did turn rich Saphyrs, and impav'd her floor:
The brighter flames, that from his eye balls ray'd,
Grew Chrysolites, whereof her walls were made:
The milder glaunces sparkled on the Ground,
And grunsild every door with Diamond:
But, dying, darted upwards, and did fix
A Battlement of purest Sardonix.
Her streets with burnisht Gold are paved round:
Stars lie like pebbles scattred on the ground:
Pearl, mixed with Onyx, and the Jasper stone,
Made gravil'd Causwayes to be trampled on.
There shines no Sun by day; no Moon, by night;
The Palace glory is the Palace light:
There is no time to measure motion by,
There, time is swallowed with Eternity;
Wry-mouthed disdain, and corner-haunting lust,
And twy-fac'd Fraud; and beetle-brow'd Distrust;
Soule-boyling Rage; and trouble-state sedition;
And giddy doubt; and goggle-ey'd suspicion;
And lumpish sorrow, and degen'rous fear
Are banished thence, and death's a stranger there:
But simple love, and sempeternall joys,
Whose sweetness neither gluts, nor fullness cloyes;
Where face to face, our ravished eye shall see
Great ELOHIM, that glorious One in Three,
And Three in One, and, seeing Him, shall bless Him,
And blessing, love Him; and, in love, possess Him:
Here stay, my soul, and ravish in relation:
Thy words being spent; spend now, in Contemplation.
S. GREG. in Psalm. 7. poenitent.
Sweet Jesus, the Word of the Father, the brightness of paternall glory, whom
Angels delight to view, teach me to do thy will; that, led by thy good Spirit,
I may come to that blessed City, where day is eternal, where there is certain
security, and secure eternity, and eternal peace, and peaceful happiness,
and happy sweetness, and sweet pleasure; where thou O God with the Father and
the holy Spirit live and raignest world without end.

Ibid.
There is light without darkness; Joy without grief; desire without
punishment; love without sadness; satiety without loathing; safety without
fear; health without disease; and life without death.

EIPG. 14.
My soul, pry not too nearely; The Complexion
Of Sols bright face is seen, but by Reflection:
But would thou know what is heaven? I Will tell thee what;
Think what thou can not think, and Heaven is that.
XV.
emblem Make have my Beloved, and be Thou like to a Roe, or to a young Heart upon
the Mountains of Spices. Cant: 8.14. Will: s^^sc


XV. CANT. VIII.XIV. Make have my Beloved, and be like the Roe. or the young
Heart upon the Mountains of Spices.
GO, Gentle Tyrant, go; thy flames do pierce
My soul too deep; thy flames are too too fierce;
My marrow melts; my fainting Spirits fry
Ith'torrid Zone of thy Meridian Eye;
Away, away: thy sweets are too perfuming;
Turn, turn thy face; Thy fires are too consuming,
Have hence; and let thy winged steps out-goe
The frighted Roe-buck, and his flying Roe:
But will thou leave me then? O thou that art
Life of my Soul, Soul of my dying heart,
Without the sweet Aspect of whose fair Eyes,
My soul does languish, and her solace dies;
Art thou so easily wooed? So apt to hear
The frantic language of my foolish fear?
Leave, leave me not; nor turn thy beauty from me,
Look, look upon me, though thine e^es ov'rcome me.
O how they wound! But, how my wounds content me!
How sweetly these delightful pains torment me!
How I am tortured in excessive measure
Of pleasing cruelties too cruel pleasure!
Turn, turn away; remove thy scorching beams;
I languish with these bitter-sweet extremes:
Have then, and let thy winged steps out-goe
The flying Roe-buck, and his frighted Roe.
Turn back, my dear; O let my ravished eye
Once more behold thy face before thou fly;
What; shall we part without a mutual kiss?
O who can leave so sweet a face as this;
Look full upon me; for my soul desires
To turn a holy Martyr in those fires:
O leave me not, nor turn thy beauty from me;
Look, look upon me, though thy flames ov'rcome me.
If thou becloud the Sunshine of thine eye,
I freeze to death; and if it shine, I fry;
Which like a Fever, that my soul has got,
Makes me to burn too cold, or freeze too hot:
Alas, I cannot bear so sweet a smart,
Nor can thou be less glorious than thou art:
Have then, and let thy winged steps out-goe
The frighted Roe-buck, and his flying Roe.
But go not far beyond the reach of breath?
Too large a distance makes another death:
My youth is in her Sping; Autumnall vows
Will make me riper for so sweet a Spouse,
When aftertimes have burnished my desire,
I Will shoot thee flames for flames, and fire for fire.
O leave me not, nor turn thy beauty from me;
Look, look upon me, though thy flames ov'rcome me.
Author sealae Paradisi. Tom. 9. Aug Cap 8.
Fear not O Bride, nor despair; Think not thy self contemned, if thy
Bridegroom withdraw his face a while: All things cooperate for the best: Both
from his absence, and his presence thou gainest light: He comes to thee, and he
goes from thee, He comes, to make thee consolate; He goes, to make thee
cautious, lest thy abundant consolation puff thee up: He comes, that thy
languishing soul may be comforted; He goes, left his familiarity should be
contemned; and, being absent, to be more desired; and being desired, to be more
earnestly sought; and being long sought, to be more acceptably found.

EPIG. 15.
My soul, sins monster, whom, with greater ease
Ten thousand fold, thy GOD could make than pleases:
What would thou have? Nor pleased with Sun, nor shade?
Heaven knows not what to make of what He made.
emblem ^^ Fidesque Coronat a^ ara^ Will: marshall-sculp:


THE FAREWELL. REVEL. II.X. Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee
the crown of life.
1
BE faithful? LORD, what is that?
Believe: It Is easy to Believe; But what?
That He whom thy hard heart has wounded,
And whom thy scorn has spit upon,
Has paid thy Fine, and has compounded
For those soul deeds thy hands have done.
Believe, that He whose gentle palms
Thy needle-pointed Sins have nailed,
Has borne thy slavish load (of Alms)
And made supply where thou have failed:
Did ever misery find so strange Relief?
It is a Love too strong for man's Belief.
2
Believe that He whose side
Thy crimes have pierced with their rebellions, di'd,
To save thy guilty soul from dying,
Ten thousand horrid deaths, from whence
There was no escape, there was no flying,
But through his dearest bloods expense:
Believe, this dying Friend requires
No other thanks for all his pain;
But even the truth of weak desires,
And for his love, but love again;
Did ever misery find so true a Friend?
It is a love too vast to comprehend.
3
With Floods of tears baptize
And drench these dry, these unregen'rate eyes;
LORD, whet my dull, my blunt belief,
And break this fleshly rock in sunder,
That from this heart, this hell of grief
May spring a Heaven of love and wonder:
O, if thy mercies will remove
And melt this lead from my belief,
My grief will then refine my love,
My love will then refresh my grief;
Then weep mine eyes as He has bled; vouchsafe
To drop for every drop an Epitaph.
4
But is the Crowde of Glory
The wages of a lamentable Story?
Or can so great a purchase rise
From a salt Humor? Can mine eye
Run fast enough t'obtaine this Prize?
If so; LORD, who is so mad to die?
Thy Tears are Trifles; Thou must do:
Alas, I cannot; Then endeavor:
I will: But will a tugg or two
Suffice the turn? Thou must persever:
I Will strive till death; And shall my feeble strife
Be crowned? I Will crown it with a Crown of life.
5
But is there such a dearth.
That thou must buy what is thy due by birth?
He whom Thy hands did form of dust,
And gave him breath upon Condition,
To love his great Creator, must
He now be thine, by Composition?
Art thou a gracious GOD, and mild,
Or headstrong man rebellious rather?
O, man's a base rebellious Child,
And thou a very gracious Father:
The Gift is Thine; we strive; thou crown'st our strife;
Thou giv'st us Faith; and Faith, a Crown of Life.
THE END.
The mind of the Frontispeece.
This Bubble's Man: Hope, Fear, False Joy and Trouble, Are those Four Winds
which daily toss this Bubble.

Hieroglyphica haec de vita hominis perlegi, and digna censeo quae typis
mandentur.

Ian. 9. 1637. Tho: Wykes R. P. Episc. Land. Capell. domest.

Hieroglyphikes of the life of Man

Fra. Quarles



LONDON, Printed by John Dawson, for Francis Eglessield, and are to be sold by
him at the sign of the Marigold in Paul's Churchyard. 1639.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE both in Blood and Virtue; and most accomplished LADY,
MARY, COVNTESS OF DORSET; LADY GOVERNESS to the most Illustrious, CHARLES,
Prince of great BRITAIN, and JAMES, Duke of YORK.
Excellent Lady,
I Present these Tapours to burn under the safe Protection of your honorable
Name: where, I presume, they stand secure from the Damps of Ignorance, and
blasts of Censure: It is a small part of that abundant service, which my
thankful heart owes your incomparable Goodness. Be pleased to honor it with
your noble Acceptance, which shall be nothing but what your own esteem shall
make it

Madam Your Lapps. most humble servant FRA: QVARLES.

To The Reader.
IF you are satisfied with my Emblems, I here set before you a second service.
It is an Egyptian dish, dressed on the English fashion: They, at their Feasts,
used to present a Deaths-head at their second course; This will serve for both:
You need not fear a surfeit: Here is but little; And that, light of digestion:
If it but please your Palate, I question not your stomach: Fall too; and much
good may't do you.

Covivio addit Minerval. E. B.

Rem, Regem, Regimen, Regionem, Relligionem, Exornat, celebrat, laudat,
honorat, amat.
BENEVOLUS.
hieroglyph Sine Lumine inane.


Behold I was shapen in Iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me. PSALM.
51.5.
MAn is man's ABC: There is none that can
Read God aright, unless he first spell Man:
Man is the Stayres, whereby his knowledge climes
To his Creator; though it oftentimes
Stumbles for want of light, and sometimes trippes
For want of careful heed; and sometimes slips
Through unadvised have; and when, at length,
His weary steps have reached the top, his strength
Often fayles to stand; his giddy brains turn round,
And Phaeton-like, falls headlong to the ground:
These stayres are often dark, and full of danger
To him, whom want of practice makes a stranger
To this blind way: The Lamp of nature lends
But a false Light; and lights to her own ends:
These be the ways to Heaven; These paths require
A Light that springs from that diviner fire
Whose humane soule-enlightning sunbeames dart
Through the bright Crannies of the immortal part.
And here, thou great Original of Light,
Whose error-chaceing Beams do unbenight
The very soul of Darkness, and untwist
The Clouds of Ignorance; do thou assist
My feeble Quill; Reflect thy sacred Rays
Upon these lines, that they may light the ways
That lead to thee; So guide my heart, my hand,
That I may do what others understand,
Let my heart practice what my hand shall write;
Till then, I am a Tapour wanting light.
This golden Precept, Know thy self, came down
From heavens high Court; It was an Art unknown
To flesh and blood. The men of Nature took
Great Iournies in it; Their dim eyes did look
But through a Mist; Like Pilgrims they did spend
Their idle steps, but knew no Iournies end:
The way to know thy self, is first to cast
Thy frail beginning, Progress, and thy Last:
This is the Sum of Man: But now return
And view this Tapour standing in this Vrne:
Behold her Substance, sordid, and impure,
Vselesse and rain, and (wanting light) obscure:
It Is but a Span at longest, nor can last
Beyond that Span; ordained, and made to wast:
Even such was Man (before his soul gave light
To his vile substance) a mere Child of night;
Ere he had life, estated in his Vrne,
And marked for death; by nature, borne to burn:
Thus livelesse, lightlesse, worthless first began
That glorious, that presumptuous thing, called Man.
S. AUGUST.
Consider o men what thou were before thy Birth, and what thou art from thy
birth to thy death, and what thou shall be after death: Thou were made of an
impure substance, clothed and nourished in thy Mothers blood.

EPIG. 1.
Forbear fond Tapour: What thou seek'st, is Fire:
Thy own destructions lodged in thy desire:
Thy wants are far more safe than their supply:
He that begins to live, begins to die.
hieroglyph Nescius Vnde.

Will. Marshall (...)



And God said, Let there be light; and there was light. GENESIS 1.3.
THis flame-expecting Tapour has, at length,
Received fire; and, now, begins to burn:
It has no vigor yet, it has no strength;
Apt to be puffed and quenched at every turn:
It was a gracious hand that thus endowed
This snuff with flame: But mark, this hand does shroud
It self from mortal eyes, and folds it in a Cloud.
2
Thus man begins to live; An unknown flame
Quickens his finished Organs; now, possessed
With motion; and which motion does proclaim
An active soul, though in a feeble breast:
But how, and when infused, ask not my Pen;
Here flies a Cloud before the eyes of men:
I cannot tell thee, how; nor can thou tell me, when,
3
Was it a parcel of celestial fire,
Infused, by Heaven, into this fleshly mould?
Or was it (think you) made a soul entire?
Then; was it new created? Or of old?
Or is it a propagated Spark, raked out
From Natures embers? While we go about,
By reason, to resolve, the more we raise a doubt.
4
If it be part of that celestial Flame,
It must be even as pure, as free from spot
As that eternal fountain whence it came:
If pure, and spotless; then, whence came the blot?
It self, being pure could not it self defile;
Nor has unactive Matter power to soil
Her pure and active Form, as Iarrs corrupt their Oil.
5
Or, if it were created, tell me, when?
If in the first six days, where kept till now?
Or, if the soul were new created, then
Heaven did not all, at first, he had to do:
Six days expired, all Creation ceast,
All kinds, even from the greatest to the least
Were finished, and complete, before the day of Rest.
6
But why should Man, the Lord of Creatures, want
That privilege which Plants and Beasts obtain?
Beasts bring forth Beasts, the Plant a perfect Plant;
And every like brings forth her like again:
Shall fowls, and fishes, beasts and plants convey
Life to their issue? And Man less than they?
Shall these get living souls? And Man, dead lumps of clay?
7
Must humane souls be generated then?
My water ebbs; behold, a Rock is nigh:
If Natures work produce the souls of men,
Man's soul is mortal: All that is borne must die.
What shall we then conclude? What sunshine will
Disperse this gloomy cloud? Till then, be still,
My vainly striving thoughts; Lie down, my puzzled quill.
ISODOR.
Why do thou wonder, o man, at the height of the Stars? or the depth of
the Sea? Enter into thine own soul, and wonder there.

The soul by creating is infused; by infusion, created.

EPIG. 2.
What art thou now the better by this flame?
Thou know not how, nor when, nor whence it came:
Poor kind of happiness, that can return
No more account but this, to say, I burn!
hieroglyph Quo me cunque rapit. Will: Marshall. ^^^sit.


The wind passes over it and it is gone. PSALM. 103.16.
NO sooner is this lighted Tapour set
Upon the transitory Stage
Of eye-bedarkning night,
But it is straight subjected to the threat
Of envious winds, whose wast full rage
Disturbs her peace full light,
And makes her substance wast, and makes her flame less bright.
2
No sooner are we borne, no sooner come
To take possession of this vast,
This soule-afflicting earth;
But Danger meets us at the very womb,
And Sorrow with her full mouthed blast,
Salutes our painful birth,
To put out all our Joys, and puff out all our mirth.
3
Nor Infant Innocence, nor childish tears,
Nor youthful wit, not manly power,
Nor politic old age,
Nor virgins pleading, nor the widows prayers,
Nor lowely Cell, nor lofty Tower,
Nor Prince, nor Peer, nor Page
Can escape this common blast, or curb her stormy rage.
4
Our life is but a pilgrimage of blasts;
And every blast brings forth a fear;
And every fear, a death;
The more it lengthens, ah, the more it wastes:
Were, were we to continue here
The days of long lif'd Seth,
Our sorrows would renew, as we renew our breath:
5.
Tossed too and fro, our frighted thoughts are driven
With every puff, with every Tide.
Of self-consuming Care;
Our peaceful flame, that would point up to heaven,
Is still disturbed, and turned aside;
And every blast of Air
Commits such wast in man, as man can not repair.
6
We Are all borne Detters, and we firmly stand
Obliged for our first Parents Det,
Besides our Interest;
Alas we have no harmless Counterband,
And we are, every hou'r, beset
With threatenings of Arrest,
And till we pay the Det, we can expect no Rest.
7
What may this sorrow-shaken life present
To the false relish of our Taste,
That Is worth the name of sweet?
Her minits pleasure's choakt with discontent,
Her glory foyld with every blast;
How many dangers meet
Poor man, betwixt the Biggin and the Winding sheet!
S. AUGUST.
In this world, not to be grieved, not to be afflicted, not to be in danger, is
impossible.

Ibid.
Behold; the world is full of troubles; yet, beloved; What if it were a
pleasing world? How would thou delight in her Calmes, that can so well
endure her storms?

EPIG. 3*
Art thou consumed with soule-afflicting crosses?
Disturbed with grief? annoyed with worldly losses
Hold up thy head; the Tapour lifted high
Will brook the wind, when lower Tapors dye.
hieroglyph Curando Labascit.


The whole need not the Physician. MAT. 9.12.
Always pruning? always cropping?
Is her brightness still obscured?
Ever dressing? ever topping?
Always cureing? never cured?
Too much snuffing makes a waste;
When the spirits spend too fast,
They will shrink at every blast.
2
You that always are bestowing
Costly pains in life repairing,
Are but always overthrowing,
Natures work, by overcaring:
Nature meeting with her Foe,
In a work she has to do,
Takes a pride to overthrow.
3
Nature knows her own perfection,
And her pride disdaines a Tutor,
Can not stoop to Arts correction,
And she scorns a Coadjutor;
Saucy Art should not appear
Till she Whisper in her ear:
Hagar flees, if Sara bear.
3
Nature works for the better,
If not hindered, that she cannot;
Art stand by as her A bettor,
Ending nothing she began not;
If distemper chance to seize,
(Nature foiled with the disease)
Art may help her if she please.
5
But to make a Trade of trying
Drugs, and Dofies, always pruning,
Is to dye, for fear of dying;
He Is untuned, that's always tuneing.
He that often loves to lack
Dear bought Drugs, has found a Knack
To foil the man, and feed the Quack.
6
O the sad, the frail Condition
Of the pride of Natures glory!
How infirm his Composition!
And, at best, how Transitory!
When his Riot does impair
Natures weakness, then his care
Adds more ruin, by repair.
7
Hold thy hand, healths Dear maintainer,
Life perchance may burn the stronger:
Having substance to sustain her,
She, untoucht, may last the longer:
When the Artist goes about
To redress her flame, I doubt,
Oftentimes he snuffes it out.
NICOCLES.
Physicians of all men are most happy; what good success soever they have, the
world proclaims, and what faults they commit, the earth covers.

EPIG. 4.
My purse being heavy, if my Light appear
But Dim, Quack comes to make all clear;
Quack, leave thy trade; Thy Dealings are not right,
Thou take our weighty gold, to give us light.
hieroglyph Te auxiliante resurgo. Will Marshall, sculpsit


And he will give his Angels charge over thee. PSALM. 91.
1
O How mine eyes could please themselves, and spend
Perpetual Ages in this precious sight!
How I could woo Eternity, to lend
My wasting day an Antidote for night!
And how my flesh could with my flesh contend,
That views this object with no more delight!
My work is great, my Tapour spends too fast:
It Is all I have, and soon would out, or wast,
Did not this blessed Screene protect it from this blast.
2
O, I have lost the Jewel of my soul,
And I must find it out, or I must dye:
Alas! my sin-made darkness does control
The bright endeavor of my careful eye:
I must go search, and ransack every hole;
Nor have I other light to seek it by:
O if this light be spent, my work not done,
My labor's worse than lost; my Iewel's gone,
And I am quite forlorn, and I am quite undone.
3
You blessed Angels, you that do enjoy
The full fruition of eternal Glory,
Will you be pleased to fancy such a Toy
As man, and quit your glorious Territory,
And stoop to earth, vouchsafing to employ
Your care to guard the dust that lies before ye?
Disdain you not these lumps of dying Clay,
That, for your pains, do oftentimes repay
Neglect, if not disdain, and send you grieved away?
4
This Tapour of our life's, that once was placed
In the fair Suburbs of Eternity,
Is now, alas, confined to every blast,
And turned a May Pole for the sporting Fly;
And will you, sacred Spirits, please to cast
Your care on us, and lend a gracious eye?
How had this slender Inch of Tapour been
Blasted, and blazed, had not this heavenly Screene
Curbed the proud blast, and timely stepped between!
5.
O Godnesse, far transcending the report
Of lavish tongues! too vast to comprehend I
Amazed Quill, how far do thou come short
To Express expressions, that so far transcend!
You blessed Courtiers of the eternal Court,
Whose full-mouthed Hallelujahs have no end,
Receive that world of praises that belongs
To your great Sov'raigne; fill your holy tongues
With our Hosannas mixed with your Seraphick Songs.
S. BERN.
If thou desire the help of Angels, flee the comforts of the world, and
resist the Temptations of the Devil.

He will give his Angels charge over thee? O what reverence, what love, what
confidence deserves so sweet a saying? For their presence, reverence; for their
good will, love; for their tuition, confidence.

EPIG. 5.
My flame, art thou disturbed, diseased, and driven
To Death with storms of grief? Point thou to heaven:
One Angel, there, shall ease thee more, alone,
Then thrice as many thousands of thy own.
hieroglyph Tempus erit.

Will Marshall. sculpsit.



To every thing there is an appointed time. ECCLES. 3.1.
Time. Death. Time BEhold the frailty of this slender snuff;
Alas it has not long to last:
Without the help of either Thief, or puff,
Her weakness knows the way to wast:
Nature has made her Substance apt enough
To spend it self, and spend too fast:
It needs the help of none,
That is so prone
To lavish out, untoucht; and languish all alone.
2
Death. Time, hold thy peace, and shake thy flow paced Sand;
Thy idle Minits make no way:
Thy glass exceeds her how'r, or else does stand,
I can not hold; I can not stay;
Surcease thy pleading, and enlarge my hand,
I surfeit with too long delay:
This brisk, this boldfac'd Light
Does burn too bright;
Darkness adornes my throne; my day is darkest night.
3
Time. Great Prince of darkness, hold thy needless hand;
Thy Captiv's fast, and can not flee:
What arm can rescue? Who can countermand,
What power can set thy Prisoner free?
Or if they could, what close, what foreign land
Can hide that head, that flees from Thee?
But if her harmless light
Offend thy sight,
What needst thou snatch at noone, what will be thine at night?
Death. I have outstaid my patience; My quick Trade
Grows dull and makes too flow return:
This long lived det is due, and should bin paid
When first her flame began to burn:
But I have staid too long, I have delayed
To store my vast, my craving Vrne.
My Patent gives me power,
Each day, each how'r,
To strike the Peasants thatch, and shake the Princely Tower.
5
Time. Thou count'st too fast: Thy Patent gives no Power
Till Time shall please to say, Amen.
Death. Can thou appoint my shaft?
Time. Or thou my How'r?
Death. It Is I bid, do:
Time It Is I bid, When.
Alas, thou can not make the poorest Flow't
To hang the drooping head, tell then:
Thy shafts can neither Kill,
Nor strike, until
My power give them wings, and pleasure arm thy will.
S. AUGUST.
Thou know not what Time he will come: Wait always, that because thou
know not the time of his coming, thou may be prepared against the time
he comes. And for this, perchance, thou know not the Time, because thou
may be prepared against all times.

EPIG. 6.
Expect, but fear not Death: Death cannot Kill,
Till Time, (that first must seal her Patent) will:
Would thou live long? Keep Time in high esteem;
Whom, gone, if thou can not recall, redeem,
hieroglyph Nec sine, nec Tecum

Will Marshall sculpsit



His light shall be dark, and his candle shall be put out. JOB 18.6.
What ails our Tapour? Is her luster fled,
Or foiled? What dire disaster bred
This Change? that thus she vailes her golden head?
2
It was but very now, she shined as fair
As Venus star: Her glory might compare
With Cynthia, burnisht with her brothers hair.
3
There was no Cave-begotten damp that might
Abuse her beams; no wind, that went about
To break her peace; no Puff, to put her out.
4
Lift up thy wondering thoughts, and thou shall spy
A Cause, will clear thy doubts, but cloud thine eye:
Subjects must veil, when as their Sov'raign's by.
5
Can thou behold bright Phoebus, and thy sight
No whit impayr'd? The object is too bright;
The weaker yields unto the stronger Light.
6
Great God, I am thy Tapour; Thou my Sun;
From thee the Spring of Light, my Light begun,
Yet if thy Light but shine, my light is done.
7
If thou withdraw thy Light, my light will shine,
If thine appear, how poor a light is mine!
My light is darkness, if compared to thine.
8
Thy Sun beams are too strong for my weak eye;
If thou but shine, how nothing, Lord, am I!
Ah, who can see thy visage, and not die!
9
If intervening earth should make a night,
My wanton flame would then shine forth too bright;
My earth would even presume t'eclipse thy Light.
10
And if thy Light be shadowed, and mine fade,
If thine be dark, and my dark light decayed,
I should be clothed with a double shade.
11
What shall I do? O what shall I desire?
What help can my distracted thoughts require,
That thus am wasting twixt a double Fire?
12
In what a straight, in what a straight am I?
Twixt two extremes how my rackt fortunes lie?
See I thy face, or see it not, I die.
13
O let the steame of my Redeemers blood,
That breaths fro'my sick soul, be made a Cloud,
T'inter pose these Lights, and be my shroud.
14
Lord, what am I? or what is the light I have?
May it but light my Ashes to their Grave,
And so from thence, to Thee? it is all I crave.
15
O make my Light, that all the world may see
Thy Glory by it: If not, It seems to me
Honor enough, to be put out by Thee.
O Light inaccessible, in respect of which my light is utter darkness; so
reflect upon my weakness, that all the world may behold thy strength. O Majesty
incomprehensible, in respect of which my glory is mere shame: so shine upon my
misery that all the world may behold thy glory.

EPIG. 7.
Will thou complain, because thou art bereav'n
Of all thy light? Will thou vie Lights with Heaven?
Can thy bright eye not brook the daily light?
Take heed: I fear, thou art a Child of night.
hieroglyph Nec Virtus obscurapetit.

Will: Marshall sculpsit



Let your light so shine, that men seeing your good works may glorify your
Father which is in Heaven. MAT. 5.16.
WAs it for this, the breath of Heaven was blown
Into the nostrils of this Heavenly Creature?
Was it for this, that sacred Three in One
Conspired to make this Quintessence of Nature?
Did heavenly Providence intend
So rare a Fabric for so poor an end?
2
Was Man, the highest Masterpiece of Nature,
The curious Abstract of the whole Creation,
Whose soul was copied from his great Creator,
Made to give Light, and set for Observation,
Ordained for this? To spend his Light
In a darke-Lanthorne? Cloystred up in night?
3
Tell me, recluse Monastic, can it be
A disadvandtage to thy beams to shine?
A thousand Tapours may gain light from Thee.
Is thy Light less, or worse for lighting mine?
If, wanting Light, I stumble, shall
Thy darkness not be guilty of my fall?
4
Why do thou lurk so close? Is it for fear
Some busy eye should pry into thy flame,
And spy a Thief or else some blemish there?
Or being spied, shrink'st thou thy head for shame?
Come, come, fond Tapour shine but clear,
Thou needst not shrink for shame, nor shroud for fear.
5
Remember, O remember, thou were set,
For men to see the Great Creator by;
Thy flame is not thy own: It is a Det
Thou ow'st thy Maker; And will thou deny
To pay the Interest of thy Light?
And skulk in Corners, and play least in sight?
6
Art thou afraid to trust thy easy flame
To the injurious wast of Fortunes puff?
Ah, Coward, rouse; and quit thy self, for shame;
Who dies in service, has lived long enough:
Who shines, and makes no eye partaker,
Vsurps himself, and closely robbs his Maker.
7
Take not thy self a Prisoner, that art free:
Why do thou turn thy Palace to a Iaile?
Thou art an Eagle; And befits it thee
To live immured, like a cloysterd Snaile?
Let Toies seek Corners: Things of cost
Gain worth by view: Hid Jewels are but lost.
8
My God, my light is dark enough at lightest,
Increase her flame, and give her strength to shine:
It Is frail at best* It Is dim enough at brightest,
But it is her glory to be foyld by Thine.
Let others lurk; My light shall be
Proposed to all men; and by them, to Thee.
S. BERN.
If thou be one of the foolish Virgins, the Congregation is necessary for thee;
If thou be one of the wise Virgins, thou art necessary for the Congregation.

HUGO.
Monasticks make Cloisters to enclose the outward man, O would to God they
would do the like to restrain the inward Man.

EPIG. 8
Afraid of eyes? What, still play least in sight?
It Is much to be presumed all is not right:
Too close endeavors, bring forth dark events:
Come forth, Monastic; Here Is no Parliaments.
hieroglyph Vt Luna Infantia torpet.

Will. Marshall. sculpsit.



He comes forth like a Flower and is cut down. JOB 14.2.
1
Behold
How short a span
Was long enough, of old,
To measure out the life of Man!
In those well tempered days his time was then
Surveyed, cast up, and found but threescore years and ten.
2
Alas
And what is that?
They come and slide and pass
Before my Pen can tell thee, what.
The Posts of Time are swift, which having run
Their sev'n short stages 'ore, their short lived task is done.
3
Our days
Begun, we lend
To sleep, to antic plays
And Toys, until the first stage end:
12. waining Moons, twice 5. times told, we give
To unrecover'd loss: We rather breathe, then live.
4
We spend
A ten years breath,
Before we apprehend
What is to live, or fear a death:
Our childish dreams are filled with painted joys,
Which please our sense a while, and waking, prove but Toies.
5
How vain.
How wretched is
Poor man, that does remain
A slave to such a State as this!
His days are short, at longest; few, at most;
They are but bad, at best; yet lavisht out, or lost.
6
They be
The secret Springs,
That make our minits flee
On wheels more swift the^ Eagles wings:
Our life's a Clock, and every gasp of breath
Breathes forth a warning grief, till Time shall strike a death.
7
How soon
Our newborn Light
Attaines to full-ag'd noone!
And this, how soon to gray-hayr'd night!
We spring, we bud, we blossom, and we blast
E're we can count our days; Our days they flee so fast.
8
They end
When scarce begun;
And ere we apprehend
That we begin to live, our life is don:
Man, Count thy days; And if they flee too fast
For thy dull thoughts to count, count every day thy last.
Our Infancy is consumed in eating and sleeping; in all which time what differ
we from beasts, but by a possibility of reason, and a necessity of sin?

O misery of man kind, in whom no sooner the Image of God appears in the act
of his Reason, but the Devil blurs it in the corruption of his will!

EIPG. 9. To the decrepit man.
Thus was the first seventh part of thy few days
Consumed in sleep, in food, in Toyish plays:
Know thou what tears thine eyes imparted then?
Review thy loss, and weep them over again.
hieroglyph Preles tua, Maia, Iuventus

Will. Marshall sculp^*



His bones are full of the sins of his youth. JOB 20.11.
1
THe swift-foot Post of Time has now begun
His second Stage;
The dawning of our Age
Is lost and spent without a Sun:
The light of Reason did not yet appear
Within th'Horizon of this Hemispheare.
2
The infant Will had yet none other guide,
But twilight Sense;
And what is gayn'd from thence
But doubtful Steps, that tread aside?
Reason now draws her Curtains; Her closed
Begin to open, and she calls to rise.
3
Youths now disclosing Bud peeps out, and shower
Her April head;
And, from her grass green bed,
Her virgin Primerose early blows;
Whilst waking Philomel prepares to sing
Her warbling Sonets to the wanton Spring.
4
His Stage is pleasant, and the way seems short.
All strow'd with flowers;
The days appear but hours,
Being spent in time-beguiling sport.
Here griefs do neither press, nor doubts perplex;
Here Is neither fear, to curb; nor care, to vex.
5
His downie Cheek grows proud, and now disdaines
The Tutors hand;
He glories to command
The proud neckt Steed with prouder Reins:
The strong breathed Horn must now salute his ear,
With the glad downfall of the falling Dear.
6
His quicknos'd Army, with their deepmouth'd sounds,
Must now prepare
To chase the timorous Hare
About his, yet unmorgag'd, Grounds;
The ev'll he hates, is Counsel, and delay,
And fears no mischief, but a rainie day.
7
The thought he takes, is how to take no thought
For bale, nor bliss;
And late Repentance is
The last dear Pen'worth that he bought:
He is a dainty Morning, and he may,
If lust'ore cast him not, b'as fair a Day.
8
Proud Blossom, use thy Time; Times head strong Horse
Will post away:
Trust not the foll'wing day,
For every day brings forth a worse:
Take time at best: believe't, thy days will fall
From good, to bad; From bad, to worst of all.
S. AMBR.
Humility is a rare thing in a young man, therefore to be admired: When youth
is vigorous, when strength is firm, when blood is hot, when Cares are
strangers, when mirth is free, then Pride swells, and humility is despised.

EPIG. 10. To the old Man.
Thy years are newly gray: His, newly Green;
His youth may live to see what thine has seen:
He is thy Parallel: His present Stage
And thine, are the two Tropicks of Man's Age.
hieroglyph Iam ruit in Venerem

Will: Marshall sculpsit.



Rejoice O young man, and let thy heart cheer Thee, but know, etc. ECCLES.
11.9.
HOw flux! how alterable is the date
Of transitory things!
How hurried on the clipping wings
Of Time, and driven upon the wheels of Fate!
How one Condition brings
The leading Prologue to another State!
No transitory things can last:
Change waits on Time; and Time is winged with have;
Time presents but the Ruins of Time past.
2
Behold how Change has incht away thy Span,
And how thy light does burn
Nearer and nearer to thy Vrne:
For this dear wast what satisfaction can
Injurious time return
Thy shortened days, but this; the style of Man?
And what is a Man? A cask of Care,
New tunn'd and working; He Is a middle Staire
Twixt birth and death; A blast of full aged Air.
3
His breast is Tinder, apt to entertain
The sparks of Cupids fire,
Whose new-blowne flames must now enquire
A wanton Juilippe out, which may restrain
The Rage of his desire,
Whose painful pleasure is but pleasing pain.
His life's a sickness, that does rise
From a hot Liver, whilst his passion lies
Expecting Cordials from his Mistress eyes.
His Stage is strowd with Thorns, and decked with Flowers;
His year sometimes appears
A Minit; and his Minits, years;
His doubtful Weather's sunshine, mixed with showers;
His traffic, Hopes and Fears:
His life's a Medly made of sweets and sowers;
His pains reward is Smiles, and Pouts;
His diet is fair language mixed with Flouts;
He is a Nothing, all composed of Doubts.
5
Do; wast thy Inch, proud Span of living earth;
Consume thy golden days
In slavish freedom; Let thy ways
Take best advantage of thy frolic mirth;
Thy Stock of Time decays;
And lavish plenty still foreruns a Dearth:
The bird that is flowne may turn at last;
And painful labor may repair a wast;
But pains nor price can call thy minits past.
SEN.
Expect great joy when thou shall lay down the mind of a Child, and deserve
the style of a wise man; for at those years childhood is past, but oftentimes
childishness remains, and what is worse, thou have the Authority of a Man, but
the vices of a Child.

EPIG. 11. To the declining Man.
Why standst thou discontented? Is not he
As equal distant from the Top as thee?
What then may cause thy discontented frown?
He Is mounting up the Hill; Thou plodding down.
hieroglyph Vt Sol ardore Virilj

Will: Marshall sculp^^t



As thy days, so shall thy strength be. DEUTERONOMY. 33.25.
The Post
Of swift foot Time
Has now, at length, begun
The Kalends of our middle Stage:
The numbered Steps that we have gone, do show
The number of those Steps we are to go:
The Buds and blossoms of our Age
Are blown, decayed, and gone,
And all our prime
Is lost;
And what we boast too much, we have least cause to boast.
Ah me!
There is no Rest,
Our Time is always fleeing:
What Rein can curb our headstrong hours!
They post away: They pass we know not how:
Our Now is gone, before we can say, Now:
Time past and futur's none of ours;
That, has as yet no Being;
And This has ceast
To be:
What is, is only ours: How short a Time have We*
And now
Apolloes ear
Expects harmonious strains,
New minted from the Thracian Lyre;
For now the Virtue of the twiforkt Hill
Inspires the ravished fancy, and does fill
The veins with Pegasean fire:
And now, those sterill brains
That cannot show,
Nor bear
Some fruits, shall never wear Apollos sacred Bow.
Excess
And surfeit uses
To wait upon these days:
Full feed, and flowing cups of wine
Conjure the fancy, forcing up a Spright,
By the base Magic of deboy^d delight;
Ah pity twiseborne Bacchus Vine
should starve Apollo's Bays,
And drown those Muses
That bless
And calm the peaceful soul, when storms of cares opp^
Strong light,
Boast not those beams
That can but only rise,
And blaze a while, and then away:
There is no Solstice in thy day;
Thy midnight glory lies
Betwixt the extrems
Of night,
A Glory foyld with shame, and foold with false delight.
Have thou climbd up to the full age of thy few days? Look backwards, and thou
shall see the frailty of thy youth; the folly of thy Childhood, and the waste
of thy Infancy: Look forwards; thou shall see, the cares of the world, the
troubles of thy mind, the diseases of thy body.

EPIG. 12. To the middle aged.
Thou that art prauncing on the lusty Noone
Of thy full Age, boast not thy self too soon:
Convert that breath to wayle thy fickle state;
Take heed; thou wilt brag too soon, or boast too late.
hieroglyph Et Martem spirat et arma

Will Marshall. sculpsit.



He must increase, but I must decrease. IOH. 3.30.
TIme voyds the Table: Dinner's done;
And now our days declining Sun
Has hurried his diurnall Load
To th'Borders of the Western road;
Fierce Phlegon, with his fellow Steeds,
Now puffes and pants, and blows and bleeds,
And froths, and fumes, remembering still
Their lashes up th'Olympick Hill;
Which having conquered, now disdain
The whip, and champs the frothy reyn,
And, with a full Career, they bend
Their paces to their Iournies end:
Our blazing Tapour now has lost
Her better half: Nature has crossed
Her forenoone book, and cleard that score,
But scarce gives trust for so much more:
And now the generous Sap forsakes
Her seir-grown twig: A breath even shakes
The down-ripe fruit; fruit soon divorced
From her dear Branch, untouchd, unforced.
Now sanguine Venus does begin
To draw her wanton colors in;
And flees neglected in disgace,
Whilst Mars supplies her luke warm place:
Blood turns to Choler: What this Age
Loses in strength it fines in Rage:
That rich Ennamell, which of old,
Damaskt the downy Cheek, and told
A harmless guilt, unaskt, is now
Worn off from the audacious brow;
Luxurious Dalliance, midnight Revells,
Loose Riot, and those venial evils
Which inconsiderate youth of late
Could plead, now wants an Advocate,
And what appeard in former times
Whispring as faults, now roar as crimes:
And now all ye, whose lips were wont
To drench their Currall in the Font
Of forkt Parnassus; you that be
The Sons of Phoebus, and can flee
On wings of Fancy, to display
The Flagge of high Invention, stay:
Repose your Quills; Your veins grow sower,
Tempt not your Salt beyond her power:
If your palled Fancies but decline,
Censure will strike at every line
And wound your names; The popular ear
Weighs what you are, not what you were.
Thus hackney like, we tire our Age,
Spurgall'd with Change, from Stage to Stage.
See thou the daily light of the greater world? When attaind to the highest
pitch of Meridian glory, it staieth not, but by the same degrees, it ascended,
it descends. And is the light of the lesser world more premanent? Continuance
is the Child of Eternity, not of Time.

EPIG. 13: To the young Man.
Young man, rejoice; And let thy rising days
Cheer thy glad heart; Think thou these uphill ways
Lead to deaths dungeon? No: but know withal,
Arising is but Prologue to a Fall.
hieroglyph Invidiosa Senectus.

Will* Marshall. sculpsit.



Yet a little while is the light with you. IOH. 12.35.
1
THe day grows old; The low pitched Lamp has made
No less than treble shade:
And the descending damp does now prepare
T'uncurle bright Titans hair;
Whose Western Wardrobe, now begins t'unfold
Her purples, fringed with gold,
To cloth his evening glory; when th'alarmes
Of Rest shall call to rest in restless Thetis arms*
2
Nature now calls to Supper, to refresh
The spirits of all flesh;
The toyling ploughman drives his Thirsty Teames,
To taste the slippery Streams:
The droyling Swineheard knocks away, and feasts
His hungry-whining guests:
The boxbill Ouzle, and the dappled Thrush
Like hungry Rivals meet, at their beloved bush.
3
And now the cold Autumnall dewes are seen
To copwebbe every Green;
And by the low-shorne Rowins does appear
The fast-declining year.
The Saplesse Branches d'off their summer Suits
And waine their winter fruits:
And stormy blasts hare forced the quaking Trees
To wrap their trembling limbs in Suits of mossie Freeze.
4
Our wasted Tapour now has brought her light
To the next door to night;
Her sprightlesse flame, grown great with snuff, does turn
Sad as her neigbr'ring Vrne:
Her slender Inch, that yet unspent remains,
Lights but to further pains,
And in a silent language bids her guest
Prepare his weary limbs to take eternal Rest.
5
Now carkfull Age has pitched her painful plough
Upon the surrow'd brow;
And snowie blasts of discontented Care
Has blancht the falling hair:
Suspicious envy mixed with jealous Spite
Disturb's his weary night:
He threatens youth with age: And, now, alas,
He ownes not what he is, but vaunts the Man he was.
6
Gray hairs, peruse thy days; And let thy past
Read lectures to thy last:
Those hasty wings that hurried them away
Will give these days no Day:
The constant wheels of Nature scorn to tire
Until her works expire:
That blast that nipt thy youth, will ruin Thee;
That hand that shook the branch will quickly strike the Tree.
S. CHRYSOSTOM.
Gray hayres are honorable, when the behavior suits with gray hayres: But when
an ancient man has childish manners, he becomes more rediculous than a child.

SEN.
Thou art in vain attained to old years, that repeatest thy youthfulness.

EPIG. 14. To the Youth.
See thou this good old man? He represents
Thy Future; Thou, his Preterperfect Tense;
Thou go to labor, He prepares to Rest:
Thou break'st thy Fast; He suppes: Now which is best*
hieroglyph Plumbeus in terram

Will Marshall sculpsit



The days of our years are threescore years and ten PSALM. 90.10.
1
SO have I seen the illustrious Prince of Light
Rising in glory from his Crocean bed,
And trampling down the horrid shades of night,
Advancing more and more his conquering head,
Pause first; decline; at length, begin to shroud
His fainting brows within a cole black cloud.
2
So have I seen a well built Castle stand
Upon the Tiptoes of a lofty Hill,
Whose active power commands both Sea and Land,
And curbs the pride of the Beleag'rers will;
At length her aged Foundation fails her trust,
And lays her tottring ruins in the Dust.
3
So have I seen the blazing Tapour shoot
Her golden head into the feeble Air;
Whose shadow-gilding Ray, spread round about,
Makes the foul face of black brow'd darkness fair;
Till at the length her wasting glory fades,
And leaves the night to her invet'rate shades.
4
Even so this little world of living Cloy,
The pride of Nature, glorified by Art,
Whom earth adores, and all her hosts obey,
Allied to Heaven by his Diviner part,
Triumphs a while, then droops, and then decays,
And worn by Age, death cancells all his days.
5
That glorious Sun, that whilom shone so bright,
Is now even ravished from our darkened eyes;
That sturdy Castle, manned with so much might,
Lies now a Monument of her own disguize:
That blazing Tapour, that disdained the puff
Of troubled Air, scarce ownes the name of Snuff.
6
Poor bedrid Man! where is that glory now,
Thy Youth so vaunted? Where that Majesty
Which sat enthroned upon thy manly brow?
Where, where that braving Arm? that daring eye?
Those buxom tunes? Those Bacchanalian Tones?
Those swelling veins? those marrow-flaming bones?
7
Thy drooping Glory's blurrd, and prostrate lies
Groveling in dust; And frightfull Horror, now,
Sharpens the glaunces of thy gashfull eyes,
Whilst fear perplexes thy distracted brow:
Thy panting breast vents all her breath by groans,
And Death enervs thy marrow-wasted bones.
8
Thus Man, that is borne of woman can remain
But a short tine; His days are full of sorrow;
His life's a penance, and his death's a pain,
Springs like a flower to day, and fades to morrow?
His breath's a bubble, and his days a Span:
It Is glorious misery to be borne a Man.
CYPR.
When eyes are dim, ears deaf, visage pale, teeth decayed, skin withered;
breath tainted, pipes furred, knees trembling, hands fumbling; feet failing,
the sudden downfall of thy fleshy house is near at hand.

S. AUGUST.
All vices wax old by Age: Covetousness done, grows young

EPIG. 15. To the Infant.
What he does spending in groans, thou spendst in tears?
Judgment and strength's alike in both your years;
He Is helpesse; so art thou; What difference than?
He Is an old Infant; Thou, a young old Man.
THE END.

